Kvec : A New Approach for Aligning Parallel Texts 
Pascale Fung
Computer Science Department
Columbia University
New York , NY 10027 USA

Kenneth Ward Church
AT&T Bell Laboratories
600 Mountain Ave.
Murray Hill , NJ 07974 USA
kwc@research.att.com

Various methods have been proposed for aligning texts in two or more languages such as the Canadian Parliamentary Debates  ( Hansards )  . Some of these methods generate a bilingual lexicon as a byproduct  . We present an alternative alignment strategy which we call K vec  , that starts by estimating the lexicon . For example , it discovers that the English word fisheries is similar to the French p~ches by noting that the distribution of fisheries in the English text is similar to the distribution of p~ches in the French  . Kvec does not depend on sentence boundaries . 
1. Motivation
There have been quite a number of recent papers on parallel text : Brown et al  ( 1990 ,  1991 ,  1993) , Chen (1993) , Church (1993) , Church et al (1993) , Dagan et al (1993) , Gale and Church (1991 ,  1993) , Isabelle (1992) , Kay and Rgsenschein (1993) , Klavans and Tzoukermann (1990) , Kupiec (1993) , Matsumoto (1991) , Ogden and Gonzales (1993) , Shemtov (1993) , Simard et al (1992) , Warwick-Armstrong and Russell (1990) , Wu ( to appear) . 
Most of this work has been focused on European language pairs  , especially English-French . It remains an open question how well these methods might generalize to other language pairs  , especially pairs such as English-Japanese and English- 

In previous work ( Church et al 1993) , we have reported some preliminary success in aligning the English and Japanese versions of the AWK manual  ( Aho , Kernighan , Weinberger (1980)) , using charalign ( Church ,  1993) , a method that looks for character sequences that are the same in both the source and target  . The charalign method was designed for European language pairs  , where cognates often share character sequences , e . g . , government and gouvernement . In general , this approach doesn't work between language such as English and Japanese which are written in different alphabets  . The AWK manual happens to contain a large number of examples and technical words that are the same in the English source and target 

It remains an open question how we might be able to align a broader class of texts  , especially those that are written in different character sets and share relatively few character sequences  . The Kvec method attempts to address this question . 
2. The Kvec Algorithm
Kvec starts by estimating the lexicon . Consider the example : fisheries -- ~ p ~ ches . The Kvec algorithm will discover this fact by noting that the distribution of fisheries in the English text is similar to the distribution of p ~ chesin the French  . 
The concordances for fisheries and p~ches are shown in Tables  1 and 2   ( at the end of this paper )  .  1 1 . These tables were computed from a small fragment of the Canadian Hansards that has been used in a number of other studies : Church  ( 1993 ) and Simard et al ( 1992 )  . The English text has 165 , 160 words and the French text has 185 , 615 words . 

There are 19 instances of fisheries and 21 instances of p~ches . The numbers along the lefthand edges how where the concordances were found in the texts  . We want to know whether the distribution of numbers in Table  1 is similar to those in Table 2  , and if so , we will suspect hat fisheries and p~ches are translations of one another  . A quick look at the two tables suggests that the two distributions are probably very similar  , though not quite identical .   2 We use a simple representation f the distribution of fisheries and p~ches  . The English text and the French text were each split into K pieces  . Then we determine whether or not the word in question appears in each of the K pieces  . Thus , we denote the distribution of fisheries in the English text with a K-dimensional binary vector  , VU , and similarly , we denote the distribution of p~ches in the French text with a K-dimensional binary vector  , Vp . The ith bit of V f indicates whether or not Fisheries occurs in the ith piece of the English text  , and similarly , the ith bit of V p indicates whether or not p~ches occurs in the ith piece of the French text  . 
If we take Kbe10 , the first three instances of fisheries in Table 1 fall into piece 2  , and the remaining 16 fall into piece 8 . Similarly , the first 4 instances of pgches in Table 2 fall into piece 2  , and the remaining 17 fall into piece 8 . Thus,
VT=Vp=<20,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,1,0>
Now , we want to know if VT is similar to V p , and if we find that it is , then we will suspect that fisheries ---> p~ches . In this example , of course , the vectors are identical , so practically any reasonable similarity statisticought to produce the desired result  . 
3 . fisheries is not file translation of lections Before describing how we estimate the similarity of Vf and Vp  , let us see what would happen if we tried to compare fisheries with a completely unrelated word  , eg . , lections .   ( This word should be the translation of elections , not fisheries . ) 2 . At most , fisheries can account for only 19 instances of p~ches , leaving at least 2 instances of p~chesunexplained . 
As can be seen in the concordances in Table 3 , for K = 10 , the vector is < 1 ,  1 ,  0 ,  1 ,  1 , 0 ,  1 ,  0 ,  0 ,  0> . By almost any measure of similarity one could imagine  , this vector will be found to be quite different from the one for fisheries  , and therefore , we will correctly discover that fisheries is not the translation of lections  . 
To make this argument a little more precise , it might help to compare the contingency matrices in Tables  5 and 6  . The contingency matrices show: ( a ) the number of pieces where both the English and French word were found  ,   ( b ) the number of pieces where just the English word was found  ,   ( c ) the number of pieces where just the French word was found  , and ( d ) the number of peices where neither word was found . 
Table 4: A contingency matrix

English abcd
Table 5: fisheries vs . pg chesp ~ chesfisheries 2008
Table 6: fisheries vs . lections lections fisheries 0244 In general , if the English and French words are good translations of one another  , as in Table 5 , then a should be large , and b and c should be small . In contrast , if the two words are not good translations of one another  , as in Table 6 , then a should be small , and b and c should be large . 
4. Mutual Information
Intuitively , these statements seem to be true , but we need to make them more precise . One could have chosen quite a number of similarity metrics for this purpose  . We use mutual information : log2 prob ( Vf ) prob ( Vp ) That is , we want to compare the probability of seeing fisheries and p~ches in the same piece to chance  . The probability of seeing the two words in the same piece is simply : a prob  ( Vf , V p ) - a + b + c + d
The marginal probabilities are : a + b prob ( Vf ) -a + b + c + da + cprob ( Vp ) = a + b + c + dFor fisheries - - ~ p ~ ches , prob(V f , Vp ) = prob(Vf ) = prob(Vp ) = 0 . 2 . Thus , the mutual information is log25 or 2 . 32 bits , meaning that the joint probability is 5 times more likely than chance . In contrast , for fisheries ~ lections , prob(V f , V p ) = O , prob(Vf ) = 0 . 5 and prob(Vp ) = 0 . 4 . Thus , the mutual information is log20 , meaning that the joint is infinitely less likely than chance  . We conclude that it is quite likely that fisheries and p~ches are translations of one another  , much more so than fisheries and lections . 
5. Significance
Unfortunately , mutual information is often unreliable when the counts are small  . For example , there are lots of infrequent words . If we pick a pair of these words at random , there is a very large chance that they would receive a large mutual information value by chance  . For example , lete be an English word that appeared just once and let f be a French word that appeared just once  . Then , there a nontrivial chance ( -~ ) that e and f will appear is in the same piece , as shown in Table 7 . If this should happen , the mutual information estimate would be very large  , i . e . , logK , and probably misleading . 
Table 7: fe 1009
In order to avoid this problem , we use at score to filter out in significant mutual information values  . 
prob(V f , Vp ) - prob(Vf ) prob(Vp ) t=1 prob(Vf , gp ) Using the numbers in Table 7 , t = l , which is not significant . ( At of 1 . 65 or more would be significant at the p > 0 . 95 confidence level . ) Similarly , if e and f appeared in just two pieces they would both appear in the same two pieces  , and then the mutual information score would be quite log  ,   ,  ~-- , but we probably wouldn't believe it high , 

because the tscore would be only "~- . By this definition of significance , we need to see the two words in at least 3 different pieces before the result would be considered significant  . 
This means , unfortunately , that we would reject fisheries --+ p~ches because we found them in only two pieces  . The problem , of course , is that we don't have enough pieces . When K = 10 , the resimply isn't enough resolution to see what ' sgoing on  . AtK = 100 , we obtain the contingency matrix shown in Table 8 , and the tscore is significant ( t = 2 . 1) . 
Table 8:K=100 p ~ chesfisheries 5 choose too small a K , then the mutual information values will be unreliable  . However , we can only increase Kup to a point . If we set K to a ridiculously large value , say the size of the English text , then an English word and its translations are likely to fall in slightly different pieces due to random fluctuations and we would miss the signal  . 
For this work , we set K to the square root of the size of the corpus  . 
K should be thought of as a scale parameter . If we use too low a resolution , then everything turns into a blur and it is hard to see anything  . But if we use too high a resolution , then we can miss the signal if Ideally , we would like to apply the Kvec algorithm to all pairs of English and French words  , but unfortunately , there are too many such pairs to consider . We therefore limited the search to pairs of words in the frequency range :  310  . This heuristic makes the search practical , and catches many interesting pairs ) 6 . Results This algorithm was applied to a fragment of the Canadian Hansards that has been used in a number of other studies : Church  ( 1993 ) and Simard et al ( 1992 )  . The 30 significant pairs with the largest mutual information values are shown in Table  9  . 
As can be seen , the results provide a quick-and-dirty estimate of a bilingua lexicon  . When the pair is not a direct translation , it is often the translation of a collocate , as illustrated by a cheteur ~ Limited and Santd-~ Welfare  .   ( Note that some words in Table 9 are spelled with same way in English and French ; this information is not used by the K vec algorithm  )  . 
Using a scatter plot technique developed by Church and Helfman  ( 1993 ) called dotplot , we can visulize the alignment , as illustrated in Figure 1 . The source text ( Nxbytes ) is concatenated to the target text ( Nybytes ) to form a single input sequence of Nx+Ny bytes . A dot is placed in position i , j whenever the input token at position i is the same as the input token at position j  . 
The equality constraint is relaxed in Figure 2 . A dot is placed in position i , j whenever the input token at position i is highly associated with the input token at position j as determined by the mutual information score of their respective K-vecs  . In addition , it shows a detailed , magnified and rotated view of the diagonal line . The alignment program tracks this line with as much precision as possible  . 
3 . The low frequency words ( frequency less then 3 ) would have been rejected anyways as in significant . 
Table 9: Kvec results
French English 3 . 2 Beauce Beauce 3 . 2 Comeau Comeau 3 . 2 1981 1981 3 . 0 Richmond Richmond 3 . 0 Rail VIA 3 . 0 p~ches Fisheries 2 . 8 Deans Deans 2 . 8 Prud Prud 2 . 8 Prudhomme 2 . 7 acheteur Limited 2 . 7 Communications Communications 2 . 7 MacDonald MacDonald 2 . 6 Mazankowski Mazankowski 2 . 5 croisi ~ renuclear 2 . 5 Sant 6Welf are 2 . 5 39 39 2 . 5 Johnston Johnston 2 . 5 essa is nuclear 2 . 5 Universit 6University 2 . 5 bo is lumber 2 . 5 Angus Angus 2 . 4 Angus VIA 2 . 4 Saskatoon University 2 . 4 agriculteurs farmers 2 . 4 inflation inflation 2 . 4 James James 2 . 4 Vanier Vanier 2 . 4 Sant 6 Health 2 . 3 royale languages 2 . 3 griefgrievance 7 . Conclusions The Kvec algorithm generates a quick -and-dirty estimate of a bilingua lexicon  . This estimate could be used as a starting point for a more detailed alignment algorithm such as word_align  ( Dagan et al ,  1993) . In this way , we might be able to apply word_align to a broader class of language combinations including possibly English-Japanese and EnglishChinese  . Currently , word_align depends on charalign ( Church , 1993) to generate a starting point , which limits its applicability to European languages since char_align was designed for language pairs that share a common alphabet  . 

Aho , Kernighan , We inberger (1980) " The AWK Programming Language , " Addison-Wesley , 
Reading , Massachusetts , USA.


Figure 1: A Dotplot of the Hansards :: .::::: l
Figure 2: K vecview of Hansards
Brown , P . , J . Cocke , S . Della Pietra , V . Della Pietra , F . Jelinek , J . Lafferty , R . Mercer , and P . 
Rooss in ,   ( 1990 ) " A Statistical Approach to Machine Translation , " Computational Linguistics , vol . 16, pp .  79-85 . 
Brown , P . , Lai , J . , and Mercer , R . (1991) " Aligning Sentences in Parallel Corpora , " ACL-91 . 
Brown , P . , Della Pietra , S . , Della Pietra , V . , and Mercer , R .  (1993) , " The mathematics of machine translation : parameters timation  , " Computational
Linguistics , pp . 263-312.
Chen , S .   ( 1993 ) " Aligning Sentences in Bilingual Corpora Using Lexical information  , " ACL 93 , pp . 

Church , K .   ( 1993 ) " Char_align : A Program for Aligning Parallel Texts at the Character Level  , "
ACL93, pp . 18.
Church , K . , Dagan , I . , Gale , W . , Fung , P . , Helfman , J . , Satish , B .   ( 1993 ) " Aligning Parallel Texts : Do Methods Developed for English-French Generalize to Asian Languages ?" Pacific Asia Conference on Formal and Computational 

Church , K . and Helfman , J .   ( 1993 ) " Dotplot : a Program for Exploring Self -Similarity in Millions of Lines of Text and Code  , " The Journal of Computationalnd Graphical Statistics  ,  2:2 , pp . 

Dagan , I . , Church , K . , and Gale , W .   ( 1993 ) " Robust Word Alignment for Machine Aided Translation  , " Proceedings of the Workshop on Very Large Corpora : Academic and Industrial Perspectives  , available from the ACL , pp . I-8 . 
Gale , W . , and Church , K .   ( 1991 ) " Identifying Word Coi Tespondences in Parallel Text  , " Fourth
Darpa Workshop on Speech and Natural
Language , Asilomar.
Gale , W . , and Church , K .   ( 1993 ) "A Program for Aligning Sentences in Bilingual Corpora  , " Computational Linguistics , also presented at ACL-91 . 
Isabelle , P . (1992) " Bi-Textual Aids for Translators , " in Proceedings of the Eigth Annual Conference of the UWC entre for the New OED and Text Research  , available from the UWC entre for the New OED and Text Research  , University of
Waterloo , Waterloo , Ontario , Canada.
Kay , M . (1980) " The Proper Place of Men and ms . , Xerox , Palo Alto , CA . 
Kay , M . and Rgsenschein , M . (1993) " Text-Translation Alignment , " Computational
Linguistics , pp . 121-142.
Klavans , J . , and Tzoukermann , E . , (1990) , " The BICORD System , " COL1 NG-90 , pp 174-179 . 
Kupiec , J .   ( 1993 ) " An Algorithm for Finding Noun Phrase Correspondences in Bilingual Corpora  , "
ACL93, pp . 1722.
Matsumoto , Y . , Ishimoto , It . , Utsuro , T . and Nagao , M . (1993) " Structural Matching of Parallel
Texts , " ACL93, pp . 2330.
Table 1: Concordances for fisheries
Shemtov , H .   ( 1993 ) " Text Alignment in a Tool for Translating Revised Documents  , " EACL , pp .  449-453 . 
Simard , M . , Foster , G . , and Isabelle , P .   ( 1992 ) " Using Cognates to Align Sentences in Bilingual Corpora  , " Fourth International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation  ( TMl-92 )  , Montreal , Canada . 
Warwick-Armstrong , S . and G . Russell ( 1990 ) " Bilingual Concordancing and Bilingual Lexicography  , " Euralex . 
Wu , D .   ( to appem ' ) " Aligning Parallel English Chinese Text Statistically with Lexica IC riteria  , "


Mr . Speaker , my question is fortile Minister of Fisheries and Oceans  . Allegations have been made of the stocks ? I-ton . Thomas Siddon ( Minister of Fisheries and Oceans ) : Mr . Speaker ,   1 tell the calculation on which the provincial Department of Fisheries makes this allegation and If in d that it private sector is quite weak  .  1 , ctusturn now to fisheries , an industry which as most important 1o The fisher men would like to see the l ) epartment of Fisheries and Oceans put more effort towards the ps in particular  . The budget of the Department of Fisheries and O ceans has been reduced to such at e'habitation '' trom which to base his trade in fisheries and filrs  . He brought wilh him the first as e . just outside of myriding . The Department of Fisheries and Oceans provides employmeut for many and all indications are that the riclmess ot'its fisheries resource will enable it to maintain its tax payer  . The role of file federal Department of Fisheries and O ceans is central to the concerns of is the new Chainnan of the Standing Committee on Fisheries and Oceans  . I am sure he will bring a wortunity to discuss it with meas a member of the Fisheries Committee  . The Hon . Member asked what he proposal has been submitted to the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans  ( Mr . Siddon ) which I hopechas well as on his selection as Chairman of the Fisheries Committee  . I have work exl with Mr . Come his in tense interest and expertise in the area of fisheries  . It seems most appropriate , given that r from Eastern Canada and the new Chairman of the Fisheries and Oceans Committee  . We know that the dO ceans Committee . We know that the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans  ( Mr . Siddon ) , should we sows the importance of research and development to fisheries and oceans  . I shen ow ready to tell the research and development component in the area of fisheries and oceans at Bedford  , in order that th
Table 2: Concordances for p~chesoyez certain queje prfsenter aimes excuses  . Les 6 sident , maquestions ' adresse auministre despoissons ? L'h on  . Thomas Siddon ( ministre descal culssurles quels le minist ~ re provincial des  iv6 est beau couplus faible . Parlons unpeudes braconnage . Ils voudraient quele minist ~ redeses stocks de homards  . Lebudget duminist & edesendant I ' hiver , lorsque I ' agriculturetles p6ches L ' existence possible d ' un march6 noire P6ches et de s Oc6ans   . On aura it p6ch6,dd barqud
P~cheset des Ocgans ) p ~ chesfon deses all 6gations , etj ' yairele v6 p~ches , unsecteur tr~s important pour 1 ' Atlant P6ches et de s Oc6ans fassed avantage , particulibr P6ches et de s Oc6ans a t6   amput6 detelles or tequp ~ chesont peu prosleur point mort  , bonnombrext6 rieur demacir conscription . Leminist ~ redes P ~ cheset des Oc6ans assure de 1 ' ern ploibiend's . Dansler apport Kirby de 1983 portant sur lesp ~ ches de la c6te est , on a malexpliqu6lesyst ~ eniers publics . Le r61e duministate f6ddral desP ~ cheset des Ocfanssetrouve aucentre des pr6oc so it lenouve au pr6sident du comit6 permanent desp ~ chese to cfans . Jesuisstir queses vastes connave cmoi , enma qualit6 demembred u comit6 des p6ches et oc6ans   . Le d6put6 a demand6 quelles per is sa voir qu'el leat ~ propos6e auministre des P ficheset Oc6ans   ( M . Siddon ) etj'esp grequ'des on choix auposte de prfsident du  comit6 desp ~ ches . Jetravail leave cM . Comeau depu is deuxet je connaist out 1  '  int6rgt qu ' il porteaux p6ches   , a in siques a comp & encecet gard . CelasEst du payset maintenant pr6sident du Comit6 des p6ches et de s oc6ans   . On sait que leministre des6 cheset desoc6ans . On sait que leministre des P6 cheset des Oc6 ans ( M . Siddon ) a , disons , a recherchet du d6veloppement dans le domaine desp ~ cheset des oc6ans   . Est-ilpr & aujourd'hui recherchet du d6veloppement dansle domaine des p6ches et desocdans Bedford a finque celaborato is endroitsou " gilssetrouvent et  1 ' avenir desp fichesdans I ' Est . Leprdsident suppl 6 ant ( M . 
Concordances for lections uiservent ensemble la Chambredes communes  . Leslections quises on ttenues au d6but dela deuxi6m np lace les mesures de contr61e suffisantes . Leslections approchaienteles lib6raux voulaient mere prend rel contenudes on discours lectoral deslections de  1984  . Onser appelle , et to us les Ca ertainement es'en rappelleront aux prochaines lecfions de to ut cequia rait pu leurar river  . Lnaperce vrontencoreune foislors des prochaines lections  . Deslections , monsieur le Pr 6 sident , n coreune foislors desprochaines lections . Deslections , monsieur le Pr 6 sident , il yenaeu deave ceux- m6mes I'analyse des r6sultats deceslections compl6mentaires   , constate ront qu ' il so set ilsr fag is sent . Ilsont r6agi aux derni6res   6mentaires et il s r6agiront encore aux prochainest , monsieur le Pr 6 sident , parlant de prochaines M . Layton ) diretant 6 tque , ant 6 rieurementaux6titions . Jesugg frera is au Comit6 permanent desule vercette question au comit6 desprivil ~ geset doiventrerenvoyfesau comit6 desprivilege set r6t soumettrela questionau comit6 permanent desle 16 janvier 1986  .   .   . M . Hov debo : A pr?~slestinuer faire cequ'il sont fait depuisques queles gensle retiennent jusqu ' aux prochaines donctrans mismonmand at audirecteur  gfn6ral des , deux d6put6s ont avis6 le dire et eur gfn6ral deslections compl6mentaires tils r6agiront encore alections . Finalement , monsieur le Pr 6 sident , palections .   .   , j ' couta is monhonorable coll ~ guelections de 1984  , lesgens de Lachine voulai entulections , desprivil bges et de la proc6 dured't lections , carily a des6rieux doutessurI ' in lections . J ' ai1' intention d'en saisir ceclections , desprivil bges et de la proc6 dure . J ' lections . M . James : .   .   . leministred ' alorslections , c'est--direrejeterle Nouveau parlections . Decettefa ~ onvousalleztrerejet6s dlections , a find e 1 ' autorisermettreun nouveaulections d'une vacance survenue la Chambre  ; i l
