
DISCO--An HPSG-based NLP System
its Application for Appointment Scheduling
- - Project Note --
Hans Uszkoreit , Roll Backofen , Stephan Busemann , Abdel Kader Diagne , 
Elizabeth A . Hinkelman , Walter Kasper , Bernd Kiefer , Hans-Ulrich Krieger , 
Klaus Netter , Gfinter Neumann , Stephan Oepen , Stephen P . Spackman
German Research Center for Artificial Intel ligence  ( DFI ( I ) 
Stuhls at zenhaus weg3 , 66123 Saarbrficken , Germany
( name ~ dfki , . uni-sb , de

The natural language system DISC () is described . It combines a powerful and flexible grammar development system  ; ? linguistic competence for German including morphology  , syntax and semantics ; ? new metlmds for linguistic performance modelling on the basis of high-level competence grammars  ; ? new methods for modelling multiagent dialogue competence  ; ? an interesting sample application for appointment scheduling and calendar management  . 
1 Introduction
We will describe results of a project in natural language research carried out during the last four years at  , the German Research Center for Artiticial Intelligence in Saarbrficken  . All system l ) uilding took place during the last three years . The special approach of this project is a combination of linguistically sound high-lev cl grammatical description and specialized methods for linguistic performance modelling  . 
During the last decade it has become obvious to the majority of researchers in our field that the linguistically designed elegant and transparent grammars written in high-level representation language such as HPSG or LFG could not be employed for elficient and robust processing in a straightforward way  . 
Many researchers have therefore resorted to wellknown older method such as ATNs or other augment-ed finite-state methods  , to statistical or connectionist methods , or to combinations of these . Several projects participating in the demanding ARPA competitions fall in this category  . 
Many others have decided to settle for a compromise between high-level description and efficient processing by strongly constraining their formalisms  . 
The resulting formalisms are usually much closer to PROLOG and do not contain a powerful multiple -inheritance type system  ; e . g . the Core Language Engine ( CLE ) of SRI Cambridge\[1\] , its der Native tile GEMINI system of SRI International in Menlo Park  , the LKP of SIEMENS in Munich\[3\] . As a consequence of their design philosophy , these systems usually do not feature a power thl development platl brm  . 
Only a few groups have continued to work ill high -level formalisms driven by the expectation that better processing methods for these formalisms can be developed  . Our work belongs in this category , tIowever , we have decided to allow for combinations of high -level grammatical description and low-level processing methods by strictly distinguishing between a general linguistic competence model and very applic ~ tion-specific performance models  . 
Our decision was based on some fundamental criteria : ? It  , is necessary to build general , reusable competence systems that can be the basis lbr different applications  , since the development of liuguistice oml ) etenee is too costly to redo for each new application  . 
? In the foreseeable future , NL applications will have very limited linguistic competence  , where the limitations depend on the task to be performed  . They determine coverage and depth of analysis . 
? The general competence system as such will not be used for iudividnal all plications because each application type impose specific requirements on the perl brmauee model  . Depending on the task there are quite different constraints on robustness  , accuracy , and processing speed . 
On the basis of these assumptions , we took a rather uncompromising stand . We decided to utilize the most suitable and most advanced methods for the development of linguistic ompetence  . Our development platl brm is based on a powerful typed feature unification formalism  , and the grammar follows the IIPSCth (' or y . ': these choices were made since we wanted on tile one hand to facilitate the difficult and time-consnllling process of grammar development  , and on the other to save our grammar from the fate of several older large-coverage grammars whichean nol ~ be reused or extended today because of their idiosyncratic representations  . 
Since research on systems with multiple cooperating agents constitutes one of the focal areas of our institute  , we tried to develop the system ill such a way that it would support dialogue among such agents  . At the same time , we under took serious efforts in research on methods that would allow us to derive adequate performance models from tile core competence system  . 
We also built a sample application ( COSMA ) for appointment scheduling and rnanagement based ontile COml  ) etence model , ill order to test tile grammar of German , methods for dialogue modelling , and eerl ; a in new n ) ethods for deriving a performance model from the competence system  . 
In the remainder of this paper we will present all ? development l  ) latform including shell , formalism , morphology , parser , gm , erator , semantics ; ? German competence including morphology , syntax , semantics ; ? methods for providing multiagent dialogue competence  ; ? methods t br linguistic performance modelling ; ?tile NL flmctionality of the sample application

Some individual components and methods have been described in more detail in previous imblications  . 
l lowever , this paper is the first attempt to l ) resent an overview of the integrated system and to describe its parts from the perspective of our overall research strategy  . 
2 Formalism
For the grammar , tile lexicon and parts of tilero of phology a power fld typed unification lbrmalism  7"/  ) ?  ( Type Description Language ) has been developed . 
Reasoning is performed by two specialized inference engines  , viz . the TD1 ; type engine and thel ~ a ture constraint solverll Di . Af e . The modnles are connected via a flexible interface to allow for mutual control  . 
Type System 7 " 191 ; is a power fifltyped feature-b~ed language and inference system  , sp ceilicalty suit-ed for highly lexiealized grammars  \[81   ( in this vohl , ne) . 
Type definitions in " I'19? consist of type constraints and feature constraints over the standard boolean connectives A  , V , and -1 . The operators are generalized ill that they can connect feature descril  ) tions , coreference tags ( logical variables ) and types .  7"/)1 ; distinguishes between arm types ( open-world remsoning )  , sort types ( closed-world reasoning ) , bl * ilt-in types , and atoms . 
Recursive types are explicitly allowed and handled by a sophisticated lazy type expavsiot  , mechanism . 
7/ ; )? allows the definition of partitions and the declaration of sets of types as incompatible  , meaning that the conjunction of them yields L . Working with partially as well ~ s with fully exl ) and ed types is possible through the use of a sophisticated type expansion mechanism  , both at definition and at runtime .  7-791 ; is fid\[y incremental in that it allows the redelinition of types and the use of undelined types  .   7'/9? allows a grammarian to define and use parameterized templates  ( macros )  . Input given to 7" D1; is parsed by a LAMI . (1) parser to allow for all intuitive , high-lew ; linput syntax . 
Eilicient reasoning in the system is accomplished through specialized modules :  ( i ) bitvector encoding of the type subsumption hierarchy  ;   ( it ) f ~ ust symbolic simplification for complex type expressions  ; ( iii ) memoization to cache precomputed results ; and ( iv ) type expansion to make constraints explicit , to determine the global satisfiability of a description  , and to work with partially expanded types during processing  . 
Constraint Solver NDi Afe is a feature constraint solver capable of dealing with distribute disiunctions over arbitrary structures  , negative coreferences , full negation , and functional and relational constraints . 
It is the first ( and to our knowledget , e only ) implemented feature constraint solver that integrates both full negation and distributed is junctions  \[2\]  . NDY q'e does l , ot use distribute disjunction only as a tool for efficient processing  . It also forms part of the input syntax , which allows for very compact representation of tire input data  . In controls ( with other systems using distributed disjunctions  , we do not restrict disjunctions to length two , thus reducing tire size of the feature structure representations massively  . 
~ l'he functionality of N1 ) iA fe is completed by several auxiliary functimls . It is possible to remove inconsistent alternatives  , to si , nplify structures , to extract subterms or to evaluate functional constraints  . One call also construct disjunctive normal form if desired  . 
Semantic Representation Aspecialized meaning representation formalism  , Aft ; t , developed atlle wlcttPackard\[9\] , is used for semantic reasoning and as a flexible interface to various application systems  . H ? 1 ; is a linguistically motivated extension of sorted \[ irst-order predicate logic  , integrating also e on ccl ) ts from Situation Semantics and l ) l '' . It provides a large range of rei ) resentational mechanisms for natural language phenomena  . 
3 Linguistic Resources
Tile core of tile linguistic resources consists of a two-level morphology with feature constraints  , all Ill ) S ( \] oriented grammar of German with integrated syntax and semantics  , and a module for surface speech act recognition , all implemented ill 7"D/2 . 
Morl ) hology The component X2 M or P , analyzing and generating word forms , is based on at two-level morphology which is extended by a word-lbrmation graln nrar  ( described in 7" l ) 1 ; ) lbr handling the concatenative llarts of morl ) ho syntax\[15\] . 
Grammar The style of the grammar closely t bllows tiles pirit of HPSG  , but also incorporates insights fi'o mother grammar frameworks  ( e . g . catcgorial grammar ) and further extensions to the theory \[12\] . 
The grammar disting nishes various types of linguistic objects  , such as lexical entries , phrase structures chm nata , lexical rules , multiword lexemes etc . , all of which are sl ) e < : if ie dast yl ) ed\[~aturestru <: tures . Lexi-ca I rules are defined as unary ruh ! s ; tndal ) plied at run-ti , ne . Multiword lexelnes are eoml ) lexlexelnes with a noncompositional semantics , such as tixed idiomatic expressions , lIPS (' , I ~ rincil ) les and constraints are rel ) -resented by inheritance links illtile type lattit : e  . The grammar covers : tfairn mnber of the standard constructions of German  , and exhibits a more detailed coverage ill some sl ) ecilic application oriented are ~ . 
Semantics Feature strncture descriptions of the s e  . -mantic contribution of linguistic items arc represented in "  I"1  ) 1 ; and are fully integrated into tile grammar . Additionally , the T'D ? type system is used to encode and check sortal constraints as they occur in selcctional restrictions  . For furl . her 1 ) rocessing such as scope normalization and anaphora resolution  , inferences and al ) plication dependent interpretation , the ( initial ) TD ? semantic descriptions arc translated into A/'1  ; 1 ; for nndae . 
Sl ) eechAct Recognition and Dialogue The grammar provides a typed interface to a speech act of utterances  . Tim assignments of illocutionary force take into account syntactic features  , a marking of per-formative verbs and assignments of fixed illoeutionary force to relevant idiomatic expressions  . 
Recently inference-based dialogue facilities using a quasi-modal logic for multiagent belief and goal attribution  \[5\] have been added to the system , incoming surface speech act structures are subjected to anaphora and reference resolution  , translated into a frame-based action representation  , and disambignated using inferential context . The effects , including communicated beliefs and goals , of the first acceptable speech act interpretation are then asserted  . 
4 Processing components
Parser and generator provide the basic processing flmctionality needed for grammar development and sample applications  . In addition to the separate modules for parsing and generation  , we also experiment with a uniform reversible processing module based on generalized Earley deduction  . 
Parser The parser is a bidirectional bottom-up chart parser which operates on a contextfree backbone implicitly contained in the grammar  \[6\]  . The parser can be parameterized according to various processing strategies  ( e . g . breadth first , preference of certain rules etc . ) . Moreover , it is possible to specify the processing order for the daughters of individual rules  . 
An elaborate statistics component supports the grammar developer in tuning these control strategies  . 
In addition , the parser provides the facility to filter out useless t~ks  , i . e . tasks where a rule application can be predicted to fail by a cheaper mechanism than nnification  . There is a facility to precompute a filter automatically by determining the possible and impossible combinations of rules  ; some additional filtering information is handcoded  . 
The parser is implemented in an object-oriented manner to allow for different parser classes using different constraint solving mechanisms or different  , parser instances using different parsing strategies in the same system  . With differing parameter settings instances of the parser module are used in the  X2MorF and surface speech act recognition modules , -uswell . 
Generator Surface generation in DISCOiS performed with the SeReal  ( Sentence Realization ) system\[4\] , which is t ) ased on the semantie-head-drivell algorithm by Shieber et al SeReal takes a TD ? semantic sentence representation ms its input and can deliver all derivations for the input admitted by the grammar  . Efficient lexieal access is achieved by having the lexicon indexed according to semantic predicates  . 
Each index is associated with a small set of lemma -tacontaining the semantic predicate  . Using the same indexing scheme at runtime for lexical access allows us to restrict unification tests to a few lexical items  . 
Subsumption-based methods for lexieal access were considered too expensive for dealing with distribut-ed disjunctions  . The grammarnsed for generation is the sanre as the one used for parsing except for some compilation steps performed by SeReal that  , among other things , introduce suitable information wherever ' semantically empty ' items are referred to  . Rule application is restricted by rule accessibility tables which are computed offline  . 
5 Per fo rmance Mode l l ing hr our search for n rethods that gel  ; us from the transparent and extensible competence grammar to el\[i-cient and robust performance systems we have been following several leads in paral M  , We assume that methods for compilation , control and learning need to be investigated . The best combination of these methods will depend ou the specific application  , hr the following some initial results of our efforts are summarized  . 
Acquisition of Sublanguages by EBL it is a matter of common experience that different domains make different demands on the grammar  . This observation has given rise to the notion of sublangnage  ; efficient processing is achieved by the exploitation of restricted language use in well specified domains  . 
In the DISCO system we have integrated such an approach based on Explanation-Based Learning  ( 1~ ; 13I , ) \[14\] . The idea is to generalize the derivations of training instances created by normal parsing automatically and to use these generalized erivations  ( called teln-plates ) in then , n-time mode of the system . If a template can be instantiated for a new input  , no further grammatical analysis is necessary . The approach is not restricted to these nl ; ential level but can also be applied to arbitrary subsentential phrases  , allowing it to interleave with normal processing . 
Intelligent Backtracldng in Processing Dis junc-tionsIn  \[16\] a method is outlined l brcontrolling the order in whicheon jnnets and disjmmts are to be processed  . The ordering of disimmts is useful when the syste . missupposed to find only the best result(s) , which is the case for any reasonably practical NL application  . An extension of ND i , / V ' e has been implemented that exploits distributed disjunctions for preference-based backtracking  . 
Compilation of IIPSG into Lexicallzed TAG \[7\] describes an approach for compiling fIPSG into lexicalized feature-based TAG  . Besides our hope to achieve more efficient processing  , we want to gain a better understanding of the correlation between  1 \[PSG and TAG . The compilation algorithm has l ) een int plelneute ( \[ and ( : overs almost all constrtlctions con-taine ( \] illour IIPS ( \] granltnar . 
6 Environment
The DISCOI ) EVEL OPMI~NT SIIELI , serves as the basic architectural platform for the integration of natural language components in the DISCO core system  , as well as for the CosMA application system \[13\]  . Following an object oriented architectural model we followed a two-step approach  , where in the first ; step the architecture is developed independently of specific components to be used and of a partien larf low of control  . 
In tim second phase t l , e resulting ' frame system ' is instantiated by theiutegration of e  . xisting components and by defining the particular llow of control between these components  . Using an object-oriented design together with multiple inheritance has been shown fruit -cremental usability  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Several editing and visualization tools greatly facilitate the work of the grammar developer  . The most prominent of them , FEGRAMEDj provides the user with a fully interactive feature editor and viewer  . 
There are many possibilities to customize tile view on-to a feature strncture  , such , as hiding certain features or parts of a structure  , specifying the feature order and many more . The large feature structures emerging in the process of constraint based formalisms make such a tool absolutely indispensable for grammar de  . -bugging . Main goals of the development of FI~Glt AMI . 'D were high portability and interfacing to different systems  . Written in ANSI-C , it exists in Macintosh and OSF/Motif versions and is already used at several external sites  . 
There exists a graphical chart display with mouse -sensitive chart nodes and edges directly linked to the feature viewer  , thus making del ) ugging muchs in q ) ler . 
It also provides a view of the running parser and enables you to inspect the effects of the chosen parsing strategy visually  . A browser for the 7"DE type system permits navigation through a type lattice and is coupled with tl  , e feature editor . There are other tools ms well , e . g . , a 77)?2I#TEXutility , an EMACSTD ? mode , global switches which affect tile I ) e haviour of the whole system etc . 
The diagnostics tool ( DiTo )   \[11\] containing close to 1500 annotate diagnostic sentences of German fimili -tates consistency maintenance and measuring of con > petenee  . The toolha . s been lmrted to several sites that participate in extending the test-sentence database  . 
7 Putting it to the Test
Cooperative Schedule Mauagement In building the COSMA prototype the DISCO core system has been success rully integrated into an application domain with both scientific interest and practical plausibility  , viz . multiagent appointment scheduling ( see Figure 1) . Understanding and sending messages in natural language is crucial fortl  , is application since it cannot be expected that all participants will haw ~ a COSMA system  . Tile use of natural hmguage also makes it easier for the owner of the system to I non-it or the progress of an appointment scheduling process  . Each COSMA instance functions as a personal secretarial assistant providing the following services :  ( i ) storage and organization of a personal aplmint- ment date-book  ;   ( ii ) graphical display and manil ) ula-tion of appointment data ; and ( iii ) natural language understanding and generation in communication with other agents via electronic mail  . The current scheduling flmctionality includes the arrangement of multiparticipant meetings  ( possibly with vague or taMer-specified details ) as well a ~ s the modification and cancellation of appointment shat are under arrangement or have already been committed to  . 
Accordingly , the current COSMA architecture h ~ us three major components : a prototype appoiutment planner  ( developed by the DFKI project AKA-MOI ) ) that keeps the calendar database , provides temporal resolution and drives the communication with other agel  , ts ; a graphical user interface ( developed inside the DISCO project ) monitoring tile Calendar state and
APPOINT MENTPLANNERI,~:VEL . er internal repreeentation _( . IR ) ~
P , IANAGEMENT
MACIIINE It Y SCANNER5 AR5NL ( standardized ) natural angoage NL
E-~a ., dLE-MA a WRAPPER AND SCANNER
INTEI ( FACE 1   1 T figure 1: longh sketch of the DISCO system in its application to the COSM Ascenario  . Tile entire COSMA prototylm has been Imilton top of I  , he DISCODIg VEL-OPMENT SIIEI , Lits an lollo to licextension to the core system . 
supporting the nlotlse-and menu-driven arrangement  , of new appointments and , finally , the DISCO core system ( enriched with a set of application specilic modules  ) that provides the natural anguage and linguistic dialogue capabilities  . 
In tm'faee to the . Core Engine The communication \] ) etweentile DISCO system and the appointment planner is modelled in it  , -estricted appointment tmskinl . erface language aim roughly nleets the illter Hall 'el  ) -resental . ion of the al ) pointment planner . ' tk ) connect the two components , DISCO is em'ie hed with a dedicat-ed interfacenm ( lule that l , rans lates l ) etween the DIS ( : ( ) internal semantics representation language Af ?~ . and the appointment planner representation . The translation process ( maintaining the substantial difference in expressive power between A /'?? and the restricted planner language  ) builds on ideas from current compiler technology with a limited set of domain - and application -specific inference rules  \[10\]  . 
On its opposite end DISCO is hooked up to plain electrmfic mail facilities through a general mrpose email i ~  , terfaee that allows it to receive and send email ( and in case of processing Nilures to ' respool ' messages to the user mail box  )  . 
8 Discussion and Outlook
We have presented an overview of the DISCO sysl . mn that illustrates our general research strategy . The sys-Sun and liP workstations . Some tools and peripheral components are coded in C  . A port of the system to another hardware platform  ( Apple Macintosh ) is currently being carried out . The total size of the system is about 100 , 000 lines of code . Parts of the system were demonstrated at several conferences  , attrade fairs and on other occasions . 
The work will be continued in two smaller projects . 
First of all we plan to extend the system's linguistic competence of German  . The diagnostic tool Di-To will be expanded in joint work with other groups to provide an instrument for measuring progress and for comparing rammars  . We will also continue work on building up dialogue competence  . The application demonstrator will be further developed in collaboration with other projects at the DFKI  . 
In the area of performance modelling , we will continue exploring different approaches for control  , compilation , and competence-based learning in parallel . 
At this point nobody can really for esee which strategy or combination of strategies will yield the best practical results  . As we pointed out in the introduction , different application types will require different performance models  . I Iigh priority is given to the integration of statistical methods in all pursued approaches  , since in contrast to competence modelling , statistical data are essential for developing adequate performance models  . 

We acknowledge the invaluable input of our former colleagues  , viz . , John Nerbonne who substantially contributed to the design and success of the DISCO project  , ttarald Trost and Jan Alexandersson . 
As in many academic environments , major parts of the daily system building have been carried out by our wonder fid research assistants  , especially Sabine Buchholz , Stephan Diehl , Thomas Fettig , Stefan IIa as , Judith Klein , Karsten Konrad , In go Neis , Ilannes Pirk-er , Ulrich Sch~ifer , Oliver Scherf , Jgrg Steffen , and
Christoph Weyers.
This work ha~s been supported by research grant ITW  9002   0 from the German Bundesministerinm fiir Forschung und Technologic to the DISCO project  . 
References\[1\]Hiyan Alshawi , editor . The Core Language Engine . 
ACL-MIT Press Series in Natural Language Process - int  . MIT Press , Cambridge MA . , 1992 . 
\[2\] Roll Backofen and Christoph Weyers . llDihfe--A Feature Constraint Solver with Distributed Disjunction and Classie MNegation  . Technical report , DFI(I , Saarbrficken , Germany ,  1994 . Forthcoming . 
\[3\]ttans-UMch Block . Compiling Trace $ z Unification Grammar . In Tomek Stl~alkowski , editor , Reversible Grammar in Naturalanguage Processing , pages 155-174 . Kluwer Academic Press , London , 1994 . 
\[4\] Stephan Busemann . The SeReal System : patting semantic-head-driven geration to timlim its  . Technical document , DFKI , Saarbrlicken , Germany ,  199 , 1 . 

\[5\]E liza bethA . t linkelman and StephenP . Spack-man . Abductive Speech Act Recognition , Corporate Agents and the COS Mh System . In W . J . Black et al , editor , Abduction , Beliefs and Context : Proceedings of the Second ESPI?ITPLUS Workshop in Compu  . 
rational Pragmatics . Academic Press , 1992.
\[6\] Bernd Kiefer and Olivet ' Scherf . Gimme More IIQ Parsers . ' File Qeneric Parser Class of DISCO . Technical report , DFKI , Saarbrllcken , Qerrnauy ,  1994 . 

\[7\] Bernd Kiefer , Klaus Nel , ter , and I ( . Vijay-Slmnker . 
Compilation or ttPSG to " FAG . Research report , I ) F-I(I , Saarbrilcken , Germany ,  1994 . Forthcoming . 
\[8\]I laus-Ulrich Krieger and UMch Sch?fer . TD?--A Type Description Language for Constraint-Based Grammars  . In Proceedings of COLING-94, 199, 1 . 
\[9\] Joachim Laubsch and John Nerbonne . An Overview of . A/'/2/2 . Technical report , Itewlett-Packard Laboratories , Polo Alto , July 1991 . 
\[10\] John Nerbonne , Joachim Lanbsdl , Abdel Kader Di-agne , and Stephan Oepen . Software for Applied Semantics . In Chu-Renthrong et al , editor , l'rocecding . ~ of Pacific Asia Conf creace on Formal and Computational Linguistics  , pages 35-56 , Talpei ,  1993 . Aca-demica Sinica .   ( Also available as DFKI Research Report RR-92-55 )  . 
\[ ll \] John Nerbomm , I(lausNetter , I(ader1)iagne , Lud-wig Dickmann , and Judith Klein . A Diagnostic Tool for German Syntax . Machine 7) ' anslation : 8, 85-107, 1993 . 
\[12\]K lausNetter . Arclfitectnre and Coverage of tim DIs-coC , rammm ' . In S ? . el~han Bnsemann and I(arin Harl ) usela , editors , Workshop on Natural Language Systems : Reusability and Modularity  . Proceedings , pages 110 . DFKI , Saarbr\[icken , Germany , 199 . '1 . 
\[13\]G ( interNenmmm . Design Prilr ciples of the Disco System . In Proceedings of the TWLT 5 , Twente , Netherlands ,  1993 . 
\[14\]G finterNenmann . Application of Explanation-based Learning for Efficient Processing of Constraint-based Grammars  . In Proceedings of the Tenth IEEE Co ~ , fer-ence of Arlifical Intelligence for Application  , Marriott Riverwalk , San Antonio , Texas , March 1994 . 
\[15\]tlar ald Trost . The Application of Two-Level Morphology to Non -eoncatenative Grman Morphology  . 
In Proceedings of COLING . 90, 1990.
\[16\]II ans Uszkoreit . Adding Control Information to 1 ) eclarative Grammars . In Proceedings of the 291h Anmml Meeting of the Associ ~ tion of Computatiorml
Linguislics in Berkeley , 1991.

