Constituentlloundary Parsing for Exanll ) lo-lkised Maclhine Tr , 'inslation
Osamu FUI , ~ I . JSF . and llitoshi\[IDA
ATR Interpreting Telocomnlunications Research Laboratories 
Abstract
This paper i ) roposes an effective parsing nicthod for examlile -based machine transhltiOl ~  . In this method , an input string is parsed by the tOl ) -downapl flication of linguistic patterns consisting ol variables and constituent boundaries  . A constituent boundary is expressed by either a functional word or al  ) art-of . .speech bigram . When structural ambiguity occurs , the most plausible structure is selected us in b , tile total values of distance calculations in tile ox an ll  ) le-basod Iraille work . 
Transfer-Driven Machine Translation ( TDMT ) achieves efficient ait drobus translation within the example-based framework by adopting this parsing method  . Using bidirectional translation between Japanese and Vnglish > tile effectiveness of this method in TDMT is nlso shown  . 
1 Introduction
I-xample-basod franie works are increasingly being applied to machiilo translatioi /  , since th0yc ~ . ill ) rovido efficient and robust processing ( Nagao , 1984; Sate , 1991; Sumita , 1992; Furuse , 1992; Watanabe ,  1992) . 
However , in order to make tilt best use o1 the a ( . lv: . lnlages of an example-based fl ' amcwork , it is essential to effectively integrate an example-based method antisource language analysis  . Unfortunately , wh cllall exain l ) le-based nletiiodix combined with a SOUFC0 lnnguago analysis in elhod having cOlnl ) loxl ~ r ~ illilliflr rules , pulling a heavy loadeli translalion , the advai/lai ; os of lheexample-based franio workiilayl ) eruined . To achieve efficient and robnst processing by the exanii  ) lc-basod framework , a lot of sttl dies have beelln lado for the pui\] ) ose of combining source lal!gtiage analysis with all example-based method  , lind of efficiently covering the analyzed source langilllgestr tiCtt lroby me  ; illS of trails fcr knowledge ( Grishman , 1992; Jollcs , 1992; McLean , 1992; Manlyama ,  1992 , 1993; Nirenburg 1993) . 
One wily to reduce tiltload of source langua ! , ,c analysis ix to directly apply trallSl'cr knowledge to all input siring  , whichs in lultaneously executes both siruciinal parsing aiM transfer know lc  . d goal ) lHi cation through pattorll-il/atchii/g , l : ' allerll-nlalchi ~ ig does liotrise grainillatica Isymbols such as " Notlil Pliraso  "  , but uses surfi . ice words an (\] non-granlmalical synlbols . Therefore , in patlern-matching , rule coml ) otition is reduced , and linguistic structure is expressed in a simpler manner thallill gramnmr-based parsing  . Thus , pattern-nlatcing achieves efficient1) arsing . It is also useful in treating spoken language , which sometimes deviates from convcntion : ll grammar  , while grammar-based p , ' lrsing has difficulty treating iln reslricle ( lspoken I\[inglll , ge . 
This pal ) Or proposes a constituom boundary parsing method based on palt or n-niatching  , and shows its effeclivonoss for spoken langnago translation within the exaniple-I  ) a sod framework . I not lr parsing method , aii inl ) Ut string . is applied linguistic patterns e?pressing some linguistic constittic nts and their bonnds-lrios  , in a topdown f : . tshion . \ Vhon structural anlbiguity occurs , tile most phlusi / ) lo structure is selected rising the total vahios of dislanco calculations in tiltexample-based lrs-Illio work  . Shicothe description of a linguistic ps-ittern is sinl plo  , it is easy to update by adding f0et l back . 
A constiLuon l boundary ix using method using nuitual ill foiillation i ~ l  ) roposed in ( M , ' lgerl flan 1990) . This method accouilts for the unrestricted lls -ltLlra \] langtlage and is efficient  , l lowever , it tends to be ill acctirate > and difficult , to a d(lfeed back to , since it completely depends on st'ltistical information with oul  , resort to a linguistic viewpoint . On the cont , ary > in order to achieve accurate parsing and Iransb'ition  , our conslituent boundary parsing method implicitly incorporates grammatical information in top'ltterns  , e . g . constituent boundary description by ai ) art-of-sl ) eech bigrani , and classification of i ) ailerns according lol in b , uislic levels suchs . ls simple sentence , tlrldtlOtHIl ) hrase . 
Tlallsfer-Orivell Maehillo Translati Oll ( TI ) MT )   ( \[:tlrtiso > 1992 , 1994) use stile COl/Stil . llont bot ln dary 1)a ~ sint , , liielhod l)l'eSollto(l in this paper , as an alternative to glamlii ar-based ali : . ilysis , ai KIlliakosthei ) ostil Se of the ex : lmplo-based framework . A bidirectional translation syslcnl between Jap , ' lnesclind English for dialogue sentences concerning international conference regislralions has been illl plenlented  ( Sobashima ,  1994) . 
l ~ x perimonts with the syston l have show noll r parsing iiict hod I  ( ) t ~ effcctive . 
Section 2 defines patterns expressed by variables and con . <; liluont boundaries . Section 3 OXl ) lains a method for derivin , possible English structures . Soelion 4 explain '4 structural disanibi , gnali Otiusing tlislanco calculations in Ihoo ?anilflo-b  , ' lsed framework . Section 5 exphlins an example of Japanese sent0nee analysis using our consliluon t boundary parsing method > and Section  6   2 PatternA pattern represents meaningful units for linguistic structure and transfer in TDMT  , and is defined as a sequence that consists of variables and synrbols representing constituent boundaries  . A variable corresponds to some linguistic constituent  , and a constituent boundary does not allow any two variables to be adjacent  . A constituent boundary is expressed by either a functional word or a part-of-speech bigram marker l The explanations in this antithe subsequent two sections  , use English sentence parsing . 
2.1 Part-of-speech
Table 1 shows tile English parts-of-speech , currently used in our English-to-Japanese TDMT system  . This part-of-speech system does not necessarily agree with that of conventional grammar  . 
Table 1 English parts-of-speech ~ of-speech abbreviation example adjective adj large adverb advexactly interjection interjoh common noun noun bus numeral numel even proper noun propn Kyoto pronotm pron I wh-word wh what verb verb go be-verb be is auxiliary verb aux crmpreposition prepca conjunction conjbta determiner det the suffix suffix a  . m . 
In this part-of-st ) eech system , a be-verb , auxiliary verb , preposition , conjtmction , deterntiner , and suffix , are classified into a functional word . 
2 . 2 Constituent I ) ( ) ull dary marke , " exl ) ressed by a functional word One problem with pattern descriptions using surface  1 In this paper , variables , actual words , and part-of-speech abbreviations are expressed in calfitaletters  , italics , and go thic , respectively . 
words is the necessity for a large number Of patterns  . To snppress then n necessary patterns , the surface words in patterns are in principle restricted to functional words  , which occur frequently , and which modify or relate content words2 . 
Fnr instance , the expression , " go to the station " is divided into two constituents " go " and " the station "  , and thel ) reposition , " to " can be identified as a constituent boundary  . Therefore , in parsing " go to the station " , we use tile l ) attem , " X to Y " , which has two variables X and Y , and a constituent boundary , " to . " 2 . 3 Constituent I ) oundary marker expressed by a pa , ' t-nf-sl ) eechig , ' anl The expression "1 go " can be divided into two constituents ' T ' and " go  . " But it has no surface word that dividestile expression into two constituents  . In this case , a part-of-speech bigr , ' unis used as a constituent boundary . 
Suppose th , qta constituent X is immediately followed by a constituent Y  . We express a boundary-marker between X and Y by A B  , where A is a part-of-speech abbreviation of X's last word  , and B is a 1 ) art-of-speech abbreviation of Y's first word . For instance , ' T ' and " go " are a pronoun and a verb , respectively , so the marker " pron-verb " is inserted as a bot , ndary marker into "1go " . Namely , " I pron-verb go ", i . e . with the boundary marker inserted into the original input  , matchestile pattern " X pron-verb Y . " 2 . 4 Linguistic level Patterns are classified into ( lffferent linguistic levels to limit the explosion of structural ambiguity during parsing  . Table 2 shows typical linguistic levels in
F.nglish patterns.
Table 2 Typical levels in English patterns level exan_ ! p_le beginning phrase excuse me but X conl pot lnd sentence X when V simple sentence I would like to X verl  ) phrase X at Y noun phrase X of Y , X at Y c ( )mpound word X o'clock 2 Exceptions are canned expressions such as '7 would like to " and " in front of ' , or frdquent content words such as " what . " compound word is the lowest . A variable on a given level is instantiated by a string described on that same level or on a lower level  . For instance , in the noun phrase " X of Y " , the variables , X and Y cannot be instantiated by a simple sentence  . 
3 Derivation of Possible Structures
The algorithnl for constituert tl ) oundary parsing is as follows ;   ( A ) Assignment of morphological in Rn'nmtion to each wo M of an input string  ( B ) Insertion of constituent boundary nmrk crs ( C ) Derivation of possible structures by topdown pattern matching  ( D ) Structural disambiguation by distance calculation Note : we will explain  ( A )  , ( B ) and ( C ) in this section , and ( D ) in the next section , usirlg die following English sentence ; (1) " The busleaves Kyoto a televen a . m , "3 . 1 Assignment of nlorphohlgical int ' or math tnFirst , each word of the input string is assigned morphological information  , such as its part-ol'-sl ) eech and conjugation fc . rm . Throught iffs assignnient , we can get the lollowing part-of-speech sequence for  ( 1 )  . 
(2) do t , noun , verb , prop n , prop , num , suffix hi addition , each word is also assigned a thesaurus code for distance calcn hltions  , ' lnd , ' ill index for retrieving l ) atterns . For instance , " bits " has a thesaurus code corresponding to tile semantic attribute ' car  . ' Moreover , from the word "( it " , we can obtain the index to the pattern " X ( at Y " , whicllis found for both verb phrase and nOl . ln phrase . 
. 3.2 Marker hiserlic , n
A constituent boundary marker is inserted in an input string for pattern-matching  . The marker is extracted \[ rein the part-of -speech sequence of an input sentence  . Since such bigrams as dot-noun belong to the same constituent  , marker insertion by a part-of-sl ) eech bigram is restricted according to the items below  . 
( a ) Neither An or B is a part-of-speech relating two constituents  , uch as a preposition ( b ) A is not al ) art-of-speech nlodifying a latter constituent , such: . is a do to rinh/or . 
( c ) B is not al ) art-of-sI ) eech modifying a previous constituent , such as a suffix . 
We maint tlina list of p : lrt-of-speech bigrams that are eligible as marke  , 's because they satisfy the above conditions . Of the bigrams in (2) , " det-noun " , " propn-prep " , " prop-nora " , and " nun > suffix " , vioklte the above conditions , and are of course excluded . Thus , only " noun-verb " and " verb-propn " are inserted into sentence  ( 1 )  , as shown in (3) . 
(3 ) " The bus noun-verb leaves verb-propn Kyoto at eleven a  . tn . " 3 . 3al ) l ) lie alhm of Ilaltel'ns Our pattern-nlatch hlg n lethod parses an inpilt sentence in a topdown fashion  . The highest level patterns of the input sentence  :  . ire applied first ; the nlmt terns at lower levels are applied . The application procedure is as follows . 
( I ) Get indices to patterns from each woM of the sentence  . With these indices , patterns are retrieved and chocked to determine if each of them can match tile sentence  . Then exect lte(II ) . 
( ll ) Try to apply the highest-level patterns first . If there is a pattern tlmt can be applied , execute ( 1 II ) with respect othe variable bindings . Otherwise , exect ite(IV ) . 
( I l l ) Try to apply surface words ( content words registered in a dictionary )  . If lheal ) lflicalion succeeds , the application fo , that portion is finished successfully . () thcrwise , execute ( I1) . 
(IV ) If the pattern to be applied is at the lowest level  , the api ) lication fails . Otherwise , lower tile level of the patterns and execute ( II )  . 
If patternal ~ plication finishes successfully for all portions o\["an input sentence  , one or more source strttctures are obtained : since there is a possibility that more ttm none pattern can be a pl  ) lied to an expression i step ( II )  , structural ambiguity may occur . We seek all possible structures by breadth-first application  , and select the most plausible structure by the total distance value  ( See Section 4 . 4) . 

In step ( I ) , indices to possible patterns : - ire obtained from several words and bigrams in the marker-inserted sentence  ( 3 )  , as shown in Table 3 . 
Table 3 ReUieved patterns from ( 3 ) word the noun-verb verb-propnata . ?l ' l . 
retrieved pattern ( lilmuistic level )_tt , eX ( compound word )
X noun-verb Y ( simple sentence)
X verb-prop n Y ( verb pltrasc)
X at Y ( verb phr:~se , noun phrase)
X a.m . ( corot ? r and word)
After step ( I ) is finished , steps ( II ) -( IV ) are repeated recursively . First , the highest level pattern of the input sentence is applied  . This is " X noun-verb Y " , which is defined at the simple sentence level . Next , an attempt is made to apply patterns to the variable bindings " the bus " and " leaves verb -prop n Kyoto a televen a  . m . " , which are bound to variables X and Y , respectively . To " the bus " , at compound word level p'tt tern " the X " is applied first  , and the surface word " bus " is applied to proso " tile bus  . "Likewise , patterns and suri ' aee words are appliecl Iotile remaining part  , and tile al~plic:-nion is finished successfully . 
The pattern " X at Y " is found for both verb phrase and noun phrase  . " leaves verb-propn Kyoto at el even a . m . " thus has two possible structures , by the application of " X at Y . "" X verb-propnY " at the verb phrase level and " X a  . m . " at compotmd word level , are also applied . Fig .   1 is tile tree representation derived from the structure for sentence  ( 1 ) where " X at Y " is a veal ) phrase , while Fig .   2 is a tree representation derived from the slrnctllrein which " X at Y " is a noun phrase  . 
A boldfilce denotes the head part in each pattent . This infer , nationist , lilizcd for extracting an input for distance calculations  ( See section 4 . 3) . 
X noun-verb Y/k the X X at Y
I/\ bus X verb-propn Y X a.m.
III loaves Kyoto eleven
Fig . 1 Structure in wltich " X at Y " is a verb phrase
X noun-verb Y/\ the XX verb-propn Y
II bus loaves\
Xat Y
I \
Kyoto Xa.m.
Ieleven
Fig .   2 Struclure in which " X at Y " is a noun phrase tile the s:mrus  , and varies from 0 to 1 . Tim value 0 indicates that two semantic attributes belong to exactly the same category  , and 1 indicates that they : -/ retmrclated . 
An expression consists of words . The distance between expressions i the sum of the  ( listance between words multiplied by each weight . 
The distance is calculated quickly bectutse of the simple mechanism employed  . ( Sumita , 1992) and ( Furuse ,  1992 ,  1994 ) give a clctail cd account of tile distance calculation mechanism we are a clopting  . 
4 Distance Calculatitm
In this , ruction , an lethod for structural disaml ) iguation utilizing dist , ' m ce calculation , is described . 
4.1 Distance
The distance between two words is retluced to the distance between their respective sem  ; mtic attributes in a thesaurus . Words have associated thesaurus codes , which correspond to partiet flar semantic attributes  . The distance between the semantic attributes i determined according to the relationship of their positions in the hierarchy of  4  . 2 Best-match by distance calcul:ltinn The advantages of an example-based framework are mainly due to the distance calct dation  , which achieves the bcst-malch operation between tile input and provided examples  . 
In TDMT , translation is performed by applying stored empirical Iransl'er knowledge  . In TDMT transfer knowledge , each source pattern has example words of variables and possible target patterns  . The most ? qp propriate target pattern is selected according to the calculate distance between  , the input words and the example words . The English pattern " X at Y " at the verb phrase level  , corresponds to several possible English-to -Japanese transfer knowledge : Xat Y => Y'de X '   ( ( present , conference ) . .),
Y ' ni X'((stay , hotel )..),
Y ' we X'((look , it)..)
The first possible target pattern is " Y'de X '  "  , with example set (( present , cotg'erenee ) . .) . We will see that this target pattern is likely to be selected to the extent that the input variable bindings are semantic qlly similar to the example elements " present " and " coati'reIce  . " Within this pattern , X ' is the target word corresl x ) nding to X , tile result of transfer . " preset , l " and " con / ~ reaee " are sample bindings for " X at Y "  , where X = " present " , and Y = " conference " . The al ) ove transfer knowledge is compiled from such translation examples as the source-target pair of " presema paper at the conference " and " kaigi der on bun wo happ  )  , ou-st ~ ru " , where " kaigi " means " conference " and " happ you-sltru " means " present "  . 
Tilt semantic distance from the input is calculated for all examples  . Then lheexample with the least distance from the input is chosen  , and the target express km of that example is extracted  . If the input is closest to ( stay , hotel ) , "Y'niX'"is chosen as the target express ion  . 
The enrichment of examples increase stile a Cc , lracyOf determining the target expression and structure because conditions become more d clailed  . 
4.3 lnl ) ut of ' distance calculation
An input for distance eal cuh . ltion consists of head words invariable parts . In " X at Y " for the structure in Fig . l , X and Y are substitumd\[or the compound expressions  , " leaves verb-propn Kyoto " a1 ~ d " el even a . m . ", respectively . In such eases , it is necessary to extract head words as the input for the disEmce calculation about " X at Y  "  . 
In order to get head words , tile head part is ( lc signaw d in each pattern ( boldface in Figs . 1 and 2) . For inslance , the t ) attern " X vorb-propnYIIe(li)t ; lillg the information that X is a head part . So the head of " leaves verb-propn Kyoto " is " leaves "  , and tile head or " xa . m . " is " a . m . " . Thus , in " X at Y " for I hestrncture in Fig .  1 , the in i ) ut of the distance calculation is ( leaves , a . m . ) . 
Table 4 shows tile result of distance cqlculation in " X at Y " in Fig  .  1 . The most plausible target structure " Y'niX ' " and its distance value  0  . 17 are obtained by the dislance calculation . 
Head words are passed upward from lower palterns to higher  1  ) atterns . Since the head of the verb phrase pattern , " XatY " is assigned teX , the head of " leaves verb-propn Kyoto at eleven a . m . " is " leaves " , which is tile head of " leaves wrb-propn Kyoto " . The head of " the bus " is " bus " fi ' om the head information that the Table  4 Result of distance calculation in " Xa/Y " in l q g  . 1 input : ( leave , a . m . ) AL~J?ELeXxl ) ression closest example and IS value : ~
Y ' de X ' ( arrive , a.m .) O .17
Y'niX'(serve , reception ) 0.67
Y ' we X ' ( look , it ) 1 . 00 head of " the X " is X . Thus , rite input of tile distance calculation of " X noun-verb Y " is  ( bits , leave ) . 
4.4 SI , ' uetural dis:ml bignation
Distance cal culq tion selects not only the most l ) lausible target expression but also the most plausible source structure  . When . strtl ctt lralaml ) iguity occttrs , the most a pllr Ol ) riate structure is selected by comt ) uting tl ~ ototals for all possible combinations of partizf l distance values  . The structure with the least total distance is judged most consistent wilh empirical knowledge  , and is chosen as I hemost 1 ) lausil ) lestructure ( Furuse 1992 , 1994; Sumita 1993) . 
Table 5 shows the result of each partial distance talc Haion for tile structure in Fig  .  1 . l:mm Table 5, we V . Ct I he total distance value 1 . 17 for the structure in l : it; .  1 . 
Table 5 Result of each partial distance calculation for tile slructure in I  , ' ig . 1 souiee chosen l~lr . .~c :\[ distance val,lg the X X ' 0 . 33
Xrlot Jrl-vorb Y X ' wa Y '0.67
X verb-propn Y Y ' we X ' 0.00
X.t Y Y " ni X ' 0.17
X a.m . goze J ~ X ' ji 0.00
The difference in total distance value I ) etween two l ) OSsible structures for sentence ( 1 ) is due only to the distance value of " X at Y " , for the structure in Figs . 1 and 2 . For the strucltne in Fig .  2 , the distance valtl0 of " X at Y " attile neun phrase level is given as  0  . 83 , as shown in Table 6 , and is given a total distance f1 . 83 . 
Thus , the structure in Fig . 1 is selected as the 3The: . ; evii\]ties were col // pu , ed based on I he present transfer knowledge of the T1  ) MT system . 
appropriate restflt because it has the least total distance knowledge for the pattern " X pron-noun Y "  ; value . 
Table 6Result of distance calcul , ltion in " X at Y " in Fig . 2 input : ( Kyoto , a . m . ) target expression ? losest exampl 0 and its value
Y ' no X ' ( room , hotel ) 0.83
Y ' deno X ' ( language , conference ) 1.00
In macbine translation , itix important to disambiguate be possible structures  , l ) ecause a difference in structure may bring about a translation difference  . For instance , the structures in Figs . 1 and 2 give different Japanese translations ( 4 ) and ( 5 )  , respectively .   ( 4 ) is selected because it is generated from the best structure with the least total distance value  . 
(4 ) basu wa gozen 11 jini Kyoto we demasu 4 ( 5 ) basuwagozen \] 1 ji ~_ Kyoto we demasu 5 Constituent Boundary Parsing in

Since a postposition is quite often used as a case -particle in Japanese  , timbotm dary markers expressed by a part-of -speech bigram may not be used less frequently than in English  . However , in spoken Japanese , postpositions are frequently omitted . The Jqpanese sentence " Kochira waji mukyoku " where ko chira means this and ji mukyoku means " office "  , is translated into the English sentence "77fis is the office " by applying transfer knowledge such as the  following5: 
Xwa Y => X'beY'
But postpositions are often omitted in natural six ) ken Japanese , e . g . in the sentence " Kochira jimu kyoku . " The sentence can thus be divided into two noun phrases  , "kochira " and " jimu kyoku . "kochira " is a pronotm , and " jimukyoku " is a noun . So , using the bigram method of marking boundaries , we get " Kochira pron-noun ji mukyoku " , where the bigram " pron-noun " was inserted . The English sentence "77fis is the oJ fice " can then be produced by applying the following transfer  4"basu  " , " de " , and " masu " mean " bus " , " leave " , and a polite sentence-final form , respectively . 
5 For simplicity , examples and other possible target expressions are omined  . 
X pron-noun Y => X'beY'
In Japanese adnominal expressions , too , constitue i ~ t bonn dary markers , 'Ire inserted between the modifier and the modified  . 
6 Results
We have evaluated timefficiency of our parsing method by utilizing a Japanese-lo-English  ( J g ) and English-to-Japanese ( EJ ) TDMT prototype system ( Furuse 1994 ; Sobashima 1994) , which ix , ' unning on a Symbolics XL 120 ( I , a LISP machine with IOMIPS performance . The system's domain is inquiries concerning international conference registrations  . The efficency is evaluated with 154 Japanese sentences and 138 corresl ) onding English sentences , which are extracted from 10 dialogues in the domain . The systeln has al ) out 500 source p , ' llterns for JE translation and about 35 ( 1 source patterns for EJ transhttion . 
The test sentences mentioned above have already l ) eentr:tined to investigate the efficiency of the method  , and can be p-lrse(lcorrectly by the system . Table 7 outlines the 154 Japanese sentences and 138 corresponding
English sentences.
Table 7 Outline of test senlences_Japanese E_j1Aj_I is h words per inp nt sentence 9  . 8 8 . 7 average numl ) erofix ) ssible structures 1 . 5 4 . 8 An l-nglish sentence tends to have more struclural ambiguities than a Japanese sentence  , be c , ' tnse of PF'-altachment , the phenomenon that an English preposition f ) rodtl CCS\[ ) ( ) \[ hanoun verbp\]lrasc\[Iliaa\[iolln p has c  . In contrast , tile Jai ) anesol ) ost position does not generally produce different -level constituents  . 
Table 8 shows how , nuch time it takes to reach the best structure and translation output in our JE and EJTDMT system  . The processing time for distance calculation include strnctnral disaml  ) iguation i addition to ktr get pattern selection . 
Tiffs demonstrates that the ot~r parsing method can get the best structure and translation output quickly wit\]f in the examl  ) lo-/xlsed framework . 

Table 8 Processing time for the TI ) MT system 6 JF . E , I derivation of possible structures 0 . 25 ( scc ) 0 . l7 dislance calculation 1 . 32 0 . 14 whole tr , ' lnsl ; ition 2 . 17 1 . 0 7   7 Conclulhlg Renllirks A constituent boundary parsing method for cxaniplo-based in  ; ich in B translation has been propose I , l , inguislio patterns consist hlg of variables and constituent boundaries  , are applied to an input string in a topdown fashion  , and the possible structures can bc lisambigutated using distance calculation by the examlle-based framework  . This nlotho discll'icicut , and useful for parsing bolh Japanese and Knglish sentences  . 
TIle "\[' DMT system , which bidirectionally translates between Jal /anese and English within the eXaml  ) le-b:~sed framework , utilizes this parsing method and achieves efficient and robust spokel  ) larlguage translation . 
By introducing linguistic information to more patterns  , there is a possibility that this method can also be utilized for ruled as ed MT  , deep so inantic analysis , and so on . We will improve our parser by increasing the number of lraining sentences  , and test its accuracy on olvn dala . 

The authors wotlld like to th-lnk theme nlbors of ATP  , Interpreting Telecomnlllilicatioi is P , esoarch Laboratories for their colnlrl Onls oi1 variot lsp , ' irts of lhi ~ , research . 
Special thanks are due 1o Kohei \[ labara and g:lsuhiro Yamazaki , for theirs nl ) l ) or t of this research . 
Bibliography
Furuse > O . , aridlida , H .  (1992) . Cool ) er : ltion betwe on Transferaild Analysis in Example -Based Framework  . 
Prec . of COTING-92, pp . 645-65I.
Fnrnse , O . , Sumita , E . , and Ii(la , I1 .  (1994) . Transfer-Driven Machine Translation Utilizing I impirical Knowledge  . Transactions of hiformation Processing Society of Jal  ) an , Vol . 35, No . 3, 17 t . 414-425 ( in

Grishman , R . , and Kosaka , M .  (1992) . Comb in hlg 6The distance calculation time in F . J transhltion is short , since the system hasllOt yet learned cr lough trai/s\]:lliOll example scml cerningEJ translation  . 
Rationalist and liml ) iricist Apl noachos to Machine " l'rans Nilio in . Prec . of TMI-92, pp . 263-274 . 
Jones , D .  (1992) . Non-hybrid l-xample-baso ( l Machine Translation Architectures . Prec . of TMI-92, i ) p . 163-171 . 
McI . ean , i . J .  (1992) . F . x , ' unile-Based Machine Translation using Counectionist Matching  . Prec . of
TMI-92, pI).35-43.
M : u ? , ernlan , D . M . , and Marcus , M . P .  (1990) . Parsing a Naltlr ; ll\] , allgtiage Using Mtlttialln for nialion Sl : ltistic  ~  . l ' roc , of AAAI 90, Ip . 984-989 . 
Maruyalna , 11 . > and Watanal)e , I1 .  (1992) . Tree Cover Search Algorithin for l '; x , ' lmple-llased " Franslaliom Proc . 
of TMI-92, Pl ). 173-184.
M: . uuyan/a , 11 .  (1993) . Pattern-Based Translation : Conlcxt-Free Transducer and ItsAlt  ) lication to Practical NI . P . Prec . of Naturall , anguago Processing Pacific P , im
SylnpO .'-; it lln'93, i ) P . 232-237.
Nqgao , M .  (1984) . A franlework of a mechanical Iranslalion between Japanese and l-nglish by analogy principle  , in Artificial and lhunan Intelligence , ods . 
Elithorn , A . and Banerji > P, . , North-Iloll and , pp . 173-180 . 
Nirenburg > S . , I ) omashnov , C . , and Grannes , D . J . 
(1993) . Two Alproaches to Matching in l-xample-Basel Machine Translation  . Prec . of TIVlI-93, pp . 47-57 . 
Sale S .  (1991) . Examl ) le-P , asod Machine Translali)n . 
l ) oclorial Thesis , Kyoto University.
Sobashima , Y . , Furuse , O . , Akamine , S . , Kawai , J . , and Iida > I1 . (1994), Al . lidirectional Trnasfer-Driven Machine " l ~ ransl :ltion Syslein for Spoken Dialogues  . 
Prec . of COI . IN(i-94.
Sumita , E . and lida > 11 .  (1992) . Examl ) le-P , a sel Transfer of Japanese Adnoin in , : il Particles int of ~2nglish . IEICI~TITANS . INV . & SYST . , Vol . li75-D,N ( . 4, pi ) . 585-59-'1 . 
Stunita , F, . , \]-' uruse , O . , and lid , q , t\[ .  (1993) . All lxain ple-llasod Disaulbiguation of Prepositional Phrase Aitachn ~ ont  . Prec . of TMI-93, pi ) . 80-91 . 
Watanal)e , 11 .  (1992) . Similarity-l ) riven Transfer Systoln . Prec . of COTING-92, pl . 771-776 . 

