Character-based Collocation for Mandarin Ch in ese 
Chu-Renl-luang
Institute of ltistory and Philology
Academia Sinica
Nankang , Taipei , Taiwan

Keh-jiann Chen
Institute of Information Science
Academia Sinica
Nankang , Taipei , Taiwan

Yun-yan Yang
Computing Center
National Taiwan University
Taipei , Taiwan

This paper describes a characters-based Chinese collocation system and discusses the advantages of it over a traditiolml word-based syst cm  . Since word breaks are not conventionally marked in Chinese text corpora  , a character-based collocation system has the dual advantages of avoiding pre-proccs sing distortion and directly accessing sublexical information  . Furthermore , word-based collocational properties can be obtained through an auxiliary modttle of automatic segmentation  . 
corporas they are , we " , vii ibeable to accessub-lexical information without additional cost  . To take the full advantage of the nature of texts  , reliable tools can also be devised to obtain \[ exical collocation  . In this paper , we , , viii describe the design and implementation era Chinese collocational system that does not require the preprocessing of automatic segmentation but is a we to allow both lexical and sublexical information be automatically extracted  . 
PI(OJ1;CTNOTE:I~ARGI ; TEXTCOI(I'ORAII . Background : Corpus and Computational Patfonn1 . Introduction Collocation has been established as an essential tool in computational linguistics  ( Church and Mercer 1993 )  . In addition , various col\[ocatiomd programs have been proven to b c indispensable in automatic acquisition of " \ [ exical information  ( e . g . Sinclair 1991, and Bibcri993) . 
Sinccwords arc the natural and undisputed units in available text corpora  , virtually all the current collocation a\[ programs are word-based  . However , there are languages where texts do not conventionally mark words  , such as Chinese . l_Jnlcs sa large tagged corpus is available , a word-based collocation system in these languages face stile following inevitable difficulties  . 
First , hand-segnlentation of a large corpus is tedious and financially nearly impossible  . Second , automatic scgmentation progral n can neither identify words not listed illtile lexicon nor correctly segment all-Milch are listed  . Third , estimation of lexical probability relies on word -ficqucncy counts based on the inaccurate results of automatic scgm cntation thus the deviation tcnds to be greater than standard tolerance  . 
Text corpora without word breaks , nevertheless , also has their advantages . Take Chinese for example , timbasic units of text corpora are zi4 ' character ' , a fairly faithful representation of the morphemic level of tim language  . In other words , if we take Chinese Icxt This collocation system is developed on the  20 million charact cr modern Chinese corpus at Academia Sinica  ( Huang and Chen 1992 , lquangInPress ) . This corpus is composed mostly of newspaper texts  . It is cstimatcd to have 14 million words . Following industrial standard in Taiwan , our collocation system can deal with any corpora encoded by  BIG5 code . The program is dcvclopcd und craUNiX cnviron mcnt on HP workstation  . It should , howcver , be portable to any UNIX machiac with compatible Chincse solution  . The collocation syst cm is currcntly used in research by more than  10 linguists affiliated with thc Chinese Knowledge Information Processing  ( CKIP ) group at Academia Sinica . It is also open to any visiting scholar for on site 

III . Overall Design of the System
There are two major modules in tile collocation system : one deals directly with unsegmented texts and the other which incorporates automatic segmentation before collocation  . The two modules share tile preprocess of KWIC search module  , which allows user-specitqed linguistic patterns ( Ituang and Chen 1992 )  . 
They also share three common routines to detect character collocation  , to identify possible collocation words through Ngrams  , and to contextually filter texts with user-sl3ecified strings . 

The overall design of the system is schematically represented in diagram  1  . 
l ) il ~ rain I , S ) , steni Design\[l " iti"ii ~ ' \]1/
I7
No : II cat'tn ( 2 ) Word Colloc ~ dion ( 3 ) Categorical
I ) istribution (4) N-\[., ram(5) l ; ill criug wilh
C : haiaclor with (6) Filleting with
Calcgmits (7) End (1) 1(a ) 1 (3) 1 (5) 1(( , )\]\[l/

IIt V . ColIocalionWithoutSc ! , ,mculalion There arc three collocatiomd tools awfilable in this system without segmenting the texts in lowords  . First , character collocation allows automatic acquisition of sub-lcxical information  , sttcll as the conditions on mor-pho-lexical rt , les . This is attested by the studies on the notion o1' word in the mental lexicon reported in \[ luang ctal  .  (1993) , and the generalizations of productive dcrivational rules in Mandarin offered in I long ctal  . 
(1992) . Take note that when applying KWIC search Io the corpus  , a user has the lie e ( Iom to specify a key that is a single character , a multicharactersiring , or even a discontinuous string of characters . These charact cr strings may or may not be words . Thus the extracted col-location aL relation is not simply between characters  . It can also be between characters and either a simplex word  , a compound , or a phrase . '\[' he collocational relation in our systel ) \] is n least lrcd all drcl ) resented by both Mutualln for unation ( Church and llanks I990 ) and frequency . The user can choose to sort and rank the collocates by cither criteria  . S/lie can also specify threshold wlhie by eithe ! criteria  . Usually , then \] ost effective method is to uselic quency threshold and Mutual Inlbr-mation ranking  ( 1luangIn Press )  . In addition to the measures of correlation , distribution of the collocates is also indicated in terms of positions relative to the key and liequency of occurrences at each position for each collocating character  . 
Second , lexical information can also be derived . fi'om this collocational system regardless of its lack of demarcation of lexical items  . This is achieved through as ilnplc Markov l node l . Once the KWIC search extracted the relevant contexts  , a simple Ngram routine can be perl brrrt cd on lhe context  ( s ) specified by the user . 
Dcl ~ cmling on the purpose of the study and the size of relcwmt texts  , the length of the targct sequence as well as \[ lie Ihreshold l  ) Ulllbcr Call be specified . For instance , a linguist may want to look lor all two or three character sequences that occtlr over  5 times after a keyver b . This would likely lima out a list of possible arguments  ( i . e . 
syntactic words ) for that verb . lleuce lexical information StlChas semantic restriction of the predicates on its post -arguments can be indirectly extracted  . In our system , the user is allowed to iterate the Ngram search by desigmtt in ~  , different contexts and string length(N ) . 
The l bllowing is an example of collocation without segmentation  , tluang ctal .   ( 1994 ) argue that Mandarin light verbs select the verbs they nomiualize  . This is supported by the Ngram collocation restllts in diagram  2  . The collocation is extracted from a 20 million clmracter corpus and the collocation window is  5 characters to the rightel ' the keyword . It shows that the verb j in 4 xing 2 ( ypically nominalizcs a process verb . 
Diagram 2 . N-granl Collocation ( By Frequency ) Bi--syllabic Collocation with the verb j in4xing2 gon\[ , l zuo4 ' to work ' diao4cha2 ' to investigate ' 354 gong I cheng2 ' engineering work ' 233 l . ,ou ltong I ' to communicate ' 198   xie2tiao2 ' to coordinate ' 185   yan2j   iu4 ' to study ' 185   liao3jie3 ' to understand ' 166   guclhua4 ' toplan ' 156   xie2shangl ' to negotiate ' 154 Last , the user can specify a character string in the context as a filter  . The lnost use fill application is to specify a string that forms a syntactic word  . This is a technique commonly used to resolve categorical or sense ambiguities  . Combining both Ngram search and string filtering , fi'equcncy-based word collocatip n is achieved without segmentation  . 
V . Collocation After Segmentation
When lexical or phrasal relation is the focus of the study  , the above collocation module may sometimes be automatic segmentation/tagging program such that we can acquire information involving word pairs as well as grammatical categories  . The automatic segmentation procc durc is an revised version of the program reported in Chen and Liu  ( 1992 )  . The online lexicon is the CKIP lexicon of more than  80 thousand cntries ( Chen 1994 )  . 
We did not automatically segment and tag the whole corpus for very good reasons  . First , without a correctly tagged corpus , no statistically-based tagger can perform satisfactorily yet  . 
Second , tll crc is no practical way to recover incorrectly identified words  . That is , when the automatic tagg cr takes a character fi'om a target word to formaninal ~ propriate word with a neighboring character  ; that target word is lost and cannot be identified in this context  . Tiros , it will be linguistically more felicitous to allow KWIC to identify all matching strings and allow filtering of incorrect matched words in later steps  . 
Last , segmented texts restrict imavailable collocation inlbrmation exclusively at word lev cl  . For instance , not only morphelne-nmr plaenae collocation will not be availabl c  , neither can correlations bct wccnamn rphcnac and a word be extracted  . 
In contrast , when optional scglnentation is performed online on the result of KWIC search  , the collocational syst cn r can be applied to any electronic text corpora with minimal pre -proccs sing  . This current approach also allows us to mix sub -lcxical  , lexical , and extra-lexical conditions according to our research need  . 
Even though the post-segmentatiou module shared three routines with timmodule without segmentation  , they do differ non-trivially in their applications  . First , the character collocation module is basically tim same  . 
The additional step of segmentation excludes accidental string matches  . For instance , with qu4shi4"topassaway'as the keyword , KWIC may extract he incorrect context'tal qu4   shi4jie4 ge , ldi4lu3xing2' . This error in identifying word boundaries can be easily avoided when the text is correctly segnrented  . In this case , the correct segmentation is ' tal qu4   shi4jie4   ge4di4   ht3xing2   ( s/hego work \[ everywhere travel ) ' . Second , Ngram in this module now can include both sequences of characters and sequences of words  . 
Two additional tools directly utilize grammatical tags  . 
Timfirst one is tim computing of tim distribution of grammatical categories in the context  . The second is contextual filte , ' ing in terms of grammatical categories . 
One caution needs to be mentioned here . As mentioned earlicr , we do not have a highly reliable automatic tagger yet because the  , ' e is no dependably tagged large Chinese corpus , llence our automatic segmentation program looks up the categories of the words but do not attempt to resolve ambiguity  . Since categorically ambiguous words make up only around  20% of the texts ( Chen and Liu 1992 , Chen et al In Preparation ) , keeping all possible tags seem to be an acceptable compromise for the moment  . But this also means that a user must be on the look out for possible errors caused by multiple tags  . Our system allows the use , " to view the categorical distribution of tim whole context  , as well as to focus on a smaller context and specific categories  . Diagram 3 shows tim categorical collocation of the head of the postverbal argument of  Imo4de2 ' to get/receive . ' We obtained this information by first perform the discontinuous KWIC on  huo4de2 and the relative clause headmarker de . After segmentation ad collocatio ! L we restrict im disphty to tim first position to tim right of de  , and to the two major categories of N and V . The result shows that this verb typically take subclasses of common noun and  ( nominalized ) transitive verbs as argulr ~ ents . 
Diagram 3 . Categorical Collocation l leads of Relative Clause Arguments  ofhuo4de2 rlficquency rl fiequency
Nab 63 Vc 262
Nac 40 Vhl 128
Nad 27 Vkl 20
Nca26 Vcl 19
Ncb 13 Vc2 16
Last , the word-based collocation system is tim part of our system that will take the most processing capacity  . 
This is also the only part of our system that is still being tested at this moment  . Word frequencies of our corpus have already been calculated and stored  . The automatically segmented word-based collocation module should be available for linguistic research within weeks  . 
VI . Conclusion
In this paper , we described a collocation system that works on text corpora without word marks  . Tiffs system hastim advantage of extracting sublexical information  . 
This is also particularly useful in studying Chinese language co  , pora since sociological words are distinct fi'om syntactic words in Chinese  ( Chao 1968 )  . Thus in linguistic and literary computing , it is often necessary to formulate generalizations based on  zi4  , the sociological word . The teclmiques reported in this paper should also find applications in two aspects of future computational linguistic research  . Fi , s t , it can be applied to other language text corpora for extraction of sublexical collocation  . Second , it can be applied to text corpora including corpora in languages in which sociological words and syntactic words do not coincide and spoken corpora  . 

Research of this project was partially funded by tile Chiang Ching-kuo Foundation for International Scholarly Exchanges  , tile National Science Council of R . O . C . , and Academia Sinica . We would like to thankl , i-ping Chang and other colleagues fit CK tP for their help and comlrients  . P , esponsibility of filly remaining errors is ours alone  . 

Ililler , D .  1993 . Cooccurrence Patterns alnong Collocations : A Tool for Coqnis-Based Lexical Knowledge Acquisition  . Computationall , inguistics . 

Chao , Y . R . 1968. A Gramniar of Spoken Chinese.
Berkeley : University of Calilbrnia Press.
Chert , K . -j .  1994 . l , inguistic lnlbrmation and l , exi-cal Data Management in Dictioilary Research . Invited Paper preserited are the Internal Conference oil Computer Processing of Oriental Languages  . l ) aeion
Korea . May 1014.
___ , and S . -II . Liu .  1992 . Word Identification for Mandarin Chinese Sentences  . COIANG-92 .  101-105 . Nantes , lrrance . 
__, S . - h . l , hl , L . - p . Chang , ai id Y . - h . Chin , In Preparation . A Practical Tagger for Chinese Corpora . Nankang : Academia Sinica . 
Chinese Knowledge Informiition I'roeesshig(2roilp . 
1993 . The CKIP Categorical Classification of Mandarin Chinese  ( hi Chinese )  . CK1P Technical Report no .  93-05 . Taipei : Academia Sinica . 
__ 1994 . A Frequency Dictionaryo\["Written Chinese . CKIP Technical Report no . 94-01 Taipei:
Academia Sinica.
C \] lnl'eh,1( , , . , and P . I\[anks .  1990 . Word Association Norms , Mutual hdormation , and I , exicogra-phy . Computational Linguistics .  16 . 1:22-29 . 
, and R . L . Mercer .  1993 . Introduction to the Special Issue ell Computation all  , inguistics Using l , arge Corpora . Computalional Linguistics . 

lhnlg , W . M . ,C . -R . lhlang , and K . -J . Chen .  1991 . 
The Morphological Rules of Chinese Derived Words . l ' , ' esented at the 1991 International Conference on Teaching Chinese as a Second lmnguage  . 

lluang , C . -R . In Press . Corpusbased Studies of Mandarin Chinese : Foundational Issues and Preliminary Results  . In M . Y . Chen and O . J - l , . Tzeng Eds .  1993 . Linguistic Essays in lloner of Willian ~ S . -
Y . Wang . Taipei : Pyramid.
, Kalhleen Ahrens , and Keh-jiann Chen .  1993 . Al ) at a-driven Approach to Psychological Reality of tile Mental Lexicon : Two Studies in Chinese Corpus Linguistics  . Proceedings of the International Conference oH the Biological Basis of l  , anguage .  53-68 . Chinyi : Center of Cognitive Science , National Chung Cheng

.  .   .   .   . l , . - p . Chang . , and M . -I , . Yeh . A Co , ' pus-based Study of Nominalization and Verbal Semantics : Two Light Verbs in Mandarin Chinese  . Paper presented attile Sixth North American Conference on 
Chinese IAnguislics . May 1315, USC.
, and K . -j . Chen .  1992 . A Chinese Corpus Ibr Linguistic Research . COLING-92 .  1214-1217 . Nan-tes , France . 
Sinclair , J . M .  1991 . Corpus , Concordance , Collocation . Oxford : Oxlbrd University Press . 
Sproat , R . , and C . Shih .  1990 . A Statistical Method for Iqndirlg Wordll , on n daries in Chinese Text . 
Conlputer Process hlgo\['Chinese and Orientall , an ; tlages .  4 4:336-351 . 
Svartvik , J .  1992 . I , ', d . I ) irections hi Corpus I , in-guistics . Proceedings of Nobel Synl posh nn 82 , 48 August 1091 . Trends in l , inguistics Studies and Monographs 65 . Berlin : Moulon . 
Wang , M . -C . , C . -P , . \[hlang , and K . -, i . Chen .  1994 . 
The hlentificatioi / and Classification of Unk ~lownWordsillChinese:aN-grflm-llasedApt  ) roach . 
Mantl script . Acadelnia Sirlica.

