Noun Phrasal Entries ill the 1 , 3)17 , English Word Dictionary
A . Koizumi , M . Arioka , Cliar \] d \], M . Sugimoto
Japan L:lectronic Dictionary Research Institute , IAd . 
Tokyo , Jap:m
L . ( htthrie , C . Watts
Comptfling Research Laboratory
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces , NM , USA
R . Cat ~ zone , Y . Wilks
l ) epartment of Computer Science
University of Sheffield
Sheffield , UK
Keywords : Lexicon construction , tmiversal features , 
resources for eL .
1. Introduction
The dictionary construction project attile Japan Flectronic Dictionary Research Institute  , Ltd .   ( El ) R ) in Tokyobegan in 1986 and is a hnost certainly the largest lexicon construction project for computational purposes it \] tile world  . This paper describe some aspects of the construction of the English language dictionary  , in particular a project to verify and enh , ' m ce information on noun phrases in the English Word Dictioniuy undertaken by the Computing Research Laboratory at New Mexico State University and the University of Sheffield  . We believe the works of arraises issues of wider linguistic interest which require practical solution so that the largescale lexicon project can proceed  . We hope that this palter will show the complexity  , diversity , attdrichness of the content of the EI ) R English Word Dictionary . 
Tile key idea has beet \] to construct a system of features  , categories and structures for encoding English words and phrases that is  , at the same time , universal , or at least sufficiently universal to code both English and Japanese  , two very different languages indeed . This is particuh My evident in the use of left and right " adjacency attributes " in both the English and Japanese dictionaries  . This general idea is a very natural outcome of the general state of linguistic theory  , at least in tile generative tradition , in its broadest sense : one which emphasises universality in its feature sets and structural conslraints  , but which has also evolved by a long and tortuous route to the current position where tile lexicon is primary in a linguistic system  , and all other levels of linguistic analysis can be seen as a projection from that level  . The alphabet-soup grammar theories that are now current all share that assumption to some degree  . 
Thus , a practical attempt to construct a lexicon on i ) rinciples as universal as possible for computational use  . is indeed a project broadly consistent with the state of generative theory  . Almost all other lexicon construction projects underway with computation as a main goal  ( e . g . COMLEX , CUP , Procter 1992 att ( I see Wilks , Slator and Guthrie , it \] press ) are designed principally for I?nglish , although CUP intends to augment is structures l " ron\]non-English corpora\[IS soon as is feasible  , and a COMI , I'; Xt br Spanish is already under discussion . Nonctlmless , the sheer scale of the EDR enterprise ( see below ) and its explicitly universalist assumptions ( 1o make it unique . We will now outline briefly tile general structure of the dictionaries it \] the project and then proceed directly to some of the theoretical : rod computational choices that have been nladeill tile Fnglish lexicon  . 
2. The EDR Dictionaries
The EI ) RI-lectronicl ) ictionary(El ) R , 1993; Yokoi ,  1990 ) is designed as the first true machine-readable dictionary that contains  , it \] are a dily q ccessible lorm , tile information required for a coln puter to understand and generate natural hmguage  . As such , the EDR Electronicl ) ictionary is intended to be universally apl\ ] licahle and is not restricted to a p  ; trticuh trapplication system . The part of the dictionary that handles surface information is kept separate from the section that handle semantic in tbrlnation : surface inlormation that is heavily dependent upon a particular language is stored in the Word I  ) ictionary , attdsclnantic infornmtion is stored in the Concept Dictionary  . 
The rearcl bur different dictionaries that comprise the El  ) I ? , l : ! lectronic Dictionary : the Word Dictionary , the Concept I ) ictionary , the Co-Occurrence Dictionary and the Bilingual Dictimmry  . The different dictionaries that makenp the EDR lilectronic Dictionary and the EDR Corpus are set in a structure of mutual interrelatedness  . Four types of constituent data are contained in the Ifl  ) Relectronic dictionaries : word entries , concept entries , cooccurrence entries and bilingual entries . Word entries consist of head words , grammatical information that indicate stile grammatical characteristics of tile word  , and concept identifiers that indicate tile concepts represented by a given word in different contexts  . 
Concept entries represent the relationship between two dif-relation labels to describe the possible cooccurrence rla-tions between head words  . Bilingual entries describe the word correspondences between head words in different languages  . Thus , each of the EDR electronic dictionaries i related to the others  , and by using the different component dictionaries as a single entity  , they can usefully be applied to many forms of natural anguage processing  . 
3. The EDR Word Dictionary
The role of the Word Dictionary is to provide morphological  , syntactic and some semantic informatio , ~: the Word Dictionary is divided into a General Vocabulary Dictionary and a Technical Terminology Dictionary and the former is further subdivided into a Japanese General Vocabulary Dictionary and  , an English General Vocabulary Dictionary , each of which contains 200 , 000 words . The vocabulary covers words , compounds , and idioms used in ordinary documents . The Technical Terminology l ) ictio-n , ' u'y covers words or terms that are specific to infornmtion processing and related fields  , and is also split into a Japanese Technical Terminology and an English Technical Terminology Dictionary  . Each contains 100,000 words . 
The main characteristics of the General Vocabulary Dictionary are:  ( 1 ) surface level information and deep ( semantic ) level information are stored separately ;   ( 2 ) surface level information is described independent of any specific application system or algorithm  ; (3) a largescale vocabul , ' u'y contains lexical items used in general writing  . 
The Word Diction , ' uy is a collection of word entries that contain entry information as shown in Fig  .  1 . 
Fig . 1 Structure and Content of Word Entries
I lead word Grammatical
Information Information ltead word

Adjacency Attributes
Extra Notation

Part of speech
Syntax tree

Grammatical ttributes
Function word information


Concept identifier
Concept illustration
Snpplement , ' u'y



Tilelle adword Information provides head word , extranotation , and pronunciation . A head word consists of notation ( the orthographic spelling of a word-containing all the characters common to all inflected forms of tile word  ) and adjacency attributes . For phrasal entries , the head word is a list of the pairs of notation and adjacency attributes of each constituent of the phrasal entry  . The adjacency attributes indicate the possibility of joining one in or pheme to another and  , are used to create adjacency rules for morphological analysis and generation  . EDR employs a bidirectional connection grammar which divides the adjacency constraint attributes into possible connectivity otheleft of tile word and possible connectivity to the right of the word  . 
This information is not nor , nally described in this form for English , but EI ) R employs the same method in both Word Dictionarie so that morphological nalysis of Japanese and English can be made by the same algorithm  . The extra notation information stores head words in kana for entries in the Japanese Word Dictionary and in a character string form with syllable markers for hyphenation for entries in the English Word Dictionary  . 
Grammatical information consists of part of speech  , syntax tree , inflection information , grammatical ttributes and function word information  . The grammatical information can be used to find tile syntactics tn  , cm re of a sentence in syntactic analysis . A syntax tree is provided for compound words or idioms consisting of multiple words  . The fimc-tion word code corresponding to the notation of the bead-word is provided for fimction words  . 
A concept ( listed under semantic information ) in addition to being aflmdamental component of the Concept Dictio-nmy  , describe stile semantic ontent of any word entry in the Wordl  ) ietionary . If the same head word has two or more different concepts  , separate word entries are used in the Word Dictionaries  . This information is used to distinguish between the various meanings a given word may have  . The concept is the link between the Word Dictionary and the Concept l  ) ictionary . 
Supl ) lementary inforlnation provides information on the usage as well as the frequency of the head word entry  . 
4 . Noun Phrase Entries in the EDR English Word Dictionary Portions of the English Word Dictionary have been subjected to rigorous verification through proiects at the Computing Research Laboratory  ( CRL ) at New Mexico State University , and the University of Sheffiekt . Following is a report on one phase of the verification project at CRL which was aimed at describing the grammatical information as well as verifying the morphological information  . 
The objects of this phase of tile verification project consisted of  37  , 039 entries initially coded by EI ) R as noun phrase expressions . Among these entries ,  2 , 389 were treated as single word entries and 34 , 6 50 were treated as single word and phrasal entries )  . 
4 . 1 Phrasal Entries vs . Single Word Entries in the lil ) RIV . n-glish Word Dictionary In the EDR English Word Dictionary  , head words are treated as either single lexical item  , while ' phrasal ' , efers to a word that is coml ) osed of more than one lexieal item . 
In addition to the difference made on lexical units  , some words are ' treated as ' single word entries even though they  , are composed of more tll an one lexical item . The type of information that is provided for head words varies according to the type of head word  . Phrasal entries are given the same information given to single word entries but they are also coded with additional information that indicates their internal syntactic structure  . The adjacency attributes and the grammatical ttributes are given to each of the constituents of the phrasal  . Phrasal expressions t ~' eated as single word entries ~: treuot segmented into constituent words  . Included under those words t bat are treated as single word entries are the following tylx~s of words : - foreign words-proper nouns-common nouns derived from prope  , ' nouns (" New
Mexican " ) -idiomatic expressions which do not fit into a generalized phrase structure l  ) atteru ( " on the cheap , "" opensesame ") - function word equivalents 4 . 2 Information Provided for Notre Phrase Entries For noun phrase entries in the English Word Dictionary information is provided for the phrase as a whole as well as far the individual constituent shat comprise the F  , hrase . 
Whole phrase information in ch , des designation as either a common oun or proper noun  ( proper norms are treated as single word entries and constituents are not separately analyzed  )  , countability , collectivity , gender , verb agreement and article usage . In addition , the head noun is designaled . 
The constituent information provided for phrasal entries includes left and right adjacency attributes  , part of speech , inflection information , and grammatical attributes . The grammatical ttributes that are provided for each of tile constituents varies according to the part of speech of the constituent  . Information reg , ' u ' diug collectivity and countability is provided for nouns and information on possible comparative  , superlative , or positive degree forms is given for both adjectives and adverbs that appear as constituents of the phrase  . Constituent information is provided within the context of the whole phrase  . Syntax trees are also described for noun phrase ntries  . 
4.3.1 Coding of Grammatical Information
The primary objective of the verification project was to codethcgrammatical information for the noun phrase n-tries  . The specific information given for the noun phrase entries include determining the intrn -phrasa \] structure of the phrasal  , the grammatical ttributes of the constituents . ' rod also the grammatical attributes of the entire noun phrase  . 
4 . ?, .  1 . 1 Syntactic Relationship Between Constituents The basic principle used in coding imra-phrasal syntactic information is th : ~ t the information should clarify the syntactic structure of the phrasal entry  . \[: or example , the lol-lowing phrases look simihu ' on the surface  , i . e . adjective+noun+noun , hut actually the internal syntactic structure of each phrasal is different  . 
( iii ) traveling post office ( iv ) dead letter box The adjective " traveling " modifies the noun phrase " post office " it l the phrase " traveling post office " while the noun phrase " dead letter "  , con , posed of an adjective and a norm , modifies then ouu " box " in the phrase " dead letter box  . "\[: or building a source of \[ exieal iuformation to be used in language processing  , in ? lication of the head noun of a F , hrase is useful as hyl~ernyrniformation . Location of the head noun cannot be determined automatically from the phrase struct t  , rc . That is to say , it is often the case that lhchead noun is the noun occurring in the final position of a phrasal composed of two  ( or more ) lexical items , but this rule does not always apply as there are also cases in which the head noun is the first norm of the phrasal e  . g . , cou , tmartial . 
l ) tuing the actual task , the distinction between the syntac~tic relationship between constituents was car  , ied out by in-dicatin\[ , the inlra-phrasal synlaxlay parentlle sizing the immediate constituents with categorical labels  . The categori-cM labels used to mark the grouping of the phrasal are shown in the example below : EAJ  ( traveling ) /EN 1 ( post ) /EN 1 ( office ) ~> EAJ ( traveling ) /EN 1 ( F , N 1 ( post ) /EN 1 ( @ office ) ) In this syntactic notation a slash ( / ) divides constituents at the same level , ENI is an English common noun , EA Jau English adjective , etc . ; and lhe bracketing structure is a linearized tree in a standard for  , n , e . g . , in ( iii ) above the tree expands to the right , while in(iv ) it expands to tile left . The symbol "6 . ~" indicates the head noun . 
4 . 3 . 1 . 2 Grammatical Inl'ornlation for tile Constituents Once the intra-phrasal syntax structure of the phrasal hascal attributes of the constituents are determined  . The grmn-matical attributes of the constituents are determined by considering the constituent as part of the phrase  . Given the information of the constituent words coded as separate dictionary entries in the EDR English Word Dictionary  , the coding is given based on the behavior of the constituent when it is nsed in the phrase  . 
traveling : EAPOS ; EANOCMP ; EANOSUP->EAPOS ; EANOCMP ; EANOSUP post : ENSG ; ECNI ; ENC->ENSG ; ENU office : ENSG ; ECN1 ; ENC->ENSG ; ECN1 ; ENC The coding ECN 1 ( takes plural ending-s ) and ENC ( Countable ) is changed to ENU ( Uncountable ) to indicate that the word " post " when used in the context of the phrase  , does not inflect . 
4 . 3 . 1 . 3 Grammatical Information for tile Noun Phrase Unit The final process in the coding of tile syntactic information for noun phrasals involves marking the grammatical t-tributes for the noun phrase as a whole  . The grammatical attributes marked for the whole phrase include : part of speech  , countability , collectivity , gender , verb agreement and article usage . The ex , -unple given in the previousec-tion , " traveling post office " , was coded as a common countable noun that may be preceded by both the definite and indefinite articles and is referred to by the pronoun'it '  . 
Since the phrase " traveling post office " does not have any special requirements on verb agreement  , that is , when tile noun is used in the singular formit is followed by a  singu-1  , -u " verb and conversely , when it is used in the plural form it is followed by a plural form verb  , the verb agreement marking is left blank for the entry  . 
4 . 3 . 2 Verifying Morphological lu for , nation Although decisions for the descriptions of the intra-phrasal syntax structure were based on initial coding phases of the EDR Word Dictionary development  , verification and correction of that morphological information dr  , ring the verification project was essential . The coding of the syntactic information for the phras  , -dmay affect the morphological information for the entry thus requiring the verification of morphological information as well  . The decisions regarding the morphological information including segmentation and p  , ' u't of speech of the constituents could be made with more precision if the syntactic structure of the phrase was taken into consideration  . 
Timbasic principles of head word etermination and segmentation are as follows:  ( 1 ) a head word unit should be determined on the basis of whether the phrasal expression comprises a single unit of meaning  ;   ( 2 ) phrasal head words hovld be segmented into those constituents which are also found as single headwords in EDR's English Word Dictionary  . 
In view of the second basic principle , timpart of speech of a phrasal constituent is decided according to the lexical part of speech consistent with the part of speech of the constituent as a single word entry in the dictionary  . For example , nouns flmctioning as adjectives in phrases like " cornstalk " are coded as nouns and verbs modifying nouns as in the phrase " jam session " are coded as verbs  . 
The treatment of hyphenated words as single words or words which should be broken down into separate constituents is a signific mlt segmentation issue  . Hyphenated words which are used on their own in Standard English should be treated as single constituents and hyphenated words which are not used on their own should be broken down into separate constituents  . In the examples below , the constituents are separated by the slash ( / ) notation . 
" X-ray // spectroscopy " " deep-sea//angler "" directed / -/ energy // weapon " " Bose / -/ Einstein / /statistics " A decision on segmentation for some hyphenated words in phrasal entries is difficult to judge purely by intuition from looking at the individual phrasal entries  . These types of entries have to be looked at as a whole with attention being given to wider usage  , and in particular to consistency with other head words in the dictionary  . For example , a decision to correct " yellow / --/ green " to " yellow-green " cannot be made purely by intuition  . The decision here is more an issue of the selection of head words rather than one of hyphenation  . The verification task of morphological information also included  , ' aising possible additional head words to be added to the EDR English Word Dictionary through the analysis of timentries  . After a decision has been made regarding entering tile hyl  ) henated word of tile phrasal as a head word in the dictionary  , t be phrasal is fed back to the segmentation process  . 
4 . 4 Some Results of the Work 4 . 4 . 1 Syntactic Patterns Tim result of the coding shows that  98% of tile 34  , 6 50 phrasal entries could be covered in approximately  40 different patterns . Tim following seven patterns are the most frequent and cover over  80% of the total entries . 
260  #Entries Pattern Exam Al~le 1 .  17422 2 .  10847 3 .  993 4 .  707 5 .  456 6 .  326 7 .  294
EN10/ENI (@) tmmmock chair
EAJ0/EN1 ( @ ) blue jay * EN20/ENI ( @ ) Doppler effect * EN 1 ( @ ) /EPP ( EPR0/EN10 ) piece of cake
EAJ(EVE0~EV ()) ~ NI (@) circulating library
ENI ( EVE0/EEV 0 ) /EN 1 ( @ ) changing room * EN 1 ( EN10/EEN:ENPOS 0 ) /EN 1 ( @ ) teacher'spet*ENI denotes a common noun , EN2 denotes a proper noun , EEN : ENPOS a noun possessivending's and ' , EPR a preposition , and EPP a prepositional phrase . The location of the head of tile phrasal is indicated by the @ notation  . 
4 . 4 . 2 Grammatical Attributes of the Constituents As mentioned em'lier one of the tasks of the coding was to indicate the grammatical ttributes of the constituents  . The data show that of the adjective+noun pattern tEA  J0/ EN 10  )  , the adjective constituent of the noun phrase did not inflect to form the superlative or comparative degree forms  , but rather most often occurred in the positive degree form  . 
The grammatical ttributes fcu ' nouns other than the head noun also showed some interesting results  . Nouns other than those designated as the head noun do not inflect in most of the cases  . One of the exceptional cases is " the time of w  #one's life  , " where " w#one's " is a word class name for any noun in the possessive form  . In this example , " life " inflects in accordance with the content of " w  #one's " word class  , though it is not the head noun of tile phrase . Since phrases like this are very rare , it is also possible to treat " the time of w #one ' slife " and " the time of w#one's lives " as individual head words and not its tile inflected forms of the same head word  . Another exceptional case in which more than one constituent couklinflect would be phrases containing the conjunction ' and  . ' l lowever , most of the phrasal entries in the form of ' A antiB ' are uncount : d  ) le and the final noun inflects if the phrase is countable  , such as " gin and tonics . " Therefore , we can assume that the grammatical behavior of constituents of noun phrase entries can be properly described by indicating the head noun and coding tile inflection information and grammatical attributes of tile head noun  ,  4 . 4 . 3 Grammatical Attributes for the Notul f'hrase Unit The coding of grammatical ttributes for tile entire noun phrase unit also provided some interesting results on countability and the usage of articles with the noun phrase  . 
As is expected , the most typic : d combim t tion of cotmtabil-ity shows the following combinations : If the noun is countal fleit may belneceded by tim definite article or the indefinite article  ; If the normistm countable it may be preceded by the definite article or no article  . 
Approximately 10% of the nouns coded as countable showed a w triation on the for emeutioned pattern  . These coutltable not ms were coded its allowing the definite article  , indefinite article as well as no article . Nouns with this type of coding included mass nouns  , names of phmlsantianimals , metals , food , titles etc . or other nouns which could refer to both the group or a member of the group  . 
Examl ) les of such nouns included " Le conte's parrow " , " Madagascarjasmiue " , " assembler language " , and " atomic weight " . Though this held for the majority of these types of nouus  , it was not unive , sally applicable ; the use of no article with " Nubiango at " , "Oregongrape " and " arcticloon " is questionable  . 
The significance of this data is that it implies per Mps a new code is necessary to cover cases of countable  ( ENC ) nouns becoming uncountable ( I -' ; NU ) nouns and vice versa . 
Instead of coding a single entry as both , or providing two entries which correspond to the ENC and ENU usage we  , night better express the grauunatical behaviors which are commonly slmred by particular types of not  , ns by using a new code ,  4 . 4 . 4 Verification of Morphological hfformation In tile morphological data some entries of the original data were segmented into constituents anti some were not  . This was particularly the case with '- ing ' and '- ed'forms of words  . The segmentation was not always consistent . But through syntactic analysis , verificatiou of tim segmentation and part of speech assignment could be carried out  . 
The El ) P , English Word Dictionary does not contain ger-nuds or p  . ' uticiple forms of a verb its separate head word entries  ( except for irregular inflected lbrms )  . If a word intire'-ing'form is regarded as a gerund or a present participle  , it is to be segmented into a verb and a verb ending  . 
There are some cases where gerund forms or participle forms have been accepted as lexical items and not as inflected forms of a verb  . In such cases , they are klentified not as verbs , but as not ms or adjectives . 
Noun phrases consisting of a word in the '- ing ' formantian other noun are treated by using one of the following four patterns  , where EVE denotes an English verb and EEV a verb ending:  ( l ) EN10/EN1 ( @ ) " hunting knife " " flying fox " " man-eating shark "  ( 3 ) EAJ ( EVE0/EEV0 ) /EN 1 ( @ ) " intervening sequence " " circulating medium " ( 4 ) EN1 ( EVE0/EEV 0 ) /EN 1 ( @ ) " changing room "" participating insurance " If a phrasal in the form of '- ing+noun ' could be reworded as ' a noun that is v-ing ' or ' a noun that v-s ' the entry was coded using either pattern  2 or pattern 3  . 
Through the verification of the morphological information we were able to gain more consistency in the segmentation of the constituents of phrasal head words  . Also we were able to indicate possible additional head word entries through the verification of the constituent shat comprise the phrasal  . 
5. Conclusion
The syntactic structure of noun phrasal entries is described in a relatively small number of patterns  . By coding a large number of noun phrasal entries it is possible to obtain an exhaustive list of syntactic patterns for noun phrases that would be listed as head word entries for English dictionaries  . By describing the syntactic structure it is possible to obtain the syntactic information which is necessary to iden-tify the internal structure of the phrasal as well as confirm and improve upon the segmentation f constituents and pm-t of speech assignment to each constituent of the phrasal entry  . 
The vast majority of additional vocabulary , not only in the EDR English Word Dictionary , but in dictionaries in general will most likely be noun phrases  . By utilizing tile results from the current improvement project  , the list of syntactic patterns for noun phrase ntries can be used to check the appropriateness of the phrases as dictionary head words as well as provide screening in order to prevent tile recording of ill-formed structures  , and finally to indicate syntactic ambiguity in the noun phrase itself  . 
Wilks , Y . , Slator , B . , Guthrie , L . ( in press ) Electric words : dictionaries , computers and meanings . Cambridge , MA . 
M1T Press.
Yokoi , T . (1990) Towards information technology.
Kyoritsu Shul ) pan.

EDR Electronic Dictionary Technic, . d Guide ( EDR , 1993) Procter , P . (1992) The Cambridge Language Survey . Cambridge ; Cambridge University Press . 
Suematsu , H . , Sugiura , M . , Arioka , M .   ( 1992 ) " A Distribu-tive Representational Framework for English Collocations in an Electronic Dictionary  , " in : Lingvisticae Investigationes , XVI : 2 . John Benjamins , Amsterdam . 
Pages 373-394.

