BLENDING SEGMENTATION WITH TAGGING
INCHINESEL ANGUAGE CORPUS PROCESSING ~
Zhou Qiang , Yu Shiwen
Institute of Computation Linguistics
Peking Univ Ersity , Beijing 100871, P.R.China

this paper proposes a new method for Chinese language corpus processing  . Unlike the past researches , our approach as following characteric stics : it blends segmentation with tagging and integrates nile-based approach with statistics-basc done in grammatical disambiguation  . The principal ideas presented in the paper are incorporated in the development of a Chinese corpus processing system  . Expcrim cntal results prove that the overall accuracy for segmentation is  97  . 68% and that for tagging is 94 . 55% in about 400,000 Chinese characters . 
1. Introduction
Processing a Mandarin Chinese corpus needs to go through several stages  . From initial text corpus , through word segmentating , grammatic category tagging , syntactic analysis ( bracketing ) , semantic and pragmatic analysis , one can get coq 3 or a with different tags , such as segment-ationaltgs , word categories , phrase categories and so on . In current paper , we will fbcus on the first two stages , i . e . word segmentation and category ( i . e . part of speech ) tagging . 
Word segmentation is essential in Chinese ilf formation processing because there are no obvious delimiting markers betwecn Chinese words except for some punctuation marks  . Matching input characters against the lexical entries in a large dictionary is helpful in identifying the embedded words  . However some ambiguous segmentation strings ( ASSs ) and unregistered words ( i . e . the word that is not registered in the dictionary  ) in the text will lower the segmentation accuracy . To resolve these problems , various knowledge sources might have to be consulted  . 
In the past decade , two different mcthodologics were used for word segmentation : some approaches are rule-based  ( ll--5\] )  , while others are statistics-based (16--8\]) . 
Many automatic word segmentation systems adopting the above models have been developed and significant results have been achieved  . But these systems were developed only on word level  . They did not take largescale corpus category tagging into account and were short of a objective cvaluaton for segmentation accuracy from category level  . So the development of these automatic segmentation systems i restricted  . 
Grammatical catcgory tagging for Chinese language is very difficult  , because Chinese words are frequently ambiguous . One ChinEse word can represent lexical items of different categories  . Apart from this , unlike English and other Indo-European languages , Chinese has no inflexions and therefore there arc not obvious morphological variations in Chinese text which are helpful to distinguish one grammatic ategory from others  . 
In some Chinese category tagging systems , statistics-based algorithms were used (\[10--12\]) . The basic processing procedure of these systems i : First  , a tagged corpus was made through editing . Then , a dictionary containing category tagging entries and a matrix of category collocational probabilities were derived from the tagged corpus  . Using these arguments , a probability model was built and category tagging was completed automatically  . Up to now , there are not any reports about rule-based approach to Chinese language category tagging  . 
Comparing with the above researches on segmentation ad tagging  , our method has the following new characteristics : First  , it blend segmentation with tagging . We use a segmentation dictionary , in which every word is marked with its word category  , to complete segmentation and initial tagging simultaneously  . The category becomes a bridge linking segmentation ad tagging  . 
Second , it integrates nde-based approach with statistics -based approach in category tagging  . Therefore it inherits the advantages of the two approaches and overcome their respective disadvantages  . 
The following sections will 5iscuss this method in detail . 
i  The project is support by National Science Fundation of China with tagging In practice of segmenting many Chinese sentences  , weffid that it is help fid to make use of word category in automatic segmentation processing  . In general , there are three advantages : 1) . Using category collocational relation of differ cnt words in ASSs and the contextnal word categories  , one can resolve most segmentation ambiguities . 
As we know , there are two types of ASS : intersecting
ASS ( IASS ) and combining ASS ( CASS).
AnlASSS = ABC has two possible segment-ation : AB +C and A+BC  . Thus it results in two category combinations : CaB+Cc and CA+CBC  . But the probility for them to appear in a given context is not the same  . 
Depending on their context and the difference between two category collocational probabilities  ( P ( CM~\]C c ) and P ( CA\]Cnc )   , we can select a correct segm cntatim ,  . 
Sometimes a CASSS = AB can be segmented into two words : A+B  , but occasionally it is only one word S . Since the CASS itself cannot provide the special information R ~ r correct segmentation  , it is necessmy to lake the relation between it and its fonvard word or its backward word into consideration  . In this sense , the categories of the words in the CASS and those one beside tim CASS play a very important role  . 
2) . l lelp to compound new words by using Cl fincs c word-lbrmation theory In Chinese  , a word is composed of morplmmes . The combination of morphemes has its special rt , les . These riflestellus which and what kind of morphcmes can be combined into a word  . Using these roles , we can find out some tmrc gister cd words and segment them correctly fi'om a sentence  . For example , typical word-compovnding cases of nouns are : A ) . mono-syllablie noun + mono-syllablic noun ma ( horsc ) + che ( car ) --> mache ( carriage ) B )  . mono-syllablie noun+bi-syllablie nouns hou ( hand ) + zhijia ( nail ) --> shouzhijia ( finger nail ) C )  . bi-syllablic noun+mono-syllablic noun dianliu ( current ) + biao ( lable ) - -> diaoliubiao ( galvanometer ) D )  . bi-syllablic verb+mono-syllablic noun zhengming ( prove ) + xin ( letter ) --> zhengming x in ( testimonial ) From such word-compounding cases , we can sum up many nsefifl word l brmation rules that are based on categoly combination  . Therefore , we will achieve a better segmentation effect in spite of using a smaller segm cntation dictionary  . 
3) . Be helpful to discover some segmentation crrors In Chinese sentence  , the frequency of some categmy collocations ivery low  , such as d+n+$ , v+u+d+$and so on , where d is a dvclb , n is noun , v is verb , u is auxiliary , $ is the ending mark of a sentence . Therefore , if there is such a category combination in the segmented sentence  , we will a hnost be certain that this segmentation may be wrong  , in the following examples , there are such Errors : i ) . mailvle/uyitou/dniu/n . / w ( btty-edhead cowcorrect result : bought a cow ) it )  . ta/rqiu/nda/vde/uzuihao/d . / w ( heball play Pr thad better correct result : lie plays basketball best  . ) liore , we can see that the categmy information provides at  ) owerful means to check seg , n  cntation  errors att tomatically . 
Based on all the above understandings , we proposed a method combining segmentation with tagging and used it in the practice of segmentation ad category tagging on a largescale Chinese language corpus  . The basic processing procedure : First , complete automatic segmentation by using a segmentation dictionary with word categories  . On the meantime , assign an initial tag ( all possible categories for a word ) to every segmentation u it . 
Second , cart 3' outseine basic word-compounding words , such as combining stems with affixes , combining overlapping morphemes , integrating Clfinescnumberal words and so on . 
Third , implement automatic ategory tagging through grammatic atcg my disambiguation and assign a single category tag to every word  . 
Fourth , find and coinbin cunregistered words which accord with Chinese word formation rules and assign a suitable categ my to  t11e combined new words . 
Fiflh , check the catcg my combination in segmented sentences  , find some possible errors and then go back to the segmentation process  . 
3 . The designing strategy of categmT tagging Comparing with many past automatic atcgmy tagging systems  ( t10--12\] )  , our current processing has some new properties . The basic idea can be briefly summarized as following : l  )  .   13e based on a dictionary with word categories by looking up the segmentation dictionary with word categories during segmentation  . The category is derivcd from the " Grammar Knowledge Base for Chinese Words "  ( GKBCW )  , which has been developed by the Institute of Computational Linguistics of Peking University in the past five  years\[13\]  . Since the information i the dictionary was provided by linguists who refer themselves to the standard of classification based on the distribution of grammatical  functions\[14\]  , it is of high accuracy . Therefore , applying this information to initial category tagging  , the coherence and reliability of the tagging results can be guaranteed  . 
This has laid good foundation for the following disambiguation processing  . 
2). Use a small tagset
In our current system , category tagging is restricted to the basic categm-y descriptions  , i . e . 26 categories . 
Meanwhile , in order to keep the new information that was found during manually proofreading  , such as proper names , proper addresses , and so on , we add up several subcategories : ng ( proper noun )  , ngp ( , proper noun for a person ) , and Ng ( noun morpheme ) , Ag ( adjective morpheme ) and Vg ( verb morpheme ) . All these categories and subcategories form a tag set of  31 tags . 
A small tagset can help us concentrate on the ambiguous words that appear the most frequently in a sentence  . Therefore , the processing complex can be reduced and tagging accuracy will be improved  . 
3) . For mast ereok nowledeg base by combining tagged rcsults with the information in the dictionary Although our tagset is small  , we can easily expand the tagset for the different application by linking with the GKBCW  . Because in our GKBCW , each category has many features , which were proposed by liguists . These f caturos help to describe the grammatic functions and distributions of every category completely  . For example , verb category has about fm-ty features , and noun category has twentyfive features (\[13\]) . In general , these grammatic features are also one kind of information for classification  . 
If we use the word and its basic category in tagged corpus a sake Dvord to lookup GKBCW  , we can get the detailed grammatic features of each word  . Therefore , taking all tagged words as a plane , and the grammatic features of every word as a depth  , we will give a stereoknowledge base . According to different needs , we can tag different grammatic ategories or subcategorics to the words in corpus by using the grammatic features in knowledge base  . In addition , using the stereoknowledge base , we can also analyse the phrase structure of sentence in corpus  . 
4) . Integrate rule-based approach with statistics -based approach in disambiguation Because rule -based approach and statistics-based approach have their respective advantages  , we tried to integrate them in our category tagging system  . Our method is : First , through statistical analysis ( manually or automatically ) in a largescale corpus , find the tile most frequent ambiguous phenomena , study their context , and extract some contextual frame rules to eliminate those most frequently appearing and comparatively simpler ambiguities  . Then , using the arguments trained by correctly tagged corpus  , make a probability model to disambiguate some ambiguous category combination of lower frequence and deduce the category of the unregistered words  . 
But during actually processing , we lay different particular emphasis on these two approaches at different stages  . At first , because there was not a largescale corpus tagged with correct category  , a small-scale corpus had to be tagged using rule -bascd approach and its remaining ambiguities and some tagging errors were corrected manually  . After statistic analysis on the correctly tagged corpus  , the rule base was adjusted and some trained arguments were given  . Then some new sentences were added to the old corpus to form a new middle-scale corpus  , Using the new adjusted rules and trained arguments  , the new corpus was tagged through both rule-based approach and statistics-based approach  . In this way , the scale of the corpus was increased gradually like as now ball  . Due to the increase in corpus scale , the descriptions of rule became more and more accurate and the statistic information became more and more comprehensive  . Therefore thc manual proofreading work will decrease drastically  . As a result , a best integration of these two approaches was achieved  . 
4 . Disambiguation in automatic categoo ' tagging 4 . 1 . rule-based approach Tile basic strategy of rule -based approach is to determine one category for a categorically ambiguous word based on its syntatic or semantic on text  . In our system , in order to hight cn the tagging effect , the task is divided into thrcestages : 1) . disaln biguato against special word In Chinese running text  , some multitag words appear frequently , especially the mono-syllablic words , such as , " yi " , " zhe " , " le " , " guo " , " ba " , " lai " , " hao " , " jiu " , and so on . 
For these words , we set some special disambiguation rules , which describe the different context for these words with different category  . Therefore , t / to category of words in one sentence can be determinated easily  . This is a word-oriented is ambiguation . 
2) . disambiguation against special multitag combinations  , uchasv-q , p-v , v-n , q-n , v-d , a-v and so on , appear li'cquently in corpus , lit order to construct he disambiguation rides for these multitag combinations  , the probability that one special tag is selected from a multitag set in the difI~rent context is counted  . At the same time , the grammatic function featnres of category , especially the distribution if oramtion which distinguishes one category from the oflmrs are snnlmed till and extracted  . Then the ambiguities can be eliminated by these rifles  . This is a multitag-oriented disambiguation . 
3). disambiguate by context constraint
The approach applies a set of contextflame rules . Each rtfle , when its context is satisfied , has the effect of deleting one or more candidates from the list of possible lags for one word  . if then mn be r of the candidal cs is reduced to one  , disambiguation is considered successful . This is a fiame-oriented disambiguation . 
4.2. statistics-based alJproach
Formally , the statistics chcme can be described as following : Let W = Wb  . .Wn be a span of ambiguous words in scntence and Wl  , Wn are unanlbiguous , C--Ct . . . Cn be a possible tag sequence for the span , where C i is a category of W i . P ( CIW ) is conditional probabilily fiom W to C . 
Therefore , the goal of disambiguation is equivalent to lind a list of category sequence C ' with the largest score 
P ( C'lW ), i.e.
P ( C'l  W ) = , naxP ( CIW)

Computing tile above for nmla with bi-g , ' ammodel , wegct :

P ( ClW ), = 11~P2(C~IC ~ . ~  ) p ( w ~ IC ~ ) where P ( CiICiq ) are the contextual probabilities and P ( WiICi ) are the lexical probabilitics . The approximation of two probablities can be calculated from the trained argmnents  . 
During actual process , the category of the unregistered word is deduced firstly  . Let Cu is a possible tagset for unregistered word  , CI is the tag of its left word and the Cr is the tag of its right word  . q ' is the set of total tags in corpus . Therefore , Cu = CI , C2, where:
C1 = argmaxP ( Ci \] Cl)
CiGT
C2 = argmaxP(Cr\]Cj)cj ~' l'
So the unregistered word phenomenon is changed into categorically ambiguous problem  . 
For a span of ambiguous words ( bounded by tm ambiguous words )  , if we arrange the diff crentags of cv cry word vertically and the different words horizontally  , we will form a direct chart whose nodes are tagged with P  ( WiICi ) and whose arcs are tagged with P ( CiICj )  . Using VOLSUNGA algorithm ( \[9\] ) to get the best path indirect chart , we will complete the automatic category disambiguation  . 
5 . Experimental results and future work A segmentation adtagging system was built based on the abovementioned  . The programs of the system are written by C language  . Using this system , a verb usage corpus with a bont 400 , 000 Chinese characters or 300 , 000 Chinese words was segmented and tagged . The test results are : segmentation accuracy --- 97  . 68%, lagging accuracy - - - 94 . 55% . 
Some better processing results of previous egmentation systems and tagging systcrms are : about  99'% segmentation acctu'acy on 150  , 000 Chinese characters (\[5\[) and 94 . 82% tagging accuracy by close test on 150 , 000 words of tagg cd corpus (\[121) . Compared with these systems , the result of our system is promising . 
I11 our future research , we try to make filrther improvement on our method and add some now fimtions to our seglnentation and tagging system  , such as , unregistered word deduce during segmentation , identity management i knowledl , ebase , analysis belief degree on tagging results . Then we will extend our corpus'scale to about five milliou words  . 
In addition , we will pcrst , e research on Chinese phrase structure analysis and try to tag phrase category in corpus  . 
We hope the work will be l~elpful for the study on
Mandarin Chinese grammar.
References 11\], Liang N . Y . , (1987) . An Autonmtic Word Scglnentatiou System of Written Chinesc---CDWS  . 
./ow'nal of Chinese lrybrmation lS'ocessing ( , \] CIP ) , Vo\[2 . 
12 J . Li G . C . , Liu K . Y . & Zhang Y . K .   ,   ( 1988 ) = Segmenting Chinese Word and Processing Different
Meaningst , - uctures . JCIP , Vol3.
131 . i Iuang Y . X . , (1989) . A'Produce-Test'Approach to Autonmtic Segmentation f Written Chinese  . JC7P , Vol 4~141 . Yao T . S . , Zlmng G . P . & Wu Y . , (1990) . A Rule-Based Chinese Word Segmentation System . JC1P ,
YgL !,\[51 . tie K . K . , Xu1I . & Suu B .  , (1991) . The Implement of Automatic Segmentation Expert System of Written 
Clfinese . JCIP , Vol3.
1277 \[6\] . Li B . Y . & i . e .  , (1992) . AMM Automatic Segmentation Algorithm using Corpus tag to Disambiguation  . Proc of ROCLINGIV , P 14% 165 . 
\[7\] . Zhang J . S . , Chen Z . D . , Shen S . D .  , (1992) . A method of word identification for Chinese by Constraint Satisfaction and Statistical Optimization Techniques  . 
Proc . of ROCLINGIV , P147-165.
\[8\] . Sun M . S . , Lai T . B . Y . , Lun S . C . & Sun C . F . , (1992) . 
Some Issues on the Statistical Approach to Chinese Word Identification  . 1CCIP92, Vol 1, P246-253\[9\] . Stevcn J . DcRose , (1989) . Grammatical categoo , disambiguation by statistical Optimization . Computional
Linguistics , Vol 14, P31-39\[10\] . Liu K . Y . , Zhen J . H . & Zhao J . , (1992) . A Research on Several Algorithms for the Assignment Parts of Speech to Words in Corpus  . Advances on Research of Machine
Translation , P378-386.
\[11\] . Bai S . H , , Xia Y . & Huang C . N .  , (1992) . The Methordic Research of Grammatical tagging Chines Corpus  . Advances on Research of Machine Translation,
P408-418\[12\] . Bai Shuanhu & Xia Ying , (1991) . A Scheme For Tagging Chinese Runing Text . NLI'RS'91, P345-349\[13\] . Yu S . W ,, Zhu X . F ,, GuoL . , (1992) . Outline of the Grammar Knowledge Base for Chinese Words and its Developing Approachs  . ICCIP92, P186-191\[14\] . Zhu Dexi , (1979) . Xufa Jianxi ( Lectures of
Grammar ). Business Press.

