COLLABORATION ONRE FERENCE TO OBJECTS
THATARENOT MUTUALLYKNOWN
Philip G . Edmonds
Department of Computer Science , University of Toronto
Toronto , Ontario , Canada M5S 1A4
pedmonds@cs , toronto , edu

In conversation , a person sometimes has to refer to an object that is not previously known to the other participant  . We present a phm-based model of how agents collaborate on reference of this sort  . In making a reference , an agent uses the most salient attributes of the referent  . In understanding a reference , an agent determines his confidence in its adequacy as a means of identifying the referent  . To collaborate , the agents use judgment , suggestion , and elaboration moves to refashion an inadequate rferring expression  . 
1 INTRODUCTION
In conversation , a person sometimes has to refer to an object that is not previously known to the other participant  . One particular situation in which this arises is in giving directions  . For example:
Example 1   1 A : Go straight ahead until you get to a funny -looking building  . 
The hearer has to understand the reference well enough that when he later reaches the building  , he will recognize it as the intended referent . 
A reference of this sort is often achieved through a collaboration between the conversants  . In such cases , the speaker has the goal of having the hearer know how to identify an object  . The speaker attempts to achieve this goal by building a description of the object that she believes will give the hearer the ability to identify it when it is possible to do so  . The hearer needs to be confident that the description will be adequate as a means of identifying the referent  , but because of the inevitable differences in beliefs about the world  , he might not be . When the hearer is not confident , the speaker and hearer collaborate o make a new referring expression that the bearer believes is adequate  . This can be seen in the following portion of a telephone conversation recorded by Psath as  ( 1991 , p .  196) . 
Example 21 A : Y a just stay on 2A , untilyage t to Lowell Street . 
2 B : Is it marked ? 3A : Yeah , I think there's a street sign there , it's an intersection with lights . 
4B : Okay.
In this dialogue , speaker B is not confident that he will be able to identify the intersection at Lowell Street  , and so suggests that the intersection might be marked  . 
Speaker A replies with an elaboration of the initial expression  , and B finds that he is now confident , and so accepts the reference . 
This type of reference is different from the type that has been studied traditionally by researchers who have usually assumed that the agents have mutual knowledge of the referent  ( Appelt , 1985a ; Appelt and Kro-nfeld , 1987; Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs , 1986; Heeman and Hirst , 1992; Searle ,  1969) , are copreseut with the referent ( Heeman and Hirst , 1992; Cohen ,  1981) , or have the referent in their focus of attention ( Reiter and Dale ,  1992) . In these theories , the speaker has the intention that the hearer either know the referent or identijy it immediately  . 
Although the type of reference that we wish to model does not rely oll these assumptions  , we can nevertheless draw from these theories . Thus , we base our model on the work of Chtrk and Wilkes -Gibbs  ( 1986 )  , and Heeman and Hirst ( 1992 ) who both modeled ( the first psychologically , and the second computationally ) how people collaborate on reference to objects for which they have mutual knowledge  . We will briefly discuss these models , before we describe our own . 
2 COLLABORATION ON REFERENCE
In their t'nndamental experiment , Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs ( 1986 ) demonstrated that conversants use a set of inherently collaborative procedures to establish the mutual belief that the hearer has understood a reference  . In the experiment , two subjects were each given a set of hard-to -describe tangram figures that were kept hidden from the other  . One subject was required to get the other subject to rearrange his set to match the ordering of her set  , and to do so through conversation alone . Thus , the two subjects were obliged to collaborate on constructing descriptions of the figm'es that would allow them to be unambiguously identified  ; for example , the one that looks like an angel with a stick . 
Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs developed the following process model to explain their findings  . To initiate the process , speaker A presents an initial version of a referring expression on which speaker B passes jndg-ment  . 13 can either accept it , reject it , or postpone his decision until later . If B rejects o1" postpones , then Refashionings are accomplished in three main ways : repairing the expression by correcting speechen ' or s  , expanding the expression by adding more qualifica - tions  , or replacing part or all of the expression with new qualifications  . Each judgment/refashioning pair operates on the current referring expression  , replacing it with a new one . This process continues until the expression , kept in the participants ' common ground , is mutually accepted . 
This excerpt from Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs's data illustrates rejection  ( line 2 )  , replacement ( line 2) , and acceptance ( lines 3 and 4):
Example 31 A : Okay , and the next one is tile person that looks like they're carrying something and it's sticking out to the left  . It looks like a hat that's upside down . 
2 B : The guy that's pointing to tile left again ?   3 A : Yeah , poiuting to the left , that's it\[/laughs/4B : Okay . 
Heernan and Hirst ( 1992 ) rendered Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs's model computationally b casting it into the planning paradigm  . Their model covers both the initiator of a referring action  , and the recipie/~tw botries to understand the reference  . In this moctel , the initiator has the goal of having tire recipient identify the referent  , and so constructs a referring plan given a set of beliefs about what the recipient believes  . The result of the initiator's plan is a set of surface speech actions  , and hearing only these actions , the recipient tries to infer a plan in order to uuders t and the reference  . Thus , referring expressions are represented as plan derivations  , and an unsuccessful referring expression is an invalid plan in whose repair the agents collaborate  . 
An agent can inferaplan even if it is invalid in that agent's view  ( Pollack ,  1990) . The evahmtion process attempts to find an instantiation of the variable such that all of the constraints are satisfied and the mental actions executable with respect othe hearer's beliefs about hespeaker's beliefs  . 
If tile recipient linds the initial referring expression phm invalid  , then the agents will collaborate in its repair . Heeman and Hirst used plan repair techniques to refashion an expression  , and used discourse phms , or recta-plans , to communicate he changes to it . Thus , a collaborative dialogue is modeled in terms of the evolution of tile referring plan  . 
First , an agent lnust comnmnic at c that she has not understood aphm  . Depending on how the referring plancous trains tile choice of referent  , she constructs an instance of either reject-p lanor postpone-plan  , whose resulting surface speech actions arcs-ro jecl  ; and s-postpone respectively . 
Next , one agent or tile other must refashion the referring expression plan in the context of the judgment by eithereplacing some of its actions  ( by using replace-plan ) or by adding new actions to it ( by using expand-plan )   . Tile result of both plans is the surface speech action a-actions  . 
Because the model can play the role of both the initiator and the recipient  , and because it can perform both plan construction and inference  , two copies of the model can converse with one another  , acting alternately as speaker and hearer . Acting as hearer , oue copy of the system performs plan inference on each set of surface speech actions that it observes  , and updates the state of the collaboration . It then switches roles to become the speakel , and look slot a goal to adopt , and constructs a plan that achieves it . After responding with the surface actions of the phm  , it updates the state of the collaboration , presupposing that the other copy will accep the plan  . The system repeats the process until it can lind no more goals to adopt  , at which time it switches back to being the hearer and waits for a response from the other copy  . 
3 CONFIDENCE ANDSALIENCE
A crucial assumption of Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs's work -- and of l ~ leeman and Hirst's model--is that the recipient of the initial referring expression already has some knowledge of ttle referent in question  . In Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs's experiments , for : example , it is one of the tangram figures . In other words , tile hearer can understand a referring expression if its content uniquely describes an object hat he knows about  . 
Obviously , an agent cannot use this criterion to understand the reference to the building in Examplel---he has never heard of the buildiug before  . What criteria , then , does hebase his understanding on ? The basis of our model is that the hearer can accept a referring expression plan if  ( 1 ) the plan contains a description that is use . /M for making an identification plan that tile hearer can execute to identify the referent  , and ( 2 ) the hearer is confident hat the identification plan is adequate  . 
The first condition , originally described by Ap-pclt (1985b ) , is important because the success of the refen'ing action depends on the hearer formulating a use liflidentilication plan  . We take the referring expression plan itself to be the identification plan  . The mental actions in the plan will encode only useful descriptions  . For the second condition to hold , the hearer must believe that he identification plan is good enough to tmiquely identify the referent when it becomes visible  . This in w ) lves giving enough information by using the most salient at ributes of the referent  . 
hlotrr model , each agerlt associates a numeric on-fidence value with each of tile attributes in the relSr-ring expression  , and by composing these , computes a referring expression plan that can be interpreted as ranging from low confidence to high confidence  . The present composition function is simple addition  , but one could envision more complex systems to compute confidence  , such as an algebra of confidence or a non-numeric system  . If the overall confidence value exceed some set value  , the agent's confidence threshold , then the agent believes the plan is adequate . That is , if the agent is the initiator , she believes that the other will be able to understand the reference  ; if the agent is the other , he believes that he has understood the reference . 
Now , the confidence value of each attribute is equiv -alento its salience within the context of the referring expression  . Salience , for our purposes in direction-giving , is primarily visual prominence , but can also involve identifiability , familiarity , and functional importance ( Devl in , 1976; Lynch ,  1960) . One approach is to encode the salient properties in a static hierarchy as Davis  ( 1989 )  , and Reiter and Dale (1992) have done . IBut , ideally , salience should depend on the contexts un-ounding the referent  . For example , the height of at all building would normally be salient  , but not if it were surrounded by other tall buildings  . 
This computation Would be quite complex , so we have adopted a middle ground between the simple context-independent approaches  , and a full-blown contextual analysis . The middle ground involves taking the type of object into account when choosing attributes and landmarks that relate to it  . For example , height and architectural style can be very salient features for describing a building  , but not for describing an intersection , for which having a signor traffic lights is important  . This approach still allows us to encode salience in a hierarchy  , but it is dependent on the referent . 
Table 1 shows an example of a simple salience hierarchy that an agent might have  . The hierarchy is actually a set of partial orderings of attributes  , represented by lambda expressions , indexed by objectype . 
In the table , the confidence value of using architectural style to describe a building is  4  . The confidence value of at all building is 3 , and so this attribute is less salient han architectural style  . The other rows ( for describing intersections ) follow similarly . 2 Each agent hash is own beliefs about salience . It is the difference in their beliefs that leads to the necessity for collaboration on reference  . Ideally , the initiator should construct referring expressions with the recipients '  ( believed ) beliefs about salience in mind , but we have chosen to avoid this complexity by making the simplifying assumption that the initiator is an expert I These models assmne that all agents have identical beliefs  , which is clearly insufficient for modeling collaborative dialogue  . 
2 Given information about salience , we could construct such a hierarchy , but we do not presume that it would be easy to know what is salient  . 
( and thus knows best what is salient).
4 PLANS FOR REFERRING
An agent uses his salience hierarchy for two related purposes : the first to determine what is salient in a particular situation  , and the second to determine the adequacy of a description  . So , the hierarchy is accessed during both plan construction and plan inference  . 
In plan construction , the hierarchy is used for constructing initial referring expression plans  , and for elaborating on inadequate plans by allowing an agent to choose the most salient properties of the referent first  . The agent constructs an initial referring expression plan in almos the same way as in Heeman and Hirst's system  . Mental actions in the intermediate plans of a referring expression plan allow the speaker to choose the most salient attributes that have not yet been chosen  , and constraints in the surface speech actions make sure the speaker believes that each attribute is true  .   3 Other mental actions in the intermediate plans add up the confidence values of the attributes  , and a final constraint makes sum that the sum exceeds the agent's confidence threshold  . So , for a referring plan to be valid , it must describe a unique object , and it must be adequate with respect to the speaker's beliefs  . 
This means that attributes beyond those required \ [' or a unique description could be necessary  . For example , to construct he reference to the building in Example l  , the speaker consulted her salience hierarchy ( in table 1 ) and determined that architectural style is salient  . Hence , she described the building as Jknny-looking . This single attribute was enough to exceed her confidence threshold  . 
During plan inference , the salience hierarchy is used when evaluating a recognized plan  . The mental actions in the intermediate plans determine the confidence values of each attribute  ( from the heamr's salience hiemmhy )  , and add them up . The final constraint in the plan makes sure that the hearer's confidence threshold is exceeded  . Thus , judging the adequacy of a referring expression planfalls out of the regular plan evaluation process  . If the final constraint does not hold , then the invalidity is noted so that the plan can be operated on appropriately b the discourse plans  . 
For example , after recognizing the reference in Examplel , the hearer evaluates the plan . Assuming he believes the salience information in table  1  , he computes the confidence value of 4 . If this value exceeds his confidence threshold , then he will accep the plan . 
If not , he will believe that them is an error at the constraint that checks his confidence threshold  . 
~lntleeman and Itirst's model , an attribute has to be mutually believed to be used  . Here , mutual belief is not possible because the bearer has no knowledge of the referent  , but mutual belief is an intended effect of using this plan  . 

Table 1: A salience hierarchy for an agent.
salient-attribute (4, building , lX . architectural-style(X,Style)) . 
salient-attribute (3, building , AX . height(X,tall)) . 
salient-attribute (3, intersection , AX . called(X,Name)) . 
salient-attribute (2, intersection , sign , AX . AY . has(X,Y)) . 
salient-attribute(2 , intersection , traffic-lights , AX . ~Y-has(X,Y)) . 
5 SUGGESTION ANDEL ABORATION
If the recipient is not confident in the adequacy of the plan  , he uses an instance of postpone-plantoinl brm I he initiator that he is not conlidentol ' its adequacy  , thereby causing tile initiator to raise her own confidence threshold  . Now , all hough he cannot refashion the expression himself  , he does have the ability to help the initiator by suggesting a good way to expand it  ; suggestion is a conversational move in which an agent suggests a new attribute that he deems would increase his confidence in the cxpressiou's adequacy if the expression were expanded to include the attribute  . Coutinuing with the example , if the hearer were uol confident about the adequacy of the  . fitnny-looking building , hc might sugges that the initiator use height ( as well as architectural style )  , by asking Isittall ? . Frmn this suggest km the initiator might expand her expression to the tallftmny-looking building  . 
So , in our sense , a suggestion is an illocution ary act of questioning  ; along with actually suggesting a way to expand a plan  , the agent is asking whether or not tile referent has lhe suggested attribute  . 
To decide what suggestion to make , tile agent uses an instance of suggest-expand -plan  , which has a mental action in its decomposition that chooses the attribute that he believes is the most salient hat has not been used ah'eady  . Tile result of tile plan is the surface speech action  , s-suggest , that communicates the suggestion . 
However , only the initiator of tile referring expression can actually elaborate a referring expression  , because only she hastile knowledge to do so . Depending on whether the hearer of the expression makes a suggestion or not  , the initiator has two options when elaborating a plan  . If no suggestion was made , then she can expand the plan according to her own beliefs about the referent's attributes and their salience  . On the other hand , ira suggestion was made , she could instead attempt to expand the plan by a flinning or deny-ing the attribute suggested  . \[f possible , shesh ou Muse the suggestion to elaborate tile plan  , lhusaw fiding unwanted conversational implicature  , but its use may not be enough to make timplan adequate  . 
Tile decomposition of expand-plan calls the plan constructor with the goalel'constructing a modif iers schema and with the suggested attribute as input--in a sense  , continuing the construction of timinitial referring plan  . The plan constructor attempts to find a plan with the surface speech actions for the snggested attribute in its yield  , but this might not be possible . In any case , the speaker constructs an expansion that will make the plan adequate according to her beliefs  . 4 The response to a suggestion depends , obviously , on whether or not the suggestion was used to expand tile plan  . The speaker can ( 1 ) affirm that the plan was expanded with the suggestion by using the s-affirm speech act  ; (2) aflirm that the suggestion was used , along with additional attributes that weren't suggested  , by using s-affirm and s-actions ; or (3) deny the suggestion with s-deny , and inform the other bys-actions as lo how the plan was expanded  . 
By repeatedly using the postponement , elaboration , aud suggestion moves , the two agents collaborate through discourse on refashioning the referring expression until they mutually believe tlmt the recipient is conlid cnt hat it is adequate  . 
6 EXAMPLE
We have implemented tile model in Prolog . Table 2 shows the input/output of two copies of the system cuegaging in a simplified version of Example  2  . Note that the system generates and tmder stands utterances in the form of descriptions of the smT ace speech actions  , not surface natural anguage forms . The existence of a parscr and a generator that can map between the two forms is assumed  . Complete details of this example and of the model are given by Edmonds  ( I993 )  . 
7 CONCLUSION
When an agent refers to a particular object that is not previously known to another agent  , she hastile intentiou that tile agent be able to identify the object  ( when it is possible to do so ) by means of the referring exln'ession . Because of the inevitable differences in their beliefs about he world-specifically about what is salient--the agents may have to collaborate o make the expression adequate  . 
4Recall that she raisect her confidence thrcshoM as a result of the heater's postponement move  , so now she must meet I heflew threshold . 

Table 2: Example of suggestion and elaboration.
1A : Go to the Lowell Street intersection.
s-go to ( Entity ) s-refer ( Entity ) s-attrib ( Entity , ~X . category(X , intersection )) s-attrib ( Entity , ~X-called(X , ' Lowell Street ' ) ) 2 B : Does i thave as ign ? s - pos tpone ( pl ) s-suggest ( pl , \[ s-attrib-rel ( Entity , Entity 2 , AX . AY . has(X , Y )) , s-refer ( Entity2) , s-attrib ( Entity 2 , AX . category(X , sign ))\]) 3A:Yes , it does , and it also has traffic lights . 
s-affirm(pl,\[s-attrib-rel(Entity,Entity2,AX . AY . has(X , Y )) , s-refer ( Entity2) , s-attrib ( Entity 2 , AX-category(X , sign ))\]) s-actions(pl , \[s-attrib-rel(Entity , Entity3 , AX . AY . has(X,Y )), s-refer ( Entity3), s-attrib ( Entity3, AX . category(X , traffic-lights ))\]) 4B : Okay . 
s-accept ( p123)
We have implemented a computational plan-based model that accounts for the collaborative nature of reference in the domain of interactive direction-giving  . 
An agent constructs a referring expression plan by using the referent's most salient features  . An agent understands a reference once he is confident in the adequacy of its  ( inferred ) plan as a means of identifying the referent . To collaborate , the agents use judgment , suggestion , and elaboration moves to refashion the referring expression until they mutually believe that the recipient has understood  . 

Our wm'k is supported by the University of ' l bronto and by the Nat-nral Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada  . We are grate fld to Peter Heeman , Graemellirst , and Jeffrey Siskind for many helpful discussions . 

Douglas E . Appelt (1985a ) . Planning English referring expressions . Artificial Intelligence , 26(1):133 . 
Douglas E . Appelt (1985b ) . Some pragmatic issues in the planning of definite and indefinite noun phrases  . In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the Association Jbr Computational Linguistics  , pages 198-203 . 
Douglas E . Appelt and Amichai Kmnfeld (1987) . A computational model o1' referring . In Proceedings of the Tenth International Joint Conference on Arli\[icial hltelligence  ( lJCA1-87 )  , pages 640-647 . 
Herbert H . Clark and Deanna Wilkes-Gibbs (1986) . Refen'ing as a collaborative process . Cognition , 22:1-39 . Reprinted in Cohen , ER . , Morgan , J . , and Pollack , M . E . , editors .  (1990) . 
Intentions h ~ Communication . MIT Press . pages 463-493 . 
Philip R . Cohen (1981) . The need for referent identification as a planned action  . In Proceed h~gs of the Seventhaer national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( HCAI-81 )  , pages 3136 . 
James Raymond Davis (1989) . BackSeat Driver : Voice As-sisted Automobile Navigation  . l'h . D , thesis , Massachusetts
Institute of %chnology.
Ann S . Devlin (1976) . The " small to wn " cognitive map : Adjusting to a new environment  . In G . T . Moore and R . G . Golledge , editors , Environmental Knowing : Theories , Research and Methods . Dowden , tlutchinson and Ross . 
Philip G . Edmonds ( I993) . A computational model of collaboration on reference in direction-giving dialogues  . M . Sc . thesis , published as technical report CSRI-289 , Department of Compnter Science , University of Toronto . 
Peter A . Heeman and Graeme Hirst (1992) . Collaborating on refen'ing expressions . Technical Report TR435, Computer Science Dept . , Univ . of Rochester , Rochester , New York . 
Kevin Lynch (1960) . The hnage of the City . M1T Press . 
Mm~ha Pollack (1990) . Plans as complex mental attitudes . In RR . Cohen , J . Morgan , and M . E . Pollack , editors , Intentions in Communication , pages 77-103 . MIT Press . 
George Psathas (1991) . The structure of direction-giving in interaction . In Deirdre Boden and Don I1 . Zimmermau , editors , Talk and Social Structure , pages 195-216 . Polity Press . 
Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale (1992) . A fast algorithm for the generation of referring expressions  . In Proceedings of the ldth International Conference on Computational Linguis-ticks I  ( COLING-92 )  , pages 232-238 . 
John . R . Searle (1969) . Speech Acts : An Essay in the Philosophy q\ [ Language  . Cambridge University Press . 

