The Interneta " natural " channel for language learning 
INU IKentaro
Dept . of Computer Science
Tokyo Institute of Technology
2-12-10-okayama Meguro 152 Japan
e-mail : in ui@cs.titech.ac.jp
The network as a motivational source for using a foreign language  . Electronic networks can be useful in many ways for language learners  . First of all , network facilities ( email , news , WWW home pages ) minimize not only the boundaries of time and space  , but they also help to break communication bar -tiers  . They are a wonderful tool for USING a foreign language  . Email , for example , can be used not only for interaction between teachers and students  , but also for interaction among students ( collaborative learning )  . Students can even ask for help from friends or " experts " living elsewhere  , on the other side of the globe . 
There have been quite a few attempts to introduce these new tools into the class room  . For example , there are several well established mailing lists between Japanese and foreign schools  . This allows Japanese kids to practice , let's say English , by exchanging messages with students from " abroad "  , chatting about their favorite topics like music , sport or any other hobby . Obviously , this kind of communication is meaningful for the student  , since s/he can talk about hings/he is concerned with  . 
What role then can CALL system play in this new setting ? Rather than trying to play the role people are very good at  ( answering on the fly questions on any topic , common sense reasoning , etc . ) , CALL system should assist people by providing the learner with information humans are generally fairly poor at  . One way to help the user is by providing him with information  ( databases ) he is looking for . For example , all language larners are concerned with lexicons  . Having fabulous browsing tools , computers have a great advantage over traditional dictionaries  . Also , people are not very good in explaining the contexts in which a word may be used  , or in explaining the difference between two words  . Last , but not least , existing NLP technology , such as parsing or machine translation , could be incorporated into the development of ' intelligent dictionaries '  . However , before doing so , we have to consider several basic issues : what information is useful  , that is , what information should be provided to the learner  , when and how ? For example , rather than killing the user by an information over flow  , -like these long list of translations that most electronic dictionaries provide  , lists in which the user has to dig deeply in order to find the relevant word  , -one could parametrize the , level of detail , scope and grain size of translations for a given text or text fragment  . In sum , there should be a balance between the information provided by the system and the user's competence  . 
Following this line of reasoning we have started to work on a user friendly interface for a bilingua lexicon  ( English-Japanese )  . Two features of our prototype are worth mentioning :  ( a ) the tool is implemented as a WWW application ( http://tanaka-www . cs:titech . ac . jp/-inui/JLD . html ) , hence lexical information is presented in a hypertext lashion  , i . e . the user can jump from one information to another ;   ( b ) the system has a mechanism for example retrieval . The dictionary consists of a lexicon and a database of examples  , the latter being a collection of collocations extracted from text corpora such as newspaper articles  . When looking for a particular word , the user can input in English or Japanese any word that is semantically related with the one he is looking for  . The system searches then its database , displaying those examples that exhibit this kind of relation  . The examples are displayed in hypter text format in terms of similarity  , that is ; the examples are grouped or ordered in terms of membership or proximity  . Each example being linked to that part of the corpus from which it has been taken  , each word in the example being linked to the corresponding dictionary entry  . 
The net as facility for resource sharing and development  . The advantages of networks for sharing resources are obvious  . For example , the CONJUGATE project between Melbourne universi -ty and Tsukuba University having started to put Japanese CALL software on an FTP server  ( http://www . 
intersc . tsukuba . ac . jp/conjugate . html ) . Although it is still at a preliminary stage , people from all over the world can access this information  . This tendency will certainly increase with the development of platform independent languages such as JAVA  . Yet , networks are also useful for resource development as they allow to reduce the gap between the developing team and the end user  . The electronic dictionary of Japanese developed at Monash University is a good example J The dictionary and reference tool are distributed as freeware  ( ftp://l'tp . cc . monash . edu . au/pub/nihongo /) . Notet ~ at the dictionary has currently more than 170  , 0 00 entries with English glosses and Kanji trans -criptions  . What enabled this research group to build so quickly such a huge lexicon was the network  . The users provided the developers with feedback , by adding new lexical items to the original dictionary  . Due to this tight coupling , i . e . connection between the developers and the users , the dictionary grewiActually , MacJDic was developed by a graduate student from Harvard  , whereas the body of the dictionary was first developed and maintained by the center administrator at Monash University  . There have been also several groups of japanese teachers across the world who have contributed to the ddvelopment  . The final maifltenance was under the control of Jim Breen  . 
1012 very quickly . There is a not he reason top lead for this kind of feedback loop : software users are generally the ones who know best what their needs are  , that is , what is useful . 
Such schemes where learners directly participate in resource development allow for authentic ommuni-cation  , hence there is a benefit t br the learner , they also show the engineer the kind of information the learner is interested in  , inlbrmation which is usually hidden . In order to maximize the overall benefits we have decided to develop our Japanese lexicon tool as a WWW application  . This allows for feedback fiom the users during the development phase  . 
The next stage consist in moving away fiom a fully client-server set np  , to a semi-standalone implementation , based on the platform independent language , JAVA . 

