Semantic-based Transfer *
Michael Dorna and Martin C . Emele
Institut fiir Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung
Azenberg stralle 12
D-70174 Stuttgart
dorna , emele@ims.uni-stuttgart , de

This article presents a new semantic-based transfer approach developed and applied within the Verbmobil Machine Translation project  . We give an overview of the declarative transfer formalism together with its procedural realization  . 
Our approach is discussed and compared with several other approaches from the MT literature  . The results presented in this article have been implemented and integrated into the Verb mobil system  . 
1 Introduction
The work presented in this article was developed within the Verbmobil project  ( Kay et al , 1994; Wahlster ,  1993) . This is one of the largest projects dealing with Machine Translation  ( MT ) of spoken language . Approx in mtely 100 researchers in 29 publica a dindustrial institutions are involved . 
The application domain is spontaneous poken language in face-to-face dialogs  . The current scenario is restricted to the task of appointment scheduling and the languages involved are English  , 
German and Japanese.
This article describes the realization of a transfer approach based on the proposals of  ( Abb and Buschbeck-Wolf , 1995; Caspari and Schmid , 1994) and ( Copestake ,  1995) . Transfer-based MT1, see e . g . ( Vauquois and Boi~et , 1985; Nagao et al ,  1985) , is based on con~rastive bilingual corpus analyses from which a bilingual lexicon of transfer equivalences is derived  . In contras to a purely * This work was funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education  , Science , Research and Technology ( BMBF ) in the framework of the Verbmobil project under grant  01 IV 101 U . We would like to thank our colleagues of the Verbmobil subproject Transfer  , our IMS colleagues Ulrich Heid and C . J . 
Rupp and our anonymous reviewers for useflt l feedback a ~ ld discussions on earlier drafts of the paper  . 
The responsibility for the contents of this paper lies with the authors  . 
1For a more detailed overview of different approaches to MT  , see e . g . ( Hutchins and Solners , 1992) . 
lexicalist approach which relates bags of lexical signs  , as in Shake-and-BakeMT ( Beaven , 1992; Whitelock ,  1992) , our transfer approach operates on the level of semantic representations produced by various analysisteps  . The output of transfer is a semantic representation for the target language which is input to the generator and speech synthesis to produce the target language utterance  . Our transfer equivalences abstract away from morphological and syntactic idiosyncracies of source and target languages  . The bilingual equivalences are described on the basis of semantic representations  . 
Since the Verbmobil domain is related to discourse rather than isolated sentences the model theoretic semantics i based on Kamp's Discourse Representation Theory  , DRT ( Kamp and Reyle ,  1993) . In order to allow for underspecification , variants of Underspecified Discourse Representation Structures  ( UDRS )   ( Reyle ,  1993 ) are employed as semantic formalisms in the different analysis components  ( Bos et al , 1996; Egg and
Lebeth , 1995; Copestak et al ., 1995).
Together with other kinds of information , such as tense , aspect , prosody and morphosyntax , the different semantic representations are mapped into a single multidimensional representation called Verbmobil Interface Term  ( VIT )   ( Dorna ,  1996) . This single information structure serves as input to semantic evaluation and transfer  . The transfer output is also a VIT which is based on the semantics of the English grammar  ( el . 
Copestak et al .   ( 1995 ) ) and used for generation ( see Kilger and Finkler ( 1995 ) for a description of the generation component )  . 
Section 2 of this paper sketches the semantic representations we have used for transfer  . In section 3 we introduce transfer rules and discuss examples . In section 4 we compare our approach with other MT approaches . In section 5 we present a summary of the implementation aspects  . For a more detailed discussion of the implementation of the transfer formalism see Dorna and Emele  ( 1996 )  . Finally , section 6 summarizes the results . 
316 2 Semantic Representations
The different Verb mobil semanti ( : construction components use variants of UDRS as their semas > tic formalisms  , el . ( Bos et al , 1996; Egg and Le-beth , 1995; Copestak et al . , 1995) . The ability to underspecify quantifier and operators cope together with certain lexical ambiguities is impofrant for a practical machine translation system like Verb mobil because it supports ambiguity preserving translations  . The ( lisambiguation of different readings couht require an m ' bitrau'y amount of reasoning on realworld knowledge and thus should be avoided whenever possible  . 
In the following examples we assume an explicit eventbased semantics  ( Dowry , 1989; Parsons ,  1991 ) with a Neo-Davidsonian representation of semantic argument relations  . All semantic entities in UDRS are uniquely labeled  . A label is a pointer to a semantic predicate nmking it easy t  , o refer to . The labeling of all scntantic entities allows a fiatret  ) resentation f the hierarchical structure of arguinent an  ( 1ot ) erator and quantifier scope embeddings as a set of labeled conditions  . 
The recursive embedding is expressed via additional subordination constraints on labels which occur as arguments of su  ( : holm rators . 
Example ( la ) shows one of the classical
Verb mobil examples and its possible English translation  ( lb )  . 
(1) a . Dasp afltecht scMecht bei'mir.
b . That really doesn't suit me well.
The corresponding semat)l , ic representations are given in (2a ) and (2b ) , respectively . 2(\[2) a . \[ ll:echt(12) , 12: schlecht ( il ) , 13: passen ( il ) , 13: arg3 ( il , i2) , 14: pron(i2) , 15: bei ( il , i3) , 16: ich(i3)\]b . \[ ll : real (12) , 12: neg(17) , 17: good ( il ) , 13: suit ( il ) , 13: arg3 ( il , i2) , 14: pron(i2) , 15: arg2 ( il , i3) , 16:ego(i3)\]S cnlantic entities in (2) are reprc , scnted as a Prologlist of la Imlcd conditions . After the unification-t ) a sed s ( ~ illantic onstruction , the logical wu'iables for labels and nmrkers , such as events , states and individuals , are skolemize ( l with special constant symt ) ols , e . g . 11 for a label at t ( t ? 1 for a state . Every condition is prefixed with a lal ) elserving as a unique identifer . Labels are also usefll l for grouping sets of conditions  , e . g . for i ) artitions whidt belong to the restriction of a qmmtifier or which are part of a specific sub -DRS  . Additionally , all these special constants can be seen as pointers for adding  o1" linking informal , i on within ml ( t between multiple levels of the VIT . 
Only the set of semantic on ditions is shown in (2) ; theot ; her levels of the multidimensional VIT ret ) resentation , whidt contain additional senmntic , 2For l ) resent a J ; ion purposes we have simplilied the actmd VIT representations  . 
pragmatic , morphosyntactic mid prosodic information , have been left , out here . If necessary , such additional information can be used in transfer and sem  ; mtic evaluation for resolving ambiguities or in generation for guiding tile realization choices  . Furthermore , it . allows traasfer to make finegrained distinctions between alternatives in cases where the semantic representations of source mid target lmlguage do not match up exactly  . 
Semantic operators like negation , modals or in-tensitier adverbials , such as really , take extra label arguments fi ) r referring to other elements in the flat ; list which m ' e in the relative scope of these operators  . a This form of semantic representation has the following adwm tages for transfer : ? It  ; is possible to preserve the underspecification of quantifier amd operator scope if there is no divergence regarding scope ambiguity between Sollrce and target languages  . 
? Coindexation of labels and markers in the source and target parts of transfer rules ensures that the semantic entities are correctly related and hence  ( ) bey any semantic constraints which may be linked to dram  . 
To produce an adequate target utterance additional constraints  whirl1 arc important for generation , e . g . sortal , topic/focus constraints etc . , may be preser w ; d . 
* There need not be a 1  :  1 relation between semantic entities and individual exical items  . 
Instead , lexical units may be decomposed in t ; o a set of seinantic entities , e . g . in the case of deriwz tions arid fi ) ranm relinegrained lexical semantics . Lexical decomposition allows us to express generalizations attd to apply trans Dr rules to parts of the decomposition  . 
3 Our Transfer Approach
Transfer equivalences are stated as relations between sets of source language  ( SL ) and sets of target language ( TL ) senlantientities . They are usually based on individual lexical items but might also involve partial phrases for treating idioms and other collocations  , e . g . verb-noun collocations ( see example (8) below ) . After skolemization of these-n , antic representation the input to transfer is variable free  . This allows the use of logical variables for labels and markers in transferules to express coindexation constraints between individual entities such as predicates  , operators , quantifiers and a Fortim concrete exaan pleat hand  , the relative scope ha . s been fully resolved by using the explicit la-bds of other conditions  . If the scope were underspeci-fled , explicit subordination constraints would be used in a speciM scope slot of the VIT  . The exact details of subordination are beyond tim scope of this paper  , of , Prankaa ~ d Reylc ( 1995 ) and Bos et al ( 1996 ) for implementations . 
317 ( abstract ) thematic roles . Hence the skolemiza-tion prevents unwanted unification of labels and markers while matching individual transferules agains the semantic representation  . 
The general form of a transferule is given by
SLSem , SL Conds Tau 0 pTL Sem , TL Conds.
where SLSem and TLSem are sets of semantic entities  .   Tau0p is an operator indicating the intended application direction  ( one of <-> , -> ,  <-) . SLeonds and TLC onds are optional sets of SL and TL conditions  , respectively . All sets are written as Prologlists and optional conditions caa be omitted  . 
On the source language , the main difference between the SLSem and conditions is that the former is matched against he input and replaced by the TLS em  , whereas conditions act as filters on the applicability of individual transferules without modifying the input representation  . Hence conditions may be viewed as general inferences which yield either true or false depending on the context  . 
The context might either be the local context as defined by the current VIT or the global context defined via the domain and dialog model  . Those inferences might involve arbitrarily complex inferences like anaphora resolution or the determination of the current dialog act  . In an interactive system one could even imagine that conditions are posed as yes/no-questions to tile user to act as a negotiator  ( Kay et al , 1994) for choosing the most plausible translation . 
K the translation rules in ( 3 ) are applied to the semantic input in ( 2a ) they yield the semantic output in ( 2b )  . We restrict the following discussion to the direction from German to English but the rules can be applied in the other direction as well  . 
(3) a .\[ L:echt(A)\]<->\[L:real(h)\].
b . \[L:passen(E ) , L : arg3(E , Y ) , LI:bei(E , X )\] <->\[ L : suit(E) , L : arg2(E , X ) , L : arg3(E , Y)\] . 
c . \[L:schlecht(E)\] , \[Ll:passen(E)\]<->\[L:neg(A) , A : good(E)\] . 
d.\[L:ich(X)\]<->\[L:ego(X)\].
e.\[L:pron(X)\]<->\[L:pron(X)\].
The simple lexical transfer rule in ( 3a ) relates the German intensifiere cht with the English real  4  . 
The : variables L and A ensure that the label and the argument of the Germanecht are assigned to the English predicate real  , respectively . 
The equivalence in ( 3b ) relates the German predicate passen with the English predicates uit  . 
The rule not only identifies the event marker E , but unifies the instances X and Y of the relevant thematic roles  . Despite the fact that the German bei-phrase is analysed as an adjunct  , it is treated exactly like the argument arg3 which is syntactically subcategorized . This rule shows how structural divergences can easily be handled within this approach  . 
4The semantic predicate real abstracts away from the adjective/adverbial distinction  . 
(4)\[L:passen(E ) , Ll : bei(E , X )\] <->\[ L : suit(E) , L : arg2(E , X)\] . 
The rule in ( 3b ) might be further abbreviated to ( 4 ) by leaving out the unmodified arg3 , because it is handled by a single metarule , which passes on all semantic entities that are preserved between source and target representation  . This also makes the rule for (3e ) superfluous , inceit uses an interlingua predicate for the anaphor in German and 

The rule in ( 3c ) illustrates how an additional condition ( ILl : passen ( E )  \ ]  ) might be used to trigger a specific translation of schleeht into not good in the context of passen  . The standard trails-lation of schlecht to bad is blocked for verbs like suit  , that presuppose a positive attitude adverbial .   5 One main advantage of having such conditions is the preservation of the modularity of transfer equivalences because we do not have to specify the translation of the particular verb which only triggers the specific translation of the adverbial  . Consequently , the transfer units remain small and independent of other elements  , thus the interdependencies between different rules are vastly reduced  . The handling of such rule interactions ik nown to be one of the major problems in scaling up MT systems  . 
A variation on example (1) is given in (5).
(5) a . Dasp aflt mirechtschleeht.
b . That really doesn't suit me well.
Tile translation is exactly the same , buttile German verb passentakes an indirect object mir instead of the adjunct be /- phrase in  ( 1 )  . The appropriate transferule looks like ( 6a ) which can be reduced to ( 6b ) because no argument switching takes place and we can use the metarule again  . 
(6) a . \[L:passen(g ) , L : arg2(E , X ) , L : arg3(E , g )\] <->\[ L : suit(E) , L : arg2(E , X ) , L : arg3(E , Y )\] . 
b.\[L:passen(E)\]<->\[L:suit(E)\].
In a purely monotonic system without overriding it would be possible to apply the transferule in  ( 6b ) to sentence ( 1 ) in addition to the rule in ( 4 ) leading to a wrong translation . Whereas in the underlying rule application scheme assumed here  , the more general rule in ( 6b ) will be blocked by the more specific rule in ( 4 )  . 
The specificity ordering of transfer rules is primarily defined in terms of the cardinality of matching subsets and by the subsumption order on terms  . In addition , it also depends on the cardinality and complexity of conditions  . For the passen example at hand , the number of matching predicates in the two competing transferules defines the degree of specificity  . 
~Instead of using a specific lexical item like passent he rule should be abstracted for a whole class of verbs with similar properties by using a type definition  , e . g . 
type(de , pos_attitude_verbs , \[ gehen , passen .   .   .   .  \] ) . 
For a description of type definition see ( 11 ) below . 

The following example illustrates how conditions are used to enforce selectional restrictions from the domain model  . For example ~ rmin in German might either be translal  ; ed as appointment or as date , depending on the context . 
(7) a . \[ L:termin(X )\] <-> It : appointment(X)\] . 
b . \[ L:terrain(X)\] , \[ sort(X ) = <' temp_point\]<->\[L:date(X)\] . 
The second rule (7b ) is more specific , because it uses an additional condition . This rule will be tried first by calling the external domain model R  ) r testing whe . ther the sort assigned to X is not suhsumed by the sort  , letup_point . Here , the first rule ( 7a ) serves as a kind of default with respect othe translation of Terrain  , in cases where no specific sort information on the marker X is awfilable or the condition in rule  ( 7b ) Nils . 
In (8) , a light verb construction like einenTer -minvorsehlagaachen is translated into su  . q gest a date by decomposing the compound and light verb to a simplex verb and its modifying noun  . 
(8)\[L:machen(E ), L:arg3(g,X),
LI:termin vorschlag ( X ) \] <->\[ L : suggest ( E )   , L : arg3(E , X ) , LI:date(X )\] . 
We close this section with a support verb example ( 9 ) showing the treatment of head switching in our approa  . ch . The German comparat ; ive construct , i on liebersei'n(lit . : bc more liked ) in (9 a ) is t ; ranslated by the verb prefer in (9t )) . 
(9) a . Diensta 9 is tairlieber.
h.\[wouldl , refer Tuesday.
( IO )\[ L:suppore(S , LI ) , L2: experioncer(S , X ) LI:lieb(Y ) , LI : comparative(Y )\] <->\[ L:prefer(S) , L : argl(S , X ) , L : arg3(S , Y )\] . 
The tra . nsferule in ( 10 ) matches the decoinposi-lion of the comI ) at'at ; ivt ; form lieber into its positive for in liebatntan additional comt  ) a rative predicate to get ; her with l ; he . support verbs ei'n such t ; IKtl ; tile comparative construction lieberse in ( gist X liebe T ) is translated as a whoh ; to the English verb prefer ( x prefers Y ) . 
.4 Discussion
The main motivation for using a senmntic-based at ) proach for transfer is the abilil ; y to abstract a ww froln morplio h ) gical and syntactic idiosyncrasies of individual languages  . Many of the , traditional cases of divergences discussed , e . g . by Dorr (1994) , at ' e already handled in the Verb mobil syntax -seniantics interface  , hence they ( lo not show up in our transfer at ) proach . Examples include cases of categorial and thematic divergences  . 
These are treat t ; d in tile linking between syntactic arguments and their corresponding thematic roles  . 
Another advantage of a semantic-based t ; rans-fer approach over a pure interlingua apt ) roach , e . g . Dorr (1993) , or a direct sl ; ructural c ( ) r respon-dence approach , e . g . Slocumel ; al .  (1987) , is the gain in modularity by allowing language independent grammar development  . Translation equivalences relating semantic entities of the source and target grammars can be f i  ) mmlated in a grmnmar independent bilingual semantic lexicon  . In cases where the semantic representations of source  , and target language are not isomorphic , a nontrivial transfe relation between the two representations is needed  . But it is cleat'ly much easier to niap between fi at semantic representations than between either syntact  ; ic trees or deeply nested semantic re , presentations Aninl ; erlingua approadt presumes thai ; a siregle representation for arbitrat'y languages exists or can be developed  . We believe fi-oma grammar engineering point of view it is unrealistic to come tip with such a ai interlingua representation without a strict coordination between the monolingual grammars  . In general , a pure interlinguapproach results in very application and domain specific knowledge sources which at'e difficult to maintain at M extend to new languages antidomains  . This holds especially in the Verb mobil context with its distributed gratnmat-development  . 
Whereas our approach does not preclude the use of interlingua predicates  . We use interlingua representations for time and date expressions in the Verbmobil domain  . S in filarly for prepositions , cf . 
Buschbeck-Wolf and Niibel (1995) , it makes sense 1 , ouse in or e abstract relations which express tim -dmnental relationships like temporal location or spatial location  . Then it is left to the language specific grammars to make the right lexical choices  . 
(11) a . type(de , leaplea,\[an , in , um , zu \]) . 
b . am Dienstag , im Mai , umdrei , zu Osternc . type(en , temploc,\[on,in,at\]) . 
( t . on Tuesday , in May , at three , at E~Lster ' File class dei initions in ( lla ) arid ( llc ) cluster together those prepositions which can be used t  , o express a temporal location . The names de and en are the SL and TL modules in which the  ( : lass is deiined , temploc is the ( : lass natne and the list denotes the extension of the class  .   ( 11b ) and ( 11 d ) show possible German and English lexicalizations . 
(12)\[temp_loc(E , X )\] , \[ sort(X ) = < time\]<->\[temploc(E , X )\] . 
The interlingua rule in ( 12 ) identifies the abstract teinl ) or a location predicates under the condition that the internal argument is more specitl c than the sort time  . This condition is necessary because of the polysemy of those prepositions  . During comt ) ilation the SL class definition will be automatically expanded to the individual predicates  , whereas the TL class dclinition will be kept unexpanded such that the tat'get gratnmar might be able to choose one of the idiosyncratic prepositions  . 
Mixed approaches like Kaptan et al ( 1989 ) can be characterized by mapping syntax , as well as a predicate-m'gument structure ( f-structure )  . Asson ,  1991) , this kind of transfer has problems with its own multiple level mappings  , e . g . handling of verb-adverb head switching , and does not cleanly separate monolingual from contrastive knowledge  , either . In Kaplan and Wedekind ( 1993 ) an improved treatment of head switching is presented but it still remains a less general solution  . 
A semantic approach is much more independent of different syntactic analyses which axe the source of a lot of classical translation problems such as structural and categorial divergences and mismatches  . In our approach grammars can be developed for each language independently of the transfer task and can therefore be reused in other applications  . 
At first glance , our approach is very similar to the semantic transfer approach presented in Alshawi et al  ( 1991 )  . It , uses a level of underspecified senmntic representations a input and output of transfer  . Tile main differences between out ' approach and theirs are the use of flat semantic representations and tile nonrecursive transfer ules  . 
Tile set-oriented representation allows much simpler operations in transfer for accessing individual entities  ( set membership ) and for combining the result of individual rules ( set union )  . Furthermore , because the recursive rule application is not part of tile rules themselves  , our approach solves problems with discontinuous translation equivalences which tile former approach cannot handle well  . A transferule for such a case is given in (4) . 
Out " current apt ) roach is strongly related totile Shake-and-Bake approach of Beaven  ( 1992 ) and Whitclock ( 1992 )  . But instead of using sets of lexical signs , i . e . morphosyntactic lexemes as in Shake-and-Bake , we specify translation cquivalences on sets of arbitrary semantic entities  . Therefore , before entering tile transfer component of our system  , individual lex-emcs can already be de coin poscd into sets of such entities  , e . g . for stating generalizations on the lexical semantics level or providing suitable representations for inferences  . For example , the wh-question word when is decomposed into temp loc  ( E , X ) , whq(X , R ) , time(R , X ) ( lit . : at which time ) , hence no additional transferules are required . Similarly , German compositalike Ter-minvorsch lagaxe decomposed into its compounds  , e . g . term in ( i2) , n n ( i l , ?2)  , vorsch lag ( i l ) where n_n denotes a generic noun-noun relation . 
As a result a compositional translation as proposal for a date is possible without stating any additional translation equivalences to the ones for the simplex nouns  . 
Another major difference is the addition of coil -ditions which trigger and block the applicability of individual transferules  . For instance in the specific t , ' anslation of schlech to not good as defined in ( 3c )  , without conditions , one would have to add tile verb passen into the bag to test for such a specific context  . As a consequence the translation of the verb needs to be reduplicated  , whereas in our approach , the translation of the verb can be kept ; totally independent of this specific translation of tile adverbial  , because the condition functions merely as a test . 
These examples also illustrates the usefulness of labeled conditions  , because the negation operator can take such a label as an argument and we can use unification again to achieve the correct coindexation  . If we would use a hierarchical semantics instead , as in the original Shake-and-Bake a proach , where the negation operator embeds the verb semantics we would have to translates chlecht  ( e )   , passen(e ) into not ( suit ( e ) , well ( e )   ) in one rule because there is no coindexation possible to express the correct embedding without the unique labeling of predicates  . 
Finally , we have filled the lack of an adequate control strategy for Shake-and-Bake by developing a nonmonotonic control strategy which orders more specific rules before less specific ones  . This strategy allows the specification of power fifl de-fanlt translations  . Whereas without ; such an ordering special care is needed to prevent a compositional translation in cases where a more specific noncompositional translation also exists  . 
The same argument about control holds in comparison to the unification-based transfer approach on Mimimal Recursion Semantics  ( MRS )   ( Copestake et al , 1995; Copestake ,  1995) . In addition , we use matching on first order terms instead of feature structure unification  . Full unification might be problematic because it is possible to add arbitrary information during rule application  , e . g . 
by further unifying different arguments . The other main difference is our nonmonotonic control component where a stile MRS approach assumes a monotonic computation of all possible transfer equiv ' & lences which are then filtered by the generation grammar  . It is difficult to judge the feasibility of their approach given the fact that only a limited coverage has been addressed so far  . 
5 Implementation
A more detailed presentation of the implementation aspects of our transfer approach can be found in Dorna and Emele  ( 1996 )  . The current transfer implementation consists of a transferule compiler which takes a set of rules likc the one presented in section  3 and compiles them into two executable Prolog programs one for each translation direction  . The compiled program includes the selection of rules  , the control of rule applications and calls to external processes if necessary  . 
Because both the transfer input and the matching part of the rules consist of sets we can exploit ordered set operations during compilation ascess and for computing common prefixes which axe shared between different rules  . 
The compiled trazlsfcr program is embcdded in the incremental and parallel axchitecture of the Verbmobil Prototype  . Interaction with external modules , e . g . the domain model and dialog module or other inference components  , is done via a set of predefined abstract interface functions whidl may be called in the condition part of transfer rules  . The result is a hilly transpaxent and modu-lax interface for filtering the applicability of transfer rules  . 
6 Summary
This pai ) er presents a new declarative transfi' . r rule for lnal is in , which provides an iInplementation platform for a selnantic-based transfer approach  . 
This approa ( : h contl ) in eside as fronlan unlber of re ( ' cnt MT proposals and tries to avoid many of the wellknown problems of other transfer and interlingua approaches  . 
The deel axativ ctrtms fer correspondences m'e compiled into an executable Prolog program  . The conlpiler exploits indexing for more efficient search of matching rules  . There is a nonnlonotonic but rule-independent control strategy based on riflespecificity  . 
Currently , the transfer conlponent contains about 1700 transferules . Thanks to the set orientation and indexing techniques we did not encounter any scaling problenls a ald the average runtime pcr for nlane c for a  15 word sentence is about 30 milliseconds . 
Fh ture work will include tim automatic acquisition of transferules fronltagged bilingual corpora to extend tim coverage and an integration of domain specific dictionaries  . 
References
B . Abb and B . Buschbeck-Wolf ,  1995 , A Minimal Transfer Conception for Verbmobil . Vcrl ) ~ nobil Report 84 , Institute for Logic and Linguistics , IBM hlfornlations system eGnfl ) llneidelberg , Germany . 
\[ t . Alshawi , D . Carter , M . nayner , and B . Gamb ~ i . ck .  1991 . 
Translation by Quasi Logical Form Transfer . In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association for " Computational Lingnistics  ( ACL'91 )  , pages 161-168 , Berkeley . 
J . L . Beaven .  1992 . Shake-and-Bake Machine Translation . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Corn-putational Linguistics  ( COLING'9 ~ )  , Nantes , France . 
J . Bos , B . Gambaek , C . Lieske , Y . Mort , M . Finkal , and K . Worm .  1996 . Compositional Semantics in Verl ) mobil . 
In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING'96 )  . 
B . Busehbeck-Wolf and R . Niibel .  1995 . Die Beh and hmgi iber-set zungsambiger P i4posit ionenim Transfer des Verbmobil-Demonstra tors  . Verbmobil Report 87, IBM , tleidelberg and
IAI , Saarbriicken , Germany.
n . Caspari and L . Schndd .  1994 . Parsing und Generieruug in qYUG . Verbmobil Report 40, Siemens AG , Munich , Ger-

A . Copestake , 11 . Flickinger , R . Malouf , S . l/ . ie hemamm , and 1 . Sag .  1995 . Transfer and Minimal Recursion Semantics . 
In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine  7~rans  -
Ision ( TM !'95), Leuven , Belgium.
A . Copeseke .  1995 . Semantic Transfer in Verbmobil . 
Verbmobil Report 93 , IMS , Universitiit Stuttgart , Germany and CSLI , Stanford University . 
M . Dorna and M . Emele .  1996 . Emcientiml flementatioa of a semantic- baaed transfer approach  . In Proceedings o\[the 12th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence ( EC'AI'96 )  . 
M . Dorna .  1996 . Ttle ADT-Package for the Verbmobil Interface Term  . Verbmob // Report 104 , IMS , Universitiit Stuttgart , Germany . ( to appear) . 
B . J . Dorr .  1993 . lnterlingual Machine Translation : a Parameterized Approach  . volume 6311-21 of Artificial Intelligence , pages 429-493 . 
B . J . Dorr .  1994 . Machine " l Yanslation Divergences : a Formal Description and Proposed Solution  . volmne20(4) of Computational Linguistics , pages 597-633 . 
D . Dowty .  1989 . On the Sen , antic Content of the Notion of ' Thematic Role '   . In G . Chierehia , B . Partee , and R . Turner , editors , Property Theory , 7 Ope Theory and Natural Language Semantics . Dordrecht , Reidel . 
M . Egg and K . Lebeth .  1995 . Semantic mtder specification and moditier a ttachment ambiguities  . In Beitrligczur 5 . 
l , ' acht a guugder Sektion ( \] omputerling nistikder 1 ) ~fS . 
A . Frank and U . Reyle .  1995 . Principle Based Semantics for tIPSG . In Proceedings of the 7th Conference of the European Ghapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ( EAUL'95 )  , Dublin , Ireland . 
W . J . l lutch in s and H . L . Somers .  1992 . An Introduction to Machine Translation . Academic Press , London , UK . 
Hans Kamtl and Uwe Reyle .  1993 . From Discourse to Logic : An Introduction to Modeltheoretic Semantics of Natural  Lan9nage   . Kluwer , Dordrecht , ttoll and . 
tt . . M . Kaplan and J . We de kind .  1993 . Restriction and e or respondance-ba . qed translation . In Proceedings of the 6th Conference o \] the European Chapter of the Association for C~omputational Linguistics  ( EAUL '931 , pages 193202 , Utrecht , The Netherlands . 
t ? . Kaplan , K . Netter , J . Wedekind , and A . Zaenen .  1989 . 
qYans\]ation by Structural Correspondences . In Proceedings of the 4th Uonfereuce of the European Chapter of tht: Association for Computational Linguistics  ( EACL'891 , pages 272-281 , Manchester , UK . 
M . Kay , M . Gawron , and ' IJ . Norwig .  1994 . Verbmobil : a Translation System for Face-to-Face Dialogs  . CSLI Lecture Notes ; No .  33 . CSLI Center for the Study of Language and In formation  , Stanford University . 
A . Kilger and W . Finkler .  1995 . Incremental Generation for Real-Time Appl ications  . Research Report RR-95-11, I ) FK 1
GmbH , Saarbriieken , Germany.
M . Nagao , U . Tsujii , and U . Nakamura .  1985 . The Japanese Government Project for Machine Translation  . volmnel 1 (23) of (: or n putational Linguistics , pages 91-110 . 
T . Parsons .  1991 . Events in the Semantics of English . M1T
Press , Cambridge , Mass.
U . Reyle .  1993 . Dealing with Ambiguities by Underspeci-l ication : Construction  , Representation and Deduction . In Jonnal of Semantics , volume 10(2) , pages 123179 . 
L . Sadler and II . S . Thompson .  1991 . Structural Non-correspondence in Translat ion  . In Proceedings of the e 5th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin  . quistics ( EAC ~ L'91) , pages 293298 , Berlin , Germany . 
3 . Slocum , W . S . Bennet , J . Bear , M . Morgan , and R . Root . 
1987 . METAL : The LIt . CMachine Translation System . In S . Michaelson and Y . Wilks , editors , Machine Translation today : the state of the art , pages 319-350 . Edinburgh University Press . 
B . Vauquois and C . Boitet .  1985 . Automated Translation at Grenoble Universi t y  . volume 1111) of Computational
Linguistics , pages 2836.
W . Wahlster .  1993 . Verbmobil--"l Yanslation of Face-to-Face Dialogs  . In Proceedings of the 4th Machine Translation
Summit , Kobe , Japan.
P . Whitelock .  1992 . Shake-and-Bake Translation . In Proceedings of the Igth International Conference on  ( Jorn pnta-tional Linguistics ( C*OLING'9 ~ )  , pages 784-791 , Nantes , 


