Mental State Adjectives : the Perspective of Generative 

Pierrette Bouillon
ISSCO , University of Geneva
54, route desAcacias
1227 Geneva , Switzerland
pb ~ divsun , unige , ch
Abstract
This paper focusses on mental state adjectives and offers a unified analysis in the theory of Generative Lexicon  ( Pustejovsky ,  1991 ,  1995) . We show that , instead of enumerating the various syntactic constructions they enter into  , with the different senses which arise , it is possible to give them a rich typed semantic representation which will explain both their semantic and syntactic polymor-phism  . 
1 Introduction
Recently , work in computational semantics and lexical semantics has made an interesting shift  . 
Motivated by a concern for lexical organization and global coherence in the structure of lexicon  , some researchers have moved towards nlore expressive semantic descriptions  , as well as more powerful methods of combining them  ( see for example Pustejovsky ,  1991 , 1995; Briscoe ,  1993) . 
This article will exploit one of these theories , The Generative Lezicon ( GL : Pustejovsky ,  1995) , and extend it for the treatment of Frenchmental adjectives  . The following section summarizes the problematic behaviour of these adjectives  . The GL approach is then described , and a GL analysis of the data . 
2 The Data
Mental adjectives which denote an emotional sta te or a competence  ( agent-oriented , following Ernst ,  1983 ) present interesting syntactic and semantic polymorphic behaviour  , as noted in the literature ( see for example Leh ~ er , 1990 and Croft ,  1984) . In this paper , we focus on the representative members of these classes in I and Ih We would like to thank James Pustejovsky for exten-sire discussions on the data presented in this article  . 
Thanks also to Laurence Danlos and Graham Russell for their conunents  . 
IE motional adjectives : triste's ad ' , furieuz ' angry , furious ' , irritg ' irritated ' , heureuz ' happy ' , ennuyg ' bored ' . 
IIA gent-or lented adjectives : intelligent , ing dnieuz ' clever ' , habile's kilful ' , adroit'dex-trous ' . 
Both classes of adjectives exhibit the property of syntactic polyvalency  , being able to appear in several distinct contexts  , with optional complement structures ( as illustrated in ( 1 )  , (2) and (3)) . In the case of agent-oriented adjectives , the complement expresses the manifestation of the state and call be realized as an infinitive with d/pour or de  ( examples ( 2a , b )) or a prepositional phrase (2c ): (2a , b , c ) means that somebody is skil-fulin whathedoes or howhedoes it  ( see Croft ,  1984) . 
(1 ) Cethommeest triste/habile/furieux " This man is sad/clever/angryTM  ( 2 ) a . Cethom meest habile departir " This man is skilful to leave " b  . Cethom meest habile ?/ pourtricher " This man is skilfulat cheating " c  . Cethom meest habile aubridge " This man is skilful at bridge " In the case of emotionals tate adjectives  , this complement typically expresses the cause of the emotional state and may be realized as and e -infinitive or a que-sentence :  ( 3a , b ) , for example , means that somebody is sad/angry because of something  . Notice however that , in some contexts , the complement can also refer to the manifesta-t ion of the state  , as for agent-or lented adjectives (3c ) . 
(3) a . Cethommeest triste/furieux departir " Thisman is sad/angry to leave " b  . Cethommecs ttriste/furieux que tupartes " This manissad/angry that you a releaving "  1 We give in quotes a literal translation of the French examples  . 
143 c . Cetho In meest tristeen jouantanpiano " This manissad at playing piano " Another property exhibited by these adjectives is that of mult iple semantic selection : that is  , they are able to predicate of different semantic types  ( examples ( 4 ) to ( 7 ) ) , namely nouns denoting individuals ( the ' a'examples )  , objects ( b ) and events ( c ) . This can however not be generalized to the whole class of mental states adjectives  , as shown by (7) , for example . 
(4) a . Unhommetriste " As adman " b . Unliv retriste " As ad book " e . Unexamentriste " As a dexam " (5) a . Unhomme furieux " An angryman " b . Unliv refurieux " A furious book " c . Une destruction furieuse " A furious destruction "   ( 6 ) a . Unhommeingdnieux " A cleverman " b . Unlivreing 6nieux " Ancle verbook " c . Unexamening ~ nieux " Ancle verexam " (7) a . Unhommeirr itfi/ennuyfi " Anirritated/bored man " b  . * Unlivre irrit~/ennuy6 " Anirritated/boredbook " c . * Une destruction irrit de/ennuy fi " Anirritated /bore destruction " Finally  , the third interesting property manifested by these adjectives is their pattern of polysemy  . They exhibit different senses depending on the semantic type of the item modified : when they predicate of an individual  , they normally denote the mental state of this individual  ( 8 )   ( but see example ( 12 ) ) . 
(8 ) Unhommetriste/ing~nieux/furieux " As ad/clever /angrynlan " - ~ which is in a sad/clever/angry state When they modify an event or an object  , they can take either a causative ( gb ) or a manifesta-tion sense ( 9c , 10 e and 11c ) . In the former case , the object or event is the cause of the stat % while in the latter it is the manifestation of the state  . In some specific contexts , the causative sense is also possible with individuals  ( 12 )  . 
(9 ) Unlivre/voyage triste " As adbook/travel"a . --* which is in a state of sadness b . - ~ which causes somebody to be sad c . --~ which is an ranifestation of some body's sadness  ( 10 ) Unlivre/voyageingfinieux " A clever book / journey " a  . ~* which is in a state of cleverness b . - ~* which causes somebody to be clevere . - ~ which is a manifestation of the some-body's cleverness  ( 11 ) Un ( e ) livre/destrnction furien x ( s e ) "A furious book/destruction " a . --,* which is in a state of anger b . --~* which causes somebody to be angry e . - ~ which is a manifestation of some body's anger ( 12 ) Unholnnletristehvoir " As admantose e " a . - ~* who is in a state of sadness b . ~ the sight of whom causes somebody to be sad A complication arises with respect to the polysemous behaviour of emotion adjectives  , in that when they modify an object or an event (9 ,  10) , they can have both the causal and the manifestation senses  ( gb , e ) . For some emotion adjectives as furieux (11) , the manifestation sense is even the only one available  ( llc )  . 
The remainder of this paper will present an explanation of the syntactic and semantic behaviour of these adjectives within the framework of Generative Lexicon theory  ( henceforth GL )  . In par-titular , instead of enumerating all syntactic constructions and the different senses for these adjectives  , we will provide a rich typed semantic representation which explains both the semantic and the syntactic polymorphism associated with these classes  . This representation and the way to project it at the syntax level will be the focus of the following section  . 
3 Mental Adjectives in Generative
Lexicon 3.1 General approach
In the rest of the article , we will propose the foplowing approach : ( a ) to distinguish emotion adjectives and agent- oriented adjectives by means of their qualia structure  ;   ( b ) to represent he semantic ambiguity of mental adjectives by use of dotted types  ( Pustejovsky 1995 , chapter 6 . 2) ;   ( e ) to explain specific semantic selection by the notion of headedness  ( Pustejovsky 1995 , chapter 5 . 3) . 
The two first points will be the object of section  3  . 2 and the third one of 3 . 3 . Section 4 will then focus on emotion adjectives . 
,3 . 2 Two k inds of ad jec t ive w i th dot ted type The emotional state  ( I ) and agent-or lented ( I i ) adjectives will be given the GL representations ( 13 ) and ( 14 )  , respectively . 
144 (13) " emotian_adj
EVENTSTR =
ARGSTR::I
QUALIA =\[
E1 = el:state
D_E := e2: experiencing_ov
D_E2 = e3: intellec-act_sv
RESTR = e2 < el < e3
ARGI = x : human \]
D_ARG \] = e2/e3l(et . e2) . ( eLe3) aep1FOIrMAI ~ = Adj(el , x)
Tma(;=P ( e3, x , ...)
AGI~NTIVI~mP ( e2, x, . .  . )(\]4) agent-oriented adj
El :: el : state
EVI.;NTS ' PR:D_E1::e3:intellsc-act_ev
RleSTII_=el<03\[AI\[G1::x:human\]
AIrGSq.'t t=\])_ARG1:=03 el.egAcp\]
QUALIA = FORMAL = A(\[\](e\]\[,x)\[
TgI . IC = P ( e.3, x,y ) J
These structures encode several different aspects of the semantics for these adjectives  . 
The event structure ( EVENTSTtL ) indicates that mental adjectives have a complex event structure  . They denoten , cntal state(el ) ( examl Jes (1) to (3)) , but they are also able to make reference to events  , the cause of the state ( c2 ) and/or its manifestation ( ca )   ( as shown in examples ( 4 ) to ( 7 ) ) . The Restr ( iction ) relation indicates the temporal precedence between the state and the two events : the cause  ( e2 ) must precede the state and the manifestation ( e3 ) must follow it . The two events are default events , as the adjective ~: e-mains a state , even when it ; has a causative sense , contrary to real transitions ( a . ecomplishnw . nt or achievement ) , like e ouler ' sink ' , for example ( as pointed out in Pustejovsky ,  1995 , chapter \] 0 ) The argument structure ( AltC~STIQ specifies that ment M adjectives select ; for two arguments , one for human ( argl ) and a second for event ( see Croft ,  11984 , for a similar view ) . The second is a default argument ( D_argJ ) as it need not to be present at the syntactic level  ( as shown in exam-pies ( 1 ) ) . As agent-oriented adjectives refer to the manifestation of the state  ( examples ( 2 ) ) , the second argmnentise 3 , the event which follows the state . It is subtyped as an intellectual act . For emotion adjeet lves , the second argument is c2 or e3 , as they can refer either to the manifestation of the  . state ( example ( 3e ) ) or its cause ( examples ( 3a , b )) . e2 is subtyped as an experiencing event , as we consider that the cause of an emotion corresponds to the experiencing of sonlething  . I , ' ol-lowing Croft (1990) , we think that there are two processes implied in a causal emotional state : an cxperiencer must direct his or her attention to a stimulus and this causes the experiencer to enterillamental state  . 
The quall a structure ( QUALIA ) encodes the basic semantic type of a word ( its Lexical Coil-ceptual Paradigm , or LCP ) and specifics how it is linked to other events and arguments of the event and argument structures  ( see Pustejovsky ,  1995 , chapter 6) . To do this , it call use four possible different roles : the FORMAL role encoding the basic semantic type  ( s ) of the word , the CONs Trru'r Iw , ; role its constitutive elements , the TELIC role its purpose or function and the AGENTIVE role the factors involved in bringing it about  . In terms of temporal relations , the qualia encode specific constraints on the relative temporal ordering of the wducs of tile qu Mia  . That is , the event involved in the AGENTIVE role precedes that state existing ill the FORMAL  ) alld the associated CONSTITUT1 VI , ) vMne , shonhlt here be one . Finally , the T\]~LIC role is inherently at cinporal consequence of the FOlt- 
MAI , , cf . (15).
(15) AGENTIVE < FORMAl , and CONST < TEL1C In the case of mental adjectives , the qualia in ( 13 ) and ( 14 ) makes explicit that they denote a complex or dot ted type  ( written ~ yp e . type ) , which is the product of basic types , stand e2 for agent-oriented adjectives and el , e2 and e3 for emo-tive ones . Each of these types can be projected independently  , if no other constraints apply ( see 3 . 3) . The state cl is encoded in the ~' Ott MAL ; an event encoded in the AGENTIVE role ( e2 ) denotes the cause or origin of the state , i . e . the experiencing event ; encoded in the TELIC role ( e3) , it denotes then the manifestation of the state  , i . e . 
the intellectual act.
In other words , the ( ll , representation for emo-ti ( m adjectives ( 13 ) stipulates that somebody ( a: ) is in a state because of an experiencing ewmt ( e2 )  , which can have a further manifestation ( e3) ; 2 that lot agent-oriented adjectives ( 14 ) specifies that somebody is in n state which can have ~ L manifestation  . 
3.3 The notion of head
However , not all mental adjectives will be able to project the two types they denote  ( i . e . state and event ) , depending on the even the a deduess , in GL , the notion of head provides a way of indicating a type of foregronnding and baek gronnding of event arguments  . In doing this , it specifies how to project the qualia representation and acts as a filter to constrain the set of projectable qualia : the headed event projects the tbrnlula associated with that event and it  ; is this formula which needs to be saturated at the syntax level  ( Pustejovsky ,  1995 , ( Jhapter 6 . 2 . 5) . 
2 For ~ L similar view see Ans combres ( 1995 ) who distinguishes internal feeling and external attitude  . 
I\]e considers then that a feeling can have a external ntan if ' esl  ; ation . 

For mental adjectives , two kinds of headedness are possible . The adjective can be headed either on the state or the event it denotes  . Moreover , some adjectives will be unspecified regarding the head and will therefore be able to be headed on any of the subevents of the event structure  . In the following , we will first focus on the two different kinds of headedness  , applying to the state or one of the events , and then show the consequences of an headless tructure  . 
3 . 3 . 1 Event s t ruc ture headed on the state The adjective is projected via the template P  ( el , z ) in the formal role . It therefore denotes the mental state of an individual  ( 16 a , 17 a ) and requires only one argument z of type human . Com-plements are however possible if they make direct reference to the agentive  ( as in ( 16b , c ) , where the complement is the cause of the emotional state  ) or relic roles ( as in ( 17b , c ) , where it is the manifestation ) . 
(16) a . Jesuistriste/furieux"I'msad/furious"b . Jesuistriste/furieux departir " I'msad /furious at leaving " c  . Jesuistriste/furieux quatupartes ' Tm sad /furious that you a releaving "  ( 17 ) a . Jesuising 6 nieux ' Tmclever " b . Jesuis ing6nieux aux & hecs " I'm clever at playing chess " c . Jesuising $ nieux departir " I'm clever to leave " The qualia representation is rich enough to explain the syntactic polyvalency shown in  ( 16 ) and ( 17 )  . There are indeed two ways of referring to a quale role : Direct saturation of a quale role  . The complement is identified as a subtype of the experiencing event or the intellectual act  . In (16b ) and (17b ) , for example , the complement directly sat-urates the event e2 or e3   ( as the qualia structures in ( 18 ) and ( 19 ) make explicit )  . Partiris indeed a subtype of the experiencing event sort  ( par-fir<ezperiencing_event ) and lesd checs ( chess ) of the intellectual act one ( lesd checs < creative-intellectual_act )  . By contrast , in order for (20) to be an acceptable sentence , ~tremalade'beill'must be reconstructed , non-standardly , as an intellectual act . 

FOR MAL ? triste(el~je))
TBmC = P ( ea , je)
AGENTIVZ = partir(e2de)
FOCAL = ing 6 nieux(elje)\]
TELIC = jouer(eaje , 4 checs )   ( 20 ) * Jesuishabile & ttremalade " I'm skilfulat being ill " Saturation of the object of the experiencing or intellectual act event  . In (16c ) and (17c) , the complement is the object ( y ) of an implicit event and the saturation of the quale is only possible because the complement can be coerced to the type expected for the complement  ( he experiencing event or intellectual ct ) :  ( 16 c ) means that I'msad ~ furious because I ezperience your leaving  ( as ( 21 ) makes explicit ) and ( 17 c ) that I'min-genious at performing ~ he intellectual ac~whose object is the departure  ( as in ( 22 ) ) . There is no further specification available for the ezp_ev or intellectual-acLev variable  . 

FORMAL = triste ( elje ) 1TBMC = P ( e3j e ) AGENTIVE = exp_ev ( e2je , que-tu-partes )   ( 22 ) \[FORMAL = ing 6 nieux ( elje ) \] TELIC = intellec-act_ev ( e3je , partir ) These two ways of saturating a quale explain what Croft  ( Croft ,  1984 ) and Ernst ( 1985 ) have called the verbal/factive ambiguity of two arguments agent-oriented ajectives  ( see also Kiparsky and Kiparsky ,  1979) . When the event is saturated , we get the eventual sense : in (17b ) , clevernessip redicated of the manner of playing chess  ( structure 19 )  ; when the object of the event is saturated , we get the faetive sense so that in ( 17 c ) cleverness is predicated of the fact of leaving ( structure 22 )  . 
3 . 3 . 2 Event s t ruc ture headed on an event Recall that the adjective denotes one or two events  , i . e . e2 or e3 in (13) and (14) . When the event structure is headed on one of these  , the adjective is projected via the agentive or the relic role  , i . e . the template P ( e2, z, .   .   . ) or P ( e3, z, . . . ) . 
It therefore selects for an event and gets the causative or manifestation sense  ( examples ( 23 ) and ( 24 ) ) . However , that does not mean that the noun must be an event  , but only that its semantic representation , or general knowledge concerning its semantic type  , should provide an event , as shown in the next examples (23) and (24) . 
(23) Celivreesttriste " The book is sad " a . ~ whose reading cause somebody to be sad b . - ~ whose writing cause some body to be sad c . - ~ whose writing is the manifestation of somebody's sadness  ( 24 ) Cesapines ttriste " The pinetree is sad " a . ~ whose experiencing causes somebody to be sad sible as livre  ( book ) contains in its qualia structure two events , namely life ( to read )   ( relic of livre ) and derire ( to write )   ( agentive of livre )   ( see Pustejovsky and Bouillon ,  1995 , for the qualia representation of livre ) . Two causative interpretations (23a , b ) and one manifestation ( 23c ) are therefore possible . Notice that when the events are defined in the lexical semantics of the word  , the experiencing and the manifestation are intentional and controlled  ( the experiencing is active , following
Lehrer , 1990).
In (24) on the other hand , there is nothing contributed by the ~ reeperse to how the experiencing is achieved  ( as the noun has notelic nor agentive )  , except for it being a physically manifested object with extension  . In this case , it is the properties inherited through the formal  ( and not the lexical semantics of the word ) that suggests how it can be experienced . For this reason , the experiencing is not controlled , nor intentional ( it is stative ) . The manifestation sense is impossible assapin ( versus book ) has no intellectual act in its qualia . 
8.3.8 Unheaded event structure.
If certain adjectives can be restricted to be headed either on the event or the state  , others can be left underspecified regarding the head  . In this last case , the adjective can then be projected via the formal or the telic/agentive roles and combines the two or three different senses : stative  , causative and/or manifestation , depending on the number of events it can refer to  ( one for agent-oriented adjectives ( see ( 14 ) ) , two for emotion alones ( see (13))) . This is the case of the adjective striste and ing dnieuz which will get respectively the three and two senses  , as illustrated in (8) to (10); in (8) , tristean dinggnieu ~ have the head on the formal role and the adjectives have a stative sense  ; in ( 9c ) and ( 10c ) on the telic : they have a manifestation sense . In (9b ) , triste has the head on the agentive and receives its causative sense  . Their semantic polymorphism is then explained , without having to list the different senses . 
Remember however that all emotional state adjectives which combine a stative and a eventual meaning will not be able to get the three mean -iugs : the emotion adjective furieuz  , for example , cannot have the head on the agentive , as shown in ( llb ) : unlivrefurieu ~ cannot get the causative meaning  . The question is then what prevents this adjective from having the head on the agentive role ? A first attempt attackling the problem follows from the observation that most emotion adjectives ending in-euz  ( with causal complement and not derived from psychological verbs  , as en-nu yeu $ , ouirage u ~ , etc . ) behave in the same way ( see the list in ( 25 ) ) and that , more generally , the suffix plays a drucial role in restricting the head  ( see Anseombres ,  1995 , for a similar view and section 4 for other examples of the influence of the suffix  )  . It seems therefore not too preliminary to think that the-euz suffix acts as a filter on the head for this kind of adjectives  . However , the formal representation of the suffixes and the way it interacts with the representation of the stem remain to be investigated  . 
(25) heureuz , anzieuz , malheu T ' euz , honteu ~ , soucieuz , etc . 
In this section , we explained the polyvalency of mental adjectives  . We are now able to show how the head distinction is relevant oclassify emotional states adjectives and explain their semantic selection  . 
4 Semant ic se lec t ion : the case o f emot ion ad jec t ives On the basis on the headedness configuration  , we will distinguish three classes of French emotion adjectives  , exemplified in (26) ,   ( 27 ) and ( 28 ) :  ( 26 ) Adjectives headed on the state : fdchg'angry  '  , ennuyg ' bored ' , irritd ' irritated ' , etc . 
(27 ) Adjectives headed on the agentive : ennuyan ~ ' boring '  , prd occup an ~' worrying ' , agr dable ' nice ' , admirable ' wonderful ' , effroy-able ' appalling ' , etc . 
(28) Headless adjectives : triste'sad' , heureuz ' happy ' , furieuz ' angry ' , ' furious ' , etc . 
Those in ( 26 ) will have the head on the state and will get only the stative sense  . As predicted , they will not be able to modify an event or an object  , as illustrated in (29) . 
(29 ) * Vnlivref?ch ~/ ennuy ~/ irrit ~" An angry/bored /irritated book " The ones in  ( 27 ) will have the head on the agentive and will receive only a causative sense  . As a result , they will keep this causative sense , even when they modify a noun of type human (30) . 
(30 ) Unhomme ennuyant/pr6occupant /admirable/effroyable -+ which causes somebody's trouble/anxiety/admiration/fright Finally  , those in ( 28 ) will not be specified regarding the head ( they are headless ) and will be able to combine the three senses ( except when the suffix acts as a filter , as shown in (25)) . They can therefore modify nouns of type human , objec ~ and even g ( 5 ) and will be ambiguous when they modify a noun of type human  , as an hm nan can be either in a mental state or the object of an experiencing event  ( 31a , b ) . In the case of ambiguity , it is striking to see that French syntax distinguishes clearly the two senses  . In (31a ) , it is the prenominal position of the adjective and in  ( 31c ) the choice of the to the causative sense ( versus the stative one )  . 
(31) a . Detristesenfants " Sad children to see "-- ~ which cause the sadness of the persons which experience them b  . Desenfant stristes " Sad children " which are in as ad state c  . Unhommetristekvoir " As admantose e " which causes the sadness of the persons which see him As a result of this  , (32 a ) ( vs . (32b )) will be impossible : in (32a ) , the prenominal position of the adjective forces the causative sense  , giving rise to an incompatibility as two different nouns  ( namely enfant ( children ) and mort deleurm ~ ve ( death of the mother ) ) try to saturate the same variable y , i . e . the object of the experiencing . 
(32) a . * Detristesenfants de lamor tdeleurl nereb . Desenfant stristes de lamor tdeleur

To finish , notice that in (28) , (29) and (30) , the role of the suffix appears clearly : for emotion adjectives  , the-d suffix constrains the head to be on the state and - anti-able on the causativ event  . It also explains possible divergences between French and English  . 
5 Conclusion
In this article , we extended GL to the treatment of Frenchmental state adjectives  . We showed how GL can adequately account for the following :  ( a ) Avoiding the multiplication of entries . 
The different senses of the mental adjectives ( examples ( 11 ) to ( 14 ) )and their polyvalency ( examples ( 3 ) to ( 5 ) ) follows from the qualia representation . 
( b ) Explaining the links between the dif-ferent senses of mental adjectives  . The qualia structure we proposed in ( 15 ) and ( 16 ) makes explicit the links between the ditl~rent senses of mental adjectives  ( mental state of an individual , causative and manifestation ) . In (15) , the qualia structure specifies that emotional states are caused by a causal event and can have a further manifestation  ; in (16) , that the agent-oriented state can have a fnrther manifestation  . 
( c ) Explaining the semantic selection of mental state adjectives  . The specific semantic selection of mental adjectives follows from the head cdness system  . 
( d ) Distinguishing two kinds of adjectives : those which denote simple type  ( rouge ( red )  , grand(big ) , etc . ) and those like mental adjectives which denote dotted type  . This distinction is in accordance with the classical distinction drawn between stative adjectives and dynamic ones  , which , following Quirk et al ,  1994:434 , denote qualities that are thought to be subject to control by possessor  . GL allows this distinction to be characterized and given a more formal representation  , an adjective being dynamic if it refers to the cause or its further manifestation  . 
References
J . C . Anscombres ( 1995 ) " Morphologie et re-p % sentation ~ v ~ nementielle : Le cas des noms de sentiment et d ' attitude "  . In Languc
Frangaise 105.
M . Bierwiseh and K . E . tIeidolph (1979) Progress in Linguistics . Mouton , The Hague . 
T . Briseoe , V . DePaiva and A . Copestake ( 1993 ) Default Inheritance in the Lexicon . CUP , Cambridge . 
W . Croft (1 . 984) " Representation fAd verbs , Adjectives and Events in Logical Form " . SRI International Technical Notes 344 . 
W . Croft (1993) " The Semantics of mental verbs " . In Pustejovsky ( ed) . 
T . B . Ernst ( 1984 ) Towards an Integrated Theory of Adverb position in English  . Indiana Linguistics Club , Indiana P . Kiparsky and C . Kiparsky (1979) " fact " . In
Bierwiseh and Heidolph ( eds).
A . Lehrer (1990) " Polysemy , conventionality and the structure of the lexicon  "  . In Cognitive Linguistics 12 . 
J . Pustejovsky (1991) " The Generative Lexicon ".
In Computational Linguistics 17(1).
J . Pustejovsky (1993) Semantics and the Lexicon.
Kluwer , Dordrecht.
J . Pustejovsky and P . Bouillon ( 1995 ) " Aspeetual Coercion and Logical Polysemy " . In Journal of
Semantics 2.
J . Pustejovsky (1995) The Generative Lexicon.
MIT , Cambridge.
R . Quirk , S . Greenbaum , G . Leech ; J . Svartvik ( 1994 ) A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language . Longman , London and New


