Computational Linguistics and its Use in Real World : 
the Case of Computer Assisted-Language Learning
Michael ZOCK
Langage & Cognition
LIMSI-CNRS , B.P . 133
91403 ORSAY-FRANCE
email : zock@limsi.fr
Surprising as it may be , one of the biggest markets for products of computional linguistics  ( CL ) has been largely overlooked : the class room . While machine translation has attracted a considerable amount of research  , hence resources , CALL , ~ a domain with a comparable potential , has hardly ever received the attention it deserves  . Actually there seems to be a communication problem and a mutual ack of interest concerning the work done in the neighbouring disciplines  . 
Computational linguists don'ts how much interest for CALL  , and CALL experts ignore the work done by computational linguists  . Strangely enough , even within the ITS , CAI , CBIORICAI communities , little , if any reference is made to work done in CALL (4 ,  10 ,  13 ,  15 ,  18 ,  24 ,  25 ,  26 ,  28 ,  30 ,  33 ,  35) . This being so , it is hardly surprising to see that the domain is never mentioned in textbook on Artificial Intelligence or Psycholinguistics  . Yet there are a number of publications in psychology that deal with related issues such as learning theory  ( 12 )  , language learning (5 ,  6 ,  11 ,  14 ,  20) , language teaching (6 ,  16 ,  19 ,  27) , educational technology , i . e . programmed instruction (9 ,  12 ,  31) , theory of writing (3) , algorithmization of the learning process (17) , learning strategies , i . e . learning how to learn (23), etc . 
It is also worth mentionning that no crossfertili -zation has taken place between the CALL community and people working in the Machine Learning paradigm  ( 7 ,  21) .   2 While there are fundamental differences in terms of goals and methods  , there are also some important overlaps . Books on more sophisticated CALL systems are still scarce  ( 13 ,  32) , so is the work that shows how current NLP technology could be used in the class room  ( 1 ,  22 ,  34 ) Yet CALL is a field with considerable potential . It is both a challenge and a chance to bring NLP ' Unlike  17S   ( Intelligent Teaching Systems )  , CAI ( Computer Assisted Instruction ) , CBI ( Computer Based Instruction ) and ICAI ( Intelligent Computer Aided Instruction )  , which use language \[' or communicating domain specific knowledge  , CALL has langage learning as its primary goal . 
Obviously , NLP-technology may be relevant for all these systems  , but in different ways . 
For a slightly outdated bibliography on CALL , see (2) . 
technology from the research laboratories to the real world  . While computational linguists will certainly have to play an important role in providing linguistic resources  ( grammars , lexicon ) and processing tools , it is not clear yet how to decide on the adequacy of the tools  ( browser , editors ) . Also , there are good chances that within this context new problems arise  , while old solution turn out not to be good at all  , in which case the following two questions arise : what is the nature of these new problems ?  , and in what terms do these new problems have to be rethough t ? Other related issues of interest are the following : ? what can current NLP technology contribute to computer-assisted language learning ? how can this technology meet the demands of pedagogical theory for communicative language teaching in a natural environment ? what can NLP-based systems teach us about language acquisition  , linguistic theory and NATURAL language processing in general ? what effect can a domain like CALL  , or the involved disciplines have on the development of 
NLP technology ? ? what lessons have been , or can be learned by looking at the available CALL systems ? In order to get a clearer picture of these problems  , and in order to draw the community's attention to the fact that there is a REAL need and potential for integrating NLP technologies in CALL systems  , we propose a panel discussion between specialists in the concerned disciplines  ( linguistics , artificial intelligence , psychology , language teaching ) . The expected results of such a discussion are not only an increase of resources  ( man power ) in the CALL domain , but also an increase of awareness , that is , a sharpening of the researchers ' understanding of what the problems are that people encounter when processing language  . All too often we look at language only from the point of view of the machine  , i . e . how can languages be processed by computers . In doing so we tend to forget the obvious : natural languages are used by people  . 

In building CAL l , systems we will realize that there are ninny problems in the area of natural language processing that have been either overlooked  , or been posed in inadequate terms . Yet , if we really want to get are altmderstanding of the fimctioning of natural languages  , -- how they are used , how they are learned ?-- we have to look at the constraints of the system for which they have been designed : man  . This is the price we have to pay if we want to produce programs that are of interest not only in the research labs but also into the arena of real world  . 
Strangely enough , in the past we had neither the right tools , nor a decent theory ( see 8 ,  27 ,  31) , yet people were optimistic and went ahead . To day we are much better of f . We do have very power fid tools ( fast computers with well designed graphical interfaces  , browsers , CD-Roms , authoring languages ) , and a whole set of quite promising theories , yet we hesitate . 
But , what are we waiting lot '?

Abeill 6, A .  1990 . A Lexicalized Tree Adjoining Grammar for French and its Relevance to Language Teaching  . In M . Swartz & M . Yazdani ( eds . ) Bailin , A , C . Chapelle , L . Levin , G . Mulford , (2 Neuwirth , A . Sanders , R . Sander & , I . Underwood . 
1989 . A Bibliography of Intelligent Computer-Assisted Lauguage Instruction  . Computers and the lhunanities . 
8590. Kluwer Academic Publishers
Bereiter , C . & M . Scardamalia . 1987 The Psychology of Written Composition . Hillsdalc , NJ : Lawrence
Erlbaum 4 . Bierman , D . , J . Breuker & J . S and berg ( Eds . ) 1989 . 
Artificial Intelligence and Education . Proceedings of the 4th Intenrational Conference on AI and Education , 
Amsterdam 5 . Brooks , N . 1964 l , anguage and l , auguage I , earning . 
Chicago , Harcourt Brace & Work l6 . Brown , H . 1987 Principles of Languagel , carning and Language Teaching . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice-
Hall 7 . Carbonell , J . ( ed . ) 1990 . Machine Learning : Paradigms and Methods . Cambrklge Mass . , the MIT Press 8 . Chastain , K .  1969 . The audio-lingual habit learning theory vs . the code-cognit if learning theory , lleidel-berg , IRAL ,  7 ,  2 ,  97-107 9 . DeCecco , J . ( ed . ) .  1964 . Educational Technology : Readings on Programmed Instruction  . New York , llolt,
Rinehart & Winston 10 . Frasson , C . & G . Gauthier ( Eds . ) . 1990 Intelligent
Tutoring Systems . Norwood , NJ : Ablex 11.
















Gethin , A . & E . Gunnemark .  1995 . The Art and Science of l , earning Languages . Intellect books,
Headington , Oxford
Hilgard , E . & G . Bower .  1975 . Theories of learning . 
Englewood Cliffs , N.J .: Prentice Hall
Ilolland , M . , J . Kaplan & M . Sams ( Eds . ) . 1995 . 
Intelligent Language Tutors . llill sdale , NJ . : Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Jakobovitz , L .  1970 . Foreign Language Learning : a Psycholinguistic Analysis of the Issues  . Rowley,
Newbury House
Kearsley , G .  1987 . Computer Aided Instruction . In , Shapiro ( ed . ) Encyclopedia of Artificiallnt ellige , ce . 
Vol . 1. New York John Wiley & Sons
Lade , R . 1969. l , anguage Teaching a Scientific
Approach . New York , ltarper & Row
Landa , L .  1974 . Algorithmization in Learning and Instruction . New Jersey , Euglewood Clifl % Lawler , R . & M . Yazdani ( Eds . ) .  1987 . Artificial Intelligence and Education . Learning Enviromnents and Tutoring Systems . Vol . l , 413~427 . Norwood , NJ:

Lcont'cv , A . A .  1974 . Psycholinguistik undS prach-unterricht ( Psycholinguistics and l , anguage Tea-ching ) . 
Stuttgart , Kohlhammer
Leont'ev , A . N .  1981 . Psychology and the Languagel . , earning Process . Pergamon Press Michalski , R . , J . Carbonell & T . Mitchell ( eds . ) .  1983 . 
Machine Learning : an Artificial Intelligence Approach  . 
Pale Alto , Tioga Publishing
Miller , G . & C . Fellbaum .  199 ( /WordNet and the Organization of Lexical Memory . In M . Swartz & M . 
Yazdani ( cds.)
Novak , J .  & 1) . Gowin .  1984 . Learning how to I , earn . 
Ca , nbridge . Cambridge University Press
O'SheaT . & J . Self .  1983 . Learning and Teaching with Computers : Artificial Intelligence in Education  . 
Englewood Cliffs . NJ : Prentice-It all
Poison , M . & J . Richardson ( eds . ) .  1988 . Foundations of Intelligent Tutoring Systems . ltill sdale , NJ . :
Lawrence Erlbamn Associates.
Psotka , J . , Massey , D . , Mutter , S . ( eds . ) 1988 . 
Intelligent Tutoring Systems : Lessons I , ea , ned.
ltill sdale , NJ .: tmwrencc Erlbamn Associates.
Rivers , W .  1964 . The Psychologist and the Foreign Langnage Teacher  . Chicago , University of Chicago
Pressning . London , Chapman and Hall Computing.
29 . Skinner , B .  1968 . The Technology of Teaching . New
York , Appleton Century Crofts 30 . Sleeman , D . & J . Brown ( eds . ) .  1982 . Intelligent Tutoring Systems . London , Academic Press 3 l . Spolsky , B .  1966 . A Psycholinguistic Critique of Programmed Foreign Language Instruction  . Heidelberg , IRAL , 4, 232 . Swartz , M . & M . Yazdani ( Eds . ) 1990 . Intelligent Tutoring Systems for Foreign Language Learning : the Bridge to International Communication  . Berlin,
Springer Verlag 33 . Wenger , E .  1987 . Artificial Intelligence and Tutoring systems , Computationalnd Cognitive Approaches to the Communication of Knowledge  . Los Altos , CA:
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers 34 . Wilks , Y . & D . Farwell .   1990 Building an Intelligent Second Language Tutoring System from Whatever Bits you Happento Have Lying Around  . In M . Swartz & M . 
Yazdani ( eds . ) 35 . Woolf , B .  1988 . Intelligent Tutoring Systems : a Survey . In H . Shrobe & American Association for Artificial Intelligence  ( Eds . ) . Exploring Artificial Intelligence : Survey Talks for the National Confe-rences on Artificial Intelligence  , Los Altos , CA :
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers . 1-43
