Evaluating and comparing three text-production techniques 
. Ios ~ Coch

l , pl . dos Mal : seilla is
F-94227 Charcnton-lc-Pont Codex

jose . coch@erli , fr

Whatal+c the benefits of ttsing Natural\[~ anguag c  (  ; cne ratio , t in an industrial apl+lication ? We have attempt t <  ) answer part ( f this q t t c s t in w i that descript i ( n of an assessment f three techniques for producing multiscntcntial text : senti-atutomatic fill-in-lhc-blank interfacing  , automalic linguistic-and-t cmp hltes hybrid generation  , and hunlall writing . This asscssIllol\]lused a blackb(xmotlmdology , with a in independetlt blind-tested jury that gave difforent quality levels in relation to a sot  o1' criteria . The texts used for tile assess liicn twcfc business reply letters  . 
1 Introduction
Thct'carc many mreindustrial proiccts in Analysis than in Naturall  , anguagc(; cneration . The rclor c the bencl : ilsf using applied N1 , ( ; would a \] p cal + a crucial issue . We have lrvid cd a partial rCS l ) on scIt this issue by analysing the asscss lnento \[" three different tccl miqucs for producing multiscntential text  ( in this case , business reply letters ) . 
In the lollowing section , we have describeltile three techniques under assessment : semiautomatic nonlinguistic fill-in -the-blank int crlhcing  , a tut ( matic linguistic-and-tent phtte hybridger lct ' ation  , and human wril : ing . 
The third section deals with the black-bxm cthodol ( gy and q ttality critcria used for tile aISSBSSIlICII\[  , "\[' lielk ) urth section descl+ibcs the results f the alsscssntcn\[  . 
The fiftll section givcs examlles of letters prt ~luccd by both the semi-autonutlic system  , and the lil U_B tistic-and-temp I ate hybrid system . 
The hlst section analyse stile results of tile assessment  . 
2 Three techniques for produc ing multisentential text This section describes tile three text -production techniques under assess lllelt\[  . 
2 . 1 F i l l - in-the-blank semi-automat ic technique Since  1975  , the mail department el ' leaRed oule(al ~ ; urop can mail-order coln pany ) has been using a semi ; automatic reply system , referred to be low as " SA " , consisting of an utnbel+of predelined at td fill -in-the-blank sentences or paragraphs which are identified by codes that the writers memorisc  . Writing a letter th crc for e involves typing the code that corresponds to the desired pm'a graph and inserting the relevant elcnlents  . The sentences or paragraphs thus produced are th cl ' cl brecon catenations  o1'predefined and illSert cd texts . 
l . A relatively high number of prc defined sentences and paragraphs have to be provided  , to cover the writers ' needs , but : 2 . In fact , writers use only a reduced set of predefined 13aragraphs   , I hen unlber of which depending on tile writer . 
3 . The quality of tile t + esulting style of reply varies widely  . 
2 . 2 Automatic Hybrid Generation ( IAnguistic + Template approach ) leaRcdoutcandGSI-Erli have developed a real -situation pilot system  ( for details on this project , see ( Coch , David , and Magnolcr , 1995)) which buildsup a text ( i . e . a letter ) fronl data entered by tile human operator who processes the request  ; a custon lcf database ; and knowledge bases . It uses GSi-Erli's Alcth Gentext generation toolbox  ( see ( Coch ,  1996)) . 
The overall system is composed of two Inain modules : thcI  ) ccision module and the Generation module . 
The Decision module has the following functions : to identify the author and subject of the request letter  ; ? it asks the writer for relevant information ; ? it suggests a decision ( for example , order cancellation , renewal , etc . ) , after consulting the customer database and the domain knowledge  ; ? it asks the writer to validate the decision ( or make a different choice )  ; ? it communicates the relevant information to the
Generation module.
The Generation module automatically produces the reply letter in a standard l ~ r mat  ( SGML )  . This module consists of several submodul cs ( for more details , see ( Coch , David and Magnoler 1995) and ( Coch and David , 1994)): the direct generator ; the text deep-structure planner ( or conceptual planner )  ; the text surface-structure planner ( or rhetorical planner )  ; and linguistic realisation , inspired by the Meaning-
Text Theory.
The direct generator has two functions : 1 . planning the text indirect mode ( topdown ) , anti2 . generating more or less fixed expressions or nonlinguistic texts  ( i . e . tables , addresses , lists , etc . ) . 
The direct generator could be used without the other submodules to generate texts in an automatic but nonlinguistic way  ( manipulation of character strings )  . Reiter ( Reiter ,  1995 ) calls this technique " the template approach " . 
The output of the conceptual planner is the text's deep structure  , in which the events to beer a ' tied out are not yet in a definitive order  . The conceptual planner uses logical , causality , and time rules ( see ( Coch and David ,  1994)) . 
The rhetorical module chooses concrete operators , modalities and surlace order , according to rhetorical rules . The choices made depend on certain attributes , e . g . whether the addressee is aware of an event , whether an event is in the addressee's favour , and so on , Lastly , the linguistic generation submodule realises each event li ' om the text surface structure  . It uses anaphora ( see ( Coch , David and Wonsever ,  1994)) , semantic , deep-syntactic , surface-syntactic , and morphological rules . This submodule is inspired mainly by the Meaning -Text Theory  ( as developed for example in ( Mel'euk , 1988) and ( Mel'euk and
Polgubre 1988)).
In accordance with Reiter ( Reiter ,  1995) , LaRedoute and GSI-Erli's system can be defined as " hybrid "  , because it uses both linguistic and template techniques  . 
2.3 Human writing
The third technique used was human writing in " ideal " conditions : one of LaRedoute's best writers wrote the letters with no time constraints  . 
2.4 Functional differences
It is to be noted that the three techniques describex ldiffer from an external functional point of view : ? in the semiautomatic approach  , the writer compose the letter themselves , even if assisted by a set of predefined-paragraph codes  ; ? in the autonmtic hybrid approach , the operator enters data on the addressee and letter  , but does not have to compose the reply letter ; ? in the third case , the writer has to write the letter . 
Reiter ( Reiter ,  1995 ) studied the difference between the linguistic generation ant item plate approaches  . 
The two techniques do not differ from an external functional point of view  . 
3. Methodology 3.1 Evaluation Tests
Blackbox methodology was used for the assessmcm , which waser a ' tied out by an independent jury of 14 people , who were representative of end users , in a blind test context . The jury was not informed of the automatic generation project  . 
Each member of the jury examined the quality of a set of  60 letters ( 20 produced by the SA system , 20 by the automatic hybrid system , and 20 human-written , for identical cases ) . No member of the jury knew which technique had been used for producing each of the letters  . 
Each member o1' the jury wrote a report on cad1 letter , with assessment values according to quality criteria  . Examples of these criteria are : ? correct spelling  , ? good grammar , ? comprehensiveness , ? rhythm and llow , ? appropriateness of the tone , ? proximity , personalisation , ? absence of repetition , ? correct choice and precision of the terminology used  . 
The first three criteria were considered as eliminatory  , and were marked 0 or I . The other criteria were marked out of 20 . 
There were also other criteria , but they were too application-oriented and confidential  . 
250 3 . 2 Reprcsentat iv i ty of the results Given that the tests used only  20 letters of each type , one might question their representativity . 
In fact , representativity is ensured by the projection of the results of the previous phase  ( system tests ) which used the same quality criteria , involved are duct xl Jury (2 to 6 members ) , and was based on 200 test cases ( 200 letters of each type )  . 
The test cycle was performed sixtim cs :
Delivery 7",,,
Correction \,/


After the sixth cycle , the average quality scores showed thai the results wottld be sufficiently representative  . 
For example , for the following criteria : ? rhythm and flow 1 . 21 precision of terminology 0 absence of rel ) ctitions " ~12 < 10
I '1I'123 45

We can thus conclude that , for the automatic letters , the results are representative , The semiautomatic letters were produced hy\[ it tnlan " writers " in a real situalion  . There is no proo\[o1"this , but several people who know the semi-autotnatic systet n were of tim opinion that the scmi -automatic letters ttsed in the test were butter than the average semi-atttomatic letter  . 
4 . Assessment results 4 . 1 E l iminatory cr i ter ia and overal l average All the automatic and human letters met the eliminatory criteria standards  . However , this was not the case for the senti-automatic system  , in particular due to problems of comprehension , but also due to grammatical mistakes in the fill -in-the-blank system  . 
The overall averages of the entire jury , for all the quality criteria ( including application-oriented criteria )  , and for all the letters were as follows . 
? semiautomatic system : I 1 out of 20 ? automatic hybrid system : 14  . 5 out of 20? human-written letters : 15 . 5 out of 20 . 
It can be seen that the quality of the letters generated by the pilot systeln using Aleth Gen was lar superior to that of the senti-automatic system using predetine xl paragraphs  . 
These tests show that the " Ideal " human-written letters are  , obviously , th cbest . However , the differences between the hmnan-written letters and those produced by the automatic hybrid system  , ' ue relatively slight . 
4.2 Detailed results
Below are the averages for the whole jury and all the letters  , as regards the non-eliminatory criteria : 4 . 2  . 1 Rhythni and flow?scmi-automatic system : 12 . 8 out o1'20 ? automatic hybrid system : 14 out of 20 ? human-written letters : 16  . 8 out of 20
II iff crcnces : , ideal human letters 2 . 8 ? atttomatic letters 1 . 2 ? kleal httnmn letters 4 The difli:rence between the ideal human letters mid those obtained with the automatic hybrid system is considerable:  2  . 8 out of 20 . 
vs . automatic letters : vs . SAlct tcrs : vs . SA letters : 4 . 2  . 2R ight tone ? Selni-automatic system : * autonmtic hybrid system : * huma  , > written letters:
Differences : . ideal human letters , automatic letters
I 1 . 6 out of 2013 . 6 out of 2014 . 4 out of 20 vs . automatic letters : vs . SA letters : 0 . 8? ideal human letters vs . SA letters : 2 . 8 The results obtained by the ideal human letters ~ md those generated automatically are close  . However , the dit Temnce between automatic and semi -autonmtic letters is considerable :  2 out of 20  . 
4 . 2 . 3 Proximity , personalisation ? semiautomatic system 12 out of 20 ? automatic hybrid system 15  . 2 out of 20? human-written letters 17 . 6 out of 20
Differences : ? ideal hunmn letters vs . automatic letters : 2 . 4 ? automatic letters vs . SA letters : 3 . 2? ideal human letters vs . SA letters : 5 . 6 Here , all the difli : renccs are considerable . The human letters are obviously the best , but the dil\]~rence between the automatic and semiautomatic letters is very great :  3  . 2 out of 20 . 
4 . 2 . 4 Absence of repetition ? semiautomatic system 11 . 2 out of 20 ? atttomatic hybrid system 14 . 8 out (11"20 ? human written-letters 17 . 6 out of 20
Differences : ? ideal human letters vs . automatic letters : 2 . 8 ? automatic letters vs . SA letters : 3 . 6? ideal human letters vs . SA letters : 6 . 4 For this last point , all the difl ~ rcncesmc considerable , but that between the automatic and semiautomatic letters is very great :  3  . 6 out of 2(i ) . 
4 . 2 . 5Correct choice of terminology ? semiautomatic system I  1  . 6 out of 20 ? automatic hybrid system 14 out of 20 ? human written-letters 16 out of 20 
Differences : ? ideal human letters vs . automatic letters : 2? automatic letters vs , SA letters : 2 . 4? ideal hunmn letters vs . SA letters : 4 . 4 Here , all differences are relatively great . That between the atmmmtic and semiautomatic letters is considerable :  2  . 4 out of 20 . 
5. Examples
Below are several examples o1' letters produced using the semiautomatic\[' ill-in4hc-blmlks system and the automatic linguistic-and-template hybrid system  . 
5.1 Semiautomatic letter
Ch Ore Madame,
J ' ai bienfe ( ~uvot recourrier du 30tohre \[ sic\]et jeeom prends to uth fait votre md contentement  . 
Nous faisons le maximum pour contenter nos clients  , ma is nous sommes d dpcn dants de sd dl ais deliw ' aison quenous imposent certains four nisseurs  . 
Jesuisdd solde deno pouvoir vous donner unedate prdcise delivraison  , croyez bienclueje resrette vivcment ce retard . 
Restans 5 votreenti ~ redisposition , jevous priede croire , Ch6rc Madame , hl'expression derues sentiments dd vouds . 
/Dear Madam,
In reply to y our letter of 3rd Owber\[sicL 1 can completely undetwt and your d#sati , sfaction . 
W (-: do our ulmost to satis JS , our customer : v , but are dependent ott the delivery times imposed on us by certain suppliers  . 
lant q/kaid that 1 cannot give you an exact delivery date , and sincerely apologise for this dek(y . 
I remain at your entired Lv posal should you require any jitr the rassistance  . 
Yours sincerely , \] 5 . 2 Linguistic and template example
Ch Ore Madame,
Jesuis dd solde quevous n'a yez pasre ( 2ules chaus surcs desport blanches . 
Commevouse nave zdtdinform d clots de
I'enrcgistrem cnt devot recommando , ellcsn'd taient p as disponibles . Laliv rais on dtait diff dr de de de ux semaines . 
Ccddlaiser a unpeuplus long que prdvu.
I ) ? ~ slarentr den stock decese haus surcs desport , j cvousl csenv crraim md diatement , cn prior it , 5 . 
J'esp ~ requevous nous pard on nerez celte attent et que vous voud rez bien patienter  . 
Jevouspried ' agrd cr , Chbre Madame , l ' expression demenentier dd vouement . 
252/Dear Mac&m , \] ant very sorry/hat you have 1tot received lhew hit esports shoes . 
These items were not available when yot trorder waxiv cor  ( led , as 3 , oil were injbrmed at the time . The deliver was postponed by two weeks . 
The delivery will in Jact take a little longer than planned  . 
As soo ~ cts these . S'l ) or ts ' hoe . s ' city in sleek 1 will send them to youil li ) rioriO ' . 
1 helle that you will for give us . /or this delay , and are prel ) ared to wait . fin your de liveo ' . 
Yo HI'Ssill('ere\[),,/5 . 3 Comments a ) Spelling errol " ill tile semiautomatic letter ' due to the dale writlen by ther  ) perat ( rr in a blank of a predefincd senl cnceb ) Personalisation : the article and its colourme mentioned only in the automatic letter c  ) Precision of terminology ( precision of the explanalion ) : clearly , tile autonnltic loller is much more precise 5 . 4 Sent i - automat ic example The following example shows the typical problem  o1'  ~?~ ) ctition i the semiautomatic letters . 
Cher Monsieur,
J ' ai bien regal w ) trelettrequialelenutoulerl\] (   ) rlattention . 
Jer@ondshw ) trc deman de concernant lamar chandise diff dr de suiw mte:cardigan  4566654 lai\[le 114  . 
Lamarch and ise a didenrcgistr@sousle no 176   788956  . 
Unenvoiadld faitle 23 juin.
Norlnalement , wins de wie zddj haw firreq ; ulaliwa is on decepaquet , veuillezm ' adresser deprdf drence unche que pour rdglerlal/\]arch and is equerlous VOtlSav  ( rllSellVOy~e . 
R cstantaw ) lreen li , Sredisposition , jevous pricde or ( tire , ChcrM(msieur , enrues sentiments dd vouds . 
/Dear Si ~,
I have received your lettel , which I haven ' gd with great attention . 
I am writing in ~ W~I3 , to your request concerning the , / o/lowing postponed merchandise : alzligan 4566654 size 114  . 
7 71e merch and ise was recorded with the number 176   788956  . 
~< Sendingo eetued > ~ oilJune23rd.
You shouhlahv cMy have received this parcel , the r@n'e would you pleases end meacheque iH payme Ht of the merchandise that we have  , velltloyell . 
I remain at your entire disposal
Yomwsineerely , /. Analysis of results and
Conclusion 6.1 Analysis of results
The order of results for tile different techniques is always tile same for all tile criteria : first  , truman writing ; second , the automatic hybrid approach ; trod third , tile senti-automatic system . Let us no we xamine the salient points of each type  o1' technique . 
Senti-automatic system ' File principal weak points of the semiautomatic system areas follows  , in decreasing order of variation in relation to the human averages  . 
? l : , liminal ory criteria not always reel due lo problems of comprehension adgramlnar  . 
? Excessive repetition ( a difl crence of 6 . 4 out of 20 ill relalion Io human writing , and of 3 . 6 ira rehrtion to tire automatic system ) . 
? l , ack of pcrs on a lisation (5.6 and 3.2).
? Lack of precision in the choice of vocabulary (4 . 4 and 2 . 4) . 
Automatic hybrid system
The principal strong points of the automatic linguistic-and-templates sytem based on Aleth Gen are as follows  , in decreasing order of variation in relation to lhese miautomatic averages  . 
? Eliminatory criteria always met.
? Absence of repelition (3 . 6 out of 20 better than tile semiautomatic system ) . 
* Proximity , personalisation (3 . 2 better than the semiautomatic system ) . 
* Precision in the choice of vocabulary (2 . 4 better ') . 
The main points for improvement for lheautomatic system are as follows  , in decreasing order of variation in relation to the human averages  . 
253 ? Absence of repetition ( human letters 2 . 8 out of 20 better ) . 
? Rhythm and flow ( human letters 2.8 better).
? Proximity , personalisation ( human letters 2 . 4 better ) . 
Human writing
The best characteristics of the human letters were absence of repetition  , and proximity/personalisation , which were both given scores of 17 . 6 out of 20 . 
it can be seen that the jury considers the tone of the human letters as being not very good : only  14  . 4 out of 20 . This would appear to be mainly \[' or easons related to commercial communication rather than computational linguistics  . 
6.2 Conclusion
The first conclusion is that semiautomatic systems  ( just as real-situation human writing ) are subject to human mistakes , and that the texts they produce may be difficult to understand  . 
The second conclusion is that the weak points of the semiautomatic systems are the strong points of the automatic hybrid systems  , in the same order . 
We can conclude that , even if current automatic generation systems could do better  ( and we believe that this will so on be the case )  , one of the two main reasons for using linguistic -and-template hybrid system such as that developed by LaRedoute ~ mdGSI-Erli  , rather than using semiautomatic systems , is the improvement in quality ( the other being , of course , productivity ) . 
Although there are more research and industrial projects in Analysis than in Natural Language Generation  , Generation has great potential , since the gains in terms of quality and productivity largely justify the investment  . 

Jose Coch and Raphael David .  1994 . Representing knowledge 1"o1: planning multisentential text . 
Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , Stuttgart , 

Jose Coch , Rapha El David , and Dina Wonsever.
1994 . Plans , rhetoric and anaphora in a text generation tool . Working papers of the IBM Institute fin " Logic and Linguistics  . Special Issue on Focus and Natural ~ cm guage Processing  , IBM Deutschl and hfl " 0 rmations system eGmbH , Scientific Centre , Heidelberg , Germany . 
Jose Coch , Rapha El David , and Jeannine Magnoler.
1995. Quality test for a mail generation system.
Proceedings of Linguistic Engineering 95,
Montpellier , France.
Jose Coch . 1996. Overview of Aleth Gen.
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  ( INLG-96 )  . 
Herstmonceux , England , 1996.
Igor Mel'~uk .  1988 . Dependency Syntax : Theory and Practice . State University of New York Press,
Albany , NY , USA.
Igor Mel'euk and Alain Polgu~re .  1987 . A Formal Lexicon in the Meaning-Text Theory ( or How to
Do Lexica with Words ). Computational
Linguistics , 13(3-4):276-289.
Ehud Reiter .  1994 . Hasa consensus NL Generation architecture appeared  , and is it psycho-linguistically plausible ? In Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Natural 
Language Generation , pages 163-170.
Ehud Reiter .  1995 . NLG vs . Templates . In Proceedings of the 1995 European NL Generation
Workshop , Holland.

