Arguments desperately
seeking Interpretation :
Parsing German Infinitives
Christopher Laenzlinger
Martin S . Ulmann
Eric Wehrli *
LATL-Department of Linguistics Universi ty of Geneva  CH-1206 Genevala enzlinger@latl . unige . ch , ulmann@latl . unige . ch , we hrli@latl . unige . ch
Abstract
In this paper we present a GB-parsing system for German and in particular the system's strategy for argument interpretation  , which copes with the difficulty that word order is relatively free in German and also that arguments can precede their predicate  . In this latter case , the parser makes a provisional interpretation , which is checked when the argument structure of the predicate is available  . Moreover , a strategy of argument transfer is used in eases of long-distances crambling  , according to which arguments and adjuncts are attached to the domain of the coherent verb  , ECM verb , or raising verb , and transferred to the infinitival complement for interpretation  . 
1 Introduction
Free word order languages raise difficulties for parsing systems based on phrase-structureule grammars  , where the constituents are ordered . Indeed , to list all the possible orders leads to an increase in the grammar size and a corresponding decrease in performance  . There have been several approaches to this problem  , notably those based on the ID/LP ( immediate dominance/linear precedence ) grammars ( eft Gazdar et al 1985 ) or functional unification grammars ( cf . Karttunnen &: Kay 1985) . Within the Government and Binding framework , Kashket (1991) presents a parser for Warlpiri , a nonconfiguration all nguage , where word order and its variation depends mainly on case marking  . 
Although German is a partially free word order language  , we will assume that it has a fixed base word order  , which is modified by a set of movement rans formations  . In this paper , we will present he argument interpretation strategy * Thanks to Scott Fergusson for comments  . This work has been supported in part by a grant from the 
FNRS , grant no 11-33731 . 92 of our parser for German , which is able to handle the difficulties arising from word order variations  , focusing on the treatment of infinitival constructions  . 12 The DIPS Parser 2 . 1 General Properties of DIPSDIPS ( Deutsches Interaktives Parsing System ' German Interactive Parsing System '  ) is a largescale interactive GB-based 2 parsing system . Its architecture is basically similar to that of IPS  ( We hrli 1992 ) and FIPS ( Laenzhnger8z Wehrli 1991 )  . The parser produces a set of GBS-structures ( trees ) from an input sentence . These structures are associated with information concerning traces  , argument structure , and case features . 
The syntactic structure of constituents corresponds to the GBX-schema  . We consider German to be an SOV-language ( i . e . objects precede their predicates in their base position  )  . Thus , the X-schema is parameterized in German as follows : The complement  ( Compl ) precedes the head X ? for the categories V , A , I , whereas it follows the head for the categories C , D , P , N , Adv . 3 As the specifier ( Spec ) is always on the left , the X-schema has the structure given in (1) . 
(1) XP-- , Spec X-~X ? Compl , if X ? : C ? , DO , po , NO '
Adv ? - ~ Compl X ? , if X ? = V ? , A ? , I ? On the basis of this schema , the clause structure in German has the general representation given in  1 There are other proposals to deal with infinitival constructions in German : Netter  1986 discusses an LFG approach , and ~ ambow 1994 uses a variation of

2C / . Chomsky & Lasnik 1992 , Haegeman 1994 for a presentation of Government and Binding Theory  ( GB )  , and Berwick et al 1991 , We hrll 1988 for a possible implementation f the theory . 
a We assume Abney's 1987 DP-hypothesis , according to which the head of a noun phrase is the determiner  ( DO )  . 

Figure 1.

Spec C
Spec I

Spee V
Compl V ?
Figure 1: Structure of a German clause 2 . 2 Genera l Pars ing St ra tegy The parsing strategy is data-triggered  ( mainly bottom-up )  , proceeds from left to right , and treats alternatives in parallel by using a chart  ( cf . Kay 1980/1986 and Kaplan 1973) . The analysis of a sentence proceeds at two levels : the lexical level and the syntactic level  . The lexical analysis looks up the words in the lexicon  ; each lexical item ( word ) projects the node corresponding to its category ; thus , the lexieal features are transferred to the syntactic level in accordance with the Projection Principle  ( Chomsky 1981 )  . The projected node is then inserted into the chart as an edge  . The syntactic analysis builds all possible structures by making use of cross-category projections  ( similar to Grimshaw's 1991 " extented projections " ) and attachments , which are further filtered by grammatical constraints  ; structure building is incremental , as the current constituent is immediately integrated into the existing hypotheses  . 
A cross-category projection creates a new constituent with the same start and end vertex in the chart as the subconstituent from which it is projected  . This kind of projection is limited to some categories and triggered by intrinsic features  . For instance , an infinitival verb projects the structure in Figure  1 from VP to CP . 
Attachment combines the current constituent with the constituents which immediately precede this current constituent in the chart  . Attachments can be divided into two different ypes of combination :  1  . A constituent of the left context is attached to the current constituent  ( left attachment )  . 
2 . The current constituent is attached to a constituent of the left context  ( right attachment )  . 
In order to keep track of where a constituent can be attached in the structure  , a list of active nodes specifics the potential attachment sites  ; this list is systematically updated . Attachments are further constrained as follows : ? Formal attachments are restricted to adjacent constituents and are licensed by lexi-eal propertie such as selection or agreement  ( e . g . auxiliary-verb selection , determiner-noun agreement ) . 
? Non-formal attachments concern thematic complements and are licensed by subcategorization and the taproperties  . 
The second type of attachment requires a specific argument interpretation strategy  ( AIS ) to establish the link between the argument and the predicate which subcategorizes it  . 
2.3 The Argument Interpretation
Strategy
The aim of the AIS is to match the arguments with the subcategorization properties  ( argument structure ) of the predicate , and thus to establish an interpretation , which corresponds to the assignment of the thematic roles  . The argument structure of a verb ( predicate ) is provided by the lexicon and specifies the number and type of arguments that the predicate can take  ; while there can be more than one argument structure for a verb at the lexical level  , there is only one argumentable for a ( verb ) node at the syntactic level , which contains the arguments of the clause . This argument a-ble is matched with the corresponding argument structures  , which has the effect of filtering the inappropriate argument structures  . 
The AIS has to deal with two types of difficulties : first  , the predicate ( with its argument structure ) is not always available at the time the argument is attached  ; second , the large number of possible word orders in German makes the argument's grammatical function difficult to determine  . 
The argument structure is only available ff the main verb  ( predicate ) occurs in Co , that is the second position in the clause ( verb second with the main verb )  , and thus at most one argument precedes the verb . In this case , a final interpretation of the arguments is established immediately  ( at the moment of attachment )  ; the arguments are inserted into the definitive argumentable of the clause and interpreted by being matched with the argument structure of the verb  ( the ta assignment )  ; if more than one interpretation is possible , different hypotheses are considered in parallel . If the verb follows the arguments , they are also inserted into the argument table , with a provisional interpretation .   4 The matching between the argu-4This strategy seems to have psycholinguistic sup-takes place at the time the main verb is attached  . 
The task of identifying the grammatical function of an argument is complicated by the large number of possible word orders  , which results from the interaction of three syntactic processes : verb second  , scrambling , and extraposition . The verb second constraint requires that the tensed verb occupies the second position of the main clause  ; for the first position , however , a large number of constituents ( XP ) is possible , such as the subject , an object , an adjunct , an empty operator . Scrambhng is a process that modifies the order of clause-internalrguments and adjuncts under some constraints  ( cf . for instance , Uszkoreit 1987) . Extraposition is the occurrence of prepositional or sentential complements or adjuncts after the verb in its base position V ?  . Thus , the grammatical function of an argument depends not only on its position  , but also on case and agreement information and ( scrambling ) ordering constraints . 
The interpretation module works as follows : The first step is to check whether there are arguments to be interpreted  . If so , it is further checked whether the main verb is available  , with the argument structures . In ease it is not available , the new argument is inserted into the provisional argumentable  ( and its interpretation can be checked only later , when the argument structure is available ) . If it is available , the new argument is matched with the argument structures  ; if there is a provisional argumentable instead of one argument  , the matching is effeeted for each argument in turn  . Thus , the list of argument structures is filtered and a list of new argument tables is returned  . For each of these argumentables , it is checked whether its arguments obey the ordering constraints  . If so , the new structure is completed and for each argument that is not in its base position  , a chain is created to hnk the argument with that position  , in which a trace is inserted . 
Let us illustrate how the analysis proceeds on the basis of the sentence in  ( 2 )  . 
(2) Die Kinder haben dieseu Bericht gelesen.
' the children have this report read'the children have read this report  . 
When the parser reads the verb haben , the general clause structure ( el . Figure 1) is projected from 7P to CP , triggered by the tensed verb , which is placed in Coleaving a head trace in V ? and in I ?  . 
Then , the first constituent die Kinder is attached as the specifier of the CP  . 
As this first constituent is morphologically ambiguous betwee nominative and accusative  , it can bc interpreted a priori as a subject or as a direct object  . For the hypothesis of haben as a main verb port : German speakers assign an interpretation to arguments even before the predicate is available  ( el . 
Bader & Lasser 1993).
or of a verb with particle , the argument structure is available : diesen Bericht is the direct object and die Kinder the subject  . This hypothesis , however , fails when the parser arrives at the participle gelesen  . For the hypothesis of haben as an auxiliary , die Kinder is inserted into the provisional argumentable as the subject or the direct object of a forthcoming verb and diesen Bericht is inserted as direct object  . When the past participle is read , the arguments are matched with the argument structure of gelesen : die Kinder as subject and diesen Bericht as direct object  . A trace is inserted into the specifier of IP for the subject  , and another trace into the complement of VP for the direct object  , as illustrated in (3) . 
(3) \[ el , \ [ Dr die Kinder\]j\[~habenilip\[Drt \] j\[DP diesen Bericht\]k\[$\[Vr\[VP\[ Drt\]k gelesen\]tl\]\]t'/  233 In the following section , we will show how the AIS works in the ease of infinitival constructions  . 
3 The Treatment of Infinitives 3 . 1 D i f fe rent In f in i t iva l S t ructures German displays two types of infinitives : infinitives introduced by the conjunction zn and infinitives without zu  . 
8.1.1 Infinitives without zu
Infinitives without zu occur as the complement of modal verbs  ( e . g . m ( tssen ' must ' ) and exceptional case marking ( Eel S ) verbs ( e . g . sehen'see ', lassen ' let/make ') . Modals are treated on a par with auxiliaries , i . e . they are taken to select an infinitival VP as complement and are not associated with an argument table  . In compound tenses , the infinitival form of the modal is usually used instead of its past participle form  ; in example (4a ) , the infinitive wollen substitutes for the participle ge woll ~  . This phenomenon is called in fini ~ ivus pro par Licipio  ( IPP ) or Ersatz infini ~ iv . If the verb selecting the IPP is in its base position  , the order of the verbs differs from the usual one : auxiliaries that would be at the right of the IPP immediately precede the final predicates  , as illustrated in example (4b ) , where h~te precedes be such en wollen . 
(4) a . Das Kind hat diealte Fraube such en wollen.
' the child had the old woman visit want ' The child wanted to visit the old woman  . 
b . Wenn das Kind die alte Frauh / ~ tte be-such en wollen  . . . 
' if the child the old woman would-have visit want ' If the child had wanted to visit the old woman  .   .   . 
From a structural point of view , this reordering can be analyzed as verb raising ( VR ) : the verb siary ( without VR ) are attached to the right of the auxiliary head ( right-adjoined position )  , forming head chains with their base positions , as represented in (5) . 
(5 ) \[ vt'\[Vv\[vvti \] tj\]h & tte besue henlwollen j \] The phenomena of IPP and verb raising also occur with F  . CM verbs , as example (6) shows . Unlike modals , ZCM verbs are analyzed as taking an infinitival CP as complement and assign  ( accusative or dative ) ease to the subject of the infinitival clause , e . g . the accusative case to ihr ~ in (6) . 
(6) Nach demihn die Polize i hattef lie hense hen ...
' after him the pofie e ha descape see '
After the police had seen himescape ...
Furthermore , the subject of the infinitival clause ( ihrt ) can be attached to a position higher than the subject of the main clause as a result of scrambling  . 
3.1.2 Infinitives with zu
The subject of infinitival clauses with zu is an empty constituent  . In control constructions , the subject is a null pronoun PRO , which can be coreferential with ( controlled by ) the subject ( example ( 7a ) ) or the object ( example ( Tb ) ) of the upper clause according to the lexicai property of the main verb  . In raising constructions , the subject of the infinitive is a trace coindexed with the subject of the higher clause  ( example ( 7c ) ) . 
(7) a . Erlbehauptete , \[ Cl ~ PR Oisic gese hen zu haben \] . 
' he claimed PRO her seen to have ' he claimed to have seen her  . 
b . Sichatihmit jerlaubt , \[ cvPRO ; das Buehanzusehen\]j . 
' she has allowed him , PRO the book to-look-at's he allowed him to look at the book  . 
c . Siei sehien\[cP tiihnge sehenzu haben\].
' she seemed him seen to have '
She seemed to have seen him.
The infinitival clause can be extraposed in control constructions  ( Tb )  , but not in raising construction . 
Among subject-control verbs , there is a class of verbs , called ' coherent verbs ' , which form a clause union with their infinitival complement  ( by restructuring )  . As a consequence , arguments and adjuncts attached to the upper clause can be interpreted with respect othe infinitival clause  . 
(8 ) Gestern hatsieider Professor versucht\[tizu kfissen\]  . cp ' yesterday hasher the professor tried to kiss ' Yester day the professor tried to kissher  . 
In the example (8) , the pronouns ic is the direct object of the infinitival clause  , although it is attached to the main clause . 
b . \[ c . \[\[vP wollenj\]3 . 2 Treatment of Infinitival
Particularities 3 . 2 . 1 Verb Ra is ing The main problem with VR is that the verbs occur on the right of the uppermost final auxiliary  , while their maximal VP constituents remain on the left and contain a head trace  . As a solution to this problem , we propose attaching the structure that contains the verb to the left and extracting all of the heads  , which are adjoined to the right of the upper verb  . Take for instance the VP in ( 9a ) and the complex VP in ( 9b )  ; the latter is attached as the complement of the former  , i . e . to its left . 
However , to account for the surface word order , the heads be suchen and wolleu must be extracted and attached to the right of hStte  , as shown in (9c ) . 
(9) a .\[ VPhKtte\]\[be suchen\]wollen\]
YP vP
VV\[VV t\]tj\]h / itte be suchem
This solution also works for verb raising in P . CM constructions , although the verbal head of the infinitival clause is deeper in the structure  . 
3.2.2 Control
An infinitive with zu projects a nonfinite clause ( CP ) to which an empty subject is added ( SpecIP )  . If the infinitival clause is a complement of a control verb  , the empty subject must be eo indexed with the controlling argument  ( lexically specified )  . 
As illustrated in (10) , an infinitival clause can precede or follow its controller  . Therefore , the coindexation only applies when both arguments  ( controller and e ontrolle e ) are available ( the infinitival
CP and the indirect object in (10)).
(10) a . Die Muttererlaubteihrer Toehterinicht , \[ PROI in sTheater zugehen\] . CP ' The mother allowed her daughter not to the the atretogo ' The mother did not allow her daughter to go to the the at re  . 
b . \[ PRO/Ins Theater zugehen \] ~ rlaubte CP die Mutterihrer Tochterinicht  . 
' to the the atretogo allowed them other her daughter not ' The mother did not allow her daughter to go to the the at re  . 
3.2.3 Argument restructuring
Since restructuring allows arguments and adjuncts to be attached to the clause containing aspect to the infinitival clause  , the AIS needs to be extended . The first modification concerns the matching procedure : An argument hat may be interpreted with respect othein finitival complement is left in the argumentable of the coherent verb -- for this reading  , no matching takes place and this argument is marked as ' uninter-preted '  . The second modification occurs after argument race insertion  . At this stage , it is checked whether there are arguments marked as ' uninter-preted ' and whether the infinitival complement is available  . If both of these conditions are fulfilled , the uninterpreted arguments are transferred from the argumentable of the main verb to a provisional argumentable  , which is matched with the predicate of the infinitival complement  . 
Consider example ( 8 ) : the pronoun sie and the nominative DP der Professor are attached to the main clause  . When the parser reads versucht , it interprets the DP unambiguously as the subject . 
For the pronoun , two analyses are taken into account ( in parallel )  . On the one hand , it can be the direct object of the main verb ( Gestern hatsic der Professor versucht ' Yesterday  , the professor has tried them ') ; this analysis fails when the infinitival complement cannot be attached  . 
On the other hand , the pronounsic is regarded as the argument of a following infinitival clause  , i . e . marked as ' uninterpreted ' . When the infinitival complement zuk ( tssen is attached , this uninterpreted argument is treated as a new argument of the infinitival verb and interpreted as its direct object  , resulting in the structure (11) . 
(11 ) \[ ep\[tdvrGestern\][~hat/\[ 1T \[ vp sie\]3" \[Drder Professor \] k\[~\[VP\[VP\[ePt \] tversucht\]ti \]\[ cP\[xpPROk\[vP\[DP t\]jzukiissen\]\]\]lIt'\]\]\] Example  ( 12 a )  , discussed by Rainbow (1994:1723) , is a sentence containing multiple coherent verbs , which illustrates the recursive application of argument ransfer  . The structure of the sentence is given in (12b ) . 
(12) a .  ? . . . we ild as Fahrradniem and zure parier enverspricht zuversuehen  . 
' because the bicycle ( ace ) no one ( nom ) to repair promises to try ' . . . because no one promises to try to repair the bicycle b  .  \[  CP1 well\[DP dasFahrrad\]iniemand\[ CP3 tizure parieren \] jtkverspricht\[ eP2 tjzuver suchen \]k The direct object das Fahrrad of the most deeply embedded infinitive zu reparieren is attached to the main clause  CP1   ( long-distances crambling )  . In addition , the CP3 is scrambled out of CP2 , which is extraposed after the finite main verb . 
The parser proceeds as follows : The three arguments preceding the main verb verspricht are attached and inserted into the provisional argument table  . When the parser reads verspricht , the matching procedure applies . DasFahrrad can be nominative or accusative . Therefore , three readings are temporarily possible : subject  , direct object and uninterpreted ( direct object of a following infinitival complement  )  . Sincertiem and is non-ambiguously interpreted as the subject of ver-such t  , the subject reading for das Fahrrad fails . 
On the one hand , the CP3 zure parieren can be interpreted as sential complement of the main verb versucht  , which produces an interpretation of dasF a hrrad as the long-distances crambled argument of zu reparieren  , resulting in the grammatical sentence (13) . 
(13)  . . . weft\[DP dasFahrrad\]iniemand\[ePtizu reparieren \] verspricht  . 
because no one promises to repair the bicycle This interpretation will fail  , since the CP2 zuver suchen cannot be attached . On the other hand , CP3 can be left uninterpreted ; when the Cp2 zuver suchen is attached ; and interpreted as the sentential complement of versprichi  , the two uninter-preted arguments das Fahrrad and zure parieren are transferred to the  CP2 for interpretation . The CP3 zure parieren is interpreted as sential object of versuchen  , while das Fahrrad is regarded as uninterpreted again  , and thus is transferred to the CP3 , where it is interpreted as the direct object of reparieren  . 
The same strategy of argument ransfer holds for ECM constructions in which a subject is scrambled to the upper clause  ( el . example (6)) . 
In almost the same way , this strategy applies to the arguments of the infinitival clause in raising constructions  . While the complements of the infinitival clause are treated in the same way as in the restructuring case  , the subject is inserted into the argumentable of the raising verb with the grammatical function ' subject '  , but without thematic role ; thus , it is inserted a second time into the argument table as ' uninterpreted '  ; therefore , it can be treated like other restructuring arguments  , i . e . it is transferred to the infinitival clause and interpreted as the logical subject of the embedded clause  . 
(14) ... dabihn die Frauzus chlagensche int.
' that him the woman to be at seems ' that the woman seems to be at him  . 
In (14) , the direct objectihn of the infinitival verb schlagen  , being in a scrambled position , is inserted into the argumentable of the raising verb and marked as ' uninterpreted '  . The subject die Frau is inserted into this argumentable as the surface subject of scheirt t without a thematicment of a following infinitival complement  . When the infinitival clause zuschlagen is interpreted as the sentential complement of scheint  , the uninter-preted arguments ihn and die Frau are transferred to this clause in order to be interpreted with respect to the verb schlagen  ; die Frau is taken as the subject of schlagen with the thematic role ' agent ' and ihn as the direct object of the same verb with the thematic role ' patient '  . 
4 Conclusion
The task of our DIPS parser consists of not only building one or more trees for an input sentence  , but also of determining the grammatical function and the thematic interpretation f arguments  . We have discussed the parsing strategy in detail and shown that it is adequate for the treatment not only of finite clauses  , but also of nonfinite clauses . 
This strategy relies on the following steps : immediate attachment  , provisional and definitive interpretation , the testing of constraints , creation of chains , and restructuring . An argument interpretation strategy has been developed  , which analyses arguments in a uniform fashion , regardless of whether they precede or follow the verb  . 
This strategy has been extended to handle long : distances crambling  , so that arguments are transferred from the clause in which they are attached to an embedded clause in which they receive an interpretation  . 
DIPS is a practical system under development , which uses a large-sized lexicon ( over 150 , 000 entries ) and which , at present , covers a large range of grammatical constructions such as simple and complex sentences  , finite and nonfinite clauses , active and passive voice , wh-constructions , topicalization , extraposition , scrambling , long-distance dependencies , and verb raising . 

Abney , S .  1987 . The English Noun Phrase in its Sentential Aspect , doctoral dissertation , MIT , 
Cambridge , Mass.
Bader , M&I . Lasser .  1993 . "German verb-final clauses and sentence processing : evidence for immediate attachment "  , ms . , in C . Clifton , L . 
Frazier & K . Rayner ( eds . ) , Perspectives in Sentence Processing , Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale

Berwick , R . , S . Abney & C . Tenny ( eds . ) .  1991 . 
Principle-Based Parsing : Computation and
Psycholinguistics , Kluwer , Dordrecht.
Chomsky , N .  1981 . Lectures on Government and Binding , For is Publications , Dordrecht . 
Chomsky , N . & H . Lasnik .  1992 . "Principles and Parameters Theory ", in J . Jacobs , A . 
van Stechow , W . Sternefeld & T . Vennemann ( eds . ) , Syntax : An International Handbook of Contemporary Research  , Walter de Gruyter , 

Haegeman , L .  1994 . Introduction to Government and Binding Theory Blackwell  , Oxford . 
Gazdar , G , E . Klein , G . Pullum & I . Sag .  1985 . 
Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , Mass . 
Grimshaw , J . 1991. Extended Projections , ms.
Brandeis University.
Kaplan , R .   1980/1986 " Algorithm Schemata and Data Structures in Syntactic Processing "  , technical report CSL-80-12 , Xerox PARC ,  1980 . 
reprinted in B . Grosz , K . Sparck Jones & B.
Lynn Webber ( eds . ) , Readings in Natural Language Processing , Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Los Altos ,  1986 ,  35-70 . 
Karttunen L . & M . Kay .  1985 . " Parsing in a free word order language ", in D . Dowry , L . Karttunen et A . Zwicky ( eds . ) Natural Language Parsing , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ,  279-306 . 
Kashket , M .  1991 . " Parsing Warlpiri , a free word order language " , in Berwick et al ( eds . ), 123-151 . 
Kay , M .  1967 . " Experiments with a powerful parser " , in COLING-67 . 
Laenzlinger , C . & E . Wehrli .  1991 . "FIPS : Unanalyseur interact if pour le fran ~ a is  "  , TA informations ,  32 . 2, 35-49 . 
Netter , K .  1986 . " Getting things out of order ( An LFG-proposal for the treatment of German word order  ) " , in COLING-86 ,  494-496 . 
Rambow , O .  1994 . " Formal and computational aspects of natural language syntax "  , IRCS Report 94-08 , University of Pennsylvania . 
Uszkoreit , H .  1987 . Word Order and Constituent Structure in German , CSLI , Lecture notes 8 , 
Stanford University.
Wehrli , E .  1988 . " Parsing with a GB grammar ", in U . Reyle and C . Rohrer ( eds . ) , Natural Language Parsing and Linguistic Theories , Reidel , 
Dordrecht , 177-201.
Wehrli , E .  1992 . " The IPS System ", in COLING-92, 870-874 . 

