Aspect and Aktion sart : Fighting or Cooperating ?
Allan Ramsay
Centre for (? omputal ; iolml Linguistics
UMIST , PO Box 88 , Manchestel'M 601 QD , England
Abstract
It is widely accepted that semanti ( : ttle-ories should , as far as possible , be compositional . The claim that admory is (: omt ) ositional , however , lacks bite if lexical and prelexical items are allowed to mean dilrerent things ill difl'erent contexts  . The aim of the current paper is to show how to deal with a wellknown t  ) he nolnen on by relying on ( : ombinato-rim effects to infer difforent consequences from the same items in difl'erent contexts without altering the contributions that these items make individually  . 
1 Compositionality vs . Coercion
Consi ( ler the thllowing sentences : 1 Henrietta was crossing the wad . 
2 Harry wash iccupping.
in ( 1 ) it seems as though the present participle marker is being used to indicate  , that some event with a well-defined endpoint was in progress at sometime in the past  , and that it is reasonable to suppose that this endpoint was eventually reached Ihmrietta did cross the road  . Cases like ( 1 ) are generally taken to be prototypical : the present part i  ( :it ) lemarker indicates the progressive aspect , which says that s onto extended event with a recognisablend t  ) oint is in progress and will probably reach its conclusion  . 
( Asher ,  1992 ) considers the circumstances under which ( 1 ) will lend you to conclude that Hen-rietta did indeed reach the farside of the road  , arguing that this conclusion can only be reached by using a default inference rule which would be cancelled in cases like:  3 Il cnrict ta was crossing th , cwad , when sh , e was hit by a bus . 
I have . no argument with his analysis of (1) and (3) . What concerns me here is the apparent change in the contribution of the present participle marker in  ( 2 )  . In ( 2 ) we have a ( conceptually ) instantaneous ( ' , vent , namely a hiccup . Since hic-cups are generally thought of as taking no time  , it ; is not possible ~ to be in the middle of a single hiccup and hence we are solne how driven to con -elude that Harry was in the middle of a series of hiccut  ) s . A similar problem arises with: 4 Allan is living in Bray . 
Here we have a homogeneous state where there is no result to be achieved no interesting state of affairs that arises as a consequence of reaching the endpoint  . As such the present participle cannot be taken as an indication that the cuhnination of my living in Bray has not been reached  , since there is no such cuhnination to reach . In this ease the present l ) artieiple somehow transforms itself to an indicator of temporariness  , othat you : angel ; exchanges like the following :
Allan's living in Bray
I though the lived in Buxton . . . . Yes , but he's on a visit to I reland at the inoInent ( Smith ,  19911 ) deals with this phenomenon by appealing to a notion of " derived interpretations "  , though with very little discussion of how the derivations take place  . ( MoSns and Steedman ,  1988 ) deal with it by invoking a process of coercion which changes the meaning of the ast  ) ectmarkers as required by the properties of the verb to which they are attaehe  ( t . Much of what I want to say below follows their an Mysis  , with one m~>j or difference . . Coercion changes tile meaning of the aspectual marker in response to the semmltic properties of the marked verb  . But if items are allowed to change their meanings as a consequence of the semantic properties of other items then the principle of compositionality hat " the mealfing of the whole is made out of simplel  ( : onlbinations of the meanings of the parts " tIf we alh  ) w arbitrary rules of combination then we ( : an include rules which make arbitrary changes to describe a word as being a homonym in exactly those cases where the meaning of what appears to be a single lexical item depends on the semantic properties of the words it is being combined with  . 
In 5IIe keeps his money tied up in the bank.
6 He keep shis boattied up by the bank.
the fact ; that ; the interpretation of bank depends on the semantic properties of money and boat is what  ; persuades us that the form bank is being used to realise two diffe  . rent lexical items . We do not , however , want to describe the present participle marker as being ambiguous  , with different interpretations which depend on the semantic context in which it occurs  , unless we are absolutely forced to . The analysis in this paper attempts to show that the effects described by Mogns and Steedman  ( : an be achieved without any meaning-changing operations or unwanted ambiguities  . 
The basic tool that I will use is the observation that AUF ~ A can hold when neither A ~ A nor  \]7' ~ A does , and ill particular that if P and F ' are different then AUF ~ A and AUP'~A'can hold where A and A ' are different  , or even incompatible . If we backut ) the labels representing lexical and predexical items with appropriate sets of meaning postulates then we may well find that different things can be inferred from a single ite in in different semantic contexts without being forced to conclude that those items themselves mean different things  . In this way the meanings of words will cooperate to convey more complex in essages than each can carry alone  . 
2 Meaning Postulates
Consider tile following analysis of 7 Harry wash iccupping ,  . A :: ( subset(A , . \[ B , name(B , Harry )\])
AIAI = i ) ~ C::past(C ) prog(C , ? IV , ( vati , , , t(D , A )
A event ( D )
Atvp(D ,
This 2a is all very well as far as it goes , but unless the consequences of saying that something is anto the meanings of the parts  . If this happens then the principle has no force . " Simple " combinations are usually taken to be things like function application and set union or intersection  . 
~ The analyses in this paper require a combination of truth functional operators and l-abstraction  . I use the notation . \[ x , P\] rather than txP to emphasise that I am relying  ( Turner , 1987)' streatment of abstraction , where you can safely combine the two , rather than classical-calculus where your un the risk of paradoxes if you combine them  . 
a~X::P ( Q ) says that Q is true of the X which satisfies P . As such it performs much the same role event of type " hiccup "  , or that someone is the patient of an event , and so on , are spelt , out ill detail then it is not possible to perform any nontrivial in Drences on tile basis of this interpretation  ( and hence not ; possible to argue about whether or not it is right  , so that the clainl that a fragment of natural language should be paraphrased illa parl  ; icular way becomes vacuous ) . Youmight , for instance , disagree with my decision to label the sleeper as the patient of the event  . Unless I spell out what this label commits me to , there is no way forme to def end it ; or for you to attack it ,  . 
Simply appealing to our everyday intert ) retation of tile term will not do . 
We therefore need to develop a collection of mean in  . q postulates ( MPs ) to specify tile conne ( > dons between the terlns that will appear illour interpre  . tations . This is perhaps an obvious point , but apart from a few honourable x ceptions ( the attempt in ( Dowty ,  1988 ) to specify the conse~quences of assigning all item to a thematic role is a notable case  ) it is too often neglected . The . 
central claim of the current paper is that ; tile interactions between I neaning postulates can produces ut  ) tle effects which you may miss if you simply label items as belonging to  ( : lasses or as being in relationships with one another and leave it at that if you simply say  , for instance , that some event is progressive , without spelling out the MPs for progressive . 
3 Akt ionsar t and Aspect Rev is i ted I will now look in some detail at aspect and aktion-sart  . For the remainder of this section I will say that  ; the relationship specified by an aspect marker holds between at ilne and all event type  , where an event type is nothing more . t , hall all abstraction over a proposition about ewmts  . What we need are tile meaning postulates that spell out the consequences of saying that a time and an event  ; type are in the relationship specified by some aspect marker  . I make the following assumptions : ? The aspect ; of the core verb specifies a relationship between all instant and all event type  . The details of these relationships are spelt ; out via MPs . 
? The tense of the core verb , together with all y auxiliaries , specify a relationship between the presentime now  , all anaphoric reference time re\]' , and the time mentione A in this relationship . Nothing much in tile analysis below depends on the particular properties of the  . 
timelille . The only assumption that i will make any use of is t  ; hat there are intervals and instants . 
? The MPs for the core verb specify the temporal properties of the event type  . If the verb as ( Barwise and Perry , 1983)'s notion of anchoring . 
890 shares temporal 1 ) roI ) erties with a range of other verbs , then dwse are gathered together as MPs for the ( : lass as a whol (  ;  , which is r('-ferred to as an aktions art . 
The first MP we , will consid ( 'rdeals with the progressive as i ) e ( : t , as folh ) ws:
MPI ) rog:
Vtgl ' ( prog(t , 1")
A-\]el(lnc"m.bc','(cl,E)
A \] t,l(t,l(t
A , ~ t , ., . / 4..(.,,~,)))
A ~ e.2(m , e.m . r(e2, E)
A-~-fll , , e(l : ~< t
Ae ~, , dpl , ( e.~, t2))))
This says that the relations h iI ) proghol ( lst ) (!tween an instant / ; and an event l ; yi ) ( ; P if there is a sel , \]\] of events of t ; h(; al)t ) roprial ; et yl)c , at ; least one of whi ( : h starts ) efore the insbmt and at least , one of which does not end1) e for (~ it; . 
Meaning 1) osl ; ulates are 1101; ile Ce . ssaryalia Slltli-(' . lent ; (: on(tit ; ions . They are (' . on stellations of \[' acts which , serve to sl ; rllCtlll '(' . \[; he (; on (: et ) imalst ) a(:c . 
They do notex haust thai ; sl ) a(:e , an ( l they do not ne , (- essarily botl ; om ( ) lit in sense-dal ; al ) ased primitives ( Carnap , \]936; Quine , , 1 . 960) . The mosl ; , and least , youca . i is a y about them is that L hey help d ( ; lin (' , t ~ t e , a set of (: once p\[;s a . n(l relatiol ls\[)(>t ; ween con ( :el ) ts which can 1 ) e use ( \] tol ) o int out I ; he relations that \] mid among words , and ateerta . inl ) oinl;s between wor(lsan (1exl ) (', ri(m (: es . In (( buse , \]986) ' st ) hrase , l ; heye . xl ) r('sssEMANTI(;'I'I,AITS state . merits about so'me of the things that tyt ) J cally follow from asserting tlt at some r (  ; lations hiI ) hohts . 
There is th ( ; reIoren ( ) irres ( )lwd ) le ( : lash1 ) etween MP prog and Asher's MPs whi ( : hdes ( :ril ) et ; he conditions under whi ( ; hyouw ouh lexpect are licevent des ( : ribed using the progressive Lot ) roceed to its cuhnination , and i would expect , to supple-menl ; what I have to say in this 1) ap ( ; rwid ~ his defaull ;  1 ; real ; l\[telltoft , hisol ; her issue . Int ) articu-lar , it should be . note ( ll ; \[ lat ; MI ) - progentails l ; he existence of a starl ; l ) oint for there i ) or te(la ( ; l ; ioilt ) llt1l Ot that of an end1) oint . 
The de(:ision to talk in terms of sets of ev ( ; nl ; s provide sexl ; ratl ( ; xil)ilil ; y , ill the same way that the de . (: ision l ; odeal with NPs in terms of sets of indi-vi ( hmlssupt ) or tsth ; xibletr (' . atmenI ; s of plurals and of otherwise awkward l ) he noinena such as generics and b are plurals ( lams w ,  1992) . We (: an always (: onstrain a set of eve . ntstot ) easing let on if we need to , so certainly nothing is , lost by talking about sets rather than individuals  . 
SU l ) l ) ose w ( ; have the following MPs for a ktion-sarts and thematic roles : mP  , ;vent:Ve(event(e)-+~t ( , ( start pt(c , to ))
A~t . ( crulpt(e , 1, 1)))
MP telic_event : v,:( . ,a:t . ,:o . .~,,,r . t ( , : , tet , : c_ . ve , , , t):J, . '(','e . ~, , dt ( . , , J
Avt ~(.',, Or(<t,~)+at(t1,.~)
AVl , '( I , ' < t,1
MPaction : Ve(o , M . ion . sa , rl . ( o ., action)
MP state:
Ve(aktion . ~ arffe , . star.c)
A t , < i
Apal'ie ', d,(c .,:, :))-?.. z(t,z'.:,:)))
MP o.xt ; end('.d,;vent:
Ve(akl . ion . sart ( e . , e . xte'ndo . d . eve . n / . ) ~ w . , , w : ,(( . ~ t . .,,'tvt(e , t . , ) A . ,, . @ t ( , , . , / . , ))-~~ t(~ . 0 < l . < t ,))
MP inst_event :
V ~@ d ~: tion , sa'rt(c,i'n . sl,_cvc'n , t ) ~ ~ . , , : \] t,(, . . t . ., . tW . ( . , 1 . , , ) a .  , ,  . @ t ( . , t , )
A-,~t ( t0 < tAt < till)
MI " cxt ; ended_telic_aetion :
V e ( , ' . :, : t~', . 1,,, . d_tcl'ic . , . tio . .(o . ) >  . , . t ', : o ,, ~( .  )
Ac : rl , c.n , dc de'vc'n.t(c)
MP agent : V : , : V c(o , gc'n , l , ( Ga :) . ., u . ~ c(:,:, o , )
AVs (' r ~ s ', , . U . (.., s)
MP-in ; end:V : , : V . s('intend(:,:,s)+, . ni'm , , , l . c(:,:)) mP patient:Va:Ve(1, al . ic , tt(c , : ) - ~ animal . e(x ) fl'ht ; st , arc ' all straighl ; forward enough . I , \] vents have sta . r\[; and endpoints . Telic events have results , which are charat : terised by propositions which become true at the  (  ; i i ( t point of the . ev(;nl ; . Astal ; e is charaeterised 1) y a prot ) ertyPl ; hathol ( ls of the state's patient a : throughout some interwdi  . A (' . -tions are ev ( ; nl ; s with agents , where an agent is a being that in l ; entionally causes the resull ; of thee Vellt\[ ; o \]) CCOllleti'ile , ~ail do Illyali i HlaLet ) eiltgSca . I i in tend to bring things about , l ? atients are . just ; animal , e , beings .  10 , x tended events take time ( th ( ; reix some instant 1 ) etween their start an ( lendpoints )  , instantaneous events dollOt ( tiote that this may or not lneall that the . stm'l ; antiend points of an instantaneous ( ; velttare identi(:al , depending on whether we regar ( l the timeline as d ( mse . As farast h( ;   ( : urrent t ) at ) eris concerned this is a free e hoic ( ' . ) . Exl ; (; n(h ; dleJi (: actions are . just extende devellts with results whi ( : h become true at ; their end t ) oints and agents who inten(1I ; hose results 1 ; o ) (' ~ ~- (: or e ( ; true . 
All we need to know at ) oute at and hicc'u . p for the moment is that ; cat denotes & ii extended relic action and hiccup denotes an instantaneous even l  ; :--+ extended_relic_action ( e ) ) MP hiccup : Ve ( type ( e , hiccup ) --> inst_event ( e ) MP eat says that eating events take time , and MPhiccup says that hiccuping events do if t ( or rather that we don't think about the time they take  )  . There are many other MPs dealing with these verbs  , since there is a great deal more to be said about them  , but we do not need this extra detail here and hence we will omit it  . 
Compare now the following analysis of 8 Iteiseating a peach . 
3 A::A C . \[B , peach(B)\]AIAI=1,,C::Oc_ . \[ D , male(D)\]AIC l=1 , prvg(now , ?\[ E , object ( E , A ) A agent(E , C )
A event ( E ) A type ( E , eat ) \] ) with the interpretation of ( 7 ) given earlier . MP prog says in each case that there must be an event whose start point is before now and an event which does not have an endpoint  , before now . In the case of ( 8 ) this is compatible with the possibility of there being exactly one such event  . Indeed , since only one peach is involved , the remainder of the MP for eat ' ( which would include the information that you can only eat something once  ) would presumably force this conclusion . It is furthermore compatible with the requirement that there should be an event whose start is before t and an event  , whose , end is not before t , since eating events are extended-if they have endpoints then these are after their start points  . In the case of (7) it is not , possible for there to be a single event , since the start and endpoints of a single hiccup are taken to occur with no intervening instant  . We therefore find that ( 7 ) must denote a set of hic-cups , simply by inspecting the MPs and without resorting to a process which turnshic cupping from an instantaneous act to a homogeneous sequence of acts  . In both cases , the sentence reports a sequence of events . But in ( 8 ) there is nothing to say that this sequence has more than one member  , and the fact that only on ( ; peach is involved suggests that it has exactly one member  ; whereas in ( 7 ) the temporal properties of the conceptually instantaneous act of hiccupping mean that there must be more than one such event  . 
Returning to 4Allan is living in Bray.
we get the following interpretation : ~ A : : AC_-\ [ B  , name(B , Allan ) \] AI At-1 , prog(now , ?\[ C , agent ( C , A )
A event ( C ) Atyve(c , live)
A~D::DC.\[E , name(E,Bray)\]
AiDI--1, in(O,D ))\])
Why does this carry an overt one of " temporari -ness "? Assuming that live denotes a state  , we need to look at the interactions between the MP for the progressive aspect and the MP for the ak-tionsart state  . MP state says that the characteristic property of the state is true of its patient throughout some interval  , but unlike MP relic-event it says nothing about the start and endpoints of that state  , not even whether or not they exist . Of course in general we know that most states do have start and endpoints  , but in many cases that is all we know about them . A speaker who is committed to the existence of a state  , then , may not be concerned about the existence of the start or endpoint of that state they may not know when it started  , they may not care whether it has ended , as far as they are concern edit may have been going on since the beginning of time and it  ; may continue to the emt of time . If , however , their report of tiffs state invokes the progressive aspect then they do become committed to knowing something about the start and end dates  . If , for instance , we were considering Allan was living in Bray rather than Allan is living in Bray then we would assume that the speaker knew enough about the end of this state to place it before the reference point marked by the past tense of the auxiliary  . Thus the use of the progressive aspect here commits the speaker to the existence of an end date for the state in a way in which commitment to the existence of tile state does not : it is this that gives  ( 4 ) its feeling of being about a temporary state of at fairs  4  . 
We now turn to the simple aspect . Consider the following pair of sentences : 9 Allanlives in Bray . 
10Mary eats a peach for her " lunch.
(9 ) describes a simple homogeneous state of affairs . The properties of the verb live and t , hesin > ple aspect seem to collude in this case , and there is no need for anything like coercion . In (1 . 0), on the other hand , the . redoes seem to be a problem . Eat-ing denotes an activity with a definite final state  , where what was eaten ends up inside the eater's stomach  . Somehow ( 10 ) conveys the message that Mary habitually eats a peach for her lunch : note in particular that it is not the same peach or the same lunch everyday ! We therefore need a single MP for the simple aspect which enables us to conclude different hingst br the two cases  . For (9) , where the verb denotes a homogeneous state of affairs  , the simple aspect support stile conclusion that such a state of affairs does indeed hold  . For (10) , where the verb denotes an activity , the simple aspect supports the 4 of . ( Smith ,  1991 ) 's observation that aspect provides a spotlight on some portion of the event  . 
892 conclusion that such an activity hal ) pens on a regular basis . The following meaning postulate says that the relations hit  ) simple holds between an instant t and all event type P if there is an interval I which contains t  , and for any instant t ' in I there is some event e of the apt  ) ropriate tyI ) e which starts before t ' and finishes after it . 
MP simple:
VWP (. simple(t,P)-?_~I ( interval(1)
At CI
AV t'(t'C1-*)\]c(l'.e
A~to(to<tA1,\[) ~_I
A start pt(c ., to ))
A ~ tl(tt < tlAt lC.\[,tl
A c ~' t d p t ( c , t t )))))
Consider tilt ' , interactions between this MP and the fonowing analyses of  ( 9 ) and ( lO )  . 
simple(now,?\[A,m:: . '_~ c . It , .   .   .   . , , e(C , All . .,O\]
AIBI = : l , a . qent(a , B)
A event ( A ) A type ( A , live )
A , , D::DC.\[E , name(E , l/ray)\]
AIDI = ~ , i , ,(A , D )))\]) simple(now , ?\[ A , ~ B::vc- . \[ C , p e , , e h(C)\]
AII~l = ItD::DC.lE,,name(E,Mary)\]
AIDI=1, ot:#et(A,I5A(,qent(A,D)
A event ( A ) A type ( A , eat)
AVF::for(A,F ) lune h(F ))\])
RemeInber that the MP for lives ws nothing about the start and endpoints of the specilied state  . Then there is nothing in MPs inlple to lead us to infe  , r the existence of more than one such state , of affairs . There is also n ( /dting to enable us to infer that there is no more ttm none : I will return to this below  . 
If , on the other hand , tile Mt ) for eat says that the start and endpoints of the action must be quite close together  , then MP simple entails that there must be several such actions in the specified interval  . Whi (: his , after all , as much as you can infer fi ' om the simple aspect itself  . Note that the wide scope of the aspect o i ) eratorsi'mpleineans that for ( f0 ) we are conside , ringe wm t types in which there is a pea(:h , and a hmch , for every instance of the type . Soun like (8) , where there was one peach and the event type we were considering dealt with eating that one peach  , here there is nothing driving us to ( : onclude that there is only one peach and hence that the set of events nmst be a single  , to n . 
The combination of have and at ) ast-participle ( I will call this the pmuq . ~(; q'w t , ; different people use different erminology \[' or this  ) prese . nt similar problents . We can obtain the same kind of interpretation for such sent  ; en(:es , paraphrasing 11 He had slept . 
as ~ A :: past(A)reI = J
Am::uc_ . \[c , . , . ./e(c )\] A I~1 =1 ped(,'ei , . \[ m ,* ge , "( D , ~)
A event ( D )
A type ( I ) , sleep ) \] ) ) " All " we need now is a suitable MP for the relation  per5 Part of the diff cre , ncebet ; we enthis construction and the simple past arises from the explicit mention here of the R  . l<lq,;R . l :; N(llr;TIME(leiehenltach , 1956) . Sentence , slike ( 1 l ) make reh~renee to s ( )nle anaphorically determined instant , and this gives them a slightly difli ; rent flawmrt ? omsinq fle past sentences . But there is more to it than tha ~ . 
Consider the following examples : 12 He lived in Bray for five years . 
lalie has lived in Bray for five years.
14 He had lived in Bray for five years.
The striking thing about these is that it teach of  ( 13 ) and ( :1 . 4) the obvious interl , retadonist sha / ; his period of living in Bray continued after the reference time  , so that he probat fly live . d there for more than five years in total ; whereas it is atl but imposs ilfle to read ( 112 ) assaying anything other than that his residence in Bray took no more or less than five years  . This distinction becomes even clearer when we consider  15 In 1919 It (  ; had lived in Bray for five ' , years . 
16In 1919 helived in B ~ zty.
17* In 1919 h , elived in BTny for five years.
It ; seems that whereas you can have both a date and a duradon with the perfective  , you C all have either but not both with the simple past  . One way to account for this is to argue that the simple past deals with the endpoint of the event whereas the perfective deals with the end of some related interval  . We have to be care fifl here . The MI ' for the simph ' , a sliect given above is designed ' to be open to readings where some single past event is being report  ; ed and to the possibility of a " hat ) if ual " reading . The perfective is also open to the same ol ) tions : 18I had read the Times for years , but hadgradually come to reeognise it as a capitalistrag  . 
We have further to acknowledge the correct intuition that for telic events the perfcctive fbcuses on the endpoint of the event where the s in q  ) leaspect ; views it as a whole . My current approach takes the MP given above for simple as a basis for t  ) oth , case all the events in the specified set , end within the interval :
MP simple ':
Vt VP ( simple(t , P ) -+ ~ I ( interval(I)
At EI
AVt'(t'CI--+~e(I'.c
A3 to ( to < t'A to EI
A start pt(e , to))
A3 tl(t ' < ttAtlEI
A cn@t(e , t ~))))

A9 t2( , start pt(e ' , t2) At2Ci)--+Vta(er ~ , dpt(c' , ta ) ) Omitting this extra clause from the MP for perf means that the set  , of ewmts in question could in-elude one that is not yet complete  , so that 19 I have also read the Guardian for years , but I am now becoming dissatisfied with it as well  . 
has a past habitual reading which is ( ) pen to con-timmtion in a way that the habitual reading of the simple past cannot be  . The ramifications of this require further exploration  , perhaps in conjunction with a treatment of implieature  , like thai ; given in ( Gazdar ,  1979 ) to explain why examples like ( 19 ) generally give rise to the feeling that the event sequence in question is not yet over and done with  . 
4 Conclusions
The analysis above of the interaction between the simple and progressive aspects and various kinds of verb shows that at least some of the phenomena dealt with by  ( Mo ~ ins and Steedman ,  1988 ) can be explained without appealing to actions which change the meanings of the lexical and prelexical items involved  . In the approach outlined here , every sentence reports a set of events . Aspect , ak-tions art and temporal modeifiers then provide information which can be used to determine the cardinality of this set and to draw other conclusions about its temporal characteristics  . Each component of the report is allowed to make a very weak contribution  , and then the interactions between these contributions construct a larger  , and more subtle , set , of conclusions . The fact that most sentences report singleton sets of events arises  , in the absence of information to the contrary , by a process of implicature , though the adverb once is available to reinforce this conclusion if necessary  . 
i have only dealt with a small subset of the relevant phenomena here  . It seemed better to use the space available to explore a small number of cases in some detail than to cover a wider range without being convincing about any particular case  . Similar analyses of other aspects and other aktion sarts are also easy to devise  . Inventing analyses that cover specific phenomena is fairly easy  . The difficult part is ensuring that all your analyses work at the same time and without introducing large nuin bers of spurious readings  . 
It is important formy claim to have preserved compositionality hat all the analyses in this paper have been obtained on the basis of the interpretations of the lexical items that appear in them and the semantics of the rules of combination  , using a version of the system described in ( Ramsay ,  1992;
Ramsay and Sch/~ler , 1995).

Asher , N .  (1992) . A default , truth conditional semantics for the progressive . Ling " aistics arm
Philosophy , 15:463508.
Barwise, . l . and Perry , J .  (11983) . Situatiorts and Attitudes . I\]radford Books , Cambridge , MA . 
Carnap , R .  (1936) . Testability and meaning . Philosophy of Science , 3:401467 . 
Cruse , D . A .  (1986) . Lcxieal Semantics . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 
Dowry , D . R .  (1988) . Typeraising , flmctional composition and nonconstituent conjunction  . 
in R . T . () ehrle , E . B . and Wheeler , D . , editors , Catcgorial Gram'mars and Natural Language Structures  , pages 153198 , l ) or drecht . 
Kluwer Aca(lemic Press.
Gazdar , G .  (1979) . P Tugrnaties : l'mplicature , Pre-s'apposition and Logical Form . Academic Press,
New York.
Mo~ns , M . and Steedman , M .  (1988) . Temporal ontology and temt ) or alre Drence . Computational Linguistics , 14(2):1528 . 
Quine , W.V.O . (1960). Word and Object . MIT
Press , Cambridge , MA.
Ramsay , A . M .  (1992) . Bare plural NPs and habitual VPs . In COLING-92, pages 226231,

Ramsay , A . M . and Schgler , R .  (11995) . Case and word order in English and German . In Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing , 
Tzigov Chark.
Reichenbach , H . (1956). The Direction of Time.
University of California Press , Berkeley.
Smith , C.S . (1991). The Parameter of Aspect.
Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordreeht.
Turner , R .  (1987) . A theory of properties . Journal of Symbolic Logic , 52(2):455472 . 

