Human Language Technology can modernize writing and grammar instruction 
Gerard Kempen
University of Leiden
P.O . Box 9555, 2300 RB Leiden , The Netherlands
kempen@rulfsw.leidenuniv.nl
The recently published Survey of the State of the Art in Human Language Technology does not spend a single word on computer-aided language learning  ( CALL )  . Indeed , present-day CALL systems hardly employ Natural Language Processing  ( NLP ) techniques . Reasons for this state of affairs are not hard to find  . First of all , current language teaching methods tend to emphasize or allanguage skills  , especially in second-language instruction . But automatic recognition of speech , in particular speech by nonnatives , has only taken its first steps outside the laboratory  ; and many language teacher still judge synthesized speech of insufficient quality to serve as a model for language learners  . 
Secondly , modern language pedagogy stresses communicative success rather than formal correctness  . This , too , works against the profitable deployment of NLP tools in CALL because automatically generating nontrivial  , communicatively interesting and instructive dialogues does not yet seem within reach of NLP technology  , let alne the evaluation of student responses from the point of view of successful interpersonal communication  . More congenial with these priorities were multimedia innovations  . If anything has brought about a metamor phosis in second-language taching practices  , it was the introduction of affordable video , audio and other graphical and acoustic tools that  , under the control of flexible software , can create an illusion of ' total immersion ' -- the supposedly ideal language learning situation  . 
However , language proficiency includes more than conversational skills alone  . Equally important a rewriting skills : orthography  , formulating wellformed sentences , composing clear and well-organized texts . It is in the area of written language instruction that NLP technology can find a wealth of extremely valuable applications  . Teaching first - and second-language writing skills is very labor-intensive because teachers need to mark large numbers of test papers  . NLP software holds the potential of alleviating this burden considerably  , and even of outperforming teachers in the speed and quality of feedback to learners  , and in the capability of generating well-targeted and attractive xercises  . 
A particularly important reason why human language technology should begin to take written hm guage instruction seriously  , derives from the following argument . Many instructional scientist subscribe to the view that language skills are best acquired in a situation similar to that of children learning their mother tongne  . 
This explains not only the bias in favor of oral and conversational language skills in current hm guag cped a gogy but also the reluctance to work with explicit gramma rules  . The negative attitude toward grammar is strengthened by the generally disappointing outcomes of grammar-based language teaching methods  . 
However , these negative results may have a completely different origin  . Although the reasoning that language acquisition can do without explicit rules may hold for oral language proficiency  , there is no evidence that it generalizes to the acquisition of written language skills  . If writing skills do require the application of explicit orthographic  , morphological , syntactic , etc . , rules by the learner , then anti-grammar attitudes must be detrimental . Learners will be deprived of knowledge that in fact is essential to solving writing problems  . More serious is the ensuing lack of interest in the improvement of grammar instruction methods  . 
Taught by age-old methods , many learners only have a ninkling of the meaning of important grammatical concepts  . Grammar rules referencing these terms are hard to apply successfully in written composition  . 
The response by most linguists and instructional scientists to this state of affairs has been misguided  . Instead of initiating research into improved grammar teaching methods  , they have tended to play down the importance of grammar rules and linguistic awareness in learning how to write  . 

Modern NLP techniques for the analysis and generation of written language  , in combination with graphical tools for visualizing and manipulating the structure of words  , sentences and texts , afford excellent possibilities for creating integrated curricula for grammar and writing instruction  . Language ngineers , take up the challenge , seize the opportunity !
