Pa Trans-A Patent Translation System
Bjarne Orsnes , Bradley Music & Bente Maegaard
Center for Language ~ lbchnology
N jals gade 80
2300 Copenhagell S

bjarne,music , bente ? ~_ cst.ku.dk

This paper describes Pa~lh'ans-a fully automatic production MT system designed for producing raw translations of patent texts fl'om English into Danish  . First we describe the backbone of tile system : the EUROTRA research project  , and prototype . Then we give an overview of the trauslat , ion process and the basic flmetionality of Pa'I ~ ' ans  , and finally we describe some recent extensions for improving processing efficiency and the translation quality of un-exl  ) ected input encountered in real-lit ~ texts . 
1 Introduction
Pa \] ~' ans 1 is a fully-automatic machine translation system designed for English-Danish translation of patent  , texts . It is based on the linguistic specifications and to some extent on the software of the EUROTRA project of the European Community  ( Copeland et al , 1991a ; Copeland et al , 1991b ) . Pa'IYans consists of a core grammar and translation module and a host of peripheral utilities : terin databases  , general databases , editors for pre - and postediting , document handling facilities , facilities for creating and updating term databases  . In this short presentation we will concentrate on the grammar  , lexicon and translation module and on some of the new features of Pa-~i ~' ans  . 
2 From EUROTRA to PaTrans
EUROTRA was the European Community MT research programme  . The Community started the programme in 1982 , with the goal of creating an advanced systeln for automatic translation capable of treating all the otficial working languages of the Community  . When the program mefinished in 1992 , it had delivered a huge amount of research 1paTrans was developed for LingtechA/S . 
results and an implemented prototype of a multilingual translation system  . The PaTrans develop-meat relics on the prototype resources  ( Macgaard and Hansen ,  1995) , the system architecture and linguistic specifications  , as well as on the experienced staff created by EUROTRA  . 
2.1 The EUROTRA Prototype
EUROTIA was a transfer-based multilingual MT project  . Because of the multilinguality , the prototype was quite " clean " in terms of separate modules for analysis  , transtL ' r and synthesis of the various languages and language pairs  . 
2.1.1 Sottware
The software component consisted of the t ; lans-lation kernel , used t branalysis , transfer and generation . The trmisb ~ tion kernel had mechanisms for treating gramma rules  , dictionary information and mapping rules . 
2.1.2 Lingware
For all languages , the project produced a large grammar and a general anguage dictionary  . 
Though insufficient for the task at hand , the Pa:'lk'ans developmente ould buil < lon the English and Danish grammars and dictionaries  , as well as on the transfer module from English into Daifish  . 
2.2 Customizing EUROTRA
Patent texts are characterised by the vocabulary they contain : terlns belonging t  ; o the fiehltt'eated , e . g . chemistry , and patent documenterms of a more legal nature . But ; patent documents are also charaeterised by tile frequency of some linguistic phenomena and the absence of others  , e . g . we had to develop ~ treatnmnt of lists and emmmration  , and conversely we could simplify the treatment of modality considerably  . The current maintenance and further development of the system continues this text type specific lille  . The success of the system is mainly based on this fundament all n in ciple of tailoring it  ; to a specific text type and subjeer field . 
11153 An overview of the Translation
Process 3.1 Document handling
The document handling step has four main flmc -tions : ? Format Preservation Input to docuinent handling is a text from a text processing system which has been marked up in SGML  . Tile SGML codes denote e, . g . titles , paragraphs , text segments that should not be translated , etc . All information about doc , ument layout is stored separately and taken away from the translation process  . 
? Formula Recognition The docmnent handler automatically recognises certain text typical untranslatable units  , such as chemical formulas and tables . 
? Term Reeognition Terms and multiword units are also recognised at this stage  , in this context , words are treated as terms if they are subject specific or if they have a unique translation in the given text type  . They are recognised during text handling and have their translation equivalent attaehed to them along within or phosyntactic nformation for both source and target language  . 
? Segmentation Finally tile text , is separated into units for translation i . e . sentences for which various recognition patterns haw ~  . been setup . In some patent texts of specfic subject tields , tile sentences are incredibly long . 
In these cases , there is no point in trying to arrive at a complete parse of the whole sentence  , since the parse is most likely to fail and processing will be too space and time consuming  . Therefore the docmnent handler attempts to arrive at a meaning flfl partition of the sentences by identifying sentence internal boundaries and submitting the individual subparts for translation  . 
3.1.1 Disambiguation
Before the text is passed onto the parser , it is subjected to a thorough process of disambiguation  . This is one of the new features of PaTrans compared to the EUR  ( )TRA model and will be discussed in detail below . 
3.1.2 Source language analysis
Since Pa Trans is based on the transfer translation model tile surface strings of the text are sequentially transformed into an interinediate representation defined by several mapping principles  . 
During source language analysis the sentences are assigned a surface syntactic structure  . This surface syntactic structure is converted into a language-neutral transfere present  , ation ordering the constituents of the sentence in a canonical order with heads preceeding arguments and ar=guments preceding modifiers  ( Copeland et al , 1991a ) . The , transfer representation is a reflection of tile argument structure of the predicates where iuformation about surface syntactic realization appears as features on the individual nodes  . Function words ( coRjm wtions , determiners , prepositional case markers ) are featur-ized and tense/aspect and negation represented in language-neutral features  . 
The output of source language analysis is thus a tree with multilwered information including syntactic and morphosyntactic features  , as well as the syntactic/semantic relationships between the predicators and the arguments  , At , all levels , sets of preference rules based on heuristic principle select among competing analyses  , e . g . for PP-attachment ( Bennett and Paggio , 1993) . 
3.1.3 Transfer
PaTrans adheres to simple transfer , i . e . the substitution of source language lexical units with target language lexical units by means of lexical transferules  ,   9 while the source languages tru <> tural representation is mapped directly onto the target language transfer representation which is input to tile generation module  . There are two main reasons why complex transfer ( i . e . transfer where the strucl ; ure of the input representation is alter e ( t ) is kept at a minimum : ? Complex transfer is costly in as much as the general applicability of the rules is usually very restricted  . 
? A transferule applies to any object matching its left hand side and performs the mapping defined on the right hand side  . Due to the ' fail-soft'-mechanis in ( discussed below )  , the structure of the objects which the transfer rules nmstapply to can no the flflly predicted  . 
In order for complex transfer to work in all cases  , rules must be set up not only for correctly parsed input structures  , but also fortile special fail-soft structures . For this reason , complex transfer is costly and is only used for frequent phenomena considered crucial for good translation  , e . g . converting certain Englishing-for ins into l ) anish relative clauses . 
3.1.4 Target syntactic generation
During gelm ration , the transti ; r representation is mat ) ped onto a target syntactic structure through intermediate representational lewfls  . At , the first level , the target language lexical units are looked up in the lexical database and mon  ( -lingually relevant features are calculated on the  2Recall the ft this only applies to words of the general vocabulary which required is a intiguation during analysis and not to terms tense and as l  ) eet . 
At L he second level ( L he relational level ) surface syntactic flmc Lions are ( : alcula Led and certain flmc Lion words , sut:hast ) reposi Lional markers are inserted . Finally , the relationals Lru ( : ture is mapped onto the level defining tim constituen Ls L ructure of L he target language sentent : e  . At ; L his level all informa Lionwi Lhindetmnden L lexical expressions is t  ) resent . 
3 . 1 . 5 Target morpho log ica l generat ion PaqA'ans has a highly develot  ) edmori ) hological module which l ) rovi ( les an almost e omt ) le Le coverage of Dmfish inflec Lionalmorl ) hoh ) gy . The module is based on sLrueture , buihling rules whi ( : ballow for downward sext ) ansion . Regular inflection , syncope and gemination is accounLed for while only completely irregular wordforms will have  , to be coded in their entirety . PaTrans also has a limited strategy for Lransla Ling  ( : ompounds com-posil , ionally . Generally , com I ) ounds are co ( led in the ( termino h ) gical ) dictionari ( ' . s ,  1 ) uL the t ) arsertries to translate ( : ompom~ds which are not code ( t in the dictionarie . s by translating their individual subparts . 
3.1.6 Document generation
Finally , the doemnent generation module in-serLs ~ fll SGML-in arkersantial liLems which have been in arke  . dasmlLranslatable(tal)les , formulas , illlllfl be , rsel ;( ; . ) , and a separate conversion programme converts the output into Wold PerfecL for- 
HI a L . a 4 The lexical'a~iYans distinguishes two kinds of voeal mlm ' ies : the general vocabulary and Lhe Lerminologi  ( : alvo-cabulm ' ies . 
? The general vocabulary is stored in a monolingual English dictionary  , a monolingual l ) an ish dictionary separated into a . in Lo syntactic and a morphological level , and at ) ilin-gual transfer dictionary . 
? The terminology is divided into sul ) . ject specific databases . As Pa Trans is used for a numl ) er of ditferen L subject fields , the priori Ly of the databases is user-defined and flexible  , The user specifies which term bases are to be used for a translation  . j ob , and in wt fich order of prior iLy . When a term is fomld in one tel ' in base , it ; is not looked upfll rL her in the subsequen L databases  . 
a until now , all texts have been d cliv (' . r(' . d in Word-Perfect , lint the conversion programme , may of ( ; our scl ) ead at ) tcd tood mrt ; t . ' xl ; processing syst , ems , 4 . 1 PaTerm Coding Tool For ease of mainLenance and updating  , PaTrans has a special coding ; tool . As mentioned above , Lhel ' a Transterm 1 ) ases conLain terms as well as words aim expressions which behave like terms  , i . e . which have unique translations . New terms occur in each and every pate . nt documen L whict ~ is submitted for trml slad on . Consequently , it ; isiml ) ortant tha LL he use , r , who is no L necessarily a ( ; onll ) Htal ; ionalling u is L , (; allel I code L (; rtnsilla . nefficient and precise way . The PaTerm coding tool provides a screen w iL h fiehls Lo fill in  , and in most ; cases an atls wer is proposed by t ; he system , s t ) L hat L it (' , userllas to make jllStone accet ) Lanceke , y-sta'olce . Care has been taken ( ; ot ) resent Lhemos L frequen L , and therefore n to sLt ) robable , answer on tim Lop of the . list , Pa'l ~ erlnasks Lhe . minimum number of quest , ions and CO mlmtes the , remaining linguis Lic information from the answers re  . ceived . 
This also saves Limet br the user.
5 Special Features 5 . 1 Error Recovery Since the system runs in a praetical environment  , it must , ne , verfail to I ) roduce , an ollt put , even if iLencounLers an unanalysable sentence . Con-sequen Lly , af~dl-sofl:ine chanism was in L roduce , d . 
Timfail-soft ; mt ' . ehanism works at all levels of representation . If the parser fiJls to assign a well-form e ( tsLrle\[ ; urcLo the input , a path is selected i \] omtim chart which spans the greatest : amount of dminlm L~ril  ( l already c . reated constituents are collecLed . Timquali Ly of fail-selL output ; varies considerably and recent work has attempLed Lo improve the results of fail-soft  ;  . Disambiguad on of individual words , the selection of al ) propria Lereadings and Lhedetermina Lion of individual  ( xm-sLituents at a very early stage are ( : rueial in arriving a La'l ) es L-tit'lm rse . 
Interestingly , L here are some flm damental diili-eulties in combining advanced MT with fail-soft  , straLegies . The mosts L riking example of this is the fact ; that PaTrans aims at a very deep analysis of the source  , text , and a L the same Lim et ; he formalismal h ) ws for non-lno not on i ( ; mappings l)e-Lweell levels of represen Ladon . Due Lo Lhemin x-petted mid1 ; ( ) some extent Ulq ) re , dict at ) le , strllct lneoftSil-sofl ; analyses , snl ) seqllent granln larrllles may fail to al ) ply , resulLing in ouLput represenl ; a-Lions where inforination e . g . about Lhc degree of adjectives an ( 1 other inforlnatiol ~ stemming fl'om flmction words has been lost  , Current efforts ( ; on-sequently aim at preserving informa Lion at all levels  . 
5 . 2 ' Fagging llefore Lhe Lext is submiLted to the parser  , the Lext , is Lagged , i . e , . dm tagger t , rics to determine the t ) arl ;- of-st)e(w . h of the individual words based reasons why the tagger has been integrated into the system : ? Since the overall translation system is unification-based  , words are disambiguated by the application of all possible rules  , which is highly inefficient . 
? If the sentence is fail-sorted , one intermediate analysis is picked from the chart  , which means that all words may not have been disambiguated properly by the gramma rules  . 
If , however , the words have been disambiguated and impossible readings have been discarded prior to parsing the ' best-fit'-parse is considerably better than it would otherwise have been  . 
The tagger is a public-domain , rule based tagger . It has been trained on a corpus of the Wall Street Journal and on patentexts within the subject field  . In addition , it has been augmented with several ' local ' contextual rules developed by the linguists working with PaTrans  . The integration of the tagger has not only provided for more ef-fecient processing but  , more importantly , also for a higher quality of the translations of fail-softed sentences  . Current efforts aim at improving the performance of the tagger  . 
5.3 Preparsing
The original EUROTRA-parser has been augmented with special rules which apply before the actual gramma rules  ( Music ,  1993) . The goal is to enable more efficient handling of long sentences that are otherwise unprocessable given moderate resources  . With pre-rules , sentences are segmented via pattern-matching , before they are sent to the parser . In this way , the number of parse paths that the system has to consider is reduced considerably  . 
To give greater power to the preparser , pre-rule application has been made cyclic . This means that the output from one rule application  ( or one application cycle ) is used as input to a new cycle which starts at the beginning of the ruleset  . 
In principle then , any rule can feed ( i . e . create the preconditions needed for application of  ) any other rule , while at the same time allowing prioritization of rules  , The pre-rules not only add structure to the input  , they are also used for lexical disambiguation based on collocatives and immediate context  . Where the rule based tagger described above is able to determine the part-of-speech of individual words based on prior training and contextual rules  , pre-rules can select individual readings of words within the same part-of-speech  . Pre-rules have been developed for lex-teal disambiguation and for parsing of adverbial phrases  , complex verb groups , coordinated that-clauses , indexed lists , valency-bound prepositional phrases and explicitly marked intervals  ( e . g . from ? . . to , between . ., and ) . The effects of pre-rules are twofold : Ontile one hand they assign structure to tile input at a shallow level  , which nevertheless increases processing efficiency considerably  , on the other hand they also improve fail-soft results since in appropriate radings of words in a given context are discarded at a nearly stage  . 
6 Performance
PaTrans is in everyday use at the translation agency Lingtech where it is being used for all texts which are suited for it in its current version  , i . e . 
chemical , biochemical , medical etc . patents , and gradually also a considerable amount of mechanical patents  . PaTrans is making the translation process faster and more efficient  , and it has proven to be a good business for Lingteeh  , saving around 50% of the raw translator cost . 
7 Conclusion
PaTrans is a running production translation system producing cost-effective raw translations of patent texts  . But Pa Trans is also a project which combines academic research and practical applications and which has shown that MT is viable in limited domains  . Current work concentrates on improving the coordination of the rule-based part of the systeln and the fail-soft component  . 

Bennett , P . and Paggio , P . , editors (1993) . Prc-\]ereneein Eu Tvtra , volume 3 of Studies in Machine Translation and Natural Language Processing  . Commission of the European Communities , Luxembourg . 
Copeland , C . , Durand , J . , Krauwer , S . , and Maegaard , B . , editors (1991a ) . The Eurotra Linguistic Specifications , volume 1 of Studies in Machine Translation and Natural Language Processing  . Commission of the European Communities , Luxembourg . 
Copeland , C . , Durand , J . , Krauwer , S . , and Mac-gaard , B . , editors (1991b ) . The Eurotra Formal Specifications , volume 2 of Studies in Machine Translation and Natural Language Pro-tossing  . Commission of the European Communities , Luxembourg . 
Maegaard , B . and Hansen , V .   ( 1995 ) ? Pa Trans-Machine Translation of Patent Texts . From Research to Practical Application . In Convention Digest : Second Language Engineering Convention  , London , pages 1--8 . 
Music , B .  (1993) . Preparsing in the PaTransMT System . In Bits ~ dBytes : Dataling vistisk Forenings ~ rsmC denr  . 3, pages 8290 . Institut for Sprogog Kommunikation , Odense Universit et . 

