Korean Language Engineering : Current Status of the 
Information Platform *
Kim , Seongyong and Choi , Key-Sun
l ) epartment of Computer Science
Korea Advanced histitute of Science and ~\[7"~chnology 
Taejon , Korea
sykim@csking . kaist . ac . kr , kschoi@worhl . kaist . ac . kr

Language engineering implenicnts functions of a language and inforillation via computers  . '\[' he need for language engineering plattbrms has been generally recognized and several researches are being undertaken around the worhl  . Our goal is to establish Korean inforn-iation platform of linguistic resources and tools for Korean language and information colnumnities  . The platform will support researchers and engineers with well-developed and standardized resources and al  ) plication tools thereby avoiding duplicate activities fi'om scratch a  . ndani-plifyiil goverall effort on the domain . 
This paper report stile components and the current status of the project  , and the importance of the effort . 
1 Korean Language Engineering 1 . 1 Language Eng ineer ing Language ngineering is slich an activity that implements various fnnctions related to a language and builds lipan information base  . It realizes linguistic activities of everyday life and linguistic competence of human beings with the aids of computer science  , thereby supporting people's intellectual linguistic productions  . The language n-gineering not only collects and disseminate stile informat  , ion and knowledge of ~ t language , among the linguistic society but also serves as a Younda-tionon which linguistic culture and ~ echnologies can be based  ( Oh et al ,  1994) . 
1.2 Korean Language Engineering
Korean language engineering is one for Korean language  . It came into birthinearly 1980's with the emergence of personal comt ) uters ( PCs )  . hi*'Fhis work is fimded by Ministry of Science and  7~  , clmology and Ministry of Education and Athletics , as a part of a contract by Center for Korean Language 

the beginning , they focused on Korean alphabets and so nwscrappy parts of character processing  , lacking the global view of the engineering approaches  . Technical approaches to Korean began with the formation of the special interest group on Korean information processing undertile Korea Information Science Society  . And in 1994 ( ; enter for Korean Language Engineering ( KLE ) was founded to serve a sacentrMorganization for Korean language engineering  , which aims to plan and progranl related projects an  ( i works in a consistent , systeinlttic way with long-teiungems . It also incorporates academic and research institutes and hid ustries into comnion goals : the etticient and imrmonious  ( lriw ~ toward research and development , and establishment of long-range policies and strategies for Koreanla  . ngu ~ tgeengineering . 
2 Areas of Korean Language
Engineering Researches
According to the level of technologies , KLE partition edits projects into ttire e classes . 
Fundamental technology deals with radical and theoretical researches  , collection and nlanipula-tion of data , and standardization . In linguistic viewpohlt , these include language \[ or nialisms , text corpora , and statistical int ' ormation of a language . On infornlation engine e . ring side , the technology covers information interchange and compression techniques  , basic techniques of artificial intelligence such as knowledge representation  , searching , and tools for manipulating Korean alphabets . From the cognitive ngineering point of view , the research focuses on the structure of Korean alphabets  , fonts , command structures , and interdisciplinary works of cognitive science . A/>o~her division handles standardization issues for code schemes and w  ) cabnlaries , keyboard layout , standard text formats , and internationalization . 
" Pile second class is called basic technology , which is related to the basic software libraries for Korean language processing  . Included in this class are natural anguage analysis  , pattern recognition , multimedia database , and data conversion tools . 
The third class is applications technology . It . ~ . o ~ r ~ sp , et to , ' m=1/ac:c~ss ~ , ~h ~ ps ~ rvor~v''v ~ ~ ftpserverl ~ ~ ~ C ( 31 Olcb ' Tenn ~ linc ~ ol . U:Unix " TexI/Di:MS1S : SolelrisW:V~4nda , w  ~ , Mgtb ~ y  ~ , t ~ rnU / . .~ . t , ~ Developing for Unix 11 rs't,
V ~ n4 o.;~s Platform then for Send W
Figure 1: The Conceptual Diagram of the Information Platform consists of systems for text interchange and compression  , hypertext , multimedia , word processing and others . For knowledge processing , it will cover document paraphrasing , indexing and retrieval , computer-based instruction/education , etc . 
3 Information Platform
For Korean language ngineering , it is necessary to develop systematically all the projects of each area and integrate them into a uniform frame  , called an information platform ( IP ) .   1 KLE programs each project according to its priority and state-of-the-art technology  . Consequently , \] P reflects the status of ongoing projects and is an as-is framework on which further researches and development works can be performed  . 
Figure 1 shows the conceptual diagram of IP.
This platform doesn't integrate all the project outcomes but some of the  5mdamental resources and basic tools , since it reflects the current configuration that is not concrete but open to changes  . 
The whole integration of the project outcomes will be available at the end of the first phase in  1997  . 
This platform is different from ALEP ( Advanced Language Engineering Platform )   ( Simp-kins ,  1994 ) in that ALEP is an environment that can be provided to users as a form of a  ( customizable ) package whereas our platform is a server-client model in pursuit of a webbased service for resources and tools  . 
Worldwide web is composed of hyperdocuments and hyperlinks to handle multimedia data as well as to provide easy and timely access to electronic information  . It uses hypertext markup language ( HTML ) based on standardized generalized markup language  ( SGML )  . Therefore , it guarantees the standardization and straightforward  de1 " ltttp://world . kaist . ac . kr/KLE/KIBS/"isSunOS , version 1 platform and web pages are only in Korean . The 2nd version will be released on Solaris at the address " http://kibs  . kaist . ac . kr/KLE/KIBS/ . " sign characteristics , which lead to the ease of system design and tlexibility of the system config ~ rations  ( Berners-Lee ~5 Connolly ,  1993) . Its other characteristic lies in the common gateway interface  ( CGI ) which makes it possible to interface with various shell scripts and program codes without difficulties  . Yet another point is that the server-client model makes the platform transparent to the users  . 
IP consists of three parts . First , text corpora , voice and handwritten scripts DBs , dictionaries and a set of terminological DBs constitute the information base  . The information base may directly be distributed throughftp server or indirectly accessed by the language tools on the higher layer of the http server configuration  . 
Secondly , language tools are running on the http server with the aids of CGI as well as being ftp-ed to users as executable codes  . Since we aim to provide software versions on Unix  , Solaris , and PCWindows altogether , initial hardware requirements for each tool may be different  . ~ Finally , documentation preparation will also be accompanied with the project's progress  . 
4 Information Base 4.1 Text Corpus
Text corpora are essential to statistical modeling  , in developing formal theories of the grammars , investigating prosodic phenomena in speech , and evaluating or comparing the adequacy of parsing models  ( Marcus et al ,  1993) . There are four sorts of corpora from contemporary Korean texts  . 
? Raw corpus
Two factors are the genre of each source text that is related to the objective  ( s ) in using the corpus , and the category of the text that represents the internal structure of the text  . 
Major sources of the corpus in chldebooks , magazines , and newspapers ; up to date three million word phrases are gathered  . 
? Part-of-speech ( POS ) tagged corpus
POS tagset for Korean originated from ( Kiln L ~ Seo ,  1994) . Inversion 1 platform we yielded 2 . 5 million automatically tagged word phrases and 1 . 5 million postedited word phrases . 
? Tree-tagged corpus
This can be produced by applying syntactic tagset to the POS tagged corpus  . The syntactic tagset is being studied using 100 , 000 sentences out of POS tagged corpus , and the result an tree-tagged corpus using a tree tagger will appear at the end of this year  . 
2 For example , the text and dictionary management system is currently being built upon PCW in dows so that Unix and Solaris executables are not yet available  . 
1050 ? Categorized corpus
Korean verbs and adjectives are classified into over seventy categories  , and a set of sentence styles are investigated for  940 basic verbs of those categories . About thirty five thousand sentences are tangible inversion  1 platform . 
4.2 Voice Data Base
This resource can be used \[' or speech recognition and synthesis applications  . We initially focused on word-level voice data . It includes phonetically balanced words , phonemic sequences pronounced by four different speakers  , and narration of sample stories . It also stores the sounds of single syllables , diphones , numerics , high-frequency words , gazetteers , flmctional words , and consecutive word sequences . The data are stored in server disks and CD-ROMs as a waveform  . This effort will be extended to sentence-level collections such as phonetically balanced sentences  , speech dialogues , and scenarios . 
4.3 Handwritten Scripts Data Base
Since charactere cognition systems are under the control of applications engineers  , the objective of this work is to provide well -tbrme data and evaluation criteria for those recognition systems  . We stepwise our data collection into three phases : to scan  , with 300 dpi resolution , one thousand sets of 590 high-frequency syllables in the first year , then of 990 syllables and 2 , 350 syllables in the following years , a At each phase , we develop both the square-hand ( : haracters and free style characters . 
4.4 Dictionaries and Terminological Data
Base ? Multilingual technical dictionary The objective is to setup mappings between technical terms of Korean and other lan-gnage  ( s ) in both directions . '\[' he first work is done for computer science domain  , and it has 35 , 000 entries each for Korean and English . It will be extended to cover Chinese , Japanese , and German as well as more domains including electrical/electronic engineering  , medical science , law , etc . 
? Monolingual terminology databank
Users need definitions and explanations of technical terms during their work on specific domains  . This work provides users such terminological details  . We assorted 15 , 0 00 entries each for culture/art and Korean classical literature  . 
-Ontology-based lexicon
Currently awnlable dictionaries are semantically oriented  . They don't provide pools 3It is possible to compose up to 11  , 172 syllables out of ea <: h Korean alphabet , but Korea / , Standard Code KSC-:5601 prescribes2 , 350 complete codes for Korean syllables . 
of target language expressions but offer basic meanings for entries together with some syntactic and morphological information  . Ontology-based lexicon is lexically oriented in that it guides the user to find a pragmatically or contextually equivalent expression corresponding to the source language x-pression  . The work is on the phase of feasibility study with intensive locus on collecting KoreanEnglish bilingual information sources and developing tools for lexicon construction  . 
Lexicon for morphological nalys is
The lexicon for Korean morphological analysis is currently being built to have  30  , 000 entries with oil'-line management tools , and will grow to 100 , 0 00 entries with online tools after two more years . 45 Language Engineering Tools Basically , the tools that we present here are for text corpus and dictionaries  , except for voice and characte recognizers . The latter two programs are currently under the develol  ) ment and will be integrated later . 
5.1 Morphological Analyzer
MorI > hological analysis is an important but dilfi - c  , ltt ) art of the analysi since Korean is an agglutinative language with sophisticated morpheme segmentation rules and morphotactic rules  . Then \] or . -phological analyzer is based on the Korean chart parsing  ( Lee ,  1993) . Its ' current precision is over 92 percent for the grammatical in l ) ut sentences . It aims to achieve 98 percent accuracy in two nrore years . It will be extended to cover special symbols , alien strings , elliptical or abbreviated words , and spell errors to earn higher accuracy . 
5.2 Tagger
Because the output of morphological analysis is rather complex due to the characteristics of Korean  , the use of a tagger to reduce ambiguities seems important for further processing  . ( Shin et al ,  1995 ) adopts the hidden Markov model and takes into account the characteristics of Korean word phrase structures for more accurate tagging : a word phrase contains one or more roof phemes  , syntactic information ( grammatical relations by bound morphemes )  , and semantic infofmation ( case roles by postpositions )  . The experiments revealed 98 % accuracy for the test set of 5  , 500 word phrases out of 55 , 000 training data , and 94 . 7% tbr 5,500 untrained test data . 
~ We can conceive much nlore types of dictionaries : for example  , lexicons for syntactic attd semantic analyses , and dictionaries tha . t are to be created or extracted from existing ones upon users ' or developers ' nee  ( Is . These will be i , clhded after the tirst phase of the project , following future direction of the project . 

Another approach is based on the Markov random field  ( MRF ) theory ( Jung ,  1996) , whose Korean version will be added to IP this year  . 
5 . 3 TreeTagger ( Kim ,  1995 ) is a prototype using dependency grammar and adopting statistical methods for ranking the parse trees to get kbest parsing results  . Its current accuracy is about 80 % for the trained data . While this is a working prototype , we need a tree tagger with better performance so that another tree tagger using partial parsing method  ( Abney , 1991) is on breadboard . 
5.4 Korean/English Alignment System
An alignment system gathers correspondences between surface representations of both languages  . ( Shin ,  1996 ) experimented xpectation-maximization algorithm with  68  . 7% accuracy at phrase level , and this will be incorporated into version 2 platform . 
5.5 KWIC Manager
Keyword-in-context ( KWIC ) manager deals with word usage of text corpus . Its functions include indexing and searching word phrases  , morphemes or unigrams , applying logic operations ( AND , OR , NO2) to them , and sorting the results . 
5.6 Text/Dictionary Management

TI ) MS ' goals are twofold : to provide customi > able information extraction/indexing/search tools and managerial functions for text database  ; and to provide an environment for dictionary devebopment and management as well as converting or merging existing dictionaries to the intended one according to user's specification  . 
Because of the big size of each text to be stored and lots of keywords to be indexed and searched for each text  , it requires special storing and managing mechanisms  . This is also the ease for the dictionary management  . For the extensibility and adaptability , we have devised standardictionary markup language based on SGML  . Templates ( dictionary features , text descriptors , and relations among those ) , specifications for text/dictionary editor and form a trans-lator have been also being designed and low-level design is being undertaken  . This work is being coded on PCWindows and will output the first draft version this year  . 
6 Conclusion
To this point we described the motivation and current status of the Korean IP  , and took a brief look at resources and tools . We started the project in 1994 to yield version I platform in 1995 and a reworking on version 2 platform . The project will continue till the years of twentyfirst century  . 
Although the current status is just an opening spot  , the long term goal is to bltikL fully automatic servers for Korean language information  . Since IP plays a key role in the effort , we hope that our endeavors would be well geared to the needs of nation wide language ngineering  . 
References
Abney , Steven . 1991. Parsing by Chunks.
Berwick , R . , Abney , S . , and Tenny , C . ( eds . ), Principle-Based Parsing . Kluwer Academic

Berners-Lee , Tim , and Connolly , Daniel . 1993.
Hypertext Markup Language : A Representation of Textual Information and Mcta information for t letrieval and interchange  . CERN , USA . 
Jung , Sung-Young .  1996 . it Markov Random Fieldbased English Part-of -rlhgging System  . M . S . 
Thesis , Korea Advanced institute of Science.
and Technology . ( to appear in COLING96 . ) Kim , tliongun .  1995 . Korean Syntactic Analysis with Probabilistic Dependency Grammar  . M . S . 
Thesis , Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology  . 
Kim , aae-Hoon , and Seo , Jungyun .  1994 . A Korean Part-@Speech 7hg Set for Natural Language Processing . Technical report no . CAIR-TR-94-55 . KAIST : Center for Artificial Intelligence Research  . 
Lee , Eun-Chul .  1993 . An hn proved Method on Korean Morphological Analysis Based on CYK Algorithm  ,  . M . S . Thesis , Pohang Institute of Science and Tcdmology . 
Marcus , Mitchell P . , Santorini , Beatrice , and Marcinkiewicz , Mary A .  1993 . Building a Large Annotated Corpus of Fmglish : The Penn Tree~hank  . Computational Linguistics , 19(2):31 . 3-330 , Oh , Gil-R , ok , Choi , Key-Sun , and Park , Se-Young . 
1994 . ftangul Engineering . Seoul , Korea : Daey-onngsa . 
Shin , Jung-lto , Ilan , Young-Seok , Park , Young-
Chan , and Choi , Key-Sun . 1995. An HMM
Part-of-Speech Tagger for Korean Based on Word -phrase  . Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing , Bulgaria . 
Shin , Jung-Ho .  1996 . Aligning a Parallel Korean English Corpus at Word and Phrase Level  . M . S . 
Thesis , Korea Adwmce Institute of Science and
Technology . ( to appear in COLING 96.)
Simpkins , N . K .  1994 . ALEP ( Advanced Language Engineering Platform ) : An Open Architecture for Language Engineering . CEC and Cray Systems , Luxembourg . 

