Yes ! NLP-based FL-ITS will be Important
Henry Hamburger
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
Fairfax VA 22030 USA

In this note , as trawman is destroyed , optimism is expressed , an existing system is sketched , and some issues are laid out . 
A Direct Approach.
It is useful to consider a straightforward argument for according NLP a central role in CALL  . I will call it SCW , since it is simple , clear and wrong . It runs like this : intelligent tutoring systems ( ITS ) with simulated problem environments are potentially excellent for learning  ; a key module of an ITS is a computational model of expertise in the domain  ; NLP systems are such models in the domain of hm nan languages  ; so let's use NLP knowledge bases as the expert module of a foreign language ITS  . 
see Chanier et al (1992) . For a rule to be learned or even to be useful in explanation  , it should be congruent with learners ' cognition and expressed in a way that is meaningful to them  . Anyone familiar with NI , Pknowledge bases could hardly think seriously about promoting their direct use in explanations to learners  . 
Stay the Course.
The lailure of SCW certainly does not mean we should all go home  . On the contrary , I strongly believe that valuable ITSs will be built and that they will use NLP  , or I would not spend so much of my time on one . It does , however , suggest hat it will take significant work , in design as well as implementation , to create an NLP-driven ITS for language that engages students and help stt lem learn efficiently  . 
But Language is Different.
But language use is different fl ' ommost ITS domains  , in a way that invalidates SCW . In a typical domain a student shows progress by success in explicit stepwise reasoning to a solution  . 
Successful language use , in contrast both to other ITS domains and to the ability to state grammatical rules  , need not demand articulating the stepwise reasoning about sentence construction  , but it does require the capacity to arrive quickly at a result  ( either a sentence that expresses one's current thought or the meaning of someone else's sentence  )  , and moreover to do so while thinking about something else  , namely the substance of the conversation . Such a capacity may well imply a grammar in the brain but not awareness and articulation of it  . 
Expertise and ITS.
Even for explicit teaching of grammatical , lexical or other knowledge of a particular language  , SCW is flawed . Experience teaches that a performance-oriented representation f domain knowledge may be tm suitable t br direct use in an ITS  ; see Ciancey ( 1987 ) and in the world of language specifically , 
Let Many Flowers Bloom.
Proclaiming a future for NLP in ITS is not to deny benefits from other kinds of devices or the continuing importance of hmnant eachers  , tutors and other conversational partners . Indeed N1 , P itself may have variegated ways of contributing to the mix of learning resources  , by systems that use different modules of NLP and that aim to foster various kinds of language knowledge in the student  . Automated aid has been undertaken lot parts of languages all the way from spelling  , pronunciation and morphology , through syntax and semantics , to discourse and cultural knowledge . For the most part , the NLP-based work has been at the low end , rarely going above syntax . 
Two-Medium Conversation.
A sketch of our own ( Hamburger ,  1995 ) two-medium conversational system will give a concrete sense of one approach to NLP-intensive CALL  . 
F LUENT-2 is a language learning and tutoring system , helping students learn and letting teachers influence what is learned  . It has features of both intelligent tutoring systems and microworld learning environments  . Using a pedagogical engages the student in meaningful multimedia communicative acts in graphically depicted realworld situations  . 
The student interacts with the system by direct use of the target language  . The system uses Felshin's ( 1993 ) multilingual NLP system , which can expose students to a wide variety of linguistic forms  . The intent is that new words , phrases and grammatical usage will become comprehensible through meaningful exposure and use  . The system makes this possible by tightly coupling the language to graphical acts and system generated animations within a realistic ongoing situation  . Actions available to both the student and the system include selecting and moving objects and making human figures walk  , turn , point , grasp and release objects , and so on . 
The teacher interacts with the system through graphical  ( GUI ) tools that facilitate the designing of exercises and the construction of appropriate microw or lds  . These tools let at eacher construct exercises that invoke specific linguistic concepts in the target language without having to deal directly with the NLP system  . One parameter of an exercise can be a plan for a goal in a situation  , a capacity that makes exercises portable across microworlds  . 
Real language teachers have given design advice and now use the system  . 
Three Issues.
Fidelity and interactiveness are key issuest br ITS  . 
Extensibility has been a key issue in NLP . All three will be important for NLP-based CALL . I ' ll subdivide each , mention some interplay among them and comment on Fluent-2 in light of them . 
Fidelity is the accuracy of a presentation . For example the visual fidelity of a photo or video exceeds that of simple graphics or animation  . A technical drawing may have good conceptual fidelity if it connects related concepts  . Two aspects of fidelity that may rightly concern language educators are cultural authenticity and the situational continuity of a conversation  . 
Interactiveness of an ITS can include its immediate responsiveness by faithfully updating the visible situation after a student makes some kind of move as well as longer-range responsiveness to an individual student  , based on a model that it builds of that student's knowledge  . In addition , the student may be offered control over parameters of the systems behavior  , including subject matter , difficulty and style . We have used this last approach , in response to arguments made by Self (1988) . 
A system can be designed to be extendable within a language  . It takes extra effort to make it possible for a teacher to do so  , as opposed to a programmer . 
Portability across languages is familiar to NLP researchers  , and , as noted above , portability can also refer to moving exercise types into new situations  . Schoelles and Hamburger ( 1996 ) show how this capacity lets one present a language concept in one situation and test it in another  . 
There are tradeoffs here . As an example , Murray's ( 1995 ) video system achieves exceptionally fine cultural fidelity  , but for that reason little of it is language portable  . Interactiveness also is difficult to achieve with video  , since there is a finite amount of video material produced in advance  . Our generative , recombinative animation approach does not encounter this constraint  . 
In the End.
It will not be easy , but I hope and believe that before too long there will be a variety of exciting  , effective NLP-based CALL systems . 

Chanier , T . , Pengelly , M . , Twidale , M . and Self , J . 
(1992 ) Conceptual modelling in error analysis in computer-assisted language learning systems  . In Swartz , M . L . and Yazdani , M . ( Eds . ) Intelligent Tutoring Systems for Foreign Language Learning  . 
Berlin : Springer-Verlag
Clancey , W .   ( 1987 ) Knowledge-Based Tutoring : The GUIDON Program . Cambridge , MA , USA:
MIT Press.
Felshin , S .   ( 1993 ) A Guide to the Athena Language Learning Project Natural Language Processing 
Systems . MIT.
Hamburger , H .   ( 1995 ) Tutorial tools for language learning by two -medium dialogue  . In Holland , V . M . , Kaplan , J . D . and Sams , M . R . ( Eds . ) Intelligent Language Tutors . Mahwah , NJ , USA:

Murray , J .   ( 1995 ) Lessons learned from the Athena Language Learning Project  . In Holland , V . M . , Kaplan , J . D . and Sams , M . R . ( Eds . ) Intelligent Language Tutors , Mahwah , NJ , USA : Erlbaum . 

Schoelles , M . and Hamburger , H . (1996) Teacher-usable xercise design tools . Montreal : Proceedings of ITS-96 . 
Self , J . A .   ( 1988 ) Bypassing the intractable problem of student modelling  . Montreal : ITS-88 . 

