Adjectival Modification in Text Meaning Representation 
Victor Raskin and Sergei Nirenburg
Computing Research Laboratory
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces , N.M .88003, U.S.A.
raskin , sergei@crl.nmsu.edu

Tiffs work belongs to a family of research efforts  , called nficro theories and aimed at describing the static inemfing of all lexical categories in several languages in the fr  , ' une work of tile Mikro Kosmos project on computational semantics  . The latter also involves other static micro theories describing world kalowledge and syntax-semantics mapping as well as dynamic micro theories comlected with the actual process of text analysis  . Tiffspaper describes our approach to detecting , ' rod recording adjectival meaning , compares it with the body of k alowledge on adjectives in literature and presents a detailed  , practically tested methodology for the acquisition of lexical entries for adjec-fives  . The work was based on the set of over 6 , 000 English and about 1 , 5 00 Spanish adjectives obtained from task-oriented corpora  . 
1. The Ontological Approach
The work on adjectives reported in tlf is paper constitutes a descriptive " microtheory " in the Mikro Kosmoseman-tic analyzer  ( Onyshkevych and Nirenburg 1994 ; and Beale et , ' d .  1995) , designed to serve as a component of a lolow ledge -based machine translation system  ( Nircn-burgctal .  1992) . 
Mikro Kosmos combines findings from a variety of quasi-antonomous micro theories of language phenomena  , world knowledge organization and procedural knowledge at the level of coinputer system arclfitectnrc  . 
The basic motivation for this organization is the continued inability of the fields of lingnistics and NLP to produce a general-coverage  , unified theory of trealment of language phenomena  , failure especially pronoanced in , are as beyond computational syntax . 
The purpose and result of the Mikro Kosmosmmlysis process is the derivation of an interlingnal representation for natm ' allanguage in lmts  . The langtmgein which these representations arc expressed is called file " text meaning representation "  ( I'M R ) langlmge , mid " texts " inda is language are called , simply , TMRs . TMR is afr , ' une-based language , where frame names typically refer to instances of ontological concepts  , lot names are derived from a set of ontological properties and slot fillers  , are either elements of property value sets or pointers to concept instances  . 
An ontology , a world model containing ilf formation aboutypes of things  , events mid properties in the world , is a necessary prerequisite for a TMR language . " An ontology for NLP purposes is a body of knowledge about the world  ( or a domain ) that a ) is a repository of primitive symbols used in meaning representation  ; b ) organizes these symbols in a tangled subsumption hierarchy  ; ? and c ) further intercom~ects these symbols using a rich system of semmltic and discourse-pragmatic relations defined among the concepts "  ( Mahesh and Nirenburg 1995:1 )  . The function of the ontology is to supply " world knowledge to lexical  , syntactic , and semantic processes " ( ibid ) . 
The lexicon in Mikro Kos Inos " mediates between the TMR  , and ontology " ( Onyshkevyeh and Nirenburg 1994:2 )  . Lexicon entries for most open-class lexieal items represent word and plu : ase senses  , which c~m be either directly mapped into ontological concepts or derived by locally  ( that is , in the lexicon entry itself ) modifying constraints on property wducs of concepts used to specify the meaning of the given lexical item  .   L6xical-senmntie information as well as clues for contextual semantic and pragmatic processing are typically located in the lexicon  , adjectives being no exception . In the following section we illustrate file structnre of those parts of the lexicon entry in Mikro Kosmos which bear on the description of adjectival memfing  . 
2. The Ontological Approach to the
Meaning of a Typical Adjective
A simple , l ~ roto typical case of adjectival modification is a scalar adjective  , which modifies a noun both syntactically and semantically  . Our micro theory associates its meaning with a region on a scale which is defined as the range of ml ontological property  ( cf . Carlson and Nix~en-burg , 1990) . Tile contribution that the adjective makes to the construction of a semantic dependency structure property-value p  , ' fir ) as a slot filler in a frame representing theme , -ming of the noun whidl this adjective syntactically modifies  . 
Thus , in bighous e , big will assigua high value as the filler of the property slot SIZE of the frame for theme  , ' m-ing of house . The range of the ontological property SIZE is a numerical and continuous scale  . Eachnmnerical Big , will , then , be assigned a vahte of ' > 0 . 75' value on the SIZE scale . These values , arc a crucial pmt of the lexical mapping ( LEX-MAP ) from language milts to TMR units included in the senmntics  ( SEM-STRUC ) " zone " of their lexical entries . Equally cruci , ' d is the syntactic-se-m , ' mtic delrendency nmppiug ( linking ) between the syn-tactic-sm~eture ( SYN-STRUC ) and sF , M-STRUC zones , which in Mikro Kosmosis canied out with the help of special variables  . The syntactico-scmantic information in file lexicon entry for big is as follows : t  ( 1 )   ( big ( big-Adjt ; the tirst adjectival sense of BIG ( CAT adj )   ( SYN-STRUC ; syqtactic characteristics : (1(( root $ varl ) ; sulxzategodzationF ~ atern(catn) ; 1 ( attributive ) ; $ varlis(mcxls((root$wlrO )))) ; bound to the noun ; the adjective modities ;   ; $ var 0 is bound to the ad- ; jective itself (2(( root $ varO) ; subcategorizatiou pattern ( catadj ) ; 2 ( predicative ) ( subj ( ( root Svarl) ; this standard Adj ; SYN-STRUC is ( cat n )))) ; omitte A from the other ; examples ( SEM-S'FRUC ( LI%X-MAP ; the syntax-semantics map-((12) ( size-attribute ; ping valid for both ( domain ( value ^$ varl ) ; patterns ;  ' ^ '  ; means " the meaning of " ( semphysical-object ) )  ; selectional ; restriction ( range ( value (> 0 . 75))  ; the value is ; in the top 25 percentile ; of the scale ( relaxabte-to ( value (> 0 . 6)))))))))) ; re- ; la?ed values are for pro- ; cessiug metonymies The standard tn'ocedurc for representing a diecliwd modification in TMRs is  , then , to insert the scale name 1 Many zones which are actually present in the entries for these adjectives in the Mikro Kosmos lexi--conart  . , omitted from the examples . 
scale can be measured in an abso httemmmer ( e . g . , LIN-EAR-SIZE ill feet , yards , or millimeters , or TIME ill seconds ) . But often natural language x pressions do not refer to abso httcmagnitudes but rather to abstract relative ones  , as in file case of big ,  . We assume a 0 to 1 nulncfical range for such abstract scales . For abstract references to SIZE , lhefillers in English e~mIre : in the frame describing the meaning of the noun the adjective meMifies  . For a noun like house , whose appro-pilate sense ( 2 ) is directly mapped into an ontological concepl , theme , ' ufing of bighouse will be represented as it TMR fragment shown in  ( 3 ) :  ( 2 )   ( house ( house-N1 ( CAT n ( SYN-STRUC ( 1  ( ( root $ vat0 )   ( cat n ) ) ) )  ( SEM-ff FP , UC(I , EX-MAP ( 2  ( private-home ) )  ( 3 )   ( priwlte-home ( size-attribute ( value > 0 . 75 ) ) More complex cases of adjectival moditication are discussed in Section  4  . 
3. Semantic and Computational
Treatment of Adjectives : Old and
New Trends
The literature on adjective shows a scarcity of systematic semantic analyses or lexicx ~ grapl fic descriptions of adjectives  . Most of file linguistic scholars lfip focuses on tile taxonomies of adjectives  , on file differences between the attrihutive and predicative syntactic usages as well as other syntaclic mms formations associated with vari-  . 
ous adjectival usages , on the qualitative/relative distinctions among adjectives  , which is related to the predicative/attributive usages  , and on the gradability/comparability of qualitative adjectives  ( for a detailed survey , see Raskin and Nirenhurg 1995:3~20) . 
As coln putational semantics m~wes to large scale syslcms serving non-toy dom ~ fins  , the need for large let-icons with entries of all lexical categories is I reconfing increasingly acute  , and the attention is turning more towards such previously neglected or avoklcd categories as the adjectives  . Recently , there have appeared some first indications of lifts attetl fion  . -- sce , lk)r instance , Viegas (1994) , and Pustejovsky (1995) . This research is a step in the same direction . 
Our analysis of adjectives , with the goal of supporting semantic analysis , shows that the issues important for adjective meaning representation are quite different from those debated in literature on adjectives  . Thns , it becomes clear that the scalar ~ non-scalar dichotomy  , and not the attributive ~ predicative distinction which dominates the literature  , is the single most important distinction in semantic treatment of adjectives  . The continuous numerical scales associated with the true scalars also render the issue of gradability and comparability rather trivial  ( see Raskin and Nirenburg 1995:2526 )  . 
Another essential issue is the grain size of description  . In ( 3 ) the linking attribute ( SIZE ) is selected rather high in the hierarchy of attributes  , because in the ontology SIZE-ATTRIBUTE is the parent of such properties as LENGTH-ATTRIBUT E  , WlDTtI-AqTRIBUTE , AREA-ATTRIBUTE , WEIGHT-ATTRIBUTE , etc . If the context does not allow the analyzer to select one of those  , a coarser-grain solution is preferred . In other words , we represent the meaning of bighouse without specifying whether big pertains to the length  , width , height or area of a house . This is the result of a principle decision , based on the principle of practical effability 2 ( Raskin and Nirenburg 1995:46ff )  , which stipulates that , in MT , the target l , 'mguage should be expected to have a corresponding adjective of a comparably argegrain-size  . 
This issue has been often discussed on the example of the adjective good  ( cf . Katz 1972, Pustejovsky 1995) . 
We deliberately settle on a grain size of description coarser than the most detailed semantic analysis possible  ( 4 )  . 
(4 )   ( good ( good-Adj 1 ( CAT adj )   ( SYN-STRUC ( 1  ( ( root $ varl )   ( cat n )   ( mods ( ( root $ vatO ) ) ) ) )   ( 2  ( ( root $ var0 )   ( eat adj )   ( subj ( ( root Svarl )   ( cat n ) ) ) ) ) )  ( SEM-STRUC ( LEX-MAP ( attitude ( type evaluative )   ( attitude-value ( value ( >0 . 75)) ( relaxable-to ( value (> 0 . 6 ) ) ) )  2 Derived from Tarski's and Katz's effability principle  ( Tarski 1956:1921 ; Katz 1978:209 ) and extended to NLE ( scope ^$ varl )   ( attributed-to*speaker* ) ) ) ) ) ) The finest grain-size analysis requires that a certain salient property of the modified noun is contextually selected as the one on which the meaning of the noun and that of the adjective is colmected  . In our approach , the representation solution for good would be to introduce an evaluation attitude  , with a high value and scoped over this property . Salient properties are , however , hard to identify formally , as is wellknown , for instance , in the scholars l fipon metaphor , where salience is the determining factor for the similarity dimension on whicll metaphors  (  , and similes ) are based , It is , therefore , wise to avoid having to search for the salient property  , and the principle of practical effability offers a justification for tiffs  . 
4. Non-Property-Based Adjectival

This section contains a brief discussion of the senmntic treatment of adjectives which cannot be reduced to the standard property-based type of adjectival modification  . 
This discussion illustrates an important point in our approach  , namely , that syntactic modification does not necessarily imply semantic modification  . 
4.1 Attitudes
Goodis , of course , a scalar . Nevertheless , unlike in the case of big (2) , the LEX-MAP for ( 4 ) does not contain a property-value pair that can be attached to the frame of tile modified noun like house in tile TMR  . Instead , the meaning representation fgood introduces an attitude on the part of the speaker with regard to the modified noun  . In the TMR , the attitudes characterize the whole proposition , and thus the semantic link between the modified noun and the adjective is weakened  . There are other types of adjectives which challenge the conunon-sense view that the memfing of the adjective somehow " amalgamates " with the memfing of the modified noun  , and most of these types are non-scalar or only marginally scalar  . 
4.2 Temporal Adjectives
The purely temporal knowledge in Mikro Kosmosis recorded with the meaning of the entire proposition  , and adjectiventries are not marked for it . Some temporal adjectives , of file kind that Levi presents as derived from adverbs rather than nouns  ( examples ( 1 . 9) in Levi 1978:7 , repeated here as 5) , are analyzed in a different manner nouns they modify syntactically -- in other words  , the temporal meaning of the adjective characterizes the proposition  . Thus , occasional visitor ( 5 iii ) is analyzed as a rhetorical paraphrase of visit occasionally  . 
(5 )   ( i ) formeroommate ( ii ) early riser ( iii ) occasional visitor ( iv ) eventual compromise 4 . 3 Membership adjectives Tim membership class has been largely ignored in the literature  . There has been a sporadic interest in the adjective fake  ( see Iw , ' mska 1995--cf . Rask in 1981 ) because it clearly violates the silnplistic subset-forming notion of adjective meaning  , such that red houses are a subset of all houses . But there are many other adjectives which use exactly the same type of lexical entry  , and their similarity to each other and to fake had not been noticed before  . 
The most typical adjectives in the member subclass are authentic  ( 6 )  , fake (7) , and nominal (8) . Many others are their synonyms and near-synonyms . The lexical entry for Ot is subclass focuses on two major elements : first  , whefl mrtile modified norm is a member of a certain set--anthentic and nominal members  , are but fake members are not ; and , second , whether the properties of tiffs noun intersect significantly with those of tile set mem-bers- -the properties of authentic members overlap with the common properties of the set meinbers on most import  , ' mt properties ; the properties of fake members overlap with those of the set members only on unimportant properties  , such as physical resembl , 'mce--e . g . fake gun ; and the properties of nominal members overlap more significantly with those of the set members bat not on the most important ones  . 
The first element is represented illase t notation : set l shows that ^$ varl belongs to the set  , whose typical member is denoted by a variable refseml  , intile ease of authentic and nominal but not in file case of fake  . Set2 is the set of , all properties of the members of set l ; set 3 is tile set of all properties of ^$ var 1 ; set4 is , essentially , the intersection of set2 and set3 . 
The second element is represented as the value of a saliency  ( importance ) attitude to the intersection between the properties of the modified noun and those of the set members it is purported to belong to : the saliency v ~ due is  1  . 0 for authentic , still l figh for nominal , and low for fake . This representation is based on the assumption that functioning as a member  , which differentiates between authentic and nominal  , in that the former does , ' rodtile latter does not function as a member should  , is the most salient feat ttre , while sometlfing like physical similarity ( a fake gun only looks like a gun ) is the least salient one . (7) and (8) below are shown only partially , where they conWast with (6) . 
(6) ( authentic ( authentic-Adj 1
CA'\["adj ) ( SEM-STRUC(I . F2(-MAP ( (12) ( set l(member refseml) ; refsemX are vari-(member ^$ varl )) ; ables not used by ( set 2 ; the linking process ( member refseml . *))  ; "*" means all ( set 3 ; properties in a ( member ^$ varl . *)); a concept ( set4 ( member ( AND(set2 . member set 3 . member ) ) ) )  ( attitude ( type salience )   ( attitude-value 1 . 0 )   ( scope set 4 ( attributed-to*speaker* ) ) ) ) ) ) )   ( 7 )   ( fake ( fake-Adjl ( (1 2 ) (setl ( member refsem1 )   ( ( member ^$ varl )   ( polarity negative ) ) )   ( attitude-value ( value ( < 0 . 25 ) ) )   ( 8 )   ( nominal ( nominal-Adjl ( attitude-value ( wdue ( < 0 . 75))) 4 . 4 Event-Related Adjectives To derive file semantic part of  , 'm adjectival entry from avel ' b , ' fl entry , first one must identify the case , or thematic role ( such as agent , theme , be ueficiary , etc . ) filled by the nolal modifiexl by the adjective illqnesfion  . We illustrate this process using file lexical entries for abusive and abuse  . The superentry for abuse includes at least three senses  , roughly ,   abuse-V1 " insult verbally " abuse-V2 ' violate a lawor a privivilege " and abuse-V3 ' assault physically " , ' rod the adjective may be derived from any one of them  . What is abusive is either file event ( E ) itself , as illabusive speech or abusive behavior , or the agent ( A ) of the event , its in a busive manor abusive neighbor . A busive lE is then tile eventive sense of the adjective formed from  abuse-V1   ( 9 )  , and abusive is 1A the agentive sense of the adjective in the same sense of abuse  . The difference between file two is , essentially , in the position of ^$ varl in the LEX-MAI ' and ill the scope of atlribntion of the two attitudes inherited from file verbal entry  . Natla'a Uy , file adjectiventries replace the verbal SYN- STRUC below wifll the standard Adj one  ( see and Nirenburg 1996 )  . 
(9 )   ( abuse ( abuse-V1 ( CATV )   ( SYN-STRUC ( ( root Svar0 )   ( cat v )   ( subj ( ( root $ varl )   ( eatn ) )  ( obj ( ( root Svar2 )   ( cat n ) ) ) ) ) )  ( SEM-STRUC ( LEX-MAP ( communicative-event ( agent ( value ^$ varl )   ( serehuman ) )  ( benef ( value ^$ var 2 )   ( semhuman ) )  ( theme ( value refseml ) )  ( attitudel ( type evaluative )   ( attitude-value ( value ( < 0 . 25 ) ) )   ( scoper efsem 1 )   ( attributed-to ( OR ( ^$ var'2 speaker ) ) ) )  ( attitude 2 ( type evaluative )   ( attitude-value ( value ( < 0 . 25 ) ) )   ( scope ^$ var 2 )   ( attributed-to ^$ varl ) ) ) ) ) ) 4 . 5 Relative ( Denominal ) Adjectives Relalive adjectives , are denourinal , object-related , in their meaning . The following example illustrates the connection betwee nominal mid adjectival meanings  . 
(10 )   ( i )   ( medicine ( medicine-Nl )   ( CAT n )   ( SYN-STRUC ( rootSvar 0 )   ( cat n ) ) )   ( SEM-STRUC ( LEX-MAP medicine ) ) ) )  ( ii )   ( medical ( medicabAdj )   ( CA'F adj )   ( SEM-STRUC ( L~X-MAP ( ^Swirl ( pertain-tomedicine ) ) ) ) ) ) As file default property connecting file modifier to the modifiexl  , the Mikro Kosmos analyzer uses file catchall relation PERTAIN-TO  . We have identified several morn specific relations  . 
The frst such relation is OWNED-BY , as in federal-Adjl in the sense of " owned by a federation  . " Another specific relation is HAS-AS-PART , as in malignant-Adj3 in the sense of containing cancer cells . LOCATION is also a conunon relation , as in international-Adj1 , " taking place in a set of two or more comltries . " It is interesting that another sense of international utilizes the OWNED-BY property noted above  , as in " owned by a set of two or more countries ; ' and yet another combines LOCATION with event -relatedness  , a in " manufactured in a set of two or more eounlries  . " The disambiguation mnong such multiple senses is not a simple matter  , and in an unusual contraposition to the standard semantic problem of infinite polysemy  , a move up , rather than down , to the undifferentiated generic meaning of an adjective like international is recommended in case of disambiguation problems  . In other words , while we continue to discover more specific relations between the lexical entries of denominal adjectives mid the nouns they are derived from  , file generic PER-TAIN-TO property should not be discarded  . This move is , again , related to file issue of grain-size of semantic description  . 
5. Adjectives and Other Modifiers
The Mikro Kosmos analyzer treats modification by attempting to merge the meanings of the modifiers into the meanings of the modified  . For those modifiers whose memfings are ( possibly , sets of ) property-value pairs , the method is to insert file values riley carry into file same property slot in the modified  . For inst , ' mcc , file sense of smooth as in smooth silk will be a r  , ' mgeon file TEXTURE scale . If TEXTURE is defined as a property of PIIYSICAL -OBJEC For MATERIAL  , and SILK is a descendent of either of them , then the v ' , duccarried in the lexicon entry for smooth will be inserted by the analyzer as the TEXTURE property value for file instance of silk in tim TMR  . 
Our a pwoach covers , all property modification i language , not only adjective-noun combinations . Thus , it would be applicable to noun-noun combinations , adverb-verb combinations and other mollification situations  , as illustrated in ( 11 ) :  ( 11 ) Modified Modifiers Verb Adverb , Noun , Prepositional Phrase
Noun Adjective , Prepositional Phra ~
Adjective Adverb , Prepositional Phrase
Adverb Adverb
The most challenging cases in all kinds of modification would be those where syntactic dependency does not i ~ redetern finesmantic dependency  . In lhispawr we have illustrated a method , based on ontology and text memfing representation  , of lreating such discretxmcies in dependency for adjectiwd modification  . This method based on the iexical entries for 6 , 000 Spanish mid 1 , 500
English adjectives.
The method is based on the discovery of a small number of basic types of adjectival lexical entries and its nse  , with minor modifications , with al~wgenumber of specific lexical entries , thus n m kingtile acquisition of adjectives cognitively easier  , faster , and cheaper . Each type of lexical entry ( lcten nines a type of mtxlilication relationship between the adjective ~ md the kind of nouns it modifies  , most significantly , whether this relations l fip is property-based or not-property-based  . We have also discovered that this approach to adjectival me  , ruing is language-independent : what varies from language to language is the adjectival superentries  , i . e . , the various combinations of different meanings of the same adjective  , as well as adjectival availability for a certain metal-ing  . i . e . , whether a specific meaning c , ' mIre expressed adjectivally in a language . Most adjectiwd meanings of one language are , however , expressed adjectiw dly as well in another language  , and the lexical entry for this me , ruing is then unchanged . 
Inm , ' my languages , adjectives and adverbs are the sanle . Is our approach to adjectival moditication of holms applicable to adverhi~dm cxlilication of ved~s ? Initial research shows that the property- /non-l ~ roperty-based dichotomy holds thereas well  . We intend to test the hypothesis flint this method extrapolates to ~ dl the above types of modification as well  . 

The research reported in this paper wassupl xJ rtcd by Contract  MDA904-92-C-5189 with the U . S . Department of Defense . Victor Raskinisgrate fid to Purdue University for pemfitting him to consult CRL/NMSU on the Mikro Kosmos project  . Both authors feel indebted to the other members of the Mikro Kosmosteam  . 

Beale , Stcphcn , Sergei Nircnburg , and Kavi Mahesh 1995 . Scmantie Analysis in the Mikrokosmos Maehinc Translation Project  . In Proceedings of the Second Symposium on Natural Language Processing  ( SNLP-95 )  , August 24 . 
Bangkok , Thailand.
Beckwith , Richard , Christimle Fellbaunl , Derek Gross , and George A . Miller 1991 . WordNet : A lexical database organized on psyeholinguistic principles  . In : UriZenfik ( ed . ) , Lexical Acquisition : Exploiting Online Resources to Build a Lexicon  . Ilillsdale , N . J . : Erlbanm , pp .  211-232 . 
Bouillon , Pierrette , and Evelyne Viegas 1994 . As cnfi-polymorphic approach to the interpretation f adjectival constructions : A crosslinguistic per-SlUCctive  . In : Proceedings of the Sixth EURALEX Intei ~aational Congress  , Amsterd , qan : Free University of Amsterdmn , pp .  36-44 . 
Cm'lson , Lynn , and Sergci Nircnburg IcY ) 0 . World Modeling for NLE Technical Report CMU-CMT 90-121  , Center for Machine Trails lafion , C , ' u'n-egie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , PA . 
lwm~ska , lncja 1995 . Semantics , pragmaties , and context of intensional negative adjectives : Notatoy problem  , l ' a per presented at fl ~ cContext in Natural I , anguage Processing . IJCAI'95
Workshop , Montre ~d , August 1995.
Ka Y , Jerrold J .  1972 . Semantic flleory and the memfing of good . Journal of Philosophy 61, pp .  736-760 . 
Katz , Jen'old J .  1978 . Effability and translation . In : I: . 
Gucnflmcr and M . Guenthner-Reuttcr ( eds . ) , Meaning and Translation : Philosophical and Linguistic Approaches  . London : Duckworth , pp .  191-234 . 
I , evi , Judith N .  1978 . The Syntax and Semantics of
Complex Nominals . New York : Academic

Mahesh , Kavi , and Sergci Nircnbmg 1995 . A situated ontology for practical NLP . A paper prcs cntc~lat the IJCAI' 95 Workshop on Basic Ontological Issues in Knowledge Sharing  . Montreal,
August 1921.
Nircnburg , Scrgci , Jaime Carboncll , Masmuqbmita , and Kcimeth Goodnmn 1992 . Machine Transla-tion : A Knowledge-Based Approach  . San
Mateo , CA : Morgau Kanfmmm.
Onyshkevych , Boyml , and Sergei Nircnlxlrg 1994 . The Lexicon in the Scheme of KBMT " llfings . 
Memoranda in Computer and Cognitive Sci-euce MCCS-94-277  . I , as Cruces , N . M . : New
Mexico State University.
lhistejovsky , James 1995. The Generative Lexicon.
Cmnbridge , MA : MIT Press.
Raskin , Victor 1981 . tIow to handle fake guns . Meetingll and book , Annual Meeting of the Iingnistics
Society of America , New York.
Raskin , Victor , and Sergei Nirenburg 1995 . Lexical Semantics of Adjectives : A Microtheory of Ad-jectiwd Me  , ' ming . Memoranda in Computer and Cognitive Science MCCS-95-288  . Las Cruces,
N.M .: New Mexico State University.
Raskin , Victor , and Sergei Nirenburg1 ~) 6 . I . exicad rules for deverbal adjectives . Paper presented at the ACL' 96 Workshop on the Breadth and Depfll of Semanlic Lexicons  . S~mta Cruz , CA . 
Smadja , Frank 1991 . Macrocoding the lexicon with cooccurrence knowledge  . In : Uri Zernik ( ed . ) , Lexical Acquisition : Exploiting Online Resources to Build a Lexicon  . ltill sdale , N . J . :
F , rlbaum , pp . 165~189.

