NKRL , a Knowledge Representation Language for Narrative
Natural Language Processing
Gian Piero Zarri
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
CNRS-CAMS
54, boulevard Raspail
75270 PARIS Cedex06, France
zarri ~ cams.msh-paris , fr

NKRL is a conceptual language which intends to provide a normalised  , pragmatic description of the semantic ontents ( in short , the " meaning ") of NL narrative documents . We introduce firstly the general architecture of NKRL  , and we give some examples of its characteristic features  . We supply , afterward , some sketchy information about the inference techniques and the NLP procedures associated with this language  . 
1. Introduction
NKRL ( Narrative Knowledge Representation Language ) aims to propose some possible , pragmatic solutions for the setup of a standardised description of the semantic ontents  ( in short , the " meaning ") of natural anguage ( NL ) n , ' u Tative documents . With the term " nan'ative documents " we denote here NL texts of an industrial and economic interest con'esponding  , e . g . , to news stories , corporate documents , normative texts , intelligence messages , etc . 
The NKRL code can be used according to two main modalities  . It can be employed as a standard vehicle for the interchange of content information about narrative documents  . It can also b cutilised to support a wide range of industrial applications  , like populating large knowledge bases which can support  , thereafter , all sort of " intelligent " applications ( advanced expert systems , case-based reasoning , intelligent information retrieval , etc . ) . NKRL is a fully implemented language ; the most recent versions have been r calised in the frmnework of two European projects : NOMOS  , Esprit P 53 30 , and COBALT , 
LREP6 1011.
2. The architecture of NKRL
NKRL is a two layer language.
The lower layer consists of a set of general tools which are structured into several integrated components  , four in our case . 
The descriptive component concerns the tools used to produce the formal representations  ( called predicative templates ) of general classes of narrativ events , like " moving a generic object " , " formulate a need " , " be present somewhere " . Predicative templates are characterised by a threefold format  , where the central piece is a semantic predicate ( a primitive , like BEHAVE , EXPERIENCE , MOVE , PRODUCE etc . ) whose arguments ( role fillers ) are introduced by roles as SUBJ ( ect )  , OBJ(ect ) , SOURCE , DEST ( ination ) , etc .   ; the data structures proper to the descriptive component are then similar to the case-grammar structures  . Templates are structured into a hierarchy , HTEMP ( lates) , corresponding , therefore , to a " taxonomy of events " . 
Templates ' instances ( predicative occurrences ) , i . e . , the NKRL representation of single , specific events like " Tomorrow , I will move the ward robe " , " Lucy was looking for a taxi " , " Peter lives in Paris " ,   , are in the domain of the factual component . 
The definitional component supplies the NKRL representations  , called concepts , of all the general notions , like physical_ entity , human_being , taxi_ , city_ , etc . , which can play the role of arguments within the data su'uctures of the two components above  . The concepts correspond to sets or collections , organised according to a generalisation /specialisation  ( tangled ) hier ~ chy which , for historical reasons , is called H_CLASS ( es) . The data structures used for the concepts are , substantially , framelike structures ; H_CLASS corresponds relatively well , therefore , to the usual ontologies of terms . 
The enumerative component of NKRL concerns the formal representation f the instances  ( concrete , countable x , ' unples , eelucy_ , ward robe_l , taxi_53) of the concepts of HCLASS ; their formal representations take the name of individuals  . 
Throughout his paper , we will use the italic type style to represent a " concept "  , the roman style to represent an " individual _" . 
The upper layer of NKRL consists of two parts.
The first is a " catalogue " , giving a complete description of the formal characteristics and the modalities of use of the wellformed  , " basic templates " ( like " moving a generic object " mentioned above ) associated with the language -- presently , about 150 , pertaining mainly to a ( very general ) socio-economico-political context where them ~ fin characters are human being ~ or social bodies  . By means of proper specialisation operations it is then possible to obtain  , from the basic templates , the ( specific ) " derived " templates that could be concretely needed to implement a particular  , practical application -- e . g . , " move an industrial process " - - and the corresponding occurrences  . In NKRL , the set of legal , basic templates can be considered , at least in a first approach ,   , as fixed . 
Analogously , the general concepts which pertain to the upper levels of H_CLASS--such as human_being  , physical entity , modality_ , etc . --form a sort of upper-level , ilwariable ontology . 
3. Some characteristic NKRL features
Fig . 1 supplies a simple exmnple of NKRL code . It translates a small fragment of COBALT news : " Milan  , October 15 ,  1993 . qhefinancial daily 11 Sole meeting concerning plums for capital increKse "  . 
cl ) MOVE SUBJ
OBJ date-1: date-2: ( SPECIF sole 24 ore financial_daily ) :  ( milan__ )  #c215 oct ober_93
C2) PRODUCE SUBJ
OBJ mediobanca ( SPECIF summoning 1 ( SPEClF board meeting_lmedioban caspecial_ ) )
TOPIC ( SPECIF plan 1 ( SPECIF cardinal#y_several_ ) capital_increase 1 ) date-l : circa 15 oct ober_93 date-2:
Figure 1. At \] NKRI . coding.
In Fig .  1 , cl and c2 are symbolic labels of occurrences ; MOVE and PRODUCE are predicates ; SUBJ , OBJ , TOPIC (" , : l proposof . . . ") are roles . 
With respect now to the arguments , sole 24 or e , milan_ , mediobanca_(an Italian merchant bank ) , summoning l , etc .   , ' u ' e individuals ; financial daily , special_ , car dirtality_and several_(this last belonging , like some , all_etc . , to the logical_quantifier intensional subtree of II_CLASS  ) are concepts , q\]~e attributive operator , SPECIF ( icatiou ) , with syulax ( SPECI FelPl- . . Pn ) , is used to represent some of tile properties which can be asserted about the first element el  , concept or individual , of a SPECIF list ; several is used within a SPECIF list having cardinality_as first element as a standard way of representing the plural number mark  , secc2 . 
The arguments , and file templates/occurrences as a whole , may be characterised by the presence of pro ' titular codes  , the determiners . For example , the location determiners , represented as lists , are associated with them ' guments ( role fillers ) by using the colon ,  ":" , operator , see cl . For the determiners date-1 and date-2 , see ( Zarri , 1992a ) . 
AMOVE cons Uuctioulike that of occurrence l ( completive construction ) is necessarily used to translate any event concerning the transmission of an information  ( " . . . I1 Sole 24Ore reported . . . ") . 
Accordingly , the filler of the OBJ ( ect ) slot in the occurrences ( here , cl ) which instantiates the MOVE transmission template is ~ dways a symbolic label  ( c2 ) which refers to anolher predicative cx : curreuce , i . e . , that bearing the informational content o be spread out  ( " . . . 
Medioban cahad called a meeting . . . ") . We can note that the enunciative situation can be both explicit or implicit  . For example , the eompletive construction can be used to deal with a problem originally raised by Naz  , ' u'enko (1992) in a conceptual graphs context , namely , that of the correct rendering of causal situations where the general framework of them ~tecedent consists of an  ( implicit ) speech situation . 
Let usex a mine briefly one of the Nazarenko's exmnples  ( 1992 : 881 ) : " Peter has a lever since he is flushed " . As Naz ~ enkore marks , " being flushed " is not the " cause " of " having a fever "  , but that of an implicite nunciative situation where we claim  ( affirm , assert etc . ) that someone has a fever . Using the completive construction , this example is easily translated in NKRL using the I ' on roccmTences of Fig  .  2 . 
\[IIc3) MOVE SUBJ human being or social body
OBJ#c4c4) EXPERIENCE SUBJ peter_
OBJ fevered_state_l
C5) EXPERIENCE SUBJ peter
OBJ flushing state_llobs\]c6 )   ( CAUSE c3e5 ) Figure 2 . An implicite nunciative situation . 
We caure mark that , in Fig . 2, c6 is a binding occun'ence . Binding structures -- i . e . , lists where the elements are conceptual labels , c3 and c5 in Fig .   2 --~ nesecond-order structures used to represeut the logico-semantic links which can exist between predicative templates or teem'fences  . The binding occun'ence c6--meaning that c3 , the main event , has been caused by c5-- is labelled using one ( CAUSE ) of the four operators which define together the taxonomy of causality of NKRL  , see ( Zarri , 1992b ) . The presence in c5 of a specific determiner--a temporal modulator  , " obs(ervc ) " , see again ( Zarri , 1992a ) -- leads to an iuterprelalion of this occurrence as the description of a situatiou that  , that very moment , is observed to exist . 
We givenow , Fig .  3 , a ( slightly simplified ) NKRL represeutation f the narrative sentence : " We have to make orange juice " which  , according to Ilwang and Schubert (1993:1298) , exemplifies several interesting semantic phenomena  . 
c7 ) BEHAVE SUBJ ( COORD informant 1 ( SPECIF humar & being ( SPECIF cardinality several _ ) ) ) \[ oblig , ment \] date 1: observed date date 2: c8 ) * PRODUCE SUBJ ( COORD in forman t_l ( SPECIF human_being ( SPECIF cardinal#y_several_ ) ) ) 
OBJ ( SPECIF orange_juice ( SPECIF amount_0 ) ) date1: observed date + i date2: c9 )   ( GOALc7c8 ) 
Figure 3. Wishes and intentions.
iiii
Fig .   3 illustrates the standard NKRL way of representing the " wishes  , desires , intention " domain . 
To translate the idea of " acting in order to obtain a given result "  , we use : i ) An occurrence ( here c7) , instance of a basic template pertaining to the BEII AVE branch of the HTEMP hierarchy  , and corresponding to the general meaniug of focusing on a result  . This occurrence is used to express the " acting " the action  , the temporal coordinates , etc . 
ii ) A second predicative occurrence , here c8 , all instance of a template structured around a different predicate  ( e . g . , PRODUCE in Fig .  3 ) and which is used to express the " intended result " component  . 
iii ) A binding occmTence , c9 , which links together the previous predicative occurrences and which is labelled by means of GOAL  , another operator included intile taxonomy of causality of NKRL  . 
Please note that " oblig " and " ment " in Fig . 3 are , like " obs " in Fig . 2, " modulators ", see ( Zan-i , 1992b ), i . e . , particular determiners u ed to refine or modify the primary interpretation fatemplate or occurrence as given by the basic " predicate -- roles -- argument " association  . " ment(al ) " pertains to the modality modulators . " oblig ( atory ) " suggests that " someone is obliged to door to endure something  , e . g . , by authority " , and pertains to the deontic modulators series . Other modulators are the temporal modulators , " begin " , " end " , " obs(erve ) " , see also Fig .  2 . 
Modulators work as global operators which take as their argumentile whole  ( predicative ) template or occurrence . When a list of modulator si present , as in the occurrence c7 of Fig .  3 , they apply successively to the template /occurrence in a polish notation style to avoid any possibility of scope ambiguity  . In the standard constructions for expressing wishes  , desires and intentions , tile absence of the " ment ( al ) " modulator in the BEHAVE occurrence meaus that tile SUBJ  ( ect ) of BEHAVE takes some concrete initiative ( acts explicitly ) in order to fulfil the result ; if " merit " is present , as in Fig .  3 , no concrete action is undertaken , and the " result " reflects only the wishes and desires of the SUBJ  ( ec0 . 
4. Inferences and NL processing
Each of the four components of NKRL is characterised by the association with a class of basic inference procedures  . For exmnple , the key inference mechanism for the factual component is the Filtering and Unification Module  ( FUM )  . The primary data structures handled by bq3M are the " search patterns " that represent the general properties of an information to be searched for  , by filtering or unification , within a knowledge base of occun'ences . The most interesting component of tile FUM module is represented by the matching algorithm which unifies the complex structures -- like "  ( SPECIF summoning_l ( SPECIF board_meeting_lmediobanca_special ) )" in occurrence c2 of Fig . 1 - - that , in the NKRL terminology , are called " structured arguments " . 
Structured arguments are built up in a principled way by making use of a specialised sublanguage which includes four expansion operators  , the " disjunctive operator " , the " distributive operator " , the " collective operator " , and the " attributive operator " ( SPECIFication )  , see ( Zaxli , 1996) for more details . 
The basic inference mechanisms call then be used as building blocks for implementing all sort of high level inference procedures  . An example is given by the " transformation rules  "  , see ( Ogonowski ,  1987) . 
NKRL's transformations deal with the problem of obtaining a plausible answer from a database of factual occurrences also in the absence of the explicitly requested in fommlion  , by searching semantic affinities between what is requested and what is really present in file base  . The fund , ' unental principle employed is then to " transform " tile original query into one or more different queries which -- unlike " trm is fonned " queries in a database context--are not strictly " equivalent " but only " semantically clos C ' to the original one  . 
With respect now to the NL/NKRL translation procedures  , they are based oil file wellknown principle of locating  , within the original texts , the syntactic and semantic indexes which can evoke the conceptual structures used to represent these texts  . Our contribution has consisted in tile setup of a rigorous algorithmic procedure  , centred around the two foUowing conceptual tools : ? The use of rules -- evoked by particular lexical items in the text exmnined and stored in proper conceptual dictionaries -- which take the form of generalised production rules  . The left hand side ( , antecedent Par 0 is always a syntactic on dition , expressed as a treelike structure , which must be unified with the results of tile general parse tree produced by the syntactic specialist of the translation system  . If the unification succeeds , tile right haud sides ( consequent parts ) , are used , e . g . , to generate wellformed templates Ctriggering rules "  )  . 
? The use , within file rules , of clever mechanisms to deal with the variables . For example , in the specific , " triggering " f , ' unily of NKRL rules , the antecedent variables ( a-variables ) , are first declared in tile syntactic ( antecedent ) part of the rules , and then " echoed " in tile consequent pro ' is , where they appear under the form of arguments and constraints associated with the roles of the activated templates  . 
The h " function is that of " capturing "-- during the match between file antecedents and the results of the syntactic specialist--NL or H_CLASS terms to be then used as specialisation term slot filling up the activated templates and building the final 
NKRL structures.
A detaile description of these tools can be found , e . g . , in ( Zarri , 1995); see also Azz (1995) . Their generality and their precise formal scmautics make it possible  , e . g . , tile quickly production of useful sets of new rules by simply duplicating and editing the existing ones  . 
We reproduce now , Fig .  5 , one of the several triggering rules to which tile lexical entry " call " -- pertaining to tile NL fragment examined at the beginning of Section  3  . -- contains a pointer , i . e . , one of tile rules corresponding to the meaning " to issue a call to convene "  . This rule allows the activation of a basic template  ( PRODUCE 4 . 12) giving rise , at a later stage , to the occurrence c2 of Fig . 1; the x symbols in Fig . 5 correspond to a-variables . 
We can remark that all the details of the full template are not actually stored in the consequent  , given that the HTEMP hierarchy is part of the " common share data stmct mes " used by the translator  . 
Only the par , ' uneters relating totile specific triggering rule  , ' u e , therefore , really stored . For exmnple , in Fig . 
5 , the list " eonstr " specialises the constraints on some on the v  , ' uiables xl ( human being/social_body ) and x4 ( planning_activity ) -- are unchanged with respect othe constraints permanently associated with the variables of template PRODUCFA  .  12 . 
trigger : " call " syntactic condition : ( s ( subj ( rip ( noun xl ) ) )   ( vcl ( voice active )   ( t = x2 = call ) )  ( dir-obj ( np ( modifiers ( adjs x31 ) )  ( noun x3 )   ( modifiers ( pp ( prep about I concerning I . . .   )   ( np ( noun x4 )   ( modifiers ( pp ( prep of I for . . . )  ( np ( noun x5 ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) parameters for the template : ( PRODUCE 4 . 12  ( roles subj x lobj ( SPECIF x2 ( SPECIF x3 x31 ) ) + topic ( spec if x4 x5 ) )  ( constr x3 assembly_ x31 quality_ x5 modification_procedures ) ) Figure 5 . An example of triggering rule . 
IIIIIIm
The " standard " prototype of an NL/NKRL translation system--e  . g . , the COMMON LISP translator ealised in the NOMOS project--is a relatively fast system which take  3 min 16s on SunSparc Stafion 1 wifll 16Mb to process ained ium-size text of 4 sentences and 150 word fonns ; it takes 1 min06s for the longest sentence . This pure conceptual parser , however , is not suitable , per se , for dealing directly with huge quantifies of unrestricted data  . In the COBALT project , we have then used a commercial product , TCS(Text Categorisation System , by Carnegie Group ) to preselect from a corpus of Reuters news stories those concerning in principle the chosen domain  ( financial news about merging , acquisitions , capital increases etc . ) . The candidate news items ( about 200 ) have then been translated into NKRI , formal , and examined through a query system in order to i  ) confirm their relevance ; ii ) exlract heir main content elements ( actors , circumstances , locations , dates , amounts of shares or money , etc . ) . Of the candidate news stories , 80% have been ( at least partly ) success fiflly translated ; " at least p , ' u'fly " metals that , somethnes , the translation was incomplete due , e . g . , to the difficulty of instantiating correctly some binding structures  . Other quantitative information about the COBALT results can be found in  ( Azzmn , 1995; Zarri ,  1995) . 
5. Conclusion
Possible , general advantages of NKRL with respecto other formalisms that also claim to be able to represent extensive chunks of semantics  , see , e . g . , ( Lehmann ,  1992) , are at least the following : ? The addition of a " taxonomy of events " to the traditional " taxonomy of concepts ": often  , " normal " ontologies elude in fact lhe problem of representing how the concepts interact with each other in the context of real-life events  . Recently , Park ( Park ,  1995 ) has prcsemed a language which provides a set of ontological primitives to be used to model the dynamic aspects  ( " events " ) of a domain , l lowever , Park's system seems to be a very " young " on c , and it lacks of tools for dcscribing essential narrative features like the relationships betwec n events  , the temporal information , etc . 
The presence of a catalogue of standard , basic templates , which can be considered as part and parcel of the definition of the language  . This implies that : i ) a system-builder does not have to create himself the slrnctural knowledge needed to describe the events proper to a  ( sufficiently ) large class of m ~ a five documents ; ii ) it becomes easier to secure the reproduction and the sharing of previous results  . 

Azzam , S .  (1995) . " Anaphors , PPs and Disambignation Process for ( ? once ptnal Analysis " . In Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  . Morgan Kaufinann , San Mateo ( CA) . 
Itwang , C . II . , and Schubert , I, . K .  (1993) . " Meeting the Interlocking Needs of LF -Computation  , Deindexing and Inference : An Organic Approach to General NI  , U" . 
In Proceedings of the 13th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  . Morgan
Kaufinann , San Mateo ( CA).
Nazarenko-Perrin , A .  (1992) . " Causal Ambiguity in Natural Langnage: Conceptual Representation f'parceque/because ' and ' puisqne/since '"  . In Proceedings of the 151h International Cot ( erence on Computational Linguistics ( COLIN (  ;  92) , Nantes , f Trance . 
l . ehmann , F . , editor (1992) . Semantic Networks in Artificial Intelligence . Pergamon Press , Oxford . 
Ogonowski , A .  (1987) . " MENTAT : An Intelligent and Cooperative Natural Lauguage DB Interface "  . In Proceedings of the 7th Avign on International Conference on Expert Systems and Their Applications  ( Avignon ' 87 )  , vol .  2 . EC2& Cie . , Paris . 
Park , B . J .  (1995) . " A Language for Ontologies Based on Objects and Events "  . In Proceedings of the IJCAI'95 Workshop on Basic Ontological Issues in Knowledge Sharing  . l ) epartmeut of Computer Science of the
University of Ottawa.
Zarri , G . P . (1992a ) . " Encoding the Temporal Characteristics of the Natural Language Descriptions of  ( Legal ) Situations " . In A . Martino , editor , Expert Systems in Law . Elsevier Science , Amsterdam . 
Zarri , G . P . (1992b ) . " The ' Descriptive ' Comt ~ neut of ally brid Knowledge Representation Language "  . In F . 
Lehmann , editor , Semantic Networks in Artificial
Intelligence . Pergamon Press , Oxford.
Zarri , G . P .  (1995) . " Knowledge Acquisition from Complex Narrative Texts Using the NKRL Technology "  . In B . R . Gaines and M . Musen , editors , Proceedings of the 9th Banff Knowledge Acquisition for Knowledge-Based Systems Workshop  , vol .  1 . 
l ) epartment of Computer Science of the University of

Zan'i , G . P . , and Gilardoni , L .  (1996) . " Structuring and Retrieval of the Complex Predicate Arguments Proper to the NKRL Conceptual I  , anguage " . In Proceedings of the Ninth International Symposiunt on Methodologies for Intelligent Systems  ( ISM1S'96 )  . Springer-Verlag,


