ATHEORYOFLEXICAL ACCESSINS PEECHPRODUCTION
Willem J.M . Levelt
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
P.O . Box 310, 6500AH Nijmegen , The Netherlands


The generation of words in speech involves a number of processing stages  . There is , first , a stage of conceptual preparation ; this is followed by stages of lexical selection , phonological encoding , phonetic encoding and articulation . In addition , the speaker monitors the output and , if necessary , self-corrects . Major parts of the theory have been computer modelled  . The paper concentrates on experimental reaction time evidence in support of the theory  . 
Central to the skill of speaking is our ability to select words that appropriately express our intentions  , to retrieve their syntactic and phonological properties and to compute the ultimate articulatory shape of these words in the context of the utterance as a whole  ( 2 )  . 
In the multistage theory of word production ( 3 ) the first stage , conceptual preparation , involves activating a lexical concept , given the intention . In picture naming , for instance , there is no " hardwired " link between the object depicted and the ultimate referential expression  . The same object can be veridically referred to by a multitude of differenterms  . The mediating process here is called perspective taking  . Its output is a lexical concept , i . e . , a concept for which there is a word in the speaker's mental lexicon  , in the computational model , lexical concepts figure in a semantic , spreading-activation et work . 
The lexical concept is input to a process called lexical selection  . Lexicat concept spread their information to lemmas in the ment a lexicon  . Lemmas are syntactic words . The probability that a lemma is selected within a minimal time intervalis its relative activation  ( following Luce " schoice rule )  . From this hazard rate expected retrieval times can be computed for various experimental conditions  . These predictions find solid experimental support  ( 5 )  . A select-ed lemmas preads its activation to the word's phonological code  . The speed of accessing this code is word -frequency dependent  ( 1 )  . 
During phonological encoding the segment alnd metrical features of the word's phonological code are " spelled out "  . The metrical structures of adjacent words may get combined to compute larger-size metrical units  , socalled phonological words . The spelled-out segments are incrementally ( " from left to right " ) attached to the metrical frame , on the fly creating the phonological word's syllabification  . 
In phonetic encoding an articulatory gesture is computed for each phonological syllable as it comes available  . This process probably involves a , syllabary , a store of high-frequent syllabic gestures (4) . Articulation can be initiated as soon as all of a word's syllabic gestures have been prepared  . 
A speaker self-monitors conceptual preparation , acoustic output , but also an intermediary level of representation , namely the syllabified phonological word (2 ,  6) . 
REFERENCES 1 . Jescheniak , J . & Levelt , W . J . M .  (1994) . Word frequency effects in production . Journal of
Fxperimental Psychology LMC , 824-843.
2 . Levelt , W . J . M .  (1989) . Speaking : From intention to articulation . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 
3 . Levelt , W . J . M .  (1994) . On the skill of speaking : How do we access words ? ICSLP  94  ,  2253-2258 . 
4 . Levelt , W . J . M . & Wheeld on . L .  (1994) . Do speakers have access to a mental syllabary ? Cognition  ,  50 ,  239-269 . 
5 . Roelofs , A .  (1992) . A spreading activation theory of lemma retrieval in speaking  . Cognition , 42, 107-142 . 
6 . Wheeldon , L . & Levelt , W . J . M .  (1995) . Monitoring the time course of phonological encoding  . Journal of
Memory and Language , 34, 311-334.
