Machine Translation Method Using Inductive Learning with 
Genetic Algorithms
Hiroshi Echizen-ya Kenji Araki Yoshio Momouchi
Department of Electronics and Information Engineering 
Faculty of Engineering , Hokkai-Gakuen University
S26-Jo , W11-Chome , Chuo-ku , Sapporo , 064 Japan
E-mail : echi , arak ? , momouchi ? eli , hokkai-s-u , ac . jp
Koji Tochinai
Department of Electronics and Information Engineering 
Faculty of Engineering , Hokkaido University
N13-Jo , W8-Chome , Kita-ku , Sapporo , 060 Japan
E-mail:tochinai?hudk , hokudai , ac.jp

We have proposed a method of machine translation , which acquires translation rules from translation examples using inductive learning  , and have evaluated the method . And we have confirmed that the method requires many translation examples  . To resolve this problem , we applied genetic algorithms to the method . In this paper , we describe our method with genetic algorithms and evaluated it by some experiments  . We confirmed that the accuracy rate of translation increased from  52  . 8% to 61 . 9% by applying genetic algorithms . 
1 Introduction
A practical and high quality method of machine translation is important for the internation aliza -tion of Japanese society  . Many studies have been carried out on machine translation  . The rule-based machine translation ( John and Harold ,  1992 ) could not deal adequately with various linguistic phenomena due to use only limited rules  . 
To resolve this problem , example-based machine translations ( Sato and Nagao , 1990; Akama and Ichikawa , 1979; Stanfill and Waltz , 1986; Sumita et al , 1993) have recently been proposed . However , these methods require many translation examples to realize a practical and high quality translation  . 
The goal of our research is to design a computer system with the same capability of language and knowledge acquisition as human beings  ( Araki and Momouchi , 1994; Araki et al ,  1995) . 
In this paper , we propose a method of machine translation using inductive learning with genetic algorithms  , The genetic algorithms ( Goldberg ,  1989 ) imitate tile evolution aW process which repeats generational replace n mnt to adapt to the environment  . The purposes are to establish various high quality translation rules from only a small amount of data  , and produce high quality translation results . The system is expected to continuously evolve to higher learning and translation capability  . 
In this paper , we describe a method of machine translation using inductive learning with genetic algorithms  , and show through the results of evaluation experiments hatgenetic algorithms are effective for the example-based machine translation  . 
2 Processes in the New Method 2 . 1 Out l ine of ti le T rans la t ion Method Figure  1 shows the outline of the new translation method . In this paper , we describe the process of English-Japanese translation as one possible application of this method  . First , a user inputs a source sentence in English . Second , in the translation process , the system produce several candidates of translation results using translation rules extracted in the learning process  . Third , the user proofreads the translated sentences . Fourth , in the feedback process , the system determines the fitness value and performs the selection process of translation rules  . In the learning process , new translation examples are automatically produced by cross over and mutation  , and various translation rules are extracted fl'om the translation examples by inductive learning  , A translation exam-pie includes the source sentence and a translated lt  , l_l : ~ Learning Proces2s \]/'~\[ Figure 1: Outline of the new I nethod of machine translation sentence  . There are two kinds of translation rules : those for sentences and those for words  . The former are called sentence translation rules and the latter word translation rules  . Rel ) etition of the abovementioned processes corresponds to generational replacement of the whole of system  , and the system continuously evolves to higher quality translation  . 
2.2 Chromosome and gene
As shown in Figure 2 , a chromosome corresponds to a translation example which consists of English and Japanese sentence  , and a gene corresponds to a word . In this paper , Japanese words are written illitalics . 
Translation example -- ~ Chromosome
A~\[I\]~NGLIS tI,JAPANESE ( HeisTaro . : Kare wataroo desu . )

Figure 2: Chromosonm and gene 2 . 3 Feedback Process First , the system evaluates the translation results using the translated sentences which have been proofread  . The system adds one to the con-cot translation fi ' equency when the translation results have the same character strings as the proof l'ead translation results  , and adds one to the erroneous translation frequency when the translation rules have different character strings to the proofread translation results  . Second , the system determines the fitness value of the rules used in translation using these correct and erroneous translation frequencies  . The fitness value is calculated by tilefitness fimction as follows : t  , tness value (%) =
The correct ranslation t'requcncy
The number of uses ?100 (1)
Third , tile system perform stile selection process using the fitness value  . The conditions of the selection process are that then unlber of uses is over  5 and the fitness value is under 25%  . These thresholds were determined by preliminary experiment  . 
2.4 Learning Process
In this process , new translation examples are alt-tomatically produced by cross over and mutation  . 
In cross over , two translation examples which have common parts are selected  . C , ross overl ) ositions are the conHlion parts ~ and one-t ) oiut cross overs for these two translation examples are performed  . 
These one-poillt cross overs use each conlll lOn part of tile English and Japanese sentences  . Figure 3 shows examples of cross over . In Figure 3 , " likes " is tile common part in the two English sentences  , and " wa " and " gasukidesu " are the COmln on parts in the two Japanese sentences  . Therefore , " likes " and " wa " are the cross over positions . One-point cross overs are performed , producing two translation examples . Next , one-point cross overs are per-tbrmed for " likes " and  "9a sukidesu " . However , the translation examples which are produced have the same character strings a stile source sentences  , and therefore , these translatio , examples are not inputted in totile dictionary . Translation exam-pies are randomly changed by nmtation  , at a rai , e of 2% . New translatio , examples are also produced by replacing the words of translation examples with those of translation rules  . 
The system extracts the common and different parts fl ' om the character strings of all translation examples  . These common and different parts are used as translation rules  . 
1021(1) Selection from translation examples
ENGLISHJAPANESE ( Helikestennis.
: Kare waten is ugasu kidesu .) ( Shelikestea.
: Kanojyowao chagasuki desu . ) (2) The cross over of the English sentence
He ~._ ~ He like stea.
Shelike ~/ \ tea . Shelikestennis.
(3) T\]~c-~-d ~ over ----~ the Japanese sentence
Karewa \/ tenisu gasuki desu.
Kanoj ~ owa ) ~ ochagasu kidesu.
Karewao chagasuki desu.
-*' Kanojyo waten is ugasuki desu.
(4) The translation examples produced
ENGLISHJAPANESE ( Helikestea.
: Katewao chagasuki kidesu.) ( Shelikestennis.
: Kanojyo waten is ugasuki desu.)
Figure 3: Cross over example (1) The input sentence
I am your teammate.
(2) The initial group
ENGLISIIJ APANESE(Iant@0 . : Watashiwa @ 0 desu . )(@0 am your@1 . :@0 wakimino@1 desu . )(@0 am@1 . :@0 wa@1 desu . ) (3) The translation rule by cross over
ENGLISItJAPANESE ( I am your@1 . : Watashi wakimino@I desu . ) (4) The evaluation of population
ENGLISHJ APANESE ( teammate : ehiimumeito )   ( I am your@1 . : Watashi wakimino@1 desu . ) ( I am your teammate . 
: Watashi wakimino ehiimumei to desu . ) (5) The translation result

Watashi waki mino chiimumei to desu.
Figure 4: Example of how the translation result is produced  2  . 5 Translation Process In this process , the system produce several candidates of translation results for a source sentence using extracted translation rules  . This process also uses genetic algorithm . The details of this process are as follows : 1 . Initial population The system selects the translation rules which can be applied to the source sentence  . The set of selected translation rules is called the initial population  . 
2. Determination of fitness value
The system calculates the fitness value of the translation rules by the fitness function  ( 1 )  . 
3. Selection process
The method of the selection process was described in the section on feedback process  . 
4, Crossover
The method of cross over was described in the section on learning process  . 
5. Mutation
The method of mutation was described in the section on learning process  . 
6. Evaluation of population
The system substitutes the words in the word translation rules for the variables in the sentence translation rules  . A translation rule includes a Japanese sentence or words corresponding to an English sentence or words  . The system produces a Japanese sentence for the English sentence when the English sentence has the same character string as the source sentence  . The Japanese sentence which is produced is the translation result  , Figure 4 shows an example of how the translation result is produced  . 
The system selects the correct translation result according to two criteria when there are several candidates of translation results : one criterion is the translation rule which has a higher fitness value and the other is the translation rule which is more similar to the source sentence  . 
3 Experiments for Performance
Evaluation 3 . 1 Method of Eva luat ion The effective translation results are grouped into two categories :  ( 1 ) The translation result has the same character string as the proofread translation result  . 
(2 ) The translation result has the same structure as the proofread translation result  . 
This means that the proofread translation result has the same character string as the translation result with substituted nouns or adjectives for the variables  . 
The ineffective translation results are grouped into three categories :  ( 3 ) The translation result has a different character string than the proofread translation result without unregistered words  . 
(4 ) The translation result has a different character string than the proofread translation result with unregistered words  . 
(5) A failed translation.
The system ranks ten candidates of translation results for the user  . The method for determining optimal translation results was described in Subsection  2  . 5 . 
3.2 Method of Experiments
In the experiments ,  1 , 810 translation examples were used as data , of which 1 , 010 examples were taken from a textbook ( Hasegawa et al ,  1991 ) for first grade junior high school students , and gorithms
Rank\]---R-~To-TT~~47 . 0% 61 . 9% Effective translation (3) 14 . 7% In cffectiv c translation (4) 17 . 1% 38 . 1%800 examples fl'om another textbook ( Ota et al ,  1991 ) for first grade junior high school students in Japan  . All of these translation examples were processed by the method outlined in Figure  1  . 
First ,  1 , 0 10 translation examples were used for the learning process  , and 800 translation exanl-ples were used for evaluation of the translation  . 
Experiments were carried out with and without genetic algorithms  . In the experiments without genetic algorithms , cross over , mutation and the selection process were not performed  . 
3.3 Results of Experiments
The accuracy rate of translation increased fronl 52  . 8% to 61 . 9% by applying genetic algorithms . 
Table 1 shows the results of experiments using genetic algorithms  . In this table , (1) ~(5) correspond to (1) ~(5) in Subsection 3 . 1 . Table 2 shows examples of translation results using genetic algorithms  . 
3.4 Discussion
In the experiments without genetic algorithms , high quality translation results coukl not be obtained due to the requirement of a very large amount of translation examples which are similar to other translatiml examples  . Therefore , we applied genetic algorithms to a method of machine translation using inductive learning to automatically produce ncw translation examples which are similar to other translation examples  . By using genetic algorithms , the accuracy rate of translation increased from 52  . 8% to 61 . 9% . 
4 Conclusion
In this paper , we proposed a new method of machine translation using inductive learning with genetic algorithms  . The results of evaluation experiments showed that the accuracy rate of translation increased from  52  . 8% to 61 . 9% by using genetic algorithms . Thus , we consider that this newmcthod can get the higher accuracy rate of translation and produce the higher quality translation results than that of other machine translations  . 
Tahlc 2: Examples of translation results using genetic algorithms 
Input sentences Translation results
ENGLI 811 JAP ANESE
He is three year sold . Karc was an said csu.
ENGLISIIJ APANESE
Mike , is this your Maiku , kochira wakimino anibrother ? desuka ?
ENGLIS tIJAPANESE
We arc playing baseball . ( ~0 wayakyuuoshile imasu . 
ENGLISItJAPANESE
Yunfispeaks English @0 wa to temo joouz unieig overy well . oh an asu . 

W . John Hutchins and Harold L . Somers . 1992.
An Introduction to Machine Translation . ACA-
DEMICPRESS . ( London)
Sato , S . and Nagao , M .  1990 . Toward Memory-based Translation . In Proceedings of the Col-ing'90 , pages 247-252 , Helsinki , Finland , August . 
Akama , K . amlehikawa , A .  1979 . A Basic Model for Learning Systems . Ill Proceedings of IJCAI-79 , pages 46 , Tokyo , Japan , August . 
Stanfill C . and Waltz D .  1986 . Toward MemoryBased Reasoning . Communications of the
ACM , Vol . 29, No . 12, pages 1213-1228.
Sumita , E . , Oi , K . , Furuse , O, . Iida , H . , Higuchi , T . , Takahashi , N . and Kitano , H . 
1993 . Example-Based Machine Translation on Massively Parallel Processors  . In Proceedings of IJCAI-g3 , pages 1283-1288 , Chambery , 
France , August-Sept enlbcr.
Araki , K . and Momouchi , Y .  1994 . Concept Learning from Japanese Copular Sentences using Heuristics  . World Scientific , In Proceedings of AI'94 , pages 466-473 , Armidale , New South
Wales , Australia , November.
Araki , K ., Momouchi , Y . and Tochinai , K.
1995 . Evaluation for Adaptability of Kana-Kanji Translation of Non-Segmented Japanese Kana Sentences using Inductive Learning  . In Proceedings of PACLING--LI , pages 17 , Bris-bane , Australia , April . 
Goldberg , D . E .  1989 . Genetic Algorithms in Scarch , Optimization , and Machine Learning . 
Addison-Wesley . ( Massachusetts )
Hasegawa , K . et al , \]991 . One World English Course 1 New Edition . Kyoiku Shuppan . 

Ota , A . et al , 1991 . New Horizon English Course 1 . Tokyo Shoseki . ( Tokyo ) . 

