Lexical Information for Determining Japanese
Unbounded Dependency
Shinichiro KAMEI , Kazunori MURAKI and Shin'ichi DOI
Information Teclmology Research Laboratories , NEC Corporation
4-1-1 Miyazaki , Miyamae-ku , Kawasaki216 , JAPANkamei , k-muraki , doi@hum , cl . nec . co . jp
Abstract
This paper presents a practical method for a global structure analyzing Mgorithm of Japanese long sentences with lexical information  , a method which we call Lexical Discourse Grammar ( LDG )  . This method assumes that . Japanese function words , such as conjunctive particles ( postpositions ) located at the end of each clause , have modality and suggest global structures of Japanese long sentences in cooperation with modality within predicates or auxiliary verbs  . LDG classifies the encapsulating powers of function words into six levels  , and modality in predicates into four types . LDG presumes tile inter-clausal dependency within Japanese sentences prior to syntactic and semantic analyses  , by utilizing the differences of the encapsulating powers each Japanese function word has  , and by utilizing modification preference between function words and predicates that reflects consistency of modality in them  . In order to confirm the encapsulation power of Japanese function words  , we analyzed the speech utterances of a male announcer and found the correlation between a particle'sencapsulating power and the pause length inserted after the clause with a conjunctive particle  . 
1 Introduction
When analyzing long sentences with two or more predicates  ( i . e . compound and complex sentences ) , it is difficult to grasp the proper structure of sentences having a largen mnber of possible dependency  ( modifier-modife e relation ) structures . This difficulty is more marked in Japanese than in English  , since there are more syntactically ambiguous structures in Japanese  . 
Tile Japanese language has few syntactic indicators for dividing sentences into phrases or clauses  , unlike English with its relative pronouns and subordinate conjunctions  . One of the most critical features of Japanese is that the difference between a phra~se and a clause is not cleat '  . Even subjects or other obligatory elements of clauses are omitted very often when they aye indicated by contexts  . In addition , the Japanese language does not have any parts of speech to clearly indicate either the beginning or end of a phrase or a clause  . 
Another critical feature is that the Japanese language is an almost pure Head-final language  , i . e . , predicates and function words to signify the sentence structure appear at the end of the clause or sentence  . This means that it is syntactically possible for all phrases or clauses that can modit  ) predicates to modify all other phrases or clauses that appear in the latter part of long sentences  . 
These syntactic haracteristics of the Japanese language make it difficult to determine the dependency  ( modification ) structure of hmg sentences . Simple parsing of Japanese long sentences inevitably produces a huge number of possible modification structures  . A conventional bottom-u parsing method can reduce ambiguity in modification by local information in tim surface structure  . However , this inclines toward an improper output , since the locally highest likelihood is sometimes low on the whole  . 
To overcome this problem , several methods to predict the global structure of long sentences have been proposed  . One is a topdown parsing method by matching the input sentence and the domain-specific patterns  ( Furuse et al ,  1992) . Improvements made by other researchers enabled this method to parse irregular  , incomplete and multiple x patterns , by describing the domain-dependent paterns in the form of grammar  ( Doi , Muraki , et M . , 1993) . 
Another method employs global structure presumption to divide a sentence into clauses by utilizing genera lexical information  . It predicts the sentence structure prior to syntactic analysis only by utilizing domain -independent lexical information such as conjunctive particles  , parallel expressions , theme transition , etc . ( Mizuno et al , 1990; Kurohashi et al , 1992) . 
Lexical Discourse Grammar ( LDG ) is one of the approaches with which a global structure of a long sentence is presumed by focusing on function words  ( Kamei et al 1986 ; Doi et al ,  1991) . LDG assumes that Japanese function words , such as conjunctive par-tides ( postpositions ) located at the end of each clause , convey modMity , or proposition alttitude , and suggest global structures of Japanese long sentences in cooperation with modality in predicates  , especially within i ) endency within Japanese sentences prior to syntactic and semantical Lalyses by utilizing tilt  ; dif Drences of the encapsulating powers each , \] a pai Lese function word has , and by utilizing modification preference-between function words and predicates that reflects consistency  ( if l nodality reading or proposition a lattitude inte  , r pre-tation . 
LDG is effective in reducing the syntactic ambiguities  , and it himal re ~ My been applied to a machine translation system  . I lowever , it has not claritied the level of tile encapsulation powers of Japanese flint : - tion words or tile relation between modality and level  . 
II ence we refined the concept of LDG , lmrticularly tile conjunction level of function words  , and explain the outline of there filled LDG in tilts paper  . First , we present heen capsulation power of Japanese function words  , which are classified into six levels . Second , we state moditication l ) refi3renee of , a panese conjunctiw ' . 
particles that reflects modality within them . Filmlly , we present evidence of tile h ; vels of a apln Lese function words . We think that tile h ; vels of clauses produce prosodic infbrmation , especially tlw location and h;ngth of pauses , which are influenced by tile sentence 51obal struchn'e . We atnalyzed the speech utterances of a professional new  , ~ announcer ( male ) and fonnda correla , tion between a particle'sencapsulating power and tile pause hmgt  ; hinser tedai'terdm clause with a conjunctiw ; i ~ a rich ;  . 
2 Lexical Discourse Grammar 2 . 1 Levels of Conjunctive Particles in
Japanese \] Jr , Jap ; ~n( ; se Olnl ) lexor compound SelL tell Ces ~ Sll ) ( ) r-dinate clauses have several dependency levels relative to the main clause  . Conjunctive particles , which are located at dmend of clauses and which link them  , are classified according to the elemeni ; s that the clause can contain , or to the correh ~ tion between clauses . 
Se , et l~ef bllowing examples with conjunctive pard - cles "  , , ode "(? "?) ~ t , ,(t " nagara "( ~ , ~7>"6) (* is added to meaningless sentences ) . 
m '), . oao6She ) - . e . ,(s ECT ) t , ~suke ( Help ) --ta ( PAST ) -node ( Because ) seikou ( succeed ) -shita ( PAST )  . 
Ite succeeded becauses he helped him.
K , . re(HJ--w,(OeIC)kaet(Rot.m)-t ~
He retunm d while lie was talking.
3)* ~ ~ , to ~ i  ~ r , " b*~~~')i ~ o ?: , , ka lojo(She)-ga(Sm3 . UC'r ) hanashi(Ta110-,,~gara(While)a(mSa') . 
He returned while she was talking.
warai ( Smile ) -nagara ( While ) tazune ( Ask ) - t  ~ ( PAST ) -node ( Becavse ) watad ( 1 ) -- wa ( TOPIC ) kot ~ e ( Answe ~9-ta ( PAST )  . 
i answered as lie asked while tiew as smiling.
4SU13 JEC') famine(Ask ) t~(l'AST)-node ( ibca , ,se )  wa , 'ai(S , * li4 , ,ag , r , (Wm , Owatasi ( . l)w,ffTOPKO kotae(Answel9 ta(l"AST ) . 
I answered while i was smiling as lie asked.
A clatuse with the conjunctive p ~ Lrticle to express ~ reason ' " node " too'el can contaii  , ~subjective noun phrase and an auxiliary verb of past tense " t ~ d'  ( 7: )  , while a clanse with the particle indicating attendant action % agara "  ( '& ~/ d 6 ) cannot , as shown in 1) 3) . 
Sentence 4 ) in comparison with 5 ) shows that a clause with " node " ( (/ ) (? ) can subordinate at clause , with " nag~md '()7') ~6) , but the reverse is impossible . In these two selt ~ , 011 ( ; eS , brackets show subordina U : clauses . 
Consequently , " nagara "()'/26) is ranked at a lower h , velthan " nodr " ( O-0") . 
in I , DG , conjunction levels of clauses are divided into six classiiic ~ tions according to the elements the clause clm contain  , a , slisted in Table 1 . These levels construct ~ thierarchy , i . e . , at lower level clause caltlctofi subordinate a higher level one  . The levels also represent the encapsulating powers of each Japanese  . flt IlC-tion words located attile end of the clauses  . Beside sem0unctiw ' partMes , Japanese conjunction ouns ( u : relative nouns are also classiiied avd assign edit level  . 
ltere , Japanese conjunction IL tltll LS , such as " toki " ( lt ~/::: when ) are nouns that can often bensed just like COL > juncdvel ~ articles when alley are attached at the end of clause  . Japanese relative not ln 8 , such as " lnae " ( \] ii ' j :: before ) are another type of nouns that play roles sim-il ; ~ r to those of conjunctions in English when they are moditied by predicative phrases or clauses  . 
2 . 2 Modality in Conjunctive Particles and Modification Preferences The conjunction lewis we introduced above reduce the syntactic ambiguities of long sentences  . However , in order to select the most reliables truchtreof sentences  , we use another important discourse feature tile conjunctive pt ~ rticles have  , i . e . , mod Mity . 
LDG assumes Japanese function words have moda\] -it yor ~ proposid on a lattitudes ' ~ md suggest global  , ~tructures of Japanese hmg sentences in cooperation with modality within ~ mxiliary verbs  . Wcms sll Inedu ~ t the same kind of modality in a conjunctive particle antilevels 






Definition of level Example of function words can contain every element cannot contain sentential particles cannot contain conclusive modal cannot contain probable modal " to "  ( ~= that ( quotation ) ) " k~ra " ( ~6= because )  , " node " (69~= because) , " keredomo " ( ~: ~ E "%= but ) " nara " ( t ~? 6= if )  , " hoka "( ~ N = besides) , " to "( a = when ) , " baai"(t ~@= in case of ) , " toki "("#= when ) " mae "(~= before) , " ato " ( ~a = after ) cannot contain " to tomoni " ( ~& ~ K -= as )  , " tame " ( ?: ~5= because ) tense expressions " to doujini " ( ~ ~1~#~-= at the same time ) cannot contain " nagara " ( re ~" 6= while )  , " tsutsu " ( oo = while ) , particle " ga "( ; O ~' ) " kotonaku " ( t ~ t ? <= without ) highert lower a predicate ( or an auxiliary verb ) correspond to each other . From the parsing viewpoint , this suggests that each conjunctive particle has modification preference with certain predicates or auxiliary verbs  . 
From the viewpoint of modality , there are four predicate types in Japanese ;   ( 1 ) Auxiliary verbs of the first-type modality ( conjecture tc . ) ,   ( 2 ) Auxiliary verbs of the second-type modality ( necessity etc . ) , (3) Copula , and ( 4 ) Plain ( present and past tense ) forms of Verbs . 
Here , first-type modality includes conjecture , such as " darou " ( f2"7~" ) ) which corresponds to ' may , '' can , '' may be , ' and ' possibly ' in English auxiliary verbs , adverbs , and adjectives . Second-type modality includes necessity , such as " nake reba-naranai " ( ret ~ fct:ft36 to ? u , ) and " ta-hou-ga-yoi" ( t : t ! " ) ~3:u ~ ) which correspond to ' have to ' or ' must , ' and ' had better , '' should , ' or ' preferably ' in English . The Japanese Copula " da " ( ? Z ) or " desu " ( ~? ' Y ) means definition or speaker's judgment with confidence  . Phdn forms of verbs are the present or past tense forms of verbs without any modal auxiliary verbs  . These forms do not have any modal morpheme , but when they which appear at the end of the sentence and are followed by a period they CAN convey modality  , that is , attitudes or intentions of the subject or speaker  . Plain forms of verbs in a relative clause which modify a nominal phrase do not have such modMity  . 
LDG assumes that each conjunctive particle has a preference in modifying predicates or auxiliary verbs with consistent modMity  . There are six levels of modality in conjunctive particles  , and there are four types of modality in predicates  , as mentioned above . A subordinate clause with modality modifies a consistent modality predicate type  . The following figure illustrates the modality consistency between particles and auxiliary verbs in Japanese sentences  . 
Clause + particle
Modality Clause + auxiliary verb

Take the Japanese conjunction oun " toki " ( 1 ~= when , if ) for example . This word corresponds to either the English conjunction ' when ' with neutral reading or ' if ' with conjecture modality  . When the word " toki " is used as the ' if ' reading  , this word modifies a clause in which the modality is expressed  . In most cases , auxiliary verbs such as " darou "(? Z , 5") = may , may be ) or " ta-hou-ga-yoi" ( t ~ It 57 ~3 : ~= had better , should , preferably ) express the modality of the modifee clause . The Japanese language has some words that indicate or emphasize the fact that the word " toki " is being used as the " if " reading  . One of them is the adverb " moshi " ( ~ oL ) that indicates a supposition reading is applicable  . This adverb is never used by itself and always modifies conjunctive forms such as " toki  , " " nara , "" to , " and so on , and selects or emphasizes the supposition reading of the conjunctive forms  . Another such word is the particle " w ?'(~: t ) , which is usually used as a topic marker for a sentence  . When " wa " is attached to " toki , " that is , in the form of " toki-wa , " the supposition reading is enhanced . This tendency is strengthened by the use of comma after the phrase " toki-wa  . " The phrase " toki-w ?' tends to be used to modify phrases with auxiliary verbs of modality  . 
When this phrase with modality modifies a plain form of a verb with a period at the end of the sentence  , the readers recognize that the plain form of the verb contains a kind of modality  , such as the subject's or speaker's intention . In other words , modality information of the subordinate clauses is attached to the plain form of the main verb  . The following figure illustrates this interpreting mechanism  . 
3 12 \[ Input Sentence Reader \ [ Morphological Analysis\[Discourse Structure Reference\[ Discourse Structure Assumption <=> ~ ictionary I 
Discourse Form Preservation \ [
Discourse Structure Analysis\[Synta . ctic & Sem~mtic Analysis
Figure 1 Analysis based on LDG ( Modality --

In contrast , when a subordinate clause does not have modality explicitly and modifies a clause with modality  , the readers interpre the subordinate clause as that with a kind of modality such as conjecture  . The following figure illustrates this situation . 
? ( Modality ) Clause + particle

The modality coincidence described in this section is the base for analyzing Japanese long sentences  . The . Japanese language has few syntactic indicators to show the segments of sentences  , but is rich in semantic indicators which suggest sentence structure  . The sem , ~n-tic indicators are the modalities that a wide range of parts of speech have  . Conjunctive particles , adverbs , and even plain forms of verbs can have modMity in the Japanese btnguage  . The modality structure is the key to comprehending Japanese long sentences  . 
2 . 3 Japanese Sentence Structure Pre-sumption We assume that the modality structure  ( : anm Mnly be detected by lexical intbrmation . Based on this assumption , LDG presumes the sentence structure before syntactic and semantic analyses on the ba~sis of previously collected lexical information that characterizes the lexical discourse  . 
Figure 1 shows the configuration of our Japanese long sentence analyzer based on LDG  . Input sentences are first analyzed morphologically  . The part ' Discourse Structure Analysis ' in Fig . 1 then presumes the sentence structure , before syntactic and semantic analysis . 
ttere , ' Discourse ' means an inner-sentence on gruence in Japanese long sentences thttt contain two or more predicates  . 
In order to reduce the huge number of syntactic structures of Japanese hmg sentences and give priorities to each possible structure  , the analyzing method based on LDG uses global modality structure focusing on lexic ~ tl information  . 
First , the Discourse Structure Reference module reduces the number of possible syntactic structures  , using the level of conjunctive particles described in the previou section  . After that , the Discourse Structure Assumption module gives priorities to each possible syntactic structure  , using the modification prefl ; rence based on modality . 
3 An Application of LDG 3 . 1 Pause Control with LDG The level of conjunctive particles  , which indicates the structure of the Japanese long sentences  , is the most important feature of LDG . In this section we apply the level to another linguistic phenomenml in order to  ( ' on firm the validity of this model . 
The sentence structure influences a wide range of linguistic phenomena  . One example is prosodic information ( Dorffner et al , 1990; Iwata et al , 1990; Kaiki et al , 1990; Sakai et al ,  1990) . If the correct sentence structure is acquired for each input sentence  , prosodic information can be accurately calculated  . As yet , even the most up-to-date , advanced systems have not achieved the analysis in the deep structure  , therefore sentence structure presumption in the surface structure is essentiM for a robust prosodic control system  . 
LDG meets this requirement since it presumes the sentence structure by means of function words occurring on the surface  ( Doi , Kamei , et al ,  1993) . Hereafter , we propose the prosodicontrol system based on LDG  . 
The presumption function ibr sentence structure ( lexical discourse ) by LDG is applied to preprocessing
Conjunction Levels
With a comma Without a comma
Number of cases
LEV .1(" gW',"ka,'a ", % ode ", etc.)
Number of cases ( with/without a pause )
LEV '.0("~ o ", " ~ te ", etc .)0-46 1.611 (11/0)
LEV : 2 (" ha ', " ~ o',"tara ", ete.)

LEV .4(" tame ", temo ", % o do ', etc.)
LEV .5(" tsutsu ", " naga ~' a ", " zuni ", etc.)
Verbs in adverbial form
Verbs in adverbial form +" te "(' Q
Adjectives in advei ' biklform
Adjectives in adverbial fbrm + " re "
Predicative auxiliary verb " da "(?2")
Average pause length\[msec\]..
1 ( 1/ 0) 4 (4 /0 ) 11 (11/ 0) 437 . 0 2 ( 2/ 0) 277 . 5 5 ( 5/ 0! 421 . 5 "4 ( 4/ 0) 293 . 8 40 (40/ 0) 468 . 814 (12/2) 331,83 (3/o ) 542 . 5 410 . 0 603 . 1 ( with/without a pauae ) 7('1/6)
Avel ' age pause length\[m see\]7 . 9 3 ( 3/ 0) 563 . 3 13 (11/ 2) 243 . 8 1 (0 /1 ) 0 . 0 8 ( 6/ 2) 201 . 65(2/a ) 12 o . o6 ( G/o ) 252 . 1 30 (15/15) 127 . 4  . . . . i9 . (8/i1) 89 . 2 6 ( 4/ 2) 56 . 7 3 (3 /  . 0 ) 359 . 2 ahead of speech synthesis , in a text-to-speech system . 
It can presume the global sentence structure through lexical information without any analysis in the deep struct m'e  . It is also possible to consider the pause length inserted after each clause in relation to the lex ~ical information in LDG  . In other words , pauses are more fl'equently inserted after the clause of the higher conjunction levels than those of the lower levels  . Corn sequently , the pause length and location can be more efficiently controlled with the LDG conjunction levels  . 
To develop a text-to-speech on version system with LDG  , it is necessary to prepare the LDG conjunction level information of a largen mnber of conjunct equivalents such as conjunctive particles  . Statistical data should also be collected fi'om human speech and reading  , in regard to the correlations between pause length and the LDG conjunction levels  . This substantial data is added to the lexical information to be used for speech synthesis in cooperation with pronunciation and accent  . 
3.2 Data Analysis
To confirm the correlation between the conjunction level and the pause length  , we have analyzed speech data spoken by a professional news announcer  ( male )  , reading newspapers and magazines at a regular speed  . 
Wc extracted conjunctive particles and verbs , auxiliary verbs and adjectives in adverbial form from the speech data  , and classified these words by the LDG conjunction level  . The average pause length for each level was calculated for two separate cases  ; words preceding a comma and words without a comma  . See Figure 2 and
Table 2.
For words without a cormn a ( marked with white bars in Fig .  2) , the result shows that the higher the conjunction level is  , the longer the average pause length is ( except for LEV . 0, which is a particle for quotation ) . 
This tendency basically does not depend on whether or not a comma exists after the words  . However , for words with a comma ( marked with black bars in Fig . 2) pause length of Lev . 3 is shorter than that of Lev .  4 . 
We suppose that the reason for this phenomenon is that a comma adds modality to the words and length-ens the pauses  , as described in the previous section . 
Taking the comma effect into consideration , we can conclude that there is a solid correlation between the LDG conjunction level and the pause length  . 
LEV . 0  ( " to " ( & ) and " tte " ( o'C ) functioning in a similar way as quotation marks )  , however , requires a careful observation . This conjunction level , the highest rank , can contain every element , even an independent sentence . In this case , the relation between the conjunctive particle and its preceding clause is so weak that a pause tends to be inserted BEFORE the conjunctive particle  , not after it . Therefore , in the present data , a pause was inserted after the particle in only one case out of seven  . 

LEV . I



LEV . ~ adv.
adv , +' re . . . . . . . . . I
III
Iii "--'----1

It . . . . . .
0  i00   200   300   400   500   600 \[ msec\]r'n : without a comma . , , ,: with a comma
Figure 2 Average Pause Length Diagram
In Table 1 , no level is assigned to two oftile most tbrm , and verbs and auxiliary verbs in tile same form with a conjunctive particle " te "  ( -C )  . These groups are difficult to allocate to a single level  , as dmy are used in expressing many factors such its parataxis  , cause , means ~ attendant circumstances , and because they vary semantically and syntactically  . However , in reference to the pause length data , the adverbial verbs ill the former group might fall into LEV  . 1 or LEV . 2 , while those in the latter group with " te " ( -\[ ) might full into LEV . 4 or LEV . 5 . Conventionally , these two groups ; are often treated as one " adverbial form " , al-dlough many functional diiferences have been pointed out between them  . Our data supports the difference with respect o the pause length  . There are identical tendenci ~ between two adw ; r bial forms of adjectives : ("- k , F ' ( ~// ) and "-kute " ( ~ a 9= ) ) and two adverbial forms of pseudo adjectives : ( "- ni " ( ~-=- ) and "- de " ( r ) ) . 
4 Concluding Remarks
We have proposed a practical method for a global structure an Myzing algorithm of Japanese long sentences with lexical information  ( Lexical Discourse Grammar : LDG )  . This model assumes that Japanese conjunctive particles convey modality  , and modality structure can basically be detected by lexical information  . We assign a ~ conjunction level ' to each conjunctive particle and reduce the number of possible syntactic structures of Japanese long sentences  . In addition , we assume that all conjunctive particles have a modification preference according to their modality  . This preference assigns priorities to the possible structures of tile sentences  . 
We applied LDG to a prosodic information control method in a Japanese text-to-speech on version system to confirm the conjunction level experimentally  . This method controls pause location and length in speech synthesis with the conjunction level in LDG  , using only lexical information with no need fi~r syntactic analysis  . Even so , it can tunetile pause length more finely than methods without sentence structure presumption  . 
An Myzing speech data , we confirmed a correlation between the level of a function word and the length of a pause inserted ai ' ~ er that word  . We are now in the process of developing a speech synthesis ystem with this method  , by defining the default pause length for each conjunction level  . In future research , LDG will also be applied to other prosodic information  ( rhythm and intonation )  . 
There can be little doubt that LDG will be more etfective when two or nmre conjunct equivalents of dif-ferent levels appear in one sentence  , since the LDG conjunction levels are closely related to the inter-clausal dependency  . Unfortur ~ atelythere were few such cases in the data used in this paper  . In future work , we will collect such data to proove this hypothesis  , in so doing will refine our method to improve its ability to analyze long Japanese sentences  . 
References\[1\]S . Doi , K . Muraki and S . Kamei .  1991 . Lexical Discom'se Grammar and its Application for Decision of Global Dependency  ( II )  . IEICN Technical R . epor%
NLC91-29(PRUgl-64) . ( in Japanese )\[2\] S . Doi , K . Muraki , S . Kamei , and K . Yamabana . 
1993 . Long Sentence Analysis by Dmnaln-Specific Pattern Grammar  . Ill Proceedings of EACL g3 . 
\[3\] S . Doi , S . Kamei , K . Muraki , Y . Mitome , and K . I wata .  1993 . Prosodic Information Control by Lexical Discourse Grammar  . In Proceedings SIG-SLUD of the JSAI , SIG-SLUD-9301-4 . ( in
Japanese )\[4\] G . Dorffner , E . Buchberger and M . Kommenda . 
1990 . Integrating Stress and Intonation into a Concept -to-Speech System  . In Proceedings of COL-
ING 90, 1 . 990\[5\]O . Furuse and H . Iida .  1992 . An Example-Based Medlod for Transfer-Driven machine translation  . In
Proceedings of TMI'92, pp . 139-150.
\[6\]K . Iwata , Y . Mitome and T . Watanabe .  1990 . 
Pause Rule for Japanese Text-to-speech Conversion Using Pause Insertion Probability  . In Proceedings of
IUSLP , 2, pp . 837-840.
\[7\] N . Kaiki and Y . Sagisaka .  1990 . Analysis of Pause Duration based on Local Phrase Structure  . IEICE Technical Report , SP91-130 . ( in Japanese )\[8\] S . Kamei and K . Muraki .  1986 . Proposal of Lexical Discourse Grammar . IEICE Technical Report,
NLC86-7 . ( ill Japanese )\[9\] S . Kurohashi and M . Nagao .  1992 . Dynamic Pro-tramming Method for Analyzing Conjunctive Structures in Japanese  . In Proceedings of COLING g ?, pp . 170--176 . 
\[10\]J . Mizuno and J . Nakagaki .  1990 . A Study for three Structures of Japanese Sentence  . IPSJ SIG
Notes , 9(I-NL-764 . ( in Japanese )\[11\]S . Sakai and K . Muraki .  1990 . From Interlin-guato Speech : Generating Prosodic Information from Conceptual Representation  . I Proceedings of
ICASSPgO , S6a.10.

