Language-Specific Mappings from Semantics to Syntax 
Judy Delin
Department of English Studies
University of Stirling
Stirling FK94 LAU.K.
jIdl~stir.ac.uk
Donia R . Scott

University of Brighton
Mithras Annexe
Lewes Road
Brighton BN24 AT , U.K.
drs2@itri , bton.ac.uk
Anthony Hartley

University of Brighton
Mithras Annexe
Lewes Road
Brighton BN24 AT , U.K.
afh ~ itri.bton.ac.uk

We . present a study of the mappings
from semantic content to syntactic ex-
pression with the aim of isolating the
precise locus and role of pragmatic infor-
mation in the generation process , l~om
a corpus of English , French , and Por-
tuguese instructions for consumer prod-
ucts , we demonstrate the range of ex-
pressions of two semantic relations , GEN-
EI~ATION and ENABLEMENT ( Goldman,
1970) in each language , and show how
the available choices are constrained syntactically  , semantically , and pragmatically . The study reveals how multilin-gumNLG can be informed by language-specific principles for syntactic hoice  . 
1 Introduction
We report here on work which addresses the message -to-syntax mapping in the context of automatic generation of instructional texts the kinds of texts found in the procedural parts of manuMs or information leaflets  , pharmaceutic M products . Instructional texts do not simply consist of lists of imperatives : instructions may also describe  , eulogise , inform and explain . Generating good-quality draft instructions requires a detailed specification of how to map from semantic representations of the task actions onto a wide range of linguistic expressions  . 
Our corpus is composed of naturally-occurring instructions in the three languages of study  . Our overall approach is to obtain different -language drafts that are congruenl with the technical content embodied in the task to be performed  ( and with other relevant information about the task  )  . 
A satisfactory level of congruence requires the use of syntactic and pragmatic rules appropriate to each target language  , mat ) pingfi ' om the semantics to appropriate x pression in a way that is frec from influence from any source language  1  . We 1See ( Hartley and Paris ,  1995 ) for discussion of the begin the generation process with a plan-based model of the underlying task In our study  , we have looked at two specific procedur M relations that can hold between pairs of actions in a task  , identified by the philosopher Alvin Goldman as the relations of GENEP~-ATION and ENABLEMENT  ( Goldman ,  1970 ) relations which have the advantage of being tbr -mally specified  ( see e . g . ( Pollack , 1986; Balkanski ,  1993)) , and need to be expressed regularly within instructional texts  . In section 2 , we give a brief definition of generation and enablement  , beforegoing on in section 3 to describe how the two relations are realised in the corpus of Portuguese  , 
English , and French instructions.
2 The Semantic Relations
Generation and enablement are relations that can hold between pairs of states  , events , processes , or actions . A simple test of generation holding between action pairs is whether it can be said that by performing one of the actions  ( a ) under appropriate conditions , the other (/9) will automatic Mlyoccur ( Pollack ,  1986) . If so , it can be said that c , generates /) . The two actions must be performed , or perceived to be performed , by the same human agent , and the two actions must be asymmetric ( i . e . if a generates fl , then fl cannot generate a ) . 
Simple examples of generation are ~ follows : 3 ( 1 ) He atgently to soften the coating . 
(2 ) Dial the numbers of the Mercury author is a-tion code by pressing the appropriate numbers on the keypad  . 
In example 1 , the action of heating gently ha~s the effect of softening the coating  . In example 2 , advantages of this approach over the inherent limitations of a translation-based approach to producing multilinguM instructions  . 
2See ( Paris et al ,  1995 ) for a discussion of the modelling of domain knowledge for instructions in the coil-text of a supportool for frafting instructional texts  . 
3 So far , we have concentrated on examples of these semantic relations that do not cross sentence boundaries  . 
2 92 pressing the correct keyp ad numbers has the auto -marie effect of dialing the numbers of the Mercury authorisation code  . In each case , by performing the ? taction ( or set of actions )  , the user has automatically performed the fl action  . Note that the two actions can bcpresented in either order : generati NG first  , or generatED first . 
q'he term cnablemeut is commonly used to refer to the procedural relation between preconditions and actions  . It obtains between two actions where the execution of the first brings about a set of conditions that are necessary  , but not necessarily suJJicienl for the subsequent performance of the second  ( Pollack ,  1986) . This is different from the generation (' rose , since enablement requires the further intervention of an agent-and it need not be the same agent-to bring about the fleventuality  . 
(3) (? lose cover and test a . s recornmended in ' Op-eration ' section . 
(4) l ) brprolonged viewing , tt le slide may be pushed downwards and then backwards untilitlocks under the ledges at each end of the slot  . 
Example 3 , taken from the instructions for a house holds moke alarm  , shows the enabliNG action appear il , gtirst : closing the cover enables testing to take place  , but does not automatically result in a test . Example 4 , front the instructions for a home photographic slide viewer  , presents the enabl ED action ~ prolonged viewing - first  , and describes totile user what must be done to facilitate it  . 
These two relations have been formalised by Pollack  ( 1986 ) and Balkanski ( 1993 ) for the purposes of plan recognition , and can be represented in a plan formalism that is a simple extension of STR ll  ) S-styled operators developed by Fikes ( 1971 ) and expanded in the NOAII system ( Sacer-doti ,  1977) . \ [ I er e , we summarise the two relations in the form of the following planning statements :  , ,  ( ~ generates fliff c ~ is the body of a plane whose goal is ft  . 
, , oe enables flifce is a precondition of a plan e  and/3 is the goal of plane , or iff l is the body of e and t ~ is a precond it km  of/3  . 
In order to generate instructions clearly , it must be obvious which , if either of the two relations is intended at any given point : e on flmion of one with the other will lead to inadequte  , incomplete , or even dangerous execution of the t~k described . 
3 From Semantics to Syntax
I low , then , are generation and enablement realised in the three languages of study ? In what follows  , we look at the syntactic resources that are used in each language to convey the two parts of the two relations  , and look attile constraints on tile ordering of tile two parts  ; then , at what discourse markers play a role in further ensuring the clarity of the relation intended  , and finally show how different rhetorical interpretations result from these choices  . Together , these factors explain a significant amount of the crosslinguistic w triation that occurs within the instruction sub-language  , in what follows , however , it is not our intention to suggest an ordering t br the set of de ~ cisions that need to be made for generation : so far  , our research suggests a complex interaction of factors is involved in choice of expression  , and timther research is required to establish their relative priorities in the decision making process  . 
Our corpora for the study consisted of 65 exam-pies of generation , and 65 examples of enablement for each of the three languages of study  .  4 3 . 1Syntacti ( . Resources The distribution of expressions among the two component stED and ING  ) of the generation relation for Portuguese is shown in figure  1  '~ . 
hdinitive ~ ~ I--27 V501-3-I--'9~-~47 . 8 hnperative 0 I0I0\[26I19I45I 34 . 6 p , . <v,~/~1?l213 1'21'~/ ~ . 4 Subjunctive/4IiI5I ? lo\[o/a . 8 Nominal 145000 38Kk_4\[_'51 ~ ( ~  ) \] : . ~ Figurel : Expressions of (~ eneral , ion : Portuguese Three strong patterns emerge in the data  . First , two syntactic forms , infinitives and imperatives , dominate ; together they account for over 80% of the action expressions in tile dataset . Second , tile overlap in expressions between ED and ING elements is relatively small  ; it is confined to only two of the five types of expressions : infinitives and passives  . Finally , these data suggest hat the order of occurrence of the ED and ING components in a sentence does not interact with decisions of choice of expression : in general  , once a syntactic form is made available lbr expressing El  ) or ING components , it can be used irrespective of the order of occurrence of that component in the sentence  . 
French ( see figure 2 ) shows a strong preference for the use of the two forms of imperative  ( imperative-simple and imperative-infinitive )  , the infinitive antitile gerundive . Overall , however , there is a more evens pread between choices than 4 In order to satisfy ourselves that the linguistic ex--amples in the corpus were indeed representative rali-sations of the two semantic relations described  , we also perforn md an experiment requiring naive inform a  . ts to identify linguistic cxamples as cases of one or other relation  . There was a high degree of agreement ( m what constituted all example of each . 
~ This includes only those syntactic ategories for which we found more t it an one example in the d ~ ttase t  ; for this reason the percentages do not total to 100  . 
293 that appearing in Portuguese.
Syntax \] GeneratED Generati NG %
L~t 2nd Total 1st 2nd Total hnp ' ve-Inf in . I 15015 135 1825 . 4, nfinitive \] i0 19 . 2
Gerundive 0O 225 19.2
Imp've-SimpleO 710 515 16.9
Finite 690 117.7
Nominal 0.233 66.2
Figure 2: Expressions of Generation : French French , unlike Portuguese and English , has two forms of imperative . One is identical inform to the infinitive of the verb and is usually associated with a generic addressee : a ' public ' form of address  . The imperative-simple , on the other hand , is identical inform to the second-person plural 6 indicative of the verb and its use is associated with identifiable addressees  . The fact that this form accounts for 40% of imperatives in the corpus may be seen as evidence for the increasingly user-oriented style of instructions for household appliances  . 
Unlike in Portuguese , ordering does play a role in French . Both imperative-infinitive and imperative simple express in generat ED occur first  , while a gerun divexpress in generati NG occurs second  . 
In addition , Portuguese showed a strong differentiation between ED-specific and ING-specific forms  , and therefore little overlap , but in French , overlap is much greater : only one form , the gerundive , is constrained to one part of the semantic relation  ( generati NG )  . 
English appears the most permissive in terms of both overlap between ED and ING-bearing expressions  , and lack of influence of ordering-a combination of the characteristics of the other two languages  . While there is a strong preference for infinitive and imperative forms  , the influence of the part of the semantic relation only extends  , as in French , to a single form : the appearance of the infinitive as an expression of generatED rather than generati NG  . The influence of ordering appears to beat the level of weak preferences  , in line with Portuguese , rather than the stronger role seen in French generation  . The distribution of expressions in English generation is shown in figure  3  . 
1G e . 0r~G~ . eratING\[ lst\[2naITotal   1st   2ha I Tota ~ 1   1251   7 I 32\]   0 O 0124  . 4 I\[8J1I9I 1029I 39136 . 71
I413\]7I 10116 . 11 i1 1 lI2I . 3 20 23\]19 . 0 Ii 814I12I3 oI 3111 . 5I

Infinitive imperative


Other Finite

Figure 3: Expressions of Generation : English Portuguese uses a very small subset of of the available syntactic resources of the language to express enablement : only infinitives  , imperatives ( together , over 85% of the dataset ) and nominals 6We ignore here the singular , familiar imperative . 
express enablement 7 . While there was no ordering preference in Portuguese generation  , there is an ordering constraint on enablement : imperatives expressing ED do not appear first  . The distribution of syntactic forms ( figure 4 ) shows that , while there is a high degree of overlap in terms of expression of  1NG or ED , a system of preferences operates : the infinitive is three times as likely to be used for the ED than ING component  , while the imperative is twice as likely to be used for ING than for ED  . 

Infinitive hnperative

Enabl ED ~ Enabli NG- 1st   2n ~ Tot-al 1st   2nd Total I\] 17   ~5   3   8   0   29   29   3   19   49   3   2   5   3   2 Figure 4: Expressions of Enablement : Portuguese French has a relatively broad range of expressions available for enablement  ( see figure 5 ) -much wider than Portuguese . As was the case for generation , French enablement shows a strong ordering preference : when an imperative is used as en -ablED  , it must be placed second ( if expressing generatED , it must be placed first ) . The gerundive is strongly marked for generation , and in the rare cases it is used in enablement is restricted to a single semantic role : expressing enabliNG  , rather than enablED-the only French expression so restricted  . Euablement is most regularly expressed by the imperative-infinitive  . 
ySy , " a ~ IE nablEO ~ E , , ab . NG/Dstl 2ha I Total/ 1st   2nd~t  ~\ ] _ \[  /6   23   29/~71   61   3314HI \]Imp've-Infin . Infiniti Ve Gerundive ~ l1~1l~l~l:I1 . ~: ~ lImp're-Simple/OI 7/7/10\]4I 14I 16 . '_2 \]
No Inillal ~_~ ~
Figure 5: Expre?ions of Enablement : French In English ( figure 6 )  , although the imperative is the most popular expression of enablement  , ( over 60% of tokens ) , when it expresses the enabl ED part of the relation  , it must appear second : to place it first would be misleading  , as it would imply that this action should be performed first  . 
There is also a constraint arising from the part of the semantic relation being expressed : infinitives do not express the enabliNG action  . Infinitives are only capable of conveying a goal , and the en-abliNG element is not the goal . 





Other Finite CI.
Other 4006 . 101 tl 113 13 16 15 . 41 19 191 lSl 3Iol3lt 6 . 2 I/31316141317110 . 0 I ?_?L ? L ~ ?_I__?A___ ?~ L_?'sS Figure 6: Expressions of Enablement : English
Discourse ~ n
S ~ (72.3%)
Purpose 08.5%)\[____
Syntaxet ( ED ) nnperative , mper at lv ( puis ( ED ) imperative imperative avant de ( El ) ) infinitive ~ imperatiw : avast ED ) nominal\[imperative apr/~s ( \[ NG ) imperative \[ infinitive apr6s ( ING ) imperative nominal/pour ( ED ) innerly e , i ~ o ~\] qn ~ er-dtlw ~ a findetED ) infinitive\[iml ) erative defa (  ; oI~l'\]D ~ inlinitive L imperative
Figure 10: French : Enablement
The relationship with actual temporal ordering of events plays no role in determining ordering in the case of a vant de and apr~s followed by an infinitive : the two possible orderings are eqnally likely  . In the case of a vast and a pr&followed by a nominal  , there is a strong preference for placing the prepositional phrase containing the nominal first  . Clearly , this yields aniconic ordering in the cause of apt & and a non-iconic ordering in the case of avant  . 
A pr~sdd poussid rage , appliquer deux couches depeinture vinylique . 
After dusting , apply two coats of vinyl paint.
(6) Avant l'emploi , faitest remperle boy aud ans del'eauti6 de . 
Before use , soak the tube in warm water.
As in Portuguese , though , both rhetorical relations are clearly marked , and there is a similar , M though less marked , tendency to view the semantic content of the enablement relation as being one of temporal sequence  . 
3.2.3 English
English h~s the greatest olerance of mmmrked discourse relations among the language studied : only  37 of the 130 clauses examined appeared with a marker of any kind  . The majority of markers were instances of by appearing with a nominalisation to convey the generati NG part of the relation  , showing a preference for communicating this semantic content in terms of the rhetorical relation of MF  , ANS in English 9   18 of these 19 instances of by appeared when the generatED element was presented first : by is used to signal the MEANS relation when conflmion might otherwise result from a user attempting to perform the generated action  , 9As stated at the outset , however , we cannot yet state the ordering of the relevant semantic  , syntactic , and rhetoric M decisions . 
presented first , rather than the generating action . 
\[\[ Di;~oT , ; g&--\[~ii lati ~ cue
I\[', trpos~j (50 . 8% ) simply ( \[ NG ) gener at ED infinitive infinitive

I so that ( H )) \ [ inite clause
If ort ED ) nominal i
IMeans by (\] NG)\]m~r~ff\[e.-~-(29,2)%
Itesult if/when(ING ) ~ e(la . S %) by ( IN(:) and tED )
O subject complement
Condition if ( EI )) fiit ~ te..
\[ i ~2%)__
Figure It : English : Generation generati NG imperative imperatiw ! imperative-ho~n~I nominal imperative nominal ~ npc~e----The markers simply and just appear only with generatiNG imperatives  . For appears only with NP , and marks only generatED elements . So that , which appears rarely , marks only gener at E1) elc-ments . The less common and , if and when couhl appear with either ING or 1'3) . 
Even though English does not mark the two parts of the generation relation explicitly by means of discourse markers  , the combination of ordering , syntax , and rhetorical relation results in all but one c ~ e in an unambiguous interpretation  . 
PUIU'OSF , , is the only relation that is expressible in both ED-first and ING-first order : in fact  , it is only infinitives and for with a nominal that can appear either before or after their main chmse  . t ? The range of rhetorical relations available for the expression of generation is  , however , the greatest of the three languages , consisting of a superset of the relations adopted in French and Portuguese  . 
Enablement in English is expressed most fl'e -quently by SEQUENCI  . ; , which , with appropriate temporal markers , can appear in both iconic and non-iconic order : the few non-iconic cases  ( 5 ) aren , arked with before , followling \] by\[ed\] , and followed by . PURPOSE is also a frequent interpretation . For enablement , some discourse markers are exclusive , and some ambiguous . If appears exclusively with the E1 ) -first presentation , and and , then , followed by , follow X by , and now only ap--pear with the ING-first ordering  , ~ docommas . 
7'0, for and before are ambiguous . Finally , just and simply are markers that only appear with the ING clement  , but there is always another marker that appears in the ED element in conjunction with them  . 
l?'l'hese alternations in ordering are discussed in  ( Vanderl , inden ,  1 . 993) in terms of the intention t . o convey optionality or oblig ~ t to riness of tile action in tte matrix clause  . 

As was the case with generation in English , there is a high degree of overlap between all other expressions of the two parts of the relation  . 
3.2 Discourse Markers and Rhetorical
Relations
Very strong correlations appear between particular choices of semantic relation and syntactic form on the one hand  , and the appearance of discourse markers and/or a strong bias towards a particular rhetorical interpretation on the other  . Our analysis shows that selection of syntactic expression and local discourse relation strongly interact  , and provides a rather clearer picture of the influences that bear on the mapping front semantics to syntax  . 
A particularly important element to emerge is the language-specific nature of the choice of rhetorical relation  , a notion which we express for the moment in terms of l ~ ST-style rhetorical relations  , of . ( Mann and Thompson , 1988) . The analysis represents a careful but intuitive interpretation of what rhetorical relation would be retrieved  , by a native speaker of the language , front the particular combination of syntax , discourse marker , and content . What triggers these interpretations is constrained both by semantic content and by the conventions and syntactic resources available within the languages of study  . 
3.2.1 Portuguese
Portuguese appears to have obligatory signalling of discourse relation by a discourse marker  , or at the very least by punctuations . Three discourse relations are available for generation  ( PURPOSE , CONDITION , RESULT ) and two for enablement ( PURPOSE , SEQUENCE ) . For generation , the dominant relation is PURPOSE (80%) ; for enablement it is SEQUENCE (72%) . The overlap in the syntax of generation vs enablement sentences is confined to expressions of PURPOSE  . Figures 7 and 8 show the relationships between semantic relation and syntax with an overlay of discourse : rhetorical relations and discourse markers  . 
\[ Discourse Syntax generatED generatl NG (80.1%)
Condition (9.3%)
Result (1 . .5% ) cnecaso EDseEl ) e+aulomat-icamente ED~-nfinitive infinitive nominal infinitive p  ; msivef'u\[ure(agent=artifact)~imperative , passive , infinitive bast a + infinitive imperative , infinitive imperative infinitive/imperative ~ npera6C   , Z
Figure 7: Portuguese : Generation
The figures show a strong and unambiguous re-SThis can be compared with the finding presented by  ( Moser and Moore , 1995) in their ACL-95 presen- . 
tation , that discourse cues are significantly more likely to occur when the ' contributor ' component of the relation PRECEDES the ' core ' in English dialogues  . 
lationship between rhetorical relation , discourse marker , and syntax . There is a strong tendency to present generation in terms of the rhetorical relation of I'URPOSE  , which is marked almost invariably by para or para que  ( so that )  , both of which can only take a nominal or infinitival expression  . SEQUENCE , on the other hand , is signalled by temporal connective such as antes de  ( before )  , depoisde ( after ) or apes ( afte , 9 , by the connective e ( and ) or implicitly by the use of a comma between the elements of a string of imperatives  . For Portugues enablement , wo relations are preferred : PURPOSE and SEQUENCE  , with a strong preference for the latter . Again , the markers of each rhetorical relation are distinct  . 
Discourse Syntax relation cue \[' urpose para ( ED )  - - ( 18 . 5%)
Sequence antes de tED ) (72 . 3% ) depoisde ( ING ) ap6s ( ING ) ot ED ) - ~\] mblEDenabliNG ( n  ~ i , infinitive \] imperative infinitive Iba . sta+infinitive
L_imperative I infinitive imperative I ! . . . . . . . inal , infinitive imperative I ! mperative imperative \ [ imperative Portuguese : Enablement  3  . 2 . 2h . encl~ig . res : In French , discourse markers do not accompany all expressions of generation  . However , where they do occur , the markers unambiguously assign the expressions to one or other of the plan elements : body  ( si , en and par ) or goal ( pour , a find e , and defafonit ) . While Portuguese generation is overwhelmingly expressed through the rhetorical relation of PURPOSE  , in French it is more evenly distributed between PURPOSE and MEANS  , with a small showing for CONDITmN . Although not shown in the figure , there is only one case in French generation where the choice of ordering of the elements and the choice of marker-plus-expression are not mutually constraining : this is when the preposition pour is followed by an infinitive  . In this case , the two orderings of the relation ( ING first or ED first ) are more or less equally probable . 
\[7) nrp-po . ~--\] p . . . . ED (41 . 5%) pour(ED ) afinde(ED ) defaqon ~ . ( ED )
Conditionsi(ING ) (0.2%)\ [ Mean sien(ING)
L('13.t % l_Lpa ~....
Syntaxge , ,e~atED ~ nne ~ infinitive tmperat!ve I nominal imperat!vcIml perat!vcI infinitive imper at lve ~ infinitive imperative  , finite nomin M
Figure 9: l~ench : Generation
The expression of enablement in French instructions  ( figure 10 ) is limited to two rhetorical relations : SEQUENCE and PURPOSE  . Situations where the choice of ordering of the elements and the choice of marker-plus-expression are not mutually constraining are limited to the PURPOSE discourse relation marked by pour and the SEQUENCE discourse relation marked otherwise than by hy- 
Sequence ( 68% ) _Syntax cueen abl ED en abli NG--~nd , th -~ , now(ED ) imperative imperative finite finite ~ ,   , imperative imperative when , after ( ING ) imperative nominal follow ( ING ) by ( ED ) nominal nominal followed by ( ED ) nominal imperative before ( ED ) nominal imperative , finite finite finite (21 . 4%) for ( ED ) nominal finite , imperative for ( ED ) nominal imperative in order to ( ED ) infinitive finite
Condition when ( ING ) (7 . 6%) if ( ED ) imperative \] finite
Result once ( ING ) (3.0%) which ( ED )
Figure 12: English : Enablement 4 Conclusions and Implications In this paper , we have gone some way towards isolating the specific point in the generation procedure at which pragmatic information such as rhetorical relation must be brought into play  . 
Since our notion of semantic content is based on a formal model of the task plan to be conveyed to the instruction user  , the significance of the approach is clear for developing naturalan-guage generation applications within this limited domain  . In particular , for rhetorical planning of the communication f particular content  , we can use the preferences observed for selection of the preferred rhetorical relation in the language in question  . Second , we can use our knowledge of how that relation is constituted and expressed in terms of syntax for marking the relation appropriately  . 
The approach also reveal some interesting facts about the individual languages  . In particular , we found different levels of tolerance of residual ambiguity : Portuguese has little ambiguity in the mapping from semantic ontento syntactic realisation  ( the least ambiguous markers of rhetorical relation  , fewest available syntactic realisations , least overlap in the roles of these realisations for conveying one or the other semantic relation  , most restricted set of favoured rhetorical relations  )  . English , on the other hand , had the opposite characteristics . We also found differing preferences for rhetor ical relations in expressing semantic ontent : for example  , while Portugues expresses generation in over 80% of cases with the relation of PURPOSE , French generation divides this relation almost equally between PURPOSE and MEANS  . The English corpus , on the other hand , while it has a strong showing for PURPOSE ( around 50% )  , reveals a relatively strong showing ( around 14% ) for the relation of RESULT , a relation found in only 1 . 5% of the Portuguese relations and not at all in French  . 
No natural anguage has an unambiguous mapping from semantics to surface syntax  , which makes the information encoded by syntax , both semantic and pragmatic , very difficult to consciously ' unpack ' from surface form in the performance of the translation task  . We suggest that uncovering the decisions necessary for producing pragmatically-appropriate sets of parallel instructions is a task best performed as an empirical study along the lines suggested here  . In this way , we can encode language-specific pragmatic principles into tools that supporthe process of multilingual document production  . 

Cecile T . Balkanski .  1993 . Actions , Beliefs and Intentions in Multi-Action Utterances  . Ph . D . 
thesis , Harvard University , May.
R . E . Fikes and Ntis Nilsson .  1971 . STRIPS : a new approach to the application of theorem proving to problem solving  . Artificial Intelligence , 2:189-208 . 
Alvin I . Goldman .  1970 . A Theory of Human Action . Prentice Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . 
Anthony F . Hartley and C6cile L . Paris . 1995.
Supporting Multilingual Document Production : Machine Translation or Multilingual Generation ? In working notes of the  IJCAI-95 Workshop on Multilingual Text Generation , August 2021 , Montr6al , Canada . Also available as
ITRI report ITRI-95-13.
William C . Mann and Sandra A . Thompson.
1988 . Rhetorical structure theory : Toward a functional theory of text organization  . Text : An Interdisciplinary Journal for the Study of 
Text , 8(2):243-281.
M . Moser and J . Moore .  1995 . Investigating Cue Selection and Placement in Tutorial Discourse  . 
In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the ACL , pages 130-150 , Boston , Mass . 
C~cile Paris , Keith Vander Linden , Markus Fischer , Anthony Hartley , Lyn Pemberton , Richard Power , and Donia Scott .  1995 . A support tool for writing mnltilingual instructions  . 
In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , August 2025 , Montrdal , Canada , pages 1398-1404 . 
Also available as ITRI report ITRI-95-11.
Martha E . Pollack .  1986 . Inferring Domain Plans in Question-Answering . SRI Technical Report

Earl D . Sacerdoti .  1977 . A Structure for Plans and Behavior . Elsevier , New York . 
Keith Vander Linden .  1993 . Speaking of Actions : Choosing Rhetorical Status and Grammatical Formin Instructional Text Generation  . 
Available as Technical leport CU-CS-654-93.

