A Sign Expansion Approach to Dynamic , Multi-Purpose

Jon Atle Gulla
GMD-IPSI
Dolivostratle 15
D-64293 Darmstadt , Germany
gull a 0gmd , de.
Sjur NCr steb ? Moshagen
Computing Centre for the Humanities
Harald H?rfagresgt . 31,
N-5007 Bergen , Norway
sjut . mosh agen 0hd , uib . no

Two problematic issues in most lexicon systems today are their size and restricted domain of use  . In this paper , we introduce a new approach to lexical organization that leads to more compact and flexible lexicons  . The lexical entries are conceptual/phonological frmes rather than word entries  , and a number of expansion rules are used to generate entries of actual words from these frames  . A single frame supports not only all forms of a word  , but also words of different categories that are derived from the same semantic basis  . The whole theory is now being implemented in the
TROLL lexicon project.
1 Introduction
Due to the complexity and wide coverage of lexical information  , fullfledged lexicon systems easily grow undesirably big and must cope with intricate ~ nets of dependencies among lexical items  . 
For keeping the speed of access at a satisfactory level  , lexical information is often repeated in different entries to reduce the number of consultations needed for a single user query  . This simplifies and speeds up the access of lexical information  , but also blows up the size of the lexicon and leads to huge maintenance problems  . In many cases , it also clutters the lexicon structure , so that important lexical relationships and generalizations are lost  . 
Structuring the lexicon in inheritance hierarchies opens for more compact lexicon representations  . So far , lexicons have been structured in syntactic inheritance hierarchies  , in which more or less abstract syntactic lasses form the upper nodes and actual words are associated with the leaf nodes  ( Flickinger and Nerbonne , 1992; Russell et al ,  1992) . However , the nature and number of these abstract syntactic lasses are not very clear  , and it seems difficult to come up with a sound method for how to decide on such classes  . 
At the same time , there are also good reasons for assuming a similar hierarchy based on semantic properties  ( Hellan and Dimitrova-Vulchanova ,  1994) . Representing many competing hierarchies in the lexicon is a problem in itself and is here even more problematic as there are many complex relationships between semantic and syntactic properties  ( Gropen et al , 1992; Hellan and
Dimitrova-Vulchanova , 1996).
Another problem is related to the notions and structures adopted in the lexicon systems  . Most lexicons today are constructed within the framework of some syntactic theory  . This theory guides the structuring of lexical information and also decides what information should be available to the user  ( Andry et al , 1992; Flickinger and Nerbonne , 1992; Mel'Suk and Polgu~re , 1987; Russellet ~ l . , 1992; Krieger and Nerbonne , 1991) . Some lexicon systems try to be reasonably theory -independent  , though they still have to adopt some basic syntactic notions that locate them into a family of theories  ( Gofii and Gonz Alez , 1995; Grimshaw and Jackendoff , 1985; Grishman et al ,  1994) . 
The Sign Expansion Approach forms a basis for creating nonredundant lexicon systems that are structured along semantic lines  . The stored lexical entries are sign frames rather than actual words  , and a whole system of expansion rules and consistency rules are used to generate dynamic entries of words that contain all the necessary semantic  , syntactic , and morphological information . 
In Section 2 , we give a brief introduction to a sign expansion theory called the Sign Model  . Section 3 explains the use of lexical expansion rules , where a some concluding remarks and directions for further work are found in Section  4  . 
478/paintNpaint(($SUB . I ) ) paint ( (~ SUBJ ) (\]" OBJ ) - ~ paint ( (t SUBJ ) (J " OBJ ) (J " XCOMP ) > paint ( (~ SuB J ) (\]" OBL ) Figure 1: The stored frame PAINT is expanded into actual words with syntactic properties  . 
2 The Sign Model
In the sign expansion approach , the lexicon is viewed as a dynamic rule system with lexical frames and various kinds of expansion rules  . 
The Sign Model ( SM ) by Hcllan and Dimitrova-Vulchanova ( Hellan and Dimitrova-Vnlchanova ,  1994 ) is a semantically based sign expansion theory and is used as the lexical basis of our lexicon  . 
It posits an abstract level of sign representation that is not associated with any word classes and establishes a framework  , within which word relationships as well as relationships between different kinds of linguistic properties can be described in a systematic way  . At the abstract level of representation , one defines conceptual/phonological fi'ames that underly the actual words found in a language  . The fi'ames combine with lexical expansion rules to create dynamic entries of actual words with morphological and syntactic properties  , as illustrated by the LFG representations in Figure  1  . No particular syntactic terminology is assumed , since the theory is intended to fit into any syntactic theory  . 
2.1 Minimal Signs
The conceptual/phonological frame , which is referred to as a minimal sign , is made up of a semantic ( conceptual ) part and a realizational part . 
As we do not have very much to say about phonological representations here  , we assmne in the following that t im realizational part is a simple graphemic representation  . The semantic part is a conceptual structure of the sign  , which is to capture all grammar-relevant aspects of its meaning  . 
The meaning of a sign is analyzed as a situation involving a number of participants  ( also called arguments )  , and these participants as well as the situation as a whole are modeled in terms of aspectual values  , semantic roles , criterial factors , and realizational and selectional properties . 
Consider the minimal sign PAINT in Figure 2 , which is the lexical entry underlying the related words paint v  , paintN , painting N , paintable A , etc . The realizational part is the string " t ) aint " , whereas the semantic part denotes a situation with two arguments  , indexed as 1 and 2 . The
Real :
Sem : " paint " - Junctual





MONOTONIC coloring noncriterial 2-dim coloring noncriterial coloring Figure 2: Stored entry for minimal sign PAINT . 
aspectual value ( -punctua O describes the situation as durative , whereas the selectional restriction DIM states that argument  2 is to serve as some two-dimensional surface . Argument 1 , the painter , possesses the semantic roles SOURCE and CONTROLLER  . SOURCE means that this argument is the source of energy for the force involved in a painting process  , whereas CONTROLLER indicates that the argument is in control of the process  . Correspondingly , argument 2 is the entity on which the force is used ( LIMIT ) and the entity being controlled by argument1 ( GOAL )  . Argument2 is also given the MONOTONIC role , which means that it undergoe some monotonic hange in the course of painting  . The change , of course , is that the surface is gradually covered by some paint  . Each semantic role is further characterized by means of a criterial factor that imposes certain role-related observational properties on the argument  . Specifying SOURCE and LIMIT as coloring means that the painter's use of force involves some observable actions that identifies himas painting  , and that the surface being painted is recognizable from the same force  . The gradual covering of the surface with paint , which is modeled by MONOTONIC , is also of the coloring type , since we can verify the covering by looking at the surface  . CONTROLLER's and GOAL'S factor non-criterial means that no particular observable behavior is required for an argument oplay these 
Sem : " walk "- punctual
CONTROLLER noncriterial
MONOTONIC 1-dimt
Figure 3: Stored entry for minimal sign WALK.
particula roles . In general , the criterial factors affect , the implicitation of arguments in syntactic expressions  ( e . g . argument 2 in , I on painted ) and the introduction of new ones ( e . g . redinJon painted the housered ) . 
As shown by the lexical entry of WALK in Figure 3 , naturally intransitive verbs are rooted in minimal signs with only one conceptual argument  . The argument of WALK is a SOURCE and a CONTROLLER  , and it undergoes a monotonic development with respect to someone-dimensional path  . In a sentence like Jonwalked to the school , the phrase to the school describes this monotonic development of argument  1  . A waying on walked away is another optional constituent  , hat can describe argument l's nmvement along a one-dimensional path  . 
2.2 Lexical Rules
The general format of the expansion rules is as follows:  ( 1 ) XIFY COMPOSITIONSX contains the information to be added and Y the requirement for using the rule  . Sconcerns the structure on which the rule is used and specifies which parts of this structure should be considered by the rule  . Interpretationally , the rule in ( 1 ) can be applied on a structure Z if Y is a substructure of Z and X unifies with the selection of Z specified in S  . The result of the operation is exactly this unified structure  , and the operation itself is referred to as a derivation  . If the whole lexical entry is to be addressed by the rule  , the COMPOSITION part is omitted in the rule specification  . Similarly , if the IFY part is not present , it means that there is no requirement for using the rule  . The expansion rules fall into five categories , depending on what kind of information they insert into the lexical representations :  ( 1 ) Morphosyntactic augment a-tions , (2) inflections , (3) conceptual expansions , (4) syntactic mappings , and (5) compositions . 
Morphosyntactic augmentation rules add a word category and an inflectional paradigm to a minimal sign  . The morphosyntactic augmentation rule shown in Figure  4  ( a )  , for example , derives the basic entry for the verb paint v from tile minimal sign PAINT  . 
Assuming that tile lexical entry has already been given a word class and a paradigm  , the inflectional rule expands the graphemic representation into a particular inflected word form  . The rule in Figure 4 ( b ) expands the basic entry for paint v into the more specialized entry for the past form painted v  . The inflectional rules m'e grouped together into paradigms that are associated with the appropriate words  ( e . g . vl is linked to paint v ) . 
Conceptuale , r , pansion rules are rules that extend the semantic part of the signs without combining them with other sign structures  . These rules are semantically conditioned and typically explain how a particular sign can support a variety of subcategorization frames  . The rule in Figure 4 ( c ) shows how a resultative construction like J on painted the wall red is supported by a minimal sign like PAINT  . If the conceptual structure contains an argument that undergoe some monotonic development  , he conceptual structure can be expanded with a new argument hat serves as the medium for this development and has a dimension matching the criterial property of the MONOTONIC role  . When an argument is a medium for some other argument  , it means that its mono-to ni ( : development is manifested or materialized through this other argument  . Hence , as argument 2 of PAINT has a MONOTONIC role , the rule is able to add an argument hat describes the resuling monotonic change of the surface being painted  . 
The realization of this argument as an adjective ( like red ) comes from the fact that the new argument , is of dimension coloring . For a minimal sign like WALK ( see Figure 3) , which contains an argument ( the walker ) that monotonically moves along someone -dimensional path  , the rule adds a new argument of dimensionality 1-dim   . The medium must then describe a one-dimensional path  , as for example to the school in Jon walked to the school  . 
Syntactic mapping rules are rules that derive syntactic properties from conceptual structures  . 
Since no special syntactic notions are assumed , we must here decide on an existing syntactic theory before the mapping rules can be defined  . The rule shown in Figure 4 ( d ) is based on Gulla's rules ( Gulla ,  1994 ) for mapping from SM conceptual structures to LFG grammatical functions  ( Kaplan and Bresnan ,  1982) . It states that if a verb is used lIlft:\[ paradigm : vl \]  .   .   .   .   . ( a ) lnfl:\[form:past,\]
R , eah insert " ed"a tend .   .   .   .   . ( b ) ~ el Ilt : I )\] M(~
MH ) IUM-ij1F . . . . . . (, 9....
Syn:\[XCOMP.i\[\]\]

Sere : 4. completed

MEI)IUM coloring ( ) lexistence > j .   .   .   .   . (, 0\[\]k

I punctual
SeIll-"\[CONTROI , LFAI,
COMPOSITION mainSuttixwh , ere(t ? no'u criterial .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Figure 4: ( a ) Morphosyntactic augmel ~ tation . ( b ) Inflectional rule . (c ) Conceptual expansion . ( d )
Mapping rule . ( e ) Compositiol ml rule.
in a completed seIIse1 , MEDIUM arguments of ( ti-mensionality coloring or existence can be mapped onto the XCOMP flmction  . Used together with rule 4(c ) on PA\[N~I ; it introduces an XCOMP element that des ( : ribes the resulting state of the surface being painted  . A similaral ) proaeh to the assign-meat of synt ; u : tic flmct , ions in LFG can be found in ( Alsina ,  1993) . 
The compositional rules combine two signs tru(>I ; ures attd create a new compound structure that includes parts of l  ) oth of them . The rule in Fig-ul'c4 ( e ) uses a suffix to create a noun \[ ; hat re\[ersto some controlled , durative activity . Except tbrl ; hc control and duration requirement , l ; he conc : ep ~ tua . 1 structure must also contain a criterially anchored argument  , i . e . mt argumen that includes at least one semantic role that is not noneritc-rial  . The ( \] OMI ' OSITION part says that there are two structures involved  , a mainstru (: ture and as ' u , J . l~xstrucl , urc , whei'c as the cxpansiolli ) art turns l ; he whole conceptual structure into an & rgulilent k  .   ( ) n the basis ot " the minimal signs PAINT and WALK  , l ; he rule (: an create I ; he not m spainting N and ' walking N . 
3 The Expanding Lexicon
In a signext mnsionle , xi (: on system , we must dis~tinguish between stored lexical entries and generated lexical entries  . The stored entries are all minimal signs , and I ; hey are usually not very in-I ; eresdng to the lexicon user . The generated entries are produ ( : ed by combining stored entries with one or more ext  ) ansion rules , and the secn-t ; ri( ; sat '( ; more or less elaborate spe(:ifica ~ , ions of actual wor ( ls . A simple generated entry is the result of combining th  (  ; minimal sign PAINT in Figure 2 with the morphosyntactic auginen ~ ation rule in Figure  4  ( a )  . This yMdsdm basic verb entry paint v , which ( loes not contain any information abou , syntactic realization . Moreelabo . - rat ( ; entries are then generated by expanding the paiut v entry with the different subcategorization frames that are possible for paint v  . For a user requesting information fl ' om the lexicon  , l ; he stored entries mW be completely hidden and only the elaborate generated ones may be made available  . 
Consider the rather elaboratentry in Figure 5 , which rel ) resents the past form painted used in the following resultative constru  ( : tion : lt , bllowing the ideas of felicity in ( Depraeter e ,  1995) , we define a clause to 1 ) e completed if it reaches a natural or intt ; ndedend point . A non-repetitive r-sultative ( : ons ~ ruction is always completed , whereas constructions like , Ionispainting and Jonpaints ev-e . ryday are incompleted . 

Cat :
Infl :
Real :
Sem :
Syn :
V paradigm : vl form : past " painted "- punctual + completed 
SOURCE coloring \]
CONTROLLER noncriterial 1
DIM2-dim 1
LIMIT coloring
GOAL noncriterial
MONOTONIC4 coloring 2
DIM coloring \]
MEDIUM--~43 suRJl:\[\]\]o,J:\[\]
XCOMP:\[\]
Figure 5: Generated entry for resultative use of painted v . 
(3) Jonpainted the housered.
The entry specifies a particular wordform , contains a conceptual structure with three arguments  , and lists the syntactic functions realizing these arguments  . Indexing SUBJ with 1 means that argument 1 of the conceptual structure is to be realized as the subject  . The whole entry is generated by a series of derivations  , where each derivation adds a piece of information to the final lexical entry  . Starting with the minimal sign PAINT , we use the rules in Figure 4 ( a ) and 4 ( b ) to generate a simple entry for painted y . Then we expand the conceptual structure into a complete description  ( + completed ) using a rule called Completed and apply the rule in Figure  4  ( c ) to add a third argument . The syntactic functions are added by the rule in Figure  4  ( d ) plus two rules that we here can call Subjland Objl  . Subjlassigns the SUBJ function to arguments that contain SOURCE or CON-TROLLER roles  , whereas Objl requires a + completed description and assigns the OBJ fimction to arguments that have a MONOTONIC role  . The generation of the lexical entry in Figure 5 , thus , can be written as the following derivational sequence :  ( 4 ) PAINT++4 ( a )  ++ 4 ( b ) + - t-Completed++4 ( c ) + + Subjl + + Objl + +4 ( d ) When the system is to create a derivational se-




N\[paradigm:nl\]"paint(ing)"-~unctual



LIMIT

MONOTONIC coloring noncriterial 2-dim coloring noncriterial coloring 2   3 Figure 6: Lexical entry for suffixing N and generated entry for painting N  . 
quence like that , we first have to indicate which morphosyntactic rule to use  . The system chooses the correct inflectional paradigm  , and it can start trying out the different expansion rules to generate complete lexical entries  . The search space for this is restricted , since the rules are semantically conditioned and monotonic  , and wellformedness conditions decide when to stop expanding the structure  . 
In a similar vein , the noun painting N ( referring to a painting process ) is derived from the minimal sign PAINT and the suffixing N  . The compositional rule from Figure 4 ( e ) combines these two structures and produces the lexical entry shown in Figure  6  . Category and Infection stem froming N , Realization is a combination of the values in PAINT and ingN  , and Semantics is the minimal sign's conceptual structur expanded into a complex argument indexed as  3  . Instead of stor=ing two entries for paint v and painting N -- that partly contain the same information -- we derive the entries dynamically from a single PAINT entry  . 
4 Conclusions
The Sign Model ( SM ) gives a theoretical foundation for structuring lexical information along semantic lines ? It prescribes a strong semantic basis and suggests various kinds of expansion rules for generating complete word entries  . The sign expansion approach is now used as a basis for the TROLL lexicon project in Trondheim  . In this project , a formalism for lexical representation as well as mechanisms for executmg lexical rules are implemented in LPA Prolog  ( Gulla and Mosha-gen ,  1995) . A lexicon of Norwegian verbs is under construction  , and SM-based analyses of En-the design of the lexicon  ( Hellan and Dimitrova-Vulchanova , 1996; Pitz ,  1994) . Due to speed concerns , the stored entries and the expansion rules are in the TROLL lexicon supplemented with indexes that refer to well-define derivational sequences for complete word entries  . The work in the TROLL project is now concentrated on the construction of a complete lexicon for Norwegian  , and this work is also to serve as an evaluation of both the lexicon structures and the Sign Model  . 
The theory is still at a development sage when it comes to psychological nd perceptional matters  , even though some suggestions have been made ( Gulla ,  1994) . The filture work also includes establishing proper interfaces to various syntactic theories  , so that the system can be integrated with existing parsers and generators  . 

Alsina , A .  (1993) . Predicate Composition : A Theory of Syntactic Function Alternations  . Ph . D . 
thesis , Stanford University , San Fransisco.
Andry , F . , N . M . Fraser , S . McGlashan , S . Thorn-ton , and N . J . Youd (1992) . Making DATR Work for Speech : Lexicon Compilation in SUN-DIAL  . Computational Linguistics 18(3), 245-268 . 
Coopmans , Everaert , and Grimshaw ( Eds . ) (1996) . Lexical Specification and Insertion . 
Lawrence Erlbaum Ass ., Inc.
Depraetere , I .  (1995) . ( Un ) boundedness and ( A ) telicity . Linguistics and Philosophy 18, 119 . 
Flickinger , D . and J . Nerbonne (1992) . Inheritance and Complementation : A Case Study of E~y Adjectives and Related Nouns  . Computational Linguistics 18(3), 269-310 . 
Gofii , J . M . and J . C . Gonz Alez (1995) . A framework for lexical representation . In AI95: 15th International Conference . Language Engineering 95, Montpellier , pp .  243-252 . 
Crimshaw , J . and R . Jackendoff (1985) . Report to the NSF on grant IST-81-20403 . Technical report , Waltham , Department of Linguistics , 
Brandeis University.
Grishman , ll . , C . Macleod , and A . Meyers (1994) . Comlex Syntax : Building a Computational Lexicon . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING94 )  , Kyoto . 
Gropen , J . , S . Pinker , M . Hollander , and R . Goldberg (1992) . Affectedness and Direct Objects : The role of lexical semantics in the acquisition of verb argument structure  . In B . Levin and S . Pinker ( Eds . ) , Lexical fJ Conceptual Semantics , Cognition Special Issues , Chapter 6 , pp . 
153-196. Elsevier Science Publishers.
Gulla , J . A .  (1994) . A Proposal for Linking LFG F-structures to a Conceptual Semantics  . 
Master's thesis , Department of Linguistics , The
University of Trondheim , Trondheim.
Gulla , J . A . and S . N . Moshagen (1995, January) . 
Representations and Derivations in the TROLL Lcxicon  . In H . Ledrup , I . Moen , and H . G . Si-monsen ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of The XVth Scandinavian Conference of Linguistics  , Oslo . 
Ilellan , L . and M . Dimitrova-Vulchanova (1994, July) . Preliminary Notes on a Framework for ' Lexically Dependent Grammar '  . Lecture series at International Summer Institute in Syntax  , Central Institutue of English and Foreign
Languages , Hyderabad , India.
Hellan , L . and M . Dimi . trova-Vulchanova (1996).
Criteriality and Grammatical Realization . libappear in ( Coopmans et al , 1996) . 
Kaplan , R . M . and J . Bresnan (1982) . Lexical-Functional Grammar : A Formal System for Grammatical Representation  . In J . Brcsnan ( Ed . ) , The Mental Representation fGrammatical Relations  , Chapter 4 , pp .  173-281 . MIT

Krieger , H . U . and J . Nerbonne (1991) . Feature-Based Inheritence Networks for Computational Lexicons  . Technical Report DFKI-P~R-91-31 , German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence  ( DFKI )  , Saarbrucken . 
Mel'~uk , I . and A . Polgu Sre (1987) . A Formal Lexicon in Meaning-Text Theory ( Or How to Do Lexica with Words . Computational Linguistics 13(3-4), 261-275 . 
Pitz , A . (1994). Nominal Signs in German . Ph.
D . thesis , Department of Linguistics , University of Trondheim , Trondheim . 
Russell , G . , A . Ballim , J . Carroll , and S . Warwick-Armstrong (1992) . A Practical Approach to Multiple Default Inheritance for Unification-Based Lexicons  . Computational Linguistics 18(3), 311-337 . 

