CALL:THEPOTENTIAL OF LING WARE AND THE
USE OF EMPIRICAL LINGUIS TICDATA
Dan Tufts
Romanian Academy & Research Institute for Informatics 
13, "13 Septembrie ", 74311, Bucharest 5, RO
email : tufts@uI.ici.ro
Language technology has significantly evolved during the last decade  . However , the community of language learning seems to ignore this development  , most of the existing language learning systems drawing their enhancements from other sources  , such as hypertext , nmltimedia , interactive video , information retrieval . Despite some spectacuhu progress made at the level of interface  , several fundamental language learning principles , are only partially met . Nevertheless , the hypermedia technology did solve on every important aspect of computer-assisted larning by putting the student in a visual environment  . Minimizing cultural differences they've been able to draw on shared background knowledge  ( microworl dimmersiveness )  . Other important aspects of typical immersion -based approaches  , i . e . natural learning , such as mixed-initiative , fault-tolerance , dialogue repair , cooperative behaviour , etc . are still in their infancy . 
In real settings learners freely interact with their environment  ( parents , tutors ) , taking turns , asking for explanations , shifting topics , etc . The language produced by the learner is more often than not a grammatical  , yet this does not preventhetutor to proceed with the dialog  . Error correction is usually done contextually , by drawing either explicitly attention to the deviation  , by producing a similar but correct sentence , or by simply ignoring the mistake leaving its correction for later  . 
There are many AI and CL program solving various specific CALL-relevant problems  . If assembled properly , these pieces could result in very powerful language learning systems  . 
Lexical thesauri Since word acquisition is a crucial part of language learning  , a thesaurus such as WordNet is practically a must in a broader CALL system  . Such a tool could provide , lists of synonyms , antonyms , hyper/hyponyms , meronyms and contexts in which these words are used  . 
Parsers While finding a freeware parser is not a problem anymore  ( if you don't know where to get hold of one , -- just send mean email , -- we have develope different parsers ) , it is no easy to find the right kind of grammar for teaching purposes  . Such a grammar should have at least the following qualities : parsing the student's input it should be error tolerant yet having a broad enough coverage for being useful both for beginners and for advanced students  . In order to deal with the student's errors in a principled way  , the grammar should anticipate typical errors and annotate them for automatic recovery and explanation generation  . While introspection and observation are a first step in determining typical errors  , data gathered in a corpus are an mch more reliable approach  . Corpus linguistics has become elvery promising and active area of investigation  . 
However , few corpora ( if any ) have been gathered with respect or egister . Such corpora should contain among other things : native tongue of the speaker  , the complexity of the text under consideration ; error/correction markup , etc . 
Generators In order to communicate with the student  , the CALL system should be able to produce natural anguage output  . It is debatable whether the system should communicate with the student only in the target language  , or , whether underspecific circumstances ( uchas error correction mode ) it should also be able to generate texts also in the student's mother tongue  . Suchaped a gogical decision has of course important consequences on the system's architecture : a bilingual approach  , requiring several components of a MT system . Again , there are several NL generators ( most of them head-driven ) available in the public domain . 
Semantic interpreters/generators Unlike the previous modules  , the one in charge of the bidirectional mapping of the syntactic structures onto the knowledge structures of the micro world  , is very sensitive to factors such as discourse universe  , tutorial strategies , tudent profile etc . That's why it is not easy to find are ady made plugin module for CALL systems  . Yet , there are several generic programs that support he contextual interpretation f the student's input  ( linguistic or graphical )  , tracking his/her goals and providing cooperative responses  . 
Intelligent planners ( linear or nonlinear ) could be used in plan-based tutorials , with the microworlds defining the possible limits of departure from the expectation-based tutorial phms  . User modelling subsystems , tuned to the language learning problems could provide valuable support in dealing with notorious difficult problems  ( discovering student's misconceptions , tailoring explanations to the level of the student's expertise  , tc . ) Speech synthesizers and prosody processors Speech technology is definitely a valuable candidate  i010 for CALL tools . In spite of the current gap between speech technology and natural language processing  , language learning is a very promising area where tile two fields could meet One could easily imagine a scenario where the student is asked to utter a word or a sentence  , which are then compared and corrected against the tutor's pronunciation  . With a graphical representation of the two pronunciations  ( waveform , pitch , duration etc . ) and a means to operate on them ( e . g . moused ragging the waveform , followed by the synthesized result ) the pedagogical value and user acceptability of a CALL system would certainly be greatly enhanced  . 

