Parsing decomposable idioms
Ingrid Fischer and Martina Keil
IMMDII , University of Erlangen
Martens str.3
91058 Erlangen , Germany
idfische , keil@informatik . uni-erlangen , de
Abstract
Verbal idioms can be divided into two
main groups : noncompositional id-
ioms askick the bucket and composi-
tional/decomposable idioms as spill the
beans . In the following we will point
to the fact that there are German de-
composable idioms which can be decom-
posed into components , having identifiable meanings contributing to the meaning of the whole  . These idiom compo-imnts are taken to have referents  . Taking these facts into account we propose an adequate way to represent the idiomatic meaning by Kamp's Discourse Representation Theory  ( DRT )  . Furthermore , we show how to parse idiomatic sentences and how to process the proposed seinan-tic representation  . While parsing idioms , the necessary idiomatic knowledge of the idioms ' syntax and semantics i extracted from a special idiomatic knowledge base called PIIRASEO-LI  . \]X . 
1 Introduction
Today it becomes more and more evident that a too restricted view on idiomatic phenomena is of limited use for the purpose of natural language processing  . Therefore , it is now widely accepted that we have to distinguish at least two groups of figurative verbal phrasal idioms : first  , there is a group of syntactically frozen idioms askick the bucket  , meaning " die " , which are called noncompositional . Second , there is a group which shows more syntactic and semantic flexibility  . An example for the , latter group , often called compositional or decomposable I idioms  , is spill the beans 1 By class fying idioms with the terms compositional respectively decomposable the same property is decribed by two different point of views  . The first notion is a more structural term , the second notion a more process oriented term . See ( Geeraerts , 1992) . 
n leaning " divul geinfbrnmtion " . With this group we are dealing here in depth . In this paper we propose an adequate semantic representation for idiomatic knowledge and show a way of processing syntax and semantics of decomposable idioms  . 
In the following we will first ; deal with the idea of decomposability of idioms in section  2  . In section 3 we will present our proposal of an adequate representation of the idioms ' meaning by means of DRT  . Before we will outline a way of processing decomposable idioms in section  5  , we will briefly introduce the necessary tools for the parsing process in a few brief words in section  4  . 
Finally , in section 6 we show some possible extensions . 
2 Decomposab le id ioms and the re ferent ia l s ta tus o f the i r i d iom chunks hi contrast o noncompositional idioms  , decomposable idioms arc ; able to undergo several syntactic operations that lead to the opinion that " pieces of an idiom typically have identifiable meanings which combine to produce the meaning of the whole "  ( Wasow ,  1982) . 
As example , we consider the syntactic behavior of the German verbal idioms cinch Bockschief lcn  ( lit . :" shoot ; abuck ", fig . : " make a mistake ", fig . eq . : " make a bloomer ")2 and j mdm . einen B&'cn aufbind cn(lit . : " tiesb . a bear on ", fig . :" tell at all tale to sb . ", fig . eq . : " pulls b . ' sleg";"spinsb . ayarn " ) In the following example sew : ralmodifications 2Since a high degree of language competence is necessary when judging about grammaticality of idiom const ructions  , we ? as German native speakers choose German idioms as examples  . We establish the following convention for translation : literal : literal English word-by word translation of the German idiom  ; figurative : English paraphrase of the figurative meaning  ; fig . equivalent : English idioms with an equivalent meaning  . 
388  ( 1 ) Tom hatmtf der Sitzung cinchgr of len\]dock geschossen  . 
Tom has on the meeting a big ) uek shot.
einige 135 e kegcs chossen.
several bucks shot
Tommade ; tbig mistake on the meeting.
(2) ~ lbln hat in seine I , lLe benseh on
Tom has in his liti ~ already
Tom already made several mistakes in his life.
(3): l ) ic.ser ~ Pcml ~ hat Toni9 cs choss cn.
This bu(:khas'\['om shot.
q . bnlmade . this misl ; ~ ke.
(4) ' lTombinder ; Kin\]cinch'l*'ngla'ablich , en
Tomt ; ies K in \] ; tmdmlievabh ~'' Pom ; ells Kimanmfl ) eliev ; t bletall tale . 
(5) Wasfiircinch I Kirenh , at Tom Kima ' ufq cb , lmden ? What for at ) em'has ' IbmKim~ied . .otf ? Wh~t ~ kind of l;a . ll tah ; did Tom tell to Kim ? lffirena '@ bear on . 
can be found : adjectival modifications in (1 ,  4) , (lu ; mtifieation in (2) , and focussing \]) y(lemonstr ; > tive determiner ( 3 ) and by question in ( 5 ) apply C ( ) the idioms internal NPs . It is ilnl ) or ta . tfl ; to notice . 
that these oi ) erations midmo(lili(: ; ttions in ( I )   ( 5 ) are not result of tmns or word l ) lays but gratnmat-ieally a . nd stylistically unmarked('onstructions . 
Similm " examples ( : an be ~ bttnd in other languages , too . The first German exmnple has a Dutch equivalent : een bok~schicten  , where inter-na \] in odifications mul quantific ; ~ tion are 1) ossible . 
A french decomposable i ( liomislever u'n li&n'e ( lit . : " raise a hm : e ", fig . : " toucha(lelieate sub-jeet "); p' , ' cnd creuna cantonata ( lit . : " take a cor-Iler ' ) in cmling " to make a mistake " is & it italian one  . Therefore , internal modifiability of idiolns seems not to be restri  ( : ted on the (   ; enmmlan--guage . 
2 . 1Decomposabh, . idioms are structured entities I tix evident f  , hat a component like bucket of a nonCOml ) ositional idioln askick the bucket ( : an-not undergo such kind of synta ( : ti ( : operations . 
The ref bre , the ineanillg of none ompositional \] d-loins is seen  :4  . 8 a Altlnstrll ctllred (' . om\]\[)lex . (, ~ otnt ) o-nents like bucket which do not carry a . ny individual mea . ning are called quasi-argument . s with a nonreferential function ( Chomsky ,  1981) . In opposite to this , components of decoln I ) os a . bleidioms d ( ) carry some individual meaning ! " Of " ( : ourse , these memfings ; ~ renot the literal memfings of the parts " is stated in  ( Wasow ,  1982) . q ? hen , the questions arise , which kind of inemfing do the sepm : ts carry ? Which is the hidden semantic stuff of Beckor  13&" rest ) e ( : tively , that is modified , inquired , quantified , and emphasized ? We adopt the i ) oint of view that iten is as l\]ock or/\]a ~' C3dlllOt be ( : onsidered as quasiargmnents but as Jigurativ c . a wum cnts , lhl rt her more , we followth ( ~ el ) in \] on that such idiomatic strings m'e 1lOt llllSLrll (  ; tlll'e(\[(:()l Ilplexe ~ , q : bill strll (: tl tre (1en-I ; ities . Their sla ' ueturing takes t ) la (: eint ) ar ; fi-M to the structuring of the literally interpwteds Lring  ( lurger ,  1973) .   ( ) ur intuition suggests to paraI ) hrase cinchI3 ocks chicflent ) y " e , in en ~% hler machen "( lit . : " make ; tmisl ; ake ") a . n d j m d m . einen13&'en aufbinden by " jlll(hn . eille Liigenges (: hieltteer zithlen ", ( lit . :" tell at all tale to sb . ") , liltix evident for timt ) m:al ) hrase and the idiom to hnve at least the same syntactics tru  (  ; ture as show lill the next table . 
\[ -( . '\] imn\]\[1~()(:1~s(:t~iet3(;i,a__Ht, . , , : a: . ~ hooteinen ~ Fehlerm ~ tehena ~ L .   .   .   .   . mistake , makei ?,' b . ~>__lb ~ . a , . , , i , , , - o ~ j m d m . Ieine I , iigenges chichte ~ erzii hhmo , s ~ z___\[tall taletell In addition it ; is importmlt that also the seman-I ; i(-s of the paraphrase and the idiom can be struc-
I ; ured in paral M.
2 . 2 Figuratiw, . referents of idiom chunks To explain this , lel ; us now consider the problem Dora I ; he referential point of view . We claim that individu ~ fl components of decoln posable ill-iot as can lm  ( : onsidered figurative arguments and that these figurative t ~ rgmnent slmve referents on their own  . 
Following ( Nunberg , \] . 978 ) who first discussed the referential aspect of idioms let " us consider that verb phn~ses' refer ' to states and ~ mtivi-\[  ; i es , and transitive verb phrases normally refer to states and activities thn  , t are best identified as % pen relations ' of tile formll  , xb where tt ~' st and s\['or \] , he relation referred to 1) y the ve . rb , ' x ' is a . 
variable for the referent of the sentence subje ( : t , and ' b's t and s for the referent of the object NP  . " xyz

Tom(y ) bear(z ) in credible ( z ) tic-on(x , y , z ) xy
Kim(x ) (7) To , ( y ) incredible (?) lic-to(z , y ) x y v w u

Tom(v ) incredible (?) (8) lic-to(x,y)
V ~ -- Xw - - - - ytall-talc(u ) bclicvc(w , v , u ) u----?(9) zyz

Tom  #) incT ~ dible(z ) tall-tale(z ) tcll-to(x , y , z ) (10) x y z u v w
Kim(x ) incredible(z ) tall-talc(z)tcll(x , y , z ) v ~ 2g ~ t = Zbdicve(w , v , u ) On this basis , an idiom is called decomposable b-cause the situation to which it refers can be seen as an open relation Rxb  . 
For the idiome in cn Bookschicflenthis means that schicflcn is a two-argument relation with a variable t br the subject NP  , the noun phrase c in cn Bock referring to the concept a mistake and the verbs chicflen denoting a situation where someone is acting  . Extending this idea to the decomposable idiom j mdm  . cinchBiirenaufbinden , it is necessary to suppose a three-argument- -relation Rxyb with two open variables : x represents the subject NP and y the indirect object NP  . The idiom j mdm . einen B&'en anf binden is now decomposable into the noun phrase cinen Biiren  , referring to at all tale , and the verb aufbinden , referring to the activity of telling . 
By paraphrasing decomposable idioms , the identifiable parts of n maning are taken into account  . That means that the concept of the underlying referent  , which often may be an abstract entity lacking a physical extension  , should be verbalized and included into the paraphrase  . 
Notice that in the above cases the relation between the idiom components Bock  , Biir and its paraphrased referents Fchler , Liigcngcs chichte is not a metaphoric alone , but a convention alone . 
There are also decomposable idioms where decomposability is based on metaphoriocal knowledge  . 
Besides our introspective intuition , evidence for the proposed paraphrases if ound through text analyses  . The strongest support comes from the everyday usage of language being observed for example in text corpora with newspapers  , literature etc . ( Keil , 1 . 995) . 
3 Semant ic representat ion o f decomposab le id ioms via DRT In the following  , we will point out the problematic nature of meaning representation fidiomaticlml-guage with the help of DIRT  ( Kamp ,  1993) . We will show the advantages of our theoretical considerations above  , that can be best illustrated by DRT already including mechanisms to handle referents  . 
Consider example ( 4 ) Kimbind et Tomeinenunglaublichen Biirenan / ( fig . : " Kim tells Toman in credible tall tale ") . DRS ( 6 ) shows the result of processing the in this case sense less--literal reading of sentence  ( 4 ) without any idiom handling procedures , a DRS ( 7 ) represents a noncompositional solution : after analysing the structure syntactically  , the literal meaning of the multi:word lexeme j mdm  . einen Biiren aufbind cn is substituted by the " complex meaning " of the simple verb phrase as " jmdn  . belfigen " (" lietosb . ") . 
Note that it is now a problem to representhe internal adjectival modifier incredible correctly  . 
There is no discourse referent for that the condition incrcdible as semantic representation f the adjective unglaublic holds  . Furthermore , if we want to represent the sentence Erglaubte ihr die Liigcngeschicht c  ( " He believes her the tall tale " ) continuing example ( 4 )  - -  , the connection of the discourse referents cannot be made correctly as shown in DRS  ( 8 )  . The connection of the resumed constituent c in cn unglaublich cnB iiren and the resuxning definite description dicunglaubliche Liigcngeschicht c  , which definitively exists , cannot be mapped into the DRS . 
We claim that a more appropriate semantic representation of this idiom should respect its kind of composition and take its referents into consideration  . On the base of the discussed paraphrase " eine Liigengeschichteerz ~ ihlen "  , we offer the solution shown in (9) . This representation now includes the condition incredible  ( z )  , tall-talc(z ) , tell(z , y , z ) to represent the idiom , in ( 10 ) the continuation of our sentence is shown . Reference identity between bear ' and tall-tale is established by the equation u = z  . 
What decomposable idioms concerns , now the a For the reason of simplification , we choose English predicate names for the conditions in the DRSs  , e . g . instead of logical clmlses a ~ sb&'(x ) , auf-bind cn(x , y , z ) , or bdiiqen('x , y ) we present he sentence meaning with bear(x ) , tie-on(x , y , z ) , or lic-to(x , y) . 
This way the expenditure of translation c~m be reduced in this paper  . 
3 90 base for adequate an a pllor are so hltion and resolution of definite deseriplions resuming em 'lier introduce discourse material is created  . 
4 Used Tools : The Basic Parser and the Lexicon In  ; lie following we introduce the tools we have used R  ) r parsing idiomatic sentences . We give a short description of the underlying chart parsing system  ( Fischer , 1995) and our idiomatic lexical database , called PIIRASEO-LEX , that we use in the sense of an additional idiom list proposed by  ( Wcinreich ,  1969) . 
'\[' he , design of our l ) arsing system was governed I ) y two main goals : paralh'lism and in crcm cntality . 
Nevertheless different formalisms m'c used to rap -resent syntactic and semantic features  , having the adwm tage that for syntax as well as for semantics thcmost appropriate tbrmalism can be chosen  . 4 Conseqnently , to guarantee parallelism , this also requires a connection le chan is nlt ) etween these formalisms is necessary . In the following sections tim structure of I , hcparser will t ) e describe ( lalong these lines . 
The grammar formalism of our systen l is an extension of the wellknown I  ) ATR-H . Synta ( :-ticinibrmation is encoded in feature structures . 
With the help of constraint equations these feature structures can be modified  . The underlying unification mechanism is enriched with sequences as well as simple w flue disjunctions  . 
For our application these , mantic formalism is of more interest . We de , cided to adopt l ) in kal'sat)-l ) roach (13 os , 1996) of I ) I // F . In contrast OKarat ) l ) llSs are not constructed in a to t ) down fashion from a phrase structure tree , but bottom-uplt S-ing a version of A calculus . When coml ) in ing ~- cah : ulus and I ) RT , two different kinds of abstraction are possible . First one can abstract over a complete DRS ( partial DRS ) or one can abstract only over a single discourse , referent ( predicative DRS ) . The h ) llowing example shows both kind of abstraction with the A  1  ) RS for the indetinite tie-termnet and the noun mistake  , a Feature structures are , use ( t to encode the A-I ) li , Ss . 
The main operation on ADRSs is the , fltnctional 4This is the socalled co-descriptive apprvach . Using the stone fl ) rmalism for syntacl ; i c and scman ~ i ( : construction is called the integrated approach , in tit (' , descriptive approach they are build up sequentially  . 
-b indicates the union of DRSs.
compost on on a partial DRS as flmctor and a predicative DRS as argument  . It is implemented with the helt ) of unification on the feature structures . 
Our parsing engine is an active chart parser.
'1) he chart edges arc marked , as usual , with cat-e , gory symhols . Additionally , syntactic % ature structures and ) vI ) RSs are attached to every edge ,  . 
1 , br the extension of active edges according to the flm damental rule of active chart parsing  , all syn-ta ( ' tic and semantic on straints of the resi ) ective gran una rule must be satisfied . 
A grammar rule consists of three parts : Context free rule  , so ver category symbols (' , on sti-tutcthel ) aekt ) on c of every grammar . They are annotate , d with equations , the solutions of which result in syntactic feature stractures  . Iil the , so equations the category symbols are used as projections to mark the structures to be used  . The category symbols are also used in the , senmntic operations on DllSs . For semanl ; ics , besides an operator compose for functional composition  , an operator id for identity is used . 
An interface module he , lps to connect ( lifl ~ realt lexicons to the , t ) arse , r . At the inoment , a synt;ac-tic lexicon containing t'e , atll rCstrll Ctllres , as enlan-l ; ic lexicon with A-I ) RSs and a specia lexicon for idioms , calle , d PIIRASI ~ : o-LEx ( Keil ,  1994) , ( Kcil , 1995) are commcted to the parser . 
Phraseo-Lex is a computational lexicon which was specially develot  ) ed for idiomatic knowledge . 
Of all dive , rsed syntactic , semantic , and pragmatic i if formal , ion provided by 1) IIRASI . ; O-LEX , we only ne , c(lforouri ) url ) ose h'mmata , base lexemes , ( idiomt ) artMt ) ating lcxi(:alwords:Bock ,   , schicfl ( , n ) , timinte ~ rnal syntacti ( : structure n coded as a syntactic tre , e , the internal sclnantic structure ell-coded as predicate argument structure and the logical tbrm  . 
As example , we show the lexical entries of our first examplary decomt  ) os ablcidiom . 
len , nta:einen Bockschie Benbase lexelnes : Boek , schie \] 3 en internal syntactic structure : ( vpll ( np-acc ( deteinen )   ( nBock ) )  ( vschie Ben ) ) internal semantic structure:
Idiom Paraphrase subje , ct subject x > X-dlre ~ c t object direct object einen Bock  -7 a mistake predicate 1  ) red careschie J3 en ~ make logical form : make ( x , y ) , mistake ( y ) iomatic information is extracted from PHRASEO-Ll , ~ x and mapped into feature structures the parser can handle  . 
5 Processing decomposable idioms
When parsing decomposable idioms with the parser described in the previous section  , the following steps are taken : While initial izing the ehart  , it is important to control whether potential parts of an idiom are found or not  . For (' . very word of a sentecne to be parsed it is checked if it is a baselexeme of an idiom  . If this test was positive , an additional chart edge is inserted for every idiom the word can occur in  . This edge is marked as usual , but with tile syntactic feature structure and the ADRS built from the idiomatic information of PtIRASEO-LI  , ' , X . 
The feature structure of this idiom edge contains informational  ) out how the idiom has to be completed and its underlying syntactic structure  . 
This information is extracted from tile PHRASEO LEX syntax tree  . The following examples how the feature structures of schicflcn and Bockofore " running example  . 
case:nominative-agrm:number:singulark person : two stem :  sehieBen_vpll3 \[ head\[stem: b?ck-vple31   1 \[ rest:nil
F case : nominative-\] number : singular agrm . \] person:two gender:mast stem : boek_vpl l3 vpl :\[ verb:schieflen_vpll3\] The features val ( for valency ) respectively vpl ( for verbal phraseologism ) contain the information necessary to find other relevant parts for building the idiom  . While in the case of verbs the feature valjust contains more information than usual  , namely the stems of the missing parts of the idiom  , the feature vpl is used to mark idiomatic information in other syntactic feature structures  . 
Every part of the idiom is marked with an extra ending  , in our example_vpll & This is due to the fact that the same words can occur in different idioms and should not be mixed up during parsing  , because of the corresponding semantic structures . 
For example , the words Katzc and Sack occur as well in die Katz causd cm  , Sacklassen ( fig . eq . " let the cat out of the bag " ) as in die Katzeim Sackkm@n ( fig . eq . " buy a pig in the poke ") . 
The A-DRS of the idiomatic edge already contains the literal referent of the part of the idiom they represent  . This means the senmnd centry for schicfic nas part of cinch Bockschicflen already contains the predicate make  ( z , y) . 
? xAy\[make(x,y)\]?x mistake(x )
For the same reasons the ADRS for bock contains the predicate mistake  ( x )  . This information is take . n from the internal semantic structure of the idiom encoded in PIIRASE o-LExaS shown above and translated into the A-DRS  . 
It is important onotice that the information concerning decomposable idioms is distribute  . damong all its base lexemes . Nevertheless , we only have one entry for every idiom in our idiomatic database  . Only when initializing the chart , this information is spread over several edges . 
In the grammar , special rules must he written to handle the idiomatic edges  . In these rules it must be checked whether a complete idiom can be constructed  . This is done with the help of extra equations over the special features val and vpl of the idiomatic feat m'e structures  . The following example shows a rule connecting an object and the verb phrase of a sentence  , checking if both the verb and the noun are 1 ) arts of the same idiom .   ( ~  ( VP--~VNP ( ( V val hcad )  =-  ( NP agrm )   ( Vvalhead stem )  =  ( NP stem )   ( NP vpl verb )  -  ( VP stem )   ( VP val )  =  ( NP valrest )   ( VPobj head ) = NP ( VP stem )  =  ( V stem ) )  ( compose NPV ) ) No changes were necessary neither to the chart parser itself nor to the fundamental rule  . All features concerning idioms are handled in the lexicons or the grammar  . 
The result of the parsing process are two readings of the sentence : the literal one  , and the idiomatic one . The syntactic feature structures of the literal and the idiomatic reading are the same  , as there is no pure syntactic difference between tile two readings  . Only the semantic structures differ : one DRS represents the literal idiomatic and one the idiomatic reading  . 
6Feature structures and rules are reduced to a minimum in our examples to keep the structures cleat'  . 

This technique allows us topm's e sentences like ( 1 )   ( 5 ) where , one part of the idiom is modified ail ( 1 i lot the idiom as whole . A discom'se referent for biir or hock respectively tall tale or mi  , stakc is already introduced dm'ing the initialization of the chart  . This referent can serve as an anchor for an I ) ossible adjectival modifier as unglanblich . 
With the help of the rule connecting a ( l jeetives and nouns ( not especially written for idioms ! )  , the predicates incredible ( z ) and tall-tale ( z ) are inserted in the DRS . This approach also works for anaphor as . The discourse referent introduce . d for B " ar is the . antecedent for the anapher in l ; he . next sentence \] 6 Extensions It is quite simt ) le to add the t ) rocessing of noncompositional idioms to our parser  . In this (: as (; , the whole literal meaning is bound to the main part of the idiom  , in in osteases the verb . The semantic of all the other parts is considered empty  , l ; he empty kI ) RS is bound l ; othee or resi ) on ding edges . Whe , n parsing a sentence where a part of a non -compositional idiom is modified  , the corresponding rules fail , t ) e ( : a use no discourse referent can be found this modification mw be bound to  . 
The only result will bett mliteral meaning of the  ~  ; elltenee . 
Our sysl ; em starts processing a potential idiom as soon as one base lexeme was fout l  ( 1 . An improved version of our approach will lmndle an idiom after some in ore baselexeines appeared  . 
This will reduce them unber of lexical lookups to PItRASI  , ;O LEX as well as the number of edges in the t ) arser . 

Bos, . h ) han ; Gamb S~ck , B j 6 r n ; l , i esk e , Christian ; Mori , Yoshiki ; Pinkal , Maiffred and Worm , Karsten . 1996 Compositional Semantics in Verbmobil , in this vol-lIIne . 
Burger , ltarald . 1973\[diomatik des Dcutschcn.

Chomsky , Noaln .   1981 Lectures on Government and Binding : The Pisa lectures  . Dordrecht/NL . 
Fischer , In grid ; Geistert , Bernd and G Srz , Gi in ther . 
1995 . Chartt ) ~tsed Incremental Semantics Con-stru ( : timl , with Anaphora Resolution Using A-DRT . 
r Similar results can be found in ( Stock , 1989) where Ital fiutidioms are the base . Hers the mapping of parts of the idiom to parts of the Imra I  ) hrase is done with the help of special referent substitutions between the literal and paraphrased meaning  . Unfor-f , unately , it ; is not described in detail how their nmeh-anism would work for anaphor ~ us or modifications of parts of the idiom  . 
In Proceedings of the fourth International Workshop on Parsing Technologies  , Prag and Karlsbad : 8788 . 
Geeraerts , Dirk .   1992 Specialisation and Reinter pre-tation in idioms . In M . Everaert , E . -J . van der Linden , A . Schenk , 11 . . Schreuder ( eds ), Proceedings of IDIOMS . International Conference on Idioms,
Tillmrg/NL:3952.
Kamp , Ilans and Reyle , Uwe .  1 . 993 From Discour , scto
Logic . Kluwer Academic Press.
Keil , Martina . 1994 Systematische Repr :, isentation verl)ah, . r Phraseologislnen midderen Eigenschaftellim Lexikon  . In Trost , Harald . ( ed . ) Proceedings of KONVENS '9 Jt , Springer , Wien/Austria : 181t 90 . 
Keil , Martina .   1995 Modell zur Repriisentation vet-baler PhT nseologismen  ( Phrasco-Lcx )  . PhD thesis,
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg.
Nunberg , Geoffrey D . 1978 The Pragmatics of Refl ' . r-ertcc . PhD thesis . Reproduced hythe Indiana University Linguistics Club  , Bloomington . 
Nunberg , Geoffrey D . , Iwm A . Sag , Thomas Wasow . 
1994 Idioms . ' I % chnicat report , University of Stan-fbrd . 
I ) ulman , Stephen G .  1993 . The Recognition , Interpretation of Idiomsht M . Everaert M , E . - il . Van der Linden ( eds . ) Procced in . qs of the fir's t Tilburg Workshop on Idioms , Tilburg/NL : 249270 . 
Stock , 0 . 1989 Parsing with flexiblity , dynamic strategies , idioms in mind . In Cornp'lttational linguistics , :15, 1:118 . 
Wasow , Thomas , ivan A . Sag , and Geoifrey Nunl : mrg . 
1982 hlioms . An Interim Report . In S . Ilattori , I . Kazuko , ( eds . ) Proceedings of the XIIIth international congress of linguists  , Tokio : 102-115 . 
Weinreich , Uriel . 1969 Problems in analysis of Idioms . 
In a . I ' uhvel(ed . ) Substance and Structure of language , Berkeley , University of California Press : 23-81 . 

