Discovering the Sounds of Discourse Structure *
Extended Abstract
Barbara J . Grosz
Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
33 Oxford Street
Cambridge , MA 02138 USA
grosz ( ~ eecs.harvard.edu
It is widely accepted that discourses are composed of segments and that the recognition of segment boundaries is essential to a determination of discourse meaning  ( Grosz and Sidner ,  1986) . Written language has orthographicues such as section headings  , paragraph boundaries , and punctuation which can assist in identifying discourse structure  . In spoken language , intonational variation provides essential information about disconrse structure  . For instance , it may be used to mark structural features of discourse at the global level  , such as segment boundaries . 
Intonation also provides more local information about relations among utterances within a segment  , for example indicating whether phrases are parenthetical  . It can also help distinguish between different interpretations of phrases that can function either as cue phrases that indicate discourse segment bomldaries or sententially to convey domain information  . Finally , variations in intonational prominence may be used to convey information about the discourse status of entities referred to by definite noun phrases and pronouns  . 
An understanding of intonational variation and the ways in which it carries information about discourse characteristics of spoken language is important for computer-based interpretation and gener-atien of speech  . From the interpretation perspective , this understanding may provide new techniques for identifying discourse structure  . From the generation perspective , it would lead to more natural synthetic speech , making it possible to produce comtmter speech that is easier for people to understand and less susceptible to misinterpretation  . 
Three major challenges have faced researchers attempting to discover the relationship between intonational features and the structure of spoken discourse  . First , the collection of corpora of spontaneous speech has required the development of * The research described in this presentation was supported by the National Science Foundation  , Grant IRI94-04756 . The research as been done collaboratively with Julia Hirschberg and Christine Nakatani  . 
David Ahn provided invaluable technical musistance . 
new experimental methodologies . Whereas it is straightforward to have the same text read by many speakers  , it is much more difficult to obtain similar samples of spontaneous speech from nmltiple speakers  . Second , techniques must be developed to obtain reliable segmentations and labelings of the corpora  . Because discourse structure is rooted in semantics rather than syntax  , this has proved more difficult than tagging corpora for sentence structure  . Third , measures of agreement among segmentations must be designed  . In this area too , the semantic nature of discourse structure leads to a more complex problem than comparing sentence parse structures  . 
This talk will begin with a summary of pilot studies that demonstrated reliable correlations of discourse structure and intonational features  ( Grosz and Hirschberg , 1992; Hirschberg and Grosz , 1992; Hirschberg and Grosz ,  1994) . 
It will then tb cus on a new corpus of direction -giving monologues  , the Boston Directions Corpus ( Nakatani et al , 1995a ; Hirschberg and Nakatani ,  1996) . I will describe the methodology we developed to elicit fluent spontaneous direction-giving monologues ranging over a spectrum of planning complexity  . Next I will describe the development of annotation instructions used to train labelers to segment spoken discourses  ( Nakatani et al , 1995b ) and will discuss agreement among segmentations on the Boston Directions Corpus obtained using these instructions  . Then I will describe results of our analyses of the correlation between discourse structure and intonational features  . Finally , I will present , a list of challenges for fllture research in this area  . 

Barbara Grosz and Julia Hirschberg .  1992 . Some intonational characteristics of discourse structure  . In John Ohala et al , editor , Proceedings of the 1992 International Conference on Spoken Language Processing  ( ICSLP-92 )  , pages 429432 , Edmonton , Canada . Personal Publishing

Barbara Grosz and Candace Sidner .  1986 . Attention , intentions , and the structure of discourse . 
Computational Linguistics , 12(3):175k-204.
Julia Hirschberg and Barbara Grosz .  1992 . Intonational features of local and global discourse structure  . In Proceedings of the Speech and Natural Language Workshop  , pages 441-446 . 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency,

Julia Hirschberg and Barbara Grosz .  1994 . Intonation and discourse structure in spontaneous and read direction-giving  . In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Prosody  , pages 103109 . Japan Society for the Promotion of

Julia Hirschberg and Christine H . Nakatani .  1996 . 
A prosodic analysis of discourse segments in direction-giving monologues  . In Proceedings of the Annual Meetingo/the Association for Computational Linguistics  . 
Christine Nakatani , Julia Hirschberg , and Barbara Grosz . 1995a . Discourse structure in spoken language : Studies on speech corpora  . In Working Notes of the AAAI-95 Spring Symposium on Empirical Methods in Discourse In-te ~ T retation  , pages 106-112 , Menlo Park , CA . 
American Association for Artificial Intelligence.
Christine H . Nakatani , Barbara J . Grosz , David D . Ahn , and Julia Hirschberg . 1995b . 
Instructions for annotating discourse . Technical Report TR-21-95, Harvard University . 

