Formal Description of Multi-Word Lexemes w ith the 
Finite-State Formalism IDAREX
Elisabeth Breidt
Seminarf fir Sprachwissenschaft
Universit?t T fibingen
Wilhelmstr . 113
D-72074 T fibingen


Frfddrique Segond , Giuseppe Valetto
Rank Xerox Research Centre
6, chemin de Maupertuis
F-38240 Meylan



Abstract
Most multiword lexemes ( MWLs ) allow
certain types of variation . This has to be taken into account for their description and their recognition in texts  . We suggest to describe their syntactic restrictions and their idiosyncratic peculiarities with local gramma rules  , which at the same time allow to express in a general way regularities valid for a whole class of 
MWLs . The local grammars can be written in a very convenient and compact way as regular expressions in the formalism IDAREX which uses a two-level morphology  . IDAREX allows to define various types of variables  , and to mix canonical and inflected word forms in the regular expressions  .  ~  1 Introduction Most texts are rich in multiword expressions that cannot be properly understood let alne be processed in an NLP system  , ff they are not recognized as complex lexical units  . Such expressions which we call multiword lexemes ( MWL ) range from idioms ( to rack one's brains over sth )  , over phrasal verbs ( to come up with ) , lexical and grammatical collocations ( to make love , with regard to resp . ) to compounds ( online dictionary ) . 
While certain MWLs only occur in exactly one form , e . g . out of the blue or G : umHa ares breite ( ' by a hair's breadth ' , lit . by hair's breadth ) , and can thus be easily recognised with simple pattern matching techniques  , it is wellknown ( see e . g . Gross 1982 , Brundage et al 1992 , Nunberg et al 1994 ) that most MWLs cannot be treated like completely fixed patterns  , since they may undergo some variation . However , only a subset of 1Part of this work was funded under LRE 62-080 by the EEC . 
the variations allowed by general rules is valid : outside that subset  , the expression loses its special , idiomatic meaning , either reverting to its literal meaning or losing any significance altogether  . 
In certain cases , MWLs can even contradict normal syntactic rules , as with by and large , or G : v on Hausaus (' originally ' , lit . from house out ) , where general rules would require an article between the preposition and the noun  . 
The identification of MWLs is essential for any natural language processing based on lexical information  , ranging from intelligent dictionary lookup over concordancing or indexing to machine translation  . Therefore , the restricted lexical and syntactic variability of MWLs and their idiosyncratic peculiarities need to be expressed in the computational lexicon in order to be able to recognize the full range of their occurrences  . We propose to use local grammars for this , written as a special type of regular expressions ( REs ) in the finite-state formalism IDAItEX which makes use of a two-level morphological lexicon  . So far , we have successfully applied this approach to approximately  15  , 000 English , French and German MWLs ( see also Segond and Breidt 1995 )  . 
2 Restricted Variability of MWLs
Basically , we recognize four types of variability ( see also Fleischer 1982 , Brundag et al .  1992 , En-gelke1994) that a description of MWLs , both for NLP and for human use , should cover . Though part of the variability of MWLs may follow from their semantic properties as argued in recent work  ( e . g . Nunberg et al 1994) , it is difficult to establish such a relationship on a large scale  , and a lot of remaining idiosyncratic haracteristics of individual MWLs need to be represented  . 
Morphological Variation : Particular words in the MWL may undergo certain inflections  . 
For instance , in G : durchschlagender Er folg ( ' sweeping success ' , lit . rubbing--off success ) , noun and comparative and superlative form are possible for the adjective  , whereas G : griine Welle (' phased traffic lights ' , lit . green wave ) may only vary in case , but not in number or adjective comparison without loosing its idiomatic meaning  . 
Lexical Variation : One or more words can be substituted by other terms without changing the overall meaning of the MWL  . 
For instance , in F : perdrel at dte (' to lose one's mind ' , lit . to lose the head ) , the noun can be substituted by laboule ( lit . ball , coll . head ) or lespddales(lit . pedals ) without loosing its idiomatic meaning , but not by latron che(lit . slice , coll . 

Modification : One of the MWL's constituents can be modified  , preserving the idiomatic meaning . 
For instance , inG : den ( schgnen ) Scheinwahren ( ' to keep up appearances ' , lit . the ( nice ) pretence preserve ) the presence or absence of the adjective does not change the meaning at all  , whereas inG : dasH and tueh werfen ( ' to throw in the towel ' , lit . the to welth row ) any modification would evoke the literal meaning . 
Structural Flexibility : This includes phenomena like passivization  , topicalization , scrambling , raising constructions etc . 
For instance , whereas in German standard word order variation applies to all verbal MWLs  , top-icalisation of lexically fixed components i only rarely po~ible  , as in G : den Vogel dabei hat dana Jan abgeschossen  ( ' finally , Jan surpassed everyone ' , lit . the bird with it has then Janshot ) . 
3 IDAREX : Encoding Idioms As
Regular EX pressions
The IDAREX formalism and the corresponding FSC FiniteState Compiler have been developed at Rank Xerox Research Centreby L  . Karttunen,
P . Tapanainen and G . Valetto2.
3.1 Morphological Variation
Because IDAItEX use 8 a two-level morphology , words can be presented either in their baseform at the lexical level or in an inflected format the surface level  . The surface form is preceded by a colon and restricts occurrences of the word to exactly this form  , e . g . 
2 For a more detailed description of the formalism see Kaxttunen and Yam-pol  ( 1993 )  , Tapanainen (1994) , Uaxttunen (1995) , and
Segond and Tapanainen (1995).
: Welle
The lezical form is followed by an IDAREX morphological variable specifying morphological features of the word  , and a colon , e . g . 
durchschlagend A :
This represents any occurrence of the word with the specified morphological properties  . The morphological variable can be very general , such a . u ' A ' for ally adjectival use , or more specific , such as Abs0 for adjectives that may not be used in comparative form and is g to restrict nouns to the singular  , asing rim Abse:WelleNsg : This way , the restricted morph ( ~ syntactic flexibility of MWLs can bcexpressed very elegantly  . 
3.2 Modification
MWL modifications with particular words are represented as optional expressions with parentheses  , as ill:den ( : sch6nen ) : Schein The definition of word class variables allows to express lexically unrestricted modifications of an MWL such as insertion of any adverb  ( s )   ( the Kleene star operator indicates that the item may occur any number of times  ) : perdre V : ADV *: la:t@te On the basis of simpler word class variables more complex ones may be defined for complex syntactic categories suclt as  NP  , ADVP or PP . 
3 . 3 Lexieal and St ructura l Var ia t ion The formalism provides a set of RE operators to combine the descriptions of single words  . Square brackets '\[\]' and the bar'--' are used to describe lexical variants and alternations of more complex sequences such as word order variation in German  . 
For instance , for the French example above we write per dreV : ADV*\[:la:t~teI:la:boule 
I : les:p6dales\];
To express German verb-front and verb-final word order as in ' dabei wahrter  ( immer ) denSchein ' ( ' in this , he always keeps up appearances ' ) and ' urn den Scheinzu wahren ' ( ' in order to keep up appearances ' ) we write \[ wahren Vf in: ( kDV*NP nor . ) / d ) V *: den ( : schSnen ) : ScheinI:den ( : schSnen ) : Schein ( : zu ) wahren \] ; macros to capture generalisations on the syntactic level  . Any position in the macro that we want to instantiate differently for each use is indicated by a parameter  $4  . Instantiations of parameters can be single words in lexical or surface form  , variables , operators or other macros . 
For example , instead of explicitly writing the complicated RE above  , we define a word order macro WOV ltrg that may be used for all German verbal MWLs having no additional idiom mxternal arguments : 
WOV1 Arg:\[$2 Vfin: ( ADV*NP nom ) ADV *$1\[$1 ( : zu ) $2v:\]In addition , we define auxiliary macrosfix ( i ) because we want to instantiate the parameter $1 , which stands for the lexically fixed components of the MWL  , with expressions of variable length : fix5:$1   $2   $3   $4 $ S fix2:$1   $2 etc . 
Using this word order macro , the MWLs den ( schSnen ) Scheinwahren and die Ohrenspitzen ( ' to prick upone ' sears ' , lit . the ears sharp en ) can now both be expressed very simply according to the same schemas 
WOV lArg ( fix S ( : den ( : schSnen ) : Schein ) vahren ) 
WOV lhrg(fix2 (: die:Ohren ) spitzen)
Further macros are defined for German for MWLs with a reflexive or particle verb  , to express scrambling of an idiom-external PP complement or topicalisation  . In French , macros describe for example the verb complex for MWLs involving a reflexive verb  . 
4 Discussion
NLP treatments of MWLs in so called high level grammar formalisms have for example been proposed in  Abeill6 and Schabes ( 1989 ) in the framework of lexicalised TAGs , Erbaeh (1992) and Copestake (1994) in HPSG , Vander Linden (1993) in CG . These approaches to our knowledge cannot satisfactorily represent lexical variants  , nor the restricted flexibility and modifiability of MWLs  . 
Instead of using a high-level grammar formalism we describe  , MWLs with finite-state local grammars . Although finite-state techniques are known to be unable to represent all the dependencies found in natural anguage  , they have the advantage of allowing a very efficient reatment of a great number of phenomena and the implementation of robust  , largescale NLP systems . However , the use of these techniques i usually hampered by the unwieldiness in notation that these techniques usually lead to  . 
The presented approach overcomes this problem : instead of having to specify local grammars directly as finite state networks or as graphs  ( e . g . 
Maurel 1993 , Roche 1993 , and Silberztein 1993) , IDAKEXREs provide a convenient way to mix inflected and uninflected word forms  , morphological features and complete word classes , thus greatly relieving lexicographers from the burden of explicitly listing all the possible forms  . Furthermore , our formalism allows the use of a bigger set of operators such as contains  ( $ )  , not (~) , and (&) , etc . This provides us with the possibility to express certain things in a very compact way  . For example , in the definition of German verbs we exclude contracted forms of verbs and the pronounes such as geht's  ( ' it goes ' )   , we simply state " any expression with the morphological feature + V  , followed by anything that must not contain a letter  ( i . e . additional morphological features ) , and which does not contain the feature+cain any position " define V ~  . + V "$ Letterk "$ Y . + esWithmacros , generahzations about patterns that can occur for a whole class of MWLs can be expressed  . This compactness and flexibility are , as far as we know , specific to our approach . 
Encoding the local grammars as REs instead of encoding them directly as networks does of course not change the expressive power of the formalism  , but it conveniently abstracts the handling of MWLs from the graph manipulation level  , allowing to develop and employ devices that operate on string representations and map them to the underlying finite state networks  . As we have shown above , this simplifies considerably the description of the different patterns of variation oe curing in 

Once the MWLs listed in the dictionary have been manually changed into their canonical baseform  , including possible lexical variants and modifiers and indicating morphologically flexible components and the scope of alternative components  , the IDA a EXREs describing all possible contexts in which the MWLs can occur can be produced automatically  . For instance , the canonical forms for the examples from section  2 can be specified as : durchschlagender ? Er folg ? gr fine ? Welle  ( sg ) perdre ? ( ADV ) ^ lat~te/laboule/lesp6dales ^
T : den Vogel ( beietw ) abschie Ben?den ( schSnen ) Scheinwahren ? out of the blue umHa ares breite Such canonical baseforms  , somewhat similar in spirit to the notation used in Longman's ' Dictionary of English Idioms '  ( 1979 )  , do not only form the basis for the automatic processing and recognition of MWLs  . Human users as well would profit from a careful description of the variability of MWLs  , so it should be worthwhile to also include the canonical forms in dictionaries for human users  . 
The presented approach is successfully used in the COMPASS project  3 to represent MWLs in dictionary databases converted from standard bilingual dictionaries  . The COMPASS system , based on the LOCOLEX engine ( Bauer , Segond and Zae-hen 1995) developed at RXRC , allows lookup of words in the dictionary database directly out of an online text  . When the user clicks on an unknown word in a foreign language  , LOCOLEX evaluates the context of the queried word  . Currently , the system determines the word's part of speech and whether the word is part of an MWL  . In the latter case , the translation for the entire MWL is returned , otherwise a selection of translations for the most appropiate part of speech  . 

We thank Annie Zaenen , Lauri Kaxttunen , Ted Briscoe , and Irene Maxwell for their comments on an earlier draft of this paper  . 
References
Abeilld Anne ; and Schabes Yves , (1989) . " Parsing idioms in lexicalized TAGs " . Proceedings of the 4th EACL , Manchester , UK . 
Bauer Daniel ; Segond Fr~ddrique ; and Zaenen Annie ,  (1995) . " LOCOLEX : the translation rolls off your tongue  "  . Proceedings of ACH-
ALLC , Santa Barbara , CA.
Brundage Jennifer ; Kresse March ; Schwall Ulrike ; and Storrer Angelika ,  (1992) . " Multiword Lexemes : A Monolingual and Contrastive Typology for NLP and MT '  . IWBS Report 232, IBM TR-80 . 92-029 , IBM Deutschl and GmbtI , Institut fiir Wissens basierte Systeme , Heidelberg , September . 
Copestake Anne , (1994) . " Idioms in general and in HPSG " . Presentation given at the Workshop ' The Future of the Dictionary '  , Uriage-
Les-Balns , France , September 1994.
Z'Adapting bilingual dictionaries for COMPrehen -sionAS Sistance '  , LRE-62-080 . 
Engelke Sabine , (1994) . Eigenschafteny on Phraseolexemen : Eine Unier suchung zur syn-taktischen Varia bilild tund internes Modifizier-barkeity on somatischen verbalenPhraseolexe-men  . Master's Thesis , Universit ~ it Tiibingen,
Germany , April.
Erbach Gregor , (1992) . " Head-Driven Lexical Representation of Idioms in HPSG "  . In M . 
Everaert et al , editors , Proceedings of the International Conference on Idioms  , Tilburg , NL , 

Fleischer Wolfgang , (1982) . Phraseologie der den-ts chen Gegenwartss prache . VEB Bibliographis-ches Institut , Leipzig , Germany . 
Gross Maurice .  (1982) . " Use classification dephrases fig 6 esfran ~ a is " . Revue Quebecoise de Linguistique , Vol . 11, No .  2 . Montreal . 
Karttunen Lanri , (1995) . " The Replace Operator " . Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ( ACL-95 )  , Boston , MA . 
Karttunen Lanri ; and Yarnpol Todd , (1993) . " Interactive Finite State Calculus " . Technical Report ISTL-NLTT-1993-04-01 , Xerox Palo Alto
Research Center , California.
van der Linden Erik-Jan , (1993) . A Categorial Computational Theory of Idioms . OTS Dissertation Series , Utrecht , NL . 
Maurel Denis , (1993) . " Passaged ' unautomate a vectables d ' acceptablilit ~ hun automate lexical "  . In Acresdu colloque Informatique et langue naturelle  , pages 269-279 , Nantes , 

Nunberg Geoffrey ; Wasow Thomas ; and SagIvan ,  (1994) . " Idioms " . Language , 70/3:491-538 . 
Roche Emmanuel , (1993) . Analyse syntaxique transformation neiled u franfais part rans duc-tent set lezique -grammaire  . Th~ededoctorat,
Universit ~ Paris 7.
Segond FrSd~rique ; and Breidt Elisabeth , (1995).
"Description formelle des expressions hmots multiple senfran ~ aisetenal lemand dunsle cadre de latechnologic desdtatsfin is "  . Lex-icomatique lDictionnairiques , Aet es des IV e Journ6es Scientifiques du reseau " Lexicologie , Terminologie , Traduction " de I ' UREF , Lyon , 
Septembre 1995.
Segond Fr6d ~ rique ; and Tapanalnen Past , (1995).
" Using a finite-state based formalism to identify and generate multiword expressions "  . Technical Report MLTT-019 , Rank Xerox Research Centre , Grenoble , France , July . 

Silberztein Max , (1993) . Dictionnaires dlectro-niqneset analyse automatique detextes-Lesyst ~ meINTEX  . Masson , Paris , France . 
Tapanainen Pasi , (1994) . " RXRC FiniteState rule Compiler " . Technical Report MLTT-020 , Rank Xerox Research Centre , Grenoble , France . 

