Issues in Communication Game
HASIDAK 6 it i
Electrotechnical Laboratory
1-1-4 Umezono , Tukuba , Ibaraki 305, Japan.


As interaction between autonomous agents , communication can be analyzed in game-theoretic terms  . Meaning game is proposed to formalize the core of intended communication in which the senders ends a message and the receiver attempts to infer its meaning intended by the sender  . Basic issues involved in the game of natural language communication are discussed  , such as salience , grammaticality , common sense , and common belief , together with some demonstration of the feasibility of game ~ theoretic account of language  . 
1 Introduction
Communication is a game ( interaction among autonomous agents ) by definition . So it can be analyzed in game-theoretic terms In this paper we study a fundamental aspect of linguistic communication from the point of view of game theory  , and enumerate some basic issues involved in the communication games of natural language  . 
Let I be the proposition that the sender S intends to communicate a semantic ontent c to the receiver R  . Then I entails that S intends that R should both recognize c and believe I  . This is the core of nonnatural meaning ( Grice , 1957; Grice ,  1969) . Grice's original notion of nonnatu-ral meaning further entails  ( S's intention of ) R's believing ( whene is a proposition or a reference ) or obeying ( when it is an order or a request ) c , but we disregard this aspect and concentrate on this core  . 
This restricted sense of nonnatural meaning implies that communication is inherently collaborative  , because both S and R want that R should recognize c and I  . S of course wants it , and so does R because it is beneficial in general to know what S intends to make R believe or obey  . Smight belying or trying to mislead R , but even in 1See Osborne and R . ubinstein (1994) , ~mong others , for general reference on game theory . 
such a case S is still intending to communicate a content c by way of making R recognize this intention  . Even if R doubts S's honesty , R will try to know what c is , because knowing whate is would help Rinfer what the hidden intent of S may be  , among others . For instance , when S tells R that it is raining , R will learn that S wants to make R believe that it is raining  . R would do so even if R knew that it is not raining  . Even if R were unsin-cere and misunderstood S's message on purpose  ,   2 the nonnatural meaning is still properly conveyed  , because otherwise the intended misunderstanding would be impossible  . 
The present study concerns this aspect of communication  , the nonnatural meaning in the restricted sense , which is a core of intended communication . Lies , ironies , indirect speech acts , and so forth ( Perrault , 1990; Perrault and Allen , 1980) all share this core . Our understanding about it will hence help us understand basic workings of natural communication systems  . As an example , centering theory ( Grosz et al ,  1995 ) could be attributed to game-theoretic accounts , as demonstrated l~ter in this paper . 
2 Communication Games
Communication has been discussed in the game -theory literature  . A signaling game consists of sender S's sending a message  ( or a signal ) to receiver R and R's doing some action in response to that message  . Here Sknows something that R did not know before receiving the message  . This is formulated by assuming that S belongs to some type  , which Sknows but R does not know at first . 
Let T be the set of the types , P be the probability distribution over T . Let M be the set of the messages and A be the set of R's possible actions  . Finally , let Ux be the utility function for player X . Us(t , m , a ) and UR(t , m , a ) are real numbers for tET , m6 Manda EA . A signaling game with T = h , t  ~ , M : ml , m2 and A = al ,   a2 is illustrated by a game tree as shown ~ If / ~ is sincere and unintentionally misunder-stands  , that is just a failure of sharing the same context with S  . 
531 in Figure 1. Here the game proceeds downwards.
tlt2 mlm2 mlm2
AAAA ~1a2ala2ala2
Figure 1: A signaling game.
The top branch is the nature's initial choice of S 's type according to P  , the middle layer is S's decision on which message to send  , and finally the bottom layer is R's choice of her action  . When R has just received ml(i = 1 ,  2) , she does not know whether the game has been played throught lor  t2  . 
Let as and ~ n be S's and R's strategies , 3 respectively . That is , as ( mlt ) is the conditional probability of S's sending message m provided that she is of type t  , and an ( aim ) the conditional probability of R's doing action a provided that she has received m  . The combination (~ s , an ) of strategies i an equilibrium 4 of a signaling game when as and a ~ are the optimal responses to each other  ; that is , when a z maximizes X's expected utility g ( t ) ~ s ( mlt ) ~ n ( alm ) Ux ( t , m , a ) given a y , for both X = SAY = R and X =

In typical applications of sign Minggame , T , M and A are not discrete sets as in the above example but connected subsets of real numbers  , and S's preference for R's action is the same irrespective of her type  . In this setting , S should send a costly message to get a large pay off  . For instance , in job market signaling ( Spence ,  1973) , a worker S signals her competence ( type ) to a potential employer R with the level of her education as the message  , and R decides the amount of salary to offer to S . A competent worker will have high education and the employer will offer her a high salary  . In mate selection ( Zahavi ,  1975) , a deer S indicates its strength by the size of its antlers  3Or mixed strategies , which are probability distri = butions over the simple strategies  ( actions )  . 
4 Orcomplete Bayesian equilibrium , in a more precise , technical term . 
to potential mates R . A strong deer will grow extral argeantlers to demonstrate its extra survival competence with this handicap  . 
Cheap-talk game is another sort of communication game  . It is a special case of signaling game where Us and UR do not depend on the message  ; that is , composing/sending and receiv-ing/interpreting message are free of cost  . In a cheap-talk game , S's preference for R's action must depend on her type for nontrivial communication to obtain  , because otherwise S's message would given o information to R about her type  . 
3 Meaning Game
Now we want to formulate the notion of meaning game to capture nonnatural meaning in the restricted sense discussed in Section  1  . Let C be the set of semantic ontents and P the probability distribution over the linguistic reference to the semantic contents  . That is , P ( c ) is the probability that S intends to communicate semantic ontent c to R  . As before , M is the set of the messages . 
A meaning game addresses a turn of communication ( cs , m , c ~> , which stands for a course of events where S , intending to communicate a semantic content Ks , sends a message m to R and R interprets m as meaning CR  . CS = cn is a necessary condition for this turn of communication to be successful  . It seems reasonable to assume that the success of communication is the only source of positive utility for any player  . 
So a meaning a me might be a sort of signaling game in which S's type stands for her intending to communicate some semantic ontent  , and R's action is to infer some semantic content . That is , both T and A could be simply regarded as C . 
Strategies or s and an are defined accordingly.
In a simple formulation , the utility function Ux of player X would thus be a real-valued function from C?M?C  ( the set of turns )  . It would be sensible to assume that Ux(cs , m , eR ) > 0 holds only if es = cn . Ux reflects the grammar of the language ( which might be private to S or R to various degrees  )  . The grammar evaluates the ( corn = putational , among others ) cost of using content-message pairs . The more costly are ( cs , mI and ( m , cR ) , the smaller is Uz(cs , m , cn ) . The notion of equilibria in a meaning game is naturally derived from that in a signaling game  . 
If the players want something like common belief , 5 however , meaning games are not signaling games . This is because cs = cn is not a sufficient condition for the success of communication in that case  . Ux should then depend on not just KS , m , and c ~ , but also the players ' nested beliefs 5People have common belief of proposition p when they all believe p  , th cy all believe that they M1 believe p , they all believe that they all believe that they all believe p  , and so on , adinf in itum . 
532 about each other . We will come back to this issue in Section 4 . 
Note also that the typical instances of meaning game in natural language communication is not like the typical applications of signaling a me such as mentioned before  , even if meaning games are special sort of signaling games  . That is , meaning games in natural anguage would normally involve discrete sets of semantic ontents and messages  . 
Natural-language meanin games are not cheap-talk games  , either , because we must take into consideration the costs of content-message pairs  . It is not just the success of communication but also various other factors that account for the players ' utility  . S and Rhence do not just want to maximize the probability of successful communication  . 
To illustrate a meaning game and to demonstrate that meaning games are not cheap-talk games  , let us consider the following discourse . 
(1) ul : Freds colded Max.
u2: He was angry with the man .
The preferred interpretation of ' he ' and ' the man ' in u ~ are Fred and Max  , respectively , rather than the contrary . This preference is accounted for by the meaning game as shown in Figure  2  . In this probability :/) 1>P2
Fred Max'he ' ~ the in all ' utility : U ~> U2 Figure 2: A meaning game about references of

game , Fred and Max are semantic ontents , and ' he ' and ' the man ' are messages .   6 We have omitted the nature ' selection among the semantic on-tents  . Also , the nodes with the same label are collapsed to one  . S's choice goes downward and R's choice upward , without their initially knowing the other's choice  . The complete bipartite connection between the contents and the messages means that either message can mean either content grammatically  ( without too much cost )  . 
-Pl and P2 are the prior probabilities of references to Fred and Maxin  u2  , respectively . Since Fred was referred to by the subject and Max by the object in ul  , Fred is considered more salient than Maxinu2 . This is captured by assuming P1>P2 . U1 and /72 are the utility ( negative 6Perhaps there are other semantic ontents and messages . 
cost ) of using ' he ' and ' the man , ' respectively , rUtilities are basically assigned to content -message pairs  , but sometimes it is possible to consider costs of messages irrespective of their contents  . We assume U1 > U ~ . to the effect that ' he ' is less complex than ' the man'both phonologically and semantically  ; ' he'is not only shorter than'theman'but also  , more importantly , less meaningful in the sense that it lacks the connotation of being adult which ' the man'has  . 
There are exactly two equilibria entailing 100% success of communication , as depicted in Figure 3 with their expected utilities ~1 and ?2 apart from the utility of success of communication  , s P , > P2
Fred Maxqle '' the man '
Fred MaxX'he '' the man '&= P~u ,  +  P2U2   ?2  =  P1U2  +  I?2U1 Figure 3: Two equilibria of the meaning game in
Figure 2 , and / 71 > U2 imply ~1-~2 = ( P1-/)2) ( U1-U2) 0 . So the equilibrium in the lefthand side is preferable for both S and R  , or Pare to superior . 
This explains the preference in (1) . It is straightforward to generalize this result for cases with more than two contents and messages : A more salient content should be referred to by a lighter message when the combinations between tile contents and the messages are complete  . A general conjecture we might draw from this discussion is the following  . 
(2 ) Natural-language meaning games are played at their Pare to-optimal equilibria  . 
An equilibrium is P are to optimal iff no other equilibrium is P are to superior to it  . 
Note that we have derived an essence of centering theory  ( Joshi and Weinstein , 1981; Kamcyama , 1986; Walker et al , 1994; Grosz et al ,  1995) . Centering theory is to explain anaphora in natural language  . It considers list Cf ( ui ) of forward-looking centers , which are the semantic entities realize ~ in ui , where ul is the ith utt e > ance . The forward-looking centers of utterance u 7For the sake of simplicity , here we assume that Us and U ~ arc equal . See Section 4 for discussion . 
SCommon belief about the communicated content is always obtained in both cases  . So the current discussion does not depend on whether the success of communication is defined by cs = cR or common belief  . 
9A linguistic expression realizes a semantic ontent when the former directly rcfers to the latter or the situation described by the former involves the latter  . 
533 are ranked in Cf ( u ) according to their saliences . 
In English , this ranking is determined by grammatical functions of the expressions in the utterance  , as below . 
subject > direct object > indirect object > other complements > adjuncts The highestranked element of Cf  ( u ) is called the preferred center of U and written C p  ( u )  . 
Backward-looking center Cb ( ui ) of utterance ui is the highestranked element of Cf  ( ui-1 ) that is realized in ui . Cb ( u ) is the entity which the discourse is most centrally concerned with at u  . 
Centering theory stipulates the following rule.
(3 ) If an element of Cf ( ui_J is realized by a pronoun in ui , then so is Cb(u ) . 
In (1) , Cb(u2): Fred because Cf(ul ) :\[ Fred , Max \] , if either ' he ' or ' the man ' refers to Fred . 
Then rule ( 3 ) predicts that Fred cannot be realized by ' the man ' if Max is realized by ' he ' -- the same prediction that we derived above  . Moreover ,   ( 3 ) itself is a special instance of our above observation that a more salient content should be referred to by a lighter message  , provided that the backward-looking center is particularly salient  . 
(3 ) is common in all the version of centering theory , but of course there are further details of the theory  , which vary from one version to another . To derive all of them ( which are right ) in a unified manne requires further extensive study  . 
4 Playing the Same Game
We have so far assumed implicitly that S and R have common knowledge about  ( the rule of ) the game ( that is , P , Us and UR ) . This assumption will be justified as a practical approximation in typical applications of signaling games  ( and cheap-talk games )  . For instance , there may well be a body of roughly correct , stable common sense knowledge about the correlation between the competence of workers and the degree of effort they make to have higher education  , about how much an employer will offer to an employee with a certain competence  , and so on . 
However , common knowledge on the game might be harder to obtain in natural language meanin games  , because the game lacks such stability of the typical signaling games as mentioned above  . A natural language meaning game is almost equivalent to the context of discourse  , which changes dynamically as the discourse unfolds  . 
In general , to figure outher ow nbest strategy , S ( R ) attempts to infer R's ( S's ) strategy by simulating R's ( S's ) inference . If S and R do not have common knowledge about the game  , this inference will constitute an infinite tree . 1 ? For instance , For instance , after an utterance of ' a house , '' the door ' realizes the house referred to by ' a house  . '  1?This is not a game tree but a tree of belief embedding . 
Figure 4 depicts S's inference when she wants to communicate cl  , where the players have common knowledge of C : Cl  , c2\] and M:ml , m2 but not of their utility functions . The nodes labeled by c~represent S when she wants to communicate c ~  , and those labeled by m~represent R when she wants to interpret mi  , for i = 1 ,  2 . The inference by R when interpreting message mi is a similar tree rooted by mi  . 
Although it is impossible to actually have common knowledge in general  ( Halpern and Moses ,  1990) , there are several motivations for the players to pretend to have common knowledge about the game  . First , they can avoid the computational complexity in dealing with infinite trees such as above  . Second , common belief on the game is a simple means to obtain common belief on the communicated content  . Third , the best pay off is obtained when the players have common knowledge about the game  , if their utility functions are equal . In fact , the utility functions are probably equal , because language use as a whole is a repeated game  . That is , provided that communicating agents play the role of S and R half of the time each  , they can maximize their expected utility by setting their utility functions to the average of their selfish utilities  . Fortunately , this equalization is very stable , as long as the success of communication is the only source of positive utility for both the players  . 
In communication games , common knowledge on which message Shassent should help the players converge on common belief on the game  . 
That is , when the players have common knowledge that message m was sent  , they may be able to detect errors in their embedded beliefs  . In fact , an embedded belief turns out wrong if it implies ~ rs  ( mlc ) = 0 for every c in the embedded context . 
This common knowledge about m may be even incorporated in the meaning game  . That is , it may affect the cost of retrieving or composing various content-message pairs  , thus biasing the scope of the game towards those content-message pairs closely associated with m  . Contents and messages very difficult to envisage given m will be virtually excluded from the game  . Once the game is defined , however , both players must take into consideration the entire maximal connected subgraph containing the content she wants to convey or the messages he wants to interpret  . 
5 Composite Game
Natural-language communication is a composite game in two senses  . First , as mentioned in the previou section , it is considered a repeated game , which is a sequence of smaller games . Second , each such smaller game is a compound game consisting of temporally overlapping meaning ames  . 
These facts introduce several complications into the communication game  . 

Clml clc2
Zl~lTt % 2T fglm2hAAA
ClC2 ClC2 C1C2 C1C2::::::::m2
C1C2 mlm2 mlm2 ? hAA
C 1   C2   C1   C2 CI C2 ClC 2 : : : : : : : : Figure 4: Inference by S to communicate semantic ontent cl . 
In a repeated game , one stage may affect the subsequent stage . In natural language communication , a meaning game can influence the next meaning game  . For instance , if a semantic on-tent c is referred to by a message with a low cost  , then the probability of reference to c may increase as a sort of accommodation  ,   1~ because a reference by a lightweight message presupposes high prior probability of reference  , as discussed in Section 3 . 
For instance , a reference to Fred by ' he ' will raise the salience of Fred  . 
Another type of contextual effect shows up the following discourse  . 
(4) ul : Freds colded Max.
u2: The man was angry with him.
Here ' the man ' and ' he ' in u2 are more readily interpreted as Fred and Max , respectively , which violates ( 3 ) and hence our game-theoretica count . 
This preference is accounted for by the preference for parallelism concerning the combination of semantic ontent and grammatical function : In both ul and u ~  . Fred is realized by the subject NP and Max is realized by the object NP  . This is the same sort of preference that is addressed by property-sharing constraint  ( Kameyama ,  1986) . 
This effect is attributed to the utility assignment as shown in Figure  5  . That is , the utility U1 of associating the proposition angry ( Fred , Max )   ( that l~ed is a ngry with Max ) with the sentence ' The man was angry with him ' is greater than the utility  ( /2 of associating angry ( Max , Fred )   ( the proposition that Max is angry with Fred ) with the same 11 Lewis ( 1979 ) discusse several types of accommodation for conversation M score  , of which the most relevant here is accommodation for comparative salience : x becomes more salient hany when something is said which presupposes x to be more salient hany  . 
probability :/91 ~ P2 angry ( Fred , Max ) angry ( Max , Fred ) utility : ' The man was angry with him ' Figure 5: A meaning a meabout propositions and sentences . 
sentence . This game might involve other possible associations such as that between angry  ( Max , Fred ) and ' The man made himan gry , ' but as mentioned at the end of Section 4 contents and messages other than included in Figure  5 probably accompany great costs and hence may be neglected  . 
In general , several meaning games are played possibly in parallel during linguistic communica ~ tion using a compound expression  . A turn of corn = munication with an utterance of ' the man was angry with him ' consists of the sentence-level game mentioned above  , the two noun phrase-level games--one concerning the subject NP  ( shown in Figure 2 ) and the other the object NP of ' with '-- and so on  . A strategy of each player in such a compound game associated with a compound expression is a combination of her strategies for all such constituent games  . Each player attempts to maximize the expected utility over the entire compound game  , rather than for each constituent game . 
Different constituent games often interact . For instance , if the speaker chooses to say ' the man ' for the subject NP  , then the whole sentence can-solution , which maximizes the utility from the entire game , may maximize the utility from some constituent games but not from others  . In the above example , the global solution , which involves saying ' the man was angry with him ' and interpreting it as angry  ( Fred , Ma ?) , maximizes the utility from the sentence-level game but not from the NP-level games  . Incidentally , the players will gain greater utility if they use the combination of a n-gry  ( Fred , Max ) and ' he was angry with the man , ' which is consistent with the optimal equilibrium of the NP-games  . When ' the man was angry with him ' is used despite the smaller default utility associated with it  , Max will probably be assigned a greater salience than otherwise  , which is again a sort of accommodation . 
Extralinguistic contextenters sentence-level games and plays an important role in language use  . For example , if it is known that Maxnever gets angry and that Fred is short-tempered  , then both in ( 1 ) and ( 4 ) the second utterance will preferably be interpreted as meaning a n-gry  ( Fred , Max) . 
6 Conclusion
Meaning game captures nonnatural meaning in the restricted sense which obtains in basically all the cases of natural language communication  . 
The factors which define a meaning a meinclude grammatical function  , reference by lightweight message , extralinguistic nformation ( these affect P ) , grammar , cost of recalling ( these affect the utility ) , and so on . To have a more complete game-theoretic a count of natural language  , we need a quantitative characterization fhow those factors contribute to the game  . 
We have almost restricted ourselves to references of nouns phrases  , but the seemingly promising targets of game -theoretic a count of natural language apparently include binding theory  , con-vcrsational implicature ( Parikh ,  1992) , and so on . 
Since our account is very general in nature , however , it should apply to language as a whole . For instance , the notion of grammaticality may well be attributed to the computational difficulty in convergence to a common game-theoretic equilibrium  . Also , abductive inference involved in language understanding  ( Hobbs et al , 1993) ( hence in language production , too , fl ' om the game-theoretic , reciprocal viewpoint ) is closely related with our theory . That is , the particular usefulness of abduction in natural anguage communication could be ascribed to the fact that language use in essence is a collaborative interaction such as discussed so far  . 
References
H . Paul Grice .  1957 . Meaning . Philosophical Review , 66:377-388 . 
H . Paul Grice .  1969 . Utterer's meaning and intentions . Philosophical Review , 68(2):147=177 . 
Barbara J . Grosz , Aravind K . Joshi , and Scott Weinstein .  1995 . Centering : A framework for modeling the local coherence of discource  . 
Computational Linguistics , 21(2):203-225.
Joseph Y . Halpern and Yoram Moses . 1990.
Knowledge and common-knowledge in a distributed environment  . Journal of the ACM , 37(3):549-587 . 
Jerry R . Hobbs , Mark E . Stickel , Douglous E . Appelt , and Paul Martin .  1993 . Interpretation as abduction . Artificial Intelligence , 63(1-2):69-142 . 
Aravind K . Joshi and Scott Weinstein . 1981.
Control of inference : Role of some aspects of discourse structure -- centering  . In Proceedings of the 7th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , pages 385-387 . 
Megumi Kameyama .  1986 . A property-sharing constraint in centering . In Proceedings of the 2~th Annual Meeting of ACL , pages 200-206 . 
David Lewis .  1979 . Score keeping in a language game . Journal of Philosophical Logic , 8:339359 . 
Martin J . Osborne and Ariel Rubinstein . 1994.
A Course in Game Theory . The MIT Press,
Cambridge , Massachusetts.
Prashant Parikh .  1992 . A game-theoretic a count of implicature . In Proc . of the Fourth Conference on Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning About 
Knowledge , pages 85-94, Monterey , CA.
C . Raymond Perrault and James F . Allen . 1980.
A plan-based analysis of indirect speech act.
American Journal of Computational Linguistics ,  6(3-4):167-182 . 
C . Raymond Perrault .  1990 . An application of default logic to speech act theory  . In Philip R . 
Cohen , J . Morgan , and Martha E . Pollack , editors , Intentions in COMMUNICATION , pages 161-185 . MIT Press . 
A . Michael Spence . 1973. Job market signaling.
Quartery Journal of Economics , 87:355-74.
Marilyn Walker , Masayo Iida , and Sharon Cote.
1994 . Japanese discourse and the process of centering . Computational Linguistics , 20(2):193-232 . 
A . Zahavi .  1975 . Mate selection--a selection for a handicap . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 53:205-214 . 

