An Overview of the EDR Electronic Dictianary and the Current Status of Its Utilization 
Hideo Miyoshi , Kenji Sugiyama , Masahiro Kobayashi , and Takano Ogino
Japan Electronic Dictionary Research Institute , LTD . ( EDR )
Daini-Abe Bldg . , 78-1 , Kanda-Sakumagashi , Chiyoda-ku , Tokyo 101 , Japan
miyoshi , kenji , kobayasi , ogino@edr.co,jp

In this paper we present the specification and the structure of EDR Electronic Dictionary which was developed in a nine-year project  . The first version of EDR dictionary ( V1 . 0) and its revised version ( V1 . 5 ) are " already released and are now utilized at many sites for both academic and commercial purposes  . We also describe the current status how the EDR dictionary is utilized  . Finally we will give the outline of the new R&D project which 
EDR will launch in fiscal 1996.
1 Introduction
The EDR Electronic Dictionary\[1 , 2 , 31 is the result of a nine-year project ( from fiscal 1986 to fiscal 1994 )  , funded by the Japan Key Technology Center and eight computer manufacturers * aimed at establishing an infrastructure for advanced processing of natural language by computers and knowledge information processing  . 
The features of the EDR Electronic Dictionary can be summarized as follows:  ( 1 ) A largescale that covers all the vocabulary used in ordinary writing  ( 2 ) Aimed at general purpose applications without bias towards a particular application system or algorithm  ( 3 ) Provided with the knowledge base required for true semantic analysis  ( 4 ) A high degree of objectivity based on large volumes of text  ( 5 ) Fundamental content hat is highly generalized across different languages and fields The EDR Electronic Dictionary  , which is composed of eleven subdictionaries , catalogues the lexical knowledge * Fujitsu , Ltd . , NEC Corporation , Hitachi , Ltd . , Sharp Corporation , Toshiba Corporation , Oki Electric Industry Co . , Ltd . , Mitsubishi Elec-tric Corporation , and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co . , Ltd . 
of Japanese and English ( the Word Dictionary , the Bilingual Dictionary , and the Cooccurrence Dictionary ) , and has unified thesaurus-like concept classifications  ( the Concept Dictionary ) with corpus databases ( the EDR Corpus )  . The Concept Classification Dictionary , a sub-dictionary of the Concept Dictionary , describes the similarity relation among concepts listed in the Word Dictionary  . The EDR Corpus is the source for the information described in each of the subdictionaries  . The basic approach taken during the development of the dictionary was to avoid a particular linguistic theory and to allow for adoptability o various applications  . 
The first version of EDR dictionary ( VI . 0) and its revised version ( V1 . 5 ) are already released and are now utilized at many sites for both academic and commercial purposes  . This paper outlines the specification of EDR Electronic Dictionary and describes the current status of its utilization  . 
2 The Structure of the EDR Electronic

The EDR Electronic Dictionary is composed of five types of dictionaries  ( Word , Bilingual , Concept , Co-occur-rence , and Technical Terminology ) , as well as th bEDR

EDR Electronic Dictionary-Word Dictionary
LJapanese Word Dictionary
English Word Dictionary-B . ilingual Dictionary ~- Jpn . -Eng . Bilingual Dictionary t . Eng . -Jpn . Bilingual Dictionary oncept Dictionary
Head concept Dictionary
Concept Classification Dictionary
Concept Description Dictionary-Cooccurrence Dictionary ~ Japanese Cooccurrence Dictionary- Technical Terminology Dictionary fJpn  . Technical Terminology Dictionary ( Information Processing ) 
Eng . Technical Terminology Dictionary ( Information Processing ) 
Others ( Concept Classification,
Bilingual Dictionary,
Cooccurrence Data , etc.)
EDR Corpust Japanese Corpus
English Corpus
The Japanese Word Dictionary contains 250 , 000 words , and the English Word Dictionary contains 190 , 000 words . 
The Bilingual Dictionary lists the correspondences between head words in the different languages  . The JapaneseEnglish Bilingual Dictionary contains  230  , 000 words , and the English-Japanese Bilingual Dictionary contains  190  , 000 words . 
The Concept Dictionary contains information on the  400  , 0 00 concepts listed in the Word Dictionary and is divided according to information type into the Head concept Dictionary  , the Concept Classification Dictionary , and the Concept Description Dictionary . The ! lead concept Dictionary describes information on the concepts themselves  . 
The Concept Classification Dictionary describes the supersubrelations among the  400  , 000 concc , pt , ; . The Concept Description Dictionary describes the semantic  ( binary ) relations , such as ' agent , '' implement , ' and ' place , ' between concepts that cooccur in a sentence . 
The Cooccurrence Diction m'y describes collocational information in the form of binm'y relations  . The Japanese Co-occmTence Dictionary contains 900 , 000 phrases , and the English Cooccurrence Dictionary contains 460  , 000 phrases . 
The Technical Terminology Dictionary covers the field of infbrmation processing  , attd is split into four types of dictionaries of Word  , Bilingual , Concept ( Classification ) , and

The linguistic data which the EDR Corpus contains has been obtained by collecting a large number of example sentences and analyzing them on morphoh  ) gical , syntactic , attd semantic levels . The Japanese Corpus contains 220 , 000 sentences , and the English Corpus contains 160 , 000 sentences . 
3 Role of Each Dictionary
This chapter describes the roles of the major subdictionaryies of the EDR Electronic Dictionary and shows some examples  . 
3.1 Word Dictionary
The role of the Word Dictionary is to provide part of the information on the morphological  , syntactic , and semantic revels that is requited for natulal anguage processing  . 
Morphological information relates to head word ( morpheme ) midint brmation on the connectivity of roof phemes  . This is used in morphological nalys is to find the morphemes  , and also used in morphological generation to produce output sentences  . 
Information on the syntactic level includes parts of speech as well as surface case information and other grammatical ttributes  . This information is used in syntactic analysis and generation  , and provides the basis for the formulation of parsing rules and production rules  . 
Semantic information includes concept identifiers.
Head concept and concept explications are provided as accampanying information  . The concept identifier is a numerical expression and the basic constituent of the Concept Dictionary  . The head concept is a representative word that is the most appropriate in expressing the corncept identified by the concept identifier  . The concept ex-plication is an explanation written in natural language to r the p  . ,i , o , ~; cof assisting humans in differentiating one ~: , ~ nccpl Imman other . Every Word Dictionary record has a concci ) t identifier to link the Word Dictionary and the
Concept Dictionary.
The following is an example of English Wordl ) ictio-nary record : llead word : dog Cormoct . Jvit:y:I !', I , N\],I , ', (', N1
Parto\[Speech:I , ', NI ( common noun)
Cramma LJ cal At . t . ribut . () s:\],: CN\];I:NSG,I,:NC;I,:NNI,:NI,:NI , :
CoIIc : (: ptI1) : ? ; dbc6'/lloadconcept:doqConceptl , : x ~) lication : an anima\]ca\]leddog3 . 2 Bilingual Dictionary The Bilingual Dictionary is designed to give appropriate correspondence words to the head words contained in the Word Diction my  , in machine processings . The head word information of the Bilingual Dictionary is a subset of the Word Dictionary  , that is , head word notations , parts of speech , concept identifiers , head concepts , and concept cations are used to indentify the meaning of the polysemous head words  . Some of the correspondence words include additional information which describes the constraints where the correspondence words are u ~d  . 
The following is an example of English Japanese
Biligual Dictionary record:
Head word : dog
Part of Speech : ENI ( common noun )
Concept_ID : 3dbc 67
Head concept : dog
Concept Explication : an animal called dog
Correspondence Word:3 . 3 Concept Dictionary The role of the Concept Dictionary is to provide the data required for computer processing of the semantic on-tents or the concepts  , expressed in natural language sentences , uch as: ( 1 ) Generating appropriate smantic representations for sentences  ( 2 ) Determining the similarity ( equivalence ) of semantic contents ( 3 ) Converting a semantic ontent into a similar ( equivalent ) content For this reason , the Concept Dictionary contains three types of subdictionaries : Head concept Dictionary  , Concept Classification Dictionary , and Concept Description Dictionary . In the Concept Dictionary , each concept is uniquely identified by a concept identifier which is a hexa decimal number  . The Head concept Dictionary contains the concept identifier and the head concept  , and the concept explication . The head concept is a word whose meaning is close to the content meaning of the concept  . 
The concept explication is an explanation which expresses the meaning of the concept  . The Concept Classification Dictionary contains the set of pairs of concepts that have supersub  ( is_a ) relation . For example , the su-per-concepts of ' school ' are ' organization  , '' building , ' and ' function . ' The subconcepts of ' school ' are ' elementary school  , '' university , ' and so forth . The Concept Description Dictionary contains the set of pairs of concept shat have certain semantic relations other than supersub relations  . The following eight semantic relations are used : object agent goal implement a-object place scene cause  , ~ ,   30f6ae < physical object > 30f801 g "** m ?' < movement > g *%
Concept Dictionary
I 30f802 agent ~ 30f6b < spatial movement > < person > // ~ dc67 k < follow > ~" ( < dog>\]NJ\~f~i < onary
Enicgtli Shna WOr ~ EVJN ~ apanese Word ~~'-~~ CO ' Occ ~'- Bilingual Dictionary D/C tiot /% ~ O  . o ~9 ~ c6O~J Figure 1 . Relationships between sections of EDR Electronic Dictionary university goverment institution nalion '  , d and public private 48   18 private company total overseas
No . of User Sites 1323 933 . 4 Cooccurrence Dictionary The Cooccurrence Dictionary includes the type of word conbinations used to construct a sentence  , that is , collocational information . This type of information is used to selec the appropriate correspondence words in machine translation  . 
3.5 EDR Corpus
The EDR Corpus is composed of the record number , ~ ntence information , constituent information , morphological information , syntactic information , and semantic information . The basic role of the EDR Corpus is first to identify the sentence constituents of sentences  , and then to indicate how the constituents combine to form the morphological  , syntactic and semantic structure of the sentence using a large number of actual examples  . The data in the Concept Description Dictionary and the Co-occur-rence Dictionary is extracted from the EDR Corpus  . 
These subdictionaries are not indendent , but are organi-cally connected ( Figure 1) . 
4 The Current Status of Utilization
As we mentioned in chapter 1 , we have already released the first CDROM version of EDR Electronic dictionary  ( V1 . 0) in April 1995 after the nine year R&D project . 
They are now being utilized at many sites for both academic and commercial purposes  ( Table 1 )  . Infiscal 1995 , furthermorer finement and improvement were done and the revised version  ( V1 . 5) is available since April 1996 . 
One of the users , Fujitsu , released a commercial product using the EDR Electronic Dictionary in  1995  . The product is called " Denjikai for Windows V2 . 0 , " which retrieves the word information from various dictionaries including EDR Electronic Dictionary  . 
5 Conclusion and Future Work
A number of dictionaries are currentry being developed under the name of electronic dictionaries  ( machine-read-able dictionaries )  . These dictionaries consist of information li'om publishe dictionaries that has been stored on a recording medium  , and which can then be referred to and used by mechanical means  . However , these electronic dictionaries are referred to and used by people  , unlike true electronic dictionaries ( machine-tractable dictionaries )  , which in the strict sense are intended for use in machine processing  . True electronic dictionaries are not simply machine-readable editions of dictionries for use by people  . They must include all the information necessary for a computer to understand a naturalan-guage  . We think that the EDR Electronic Dictionary satisfies those conditions and hope that it will be widely used for various natural anguage processing applications  . 
Finally we would like to make a short remark on the new project which EDR will laun chinfiscal  1996  . The new project will be funded by Information Technology Promotion Agency  ( IPA ) of Japan and will be carried out in conjunction with Tokyo Institute of Technology and To-kyo University  . The objective of the project will be the creation of a software that will allow the linguistic knowledge base to automatically expand by feeding the output of analyzed text into the knowledge base itself  . We hope this will help refine and extend the EDR Electronic Dictionary  . 
References\[1\]EDR , Proceedings of the International Workshop on Electronic Dictionaries  , EDRTR-031 ,  1991 . 
\[2lEDR , EDR Electronic Dictionary Version 1 Technical Guide , EDRTR2-003 ,  1995 . 
\[3lEDR , Summary for the EDR Electronic Dictionary Version  1 Technical Guide , EDRTR2-005 ,  1995 . 

