Anaphor Resolution and the Scope of Syntactic Constraints 
Roland Stuckardt
German National Research Center for Informat i on Technology  ( GMD ) 
K()NTEXT-Natural Language Systems
Dolivostrafie15, D-64293 Darmstadt , Germany
stuck ar(l(o ) darm stadt . grad . de
Abstract
Ananal ) hore solution algorithm is presented which relies on a combination of strategies for narrowing down and selecting ti'om antecedent sets fl  ) rref lexive pronouns , nonreflexive pronom ~ s , and common 11011118 . ~lqle work focuses on syntactic restrictions which are derived froin 
Chomsky's Binding Theory . It is discussed how these constraints can be incorporated adequately in an anaphores-olution algorithm  . Moreover , by showing that t ) ragmatic inferences may t ) enecessary , the limits of syntactic restrictions are ehleidated  . 
1 Introduction
It is by now widely agreed upon that tile process of resolving anaphors in natural anguage text is supported by a w ~ riety of strategies employing different kinds of knowledge  . Thet ) rocess of determin-in9 the set of possible antecedent sig over ne , d by morphosyntactic , syntactic , semantic , and prag-Inatic restrictions . The same holds for preferences applie , d in the antecedent selection process : simple surface criteria are involved as well as more elaborate syntactic  , semantic , or focusing heuristics . 
As a consequence , recent approaches to anaphor resolution apply a careflfly selected blend of constraints and preferences  , thus constituting Inulti-strategy approaches in the sense of Carbonell and 
Brown ( Carbonell and Brown , 1988).
There are , however , implementability limitations . At discourse level , determining the set of admissible antecedents requires a representation which is ordered according to pragmatic relations  ( Grosz and Sidner , 1986; Wehber ,  1989) . Although various theoretical frmneworks have been suggested  , the recognition of these relations in the case of unrestricted is course is still beyond the state -of the-art  . Moreover , there arc cases ill which antecedent decisions can only be made on the grounds of domain knowledge and inferencing  , and although there have been various attempts to integrate components of these kinds into anaphor resolution approaches  , a satisfying solution l ; oth is problem is not available by now . 
As a conseqllence , c/lrrent anaphor resolution implementations rely oil constraints and preference heuristics which employ information originating from morphosyntactic  , syntactic , or shallow semmltic analysis ( of . ( Carter , 1987)) . These approaches , however , perform remarkably well . 
An early case study revealed that a ' naive ' algorithm for resolving nonre\[texive pronouns  , by relying merely on morphosyntactic , syntactic , and surface criteria , yields correct results for more than 80 percent of pronoun occurrences , and that tile incorporation of selectional constraints re-suits in a gain of another  3  . 5 percent of accuracy ( Hobbs , 1978) . These results have been confirmed by recent work ( Lappin and Leass ,  1994) . The latter approach is based on a more elaborate , theory-oriented , declarative , for lnulation of the syntactic constraints , and handles reflexive pronouns too . It proved that the incorporation of statistically measured lexical preference patterns  ( a dynamic , domain specific suhstitute R ) r the static encoding of sele ( ' tional t ) references ) yields again of only 3 p e . rcent , and a sol ( ; application of lexical preference t ) atterns resulted in a performance below 35 percent . Hence , there is strong evidence that syntactic restrictions in combination with surface based and syntactic prefe  , rence criteria play the central role in realistic approaches to anaphore solution  . 
In this I ) a per , anana I ) hore solution algorithin is described which hast ) een implemented as part of the KONTEXT text analysis system for the German language  ( Haenelt ,  1994) . The emphasis lies on the description of imt ) lementation techniques for syntactic on straints . Section 2 works out strategies whi ( : h are applied , focusing on the constraints emerge . Section 3 describes how these strategies are coined into an algorithm for the resolution of reflexives  , nonreflexive pronouns , and definite common nouns , thereby elucidating details which have to be taken into account in an adequate implenmntation  . In section 4 , a theoretical evaluation is performed , and application results are given . Section 5 points out that the structural constraints may depend on circumstances which are not a matter of syntax alone  , but rather necessitate semantic and pragmatic infereneing  . As a consequence , limitations concerning the imple-mentability show up  , and the scope of syntactic constraints proves to be restricted  . 
2 Constraints and Preferences 2 . 1 Morphosyntactic Agreement A quite strict constraint requires the pronoun to agree with its antecedent in person  , number , and gender . In example 1(1) The father visited his daughter . 
She had invited him on Sunday.
the antecedents for hint and size are identified uniquely as father and daughter '  , respectively . 
2.2 Syntactic Constraints
The following data substantiate the syntactic restrictions which are to be employed :  ( 2a ) The barbe ~ shaveshirn selfi . 
(2b ) * The clientiap preciates that the barb crs haves himself i  . 
These example suggest that reflexive pronouns choose their antecedents in some kind of local domain  . On the other hand , examples (3a )* The barber is have shimi . 
(3b ) The elientiap preciates that the barbers haves himi  . 
indicate that the admissible structural positions of antecedents for nonretiexive pronouns are distributed complementarily  , i . e . these pronouns choose their antecedents outside of their local domain  . An even more stringent restriction holds for nonpronominal nouns :  ( / ta ) * The barber ) shaves the barber i . 
( ~ b )* The client , i appreciates that the barberst taves the clicn t , i . 
But even here , configurations exist in which intrasentential ntecedents are possible :* The examples are given in English  . The phenomena and its implications translate directly to German  . 
(4c ) The barber whosh aved the client it old the elientia story  . 
Ctlomsky provides a formal description of these observations as part of his Government and Bind -lug  ( GB ) Theory ( Chomsky , 1981; Chomsky ,  1986) . Binding Theory ( BT ) distinguishes three types of NP , namely type A('anaphor ' , comprising reflexives and reciprocals2) , type B ( nonreflex-ire pronouns ) , and type C('referring'expressions , comprising common nouns and names ) . The restrictions are stated as binding principles : 
Definition 1 ( binding principles )   ( A ) An anaphor is bound in its binding category . 
( B ) A pronominal is free ( i . e . not bound ) in its binding category . 
( C ) A referring expression is free ( i . e . not bound ) in any domain . 
where binds is a relation which is defined on the NP nodes of the  ( surface ) phrase structure tree : Definition 2 ( the binding relation ) Node X binds Node Y if and only if X and Y arc coindexed and Xe-commands Y  . 
where ( definitions vary slightly ):
Definition 3 ( the c-command relation )
Node Xe-commands node Y if and only if the next b ~ nnehing node which dominates X also dominates Y and neither X dominates Y  , Y dominates X nor

The central part of the Binding Theory develops the notion of local domain to which binding principles A  , B , and C refer as binding category : Definition 4 ( binding category ) Node X is binding category of node Y if and only if X is the next node which dominates Y  , and which contains a subject that e-commands Y . 
Due to these definitions , the acceptability judgements for the data presented above are reproduced by binding principles A  , B , and C . For each example , the subject demarcating the ( local ) binding category is just the ordinary subject of the subordinate clause  . ( One has to recall that , in phrase structure trees , the subject c-commands the content of the VP . ) The notion of subject , however , is a more general one , applying also to some kinds of nominal phrase attributes  , in particular certain variations of genitives and possessives :  (  , 5) Peter listens to Sam's is tory about himself . 
2 In this paper , the notion of anaphor is used more generally . When referring to anaphor in the Chom~skyan sense  , the notion reflexive/reciprocal ( pronoun ) is used . 
938 2.3 Antecedent Predictability
For eataphorie pronominal resumptions , a constraint is applied which has l ) een described l ) y
Kuno ( Kuno , 1987) . According to ( 6@ The barber who shaved himi told the : client  a story  . 
(6b ) * The barber whosh aved him told a clientia story  . 
adcJiniteness requirement has to be fulfilled , ruling out antecedents which are not predictable , i . e . 
not a . lready introduc , ed in the . discourse ?2 . 4 Case Role Inertiaing ( meral , the constraint applicatioil will not single out a uifique antecedent  . Depending on the tyl)e of anaphor to be resolved , preferenc ( , s are applied , coinprising the rather superficial and self-exf ) lanatory criteria of recen ( : y , cataphor penalty , and sul ) ject preference . The case role inertia criterion , which proved to /) every useful in practice , is explainal ) h ; by the following e ? amt ) le: ( 7 ) Peter visited his brv ther . 
lte showed him his ne '. w car.
Unless given further information , there see , ms to I ) eastrong tendency to choose the antecedents in a way that the  , syntactic and/or semanticase roles of the pronouns re  , produce the corresponding roles of the , it antecedents . Thus , the pre , fer-ence rule suggests Peter as the , ~mtecedent for lie , and brother as the antecedent for him . As cant ) e demonstrated by fllrth( , ' re , xamples ( e . g . changing from active , to passive voice or vice versa ) , retaining the semanti ( : case role should out vote retaining the synta ( : tic ( : as (  ; role . In cases in whi ( : h semantic ( : ase is not available , however , promoting syntactic (: as (' , t ) arallelism serves as a good at ) proximal on . 
In its effect , this prefl ; rence rule al ) proximat ( ; s the ' often suggested heuristic of k e , eping rather then shifting ret ? ; rential focus ( of . ( Sidner , 1983)) . 
3 Towards the Algorithm
The lnaill question concerns the adequate implementation of Chomsky's I  ) inding t ) rinciples . Someal ) riori remarks on theoretic subtM ; ies and on the eml ) loyed ret ) resentation are in t ) lace . 
3.1 lnter dei ) endency Sensitiveness
As state ( lt ) y ( Correa ,  1988) , an immediate im I ) le-mena to noft h ( ; constraints proposed in Binding Theory is unlbasil  ) le . Chomsky states , merely as a the () rctical device , a flee , inclexing rule wl fich ran- ( lomly assigns reference in ( lexes to surface structure NP nodes . During in apt ) lug to these in ant i ( : LF ( logical form ) representation , the t ) inding principles s ( )~'ve as restrictions tbr filtering out the im dex distributions which are considered valid when intert  ) re , tedaseore fL'rence markers . A direct im-l ) leme , ntation of this generate-~md-test1 ) ro ( : edure yields an exponential time complexity . 
Current approaches avoid gen ( ' rate-and-te~st ) y resorting to different strategies . According to 1; 11(; most coln montect miquc , for an at ) horic NPs , a separate antecedent search is t)ert brmed , resulting in a quadratic time complexity ( e . g . ( Hot ) bs , 1978; Strube and Hahn , 1995)) . Because , howev (; r , the ante ( : edent decisions are performed in isolation , invalid index distributions may m'ise . In examph ; ( Sa ) The barb critold the elient jastory , while heks haved himl . 
neither of the t ) ronouns is confined structurally to one of the intrasent tm tialntece  . ( lenteandi ( tates in tie matrix clause . But , afl , erafirst decision , e . g . 
( Sb ) The barber it old the client jastory , while hes have dhimz . 
the situation changes , for one of the antect ; dent options of the still unresolved l ) ronoun is no longer available . Binding principle B may bcviolat ( . ' d : (8c )* The barber i told the . client jastory , while heshaved him . 
An interdepemlen (: y1)el ; we( ; it antecedent ; choi ( : es may arise as well when choosing / ) etween discourse all tece ( leilt S~O Fas a COllSeqll (  ; llc(~ , ( ) f relative , clause attachment , which 1) redetermines coindexing . 
The at ) proach presented below is seals it ive to these , decision interdependencies , while avoiding the exponential time comi ) lexity of an immed Latel ) inding constraint implem ( mtatioil . This is achieved by supplementing the straightforwards e  , -quential strategy with a dynamic reveritication of the binding restrictions in the antecedent selections tet  )  . To avoid that ( te . sirable antecedent options are ruled outl ) y interdependency , the choices wil ; hhighest plausibility is given preference to . 
3.2 Representing Surihce Structure
The original statement of Binding Theory forms part of GB Theory  , in which a broader set < ) 1' in : tera <: tingl ) rin ( : iph~s is f < ) rmulated . Because the aim of aim i ) hor resolution for a specific language is restricted  , there I ) resentation (: an be simplifiex l . 
Complicating details which result fl ' om the Gll claim tom fiversality may t  ) eemil ; ted . 
lies desbeing efficiently searchable , the simplified surface structure has to represent the stru  ( :-t ; ural details wt fich are necessary forth ( , ' verifica- . 
tion of the 1) in ( ling restrictions . In particular , this cation of local domains , and surf . a ceorder dependent structural variations 3 . 
Because the KONTEXT text analysis ystem is based on a dependency grammar  , a mapping process generates the required representation from a dependency trees which is not suitable for a structural verification of the binding principles  , because vital details are not structurally visible  . 
The attempt of directly Verifying BT restrictions on dependency structure  , as suggested by Strube and Hahn ( Strube and Hahn ,  1995) , does not seem adequate , because important details are ignored . 
The structures which were generated for some of the above examples are as follows:  4   ( ga )   ( Sbarber ( VP himself ) ) -+  ( 2a )   ( gb ) client ( VP ( STHAT barber ( VP him ) ) ) ) -+ ( 3b )   ( 9c )   ( Sbarber ( SREL who ( VP client ) )  ( VP client ( VP story ) ) )  -+ ( 4c ) The marker nodes STHAT and SREL are delimiters of local domains  , to which the binding principle verification functions are sensitive  . 
Special techniques are employed in representing local NP domains  , which are introduced by de-verbative NPs and NPs with possessive markers  ( saxonian genitive , genitivus possessivus , possessive pronoun , or certain attributive PPs ) , e . g . 
(10) The barber hearshisistory about himselfi.
(S barber ( VP story j ( SVATTx_story j ( ATThis ( ATT ( PP himself )  . . . ) A domain SVATT enforcing local reflexivation is opened  . The NP barber and the reflexive pronoun himself may be coindexed only indirectly via the possessive pronoun his  , which is of type B , and henceforced to take a nonlocal antecedent . In accordance with intuitive judgement , a local instance of the NP story j blocks the e o indexing of the possessiv c pronoun and its dominating noun  . 
Here again , the mechanism which copes with in-terdependencics is applied fi Technically  , new NP types C' ( example ( 10 ) ) and B ' ( relative pronoun ,   3This concerns certain cases of subject and object clause extraposition as well as  , in particular , the object NPs contained in the VP , for which a right branching structure is generated  , yielding a base for a structural determination of admissible antecedents for reflexive pronouns  , which is mainly governed by subject-object asymmetry and surface order  . 
4 Implementation details are ignored.
5This technique resembles the use of traces in Chomsky's GB theory  . Because of its restricted aim , however , it is nmch simpler . 
cf . section 3 . 1 ) are introduced for which binding principles C and B are verified  , respectively , but for which no antecedent search is performed . 
3.3 The Algorithm
The KONTEXT anaphore solution algorithm , as shown in figure 1 , consists of three phases : constraint application  , preference criteria application and plausibility sorting  , and antecedent selection including reverification of constraints which may be involved in decision interdependencies  . 
Two binding constraint verification procedures are employed which differ in the handling of type A NPs  . According to binding principle A , are flexive pronoun requires ' constructively ' a local antecedent  ( step l ( b ) i )  . Example (10) , however , illustrates that further nonloeal coindexings are admissible  . This gives rise to a weak version of binding constraint verification  , the usage of which is of vital importance to the fimctioning of the interdependency test step  3b  . 
4 Evaluation
As a proper base for comparison , the theoretical analysis is restricted to the contribution of intrasentential ntecedent search  . Let n be the number of NP nodes in the surface structure representation  . Because the number of anaphoric NPs and intrasentential candidates is bounded by n  , and the individual a priori verifications of the binding principles contribute costs proportional to the number of nodes in the surface structure tree  , the worst case time complexity of step 1 is O(n3) . A similar analysis , assuming a clever handling which prevents individual interdependency hecks from being done more the nonce  , reveals that the complexity of step 3 is O ( n3 ) too . Therefore , since the scoring and sorting step 2 does not exceed this limit , the overall worst case complexity is O(n3) . 
In tests on architect biographies drawn from ( Lampugnani ,  1983) , the algorithm correctly resolved approximately 90 percent of type B pronouns ( including possessives )  , and , as expected , all occurrences of reflexives , which occur quite scarcely in the test corpus . The set of possible antecedents tends to be reduce drastically during constraint application  . Interdependency collisions did not happen too frequent  . This tendency is strongly supported by the case role inertia heuristic  , which promotes a complementary distribution of preferred antecedents for type B pronouns cooccurring in a domain of binding  . 
The strategy of considering the more plausible antecedent choices first does not eliminate interdependency collisions in general  , and , moreover ,   ( a ) Verify morphosyntactic or lexical agreement with X  ( congruence in person , number , and gender , lexical recurrence et e , depending on the type of Y )   ( b ) If the antecedent candidate X is intru . sentential , check whether the binding l ) rinciples of Y and X are satisfied : for the propose deo indexing  , i . verify that the binding principle of Y is satisfied constructively  , ii . verify that the binding principle of X is not violated  . 
(c ) If Y is a type B1) ronoun , antecedent candidate X is intr~scntential , nd , according to surfa (: e order , X follows Y(i . e . t i t ( . ' resumption would be cataphorie ) , verify that X is definite . 
2 . Plausibility scoring and sorting : ( a ) For each surviving pair ( Y / , A  ~ ) of anaphor and antecedent candidate : deterinine the munerical plausibility score v  ( Y / , Xj ) , which ranks Xj relatively to Y/ , based on case role in ertia , recency , cataphor penalty , and subject prefe . rence , deI ) ending on the type of I ~ . 
( b )   ( local sorting ) For each an ai ) horY : sort their individual antecedent cm , didates Xj according to decreasing plausibility v ( Y , X a ) . 
( c )   ( global sorting ) Sort the anaphors V according to decreasing I ) lausibility of their individual best antecedent candidate  . 
Antecedent Selection : Consider anaphors Y in the order determined in step  2c   . Suggest antecedent candidates X ( Y ) in the order determined in step 213 . Select X ( Y ) as candidate if there is no interdependency , i . e . if ( a ) the morphosyntactic featmes of Y and X ( Y ) are still compatible % ( b ) for each NPZ whose coindexing with X ( Y ) has been determined in the current invocation of the anaphore solution algorithm : the coindexing of YantiZ which results as a side effect when chosing X  ( Y ) as antecedent for Y does not violate the binding 1  ) rincil ) les . 
To allow form , efficient detection of intex(let ) endencies , store the selected antecedent separately fl'om corefer cnt occurrences contributed by earlier invocations of the algorithm  . 
Figure \]: The KONTEXT Anaphor Resolution Algorithm  3  . 
does not guarantee that the global maximum of plausibility is reached  . Because of its practical performance , however , it proved to be a satisfactory substitute for the generate-and-test strategy  . 
5 Exploring the Limits
The determination of the substructure describing a local domain iv not always easy  . Whereas for NPs with possessive markers ( of . example (10)) the matter tends to be clear , a common source of difficulties emerges from adjectivally used participles and from deverbative NPs  . In the latter case , e . g . a genitival attribute may instantiate , depend-lug on the NP , either the subject ( . qenitiwt sub-jectivus ) or the object ( . qenitiwts objectivus ) ( for German , cf . ( Teubert , 1979)) . As the following examl ) les demonstrate , it iv insufficient ok now merely about the existence of a h  ) caldomain . In general , it is necessary to determine the instantia = tion of its participants  , but this , at least in certain <: as es , involves pragmatic inferencing . 
(lla ) Pauli accepts the decision for himi.
(llb ) * Pauli accepts the decision for himselfi.
According to accet ) tability judgements , decision introduces a local binding domain . But a change 6In German , this kind of interdependency may arise , due to l nor phosyntactic ambiguity , in case of multiple occurrences of the pronoun sic  . 
of tile matrix clause verb leads to a different judgement  , while tile syntactic structure is preserved : ( 12 a ) Pauli revises the decision for himi . 
(12b ) Paulir cviscs the decision for himselfi.
The cluelies in the observation that a pragmatic restriction is governing the instantiation of the implicit local subject in exmnples  ( 11 )  , but not in examples (12) . in (11@ , ducto the obvious conclusio il that someone who accepts an action is not the conscious actor of it  ,   . Paul is pragmati- ( : ally ruled out as the local subject of the decision domain  . On the other hand , revise leaves open whether Paul or someonelse is the decider  . This explanation is confirmed by the following data :  ( 13 a ) Paull revises Sarn's j decision for h , imi . 
(13b ) * Pauli revises Sam'sj decision fi ) rhimself i . 
(13e )* Pauli revises his idecision for himi.
(13d ) Pauli revises his idecision for himselfi.
Current approaches ( Strube and Hahn , 1995; Lappinamt Leass ,  1994 ) ignore this subtlety by merely taking into account NP domains Which are established by possessive determiners  . As a consequence , wrong results may be obtained , e . g . in case of example ( lla ) , as there is not ) ossessive modifier , Paul will not be considered to be an mt-tecedent candidate for him  . With these difficulties in mind , questionable antecedent decisions may t ) eations , by this means providing a starting point for more comprehensive considerations which take into account he relation between structural restrictions and the resolution of ellipsis  . 
6 Conclusion
Starting with a recapitulation of current work on anaphor resolution  , it was argued for an approach which bases on syntactic restrictions  . 
The original formulation of Chomsky's Binding Theory proved to be unsuitable for immediate implementation  . Straightforward approaches may fail in cases in which interdependencies bt ween antecedent decisions arise  . Based on this observation , an algorithm has been presented which , on the one hand , is interdependency-sensitive , but , on the other hand , avoids computational unfeasi-bility l ) y following a strategy according to which the choices with the highest plausibility are considered first  . For each decision , its dynamicom-patibility with the earlier ( more plausible ) deci- . 
sions is verified . The practical behaviour of the algorithm fulfilled the expectations  . 
There are , however , limitations to the scope of syntactic on straints . It has been demonstrated that , in general , the construction of appropriate representations for binding domains may necessitate semantic or pragmatic inferencing  . 
A topic which should be subject of further e -search is the interdependency between parse tree construction and anaphore solution  . Up to now , it has been assumed tacitly that , at the time of binding constraint application , the surface structure representation is available  . The construction of this representation involves disambiguation decisions  ( relative clause attachment , prepositional phrase attachment , and uncertainty of syntactic flmction ) , which , due to their structure determining effects , may interfere with the antecedent options of anaphor resolution  ( cf . ( Stuckardt , 1996)) . 
At current , the KONTEXT text analysis ystem employs a processing model according to which parsing is performed prior to anaphore solution  . 
Because of the interdependency between parsing and anaphore solution  , however , these two problem ( : lasse should be handled at one stage of processing rather than sequentially  . 

Jaimc G . Carbonell , Ralf D . Brown .  1988 . Ana-phora Resolution : A Multi-Strategy Approach . 
In : Proc . I2th Int . Conf . on Computational Linguistics , COLING , Vol . I , 96-101, Budapest . 
David Carter .  1987 . Interpreting Anaphors in Natural Language Texts . Ell is Horwood Series in Artificial Intelligence , Chichester . 
Noam Chomsky .  1981 . Lectures on Government and Binding . Foris Publications , Dordrecht . 
Noam Choinsky . 1986. Knowledge of Language.
Praeger , New York.
Nelson Correa .  1988 . A Binding Rule \] or Go-vernment-binding Parsing . In : Proc . 12th Int . 
Conf . on Computational Linguistics , COLING,
Vol . I , 123-129, Budapest.
Barbara J . Grosz , Candace L . Sidner .  1986 . Attention , intention and the Structure of Discourse , in : Computational Linguistics , Vol .  12,
Number 3, 175-204.
Karin Haenelt .  1994 . Das Text analyse system KONTEXT . Konzcption und Anwendungsm Sg ~ lichk citen . In : Sprache und Datcnv crarbeitung ,  18 ,  1 ,  17-31 ,  1994 . 
Jerry Hobbs .  1978 . Resolving Pronoun Refer-enccs . In : Lingua , 44, 311-338 . 
Susmnu Kuno .  1987 . Anapho~t and Discourse Principles . In : Makoto Nagao ( ed) . Language and Artificial Intelligence . Elsevier , 1987 . 
Vittorio M . Lampugnani ( ed) .  1983 . Lexikon der Architekturdes 20 . , I a hr hund crts . Hatje,

Shalom Lappin and Herbert J . Lea~s .  1994 . An Algorithm for P~vnominal Anaphora Resolution . In : Computational Linguistics , 20(4), 535-561 . 
Candace L . Sidner . 1983 I , bcusing in the Comprehension of Definite Anaphora . In : Michael Brady , Robert C . Berwick ( eds ) . Computational Models of Discourse . M . I . T . Press , Cambridge,
MA , 267-330.
Michael Strube , Udo Hahn .  1995 . ParscTalk about Sentence - and Text-Level Anaphora  . In : Proc . ~th Conf . of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , EACL ,  237-244 . Dublin , March 28-31, 1995 . 
Roland Stucl ~ trdt .  1996 . An Interdependency-Sensitive Approach to Anaphor Resolution  . To appear in : Proc . of DAARCg6 -Discourse Anaphora and Anaphor Resolu , tion Colloquium ,  . 
Lancaster University , 17-18th July , 1996.
Wolfgang Teubert .  1979 . Valenz des Sub-stanti vs . Attributive Ergi in zungennd Angaben . 
P~idagogischer Verlag Schwann.
Bonnie L . Webber .  1989 . Deictic Reference and Discourse Structure . Department of Computer and Information Science , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia PA 19104-6389 . 

