Constructing Verb Semantic Classes for French : Methods and 
Evaluation
Patrick Saint-Dizier

1 18 route de Narbonnc F-31062   3bulouse Cedex France
stdizier@iri %. fr
Abstract
In this paper , we study are formulation,
which is better adapted to NLP , of the
alternation system developed for English
by B . Levin . We have studied a set of
1700 verbs from which we explain how
verb semantic classes can be built in a
systematic way . The quality of the re-
sults w.r.t , semantic hLssifications such
as WordNet is then evaluated.
1 Aims
Predicative forms are complex to describe ; it is indeed necessary to describe in detail their symtactic behavior  , the different meanings they may convey , preferably at different levels of granularity ( e . g . argument structure , thematic grids , conceptual representations ( a ackend of r90)) , and the relations between syntactic forms and meaning  ( s )   ( Levin 93 )  , ( Williams 94) . It is also important o hierarchically organize these predicative forms so that syntactic and semantic descriptions are minimal and coherent  . 
Our work focusses on verbs and is primlt rily based on B  . Levin's work ( Levin 93) for English , where she shows that , the syntactic behavior of verbs is in a large part predictable from some aspects of their semantics  . 13 y syntactic behavior , she means the way arguments are syntactically realized with respect to the predicate  . This includes the description of the basic distrihution of the arguments  , the description of the other positions they may occupy  ( e . g . ergative and passive forms ) and when they can be conjoined or deleted . 
These descriptions are called alternations . This work results in the creation of organized w' . rbst-mantic classes , mainly based on their syntactic lm-havior ( alternations may also include specific semantic restrictions  )  . It is an extremely use fifi and detailed study of the syntactico-semantic relations between a predicate and its arguments  . 
We show here how the alternation system can be reformulated in a more N l  , P-oriented way , and develop for French a set of syntactic descriptions  , called contexts , which sh ~ remany similarities with alternations , and propose principles that help defining their form and contents  . Next , we show how verb semantic classes can be constructed in a systematic way and evaluate them w  . r . t . WordNet-like classifications . The implicit semantic conveyed by contexts is also analysed  . 
The work presented here is applied to French , but can be transposed to other languages . 
2 The context system 2 . 1 General approach and motivations We . have refornmlated BethLevin's notion of alternation into a more declarative one : the notion of context  . A context is a Dame where the category and some additional syntactic is used to describe a precise form and position the argmneuts of a verb may have in a sentence  . Verb classes are then formed from verbs having similar sets of contexts  . 
Very briefly , compared to the alternation system , our approach avoids having to detlneabasic form from which alternations are produced and to have to explain what is the relation between a basic and an alternated form  . Moreover , it avoids us to have to account for changes in meaning provo-qued by alternations  ( e . g . by the adjunction of a preposition ) . 
l ) etining contexts has led us to formulate a few principles : + contexts should be of general purpose  , this means that : exceptional forms should be avoided  , only non-mn biguous and easy-to-use forms are acceptable  , and theory-neutral description should be used . 
- c . on text should minimally overlapp , ? they must only describe lexical properties ; the scope of a context is nsu Mlya propos Ltion ? as less semantic data as possible should bc used  , otherwise the classification will also be based on semantic riteria  , should be defined by feedback and retro -evaluation on verbs  , ? consider generalizing two contexts into one , if their discriminatory power is low . 
These principles allow us to partly automate the determination those of contexts which can be associated with a given verb  ( for example by corpora inspection )  . However , there will always remain quite a lot of manual work to check and improve the results  , in spite of some promising research in this direction  ( Dorr et al95 a )  . 
As shall be seen below , the context system ( which is not really a new concept ) provides us with a very powerful tool for specifying and organizing the syntax and the semantics of verbs  . 
Our contribution at this level is the way a context is defined  , at what level of generality , with what formal means , and the way contexts are used to form verb classes  . 
From a methodological point of view , contexts for French have been defined from a transposition of some English alternations  ( about 1/3 of our contexts )  , from French syntactic descriptions , among which ( Gross 75) , from corpora and from our own intuitions of language  . Context coverage has then been validated on corpora to ensure that we cover most of the syntactic behaviors of arguments w  . r . t , predicates . 
2.2 Description of contexts
Contexts and the detailed criteria used to define them are presented in  ( Saint-Dizier 95 )  . A context is a set of ' extended ' distribution frames : l  . a set : a cluster of syntactic forms which must all be valid for a given verb-sense  . A verb accepts a certain context if it accepts all the distributions the context is composed of  . A distribution is a list of syntactic on structions  ( NPs , PPs and sentences) ; this list is ordered and corresponds to the way these constructions are linearly realized in the surface form as arguments or modifiers  . 
2 . ' extended':syntactic ategory distributions are expressed as a Type Feature Structure  ( written in Login ( hit-Ka~i and Nasr 86 ) ) . 
We have identified several types of constraints : ? Local conslrainls on arguments or on ~ heverb : thematic roles  ( including those defined in ( Pngeault et al 94 )  , from ( Dowty 89 ,  91)) , the verb subcategorization frame , the arity of the verb , and a few commonly-admitted selectional restrictions  . 
? Introduction of syntactic forms : coordination of arguments  , introduction of reflexive pronouns and of a few modifiers  . 
? Relations between arguments : thematic grids , modifier-modifieer lation between . arguments ( e . g . noun complements ) , and expression of essential semantic relations : container-containe e  , and part-whole of various types . 
Our descriptions are more declarative than alternations  , however , it is clear that this formalism allows us to introduce some forms of constraints between basis forms  ( via constraints on the verb ) and the form being described . Similarly , the use of clusters of descriptions permits us to relate two forms  . 
We have defined 70 contexts , including ' basic ' contexts ( corresponding to ' direct ' realizations of argument structures  ) and non-basic ones . We have grouped the non-basic ones according to some similititudes into  17 subclasses . We have a total of 23 basic contexts ( of general purpose ) and 47 non-basic ones ( there are 89 alternations in English )  . Non-basic contexts include the description of : middle reflexives  , passives , in choat-ives , place-subject inversion , introduction of the senti-auxiliary faire , support verbs with nominalization of the predicate  ( e . g . crier-pousseruncri ) , various forms of argument deletion , preposition change , reciproquals , body part reformulations , means-instrument raising , reflexives , argument'des-incorporation ' , perspective change , there insertion , etc . 
For example , we have the famous Englishs pray/load alternation  , which also exists m French , which is described as follows : context ( \[ dist ( l l l ,  7 , context ID is 111 verb ( I\]) ,  7 , no constraint on verb phrases ( \[ xp ( syntax=>syn ( cat => n )   )   ,  7 , distribution xp(syntax=>syn(cat=>p )) , xp(syntax=>syn(cat=>n , type-prep =>\[ sur , dana \]) , semantics => sem ( thematic =>\[\[ loc\]\] )   )  \]  )  , constraints (\[\]) , ex(\[je , pulverise , la , peinture , sur , le , mur\])) ,  7 , Is pray paint on the wall dist ( lll , verb(I\]) , phrases (\[ xp(syntax=>syn(cat=>n )) , xp(syntax=>syn(cat => n) , semantics=>sem(thematic=>\[\[loc\]\])) , xp(syntax=>syn(cat=>p , type-prep =>\[ de\]) , semantics=>sem(thematic=>\[\[tg\]\] , sem-type=>tsem(semp=>substance )))\]) , constraints (\[\]) , ex(\[je , pulverise , le , mur , de , peinture \]))\]) . 
7 , Is pray the wall with paint ( tg : general theme and loc:localization )  . 
3 Construction of verb classes 3 . 1 Typo logy of the verb sample The experiment presented here has been realized on a set of  1700 usual verbs which are the most frequently used in French  . Our aim is to classify sidered so far is however sufficiently large to allow us to draw significant and precise conclusions  . 
It should be noticed that contexts are associated with a given word sense  , not wilh all the senses of a verb . Each sense of a polysemous verb is associated with a different set of contexts  . The description of a verb is the following : verb ( \[verb\] , arity , \[ basic context number \] , \[ thematic grid\] , \[ prepositions \] , \[ list of contexts \]) . 
verb(\[admirer\] , 3 , \[20\] , \[ae , tib , src\] , \[pour \] ,  \[50 , 51 , 61 , i02 , 150 , 171 , 180\]) . 
( ae = effective agent , tib = incremental bene-ficiary theme , src = source ) . Contexts have been associated with verbs on the basis of an mnber of linguistic analyses of French  ( e . g . ( Gross 75)) , of already existing lexicons , and from corpora inspection and our own intuitions  . 
3 . 2 A s imple verb c lass i f icat ion We have carried out a simple classitication where a verb class contains all the verbs which accept exactly the same set of contexts  . This is not the classification method adopted by Beth Levin : her verb classes are constructed from subsets of alternations  , intuitively selected , which are sufficiently selective to allow for the characterization of a set of semantically related verbs  . Exceptions are allowed in order to elt > ctively gather all the verbs which are intuitively semantically related  . Her classification method , based on a large number of linguistic analyses involving some subtle semantic criteria  ( e . g . intentionality ) , can only be carried out manually and is therefore not adapted to our approach  . 
We obtain a total of 953 classes . We get a large number of classes with just one element  ( about 77% )  , this is not surprising , however , since contexts can be combined in a large number of ways  . 
5 6% of the verbs appear in classes with at least 2 elements , and 33% of them are in classes with at least 5 elements . 
This number of classes is quite large compared to Beth Levin's results  ( about 200 classes )  , however , our classes have been constructed on a strict equivalence class basis  , without any exceptions , and all the contexts have been taken into account . 
We have an average of 1 . 8 verbs per class . A similar result was also obtain by ( Gross 75) , on a difi'erent basis ( including morphology ) and with more criteria ( about 200 )  . 
A very informal study of the progression of the number of classes tends to indicate that the increase of the number of new classes is not linear  , but progressively decreases . It seems that beyond 2500 verbs almost no new verb class should be created , defining about 1100 to 1200 classes . But this is clearly too much . 
3 . 3 Eva luat ion of the semant ic re la tedness of verb gemantic classes The overall quality of the verb classes are studied in detail in  ( Saint-Dizier 95 )  . With the same set of verb-senses , we have carried out a classification similar to the classification proposed in WordNet  . Besides the main categories presented in ( Fe\]lbaum 93 )  , we have added two classes : aspectual verbs and verbs expressing causality  . We have then subdivided these main categories according to different types of properties or constraints following as much as possible those defined in WordNet  . In our current classification , we consider 198 hierarchically organized classification criteria , instances of the isa ( or troponymy ) relation , the depth of the decomposition is 3 ( Saint-Dizier 96 )  . We therefore get 198 verb classes ( called WN classes ) for levels 1 to 3 . For example , a three level decomposition is for raovem cn ! verbs  ( level 1 )  , directed motion , local motion , etc . 
( level2) and upward motion , downward motion , etc . ( level 3) . 
If we now compare the degree of overlapp between the classes  ( with at least 2 elements ) formed above from syntactic on texts ( called VS classes ) and those of WN , we get the following results :
WN level overlapp VS/WN-1   17   120   5-4o  %-~  2   75   41   47%-   -3   106   18   32%-o  - - ( 1 ) : number of WN classes , (2): average size of a WN class at this level . 
Classes where verbs are associated with at least 5 contexts are of a much better quality ( semantic relateuess with WN classes above 64% ) than those under 5 . The best classes contain an average of 4 to 7 verbs , larger classes ( above 10 elements ) are often of a lower quality or may contain several subsets of semantically related verbs : in a large number of classes with more than  8 elements we tbund 2 or 3 subsets of classes of WN . 
These classes are often formed from a small n m n -bet of contexts  ( 1 to 3 )  , which explains their low semantic relatedness rate  . 
Globally , these results aren't very good . If we want to explore in more depth the cooperation between syntax and semantics  , and if we want to be able to construct verb semantic classes on a rigourous basis  , it is necessary to develop methods that improve the quality of VS classes  ( considering that syntactic riteria are the most ' rigourous ' ones a priori  )  . The first approach , which is the simplest , is to make the classification more flexible by allowing exceptions : a verb in a class may have one more or one less context han the norm of the class  . This approach gives however very bad results , with an overlapp VS/WN rate below 35% . 
To improve that rate , exception should depend and hard to carry out . The second type of solution consists in analyzing the implicit semantics conveyed by contexts and to form classes from sets of contexts  , on the basis of their implicit semantics . 
Then all the verbs accepting exactly an a priori given set of contexts will belong to the same VS class  , even if they accept many other contexts . 
4 Analysis of the semantics conveyed by contexts Some contexts are quite general and are not related to precise semantic notions  , while others convey clearly identifiable meaning components  . 
First , there are contexts which convey very precise meaning components  , which are not taken into account , for various reasons , in WordNet classifications . For example , the context of the form ' pousser + nominalization of verb ' is associated with verbs of sound emission : painful sounds for humans and any sound for animals  ; verbs which accep the ' dans/en-depreposition change ' convey an idea of putting something into something else  ( bourrerletuy aude papicr , bour rerle papier dausle tuyau ) . 
Next , a second type of context conveys meaning components which can directly be associated with WN criteria  . We have carried out a detailed analysis of the correlations between WN criteria and contexts  . There are 19 non-basic on texts ( out of 47) , which can very clearly be associated with 1 or 2 WN criteria . For example , context 91 ,   ( jefats atterirl ' avion ( ' I makel and the plane ' ) ) , is at 90% associated with verbs of body care . Context 151, ( alternation 2 . 13 . 4 in Beth Levin : Les grimaces de Jean terrifient Sophie  )  , is associated at a rate of 60% with psychological verbs . This is studied in detail in ( Saint-Dizier 96) . 
5 Perspectives
The semantic haracterization f context should allow us to construct verb semantic lasses on a stronger basis  , and with a clear method . We have carried out preliminary experiments on transfer of possession verbs which confirm this hypothesis  . Besides these results , it is of much interest to study how WN and VS classification systems can cooperate and can contribute to defining the syntax and the semantics of verbs  , in a quite comprehensive and finegrained way . It should be noted that we consider that the syntaxbased approach  ( VS ) is the most stable and the most for-real approach  , it should therefore be the central element of our classification strategy  . WN criteria are extremely useful , but they remaine vertheless somewhat intuitive and less connected to language realizations  . 
Our ultimate goal , from this perspective , is to associate with families of verb classes , verb classes and possibly individual verbs , hierarchically orga-nize . d semantic representations , under the form of partially instanciated LCS -based semantic representations  ( a suce ss full experiment in this direction has been carried out for English by  ( Voss and Dorr 95 )  , and also by ourselves on verbs of transfer of possession  ) and ontological knowledge . 
Acknowledgements I thank Bonnie Dorr,
Martha Palmer , Beth Levin , Doug Jones and Pahnira Marrafa for discussions that helped improving this research  . Many thanks also to Alda Martwho carried out parts of the syntactic descriptions of verbs  . 

A'/t-Ka?i , H . , Nasr , R . , LOGIN : A Logic Programming Language with Built -in Inheritance  , journal of Logic Programming , voh 3 , pp 185-215 ,  1986 . 
Dorr , B . , Garman , J . , Weinberg , A . , From Syntactic Encodings to Thematic Roles : Building Lexical Entries for Interlingual MT  , Machine Translation ,  9-3 , Kluwer Academic , 1995 Dowty , D . , On the Semantic Content of the Notion of Thematic Role  , in G . Cherchia , B . Partee , R . ~hrner ( eds ), Properties , Types and meaning,
Kluwer , 1989.
Dowty , D ., Thematic Proto-roles and Argument
Selection , Language , vol . 67-3, 1991.
Fellbaum , C ., English Verbs as Semantic Net,
Journal of Lexicography , 1993.
Gross ~ M . , Mdthodesentaxe , Masson , Paris , 1975 . 
Jackendoff , Ft ., Semantic Structures , MIT
Press , 1990.
Levin , B . , English verb Classes and Alternations : A Preliminary Investigation  , Chicago Univ . 
Press , 1993.
Pinker , S ., Learnability and Cognition , MIT
Press , 1993.
Pugeault , F . , Saint-Dizier , P . , Monteil , M . G . , Knowledge Extraction from Texts : a method for extracting predicate-argument structures from texts  , in proc . Coling 94, Kyoto , 1994 . 
Saint-Dizier , P . , Verb Semantic Classes in French , IR1T research report , December 1995 , ( revised and extended May 1996) . 
Saint-Dizier , P . , Semantic verb classes based on ' alternations ' and on WordNet-likc semantic ri-teria : a powerful convergence  , in proc . workshop on Predicative Forms , univ . of Toulouse , August 1996 . 
Voss , C . , Dorr , B . , Toward a Lexicalized Grammar for Interlinguas , Machine Translation ,  94 , 
Kluwer Academic , 1995.
Williams , E . , Thematic Structure in Syntax , Linguistic Inquiry monograph no . 23, MIT Press , 1994 . 

