Zero Pronouns and Conditionals
in Japanese Instruction Manuals
Tatsunori Mori and Hiroshi Nakagawa
Division of Electrical and Computer Engineering , l " a cnlty of Engineering , Yokohama National University , 
Tokiwa-dai156 , llo dogztya-kn , Yokoh , ~ma240 , JAPAN
E-maih mori@forest . dnj . ynu . ac . jp , nakagawa@naklab . dnj . ynu . ac . jp

This paper proposes a method of the zero pronoun resohition  , which is one of the essential processes in understanding systems for Japanese manual sentences  . It is based on pragmatic properties of Japanese conditionals  . We examined a uumber of sentences appearing in Japanese manuals according to the clas-sill cation based on the types of agent and the types of verb phrase  . As ~ result , we obtained the following pattern of usage in matrix clauses :  1  ) The connective particles TO and REBA have tt , esame distribution of usage . TARA and NARA have the same distribution of usage  . 2)'\[' he distribution of usage of TO and REBA , and that of TARA and NARA are complementary to each other  . We show that these distributions of usage can be used for resolution of zero subjects  . 
1 Introduction
From simple electrical appliances to complex computer systems  , almost all machines are accompanied by instruction manuals  . Since recently there are many machines whose operating procedures are complicated  , we have much trouble in many cases including translating their manuals into other languages  , maintaining consistency between the description in manuals and the actual behavior of the machines  . To solve these problems , we have to have a computer assisted system tbr processing Japanese manual sentences  , especially tbrunderstanding manual sentences . 
A large number of researchers have gottentogrip with the method of understanding some types of textine hlding instruction lanuals  ( Ab et al . , 1988; Nomura , 1992; Eugenio , 1992) . One of the most important matters of concern in tliese types of system is how we can fix ambiguities in semantic representations and fill uuderspecified parts of them  . Generally speaking , almost all systems described above take the following scheme  , l " irstly , each sentence in ' a text is translated into a semantic representation  , hith is process , the system uses only non-defeasible syntactic and semantic coll-straints  . Most of pragmatic information and coln-rnousense knowledge are not used here  , because the result of these knowledge would be overridden by some other information such as contextual intbrmation  . Therefore the semantic representation would include some undetermined parts which would be fixed by other kind of information including context  . This way of analysis is known as the Noud cfeasibility Thesis  ( Kameyama ,  1995) . 
Secondly , all of undetermined parts of the semantic representation are filled or settled by some kind of inferences based on ttied on lain knowledge  . 
This type of method , which uses a , large ~% l nollut of domain knowledge , seems to be dominant fronitheview point of disambiguation  . Moreover its carcely depends on the language in use becmlsc the way of disambiguation is based oil the inference with a certain knowledge base  . On the otl Lerh and , ill order to use this method , we have to pre-pa . rethe amount of knowledge being large euough to cope with various type of described objects  . 
Unfortunately , so far we have not had such a common sense knowledge base  . 
One of ways to get rid of this situation is to adopt some knowledge which hardly depends on some particular domain  . As such a kind of knowledge , we pay our attention to pragmatic constraints , which haw . ' not been used sufficiently in the former methods  . We expect that by pragmatic constraints the ambiguity in manual sentences would be resolw  ; d to some extent not in the process of inference but in the process of the translation of manual sentences into semantic representations  . 
We do not commit ourselves to the domain spe-citlc knowledge  , but use some ontological knowledge in general manuals  . For example , the colrespondence of objects in the mamlal sentences to the objects in linguistic coustra  . ints , like the speaker , the hearer , and so on . Note tha . ttile ontology in this paper does not refer to all of objects in the world described by manuals  , like a certain part of machine . Aiming atiride pendence from the donia in knowledge of objects  , we adopterie of general ontologies which is applicable to almost all manuals  . In short , our scheme consists of tile following three parts  :   1  ) a parser based on tim non-defeasiblity thesis ,  2 ) pragmatic on straintspe-cific to linguistic expressions  , and 3 ) the general ontology of the worhl described by tnanuals  . 
In the rest of this paper , we will focns on the zero pronoun resolution . In Jal ) anese , zero pronouns frequently make a sentence ambiguous  . 
Zero pronouns are ellipsis of obligatory ca . ses , which very frequently appear in Japanese sen-ten . It is called " zero subject . "In some sense , the resolution of zero pronouns ' referents , especially the resolution of " zero subject " , is the essential part of the knowledg extraction fi'om JaI  ) at mseillanuals ~ be can seonce referents of zero prOllOtlllS are identified  , we can use w ~ rious methods already been l ) roposed to recognize the structure of sentence and to map it into the suitable knowledge representation  . To capture pragmatic on straints , we have paid our attention to conditionals , which occur very frequently in instruction manuals  . In this paper , we will show that in instruction manuals , the constraint of conditionals can I ) e used to identify the referents of zero subjects . Although , of course , not all the zero pronomls cant ) esolved with the constraint shown in the paper , our examination for a lot of manual sentences hows that the constraints work very effectively and accurately in sentences with conditionals  . 
Now we have to deline the term'subject'we used in this paper  . Generally , the term ' subject ' d ( 'notes a nominative from the grammatical point of view  . In this paper , however , we will use the term SUBJECT to denote a main participant of the sentence  . Roughly speaking , in tile active voice , the SUBJECT is the nominative . , on the other hand , in the passive voice , the SUBJECT is the nominative of the corresponding sentence in the active voice  . 
2 Zero pronouns in manual sentences
Let's consider the following Japanese sentence , which shows a certain instrnction . 
(1) ?~ , kono-botan-oosu-to ,   ( ~ a-N ( )M this-button-ACe push - TO ? b der - are - mas - u  . 
qSb-NOM goollt-car-I'O l,-NONPAST.
If lb , push(es ) this button , then ? b can gooul . .
Native speakers of Japanese have the following intuitive interpretation for  ( 1 ) without any special context . 
(2) ?. := the hearer (= the u , er)
Here , ' TO'is a Japanese conjunctive particle which represents a causal relation  . ' MASU's hows politeness , Milch is expressed by cot , i u ( l ) . The ' ARE' shows ability or permission . 
On the other hand , the following sentence , which does uot have the verbal suffix of possibility ' ARE ' in the matrix clause  , has a different interpretation . 
(3) ? ckono-botan-oosu-to , ( ~ c-N () M this-button-Ace push-TO , 
Cade-mas-u.
q~d-NOM conicout-POL-NON PAST . 1
If ? ? push(es ) this button , then Ca will come out . 
The zero pronoun Ca does not refer to timhearer ( the user )  , even though qS ~ refers to the user as well a . s(1) . The intuition of natives l ) eal~ers of Japanesc for ( 3 ) is that Cd refers to a machine or a certain part of the machine  . Note that when only the matrix clause of ( 3 ) is use ( tas shown in ( 4 )  ,  ? ,  . can lie interpreted as either the hearer or the machine ~  , (4) g be de-ln as-u . 
(/) e-NOM go out-POl ,- NON PAST.
? ~ will go out .
These example show that the expressions TO and ARE impose some constraints on the referents of SUBJECTS of the sentences  . As described above , there are many cases that linguistic expressions give usa key information to resolve some tyl  ) e of ambiguity like the a . nal ) hora of a zero pronoun . In the rest of this paper , we will show several pragmatic constraints , which can ace onll t for the interpretations of these sentences described above  . 
I ) oh saka ( l ) oh saka , 1994) l ) roposes a similar approach , in which pragmatic on straints are used to determine rethrents of zero pronouns  . While his a pl ) roach treats dialogue , our targets are manual sentences . His approach utilizes honorific expressions and the speaker's point of view  . Since the constraints are efl'ective in the ( lifferen target from ours , the accuracy of identifying the referents of zero pronouns would be improved much more by using both of his constraints and the constraint we proposed  . As for the identifying method available in general discourses  , the centering the-ory ( Brennan et al , 1987; Walker et al , 1990) and the property sharing theory ( Kameyama , 1988) are proposed . Although this kind of theory has a good point that it is independent of the type  o17 discourse , the linguistic constraints specitic to expressions like the pragmatic on straints l /roposed by Dohsakaorus are more accurate than theirs when the speeit lc constraints are applicable  . 
3 Genera l onto logy in manua ls and prinmry constraints In this section  , we consider the general ontology which can be used in  , dl types of manuals . 
We shouhl consider two types of information as the parts of ontology : the properties of the objects in manuals and the discourse situation that is characterized by linguistic roles like a writer and a reader  . 
Constraint 1 ( Objects )
User has intention.
Manutheturer has intention.
Machine has no intenlion.
1 The English translation of ' DERU'ill ( 3 ) is different from the translation ill ( 1 )  . It is due to the ditference of tile view l ) oint be . tweei , Japanese and Eli-glish . The difference has no effect on the selection of zero prOllOllll ~ S refer cllt  . 
2It seems to be more natural that Ce is interl ) reted as the hearer . 

Constraint 2 ( Discourse Situation )
Speaker(Writer ) = Manufacturer
Hearer(Reader ) = User
From these constraints of the ontology , we can obtain the constraint of persons as follows  . 
Constraint 3 ( Persons )
First Person = Manufacturer
Second Person--User
Third Person = Machine
Before considering the constraints of Japanese conditionals  , we had better mention the more basic expressions in manuals  . In Japanese , simple operation procedures , like those which do not in-elude some conditions , are often described as simple sentences with no subjects whose verbs arc of one of the following types : the RU form  , the request form or the solicitation form . The RU form is the basic form of verbs and it denotes the non-past tense  . Since the RO form has a neutral meaning , it does not impose any restriction on the SUBJECT . 
On the other hand , the request form and the solicitation form have some constraints  . The speaker uses the sentences to promp the arers to do an action described by the sentence  . Therefore , we have the following constraint . 
Constraint 4 ( SUBJECT of sentence in the request form ) The SUBJECT of a sentence in either the requesl form or the solicitation form is the hearer  , Manual sentences may have a kind of modality expressing the permission  , the possibility , the obligation , and so on . Sentences which have the expressions of ability or permission mean not  . only that it is possible for the SUBJECT of the sentence to do the action  , but also thai ; the SUBJECT has their choice of whether to do the action or not to do it  . Therefore , we have the following . 
Constraint 5 ( SUBJECT of sentence with ability express ions  ) A SUBJECT of a sentence with the expressions of ability or permission must have his ~ her intention to make a choice about the action described by the  . sentence . 
4 Semantics of Japanese
Conditionals
Japanese has four conditional particles , TO , REBA , TARA and NARA , which are attached to the end of subordinate clauses as described in  ( 1 )  . The subordinate clause aud the matrix clause conjoined by one of these particles correspond to the antecedent and the consequence  , respectively . Each expression has its own meaning as shown in Tablel  ( Masuoka ,  1993) . TARA and NARA are very rarely used in manual sentences as far as we examined  . For example , the rates of use of each conditional in over a dozen of instruction manuals are as  follows3: TO is 77  . 6% (385 sentences ) of all conditionals , REBA is 19 . 4% (96 sentences ), TARA is 2 . 63 As described later , we have examined several other manuals especially for the consideration of the %  ( 13 sentences ) and NARA is 0 . 4% (2 sentences) . 
Roughly speaking , TO and REBA show causality relations , namely some general rules , and TARA and NARA are used in the case that the the antecedent is an assumption  . The fact that not assumptions but general rules are usually described in the context of instruction is the reason why TARA and NARA are used less fi'equently than TO and REBA  . 
The difference of constraints of these expressions are shown in the following sentences  , which are the variants of the sentence (3) . 
(5) ? ikono-botan-ouse-ba , ( ~ i-NOM this-button-ace push-REBA , ej de-mas-u . 
( fij-NOM come out-POL-NON PAST.
If ? ipus h(es ) this button , the nej will come out . 
(6) ? kkono-botan-oo si-tara , ek-NOM this-button-Ace push-TARA , et de-mas-u . 
~/- NOM come out/goout-POL-NON PAST.
If ekpush ( es ) this button , the net will come out/go out . 
(7) emkom > botan-oo su-nara , em-NOM this-button-Ace push-NARA , ende-mas-u . 
en-NOM come out/goout-POL-NON PAST.
If empush ( es ) this button , then ? , ~ will come out/go out . 
As well as the sentence (3) , for Japanese native speakers , the SUBJECT of the matrix clause of ( 5 ) should be a machine . On the other hand , in the case of the sentences (6) and (7) , the SUBJECTS of the matrix clauses can be either users or ma-  ( : hines . These phenomena probably due to the nature of each conditionals  . Since a causal relation , which is shown by TO or REBA , expresses a general rule , the consequence cannot include speaker's attitude  , like volition and request . Therefore , the SUBJECT of the matrix clause should be a machine  . In contrast , in the case of assumptions , that is TARA and NARA , there are no such restrictions on the SUBJECT . 
It depends on the volitionality of the verb whether a sentence shows a speaker's attitude  , or not . Therefore , we consider each Japanese conditionals in terms of volitionality of the verb  . Note that the electronic dictinary IPAL provides the information of volitionality for each Japanese verb entry  ( IPA Te . chn01ogycenter , 1987) . We can use it to analyze sentences based on our proposal  . 
4 . 1 SUBJECTS of complex sentences w i th the eond i t iona l TO A matrix clause of the sentence with TO expresses a consequence of a causal relation  . Consequently , conditionals REBA , TARA and NARA , since they occur less frequently than TO in manuals and we have to collect more examples to estimate their property in nralluals  . 





Tableh ( \] haracteristics of Japanese Conditionals shows successi  ; eness of two " e ; eents observed in a real situation . 
shows a universal causal relation . ' . . . . .
It becomes more assurn lStive when the subordinate clause shows a state  . 
shows l ) two individual events occur with ~ iel ) assing of tile time , or 2 ) an event which is expected to occur on the uncertain assumption expressed in the subordinate clause  . 
shows that the antecedent of these nl . e . nceisan ~ ssumpi , i0n .   .   .   .   . 
and tire consequence holds on that ; ~ ssmnption.
in matrix clauses , we can use either the mood of the description of f a  . cts or the mood of evidentials like conjectures , judgment and so on . In contrast , we may not use the expressions of volition , requests and so on . We consider only the mood of the description of facts  , because manual sentences should describe only facts and must not in  ( ' ludcsl ) eaker's at , titude . The sentences having the mood are classified into two types : tile  ( le-scription of an action and the description of a state like an expression for the ability of some action  . 
The former type is problematic , because the RU-l'orm ~ which is the normal inflection form of verbs and describes an action  , is ambiguous in its meaning . The RU-fonn can show one of tit (' , followings : speaker's volition , speaker's request , oh earers , or the action done hyathird party . 
In the analysis of the description of an action , it , is important o examine whether the verb phrase expresses a volitional action or not  . According to the classitlcation by IPA ( IPA Technology een-ter ,  1987) , all of Japanese verbs are classitied into two types  , volitioual verbs , which usually express in t , entional actions , and non-volitional verbs , which express non-intentional actions . Although non-volitional verbs only exl ) ress non-volitional actions , volitional verbs are cb~ssitied into two kind of verbs  . One is the type of verbs which can be used tbr not only volitional actions but also non -volitional actiorts  . The other is the type of verbs which are used only for volitional actions  . For example , ITAMO(hav capain ) is a non-volitional verb , OTOSO ( drop/loose ) is a volitional verb which has also the non -volitional use  , SAGASU ( scarch ) is a volitional wM ) which has only the volitional use . 
Let us consider the interpretations of the ma- -trix clauses of the sentences with  1O   . The first case is that verbs in the matrix clauses are involitional use  . If the SUBJECT is the speaker , the verb involitional use expresses peaker's volition  . If the SUBJECT is the hearer , the st ) eaker expresses his/her expectation that the hearer makes a volitional action shown by the sentence  . This is the case of requests . Consequently , the SUBJECT should be neither the speaker nor the hearer due to the constrain that we cannot expresss or tievo-lition  o1: request in a matrix clause of the TO sentence . On the other hand , a third paJ'ty can 1) e the SUBJECT , because a sentence whose SUBJECT is a third party does not express any volition  , invitations , requests or injunctions . Since tile man-uf act m'e is the speaker and the user is the hearer according to the constraint of the discourse situation  , them auu facture Ltll ( ltile user cannot be the SUBJECT of the matrix clause  . Therefore , the only possible interpretation is that the SUBJECT of the matrix clause is the machine  . 
The second case is thal , verbs in the nlatrix clauses are in nell -volitional use  . If a verb of the matrix chmse has a non -volitional use  , thai , is , it ' it is possible for the action of the clause to be done unconsciously  , the constraint is not applied , because the w:rb in non-volitional use does not express any volition  , invitations , requests and imjunctions . For example , the SUBJECT of the matrix clause of the following sentence refers to the users  . 
(8) ~ b \] O . qfllreru-l , o , qSj-NOM q59-ACC touch-TO , '/' hk an denshi-mas-u . 
(~h-NOM get_an_eh ~ ctric ~ shocl ~- pOL-NONI'AST.
\[1'@touch(es)qSq , then 4h will get a neh ' . etric shock . 
To examine the accuracy of interpretations bused on our estinmtion we have collected about  400 sentences , which include TO and some of which also inch . Mepossibility expressions , from several types of inanuals , l / y these sentence . s , we check Constraint 5 and our estimati(m of TO . 
Then , it is contirmed that there are no excel ) tion to them , at least in the collected sentences . 
4 . 2 SUBJECTS of comI ) h ~ . xs(mten('es with the conditionals REBA , TARA and NARA Because of the characteristics of each conditionals descril  ) e ( t in Table 1 , we expect that a ) the conjunctive REBA , which shows a causal relation , has the same constraint as TO has , which also express causality , b ) since both of TARA and NARA express an assumption  , they have the same type of constraint , which is difl'erent fi'om the constraint of TO and REBA  . As the first step to confirm this expectation , let us examine whether the matrix clause may have a request form  , or not , in the cruses of REBA , TARA and NARA . At lirst , note that the hearer , namely the use . r , is the agent of Cite requested action if the matrix clause is a  . re(luest form . In the case that the conjunctive shows causality , the matrix chmse should show some inevitable result of tile event expressed by the should not express the judgement and attitude of the speaker  . As for the conjunctive REBA , the fact that tile conjunctive represents some causality means that the matrix clause does not have a request form  . Note that the exception is tile case that the subordinate clause is stative  , or a non-volitional action . As described in ' Fable 1 , in those eases , the subordinate clause shows an assumption rather than a cause  , and the matrix clause may be a request as shown in the following example  . 
(9) hitsuyou-ganake-reba,
Necessity-NON there-is-no-REBA , ? o Cpsute te-ku dasa-i . 
Co-NONCp-ACC discard-REQPOL-NON PAST.
If there is no need of Cp , please discard Cp.
The usages of the conjunctives TARA and NARA , which express assumptions , are explained as follows . Since the assumptions are introduced by the speaker  , the matrix clause is to describe speaker's expectation or desire  . Therefore , it is quite probable that not only the normal form but also some request form  , which is considered as a kind of wish , appears in the matrix clause . 
In order to ascertain our estimation , we have examined a bunch of real sentences , which appear in real instruction manuals . First of all , in about 400TO sentences , all of tile matrix clauses have no request form . In the REBA case , few request form appear in the matrix clauses . The exceptions are the same type of sentences as ( 9 )  . 
Next , we consider the usage of TARA and NARA.
Even if the conjunctive REBA in the sentence ( 9 ) is changed for TARA or NARA , the sentences are still acceptable . As we exepcted , it shows that the matrix clause of the sentence with TARA or NARA may have a request form  , that is , the SUBJECT of the matrix clause may be a user . Then , can the SUBJECT of the matrix chmse be a machine ? We expect that there are few cases that the SUBJECT of the matrix clause is a machine  , because the highly context specific assumption , which is expressed by TARA or NARA , is not suitable fortile description of general rules  . Moreover , fi ' om the fact that the matrix clause of TO and REBA cannot express the speaker's attitude  , we pragmatically infer that TARA and NARA are expected to be used only for expressing the speaker's attitude  . Our expectation is summarized in Table 2 . 
Note that a SUBJECT should be either a user or a machine because manufacturers have finished all the actions appeared in the context of instruction before shipment  . 
Our estimation about TO has been already confirmed in Section  4  . 1 . In order to confirm our estimation about REBA , TARA and NARA , let use x a mine real examples . Since tile constraints we pursue here are those which restrict the types of SUBJECTS  , we examined the correlation among the types of conjunctives  , the types of verbs and the SUBJECT . As for the types of SUBJECTS , a SUBJECT should be either a user or a machine . 
Table 2: Our estimate of the usage of tile matrix clause
Speaker's attitude =
User's Volitional Act.
TO , REBA Not available
TARA , NARA Available


Not available
As fortile types of verbs , each clause is classified into two classes according to volitionality of verb  . 
One of the mistile cl ; ~ss of verbs involitional use , the other is the class of other non-volitional predicates  . There for each clause belongs to one of the followings : ? SUBJECT = user and Predicate = verb involitional use  ( U/V , hereafter ) ? SUBJECT = user and Predicate = others ( u/o ) ? SUBJECT = machine and Predicate=verb in volitional use  ( M/V ) ? SUBJECT = machine and Predicate = others ( M/O ) Table 3 ,   4 and 5 show the distribution of usage of each conjunctive  . Each number shows the frequency of use in the examples we examined  . Note that to create ' Fable 3 , 4 and 5 , several Japanese native speakers determine referents of zero SUB- 
JECTS according to contexts.
Table 3: Distribution of use of REBA
Matrix Clause
U/V U/O M/V M/O Total
U/V 16552 1413 20.4% 26.9% 23.1% 6.2% 58.7%
U/O 412 101 71.8% 5.3% 0.4% 0.0% 7.6%
M/V 0014 50.0% 0.0% 0.4% 1.8% 2.2%
M/O 62038 7712 . 7% 9  . 0% 16 . 9% 3,1%3 1,9%1 1979 225 225 rotal 4 . 9% 43 . 1% 40 . 9% 11 . 1% 100% First of all , as we expected before , the distribution of the use of REBA is different from those of TARA and NARA  . While we call see several differences of use , the most remarkable one is the difference of use of the matrix clause  . The matrix clauses of REBA are hardly any user's volitional action  . The exceptions are only about 5% of all examples . The distribution of use of the matrix clauses of TARA and NARA is complementary to the distribution of REBA  , that is , the majority of the matrix clause of TARA ( about 90% of all examples ) and NARA ( 100% of all examples ) are user's volitional actions , although the number of the total examples of NARA is not so numerous  . The empirical result supports the our estimation . 

Table 4: l ) is tribution of use of TARA
Matrix Clause
U/V U/O M/V M/O Total'2 5000 25
U/V 42.4% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 42.4% 71008....
U/O 11.9% 1.7% 0.0% 0.0% 13.6%8 2O 111
M/V 13.6% 3.4% 0.0% 1.7% 18.6% 130 2015
M/O22 . 0% 0 . 0% 3 . 4% 0 . 0% 25 . 4% 533 2159\]'ota\] 89 . 8% 5 . 1% 3 . 4% 1 . 7% 100%



TMJe5: Distrilmtion of use of NARA
Matrix Clause
U/V U/O M/V M/O Total 0 0 0 0 0
U/V 0.0% 0.o % 0.0% o.o % 0.0% 80008
U/O 88.9% 0.0% 0.(l % 0.0% 88.9% 0 0 0 0 0
M/V 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
I0001
M/O 11.1% 0.0% 0.0% o .0% 11.1% 90009
Tot ; ill 100% 0 . 0% 0 . 0% 0 . 0% 100% 4 . 3 Default rules of usage of REBA , TARA and NARA The tendency of use of the conjunctives gives us a couple of strong defimlts to resolve the zero pronoun in tit  (  ; matrix clauses . We propose the following defaults . 
Default1 ( SUBJECT of sentem : e with TO or

In a complex sentence with the connect zvep article TO or REBA  , the matrix clause does not empress user's volitional action  . Therefore , the SUBJECT of the matriz clause should be a machine  , if the verb of the matrix clause does not have the non-volitional use  . 
Default2 ( SUBJECT of sentence with TARA or NARA ) In a complex sentence with . the connective particle TARA or NARA , the matrix clause e ~: presses only user's volitional action  . 7' h . erefore , the SUBJECT of the malrix clause should be a user . 
The accuracy of the default rules of-I-O , REBA , TARA and NARA is 100% ,  95 . 1%, 89 . 8% and 100%, respectively , as far as we examined . 
5 Conclusion
Inl ; his pat)er , we proposed a scheme which closely depends not on domain knowledge of objects described in manual but on pragmatic constraints which linguistic expressions in nately have  . This method uses only the linguistic constraints and the general ontology of the world described by manuals  . Especially , we have shown that we can detern fine the referents of zero pronouns to some extent with our linguistic constraints  , like the constraint of the Japanese Conditionals  . l lowew ~' r , we do not have enough knowledge about the fob lowing l  ) oints . They are important portions of our future work . 
? Utilization of discourse , structure.
? Analysis for the other types of manual sentences  , like definitions . 

Norihiro Abe , Tomohirolshikawa , and Tsuji Salmro .  1988 . Generating an asscnfl ) ly procedure from asselnbly instruction . Journal of Japanese Society for Artificial intelligence  ,  3(5):590-598 , September . ( in Japanese) . 
Susan E . F/rennan , Marilyn Walker Friedman , and Carl3 . Pollard .  1987 . A centering approach to pronouns , In Proceedings of th . e25th Annual Meeting of the American . Association of Computational Linguistics ( ACL 87 )  , pages 155:162 . 
Kohji Dohsaka .  1994 . hlentifying the referents of Japanese zero pronouns based on pra  . gmatic condition interpretation .   7Yansactions of Informalion Processing Society o\]Japan ,  35(5):768 778 . ( in Japanese) . 
Barbara Di Eugenio .  1992 . Understanding natural language instructions : The case of purl  ) use clause_In Proceedings of 30th Annual Meeting of ACL , pages 120127 . 
II'A Technology center , 1987 . Th . elexz-eon of the Japanese basic verbs for Com -lrulers  , hfformation-teehnology I'romotion Agency ( IPA ) , lapan , March . ( in : lapanesc ) . 
Megumi Karneya Ina .  1988 . Japanese zero pronominal binding : Where syntax and discourse meet  . In W . Poser , editor , Japanese 5' yn-tax , pages 351-369 . CSIA , Stantbrd . 
Megumi Kameyama .  1995 . The syntax and se-nm . utics of the . lal ) an ese language engine . In R, . Mazuka and N . Nagai , editors , Japanese Syntactic Processing . Lawrencel , \] rll ) aum Associates . 
' Fakashi Masuoka , editor .  1993 . Nihongo-no Joken-llyogen ( Conditional t'2 ~: pr'essionsi , /apanese) . Kurosio Publishers , Tokyo . ( in

llirosato Nomura .  1992 . l , inguistic analysis of law sentences . In Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium : Legal ( nowledge and Legal Reasoning Systems , pages 1018 . l , egalExl ) ert
System Association , October.
Marilyn Walker , Masayo1ida , a .nd Sharon Cote.
1990 . Centering in Japanese discourse . In Proceedings of COLING90 . 

