On Inference-Based Procedures for Lexical Disambiguation 
Jiirgen Wedekind
Institute for Natural Language Processing
University of Stuttgart
Azenbergstr . 12
D-70174 Stuttgart , FRG
juergen(0)ims.uni-stuttgart.de

In this paper we sketch a decidable inference -based procedure for lexical disambiguation which operates on semantic representations of discourse and conceptual knowledge  , In contras to other approaches which use a classical logic for the disambiguating inferences and run into decidability problems  , we argue on the basis of empirical evidence that the underlying i ifference mechanism has to be essentially incomplete in order to be  ( cognitively ) adequate . Since our conceptual knowledge can be represented in a rather restricted representation language  , it is then possible to show that the restrictions at is fied by the conceptual knowledge and the inferences ensure in an empirically adequate ww the decidability of the problem  , although a fully expressive language is used to represent discourse  . 
1 Introduction
The determination of the contextual appropriate -hess of a reading of a lexically ambiguous entence is conlmonly called lexical disambiguation  . Lexical disambiguation presents a particular proble in for any sort of natural anguage processing  , but especially for machine translation , since these In anticgrids of the source and the target may diverge in such a way that one has to disambiguate in cases where it  , is not required for applications of the source alone  .   1 Resolving lexical ambiguities is a problematic task  , since it , involves different sources of linguistic and nonlinguistic information : intbrmation about the context of a sentence in a discourse  , about the meanings of the words and about the world  . 
iF or the translation from German to English e . g . it ; is necessary to disambiguate ' U hr ' ( clock/watch )  , but 1lot for knowledge retrieval or other 1 , atural language processing tasks based on German alone  . 
Approaches to model the lexical disambiguation process formally differ as to the degree to which they consider the information of tile various sources needed to disambiguate properly  . We can distinguish two classes of approaches : " surface-oriented " approaches and " inference -based " approaches  . Surface-oriented approaches rely on selectional restrictions  ( of . e . g . McCord 1989 )   ( sometime supplied by an external type hierar-chy /ontology  ( e . g . Nirenburg 1989) or are statistical ( e . g . Kameyama , Peters , and Schiitze 1993) . 
Although quite useful for some purposes , the performance of surface-oriented approaches i inherently limited in that their context sensitivity is always locally bounded  ( see e . g . Kay , Gawron , and Norvig 1994 for details) . Since we cannot assume fixed finite context , boundaries within each lexical ambiguity can be locally resolved  , inference-based approaches seem more promising for handling lexical disambiguation  , hfference-based approaches assume thai ; the language of a logic is used to represent the meaning of a discourse  , that the same language is used to store our conceptual and world knowledge and that resolution is achieved on the basis of the underlying logic by special inferences  . 
The most promine ut inference pattern ( which is also the center of the discussion here ) is e . g . 
the proof of a contradiction from a given reading in a given context and our conceptual and world knowledge which allows us to rule out that reading  . Although these approaches can handle the problem of disambiguating information arbitrarily far away  ( the whole context is available as a premise )  , without any fllrther restrictions they run into tractability problems which exclude a practical application  . Since we need-as we will show below a representation language which is at least as expressive as the language of first-order predicate logic for an adeqm~te representation of discourse meanings  , an inconsistency test is not computable any more if a classical  ( sound and as far as possible complete ) calculus is used for the test : the underlying problem is simply undecidable  . 
Although it , nay turn out that the disambiguation problem is in fact undecidable if world knowl-we assmrm ~ that resolut  ; ion restricted to conceptual knowle . dgeconstitutes an important subproblem froln a cognitive point of view  , which is solvable in e onl : r as to the general problem  . Thai ; all known approaches which are confined to conceptual knowledge nevertheless rtm into probletns is due to an empirically false estimation : they do not take into account that humans areable  . to disalnt figuat even without a flll understm Ming of the discourse Lexical disambiguation works even very well in most of those cases where tile discourse is inconsistent  ; or its consistency ix not known , and the inconsistency test wouht either fail or l to t necessarily terminate  . Thus , the kind of reasoning which is involved ill lexieal disambigua-lion has to be  . essentially incoml ) let e . Since our conceptual knowledge , on the other hand , can be ret ) resen l ; e . dinarift ; her restricted ret ) resentation language , it is possible to restrict infer e . n ( : ing in a nemt ) irically adequate way which ensures decid-ahility of tile problem all  ; hough aflfly expressive , language in used to represent discourse . 
2 The Idea of Inference-Based
Lexical Disambiguation
Lexical disambiguation is a procedm'e determin-in ~ r for a  ( le . xically ) amhiguou sentence within a discourse which reading of the selt tellce is contextually api  ) ropriate . Iq'omalogicMpoint of view , the resolution of a lexical amt figuity is usually reconstructed by an inference process which rules out a reading if our concet  ) tual knowledge contradicts this readiug in the given  ( ' on text . ' ~ In order to illustrate this type of inference -based resolution t  ) roce dure let us consider the German sentence ( 1 )   ( 1 ) Einige Arztehabeneine Schwester . 
which contains the ambiguous lexical item ' Seh wester '  . Let us consider the two readings of ( 1 ) which have to be expressed in English by ( 2a , b ) . 4(2) ( a ) Some physician shaw ; a sister . 
(b ) Some physicians have a nurse.
These two readings are represented by the two ( over simplified ) predicate-calculus for inulas given in ( 3 )  . '5 ( a ) ( a ) 3~: ( S'h > ~ i , . i ~4 ~;) A ~ : j ( s i . , . t  ~ r . (:/,:,:)))(I ,)~: ( l'h > ~ i , : i , , ~( ~ . )^~:, j(m , , , . ~ e ( , ) ) )  2Approaehes which employ worhlknowledge in a nontrivial way m'e not  ; known , by the way . 
SAn overview on the , different methods is given in
Kay , Oawron , and Norvig 1994.
4 Sentence (1) has , of course , more readings . But we abstract a wayfl'oln the others R ) r the sake of simplicity . 
SSince we are primarily interested in the process , we abstract fi ' om furtl , er details , like temporal aspects . 
ll , esolution of an ambiguity as in ( 1 ) is possible if it ; is embedded in a discourse which provides disambiguating information  . If the discourse were continued as in ( 4 )   ( 4 ) Einige Arztehabeneine Schwester , mitder sicver heiratets in d . 
we could rule out them Mesired reading given in ( 5 )  . 
(5) 3a : ( Pi~ys . ( x)A3 y(Sister(y , x ) A Married(x , y ))) This reading which is expre , ssed in English by ( 6 )   ( 6 ) Some physicians have a sister to whom they are married  . 
can he ruled out , since according to our conceptual system nobody can be married to his sister  . 
Since this part of our conceptual knowledge can be formalized  , as in (7) (7) VxVy(Xistc . r(y , x)-~-Married(x , y )   ) the inapl ) roprial : eness of reading ( 5 ) can be ex-plicated frontalogical point of view by the fact that we can deriw  ; a contradiction fl ' Oln that reading of ( 4 ) and our conceptual knowledge ( meaning postulates )  . a 3 The Intractability Problem Our inference -based reconstruction of the disambiguation process given in the previous section requires oil the one hand that the meaning of the text is adequately represented in an apt  ) ropriate ( formal ) representation language , which allows the encoding of concept uM knowledge as well  . By requiring on l ; he other hand the underlying logic to be sound and as far as possible complete  , we run , of course , into wellknown decidability prot ) lems . 
Without any flu'ther restrictions on tile expressive power of  1  ; he representation language and/or the underlying logic the inconsistency of the representation of an arbitrary text and our conceptual knowledge is not decidable  . Thus a natural language system whose re . solver is based on such an inference system is not very use f l f l  , since an attempt to resolve an ambiguity is not guaranteed to terminate  . 
Since the field of AI which deals with knowledge represenl  ; ation and rel , riev M hasheen wo rrying about the same problem for quite a hmg time  , it is not surprising that approaches to e ope with ~> Phere is  , of course , another procedure which is dual to the given one . The . dtml variant allows us to rule out a reading if this reading of the discourse con-rains redundant intbrmation  , i . e . , inlbrmation which already follows fl'om the meaning postulates  . This procedure would exchldee . g . for ' Einige Arztehabe . neine Schwester , rail ; der sie nichtw ' x heirate tsind ' the Sister " reading which is expressed in English by ' Some physicians have a sister to whom they are not married '  , since (7) implies for physicians who 1 , aw ~ a sister that they are not married to her . 
9 81 this problem within lexical disambiguation were directly adopted from knowledge representation  . 
According to the subject of the restriction used to ensure the traetabilty of the problem  , we have to distinguish three main approaches . 
The simplest way to guarantee tractability of the disambiguation problem is by restricted computations  . If the underlying logic of a resolver is known to be undecidable  ( e . g . the inference machine used in LILOG ( Bollinger , Lorenz , and Ple-tat1991 ) ) the only chance to ensure termination is by stopping the computation after a limited amount of resources  ( inference length , computation time , etc . ) is consumed . Since the termination behavior of such a system is without any further empirical evidence not in anyway correlated with our cognitive capabilities and without any further formal evidence not in anyway correlated with the behavior which we would expect  , if the disambiguation problem were nevertheless decidable  , we have to rule out these approaches from a scientific point of view  . 
The second class of approaches achieves tractability by restricted representation languages  . 
These restrictions allow one to base retrieval on a tractable logic which is sound and complete  . In order to supporthe distinction between terminological and assertional knowledge  , most formalisms of this class provide two different  ( restricted ) representation languages : the terminological language and the assertional language  . 
To use one of these knowledge representation formalisms  ( especially the tractable descendants of KL-ONE ) for lexical disambiguation leads to problems which disqualify language restrictions as the only means to ensure tractability of the disambiguation problem  . On the one hand it is , of course , possible to find examples of meaning postulates which are in expressible in the restricted terminological languages  ( see e . g . the list given in Doyle and Patil 1991) . But these counterexamples do not provide conclusive arguments  , since the expressive power needed in order to formulate these eounter examples i still rather weak  , and one could counter by moving a little bit of expressive power around  . Much more crucial for disambiguation are the restrictions imposed on the assertional language  . 
In BACK ( Hoppe et al 1993) , for example , which is used by Quantz and Schmitz 1993 for disambiguation by storing the text representation in the ABox  ( assertional knowledge base ) and the meaning postulates in the TBox ( terminological knowledge base ) itise . g . not possible to represent (4) in an adequate way . We can only find representations whose models include the models of  ( 5 )  , but not a representation with exactly the same models  . In order to see this , consider the set-theoretic versions of the satisfiability conditions of  ( 5 ) and ( 7 )   ( for a model with interpretation flmction Z ) given in ( 8 ) and ( 9 )  . 7(8) (~ Phys . \] ZNxI~y((y , x)e ~ Sist . \]Zn~Marr . \] Z ) ) # 0  ( 9 ) \[ Sister\]zn\[Married\]z = According to these conditions the BACK expressions  ( 10 ) and ( 11 ) we readequate representations of " ( 5 ) and ( 7 )  . 
(10) X::Phys . and some ( Sister and Married )   ( 11 ) Sister and Married : < nothing Although ( 10 ) contradicts the TBox representation ( 11 ) of ( 7 )  , it is not possible to use BACK to establish this inconsistency  ( incoherence )  , since BACK does not allow the conjunction of roles in the ABox  ( cf . Hoppe et al 1993, p .  5 ) ) which is of course needed in ( 10 )   ( the conjunction of the roles Sister and Married )  . 
Example (10) is , of course , just beyond the border of the permitted expressions  , since it is in principle expressible but not allowed  , and much more problematic ( e . g . for ' donkey ' sentences ) is certainly the fact that variables are not explicitly available in these representation languages  . But it should indicate the lack in expressive power at least in as much as it is possible without a more general formal proof  ( which we cannot give here for lack of space )  . Since the correct disambiguating inferences cannot be performed any more if the truth conditions of a discourse are boiled down in a way that allows to represent it  ( somehow ) in such a restricted assertional language , approaches which modelexical disambiguation the basis of these knowledge representation formalisms must fail  . 
Since an extension of the expressive power of the assertional languages would lead immediately to our original tractability problem  , we have to give up the implicit assumption that lexical disambiguation presupposes the consistency of the discourse  , if we don't want to give up lexical disambiguation at all  . Thus , we end up in the third class of approaches which provide us with fully expressive languages to represent discourse and ensure tractability by limited inferences  . In order to see whether the requirements of soundness and completeness can be adequately weakend we have to study the inferences involved in lexical disambiguation more carefully  . 
4 Towards Tractable Lexical

To limit inference is a wellknown strategy employed for knowledge retrieval  ( e . g . Frisch and Allen 1982) . By using incomplete theorem provers it is certainly possible to ensure tractability  , but incompletenessial ways a compromise which can  7We assume Married to be asymmetric relation . 
982 be a ( :cet ) tedas long as the prover computes the desired inferences completely  ( which is in fact hard to show )  . 
In contrasto knowledge retrieval where incompleteness is assumed for utility reasons  , inference systems used for lexieal disambiguation have to be essentially incomplete  . Otherwise we wouht get wrong results . In order to motivate our restrictions we proceed in three steps  . In the first step we show that we need an incomplete  ( buts ou Ild ) in li?rence mechanism for lcxical disambiguation , since a complete mechanis in leads to wrong results  . West ) ecify a class of inconsistency l ) rooN which contains the disamt ) iguating inferences as a subclass . In the second step , we separate out those prooN which are in fact disamt  ) iguating and illustrate in the last steptidal the discourse structure imposes further restrictions on the accessibility of premises  . 
4 . 1 The Incompleteness and Dec idab i l i ty of Lexieally Disambiguating 
Inference Mechanisms in order ~ o develop our approach to lexical disambiguation  , we work successively through some . 
adequacy conditions which have to be . satisfied by an adequate procedure . According to the discussion in section 3 we have to assume a full yexl ) res-sive language for the representation of discourse  . 
Assuml ) tion ( I ) is therefore as follows: ( I ) We have to assume a fully expressive language for the representation of texts  . Semantic representations of natural language texts in this language do in general not satisfy conditions which make them de <- idable  ( see e . g . Rabin 1977 for standard conditions ) . 
To illustrate which kind of iimoinple teness we need  , we assume that the meaning postulates and the discourse can bee  , xt ) ressed in a first-order language without flmction symbols and identity  . Although we think that one needs a more expressive language for an adequate representation of discourse  , and that very of l ; en nonmonotonic reasoning is involved , the . first , -order case seems nevertheless representative , since we have to ( teal with the decidability problem . Moreover , we expect that dm methodology we used can be applied to more expressive discourse rel  ) resent a donhm guages in a similar way . 
For our conceptual knowledge on the other hand we make the much stronger assumption  ( 1I )  . 
( H ) Conceptual knowledge is represented by a finite consistent and decidable set of meaning postulates MP that does not contain logi-<:ally valid subsets of formulas  , s 8Since this condition is certainly not satisfed by our world knowledge  , its integration in the disambiguation process would he a much harder prohlem  . 
Decidability of MP , i . e . the decidability of MP~- ( / ~ for a given formula ( /~ , results fi'o In the fact that MP does not make any absolute existential claim on the entities in the world  , especially on the , Jrcardinality .   9 In order to be able to specify the incompleteness of our inference machinery in terms of a resolution logic  , let us in the following assume that MP and the discourse is given in Skolem conjunctive form  ( SCF )  . I . e . , as two uniw~'rsally quantified formulas whose matrices are in conjunctive normal form  . 
Let us fllrthermore assume that we wouhl know that the given discourse is consistent  ( we abstract here first fi ' or n thei ) rohlem that this t ) roperty is undecidable )  . We were then able to determine them , satisfiahility of the discourse and MP by resolution  . 
Let us take , for example , the set of clauses obtained fi'om the SCFs of the memfiilg postulate  ( 7 ) aim the discourse ( 5 ) by the standard preparation pro < : edures . If we abbreviate Physician by P , Sis-terby S and Married by M and use clause set notation  ( each conjunct of the matrix is represented as dm set of its disjunctively connected liten Js  ) tt ~ eunsatisfiability of ( 5 ) and ( 7 ) can be shown , since there is a resolution refiltation depicted as a refills < i on tree in  ( l2 )  . 
(12) P ( a ) S(b , a ) 2k l(a ,  1 , ) ~ S(V , a : ) , ~ M(:r , y ) . .
, a)\[\]
The whole problem is now that despite of the de- ( -idability of MP the lexical disamt figuation problem would still be undecidable if it wouhl pre-SUl  ) pose a consistent discourse . Decidability of the lexical disamhiguation problem results nevertheless from the fact that lexical disambigua-don does not involve a complete understanding of the discom'se  . In order to illustrate that , let us ' a By checking several examples we found out that this t  ) rot ) erty can I ) e characterized model-theoretically as follows . There is a finite set of ( up to isomorphism unique ) tinite models M1 ,   . . , Mu of MP such that each other finite model M ~ of MP can successively be reduced to a model MG \[ Mk\] by a chain of models M = ME-<M~-<  . . ~ M ~ . ~ of MP such that for each pair of models/VI ~ =   ( lal ' , % : i ) , M~+1=(L/i+1 , 53: I+1 dmre is a ( partial ) isomorphismf from l , ti + l\bliinla  #such that , 9 ~( R ) is the set of tuples ( at ,  . ., a ,,~) with ( bl , . . , b , ,~) 6 c3:+1 ( R ) , and al = blifbtCb?i , and at = f(bt ) if btGU ~+ ~\ U ~ , for every relation symbol R . Since the infinite models of MP correspond to unions of infinite chains of such models  ( i . e . MP is a rather restricted W-theory ) , we can reduce the test of M ~ . pq~t breach model M ~ . of Me to a test of Mk ~( b . 
Thus , we can decide MPL-~/ ) by checking M\[=-q5 for all models MEM 1 ,   . ., Mn . But note that this does not allow us to test whether  q5 is valid or not . 
9 83 consider the inconsistent lexically ambiguous sentences  ( 13a , c ) whose Sister " readings are expressed in English by  ( 13b , d) . 
(13) ( a ) Es gibt keine Seh western , a bereinige Arzte habeneine , mitdersic niehtverheirate tsind . 
(b ) There are no sisters at all , but some physicians have one to whom they are not married  . 
(c ) Es gibt keine Sch western , a bereinige Arzte habeneine , mitder siever heiratets in d . 
( d ) There are no sisters at all , but some physicians have one to whom they are married  . 
Although it is possible to derive from the semantic representations of  ( 13a , c ) a contradiction , these proofs are by no means disambiguating inferences  , since the meaning postulates are not involved . In order to be able to explain by inconsistency proofs why the Sister reading is excluded for  ( 13 c ) but not for ( 13 a ) one has to assume an incomplete inference system ? Otherwise the system would not work correctly and would  , of course , not necessarily terminate . Thus , our third assumption is: ( III ) Lexical disambiguation is very often possible although the discourse is inconsistent or its consistency is not known  . 
What we are in fact looking for is a procedure which tests whether there is a consistent set of information pieces of the discourse which contradicts MP  . In order to isolate tile consistent information pieces provided by a  ( possibly inconsistent ) discourse we use a discourse representation ( and meaning postulates ) in clause form . Since each single clause of such a representation must be satisfiable  , we can identify the set of consistent information pieces provided by a discourse with the set of clauses of the discourse in SCF  . On the basis of this set we can then test whether there is a consistent subset of these pieces which contradicts MP  . Take as an example the clause representation of ( 13 a ) and our meaning postulate ( 7 ) depicted in ( 14a , b) . 
(14) ( a ) - , S(u , v)P ( a)S(b , a ) ~ M(a , b ) ( b ) ~ S(y , x) , -~M(x , y ) . .
That the Sister reading is not excluded for ( laa ) is then explicable by the fact that there is no consistent subset of clauses of  ( 14 a ) which is inconsistent with MP . What is consistently said in the ( inconsistent ) discourse does not violate tilemFor the sake of simplicity we were confined to short and simple examples and could therefore not avoids tone artificiality  . Moreover , an additional test based on the procedure sketched in footnote  6 would certainly exclude the Sister reading for ( laa )  . But it is , of course , easy to construct more realistic examples where the inconsistency is much more hidden and does not affect the disambiguation  . 
meaning postulates in this case . In order to test this kind of incompatibility we have to demand that each resolution deduction starts with a clause from MP  . This restriction prevents the attempto prove the inconsistency of the discourse alone  ( at least if MP does not contain logically valid subsets of formulas that we assume and areable to decide  )  . It prevents us Dora proving the unsatis-fiability of  ( 14a , b ) , but we can still show the inconsistency of the clause representation of  ( 13 c ) and ( 14 tl ) as in ( 12 )  . 
4.2 Disambiguating Inferences
The restriction introduced above is by no means sufficient  , since the proof procedure is not yet sensitive to the predicates representing the readings of an ambiguous lexical item  . In order to illustrate this insufficiency let us consider the English translation of tile Sister " reading of  ( 4 )  , repeated in (15) . 
(15 ) Some physicians have a sister to whom they are married  . 
If we also assume ( 7 ) for English then a contradiction would result although we did not regard'sister ' as ambiguous  ( at least in our oversimplified language domain )  , ttence , if ( 15 ) were embedded in a larger discourse we would have no chance to disambiguate other ambiguous lexical items  , since we would get a contradiction for every reading of these items  . That disambiguation is nevertheless possible in many of those cases can be made obvious e  . g . by continuing (15) as in (16) . 
(16 ) Some physicians have a sister to whom they are mm ' ried  . Some of these sisters admire stars who got an Oscar  . 
The disambiguation of the ambiguous item ' star ' should make no problems  , given we had the right ; meaning postulates . Thus , we have to assume : ( IV ) Lexical disambiguation is very often possible although the discourse contradicts our conceptual knowledge  . 
In order to disambiguate properly we have t6 consider only those consistent sets of information pieces which contain at least one occurrence of the predicate that represents one reading of t  , he ambiguous lexical item . Therefore we have to demand in addition that each resolution deduction starts with a pair of clauses AEMP and B from the discourse representation where B contains an occurrence of the predicate representing one reading of the ambiguous lexical item  . This prevents disambiguating inferences for cases where there is no choice with respect othe interpretation of tile discourse  ( ' sister ' has to be interpreted as Sister although there is a contradiction  )  . 
4 . 3 Ref lec t ing D iscourse S t ructure For lexical disambiguation we assumed so far that the underlying inference machinery operates on by the discourse  . This set was crucially dependent on what is said and not on what follows  , since we were ( especially in case of inconsistencies ) not interested in the set of all logical consequences of a discourse  . Hence , our procedure already reflects in a very weak sense the discourse structure  , since we did not allow all conversions preserving logical equivalence  , but only those needed to construct an SCF froln the discourse  . 
By converting the whole discourse into SCF we made all consistent information pieces provided by the discourse accessible for lexical disambiguation  . Whether we need this entire set or just a rather limited subset of pieces which can be made accessible by locally restricted conversions into SCF  , is for a first-order discourse an empirical trot no formal problem  . But if we consider discourse representations in more expressive languages  ( e . g . the language of an intensional logic ) it becomes cleat " that we have to make only those consistent pieces accessible which result frolnt lrst-order consequences of the discourse representation  . Information in the scope of the intensional verb in  ( 17 a ) whose Sister reading is expressed in English by ( 17 b ) is , for example , not accessible for lexical disambiguation . J 1 (17) ( a ) Einige . Arztever such tenihre Schwestern zu heiraten . 
(b ) Some physicians tried to marry their sisters.
Since we cannot get an SCF of the first-order consequences of a  ( possibly inconsistent ) discourse represented in a more expressive representation language  , it is necessary to find exactly those logical equivalence preserving conversions which allow us to convert the discourse representation in such a way that the adequate set of consistent infor-mat ion pieces can be made accessible for the dis -ambiguation by locally restricted conversions into SCF  . But we must , of course , admitl ; hat further study is needed in order to be able to determine these conversions  . 
5 Conclusion
Lexical disambiguation is a procedure which works according to the communicative convention to interpre the discourse as consistent as possible  , if there is a choice . It allows us to decide for two alternative readings of the discourse which one is less contradictory to what is said consistently in the discourse and to our conceptual knowledge  . 
As the analysis of the examples in this paper has shown  , there is a striking similarity between lexical disambiguation and anaphoric resohltion  . Not nMore complex examples can be found e . g . in Kalnp1992, Kamp and Rofldeutseher1994a , b . 
a complete understanding of the discourse is required  , but only an incomplete one that is restricted to a set of accessible consistent information pieces  . The only difference is that ; lexical disambiguation requires a little bit more understanding  . 

Thanks to Ede Zimmer in an nan ( lHansKamp for usefll discussions and to the anonymous reviewers for  (  ; oinulel/ts . 

Bollinger , T . , S . Lorenz , art (1U . Pletat .  1991 . The LILOG Inference Engine . htO . Herzog and C . 
Rollinger , eds . , ~/'(:: ut Understanding in LILOG . 
Berlin : Springer.
Doyle , J . , and I . Patti .  1991 . Two Theses of Knowledge Representation : Language iestrictions  , Taxonomic Classification , and the Utility of Representation Services . Artificial Intelligence 48,261 297 . 
bhisch , A . , and J . Allen .  1982 . Knowledge Retrieval as Limited hfference . In D . Lovel and , ed . , 6th Con-fcrence on Automated Deduction . Berlin : Springer . 
tIoppc , T . , C . Kindermam ~, J . Quantz , A . Schmiedel , and M . Fischer .  1993 . nA(:KV5'lhltorial &: Manual . 
KIT . l ~ eport 100. TU Berlin.
Kameyama , IVl . , S . Peters , and H . Sehiitze .  1993 . 
Combining Logic-Based and Corpus-Based Methods for Resolving Translation Mismatches  . In Working Notes : AAAI Spring Symposium Series , Symposium " Building Lexicons for Machine Translation "  , Stanfl ) rd . 
Kamp , tt .  1992 . Disambiguation i Discourse . In IV l . 
Aurnagu et al . , eds . , Semantics of Time , Space and Movement . Working Papers on the 4th International Workshop , Chateau de Bonas , l ~' a nee . 
Kamp , H . , and A . R of l deutscher . 1994a . Remarks on Lexical Structure and DRS -Construction  . Theoretical Linguistics 20,981 64 . 
Kamp , H . , and A . R of l deutscher .  19941) . DRS-Construction and Lexically Driven hfference . The-orctical Linguistics 20,166 235 . 
Kay , M . , J . Gawron , and P . Norvig .  1994 . VERB MOBIL : A Translation System for Face-to-Face Dialog  . 
Stanford : CSLI Lecture Notes.
McCord , M .  1989 . Design of LMT : A Prolog-B~used Machine Translation System  . Computational Linguistics 15, 33--52 . 
Nirenburg , S .  1989 . Knowledge-Bmqed Machine Translation . Machine ~ l-anslation 4,5-24 . 
Quantz , J . , and B . Sehmitz .  1993 . Knowledge-Based Disambiguation for Machine Translation  . Minds and Machines . Special Issue on ' Knowledge Representation for Natural I  , anguage Processing ' . 
Rabin ~ M .  1977 . Decidable Theories . In J . Barwise , ed . , Handbook of Mathematical Logic . Amsterdam :
North Holland.

