Role of Word Sense Disambiguation i Lexical Acquisition : 
Predicting Semantics from Syntactic Cues
Bonnie J . Dorr and Doug Jones
Department of Computer Science and
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies
University of Maryland
A.V . Williams Building
College Park , MD 20742
bonnie , jones ~ umiacs , umd.edu

This paper addresses the issue of word sense ambiguity in extraction from machine-readable resources for the construction of largescale knowledge sources  . We describe two experiments : one which ignored word sense distinctions  , resulting in 6 . 3% accuracy for semantic lassification of verbs based on  ( Levin ,  1993) ; and one which exploited word sense distinctions , resulting in 97 . 9% accuracy . These experiments were dual purpose : ( 1 ) to validate the central thesis of the work of ( Levin ,  1993) , i . e . , that verb semantics and syntactic behavior are predictably related  ;   ( 2 ) to demonstrate hata 15-fold improvement can be achieved in deriving semantic information from syntacticues if we first divide the syntactic cues into distinct groupings that correlate with different word senses  . Finally , we show that we can provide effective acquisition techniques for novel word senses using a combination of online sources  . 
1 Introduction
This paper addresses the issue of word sense ambiguity in extraction from machine-readable resources for the construction of largescale knowledge sources  . We describe two experiments : one which ignored word sense distinctions  , resulting in 6 . 3% accuracy for semantic classification of verbs based on  ( Levin ,  1993) ; and one which exploited word sense distinctions , resulting in 97 . 9% accuracy . These experiments were dual purpose : ( l ) to validate the central thesis of the work of ( Levin ,  1993) , i . e . , that verb semantics and syntactic behavior are predictably related  ;   ( 2 ) to demonstrate hata 15-fold improvement can be achieved in deriving semantic information from syntacticues if we first divide the syntacticues into distinct groupings that correlate with different word senses  . Finally , we show that we can provide effective acquisition techniques for novel word senses using a combination of online sources  , in particular , Longman's Dictionary of Contemporary English ( LDOCE )   ( Procter ,  1978) , Levin's verb classification scheme ( Levin ,  1993) , and WordNet ( Miller ,  1985) . 
We have used these techniques to build a database of  10  , 0 00 English verb entries containing semantic information that we are currently porting into languages such as Arabic  , Spanish , and Korean for multilingual NLP tasks such as foreign language tutoring and machine translation  . 
322 2 Automatic Lexical Acquisition for
NLP Tasks
As machine-readable resources ( i . e . , online dictionaries , thesauri , and other knowledge sources ) become readily available to NLP researchers , automated acquisition has become increasingly more attractive  . Several researchers have noted that the average time needed to construct a lexical entry can be as much as  30 minutes ( see , e . g . , ( Neff and McCord , 1990; Copestakcetal . , 1995; Walker and Amsler , 1986)) . Given that we are aiming for largescale lexicons of  20-60  , 000 words , automation of the acquisition process has become a necessity  . 
Previous research in automatic acquisition focuscs primarily on the use of statistical techniques  , such as bilingual alignment ( Church and Hanks , 1990; Klavans and Tzoukermann , 1996; Wu and Xia ,  1995) , or extraction of syntactic constructions from online dictionaries and corpora  ( Brant , 1993; Dorr , Garman , and Weinberg ,  1995) . Others who have taken a more knowledge-based ( interlingual ) approach ( Lonsdale , Mitamura , and Nyberg ,  1996 ) do not provide a means for systematically deriving the relation between surface syntactic structures and their underlying semantic representations  . Those who have taken more argument structures into account  , e . g . , ( Copestak et al . , 1995) , do not take full advantage of the systematic relation between syntax and semantics during lexical acquisition  . 
We adopt the central thesis of Levin (1993), i . e . , that the semantic class of a verb and its syntactic behavior are predictably related  . We base our work on a correlation between semantic classes and patterns of grammar codes in the Longman's Dictionary of Contemporary English  ( LDOCE )   ( Procter ,  1978) . While the LDOCE has been used previously in automatic x-traction tasks  ( Alshawi , 1989; Farwell , Guthrie , and Wilks , 1993; Boguraev and Briscoe ,  1989;  , Wilks et al , 1989; Wilks et al ,  1990 ) these tasks are primarily concerned with the extraction of other types of information including syntactic phrase structure and broad argument restrictions or with the derivation of semantic structures from definition analyses  . The work of Sanfilippo and Poznanski ( 1992 ) is more closely related to our approach in that it attempts to recover a syntactic-semantic relation from machine-readable dictionaries  . 
I to we ver , they claim that the semantic lassification of verbs based on standard machine-readable dictionaries  ( e . g . , the LDOCE ) is % hopeless pursuit\[since\]standard dictionaries are simply not equipped to offer this kind of information with consistency and exhaustive-ness  . " Others have also argued that the task of simplify-in K lexical entries on the basis of broad semantic lass membership is complex and  , perhaps , infeasible ( see , e . g . , Boguraev and llriscoe (1989)) . t lowever , a number of researchers ( l , ' ilhnore , 1968; Grimshaw , 1990; Gruber , 1965; Guthrie et al , 1991; Hearst , 1991; Jackend-otr , 1983; Jackendoff , 1990; l , ev in , 1993; Pinker , t989; Yarowsky ,  1992 ) have demonstrated conclusively that there is a clear relationship between syntactic context and word senses  ; it is our aim to exploit this relationship for the acquisition of semantic lexicons  . 
3 Syntax-Semantics Relation : - Verb
Classification Based on Syntactic

The central thesis of ( Levin ,  1993 ) is that the semantics of a verb and its syntactic behavior are predictably related  . As a demonstration that such predictable relationships are not confined to an in significant portion of the vocabulary  , Levin surveys 4183 verbs , grouped into 191 semantic lasses in Part Two of her book . The syntactic behavior of these classes is illustrated with  1668 example sentences , an average of 8 sentences per (: lass . 
Given the scope of bevin's work , it is not easy to verify the central thesis . ' lb this end , we created a database of Levin's verb classes and example sentences from each class  , and wrote a parser to extract , basic syntactic patterns from tire sentences . 1 We then characterized each semantic lass by a set of syntactic patterns  , which we call a syntactic signature , and used the re-suiting database as the basis of two experiments  , both designed to to discover whether the syntactic signatures tell us anything about the meaning of the verbs  . 2'\['he first experiment , which we label Verb-Based , ignores word sense distinctions by assigning one syntactic signature to each verb  , regardless of whether it occurred in multiple classes  . The second experiment , which we label Class-Based , implicitly takes word sense distinctions into account by considering each occurrence of a verb individually and assigning it a single syntactic signature according to class membership  . 
The remainder of this section describes the assign -rnent of signatures to semantic busses and the two experiments for determining the relation of syntactic information to semantic btsses  . We will see that our clas-sitication technique shows a  15-fold improvement in the experiment where we implicitly account for word sense distinctions  . 
1Both the database and the parser are encoded in Quin-tus Prolog  . 
2The design of this experiment is inspired by the work of  ( Dubois and Saint-Dizier ,  1995) . In particular , we depart from the alternation-based data in ( Levin ,  1993) , which is primarily binary in that sentences are presented in pairs which constitute an alternation  . Following Saint-Dizier's work , we construct N-ary syntactic haracterizations . The choice is of no empirie M consequence , but it simplifms the experiment by eliminating the problem of naming the syntactic patterns  . 
Verbs : break , chip , crack , crash , crush , fracture , rip , shatter , slnash , snap , sl ) linter , split , tear
Example Sentences:
Crystal vases break easily.
The hammer broke the window.
The window broke.
q ' ony broke her arm.
' l?ony broke his finger.
" l bny broke the crystal vase.
q bny broke the cup agains the wall.
q ' ony broke the glass to 1) ie ces.
Tony broke the piggy bank open.
Tony broke the window with a hanuner.
Tony broke the window.
* Tony broke at tit (; window.
* q bny broke herself on the arm.
* Tony broke himself.
* q bny broke the wall with the cup.
Abreak .
Derived Syntactic Signature : 1-\[np , v\]1-\[np , v , np\]1-\[np , v , np , adjectiw\]1-\[np , v , np , pp(against)\]l-\[np , v , np , pp(to)\]1-\[np , v , np , pp(with)\]1-\[np , v , pess , np\]1-\[np , v , adv ( easily )\] l-in\]O-\[np , v , np , pp(with)\]0-\[np , v , self\]O-\[np , v , seH , pp(on)\]0-\[np , v , pp ( at ) \] Table 1: Syntactic Signatm : e for Change of State break subclass  3  . 1 Ass lgntnent of S ignatures For tile first experiment below  , we construct a verb-based syntactic signature , while for the second exl ) eri-ment , we constructed a classbased signature . 
The first step for constructing a signature is to decide what syntactic information to extract for ttret  ) asic syntactic patterns that make up the signature . 
It turns out that a very simple strategy works well  , namely , flat parses that contain lists of the major categories in the sentence  , the verb , and a handfifl of other elements . The " parse " , then , for the sentence Tony broke the crystal vase is simply the syntactic pattern\[np  , v , np\] . For Tonybroke the vase to pieces we get\[np , v , np , pp(to)\] . Note that the pp node is marked with its head preposition  . Tablel shows an example class , the break subclass of the Change of State verbs ( 45 . 1) , along with example sentences and the derived syntactic signature based on sentence patterns  . Positive example sentences are denoted by the number  1 in the sentence patterns and negative xample sentences are denoted by the number  0   ( corresponding to sentences marked with a * )  . 
3 . 2 Experiment 1: Verb-based Approach In the first experiment , we ignored word sense distinctions and considered each verb only once  , regardless of whether it occurred in multiple classes  . In fact ; , 46% of the verbs appear more than once . In some cases , the verb appears to have a related sense even though it appears in different classes  . For example , the verb roll appears in two subclasses of Manner of Motion Verbs that are distinguished on the basis of whether the grammatical subject is animate or inanimate  . In other cases , tile verb may have ( largely ) unrelated senses . For example , the verb move is both a Manner of Motion verb To compose the syntactic signatures for each verb  , we collect all of the syntactic patterns associated with every class a particular verb appears in  , regardless of the different classes are semantically related  . A syntactic signature for a verb , by definition , is the union of the frames extracted from every example sentence for each verb  . The outline of the verb-based experiment is as follows:  1  . Automatically extract syntactic information from the example sentences  . 
2 . Group the verbs according to their syntactic signature  . 
3 . Determine where the two ways of grouping verbs overlap :  ( a ) the semantic lassification given by Levin . 
(1 ) ) the syntactic classification based on the derived syntactic signatures  . 
To return to the Change of State verbs , we now consider the syntactic signature of the verb break  , rather than the signature of the semantic lass as a unit  . The verb break belongs not only to the Change of State class  , but also four other classes : 10 . 6 Cheat , 23 . 2 Split , 40 . 8 . 3 Hurl , and 48 . 1 . 1 Appear . Each of these classes is characterized syntactically with a set of sentences  . The union of the syntactic patterns corresponding to these sentences forms the syntactic signature for the verb  . So although the signature for the Change of State class has  13 frames , the verb break has 39 frames from the other classes it appears in . 
Conceptually , it is helpful to consider the difference between the intension of a function versus its extension  . In this case , we are interested in the functions that group the verbs syntactically and semantically  . In-tensionally speaking , the definition of the function that groups verbs semantically would have something to do with the actual meaning of the verbs  . ~Likewise , the intension of the function that groups verbs syntactically would be defined in terms of something strictly syntactic  , such as subcategorization frames . But the inten-sions of these functions are matters of significan the-oretical investigation  , and although much has been accomplished in this ~ rea  , the question of mapping syntax to semantics and vice versa is an open research topic  . 
Therefore , we can turn to the extensions of the functions : the actual groupings of verbs  , based on these two separate criteria . The semantic extensions are sets of verb tokens , and likewise , the syntactic extensions are sets of verb tokens . To the extent that these functions map between syntax and semantics intensionally  , they will pick out the same verbs extensionally . 
So for the verb-based experiment , our technique for establishing the relatedness between the syntactic signatures and the semantic lasses  , is mediated by the verbs themselves . We compare the two orthogonal groupings of the inventory of verbs : the semantic lasses defined by Levin and the sets of verbs that correspond to each of the derived syntactic signatures  . When these two groupings overlap , we have discovered a mapping from the syntax of the verbs to their semantics  , via the verb tokens . More specifically , we define the overlap index 3An example of the intensional characterization of the Levin classes are the definitions of Lexical Conceptual Structures which correspond to each of Levin's semantic lasses  . 
See ( Dorr and Voss , to appear).
as the number of overlapping verbs divided by the average of the number of verbs in the semantic lass and the number of verbs in the syntactic signature  . Thus an overlap index of 1 . 0 0 is a complete overlap and an overlap of 0 is completely disjoint . In this experiment , he sets of verbs with a high overlap index are of interest  . 
When we parsed the 1668 example sentences in PartTwo of Levin's book ( including the negative xamples )  , these sentences reduce to 282 unique patterns . The 191 sets of sentences listed with each of the 191 semantic classes in turn reduces to 748 distinct syntactic signatures . Since there are far more syntactic signatures than the  191 semantic lasses , it is clear that the mapping between signatures and semantic classes is not direct  ,  . 
Only 12 mappings have complete overlaps . That means 6 . 3% of the 191 semantic lasses have a complete overlap with a syntactic signature  . 
The results of this experiment are shown in Table 2  . 
Three values are shown for each of the six variations in the experiment : the mean overlap  , the median overlap , and the percentage of perfect overlaps ( overlaps of value 1 . 00) . In every case , the median is higher than the mean . Put another way , there is always a cluster of good overlaps , but the general tendency is to have fairly poor overlaps  . 
The six variations of the experiment areas follows  . 
The first distinction is whether or not to count the negative evidence  . We note that the use of negative xam-ples , i . e . , plausible uses of the verb in contexts which are disallowed  , was a key component of this experiment . There are 1082 positive examples and 586 negative examples . Although this evidence is useful , it is not available in dictionaries , corpora , or other convenient resources that could be used to extend Levin's classification  . Thus , to extend our approach to novel word senses ( i . e . , words not occurring in Levin ) , we would not be able to use negative evidence . For this reason , we felt it necessary to determine the importance of negative evidence for building uniquely identifying syntactic signatures  . As one might expect , throwing out the negative evidence degrades the usefulness of the signatures across the board  . The results which had the negative evidence are shown in the lefthand column of numbers in Table  2  , and the results which had only positive evidence are shown in the right hand side  . 
The second , three-way , distinction involves prepositions , and breaks the two previous distinctions involving negative vidence into three subcases  . Because we were interested in the role of prepositions in the signatures  , we also ran the experiment with two different parse types : ones that ignored the actual prepositions in the pp's  , and ones that ignored all information except for the values of the prepositions  . Interestingly , we still got useful results with these impoverished parses  , although fewer semantic lasses had uniquely -identifying syntactic signatures under these conditions  . These results are shown in the three major rows of Table  2  . 
The best result , using both positive and negative v-idence to identify semantic classes  , gives 6 . 3% of the verbs having perfect overlaps relating semantic lasses to syntactic signatures  . See Table 2 for the full results . 
3.3 Experiment 2" Class-based Approach
In this experiment , we attemp to discover whether each classbased syntactic signature uniquely identifies as in- : ed  , ~sitions ~ i ~ ed)sitionsqYgfy ) sitions










With No
Negative Negative
Evidence Evidence
O . lO0 . 09 0 . 17 0 . 17 6 . 3% 5 . 2% 0 . t00 . 09 0 . 17O .  16 6 . 3% 4 . 2% 0 . 10 0 . 09 0 . 16 0 . 715 3 . 1% 3 . 1%
Table 2: Verb-Ba`sed Results
Class-based Experiment ( Disambiguated Verbs ) -With No
Negative Negative
Overlap Evidence Evidence

Prepositions ~ lgnored
Pret ) ositions ~3 nly
Prepositions-T Vledian







Perfect 1 . 00 1 . 00 0 . 99 0 . 93 97 . 9% 88 . 0% -1 . 00 1 . 00 0 . 96 0 . 69 87 . 4% 52 . 4% 1 . 00 0 . 54 0 . 82 0 . 57 66 . 5% 42 . 9% ' fable 3: Cla~ss-Based lesnlt sgle semantic lass . Byh ) cnsing on the classes , the verbs are implicitly disambiguated : the word sense is by definition the sense of the verb as a member of a given class  . To compare these signatures with the previous verb-based signatures  , it may be help fnltonote that a verb-based signature is the union of all of the class ~ based signatures of the semantic lasses that the verb appears m  . 
' Fhe outline for this class based exl ) eriment is as follows : 1 . Automatically extract syntactic information from tile example sentences to y M d the syntactic signatnre for the class  . 
2 . Determine which semantic classes have uniquely -identifying syntactic signatures  . 
If we use the classbased syntactic signatures containing t  ) rcposition-marked pp's and both positive and negative evidence  , the 1668 example sentences reduce to 282 syntactic patterns , just as before . But now there are 189 classbased syntactic signatures , as compared with 748 verb-based signatures from before . 187 of themmriquely identify a semantic (: lass , meaning that 97 . 9% of the classes have uniquely identifying syntactic signatures  . Four of the semantic lasses do not have enough syntactic information to distinguish them uniquely  .   4 Although the effects of the various distinctions we represent in the verb-based experiment  , these effects are much clearer in the classbased experiments  . The effects of negative and positive evidence , as well as the three ways of handling prepositions how up much clearer here  , as is clear in Table 4 . 
In the classbased experiment , we counted the percentage of semantic classes that had uniquely ide  . nti-fying signatures . In the verb-based experiment , we counted the number of perfect overlaps ( i . e . , index of 1 . 00 ) between the verbs as grouped in the semantic classes and grouped by syntactic signature  . The overall results of the suite of experiments , illustrating tile role of disambiguation , egativ evidence , and prepositions , is shown in Table 4 . There were three ways of treating prepositions : ( i ) mark the pp with the preposition , ( ii ) ignore the preposition , and ( iii ) keel ) only the prepositions . For these different strategies , we see the percentage of perfect overlaps , as well as both tire 4Two of these classes correspond to one of the two non -unique signatures  , and two ( : or respond to the other non-unique signature . 
median and mean overlap ratios for each experiment . 
' Fhese data show that the most important factor in the experiments i word sense disambiguation  . 
Marked Prepositions ignored Prepositions
Only Prepositions ~ W~h Dismnl ) lguation
Marked Prepositions
Ignored Prepositions
Only Prepositions
With No
Negative Negative
Evidence Evidence 6 . 3% 5 . 2% 6 . 3% 4 . 2% 3 . 1% 3 . 1% 97 . 9% 88 . )% 87 . 4% 52 . 4% 66 . 5% 42 . 9%
Table 4: Overall Results 4 Semantic Classification of Novel

As we saw above , word sense disambiguation is critical totile success of any \ [ exical acquisition algorithm  . The Levin-based verbs are already disambiguated by virtue of their membership in different classes  . The difficulty , then , is to disambiguate and classify verbs that do not occur in Levin  . Our current direction is to make use of the results of tire first two experiments  , i . e . , the relation t ) etween syntactic patterns and semantic lasses , but to use two additional techniques for disambiguation and classification of non-Levin verbs :  ( 1 ) extraction of synonym sets provided in WordNet ( Miller ,  1985) , an online lexical database containing thesaurus -like relations such as synonymy  ; and ( 2 ) selection of appropriate synonyms based on correlations between syntactic information in l  , ongman's Dictionary of Contemporary English ( LDOCF , ) ( Procter , 1978) and semantic lasses in Levin . ' Phe basic idea is to first determine tire most likely candidates for semantic lassification of a verb by examining the verb's synonym sets  , many of which intersect directly with the verbs classified by Leviu  . The " closest " synonyms are then selected fl'om these sets by comparing the LDOCE grammar codes of tire unknown word with those associated with each synonym candidate  . The use of LDOCE as a syntactic filter ontire semantics derived from WordNet is tire key to resolving word sense ambiguity during the acquisition process  . The fldl acquisition algorithm is as follows : 1 . If in Levitt , classify directly . 
2 . if not in Levin , find synonym set from WordNet . 
( a ) if synonym in Levin , select , the class that has the closest match with canonical LDOCE codes  . 
( b ) If no synonyms in Levinor canonical LDOCE codes are completely mismatched  , hypothesize new class . 
Note that this algorithm assmnes that there is a " canonicM " set of LDOCE codest breach of Levin's semantic lasses  . Table 5 describes the significance of a subset of the syntactic codes in LDOCE  . ( The total n m n ber of codes is 174 . ) We have developed a relation between LDOCE codes and Levin classes  , in mnch the same way that we associated syntactic signatures with the semantic lasses in the earlier experiments  . These canonical codes are for syntactic filtering  ( checking for the closest match ) in the classification algorithm . 
As an example of how the word sense disambiguation process and class if cation  , consider the non-Levin verb attempt . The LDOCE specification for this verb is : T1   T3   T4   WV5 N . Using the synonymy feature of WordNet , the algorithm automatically extracts tire candidate classes associated with the synonyms of this word :  ( 1 ) Class 29 . 6 " Masquera de Verbs " ( ace ), (2) Class 29 . 8 " Captain Verbs " ( pioneer ), (3) Class 31 . 1" Amuse Verbs " ( try ), (4) Class 35 . 6 " Ferret Verbs " ( seek ), and (5) Class 55 . 2" Complete Verbs " ( initiate) . 
The synonyms for each of these classes have the following LDOCE encodiugs  , respectively : ( 1 ) II-FOIl I-ONI-UPONLIL 9T1N ; (2) L9T1N ; (3) IT1T3T4WV 4N ; (4) ~ bAF'\['EI~I-FORT 1 T 3 ; and (5) T1TI-INTON . The largest intersection with the syntactic odes for attempt occurs with the verb try  ( TIT3T4N )  . However , Levin's class 31 . 1 is not the correct class for attempt since this sense of try has a " negative amuse " meaning  ( e . g . , John's behavior tried my patience . In fact , the ( : odes T1  '  l'3   '1'4 are not part of the canonical class-code mapping associated with class  31  . 1 . Thus , attempt falls under case 2(b ) of the algorithm , and a new class is hypothesized . This is a case where word sense disambiguation has allowed us to classify a new word and to enhance Levin's verb classification by adding a new class to the word try as well  . In our experiment ; s , our algorithm found sever M additional non-Levin verbs that fell into this newly hypothesized  (  ; lass , including aspire , attempt , dare , decide , desire , elect , need , and swear . 
We have automatically classified 10 , 000 " unknown " verbs , i . e . , those not occurring in the Levin classification , using this technique . These verbs are taken from ie , translations provided in bilin-English " glosses "  (   .   .  )  . 
gual dictionaries for Spanish and Arabic ) As a preliminary measure of success , we picked out 84L 1) OCE control vocabulary verbs , ( i . e . , primitive words used for defning dictionary entries  ) and hand-checked our results . We found that 69 verbs were classifed correctly , S The Spanish-English dictionary was built at the University of Maryland  ; The Arabic-English dictionary was produced by Alpnet  , a company in Utah that develops translation aids . We are M so in the process of developing bilingual dictionaries for Korean and French  , and we will be porting our LCS acquisition technology to these languages in the near future  . 
i . e ., 82% accuracy.
5 Summary
We have conducted two experiments with the intent of addressing the issue of word sense ambiguity in extraction from machine-readable resources for the construetion of largescale knowledge sources  . In the first experiment , verbs that appeared in different classes collected the syntactic information fl'om each class it appeared in  . Therefore , the syntactic signature was coml ) osed from all of the example sentences fi'om every  ( : lass the verb appeared in . In some cases , the verbs were seanan-tically unrelated and consequently them at  ) ping from syntax to semantics was muddied . '\[' he second experiment attelnpted to determine a relationship between a semantic lass and the syntactic information associated with each class  . Not surprisingly , but not insign if-icantly , this relationship was very clear , since this experiment avoided the problem of word sense ambiguity  . 
These experiments served to validate Levin's claim that verb semantics and syntactic behavior are predictably related and also demonstrated that a significant con > ponent of any lexical acquisition program is the ability to perform word sense disambiguation  . 
We have used the results of our first two experiments to help in constructing and augmenting online dictionaries for novel verb senses  . We have used the same syntactic signatures to categorize new verbs into Lcvin's classes on the basis of WordNet and  1  , 1)O(?1!3 . We are currently porting these results to new languages using online bilingual lexicons  . 

The research reported here in was supported , in part , by Armyl , esearch Office contract I ) AAL03-91-C-0034 through Battelle Corporation , NSF NYIIRl-93 57731 , Alfred P . Sloan Research Fellow Award BR 3336 , and a General Research Board Semester Award . 

Alshawi , H .  1989 . Analysing the Dictionary l ) efini-tions . In B . Boguraev and T . Briscoe , editor , Compuorational Lexicography for Natural Language Prvcess-ing  . Longman , London , pages 153169 . 
Boguraev , B . and T . Briscoe .  1989 . Utilising the LDOCE Grammar Codes . In B . Boguraev and T . 
Briscoe , editor , Computational Lexicography for " Natural Language Processing  . Longman , London , pages 85-116 . 
Brent , M .  1993 . Unsupervised Learning of Lexical Syntax . Computational Linguistics , 19:243-262 . 
Chm'ch , K . and P . Hanks .  1990 . Word Association Norlns , Mutual Information and Lexicography . Co'm-pntational Linguistics , 1(5:2229 . 
Copestake , A . , T . Briscoe , 1) . Vossen , A . Ageno , I . Castellon , F . libas , ( J . tigau , 1t . lodrguez , and A . Samiotou .  1995 . Acquisition of LexicM Translation Relations from MRDS  . Machine Translation , 9 . 
l ) or r , B . , J . Garlnan , and A . Weinberg .  1995 . l , ' romSyntactic Encodings to '\[' hematic Roles : Building Lexieal Entries l br Interlingual MT  . Machine 7' rans-lation , 9 . 

LDOCE Code Argmnent gAdjuncts ExmnI)le


I-I , ' O1/.
I-ONn
I-UPON\],1
L9-q,\].............

T3 q'4



NP t'P ~ af ~
Tq , ~. \] - - -

Olivier is acting t , onight
She sought ; ffter the truth
They sought for the right ot to lie acted on our suggestion '\[' he drug acted upon the pa  . in 11( . ' a('ts the exl ) erienced man'l'he \]) by a (' . tswell-Ii ) loneered tit(:newbum-WeT~it ~ , eTd-him into tit(:grouplie . trled to do it 7qh (7 Grh . ~dleating the new food WV4ing adjectiwd I've ha . da , trying day-ed adjectiw d WV5 lie was convicted for attelnpte ( 1 murder Tabh ' . 5: Sample Syntactic Codes used in IA ) OCI' ; l ) or r , B . and C . Voss . to appear . A Multiq , evel Approach to lnterlingual MT : I ) etining the Interface between le present t ~ tion all , nguages , l ' nlcr ' national
Jou'rnal ofl ,, ', pertSystcms.
Dubois , \]) . and 1) . Saint-Dizier .  1995 . Construction el ,   repres6ntation declasses sdmantiques deverbes : une coop & ation entre syntaxe et cognition  , manuscript , 
IRIT-CNRS , Toulouse , li'rance.
Farwell , D . , 1, . Guthrie , trod Y . Wilks .  1993 . Automatically Creating Lexical Entries for UI , ' FRA , a Multilingual MT System . Machine 7Y ' anslaliou , 8(3) . 
Fillmore , C . , I .  1968 . The Caselbr(?ase . In 1, ', . Bach and t ~ . '1' . /larms , editor , Universals in Linguistic Th , cory . 
\[ lolt , l , in ehart , a 11d Winston , p~ges188.
Grimshaw , J .  1990 . Argument b ' lruclure . MIT Press,
Cambridge , MA.
Gruber , J . S .  1965 . Studies in Lcxical Rela?ions . Ph . I) . 
thesis , MIT , Cambridge , MA.
Guthrie , J . , L . Guthrie , Y . Wilks , and 11 . Aidinciad . 
19911 . Subjeet-l ) ependent Cooccurrence and Word Sensel ) is ambiguation . Inl ~ roceeding so Jlhc 29th Annual Meeting of lhers socialion for Compulalional Linguistics  , pages 146152 , ( Jniversity of California , 
Berkeley , CA.
Ilearst , M .  1991 . Nounllomographl ) is ambiguation Using 1 , oeal (' Jontext in Large ' Pext Corl ) or a . In Using Corpora , University of Waterloo , Waterloo , Ontario . 
, l~u ; kendoff , R, .  1983 . Semantics aud Cognition . MtT
Press , Cambridge , MA.
Jackendoff , R .  1990 . fiemanlic Structures . MIT Press,
Cambridge , MA.
Klawms , J . L . and 1,; . q ' zoukermmm .  1996 . Dictionaries and ( k ) rpora : ( Jolnbiniug ( ~ or t ) usaud Machine , -readable Dictionaryl ) at albrBuilding 13 ilingual I , exicons . Machine ' l Yans latiou , 10 . 
Levin , B .  1993 . l'h ~ . glid ~, Verb Classes and Alternation . s : A Preliminary Investigation . Chicttgo , II, . 
l , on sdale , I) . , T . Mitamura , and F, . Nyberg .  19!)6 . Ac . 
quisition of l , argeLexicous for Practical Knowledge-
Based MT . Machine Translation , '9.
Miller , (\] .  1985 . WOIU ) NF , T:A/)ictiouarylh:owser . 
In Proceedings of the First lnl crualional Conference on ht Jbrmalion  , i ' nl ) ala , University of Waterloo (' , en-tre for the New () li)l ) , Waterloo , Ontario . 
Neff , M . and M . Mc(;ord .  1990 . Acquiring I , exh : at I ) at af ' ronl Machinc-II . eadable ) ictionary I~es our ccs for Machine Translation . \] ii Thirdl'nter'nalional Conference on Theoretical and Methodological issues in Machine Translation oJ ' Nahwal Languages  ( 7'MI-90 )  , 
Austin , ' l'exas.
Pinker , S .  1989 . hearnability and Cognilion : The Ac-quisitiou of Argument Structure  . MIq'Press , Cambridge , MA . 
Procter , P .  1978 . Lou , gman Dictionary of Conlcmpo or a WI 5' uglish . l , onginan , l , ond on . 
Sanfilippo , A . and V . I ' oz mm sk\[ .  1992 . The Acquisition of \[ , exieal Knowledge from ( ~ olnbine ( l Machine-Readable Dictionary Ih- . som'('es . In Proceedings of th . eApplied Natural Languaq c Processing Co ' nfcrencc , pages 8087 , Tren ; o , Italy . 
Walker , 1) . and R, . Ams \] er .  1986 . The Use of Machine--readable Dictionaries in Sublanguage Atmlysis  . In 1L Grishman and ILKittr edge , editors , Analyzing Language in tcsl'ricled Domains . l , awrence Erlbaum Associates , llill sdale , New Jersey , pages 6983 . 
Wilks , Y . , 71) . Fass , C . M . Guo , , 1 . 1'; . M('Domdd , and T . l ' ate .  1990 . Providing Machine't ' ractable\[ ) ic-~ionary'lbols . Machine 7' ranslalion , 5(2):99154 . 
Wilks , Y . , 1) . Fass , C . M . Guo , a . E . M('l ) on ald , '\[' . P\]al , e , and B . M . Slator .  1989 . A Tractable Machine Dicl ; io-nary as a . I . esource for Computational Semanl , ics . In B . Bogura . ev and T . Briscoe , editor , Computaiional Lexicograph , y for ' Natural Language Processing . \[, oug--man , l , on don , pages 85116 . 
Wu , \]) . and X . Xia .  19!)5 . I , m'ge-SealeAutomaticExtractiono\['a nl , \] nglish-Chinese , Translation l , exieon . 
Machine Translalion , 9.
Yarowsky , 1) .  1992 . Word-Sensel ) is ambigual , io ~: , Using Statistical Models of Roget's Categories Train c  . , donl , arge Corpora . In Proceedings of the l/ou'rlce ~ lhlntc'rnatioual UonJi:renc ~ on Compulalional Linguis-lie  . s , pages 454460, Nantes , l ~' rancc . 

