Bridging Textual Ellipses
Udo Hahn Michael Strube Katja Markert
Freiburg University
( ~ Computational Linguistics Lab
Europa platz 1 , D-79085 Freiburg , Germany hahn , struhe , markert@coling . uni-freiburg . de
Abstract (1) a.
We present a hybrid text understanding methodology for the resolution of textual ellipsis  . It integrates language-independent conceptual criteria and language-dependent functional constraints  . The methodological framework for text ellipsis resolution is the centering model that has been adapted to constraints reflecting the functional information structure within utterances  , i . e . , the distinction between context-bound and un -bound discours elements  . 

e .
Der 316127" wird mit einem Nickel-Met att-lly dride-
Akkubest fickt.
0"he 316LT is-with a nickel-metal-hydride accu-mulator- equipped  . ) Der Rechner wird durch diesen neuartigen Akku ftir  4 Stundenmit Strom versor gt . 
(l'he computer is - because of this new type of ac -cumulator-for  4 hours-with power-provided . ) Dariaberh in mlsist die Ladeze it mit 1 , 5 Smn dense hr kurz . 
( Also-is-the chargetime of 1 . 5 hours quite short . ) 1 Introduction Text phenomena , e . g . , textual forms of ellipsis and anaphora re a challenging issue for the design of parsers for text understanding systems  , since lacking recognition lacilities either esult in referentially incoherent or invalid text knowledge representations  . 
At the conceptual level , textual ellipsis ( also called functional anaphora ) relates a quasi-anaphoric expression to its extra sentential antecedent by conceptual attributes  ( or roles ) associated with that antecedent ( see , e . g . , the relation between " Ladezeit " ( chargetime ) and " Al & u " ( accumulator ) in ( lc ) and ( lb ) ) . 
Thus , it complement she phenomenon of nominal anaphora , where an anaphoric expression is related to its antecedent in terms of conceptual generalization  ( as , e . g . , "' Rechner " ( computer ) refers to "'316LT " , a particular notebook , in(lb ) and ( la )) . The resolution of text-level nominal ( and pronominal ) anaphora contributes to the construction of referentially valid text knowledge bases  , while the resolution of textual ellipsis yields referentially coherent text knowledge bases  . Both phenomena tend to interact , as evidenced by the examples below . " Akku " ( accumulator ) in ( lb ) is a nominal anaphor referring to " Nickel-Metall -llyd ride-Akku "  ( nickel-metal-hydride accumulator ) in ( 1a )  , which , when resolved , provides the prope refer-ent for relating " Ladezeit "  ( chargetime ) in ( lc ) to it . 
In the case of textual ellipsis , the missing conceptual link between two discourse lements occurring in adjacent utterances must be inferred in order to establish the local coherence of the discourse  ( for an early state-merit of that idea , cf . Clark (1975)) . In sentence ( lc ) the information is missing that " Ladeze it " ( chargetime ) links up with " Akku " ( accumulator )  . This relation can only be made explicit if conceptual knowledge about he domain  , viz . the relation charge-time-of between the concepts CIIARGE-TIMF  , and ACCUMU-
LATOR , is available.
The solution we propose is embedded within the centering model  ( Grosz et al ,  1995) . In this approach , discours entities linking successive utterances ~ in a discourse segment are organized in terms of centers  . 
Local coherence in discourse is established whenever a center element of the previous utterance is associated with an expression that has a valid semantic in-teq ~ retation  ( i . e . , is realized ) in the following utterance . Textual ellipsis has only been given insufficient treatment within the centering model in terms of rather sketchy realization conditions as opposed to the more elaborated constraints for  ( pro ) nominal naphora . The heuristics we propose include language -independent conceptual criteria and language -dependent information structure constraints reflecting the context-boundednessor unboundedness of discours elements within the considered utterances  . 
4 96   2 Constraints on Conceptual Linkage This section provides a highly condensed exposition of the conceptual constraints underlying the resolu-tkm of textual ellipses  . A much more detailed presentation is given by H ~ dm et al  ( 1996 )  . The constraints we posit require a domain knowledge base to consist of concepts and conceptual roles linking these concepts  . Concepts and roles are hierarchically ordered by subsumption  ( a terminological knowledge representation framework is assumed  ; cf . Woods &
Schmolze (1992)).
In order to determine suitable conceptual links between ~ mantecedent and an elliptic expression  , we distinguish two modes of constraining the linkage between concepts via conceptual roles  . In the process of path finding an extensive unidirectional search is performed in the domain knowledge base and formal wellformedness conditions holding for paths between two concepts are consider exl  , viz . complete connectivity ( compatibility of domains and ranges of the included relations  )  , non-cyclicity ( exclusion of inverses of relations ) and non-redundancy ( exclusion of including paths )  . 
The mode of path evaluation incorporates empirically plausible criteria in order to select he strongests of the ensuing Imths  . Based on mmlyses of approximately 60 product reviews from the informatkmtech-nok ) gy domain and experimental evidences from several ( psycho ) linguistic studies ( e . g . , Chaffin (1992)) , we state certain predefined path patterns . From those general troth patterns and by virtue of the hierarchical organizatkm of conceptual relations  , concrete conceptual role chains cau atttomatically be derived in a terminological r ~tsoning system  . As a consequence , we may distinguish between a subset of all types of well-lormed paths  , which is labelext " plausible " , another subset which is labeled " metonymic " , and all remaining paths which are labeled " implausible "  . Examples of plausible paths are all paths of length  1 -- they are explicitly encoded in the domain's concept descrip-tkms and are therefore " plausible "  , by definition -- or any series of transitive relations  , e . g . has-physical-part relations . Following well-established typologies of metonymies  ( Lakoff , 1987) we include producer-for-product , part-for-whole , and whole-for-part patterns among the metonymic paths  . 
The computation of paths between an antecedent z and a nelliptic expression  9  , however , may yield several types of well-lormed paths , viz . " plausible ", " metonymic " or " implausible " . For proper selection we define a ranking on those path labels according to their intrinsic conceptual strength in terms of the relation "> ~ -~  , t ,  . "( conceptually stronger than ) ( cf . Tablel ) . 
As a consequence of this ordering , " metonymic " 1 ~ : t ~ ausibl c ' ' > ~ . - . , t , . " mctonymic "> c-st , . " implausible "\] Table 1: Path Labels Ordered by Concepttml Strength paths will be excluded from a path list iff " plausible " paths already exist  , while " implausible " paths will be exclude diff " plausible " or " metonymic " paths already exist  . At the end of this selection process , only paths of the strongest type are retained in the tinal path list  . 
All conceptual paths which meet the above linkage criteria for two concepts  , z and y , are contained in the final list denoted by CP < v . As , in the case of textual ellipsis , we have to deal with imths leading fi'om the elliptical expression to several altenmtiv c antecedents  , we usually have to compare pairs of path lists CP  ~  , , vand CP , : , ~ , where x , y , zare concepts . Obviously , the criterion which ranks conceptual paths according to their associated path markers is applicable as all paths in a single CP list have the same marker  . 
A function , Path Marker ( CPi , j ) , yields either " plausible " , " metonymic " or " imphmsible " depending on the type of lm ths the list contains  . Hence , the same ordering of path markers as in Table 1 can be applied to compare two CP lists ( of . Table 2) . 
:  .   .   .   .   . 1 Path Marker ( CP , , , j ) > . . . . z , . Path Marker ( CP . ,: ~) \[ asStrongAs ( CPx ;: , C 1 ) , ~: ~) :?~ , \] Path Marker((' , ' P . ~ , v)~-Path Marker ( CP ~ , z )   1 Table 2: Path Lists Compared by Conceptual Strength 3 Constraints on Centers Conceptual criteriare of tremendous importance  , but they are not sufficient for proper ellipsis resolution  . 
Additional criteria have to be supplied in the case of equal strength of CP lists for alternative antecedents  . 
We therefore incorporate into our model criteria which relate to the fimctional information structure of utterances using the methodological framework of the wellknown centering model  ( Grosz et al ,  1995) . Accordingly , we distinguish each utterance's backward-looking center  ( Cb ( U , ~)) and its forward-looking centers ( Cf(U~)) . The ranking imposed on the elements of the CI rellccts the assumption that the most highly ranked element of Cy  ( U , ~ ) is the most preferred antecedent of an anaphoric ( or elliptical ) express km in IJ , ,+~ , while the remaining elements are ordered by decreasing preference for establishing refereutial links  . 
The main difference between Grosz et al's work and our proposal  ( see Strube & Hahn ( 1996 ) ) concerns the criteria for r~mking the forward -looking centers  . While Grosz et al assume that grammatical roles are the major determinant for the ranking on the word order  ( such as German )  , it is the functional information structure ( IS ) of the utterance in terms of the context -boundednessor unboundedness of discourse elements  . The centering data structures and the notion of context-boundedness can be used to redefine Dane ~'   ( 1974 ) trichotomy between given information , theme and new information ( or rheme ) . The Cb(Un ) , the most highly ranked element of Cf(U , ~_1) realized in U ~ , corresponds to the element which represents he given information  . The theme of U , ~ is represented by the preferred center Cp(U , ~) , the most highly ranked element of C!(Un ) . The theme/rheme hierarchy of Un is determined by the C\]  ( U , ~_1): the most rhematic elements of U , ~ are the ones not contained in C!(U , ~_J ( unboundis cours elements ) , they express the new information in U , ~ . The distinction between context-bound and unbound elements i important for the ranking on the Cf  , since bound elements are generally ranked higher than any other nonanaphoric elements  ( cf . also Hajieovfi et al (1992)) . 
bound element(s ) > rsb , , , unbound element(s ) anaphora > XS bo , ,~ elliptical antecedent > XSbo , ,d elliptical expression nom headt > p ~ , ~ nom head 2 > p ~ , ~  . . . > p ~ , ~ nom head , ~ Table 3: Functional Ranking Constraints on the Cf The constraints holding for the ranking on the Cf for German are summarized in Table  3  . They are organized at three layers . At the top ,  "> , Sbo , o " denotes the basic relation for the overall ranking of information structure  ( IS ) patterns . The second relation , "> r ~ bound "' denotes preference rlations dealing exclusively with multiple occurrences of bound elements in the preceding utterance  . Finally , "> ~ . ~ o " covers the preference order for multiple occurrences of the same type of any information structure pattern  , e . g . , the occurrence of two anaphora or two unbound elements  ( all nominal heads in an utterance are ordered by linear precedence in terms of their text position  )  . Given these basic relations , we may formulate the composite relation "> , s " ( Table 4) , It summarizes the criteria for the ordering of the items on the Cf  ( x and y denote lexical heads )  . 
> rs::(x , y ) I/fx and y represent the same type of IS pattern then the relation > p  . ,c applies to x and y else ifx and y represent different forms of bound elements then the relation > iSbo  , nd applies to x and y else the relation > rs b , , , applies to x and y Table 4: Information Structure Relation 4 Predicates for Textual Ellipsis The grammar formalism we use  ( for a survey , cf . 
Hahn et al ( 1994 ) ) is based on dependency relations between lexical heads and modifiers  . The dependency specifications allow a tight integration of linguistic  ( grammar ) and conceptual knowledge ( domain model )  , thus making powerful terminological reasoning facilities directly available for the parsing process  .   1 The resolution of textual ellipses is based on two major criteria  , a conceptual and a structural one . The conceptual strength criterion for role chains is already specified in Table  2  . The structural condition is embodied in the predicate is Potential Elliptic-Antecedent  ( cf . Table 5) . A quasi-anaphoricelation between two lexical items in terms of textual ellipsisis here restricted to pairs of nouns  . The elliptical phrase which occurs in the nth utterance is restricted to be a definite NP and the antecedent must be one of the forward-looking centers of the preceding utterance  . 
is Potential Elliptie Antecedent ( y , x , n ) : ? ~- yisac * NominalAxisac*NounA3z : ( xheadz Azisac*Det Definite ) 
AxEU , ~ Ay.rECf(U , ~- x)
Table 5: Potential Elliptic Antecedent
The predicate Preferred Conceptual Bridge ( cf . Table 6) combines both criteria . A lexical item y is determined as the proper antecedent of the elliptic expression x iff it is a potential antecedent and if there exists no alternative antecedent z whose conceptual strength relative to z exceeds that of y or  , if their conceptual strength is equal , whose strength of preference under the IS relation is higher than that of y  . 
Preferred Conceptual Bridge(y , x , n ) : ? ~ is Potential Elliptic Antecedent ( y , x , n ) A-~3z : is Potential Elliptic Antecedent ( z , x , n ) A(Stronger Than ( CP . . . . . . . . CP . . . . y . ~) V(asStrongAs(CP . . . . . . . . CP . . . . , j . ~) Az > , sY ))
Table 6: Preferred Conceptual Bridge 5 Resolution of Textual Ellipsis The actor computation model  ( Agha & Hewitt ,  1987 ) provides the background for the procedural interpretation of lexicalized grammar specifications  , as those 1We assume the following conventions to hold : C = Word  , Nominal , Noun , Pron Personal ,  . . . denotes the set of word classes , and is a c = ( Nominal , Word ) , ( Noun , Nominal ) , ( Pron Personal , Nominal ) ,  . . . CC?g denotes the subclass relation which yields a hierarchical ordering among these classes  . Furthermore , object . refers to the instance in the text knowledge base denoted by the linguistic  , item object and object . c refers to the corresponding concept class c . 
Head denotes a stxuctural relation within dependency trees  , viz . x being the head of modifier y . 
498 given in the previous section , in terms of socalled word actors . Word actors communicate via a synchronous message passing  ; an actor can only send messages to other actors it knows about  , its socalled acquaintances . The arrival of a message at an actor triggers the execution of a method  , a program composed of grammatical predicates . 
The resolution of textual ellipses depends on the results of the foregoing resolution of nominal anaphors  ( Strube & Hahn ,  1995 ) and the termination of the semantic interpretation of the current utterance  . It will only be triggered at the occurrence of the definite noun phrase NP when NP is not a nominal anaphor and  ( the referent of the ) NP is only connected via certain types of relations  ( e . g . , has-property , has-physical-part )   2 o referents denoted in the current utterance at the conceptual level  . 
The protocollevel of text analysis encompasses the procedural interpretation of the grammatical constraints from Section  4  . We will illustrate the protocol for text ellipsis resolution  ( of . Fig .  1) , referring to the already introduced text fragment  ( 1 ) which is repeated at the bottom line of Fig .  1 . 
( lc ) contains the definite noun phrase " die Ladeze it  "  . Since " Ladezeit " ( chargetime ) does not subsume any word at the conceptual level in the preceding text  , the anaphora test fails ; the definite noun phrase " die Ladezeit " has also not been integrated in terms of a significant relation into the conceptual representation of the utterance as a result of its semantic interpretation  . Consequently , a Search Text Ellip-sisAntecedent message is created by the word actor for " Ladeze it "  . Message passing consists of two phases : 1 . In phase 1 , the message is forwarded from its ini-tiator " Ladezeit " to the forward-looking centers of the previou sentence  ( an acquaintance of that sentence's punctation mark  )  , where its state is set to phase 2 . 
Z Associated with the set of conceptual roles is the set of their inverses  . This distinction becomes crucial for already established relations like has-property  ( subsuming charge-time , etc . ) or has-physical-part ( subsuming has-accumu-lator , etc . ) . These relations do no__tt block the triggering of the resolution procedure for textual ellipsis  ( e . g . , ACCUMU-LATOR -- charge-time - CI IARGE-T IME ) , whereas instantiations of their inverses , we here refer to as POF-type relations , e . g . , property-of(subsuming charge-time-of , etc . ) and physical-part-of ( subsuming accumulator-of , etc . ), do ( e . g . , ACCUMULATOR-accumulator-of-316 LT ) . This is simply due to the fact that the semantic interpretation of a phrase like " the charge time of the accumulator " already leads to the creation of the POF-type relation the resolution mechanism for textual ellipsis is supposed to determine  . This is opposed to the interpretation of its elliptified counterpart " he chargetime " in sentence  ( 1c )  , where the genitive object "\[ of OJ ~ the accumulatr\]iszeroed and  , thus , the role charge-time-of remains uninstantiated . ' 2 . In phase 2 , the forward-looking centers of the previous entence are tested for the predicate Pre -ferredConceptualBridge  . 
In this case , the instance 316 LT ( the conceptual referent of the nominal anaphor " der Rechner "  ( the computer )  , which has already been properly resolved ) is related to CHARGE-TIME ( the concept denoting " Ladezeit " ) via a metonymic path , viz .   ( charge-time-of accumulator-of ) indicating a whole-for-part metonymy , while the concept ACCUMULATOR is related to CHARGE-TIME via a plausible path  ( viz . 
charge-time-of ) . As plausible paths are the strongest type of conceptual paths  , only an element which is more highly ranked in the centering list and is linked via a plausible path to the elliptical expression could be preferred as the elliptic antecedent of " Ladezeit "  ( chargetime ) over " Akku " ( accumulator ) according to the constraint from Table 6 . As this can be excluded the remaining concepts associated with the current forward-looking centers  ( namely , TIME-UNIT-PAIR and POWER ) need no longer be considered . 
Hence , " Akku " is determined as the proper elliptical antecedent  3  . As a consequence , a Text Ellipsis-Antecedent Found message is sent from " Akku " to the initiator of the Search Antecedent message  , viz . 
" Ladezeit " . An appropriate role filler update links the corresponding concepts via the role charge-time -of and  , thus , local coherence is established at the conceptual level of the text knowledge base  . 
In order to illustrate our approach underslightly varying conditions  , consider text fragment (2): (2) a . Der 316 LT gehts pars amit Energieum . 
( The 316 LT uses-sparingly-energy.)b.

Ne ~ unabh ~ a-agig wrder fiir ca . 2 Stundenmit
Strom versorgt.
(In a power supply-independent mode it is - for approximately  2 hours-with power-provided . ) We nn die Takt frequenz herabge set ztwird , reicht die Energie so gar ~ r3 Stunden . 
(When the clock frequency - is reduced - suffices - the power - even for  3 hours . ) Here , the elliptical expression " Takt frequenz " ( clock frequency ) cantentatively be related to three antecedents in the preceding sentence : " er "  ( it )   ( which is an anaphoric expression for "316 LT " )  , " Stun-den " ( hours) , and " Strom " ( power) . Thus , in the path finding mode paths from CLOCK-MIIZ -PAIR  ( the conceptual representation for " Takt frequenz  "  ) to 316 LT , TIME-UNIT-PAIR ( representing " Stunden ") ,   3Note that only nouns and pronouns are capable of responding to the Search Text Ellipsis Antecedent m ssage and of being tested as to whether they fulfill the required criteria for an elliptical relation  . 

Forward-looking cenber ~-- ~ . _~--Seareh Antea edent meJnage ' ~'' , ~~316 LT "'''- i , - ~'" " Anteced ~ nt Found men , age " ACCUMULATOR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ",
TIME-UNIT ~ PAIR "'''" ..."",
Recknerku ~
Dex // durch furmit die Stundense hr
AkkuSt ~ ndenStr0m1 , 5 dlesenneu artlgen ( ib ) Der Beohner wird dur ~ h die nenneuar ~ i genA kkuf ~ z  4 Stundenmlt Strom v ~ rnorgt . ( Ic ) Daz ~ berhlnaus in tdlm1 ~ dmzoitmit1 , 5 Stundennehrkurz . 
( lh ) The ~ ompute ri . bacau Beofth IB new typ . of ac~mulator for 4 hours with powar provided . ( Ic ) Alao . i . the chargetime of 1 . 5 hour . quite ~ hoxt . 
Figure 1: Sample Parse and POWER , respectively , are searched . As only a single wellformed role chain from CLOCK -MIIZ-PAIR to  316LT can be determined ( viz .   ( clock-mhz-pair-of cpu-of mother board-of central -unit-oJ  )   )  ,   "316LT " is selected as the valid elliptic antecedent . Under these circumstances , conceptual linkage could not be established via a plausible path  , but only via a metonymic path , corresponding to a whole-for-part metonymy . 
This is due to the fact that " Takt frequenz " ( clock frequency )   ( conceptualized as CLOCK-MHZ-PAIR ) is a property of the CPU of COMPUTER-SYSTEM and , therefore , only a mediated property of computers as a whole ( hence , the whole-for-part metonymy ) . 
Evaluation . A small-scale evaluation experiment was conducted on a test set of  109 occurrences of textual ellipses in 5 different exts taken from our corpus . The evaluation used our knowledge base from the information technology domain  , which consists of 449 concepts and 334 relations . Among 46 (42 . 2% ) false negatives ( no resolution triggered though textual ellipsis occurs  )  , the ellipsis handler encountered 42 (38 . 5% ) cases of lacking concept specifications ( half of which were gaps that can easily be closed  , the other half constituted by " soft " concepts ( e . g . , referring to spatial knowledge ) which are hard to get hold of )  . In 4 of the 46 cases the conceptual model was adequate but the triggering conditions were inappropriate  . 
Among the 63 cases where the ellipsis handler started processing  60 were correctly analyzed ( recall rate of 55 . 05%) ,   2 modelling bugs were encountered in the knowledge base  , and one case was due to incorrect conceptual constraints  . Considering the performance of the criteria we propose--disregarding effects that come from deficient knowledgengineer-ing  , i . e . restricting the evaluation to the 63 cases run by the ellipsis handler--the precision rate amounts to  95  . 2% . 
With respecto accuracy , however , we still have to consider the actual number of textual ellipses processed including false positives  , i . e . , cases where the for Text Ellipsis Resolution ellipsis resolution is carried out although no textual elmlips is actually occurs  . Altogether , the ellipsis handler was triggered 82 times , thus it was incorrectly triggered in 19 cases (23 . 2%) .   12 of these 19 false positives were due to insufficiencies of the parsing process  ( it failed to create suitable semantic/conceptual representations blocking the triggering of the ellipsis handler  )  . In 4 cases the anaphora resolution process failed to resolve an anaphor  , thus leading to an incorrect call of the ellipsis handler  , and in the 3 remaining cases the triggering condition was not restrictive nough  . This condition gives an overall accuracy score of  73  . 2% . 
6 Comparison with Related Approaches
As far as text-level processing is concerned , the framework of DRT ( Kamp & Reyle ,  1993) , attirst sight , constitutes a particularly strong alternative to our approach  . The machinery of DRT , however , might work well for ( pro ) nominal anaphora , but faces problems when elliptical text phenomena are to be interpreted  ( though Wada ( 1994 ) has recently made an attempt to deal with restricted forms of textual ellipsis in the DRT context  )  . This shortcoming is simply due to the fact that DRT is basically a semantic theory  , not a full-tledged model for text understanding . In particular , it lacks any systematic on nection to well -developed reasoning systems accounting for conceptual domain knowledge  . Actually , the sort of constraints we considered seem much more rooted in encyclopedic knowledge than are they of a primarily semantic nature anyway  . 
As far as proposal slot the analysis of textual ellipsis are concerned  , none of the standard grammar theories ( e . g . , HPSG , LFG , GB , CG , TAG ) covers this issue . 
This is not at all surprising , as their advocates pay almost no attention to the text level of linguistic description  ( with the exception of several forms of anaphora ) and also do not seriously take conceptual criteria beyond semantic features into account  . Hence their in-determination with respect o conceptually driven inferencing in the context of text understanding  . 

Actttally , only few systems exist which deal with text tml ellipsis in a dedicated way  . For example , the PUNDIT system ( Palmer et al ( 1986 ) ) provides a fairly restricted solution in that only direct conceptual links between the concept denoted by the antecedent and the elliptical expression are considered  ( " plausible " paths of length 1 , in our terminology ) . A pattern-based approach to infereucing ( in chtding textual ellipsis ) has also been put forward by Norvig 11989 )  . 
The main dillerence to our work lies in the fact that these path patterns  ( to not take the compositional properties of relations into accotmt  ( e . g . , transitive relations ) . Furthermore , numerical constraints like path length restrictions amposited without motivating their origin  , whereas we state fomml wellformedness and empirical criteria the evidence for which is derived li ' ompsycholinguistic studies  . The abduction-based approach to inferencing underlying the TACITUS system  ( ltobbs et al ( 1993 ) ) also refers to weights and costs and , thus , shares somes in filarity with Norvig's proposal ( Hobbsctal . , 1993, p .  122) . Moreover , the crucial problem still unsolved in this logically very principled framework concerns a proper choice methodology lor fixing appropriate costs for specific assmnptions on which  , among other factors , textual ellipsis resolution is primarily based . The approach report exl in this paper also extends our own previous work on textual ellipses  ( H ~ flm ,  1989 ) by the incorporation of an elabor a texl model of ftmctional prefer-enccs on  ( /1 elements . 
7 Conclusion
We have outlined a model of textual ellipsis resolution  . 
It conskters conceptual criteria to be o1' primary importance and provides linkage constraints for role paths in a terminological knowledge base in order to assess the plausibility of possible  , antecexlents as proper bridges ( Clark , 1975) to elliptical expressions . In addition , futtctional information struct ttreconstraints contribute further restrict kms on proper elliptical antecedents  . 
Tim particular advantage of our approach lies in the integrated treatment of textual ellipsis within a single coherent grmn marlormat that integrates linguistic and conceptual criteria in terms of general constraints  . 
The ellipsis handler has been implemented in Small talk as part of a comprehensive txt parser lot German  . Besides the intormation technology domain , expcriments with ottr parser have also been successfully run on medical domain texts  , thus indicating that the heuristics we have been developing arc not bound to a particular domain  , The current lexicon contains a hierarchy of approximately  100 word class spec-ilications with nearly 3  . 0 00 lexical entries and colresponding concept descriptions available from the LOOM knowledge representation system  ( MacGregor & Bates ,  1987 )  ---  800 and 500 concept/role spccifi-cations for the inlormation technology and medicine domain  , respectively . 
Acknowledgments . We would like to fllank our colleagues in tim C?Z9 r group for fmitfifl discussions . This work has been funded by LGFG Baden -Wiirttemberg  ( M . Stuff ) e) . 
Katja Markert is supported by a grant from DFG within the Freiburg University Graduate Program on "tluman and Ar  . 
tificial Intelligence " . We also gratefully acknowledget improvision of timLOOM systemf:mmUSC/ISI  . 

Agha , G . & C . \[ lewitt (1987) . Concurrent programming using actors . In A . Yonezawa & M . rlb kororeds . ), Object-Oriented Concurrent Progrwnming , pp .  37- 53 . 
(? aml ) ridge , Mass .: Mrl ' Press.
Chaffin , R .  (1992) . The concept of semantic relations . In A . Imhrer & E . Kittayr Eds . ), Frames , Fields and Con-trasts , pp .  253-288 . Hillsdale , N . J . : 1, . Erlbaum . 
Clark , H . H .  (1975) . Bridging . In TINLAP-I , pp .  169- 174 . 
Dane . ~, F .  (1974) . Funct kmal sentence perspective and tim organization of tim text  . in F . Dancgr Ed . ), Papers on Functional Sentence Perspective , pp .  11)6- 128 . 
Prague : Academia.
Grosz , B . J . , A . K . Joshi & S . Weinstein (1995) . Centering : Atamework for modeling file local coherence of discourse  . Computational Linguistics , 21(2):203-225 . 
Hahr , , U .  11989) . Making understanders out of parsers : Semantically driven parshlg as a key concept to t realistic text understanding applications  . International Joumral of Intelligent Systems ,  4(3):345-393 . 
Hahn , U . , K . Markert & M . Strube 11996) . A conceptual reasoning approach to the resolution of textual ellipses  . 
In Prec . of ECAI-96.
Hahn , U . , S . Schacht & N . Br6ker 11994) . Concurrent , object-oriented dependency parsing : The Parse Talk model  . International Journal of lluman-Computer
Studies , 41(1/2):179-222.
llaji & wfi , E . , V . Kubofi & P . Kubofi (1992) . Stock of shared knowledge : A tool for solving pronominal anaphora  . 
In Prec . of COLING-92, Vol.1, t)p . 127-133.
Hobbs , J . R . , M . E . Stickel , D . E . Apl ) elt & P . Mmlin (1993) . Interpretation as abduction . Artificiallnte Lligence , 63:6%142 . 
Kamp , H . & U . Reyle (1993) . \[') ' om Discourse to Logic . 
I ) or drecht : Kluwer.
Lakoft , G .  (1987) . Women , Nre , and Dangerous Things . 
Chicago : Chicago University Press.
MacGregor , R . & R . Bates (1987) . The LOOM Knowledge Represemation Language . (1S1/RS-87-18) USC/ISI . 
Norvig , P .  (1989) . Marker passing as a weak melhod for inferencing . Cognitive Science , 13(4):569620 . 
Pahner , M . S . , D . A . Dahl , R . J . Schiffman & L . 1 lirschman (:1986) . Recovering imt ) licit infornlation , hil'roc , of
ACL-86, pp . 1019.
Strube , M . & U . Hahn (1995) . Parse Talk about sentence - and text-level atlaphora  . In Prec . of EACL05, pp .  237-244 . 
Stnfl~e , M . & U . ltahn (:1996) . Functional centering . In Prec . 
of ACL96.
Wada , 1 .  (1994) . A I realment of functional dctinite descriptions . In Prec . of COLING-94, Vol . 2, pp .  789 -795 . 
Woods , W . A . & J . O . Schmolze (1992) . The KL-ONE fmnily . Computers & Mathematics with Applications ,  23(2-5): 133-177 . 

