Multiple Discourse Relations
on the Sentential Level in Japanese
Yoshiki Mori *
Department of Computational Linguistics
University of the Saarland
Postfach 15 11 50
D-66041 Saarbrflcken , Germany
email : mori ~ coli.uni-sb.de
Abstract
In the spoken language machine trans-
lation project Verbmobil , the seman-
tic formalism Language for Underspec-
ified Discourse representation structures
( LUD ) is used . LUD describes a num-
ber of DRSs and allows for underspec-
ification of scopal ambiguities . Dealing with Japanese-to-English translation besides German-to-English poses challenging problems  . In this paper , a treatment of multiple discourse relation constructions on the sentential level is discussed  . 
These are common in Japanese but cause a problem for the formalism  . It is shown that the underspecification is to be represented for them  , too . Additionally , it is possible to state a semantic on straint on the resolution of multiple discourse relations which seems to prevail over the syntactic- command constraint  . 
1 Introduction
In the Verbmobil project , a spoken language machine translation system is being developed  . 
Its dialogue domain is restricted to appointment scheduling  . For the semantic analysis , a version of Discourse Representation Theory is used which can express underspecification ad take compositionality into account  . The semantic on struction is represented by LUD , Language for Underspec-ified Discourse Representation Structures  ( Bos et al . , 1996) , which takes discourse representation This research was funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education  , Science , Research , and Technology ( BMBF ) under grant number 01IV 101R . 
A big bunch of thanks goes to Johan Bos , Bj6rnGamb?ck , Claire Gardent , Christian Lieske , Manfred Pinkal and Karsten Worm for their valuable comments  , and to Feiyu Xu and Juli a Heine for a kind help editing the text  . 
structures ( henceforth DRSs ) as its object language . 
The main focus of the project is on translation from German to English  , but it also treats that from Japanese to English . As for the semantic construction , it is aimed at that semantic analyses of Japanese as well as German should be done in the same formalism  , which is especially challenging , taking differences of the two languages into account : compared to languages like German and English  , peculiarities of Japanese such as the absence of definite articles seem to invite common semantic analyses based on underspecification  . 
For example , in the current LUD-formalism it is assumed that a discourse relation has the widest scope among the scope-taking elements in a sentence except for the scope of sentence mood  . Thus LUD allows for only one discourse relation in each sentence  . Discourse relations contain not only such relations expressed by subordinate conjunctions as explanation relations  ( because )  , adverse relations ( though ) and temporal relations ( before , after etc . ) , but also purpose , conditional and topic comment relations . We interprethem as relations between two DRSs , consisting of restriction ( the antecedent part ) and scope ( the conclusion part )  . 
In Japanese , it is possible and even common to use a number of discourse relations in one sentence  . Lexical entries which realize discourse relations occur in various grammatical positions  . Discourse relation elements can be also classified according to the anaphoricity of the elements expressing the antecedent part and those expressing the conclusion part  . In Fig .   1 an explanation relation in the subordinate conjunction and another one in the modality auxiliary are used together with a topic relation  . 
For this case , the current reatment of LUD implies that the widest scope should be assigned to any discourse relation  . This extension of the formalism poses a serious problem : every discourse iru-node zikan-gana-i nodamon day-top seminar-nor a insert as p-pres-conj time-nor a fail-prcs aux-pres Monday  ( isn't good ) because I don't have any time , since some seminars have been inserted ( then ) Figure h Three discourse relations in a sentence relation introduces a partition into the antecedent and the conclusion part for the sentence in which it occurs  .   1 If there are a number of discourse relation elements contained in a sentence  , the partitions they introduce can differ from each other  ( see Sec .  2) . 
While scopal relations of quantifiers normally can be aligned  , scopal relations can , but do not have to be built between discourse relations  , and between scope-taking elements in general . Semantically , this is one of the main reasons that underspecification should be introduced rigorously  . 
Nevertheless , some regular scopal relations may be found among discourse relations  ( and again in general among scope-taking elements )  . These relations are determined not only syntactically  , but also by way of semantics and discourse structure  . 
The paper outlines a treatment of multiple discourse relations on the sentential level in two aspects  . First , it proposes an underspccified treatment also for these cases along the lines of quanti-tiers and other operators  . Secondly , it suggests some typical orders in which the scopal underspecification among discourse relations can be resolved  . The paper is organized in tile following way . In Section 2 , multiple discourse phenomena arc presented in terms of an example  . In Section 3 , tile formalism of LUD is introduced . In Section 4 , a representation for multiple discourse relations is proposed  . Section 5 discusses possible resolutions , in which a relationship between semantics and discourse structure plays an important role  . 
2 D iscourse Re la t ions in Japanese As mentioned above  , it is apparent in Japanese that a sentence can include a number of discourse relation elements  ( Fig .  1) . Keeping track of the assumption that all discourse relations in a sentence take a wider scope than the other scope-taking elements in a sentence  , we are confronted with the l Since the Verb mobil project deals with spoken languages  , the unit treated is in reality not a sentence but an utterance which constitutes a turn in a dialogue and includes ellipsism Mother typical phenomena which need special treatments  . Here , however , the linguistically abstract unit of sentence will be presupposed  . 
next question which kind of relative scope holds among discourse relations  . The treatment of discourse relations should thus be modified at least in these respects  . 
A discourse relation is represented in LUD as a predicate with three arguments  ; the first one is a term for the type of the concerning discourse relation  , the second one is an underspecified scope domain of the antecedent part  , and the last one is another underspecified scope domain for the conclusion part  . An underspecified scope domain is represented by a hole  . 
In Japanese sentences , discourse relations occur in various grammatical positions  . The sentence in Fig .   1 contains at least three different discourse relations  . First , there is a topic relation which is expressed by a socalled topic phrase marked by wa  . It is encoded in tile LUD as in (1) ( of . Asher's elaboration relation ( Asher , 1993)) . In Japanese , the antecedent part can be syntactically determined  , so far as the topic phrase is expressed with the topic marker  . In Fig . 1, getsuyou biamounts to this part . 
(1) (2) (3) 12-discrel ( topic , hl , h2) 14-discrel ( explanation-noda , hS , h6) 13-discrel ( explanation-node , h3 , h4) Fig .   1 also contains a discourse relation expressed by the auxiliary noda in the modality position of the verbal complex of the conclusion part of the sentence  . Semantically , it is an subordinate relation of explanation . It consists of a functional noun for the senteutial nominalization o and the copula  . The use of noda is dif\[crent from the nor-real use of the copula in that it takes a temporal -ized sentence as a complement and  , at the same time , lacks the argument of the copular predication . It is this lacking argument which makes up the conclusion part of the discourse relation  ( h6 in ( 2 ) ) .   h5 will be bound to a DRS which is constructed out of the sentence subordinated to nod a  , that is , the whole sentence . 
Finally , a discourse relation expressed by a subordinate conjunction node can be found in Fig  . 1, too (3) . This form can be seen as a participle form ( reform ) of noda mentioned above . Semantically , the meaning is restricted to explanation . Therefore , the term for the discourse relation type is basically the same as  ( 2 )  . 
Eventaking these pieces of information into account  , the scope relations both between wa and uoda and between wa and node seem to be underspecified  , whereas noda always has scope over node . Since every discourse relation has two scope possibilities of scopal relations for Fig  .  1 . 2 These scopal relations are at least theoretically able to be forced onto the sentence in Fig  . 1 ( see See .  5) . 
(4) wa ( monday , noda ( node ( h3 , h4) , anaphoric )) (5) noda(wa ( monday , node ( h3 , h4)) , anaphoric ) (6) noda ( node ( wa ( monday , h2) , h4)) , anaphoric ) (7) noda(node(h3 , wa ( monday , h2))) , anaphoric ) 3 Theoretical Framework :
DRT and LUD
Since the Verbmobil domain is spoken dialogues rather than isolated sentences  , it is natural to choose a variant of Discourse Representation Theory  , DRT ( Kamp and Reyle ,  1993) , as the framework of its semantic formalism . To treat scope ambiguities and other underspecification phenomena adequately  , we have , however , needed to extend the formalism to one which suits for representing underspecified structures  ( Bos ,  1995) . As further described in ( Bos et al ,  1996) , LUD is a declarative description language for underspeei-fled DRSs  . The basic idea is that natural anguage expressions are not directly translated into DRSs  , but into a representation that describes a number of DRSs  . It is different from UDRS ( Reyle , 1993) in that not only DRSs , but all predicates and discourse markers are labeled  . Moreover , holes for scope domains are discerned from other labels  . 
ALUD-representation U is a triple U = <
Hu , Lu , Cv > , where Hu is a set of holes ( variables over labels )  , Lu is a set of labeled conditions , and C~raset of constraints . Holes are special labels for the slot of an operator's cope domain  . A hole will be bound by means of a plugging function to a standard label which stands for a DRS of a certain element  . 
The set of constraints is divided into alf a conditions and leq  ( less-or-equal ) conditions , alfa conditions define presuppositions and anaphorie relations  . They stipulate relations of those DRSs which do not come into scope relations to those DRSs which do  . leq conditions , on the other hand , define partial order constraints between holes and labels which give a semilattice structure on HvUC cr with a hole at the top  ( top hole )  . They should be maintained in the definition of a consistent subordination relation  . The latter , called a possible plugging , fully specifies 2Int l~s example , each discourse relation element is taken as a predicate with the antecedent and the conclusion part as its arguments  . 
the relations of holes to labels by way of an injective plugging function from holes to labels  , which determines which hole is instantiat'ed into by  ( or is bound to ) which label . The interpretation of a possible plugging at the top hole is the interpretation of the matrix DRS  . In this way , a LUD-representation describes a set of possible pluggings at once  . 
There are two main exceptions to this characterization of LUD  . First , modifiers share its instance with the modified DRS and show no different scopal behavior  . Secondly , DRSs for discourse relations are assumed to always instantiate into the top hole  . In the current version , the top hole is simply assumed to be the hole argument of the sentence mood predicate of the main clause  . 
4 Representat ions fo r mul t ip le d i scourse re lations In the Verb mobil semantic onstruction  , Japanese dialogues are analysed within the same theoretical framework and with largely identical semantic macros as German ones  . In order to apply the theory and implementation of LUD to Japanese  , some modifications are needed . As for discourse relations , a major source of complication comes from the assumption that predicates for discourse relations have two holes as their arguments  . The first problem lies in the fact that everything that goes into a leq relation to one hole cannot be in a leq relation to the other hole of the same discourse relation predicate because of its partitioning character  . Another problem is the treatment of multiple occurrences of discourse relations in a sentence  . We will be concentrated on the latter problem in the following sections  . 
For the problem of processing multiple discourse dependencies there are a few approaches  ( Mann et al , 1992; Kurohashi and Nagao ,  1994) . 
( Gardent ,  1994 ) uses Tree Inserting Grammar based on the feature -based Tree Adjoining Grammar  ( Vijay-Shanker and Joshi ,  1988 ) to develop a formal theory about a discourse semantic representation  . This paper is distinguished from these works in two perspectives : First  , it concentrates on the sentential level and offers a treatment of multiple discourse relations in terms of a formalism for underspecified structures of DRSs  . Secondly , it does not concern multi-functions of one discourse relation element  , but multiple occurrences of various discourse relation elements  . 
As suggested above , discourse relation elements have the following characteristic nLUD  . The two holes which are contained in each of them partition the sentence in which the element occurs into other hole by way of a leq constraint as a " unit "  . 
This has lead to the decision that a discourse relation element should be directly subordinated to the top hole  . Other labels for DRSs should be subordinated to the discourse relation element in the way in which each of them is unambiguously subordinated to one of its two holes  . The first problem mentioned at the beginning of this section can be dealt within this manner if only one discourse relation element occurs in a sentence  . 
At least two problems remain when there are a number of discourse relation elements in a sentence  . First , if we keep the solution above , discourse relation elements in the sentence are all candidates for the directly subordinated position to the top hole in a semilattice structure  . Secondly , each discourse relation element introduces a different partition of the given sentence  . 
For a general solution , the paper proposes a device to introduce a special kind of predicate mode which has a hole as the only argument for the bottom of a lattice structure which is built by the top hole and discourse relation elements  . This enables us to keep the decision , on the one hand , that discourse relation elements are in a next-to -toposi-tion in a possible plugging and to keep DRSs for other parts of the sentence underneath the mode predicate  , on the other . Every discourse relation is situated above any other scope-taking element  . 
This proposal crucially relies on the fact that for every discourse relation element which occurs in a sentence  , one of its two holes can be plugged by a DRS in a lexically determined way  . Additionally , it is assumed that we have a syntactic strategy in which the topic phrase is dealt with as an adjunct modification which should be interpreted in the discourse structure with respect to the main predicate of a sentence  . Therefore , what is subordinated to the hole introduced by the mode predicate amounts to the matrix clause of the given sentence  . In this way , an ordinary underspecification treatment of multiple discourse relations among each other gets possible  . 
For the sentence in Fig .  1 , the LUD-representation can be implemented like in  ( 8 )  . Labels are represented underlud preds . 
lud_grouping and lud_mota show among others which labels are to be treated together to construct DRSs  . Underlud_scoping , alfa and loq conditions are found . The labels 112 and 113 are presuppositions of 18 and 111  . leq relations read that labels are always less or equal to labels in the given order  . Fig .   2 is a graphical representation of the loq constraints of  ( 8 )  . Discourse relations and discourse markers are abbreviated to discrol and din  , respectively . 
(8) index : ( i8 , 118 , h0) lud_preds:ll-mood(deal , hO ) 12-discrel ( topic , hl , h2) 13-discrel(node , h3 , h4) 14-discrel(noda , h5 , h6) 16-dm(iD17-predicate(getsuyoubi , iI ) 19-dm(i2)1 lO-predicate(halite , i2) 11 O-role(i2 , art 3 , i3) lll-role(i2 , tloc , i4 ) 112-dm ( i5 ) 114-dm ( i6 ) 115-predicate ( seminaa , i6 ) 116-dm ( i  ~ ) 117-mode ( h7 ) 119-dm ( iS ) 120-predicate ( zikan , i8) 122-dm(i9) ll3-neg(i9 , h8) lud_grouping:15-inc(\[16 , 17\])18-inc(\[19 , 110\]) 113-inc(\[114 , 115\])ll8-inc(\[119 , 120\]) 121-inc(\[122 , 123\]) lud_meta:modifies (18 , 111) lud_scoping:alfa(i 6 , udef ,  18 , 113) alfa(iS , pron , lll , 112) leq (12 , hO ) leq(13 , hO ) leq(14 , hO ) leq(15 , hl ) leq(18 , h3) leq(ll6 , h6) leq(llZ , h2) leq(117 , h4) leq(llT , h5) leq(ll8 , hT ) leq(118 , h8) leq(121 , h7 ) The mode predicate can be seen as a secondary sentence mood predicate  . For example , it serves in a similar way to the predicate used for the introduction of a propositional complement of propositional attitude verbs  . This kind of use of the mode predicate does not seem to be restricted to discourse relations  . For example , multiple occurences of modal expression show a concerted behavior as regards copal relations as in " we can perhaps meet there "  . The mode predicate is applicable when multiple occurrences of predicates in one semantic lass take a scope over any other scope-taking elements together but the scope relations among each other are underspecified  . 
5 Possible Resolutions
It is sometimes possible to resolves copal underspecifications of discourse relations on several grounds  . Actually , there seems to be only one 15-inc\[16 , 17\] ~06)  . . . . . . . . / 1-~7_mLoderh7 ' unbound 16-dm ( i l ) 115-pred ( ~emin~ , i6)/H/-:~17-pred(getsugoobi , i l ) - k , // 112-inc\[122 , 123\]alfa(i 6 , udef , 18 , 113) ' ~/ ll2-dm(i5)"'"' , /122-dm(t9) "" . alfa(i5, pron , 111, 112) '/123 . : . aeg(i9 , h8) "'-18-inc\[19 , 110\] 1 1 1-role(i2 , tloc , i4)~19-dm02) 118-inc\[119 , 120\] modifies ll0-pred(haitte , i2) ll9-dm(i8) 110-role(i2 , arg3 , i3) 120-pred(zikan , i8 ) Figure 2: A graphical representation f the sentence in Figure  1 plausible resolution possibility for the sentence of Fig  .  1 . This resolution possibility corresponds to (5) . The plugging function for this case is as follows  ( 9 )  . It should be read such that a label is bound to ( plugged into ) a hole . 
(9) plug_into (14 , hO ) plug_into (12 , h5) plug_into (13 , h2 ) Confinement of resolution possibilities depends on various factors  . One of the most important factors is lexical determination of the scope domains of the antecedent part or the conclusion part of a discourse relation  . Especially when one of the two is determined as anaphoric  , that is , sentence x-ternal , the scope of this discourse relation seems to be wider than the others  , noda in Fig . 1 is an example for this . In the same vein , the scope of noda supercedes that of a conditional discourse relation nara in Fig  .  3 . The latter's scope domains of the antecedent as well as the conclusion part are sentence internal  . 
gogo-naraya mada-gai-runod a afternoon-condPN -nombe-presaux-pres  ( If you mean ) the afternoon , Yamada will be here Figure 3: Discourse relations with and without anaphoric force Among discourse relations with sentence xter-nalanaphoric binding there are two types : those whose antecedent part is bound sentence xter-nally and those whose conclusion part is bound sentence externally  . Discourse relation particles liked a kara ( therefore ) belong to the former ( Fig .  4) , subordinate x planation relations like no dabelong to the latter  . 
dakara getsuyoubi-de dai joubu-des-utherefore monday-obl with okay-cop-pres  ( I ) am therefore ready form on day Figure 4: A relation with a uaphoric antecedent Though the semantics of socalled topic phrases marked by wa goes beyond the scope of this paper  , we assume that their discourse relations belongs to those whose antecedent part and conclusion part are both plugged sentence internally  . This predicts a narrower scope than that of the subordinate relation nod a  . This not only corresponds to the intuition in (9) , but is also the case in Fig .  5 . 
gogo-wa yamada-gai-runod a afternoon-top PN-nom be-presaux-pres  ( as \] or ) the afternoon , Yamada will be here Figure 5: A topic relation getting narrow scope among discourse relations cannot be disambiguated straightforwardly if they are of the same type according to the above classification  . They can all be of the type whose antecedent and conclusion part are both bound sentence internally  . 
In this case , the resolution seems to depend on the syntactic- command information  . This explains the stipulated scope relation between the topic wa and the explanative node in  ( 9 )  . ( In (9) , the scope relation is also influenced by antecedent resolution of the temporal-local modification which is needed from the syntactic information  . ) The same explanation holds for the scope difference which is observable between the two sentences in Fig  .  6 . 
getsuyoubi-wa gogo-na radai joubu-damon day-top afternoon-condokay-coppresAs\]or Monday  , it is oki \] it is in the a\[terno ongogo-nara getsuyoubi-wa dai joubu-da aft crnoon-cond monday -topokay-cop-prcs I\] it is in the afternoon  , the Monday is okay Figure 6: Topic and conditional relations Discourse relations can  , in contrast , all be of the type whose antecedent part or conclusion part is bound sentence xternally  . This can be observed in Fig .  7 . Not only the syntactic modality auxiliary nod a , but also the discourse particled a kara includes a part which is bound sentence xternally  . 
To the extent that the c-command relation is unclear between them  , the resolution remains unclear here . 
dakaraike-na-i nodes-u therefore gomid-aux neg -presaux-pres  ( It is since )   ( 0 could , , ot go because of it Figure 7: Two relations with anaphoric force 6 Conclusions The LUD formalism that describes DRSs in an underspecified way also pertains to dealing with multiple discourse relation constructions  , which are common in Japanese . The problem is to distinguish the discourse relations which take the wide scope relative to other scope-taking elements on the one hand and to have them underspecified among each other  , on the other . The solution has a general character ; several scope-taking elements can go into scope relations collectively if they belong to the same semantic lass  . The scope among them is underspecified again . This treatment reflects the fact that each element can introduce a different partition of the same sentence  . 
We have also stated an interesting semantic on -straint on the resolution of multiple discourse relations which seems to prevail over the syntactic c-command constraint : discourse relation should be scopally compared with each other on the criteria whether the restriction  ( antecedent part ) or to the scope ( conclusion part ) of a discourse relation has an anaphoric force . 
References
Nicholas Asher .  1993 . Reference to Abstract Objects in Discourse . Kluwer , Dordrecht , Holland . 
Johan Bos , Bj6rnGambKck , Christian Lieske , Yoshiki Mori , Manfred Pinkal , and Karsten Worm .  1996 . Compositional semantics in Verbmobil . In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Koebcn havn , Denmark , August . ACL . 
Johan Bos . 1995. Predicate logic unplugged.
In Proceedings of the l Oth Amsterdam Colloquium , University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , tIoll and . 
Claire Gardent .  1994 . Discourse multiple dependencies . ILLC-report , University of Amsterdam , Amsterdam , Holland . 
Hans Kamp and Uwe Reyle .  1993 . From Discourse to Logic : An Introduction to Model the-oretic Semantics of Natural Language  , Formal Logic and DRT . Kluwer , Dordrecht , Holland . 
Sadao Kurohashi and Makoto Nagao . 1994.
Automatic detection of discourse structure by checking surface information in sentences  . In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , pages 1123-1127 , Kyoto , Japan , August . ACL . 
William C . Mann , Christian M . I . M . Mathiessen , and Sandra Thompson .  1992 . Rhetorical structure theory and text analysis . In W . C . Mann and S . A . Thompson , editors , Discourse Description . John Benjamins , Amsterdam , Holland . 
Uwe Reyle .  1993 . Dealing with ambiguities by underspecification : Construction  , representation and deduction . Journal of Semantics , 10:123-179 . 
K . Vijay-Shanker and A . K . Joshi .  1988 . Feature structure based tree adjoining grammars . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , volume 2 , pages 714-719 , Budapest , Hungary , August . 


