SEEMP: An Semantic Interoperability

Infrastructure for e-Government Services in the

Employment Sector

E. Della Valle1, D. Cerizza1, I. Celino1, J. Estublier2, G. Vega2, M. Kerrigan3,

J. Ram rez4, B. Villazon4, P. Guarrera5, G. Zhao5, and G. Monteleone6

1 CEFRIEL  Politecnico of Milano, Via Fucini 2, 20133 Milano, Italy

2 Equipe Adele, LSR, Universit e Joseph Fourier,F-38041 Grenoble Cedex 9, France

3 DERI, University of Innsbruck, Technikerstrae 21a, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria
4 Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, 28660 Boadilla del Monte, Madrid, Spain

5 Le Forem, Boulevard Tirou 104, 6000 Charleroi, Belgium

6 TXT e-solutions, via Frigia 27, 21126 Milano, Italy

Abstract. This paper presents SEEMP, a marketplace to coordinate
and integrate public and private employment services (ESs) around the
EU Member States. The need for flexible collaboration in the marketplace gives rise to the issue of interoperability in both data exchange and
share of services. SEEMP proposes a mixed approach that relies on the
concepts of services and semantics. SEEMP approach combines Software
Engineering and Semantic Web methodologies/tools in an infrastructure
that allows for a meaningful service-based communication among ESs.

1 Introduction

SEEMP project1 aims at designing and implementing in a prototype an Interoperability infrastructure for e-government. More specifically, SEEMP is developing
an EIF-compliant [1] to allow interoperability among the hundreds of public and
private Employment services (ESs) that exist in Europe. The resulting European
Employment Marketplace will overcome the national barriers complying, at the
same time, with the local policies of each Member States.

Thanks to SEEMP, which promotes increased partnership between labour
market actors and the development of closer relations between private and public
employment services, job-seekers and employers will have better services that
operate at European scale. For instance, the matching process between job offers
and CVs across all Europe will become possible increasing, eventually, labour
hiring and workforce mobility. In order to fulfil such an ambitious goal several
problems must be solved at organizational and technical level.

At an organizational level, the business model of SEEMP has to be catchy for
all ESs. The main reason for a ES to buying in is creating added value for its
local users (both job seekers and employers) by offering interconnections with

1 SEEMP is funded by EU (IST-4-027347); please visit http://www.seemp.org/.

E. Franconi, M. Kifer, and W. May (Eds.): ESWC 2007, LNCS 4519, pp. 220234, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007
?

?

?
other ESs. Today it is normal for all users to insert CV and Job Offers in many
ESs and collect, laboriously, the results personally. When SEEMP will be in
place each ES will be able to collaborate with other ESs. From the perspective
of the end user, the add-value is the outreach to other niches of the job market
without being stretched out. End users could insert the CV and Job Offers
once and collect pan-European results. From ESs perspective it will results in
increase both the number of users and their faithfulness to each ES, thus an
increase in transaction volume.

The need for such flexible collaboration between ESs, gives rise to the issue
of interoperability in both data exchange and share of services. The technical
approach of SEEMP relies on the concepts of Web Services and semantics. Web
Services, exploited in a Software Engineering manner, enable an easier maintenance of the integration. Semantics, encoded in the systems by the means of
ontologies and mediators, allows for reconciliation of the hundreds local professional profiles and taxonomies.

SEEMP solution will expose, following the well established Software Engineering approach of M elusine [2], a single consistent set of abstract services each
ES can invoke. Such abstract services will provide a multilateral interoperability
solution that delegates the execution of the services to the local ESs (in accordance with the subsidiarity principle) and aggregates the results before sending
the response back to the invoker. Moreover, following the innovative Web Service
Modeling Ontology [3] approach, we will capture the semantics shared among
ESs in a single consistent model. Such model includes a reference ontology in
which and from which the local semantics is mapped as well as semantic description of the local Web Services for their automatic use. A set tools will be provided
to each ES for modeling its local ontology and for aligning the local ontology
with the reference one. As a technical result SEEMP will enable a meaningful
service-based communication among ESs.

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents a running example that
will be discussed throughout the paper; Section 3 explains the interoperability
issue that arises in SEEMP project; Section 4 presents the SEEMP approach
to support meaningful service-based communication among ESs; Sections 5 and
6 outline SEEMP solution architecture and components rooting them to the
related work in Web Services and Semantic Web community; Section 7 briefly
discusses the approach of SEEMP comparing it with already implemented ap-
proaches; and finally Section 8 presents future work.

2 A e-Employment Running Example

European Member States have introduced major reforms to make the labour
market more flexible, transparent and efficient. Such major reforms include de-
centralization, liberalization of the mediation market (competition between public and private), and quality monitoring of ES staff and services. As an effect ESs
understood the need for making available on-line a one-stop shop for the employ-
ment. This results in an increased used of ICT and in a boost in differentiating

E. Della Valle et al.

and personalizing the services they offer (e.g., Borsa Lavoro Lombardia, Le
FOREM2). For the discussion of this paper we will consider a running example
derived by the user requirements of the SEEMP project (for a more detailed
description of the socio-economic constrains please refer to [4]):

Job seekers (companies) put their CVs (Job Offers) on a local ES and
ask to match them with the Job Offers (CVs) other users put in different
ESs through SEEMP.

x

Spain

Local

Matching
algorithm

w

Belgian

Local

Matching
algorithm

v

Polish

Local

Matching
algorithm

t

French

Local

Matching
algorithm

c

d

e

y

z

Italian

a

LEGENDA

Requester PES
Responding PES
PES not involved
Job Seekers CV
Employer Offer

Fig. 1. The running example of distributed matching of CVs and job offers

It may look like a fairly simple example, but to reach its potential EU-wide
audience, this e-Employment running example (see figure 1) needs to fulfill a
wider set of requirements than the respective local ES services. A local matching
service is designed for national/regional requirements only (i.e., central database,
single professional taxonomy, single user language, etc.). SEEMP has to be able
to send the request, which an end-user submits to the local ES (the Italian ES
on left in the figure), to all the other ESs in the marketplace. In order to avoid
asking all ESs, SEEMP has to select those ESs that most likely will be able to
provide an answer and send the request only to them (the four ES on the right in
the figure). Moreover, the answers should be merged and ranked homogeneously
by SEEMP before they are sent back.

2 Respectively http://www.borsalavorolombardia.net/ and http://www.leforem.be/
?

?

?
3 Interoperability Issues

The running example presented in section 2 highlights the need for a system that
covers the whole EU and subsumes hundreds of real heterogeneous systems
existing in EU countries and regions. It implies by-passing:

 language heterogeneity, e.g., an Italian Java Analyst Programmer may be

looking for job offers written in all the different European languages;

 CVs and Job Offers structural heterogeneity, i.e., the use of standards like

HR-XML3 is not wide spread and a multitude of local formats exists;

 CVs and Job Offers content heterogeneity, i.e., European level occupation
classifications like ISCO-884 exist, but they do not reflect legitimate differences and perspectives of economic, cultural and political environments;

 heterogeneity of service interface and behavior, i.e., no standard exists for

e-employment services thus each ES implemented them differently.

All those are typical interoperability issues. The need for interoperability at
European Level among e-Government services has been perceived since 1999 [5]
with the adoption of a series of actions and measures for electronic interchange
of data between administrations, businesses and citizens (IDABC) [6].

The main results of IDABC is the European Interoperability Framework (EIF)
[1]. EIF follows the principle of subsidiarity5 in addressing the interoperability
problem at all levels: organizational, semantic and technical. One crucial aspect,
deriving from the principle of subsidiarity, is to keep responsibility decentralized;
in other words each partner should be able to keep its own business process
almost unchanged6 and to provide externally point of exchange for its processes.
EIF names these points business interoperability interfaces (BII).

EIF does not prescribe any solution, but it rather recommends the principles
to be considered for any e-Government service to be set up at a pan-European
level: accessibility, multilingualism, security, privacy, use of open standards and
of open source software and use of multilateral solutions. SEEMP proposes itself
as an implementation of EIF in the domain of e-employment.

4 The SEEMP Approach

SEEMP relies on the concept of Service. Following the EIF, each ES
locally must expose its BII as Web Services. All these Web Services differ but
they are fairly similar. SEEMP, as marketplace, models a single consistent set of

3 http://www.hr-xml.org/
4 http://www.warwick.ac.uk/ier/isco/isco88.html
5 The principle of subsidiarity recommends not to interfere with the internal workings

of administrations and EU Institutions.

6 Quoting from IDABC: it is unrealistic to believe that administrations from different
Member States will be able to harmonize their business processes because of panEuropean requirements.

E. Della Valle et al.

Web Service out of those exposed by the ESs. Therefore the services exposed by
SEEMP become the standard for the distributed independent service providers.
For instance, for the running example provided in section 2 each ES should
expose two Web Services: match an external CV against the job offers stored
locally and match an external job offer against the CVs stored locally. Therefore a
service that subsume all the local heterogeneous ones can be modeled in SEEMP
for each of the two families of similar Web Service. These two abstract service
are those that SEEMP, as a marketplace, offers to the ESs.

SEEMP uses M elusine [2] as tool for modeling those abstract services and
orchestrating the process of delegating the execution to the distributed independent service providers.

SEEMP relies on the concept Semantics (both ontologies and media-
tors. As for the service, each local ES has its own local ontology for describing
at a semantic level the Web Services it exposes, and the structure/content of
the messages it exchanges. All these ontologies differ but they are fairly simi-
lar, because a common knowledge about employment exists as well as the needs
for exchange (i.e., you dont exchange on things with no equivalence calculus).
So, SEEMP, as marketplace, models a single consistent ontology out of those
exposed by the ESs. Therefore the reference ontology of SEEMP becomes the
actual standard for the ESs that should provide the mediators for translating
from the local ontologies to the reference one and vice versa.

For instance, for the running example each ES should model in a local ontology the structure/content of its CV/job offers and the way they are exchanged
via Web Services. A reference ontology that subsumes all the local heterogeneous ones can be modeled in SEEMP and it becomes the source of shared
understanding. Each ES has to provide its mediator for local-reference semantic
mapping.

SEEMP adopts WSMO [3] a way to semantically describe Web Service, ontologies and mediators, WSML [7] as concrete syntax for encoding those descriptions
and METHONTOLOGY [8] as methodology for developing and maintaining
those semantic descriptions.

Minimal shared commitment. In implementing SEEMP approach particular
attention is paid in keeping a win-win situation among all ESs. The commitment (both at services and semantics level) of each ES should be minimal. ESs
care about being able to share while maintaining all the necessary and unnecessary disagreements. It may appear counter-intuitive, but the most suitable set
of services and ontologies is the one that enables ESs to agree while disagree-
ing. Both the reference set of services and the reference ontology must cover
the various aspects of the employment market with an acceptable level of details
that leaves leeways of disagreement.

Considering the running example of section 2, the minimal shared commitment the SEEMP consortium agreed upon consists in sharing a subset of the CV
named candidacy and a subset of job offer named vacancy. Candidacy (vacancy)
enables matching without reveling how to contact the job seeker (employer) that
?

?

