An Approach for Identification of Users Intentions 

During the Navigation in Semantic Websites 

Rafael Liberato Roberto and Sergio Roberto P. da Silva  

Universidade Estadual de Maringa, Av. Colombo 5790, zona 07,  

Maringa  PR  Brasil 

{liberato,srsilva}@din.uem.br 

Abstract. The growing need for content customization in websites has fostered 
the development of systems which try to identify the users navigation patterns. 
These may be, normally, identified by means of log file analysis. However, this 
solution does not identify the semantic intention behind users navigation. This 
paper provides an approach to incorporating semantic knowledge to the process 
of identifying the users intentions in the navigation of a website with semantic 
support.  The  capture  of  the  users  intentions  is  achieved  by  the  semantic 
enrichment of the log files and the use of and approach that takes into account 
the linguistic and cognitive aspects in the development of the user model.  

Keywords: User Model, Semantic Web, Web Personalization. 

1   Introduction 

A  users  website  navigation  is  strongly  related  to  his  interests  and  necessities. 
However,  most of todays  websites do not take this into account.  A  solution to this 
problem  would  use  of  personalization  mechanisms.  A  personalized  website  may 
include  new  index  pages,  provide  personalized  search  results,  dynamically  create 
recommendations  (such  as  new  links),  or  even  define  new  layouts  for  a  webpage. 
Several  projects  have  come  out  aiming  to  improve  the  users  interaction  with  the 
website such as, for instance, Letizia [14], WebMate [5], PersonalWebWatcher [17] 
and OBIWAM [11], which construct a user model analyzing the webpages visited by 
the user and making adaptations on the pages he has visited. 

Todays  personalization  mechanisms,  in  general,  utilize  a  navigational  behavior 
analyses to create a user model [4] [10] [13], extracting behavioral patterns by means 
of machine learning techniques. These models can be represented in several different 
ways. Letizia [14] produce a list of webpages, while QuickStep [16] creates a list of 
concepts of interests, and Persona [21] creates ontologies. It is interesting to note that 
these models are constructed by using a great variety of learning techniques such as, 
vectorial space models [5], probabilistic models [17] or clustering [18]. However, as 
seen  in  [17],  the  exclusive  use  of  the  navigation  data  can  be  problematic,  because 
there may be difficulties when there is not enough data to extract patterns related to 
certain categories of the domain, or when new webpages, which have not been visited 
already by the users yet, are added to the website.  

E. Franconi, M. Kifer, and W. May (Eds.): ESWC 2007, LNCS 4519, pp. 371383, 2007. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 

R.L. Roberto and S.R.P. da Silva 

The  incorporation  of  information  related  to  the  content  of  the  webpages  or  the 
websites  structure,  i.e.,  data  concerning  its  semantic  relations,  provides  a  way  of 
overcoming the problems mentioned above, improving the personalization process [8] 
[10]. A common approach in this context is the integration of the characteristics of the 
webpages  contents  with  a  classification  defined  by  the  users  [6]  [19].  Generally,  in 
this  approach,  keywords  are  extracted  from  the  websites  content  and  are  used  to 
index or classify its webpages in several categories of content. Thus, these approaches 
would permit the recommendation engines to indicate pages to a user based not only 
in  the  similarity  among  the  users  navigation  patterns,  but  (or  alternatively)  on  the 
similarity  of  the  content  of  the  webpages  as  well.  Some  projects  have  adopted  the 
integration  of  the  similarity  of  the  webpages  content  to  enrich  the  process  of  user 
model construction [6] [19] [9]. SEWeP [9], for example, has as main characteristic 
the  creation  of  C-logs  (concept-logs),  a  semantically  enriched  log  file  based  on  the 
extraction of keywords of the  webpages.  After they  have been found, the  keywords 
are mapped to the concept of a taxonomy created to model the domain concepts. Each 
register  of  log  file  is  improved  with  the  concepts  representing  the  semantic  of  the 
respective  URI.  However,  even  these  systems  may  not  be  able  to  capture  more 
complex relations among the information as, for example, relations originating from a 
deeper  semantic  level,  which  are  based  on  attributes  and  properties  of  the  concepts 
involved.  To  do  so,  a  richer  model  is  necessary,  one  which  is  able  to  represent  the 
semantically richer relations as, for example, a domain ontology. 

In the context of the semantic web [3], webpages must be understood not only by 
people, but also by the  machines, in the  form of computational agents. One  way of 
making this idea viable is through the usage of ontologies associated to the websites 
[12]. These ontologies would permit the software agents to reason about the relations 
of the websites content and, by doing so, to make it possible to improve the attention 
given to the necessities of the user. 

This article suggests an approach to associate the benefits provided by the semantic 
structuring offered by the semantic web proposal, by means of ontologies associated 
to the websites, along with the analyses of the users navigational behaviors, creating 
what is called a semantic log. In this way, it proposes a process of user model creation 
based  on  the  identification  of  possible  interests  of  a  user  when  s/he  is  navigating  a 
website  with  semantic  support.  This  process  is  based  on  the  analyses  of  a  semantic 
log, using the domain ontology available for the website. To do so, an algorithm was 
developed  in  order  to  classify  the  users  intentions.  This  algorithm  is  based  on  the 
idea  that  all  the  concepts  involved  on  the  website  are  candidates  to  be  the  users 
intentions. To determine the real relevancy of each concept, a set of parameters was 
defined  to  ponders  the  influence  of  the  linguistic  control  over  the  users  power  of 
expression in the form of a segmentation of the domain ontology, and the influence of 
a concept in the users interaction applying the idea of cognitive force, derived from 
the  theory  of  spreading  activation  [1]  [2],  and  developed  under  the  cognitive 
psychology to explain how human memory works. 

This  article  is  organized  as  follows.  In  section  2  we  describe  the  algorithm 
responsible  for  identifying  the  possible  users  interests.  In  section  3  we  discusses  a 
comparative analyses done by means of a simulation of the proposed algorithm with 
algorithms  based  on  the  frequency  and  the  classic  algorithm  of  the  Naive  Bayes 
classifier. Finally, section 4 describes the results and our conclusions. 
?

?

?
2   The User Modeling 

The creation a user model is always a very complex task, for the set of parameters to 
be considered is always large. The choice of these parameters along with the machine 
learning  techniques  which  are  applied  makes  the  difference  in  the  quality  of  the 
model. 

To define which parameters should be used in our project we take into account the 
linguistic  and  cognitive  aspects  which  affect  the  users  in  the  expression  of  their 
interests. In this way, we are initially going to discuss the effect that the vocabulary 
available to the user has on his form of expression. Then, we are going to discuss the 
effect that the semantic relationship among the concepts  has on the human  memory 
and  how  that  can  affect  the  users  expression  and  the  identification  of  his  intention 
when navigating a website. 

2.1   The Linguistic Aspects That Affect the User Model 

A  domain  ontology  consists  of  a  set  of  concepts  and  relationships  that  describe  the 
knowledge about a domain of interest. It can also be seen as a vocabulary definer for a 
controlled language that permits the users to express themselves about the domain. 

However, when developing a software application, be it for the desktop or for the 
web, not all the concepts present in the ontology domain needs to be involved.  This 
partition of domain ontology, which we can call the application model, has indirect 
influence on the expression of the users interests about the domain. 

In the case of a website, the problem goes further, for each webpage uses only a 
part of the knowledge contained in the application ontology, limiting even more the 
users power of expression. To reflect this new reduction in the users vocabulary, we 
use  a  presentation  model,  which  represents  the  segmentation  of  the  application 
model, which is presented in each webpage. Thus, the partition of the knowledge for a 
website is structured as illustrated on Fig. 1. 

Fig. 1. Segmentation of knowledge in a web application 

 

It is important to emphasize that, in this project, the presentation model is related, 
mainly,  to  the  information  content  present  in  the  webpages.  It  does  not  take  into 
account the effect that the esthetic presentation has on the users attention and that can 

R.L. Roberto and S.R.P. da Silva 

also  direct  his  intentions.  The  introduction  of  the  presentation  model  tries  to 
contemplate  the  fact  that  a  person  can  only  express  something  for  which  he  has  a 
vocabulary. This fact has an indirect influence on the creation of a model of the users 
interests, but that should be considered. Thus, the presentation model is necessary to 
model the limitations imposed by the language to the users power of expression. 

Trying to consider, partially, the effect that the layout has on the presentation model, 
we have defined a status (S) parameter, in which we isolate three main components in 
a  webpage,  based  on  its  level  of  prominence,  which  are:  the  Main  Menu,  the 
Secondary Menu and the Body of the webpage, as illustrated in Fig. 2. As each 
component  possesses  a  level  of  importance  in  the  webpage,  drawing  the  users 
attention  in  different  forms,  we  attribute  differentiated  weights  for  the  concepts 
involved to each component.  

Fig. 2. Parts of the page with different status 

 

2.2   The Cognitive Aspects That Affect the User Model 

One  of  the  dominant  theories  to  explain  the  semantic  processing  in  the  cognitive 
psychology is known as spreading activation [1] [2] [20]. This theory tries to explain 
how the information recovery of the human brain works [1] [20]. It considers that the 
human  memory  is  organized  in  a  semantic  network  form,  proposing  that  when  a 
concept becomes the focus of our attention all the concepts associated to it are also 
activated. That is to say, the activation of a concept spreads itself to all the concepts 
associated to it.  This activation spreading helps to explain how the remembrance of a 
topic can bring related topic to the mind. 

According  to  Collins  and  Loftus  [7],  to  better  explain  the  cognitive  process  of 
spreading  activation  it  is  also  necessary  to  consider  activation  strength  for  each 
existent association  with the  focus concept. In this  way, it is possible to amplify or 
reduce the cognitive force in the spreading process. 

In this project, the domain ontology, used for the semantic log construction as well 
as the models of application and presentation, is represented by a semantic network 
expressed  in  the  OWL  language  [15]. If  we  considerer  that  by  choosing  a  link  in  a 
semantic website page the user will be activating a concept (the focus concept) in the 
semantic  network  which  composes  it,  it  is  very  reasonable  to  apply  the  concept  of 
cognitive strength and spreading activation to evaluate the real interest of the user. 
?

?

?
2.3   Linking Navigational Patterns and Semantic Content 

Aiming  at  aiding  the  users  intentions  modeling,  in  the  development  of  semantic 
website pages we have adopted a strategy to monitor in a transparent way, the users 
interactions  with  the  website,  creating  a  proper  log  file.  Thus,  each  website  page 
visited  inserts  a  register  in  the  log  file  storing  the  date  and  time  of  access,  and  its 
address. However, in the context of  websites personalization, as  seen in [17], using 
data  originating  from  the  users  navigation  can  bring  difficulties,  especially  when 
there  is  not  enough  data  to  extract  patterns  related  to  certain  domain  categories,  or 
when new website pages are added which have not been visited by the user yet. In this 
way, due to the  fact  that all information on  the  website pages  we are interested are 
based on the domain ontology, the concepts involved in the information of the pages 
visited, also are inserted in the log file, creating what we call a semantic log. Thus, 
the construction of the semantic log associates the semantic information of websites 
content with the users navigation behavior. 

It is important to emphasize that, in the scope of this project; we will be limiting 
our  discussion  to  websites  constituted  of  intranets  portals  which  have  been 
constructed with technology for semantic support since the beginning. We know that 
the treatment of the websites constructed with modern technology is very relevant, but 
it will be the target of this project at the moment. 

2.4   An Identification Algorithm of a Users Interests 

The  algorithm  proposed  here  takes  into  consideration  the  linguistics  and  cognitive 
aspects that influence the process user model creation. Thus, it uses the presentation 
model and the idea of spreading activation, considering the cognitive strength of each 
concept, in order to select the concept that expresses the present users interest.  

The algorithm has as entrance the semantic log and the presentation model of the 
page that the user is in. The presentation model has two functions. The first is taking 
into  account  the  linguistic  limitation  imposed  by  the  content  presented  on  the 
webpage.  As  the  concepts  present  in  it  are  more  strongly  activated  in  the  users 
memory, focusing its scope of expression, they are pondered more strongly than the 
other concepts of application  model,  when determining the probability of a concept 
expresses the users intention. The second is to take into account the cognitive aspect 
of the spreading activation in the human memory. The cognitive strength increases or 
decreases  the  strength  of  the  activation  of  the  concept  in  the  spreading  process.  To 
determine  this  cognitive  strength  for  each  concept  is  necessary  to  determine  the 
following  parameters:  R,  which  define  the  number  of  relations  that  the  concept  in 
question  possesses,  and  S,  that  defines  the  status  of  the  concept  in  the  presentation 
model, as mentioned before in section 2.1. The relations that a concept possesses were 
classified in two groups: #Raplic provides the number of relations with other concepts 
in  the  application  model  (concepts  that  do  not  appear  in  the  presentation  model), 
#Rapress  provides  the  number  of  relations  with  other  concepts  of  the  presentation 
model.  Thus,  the  parameter  R  is  defined  by  the  formula  R=Paplic  #(Raplic).+  Papres 
#(Rapres),  were  px  is  a  specific  weight  for  each  type  of  relation,  respecting  the  first 
function  of  the  presentation  model.  The  parameter  S  is  defined  by  the  position  in 

R.L. Roberto and S.R.P. da Silva 

which the concept occupies in the  webpage layout, as seen in  Fig. 2. The cognitive 
strength of a concept is defined by the formula F = S * R.  

Fig.  3  illustrates  the  parameters  that  must  be  determined  for  any  concept  of 
presentation model during the process of spreading activation. Besides the cognitive 
strength, differentiated weights were defined for three different types of concepts: the 
focus  concept    associated  to  the  link  chosen  by  the  user  and  that,  therefore,  has  a 
high possibility of being his real interest, has a higher value;  the directly connected 
concepts to the focus concept  which have a good probability of being the users real 
interest, have a value dependent on its cognitive strength, as previously defined; and 
the  disconnected  concepts  of  the  focus  concept,  which  are  not  involved  in  the 
spreading  process  and  are  considered  noise  (once  they  do  not  share  the  users 
attention) have a residual value, since they must not be ignored, as it will be shown in 
the Section 3. 

Fig. 3. Parameters in the spreading process 

 

Thus, at each users interaction, represented by a register of the semantic log, the 
algorithm  identifies  the  focus  concept,  the  connected  concept  and  the  noises  in  the 
presentation and application mode and attributes the weights correspondent to each of 
them  and  defines  the  probabilities  of  interest  of  each  concept.  This  probability  is 
defined by the formula: 

(

|

i

...

)

j

= j


=

k

(
Tc

)

k

i

+

(

i

)

k

 

(1) 

where: 

  P = probability of users interest to a determined concept; 
  C = the concept in question among all the domain ontology concepts; 
 
 

I = the present interaction in the semantic log;  
?

?

?
  Tc = the value correspondent to the type of concept (Focus Concept, Directly 

Connected Focus and Disconnected Concept); 

  F  =  the  cognitive  strength  of  concept  (F  =  0,  if  the  type  of  concept  is  a 

Disconnected Concept). 

To obtain the concept that represents the greater interest the following formula is 

used: 

max(

arg
i

(

|

i

...

))

j

(2) 

where I varies for all the concepts and j is the total of interactions. In this way, the 
algorithm keeps an updated list of the concepts with their respective probabilities of 
interest.  

3   An Evaluation of the Proposed Algorithm  

In this section we present an experimental study based on simulated empiric tests, in 
which navigations are defined with pre-defined interests. The objective of these tests 
is  to  verify  the  validity  of  the  approach  of  semantic  knowledge  integration  to 
navigation  data  in  the  identification  process  of  the  users  interests,  considering  the 
linguistics and cognitive aspects of the process of user model creation. 

To compare our results, tests were also performed using classification algorithms 
based on frequency and on a Bayesian approach. It is important to emphasize that the 
parameters  used  on  the  proposed  approach  were  defined  in  an  empiric  form. 
However, as future work, we intended to develop a learning algorithm to identify their 
ideal values. 

Thus,  in  the  Bayesian  approach,  we  have  used  the  Naive  Bayes  Classifier 
algorithm,  using  just  positive  learning  examples,  since  it  is  not  possible  to  obtain 
negative  examples  in  this  case  without  an  explicit  intervention  of  the  user.  The 
positive examples were extracted by means of the simulated semantic log, in which 
each  entrance  was  considered  as  a  positive  example.  In  the  classification  approach 
based  on  frequency,  just  the  frequency  of  visits  to  the  webpage  is  considered. 
However, as the frequency is obtained by means of semantic log, it will be considered 
in fact the frequency of concepts involved on the webpage. 

For the execution of the tests a semantic website was developed for the Computer 
Department  of  the  State  University  of  Maringa,  in  which  the  navigations  were 
applied.  For  each  navigation,  one  hundred  interactions  with  their  respective  interest 
concepts were defined. As the result of navigating in the semantic website, a semantic 
log was generated and departing from it, and from the presentation model, the three 
approach previously mentioned were applied.  

In the tests, each navigation was defined to characterize a determined interest. As 
an  example,  the  objective  of  one  of  the  pre-defined  navigation  was  to  search  for 
publications  and  events  in  which  some  professors  are  involved.  To  find  the 
desired  professor  it  is  necessary  to  access  the  research  projects  in  which  s/he  takes 
part.  When  the  professor  is  found,  her/his  publications  as  well  the  events  in  which 
s/he  took  part  can  be  visualized.  In  this  example,  the  greatest  concentration  of 
accesses will be found in the process of searching the professor, that is to say, most of  

R.L. Roberto and S.R.P. da Silva 

 

Fig. 4. Interests Percentages progress in the navigation for the algorithm based on frequency 

the accessed pages belong to the professors. In this way, the concepts pre-defined as 
of greater navigation interest were Professor, Publication and Event.  

The Bayesian classification approach and the frequency-based approach, presented 
similar  results.  In  the  frequency-based  classification,  the  concepts  identified  as  of 
greater  interest  are  the  concepts  involved  on  the  most  accessed  webpages.  Thus, 
initially we had a very high value (100%) for the concept Research Project and a 
null value for the others, with a better convergence for the real value with the increase 
of interactions number, as illustrated in Fig. 4. In the Bayesian classification, this total 
preference  for  just  one  concept  is  corrected,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  5,  for  the  Naive 
Bayes Classifier considers a similar probability for all concepts in the beginning, but 
with  the  increase  in  the  interactions  number  its  classification  converge  to  the  same 
result. 

Thus,  both  approach  identified  the  same  pre-defined  concept  for  the  navigation, 
that  is:  Professor,  Publication  and  Event,  as  being  the  ones  of  the  users 
greatest interests. The Professor concept becomes the users greatest interest. This 
happens  due  to  the  high  access  to  the  professors  pages.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
frequency-based  classification  do  not  take  into  account  all  the  concepts  involved  in 
the  webpage,  which  were  not accessed, attributing a  null value to the percentage of 
interest. The same happens in the Bayesian classification, however it attributes a very 
small value to the percentage of interest, as illustrated in Fig. 6. 
?

?

?
Fig. 5. Interest Percentage Progress in the navigation for the Bayesian algorithm 

 

 

Fig.  6.  Preferences  resulted  from  the  Bayesian,  the  Frequency-based  and  the  Proposed 
algorithm 

One  characteristic,  which  we  consider  negative  in  these  two  approaches,  is  that 
they  do  not  take  into  account  the  concepts  involved  on  the  webpages  that  were  not 
accessed  yet.  These  concepts  have  a  great  semantic  relation  to  the  present  users 
interest  concepts  and,  due  to  that  semantic  proximity,  can  be  good  candidates  to 
become the users interest focus in a posterior navigation. 

Our  algorithm  also  identified  as  main  users  interest  the  concepts  that  were  predefined  for  the  navigation,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  7,  however  we  have  found  some 
interesting differences. 

R.L. Roberto and S.R.P. da Silva 

 

Fig.  7. Progress  in  the  percentage  of  interest  in  the  navigation  when  applied  to  the  proposed 
algorithm 

First,  the  Publication  concept  was  identified  as  being  of  the  users  greater 
interest,  even  having  the  less  access  number  in  the  navigation.  This  fact  is  very 
relevant, considering that during the navigation, the process of searching the professor 
is secondary, for s/he is only the way to find the Publications and Events of the 
desired  professor.  In  this  way,  taking  in  to  account  the  linguistics  and  cognitive 
aspects  of  the  process  of  user  model  creation,  the  proposed  algorithm  was  able  to 
identify this semantic relation and ponder on the Publication concept (according to 
its cognitive strength) each time that the Professor concept was accessed. As can be 
seen in Fig. 6, the difference between the percentage of interest of the Publication 
and  Professor  concepts  became  small  which  confirms  an  equivalent  interest 
between  the  concepts.  The  same  do  not  happen  in  the  other  approaches,  in  which 
there is a considerable difference between the Publication and Professor concepts. 
Secondly,  we  can  observe  that  the  percentages  graphic  suffers  a  flattening.  This 
phenomenon can be explained by the fact that in our algorithm, the concepts involved 
on  the  non-accessed  pages  were  also  considered,  this  occurs  due  to  their  semantic 
relations  with  the  concepts  of  greater  interest  and  their  cognitive  strength.  This 
consideration  of  the  concepts  which  do  not  appear  directly  on  the  pages  raises  the 
percentage of interest for these concepts and permits a faster response to the changes 
of the users future interests. 
?

?

?
Finally,  we  can  consider  that  the  results  of  this  experiment  were  satisfactory, 
conforming our expectations that the use of the cognitive and linguistics aspects make 
a great difference in determining the users intention 

4   Conclusion and Future Projects 

In this article, we present an approach to integrate semantic knowledge and navigation 
data  in  the  process  of  identification  of  possible  users  interests.  For  this,  we  have 
created  a  semantic  log  associating  navigational  patterns  to  concepts  defined  in  a 
domain ontology. We have developed an algorithm using the linguistics and cognitive 
aspects  that  affect  the  process  of  user  models  creation.  We  identified  that  the  form 
with  which  the  concepts  are  disposed  in  the  webpages,  limit  the  users  capacity  of 
choice,  influencing  indirectly  the  expression  of  her/his  interests.  In  this  way  we 
consider  the  effect  that  the  segmentation  of  the  application  model,  i.e.,  the 
presentation  model,  has  over  the  concepts  presented  in  the  webpages.  The 
presentation  models  along  with  the  semantic  log  act  as  the  basis  for  the  proposed 
algorithm.  In  order  to  take  into  account  the  way  the  concepts  are  organized  in  the 
human  memory,  and  how  the  remembrance  of  a  certain  concept  can  bring  to  the 
memory the related concepts, we apply the idea of spreading activation and cognitive 
strength, to consider the degree of relevance of the concepts in the knowledge model. 
In  our  analysis  of  the  proposed  approach,  our  algorithm  presented  very  positive 
aspects 
to  other  well  known  approaches  (the  Frequency-based 
classification and the Bayesian classification and the). One of the relevant points was 
to make it possible to identify a concept that has not had the largest number of access 
as being it the concept of greatest interests by the user. This behavior shows that the 
spreading  activation  considered  with  the  different  status  of  the  accessed  concepts, 
defined by the presentation model, permits the compensating the deviation caused by 
greater  number  of  access  resulted  from  a  secondary  path  used  to  achieve  the  main 
objective. This does not happen in the other approaches, in which these concepts have 
a considerable difference of percentage of interest, in which the concept with greater 
number  of  access  prevails.    Another  important  fact  is  the  determination  of  greater 
values for the probability of the non-visible concepts, which makes possible to obtain 
a better answer in the change of the users interests possible. 

in  relation 

This  article  also  shows  interesting  research  problems  to  be  discussed  and  future 
projects.  Most  urgent  among  them  is  the  development  of  learning  techniques  to 
identify ideal values of the parameters for the cognitive strength consideration and of 
the individual values of the different types of concepts. We also envisage a great deal 
of work to be done to consider the influence of the aesthetic aspects of the webpages. 

Acknowledgements 

Special  thanks  to  CNPq    (Scientific  and  Technological  Development  National 
Counsel for financial support to the Post Graduation in Computer Science Program of 
the State University of Maringa - UEM). 

R.L. Roberto and S.R.P. da Silva 
