A Semantic Web Service Oriented Framework for 

Adaptive Learning Environments 

Stefan Dietze, Alessio Gugliotta, and John Domingue 

Knowledge Media Institute 

Open University 

Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK 

{s.dietze,a.gugliotta,j.b.domingue}@open.ac.uk 

Abstract.  The  current  state  of  the  art  in  supporting  e-learning  objectives  is 
primarily based on providing a learner with learning content by using metadata 
standards. Due to this approach, several issues have to be taken into account  e. 
g. limited re-usability across different standards and learning contexts and high 
development  costs.  To  overcome  these  issues,  this  paper  describes  an 
innovative  semantic  web  service-oriented  framework  aimed  at  changing  this 
data-  and  metadata-based  paradigm  to  a  highly  dynamic  service-oriented 
approach. Instead of providing a learner with static data, our approach is based 
on  fulfilling  learning  objectives  based  on  a  dynamic  supply  of  services. 
Therefore, we introduce a semantic layer architecture to abstract from existing 
learning  data  as  well  as  process  metadata  standards  by  using  Semantic  Web 
Service (SWS) technology. Furthermore, our approach is based on abstract and 
reusable learning process models describing a learning process semantically as 
a composition of learning goals. Based on the formal semantic descriptions of 
learning goals as well as web services, services appropriate to achieve a specific 
learning  goal  can  be  selected,  composed  and  invoked  dynamically.  This 
supports  a  high  level  of  re-usability  since  a  dynamic  adaptation  to  different 
learning  contexts  and  requirements  of  individual  learners  is  achieved  while 
utilizing standard-compliant learning applications. To illustrate the application 
of  our  approach,  we  describe  a  prototypical  implementation  utilizing  the 
introduced approach based on the SWS framework WSMO.  

Keywords: Semantic Web Services, Service oriented Architecture, WSMO, E-
Learning, IRS III, IMS Learning Design. 

1   Introduction 

Current  approaches  to  support  a  learning  objective  are  fundamentally  based  on 
providing a learner with appropriate learning content  the so called learning objects. 
Composite learning objects contain the learning resources - the physical data assets  
as  well  as  a  description  of  the  learning  process  to  be  followed  by  the  learner.  The 
latter usually is based on existing metadata standards - IEEE LOM [9], ADL SCORM 
[1]    based  on  IMS  Simple  Sequencing  -  or  IMS  Learning  Design  (IMS  LD)  [15].  
Due to the approach of allocating learning resources  whether services or data - at 

E. Franconi, M. Kifer, and W. May (Eds.): ESWC 2007, LNCS 4519, pp. 701715, 2007. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 

S. Dietze, A. Gugliotta, and J. Domingue 

design-time  of  a  learning  process  model,  the  actual  learning  context    known  at 
runtime only  cannot be considered. This means, a new learning content package has 
to be developed for every different learning scenario or individual needs of specific 
learners.  For  instance,  a  package  suiting  the  needs  of  a  learner  with  specific 
preferences  e. g. his native language or technological platform - can suit only this 
specific  requirements  and  cannot  be  reused  across  different  learning  contexts.  The 
identified limitations (cf. [2], [16], [6]) can be summarized as follows: 

L1.  Limited appropriateness and dynamic adaptability to actual learning contexts. 
It is assumed that every learning objective occurs in a specific context which is 
defined by e. g. the preferences of the actual learner. Learning data is allocated 
at design-time what limits the appropriateness of the data to the actual learning 
context. Moreover, the use of data excludes the dynamic adaptability a priori. 
In parallel to data-centric approaches, analogous issues can also be observed 
with  service-oriented  approaches.  However,  in  that  case,  these  issues  are 
related to the allocation of services only. 

L2.  Limited reusability across different learning contexts and metadata standards. 
Due to L1, for every different learning context having distinct requirements or 
learner  needs  a  new  learning  content  package  has  to  be  developed.  Since 
metadata is described based on standard-specific specifications, an individual 
content package cannot be reused across different standards. Besides that, the 
current  approach  limits  opportunities  for  reusing  available  learning  data  and 
service repositories. 

L3.  High development costs. Due to L1 and L2, high development costs have to be 
taken into account when developing standard-compliant E-Learning packages.  

To overcome these issues, the approach described in this paper changes this data- and 
metadata-based paradigm to a dynamic service-oriented approach based on Semantic 
Web Service (SWS) technologies.  

SWS are aimed at enabling a automatic discovery, composition and invocation of 
available Web services. Based on semantic descriptions of functional capabilities of 
available  Web  services,  a  SWS  broker  automatically  selects  and  invokes  Web 
services appropriate to achieve a given goal.    

IRS-III [5], the Internet Reasoning Service, is an implementation of a SWS broker 
environment.  It  provides  the  representational  and  reasoning  mechanisms,  which 
enable the dynamic interoperability and orchestration between services as well as the 
mediation between their semantic concepts. IRS-III utilizes a SWS library based on 
the  reference  ontology  Web  Service  Modelling  Ontology  (WSMO)  [26]  and  the 
OCML representation language [7] to store semantic descriptions of Web services and 
knowledge domains.  

WSMO is a formal ontology for describing the various aspects of services in order 
to  enable  the  automation  of  Web  service  discovery,  composition,  mediation  and 
invocation. The  meta-model  of WSMO defines  four top level elements: Ontologies, 
Goals,  Web  Services  and  Mediators.  Whereas  Ontologies  describe  the  terminology 
and  its  semantics  used  by  Web  Services,  Web  Service  descriptions  describe  the 
capabilities  and  interfaces  of  a  particular  service.  Moreover,  Goals  describe  a  task 
from a user perspective and Mediators handle data and process interoperability issues  
?

?

?
that arise when handling heterogeneous systems. As a result, we enable the automatic 
allocation of the adequate services at runtime  not only data  and the integration of 
a wide variety of learning resources  whether data or services.  

The  following  section  of  the  paper  outlines  the  issues  of  current  learning 
technologies  which  are  addressed  with  this  paper.  Section  3  then  describes  our 
approach of using a SWS oriented architecture to support learning processes followed 
by a section describing our ontological framework. The fifth section explains a SWS 
oriented  architecture  implemented  as  a  first  prototype  and  the  used  development 
principles. Finally,  we summarize the contributions of our  work, draw a conclusion 
and provide an outlook to future work related to our approach. 

2   Related Work 

Several  approaches  follow  the  idea  of  using  semantic  Web  or  Web  service 
technologies  to  provide  dynamic  as  well  as  personalized  support  for  learning 
objectives.  

To quote a few examples, [16] as well as [3] are concerned with bridging learning 
contexts  and  resources  by  introducing  semantic  learning  context  descriptions.  This 
allows  the  adaptation  to  different  contexts  based  on  reasoning  over  the  provided 
context  ontologies,  but  does  not  provide  solutions  for  building  complex  adaptive 
learning applications by reusing distributed learning functionalities. Moreover, [16] is 
entirely based on IMS LD. 

[4] follows the idea of using a dedicated personalization web service which makes 
use  of  semantic  learning  object  descriptions  to  identify  and  provide  appropriate 
learning  content.  Integration  of  several  distributed  learning  services  or  service 
allocation at runtime is not within the scope of this approach. The related research on 
a  Personal  Reader  Framework  (PRF)  introduced  in  [8],  [13]  and  [14]  allows  a 
mediaton  between  different  services  based  on  a  socalled  connector  service.  The 
composition  of  complex  learning  applications  based  on  distributed  services  is  not 
within the scope of the PRF.  

The  work  described  in  [22],  [23]  utilize  semantic  web  as  well  as  web  service 
technologies  to  enable  adaptation  to  different  learning  contexts  by  introducing  a 
matching mechanism to map between a context and available learning data. However, 
neither  it  considers  approaches  for  automatic  service  discovery  nor  it  is  based  on 
common standards. Hence, the reuse and automatic allocation of a variety of services 
or the mediation between different metadata standards is not supported. These issues 
apply to the idea of Smart Spaces for learning as well (cf. [24]). 

Whereas the majority of the described approaches enable context-adaptation based 
on  runtime  allocation  of  learning  data,  all  of  them  do  not  enable  the  automatic 
allocation  of  learning  functionalities  neither  it  does  enable  the  integration  of  new 
functionalities based on open standards. Nevertheless, all approaches do not envisage 
mappings between different learning metadata standards to enable interoperability not 
only between learning contexts but also between platforms and metadata standards.  

S. Dietze, A. Gugliotta, and J. Domingue 

3   Semantic Web Service Based E-Learning Applications: Vision 

and Approach 

This section describes our vision as well as the approach to support e-learning based 
on semantic web services. 

3.1   Vision: Context-Adaptation Through Automatic Service Selection and 

Invocation 

To  overcome  the  limitations  described  above,  we  consider  the  automatic  allocation 
and  invocation  of  functionalities  at  runtime.  A  typical  learning  related  service 
functionality  provides  the  learner  for  instance  with  appropriate  learning  content  or 
topic-specific  discussion  facilities.  Learning  processes  are  described  semantically  in 
terms of a composition of user objectives (goals) and abstract from specific data and 
metadata  standards.  When  a  specific  learning  goal  has  to  be  achieved,  the  most 
adequate  functionality  is  selected  and  invoked  dynamically  regarding  the  demands 
and  requirements  of  the  actual  specific  context.  This  enables  a  highly  dynamic 
adaptation to different learning contexts and learner needs. 

This vision is radically distinctive to the current state of the art in this area, since it 
shifts  from  a  data-  and  metadata-centric  paradigm  to  a  context-adaptive  serviceoriented  approach.  Moreover,  using  adequate  mappings,  our  standard-independent 
process models can be translated into existing metadata standards in order to enable a 
reuse within existing standard-compliant runtime environments.  

Addressing  the  limitations  L1  and  L2  identified  in  Section  0,  we  consequently 
reduce  the  efforts  of  creating  learning  process  models  (L3):  one  unique  learning 
process  model  can  adapt  dynamically  to  different  process  contexts  and  can  be 
translated into different process metadata standards. 

 3.2   Approach: Semantic Abstraction from Process Metadata, Functionalities 

and Data 

Our  approach  is  fundamentally  based  on  utilizing  SWS  technologies  to  realize  the 
following principles. To support these principles, we introduce several layers as well 
as a mapping between them in order to achieve a gradual abstraction (Figure 1). 

1.  Abstraction  from  Learning  Data  and  Functionalities.  To  abstract  from 
existing learning data and content we consider a Web Service Layer. It operates 
on  top  of  the  data  and  exposes  the  functionalities  appropriate  to  fulfill  specific 
learning  objectives.  This  first  step  enables  a  dynamic  supply  of  appropriate 
learning data to suit a specific context and objective. Web services at this layer 
may  make  use  of  semantic  descriptions  of  available  learning  data.  In  order  to 
abstract  from  these  functionalities  (Web  services),  we  introduce  an  additional 
layer    the  Semantic  Web  Service  Layer.  This  layer  enables  the  automatic 
selection, composition and invocation of appropriate Web services for a specific 
learning  context.  This  is  achieved  on  the  basis  of  formal  semantic,  declarative 
descriptions  of  the  capabilities  of  available  services  which  enable  the  dynamic 
matching of service capabilities to specific user goals. 
?

?

?
2.  Abstraction from Learning Process Metadata. A first layer concerned with the 
abstraction  from  current  learning  process  metadata  standards  is  the  Semantic 
Learning Process Model Layer. It allows the description of processes within the 
domain of E-Learning in terms of higher level domain concepts - e. g. learning 
goals,  learners  or  learning  contexts.  This  layer  is  mapped  to  semantic 
representations  of  current  learning  metadata  standards  in  order  to  enable  the 
interoperability  between  different  standards.  To  achieve  a  further  abstraction 
from domain  specific process  models   whether it is e. g.  a learning process, a 
business  process  or  a  communication  process    we  consider  an  upper  level 
process  model  layer    Semantic  Process  Model  Layer.  For  instance,  this  layer 
supports  the  mapping  between  learning  objectives  and  business  objectives  to 
support all kind of organizational processes. 

 

Learning  
Designer 

Learning 
Service 
Provider 

Learning Metadata Standard Layer 

Learner 

 

Process Metadata Abstraction 

mapping 

Semantic Learning Process Model Layer 

mapping 

Semantic Process Model Layer 

mapping 

Semantic Web Service Layer 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Abstraction

Web Service Layer 

mapping 

uses 

Learning Data Layer 

 

Fig. 1. Semantic layer architecture for supporting learning processes through SWS 

Based  on  mappings  between  the  described  layers,  upper  level  layers  can  utilize 
information  at  lower  level  layers.  In  particular,  we  consider  mappings  between  a 
learning  objective  and  a  WSMO  goal  to  enable  the  automatic  discovery  and 
invocation  of  a  Web  service  (Web  Service  Layer)  from,  for  instance,  a  standardcompliant learning application (Learning Application Standard Layer). As a result, a 
dynamic  adaptation  to  individual  demands  of  a  learner  within  a  specific  learning 
context  is  achieved  by  using  existing  standard-compliant  learning  applications.  It  is 
important  to  note,  that  we  explicitly  consider  mappings  not  only  between  multiple 
semantic layers but also within a specific semantic layer.  

S. Dietze, A. Gugliotta, and J. Domingue 

4   The Ontological Framework  

This  section  describes  an  ontological  framework  aimed  at  implementing  the 
introduced semantic layers. 

4.1   Staged Ontological Mapping 

To implement the described semantic layer architecture, we follow an approach of a 
staged ontological mapping between semantic models of a process at different levels 
of  abstraction.  Therefore,  our  approach  considers  different  ontologies  aimed  at 
providing abstract semantic descriptions of data as well as processes.  

The  following  figure  gives  an  overview  of  the  main  ontological  representations 

considered in our approach as well as their relationships: 

Fig. 2. Conceptual overview of proposed ontological framework 

 

To enable mappings between different learning metadata standards, a higher level 
ontology is introduced, to model the learning process from a general point of view - 
independent  from  any  supported  platform  or  learning  technology  standard.  This 
Learning  Process  Modelling  Ontology  (LPMO)  implements  the  Semantic  Learning 
Process Model Layer and is mapped to ontological representations of learning process 
models based on current e-learning metadata standards. Currently, representations of 
the following metadata standards are foreseen: adlScormO (The ADL SCORM 2004 
Ontology);  imsLdO  (The  IMS  Learning  Design  Ontology);  ieeeLomO  (The  IEEE 
LOM Ontology). 
?

?

?
The  next  level  in  our  staged  mapping  approach  abstracts  from  the  specialised 
process  e.g. learning process or business process  to a  general process ontology. 
This is the Upper Process Ontology (UPO) which implements our Semantic Process 
Model Layer and is currently being developed as part of the SUPER project [25]. The 
UPO enables the description of a process independent from its specific purpose and 
can  be  mapped  to  domain  specific  process  ontologies,  e.  g.  the  LPMO.  In  order  to 
enable a high level of interoperability of our ontologies, we intend to align the LPMO 
as  well  as  the  UPO  to  the  DOLCE  foundational  ontology  [12]  as  well  as  to  the 
DOLCE Descriptions and Situations ontology (DDnS) [11].  

Furthermore,  the  UPO  is  mapped  to  the  WSMO  standard.  Therefore,  a  gradual 
mapping  between  a  standard  learning  application  and  WSMO  entities  is  achieved 
based on these ontologies. It  has to be highlighted, that our ontological architecture 
explicitly  considers  mappings  not  only  between  several  semantic  layers  but  also 
within a specific semantic layer. This enables for example the mapping of our LPMO 
concepts  to  other  existing  semantic  descriptions  of  learning  related  concepts. 
Furthermore, it has to be taken into account that the proposed ontologies are currently 
implemented only partially, since this work is ongoing research at the moment. 

4.2   Semantic Learning Process Model Layer 

From an e-learning perspective, the LPMO has to be perceived as the central ontology 
within our architecture, since it describes the semantics of a learning process from a  

 

Fig. 3. Conceptual model of parts of the LPMO and key mappings to the UPO and the WSMO 
framework  

S. Dietze, A. Gugliotta, and J. Domingue 

general  point  of  view  and  independent  from  any  supported  platform  or  learning 
technology  standard.  Figure  3  depicts  an  extract  of  the  proposed  LPMO  containing 
some  of  its  main  concepts  as  well  as  some  mappings  to  some  key  concepts  within 
different semantic layers.  

As  shown  below,  a  learning  objective  as  defined  in  the  LPMO  is  mapped  to  a 
upo:Goal    which  represents  a  central  concept  within  the  Semantic  Process  Model 
Layer.  This  concept  is  furthermore  mapped  to  the  wsmo:Goal  concept  which 
represents one of the main concepts of the Semantic Web Service Layer and enables 
the  mapping  and  matching  of  appropriate  web  services.  Besides  the  proposed 
mappings  between  several  semantic  layers,  mappings  are  also  considered  within  a 
specific layer to enable a wide applicability of our approach. E. g. semantic concepts 
of  our  LPMO  can  be  mapped  to  other  existing  semantic  concepts  representing 
learning-related entities within different approaches  e. g. learning process modules 
as defined in [19], [17].   

5   A SWS Based Framework for E-Learning - Prototype 

Application Based on IMS Learning Design and WSMO 

In  order  to  validate  the  technical  feasibility  of  the  described  approach,  a  first 
prototype was implemented. In this section, we describe an application based on IMS 
Learning  Design  as  well  as  the  WSMO  framework.  The  application  implements  an 
initial  use  case  by  utilizing  the  semantic  layers  and  fundamental  concepts  as 
introduced in 3.2.  

5.1   Use Case: An Adaptive IMS LD Learning Package to Support Language 

Learning 

Within our supported scenario, several learners request to  learn different languages: 
English, German and Italian. It is assumed, that all learners have different preferences 
 e.g. their  spoken native language or  technical environment. Following the current 
approach  of  creating  standard-compliant  learning  content  packages,  for  every 
individual learner a specific package would have to be created in order to achieve a 
high  level  of  appropriateness  to  the  individual  learner  needs.  Based  on  our 
application, we enable all learners to use the same learning content package  an IMS 
LD compliant content package. This is achieved by enabling a dynamic adaptation to 
the  individual  learner  requirements  based  on  a  dynamic  selection  and  invocation  of 
semantic web services at runtime.   

For  example,  a  learner  is  authenticated  as  a  person  with  the  native  language 
English and wants to learn the language German. By following a learning process 
as defined in the content package, the learner will be provided with learning content 
appropriate to his specific native language as well as his current learning objective  
an English-based online learning unit aimed at teaching the German language. Due to 
the dynamic adaptation at runtime, the standard-compliant learning process could suit  
 
?

?

?
all  kind  of  different  individual  requirements.  Since  our  approach  is  fundamentally 
based on the principles described in section 0, this scenario could be extended in the 
future  to  achieve  a  dynamic  adaptation  to  all  kind  of  different  learning  contexts  or 
learner requirements. 

5.2   A SWS Oriented Architecture 

To implement a software architecture aimed at supporting our semantic web service 
based approach, several dedicated software layers have to be provided. The following 
figure illustrates the SWS oriented architecture for e-learning which is utilized in the 
prototype application: 

Learners 

IMSLD Application 

Developers 

WSMO Web  

Service Developers 

SWSOA for E-Learning 

IMSLD Runtime Environment  

Reload IMSLD Player 

IMSLD Application Authoring  

Reload IMSLD Editor  

Ontology / SWS Development  
WSMO Studio, IRS III Browser 

SWS Environment IRS III 

Invocation Engine 

WSMO Library 

Choreography 

Interpreter 

Orchestration 

Interpreter 

WSMO Goals  

WSMO Services  

Mediation Handler 

WSMO Ontologies  

WSMO Mediators  

SOAP Handler 

Learning WS Library 

(External) 

Learning WS Library 

(Internal) 

Semantic Learning Metadata 

(External) 

Learning Content 

(External) 

Semantic Learner Profiles 

(Internal) 

 

Fig. 4. SWS-based software architecture as utilized in the prototype application  

The  architecture  depicted  above  is  fundamentally  based  on  the  semantic  layers 
described in section 3.2. In the figure, a SWS broker based on the WSMO framework 
serves  as  foundation  for  a  dynamic  selection,  composition  and  invocation  of  web 
services.  Services  are  distributed  across  different  external  repositories  and  provide 
functionalities based on existing learning data and metadata repositories. In addition, 
several user interfaces for developing and presenting learning applications as well as 
for developing formal semantic descriptions of web services are utilized. Our current 
implementation makes use of standard runtime environments and implements a SWS 
oriented architecture based on these infrastructural components. For WSMO runtime 
processing as well as development environment for WSMO, the SWS broker IRS III  

S. Dietze, A. Gugliotta, and J. Domingue 

[5] is used,  whereas editing and runtime processing of IMS LD is supported by the 
Reload Learning Design Editor and Player [21].  

5.3   Implementation Approach 

To  support  the  described  scenario  based  on  an  SWS-based  approach  the  following 
items had to be provided: 
  An  IMS  LD-compliant  content  package  describing  the  learning  activities  and 

objectives 

  Web services able to achieve the objectives 
  Semantic descriptions of available services based on WSMO 
  Ontologies implementing the semantic layers as described above 
  Mappings between the semantic layers as well as the IMS LD standard. 

As starting point, initial semantic representations of the LPMO, IMS LD as well as 
utilized content objects were provided in terms of OCML [7] ontologies to implement 
the  Semantic  Learning  Process  Model  Layer.  To  support  individual  learner 
preferences,  we  particularly  consider  semantic  learner  profiles  which  describe  the 
native language of every learner. 

The  web  services  utilized  in  this  demonstrator  were  partly  developed  within  the 
LUISA  project  [18]  which  is  aimed  at  providing  innovative  learning  content 
management technologies based on a SWS oriented architecture. Additional services 
were  provided  to  support  e.  g.  the  authentication  of  the  learner,  the  retrieval  of 
semantic learner profiles or the retrieval of learning content. In addition, the mappings 
between  the  semantic  layers  were  implemented  as  web  services    e.  g.  a  mapping 
between the Semantic Web Service Layer and the Semantic Learning Process Model 
Layer.  

Besides that, a learning process was described based on the IMS LD standard and 
included  into  a  IMS  Content  Package.  The  learning  process  in  our  example  defines 
some  learning  activities  (imsld:Activities)  as  well  as  corresponding  sequencing 
information.  Instead  of  grounding  these  activities  to  static  learning  data,  no  static 
resources  were  associated  with  this  learning  process.  In  contrast,  only  references  to 
the  described  WSMO-Goals  were  associated  with  every  learning  activity  within  the 
IMS LD metadata. At runtime, a WSMO-Goal then dynamically invokes a WSMOweb service which shows the appropriate capabilities to achieve the specific goal. The 
mapping between the IMS LD metadata and appropriate WSMO-Goals was achieved 
by  associating  IMS  LD  learning  activities  with  HTTP-references  to  a  web  applet 
enabling to request the achievement of a specific WSMO-goal from the SWS broker.  

5.4   Ontological Mappings  

As  described  above,  we  created  mappings  between  the  initial  implementations  of 
semantic  representations  of  the  IMS  LD  standard,  the  LPMO  and  WSMO.  This  
 
?

?

?
includes  e.  g.  a  mapping  between  the  lpmo:Objective  and  the  objective  description 
used within the IMS LD metadata (imsld:Objective). Furthermore, semantic learning 
object descriptions based on the LPMO are mapped to learning content provided by 
the  Open  Learn  Project  [20]  based  on  an  initial  ontology  representing  this  specific 
learning content objects. Besides that, a web service implements the mapping between 
the language of a content object (ol:Language) and the native language of the learner 
(lpmo:Language).  

It has to be highlighted, that our current prototype does not implement the mapping 
to  the  UPO.  Instead  of  that,  our  learning  process  was  mapped  directly  to  WSMO, 
since the UPO currently is not supported by any software RTE. The following figure 
depicts the main ontological mappings as implemented in our prototype: 

Fig. 5. Ontological mappings implemented and utilized in the prototype 

 

5.5   Dynamic Adaptation at Runtime 

In  our  example  scenario,  several  web  services  are  invoked  to  retrieve  semantic 
learning  metadata,  learner  profile  descriptions  and  e-learning  content  as  well  as  to 
map  between  different  semantic  concepts.  An  initial  service  first  authenticates  the 
learner  and  retrieves  the  semantic  learner  profile  description.  After  providing  an 
individual  objective,  our  application  dynamically  selects  and  invokes  semantic  web 
services appropriate to the individual learner preferences and his specific objectives  
as defined in the IMS LD metadata. 

learner 

For  example,  a 

is  authenticated  as  an  English-speaking  person 
(lpmo:Language=English)  and  uses  an  IMSLD  package  to  learn  the  language 
German.  Therefore,  an  imsld:Activity  with  the  imsld:Objective  Learn  German  is 
mapped to a WSMO-goal to achieve this learning activity. This triggers the selection, 
orchestration  and  invocation  of  different  web  services  to  achieve  the  described 
mappings  and  to  retrieve  appropriate  learning  content.  The  following  OCML  code  

S. Dietze, A. Gugliotta, and J. Domingue 

listing  shows  the  partial  capability  description  of  a  web  service  able  to  provide 
learning content to teach the language German:   

 (DEF-CLASS ACHIEVE-IMSLD-OBJECTIVE-GERMAN-WS-CAPABILITY 
   (CAPABILITY) 
   ?CAPABILITY 

     ((USED-MEDIATOR :VALUE ACHIEVE IMSLD-OBJECTIVE-GERMAN-MED) 

   (HAS-ASSUMPTION 
             :VALUE 
             (KAPPA 

(?WEB-SERVICE) (= (WSMO-ROLE-VALUE ?WEB-
SERVICE 'HAS-IMSLD-OBJECTIVE)"Learn 
German")))  

(HAS-NON-FUNCTIONAL-PROPERTIES :VALUE ACHIEVE-IMSLD-
OBJECTIVE-GERMAN-WS-CAPABILITY-NON-FUNCTIONAL-
PROPERTIES))) 

Listing 1. Partial source code of a web service capability description 

In the listing above, a WSMO description defines the assumption of a web service 
that the objective provided by the IMS LD package has the Value Learn German. 
The imsld-Objective is furthermore mapped to the lpmo:Objective concept in order to 
invoke  another  service  for  retrieving  semantic  metadata  of  an  appropriate  learning 
object based on the lpmo:Objective. The retrieved object identifier is used to obtain 
an  Open  Learn  object  appropriate  to  the  individual  language  of  the  learner  and  its 
current objective. An appropriate learning object is then presented dynamically in the 
IMS LD runtime environment.  

Figure 6 depicts a screenshot of the  Reload IMS  LD Player  while presenting the 
developed standard-compliant IMS Content Package and dynamically invoking SWS 
appropriate to fulfill the given learning objective Learn German. 

Fig. 6. Reload IMS Learning Design Player while dynamically invoking SWS for e-learning 

 
?

?

?
The  current  prototype  implements  the  basic  approach  of  a  standard-compliant 
SWSOA for e-learning as described here, and will be extended in the future in order 
to  address  existing  limitations.  Furthermore,  the  described  approach  was  already 
applied to another e-learning standard - ADL SCORM 2004. 

6   Conclusions 

Our approach - the support of learning objectives based on a dynamic invocation of 
SWS at runtime of a learning process model - follows an innovative approach and is 
distinctive to the current state of the art in this area. By using semantic web as well as 
SWS technology this approach overcomes the limitations described in Section 0 and 
provides  a  high  level  of  openness  to  reuse  existing  service  and  data  repositories. 
Based on existing standards  SWS as  well as E-Learning standards - new  learning 
data  as  well  as  application  functionalities  can  be  integrated  by  our  SWS  oriented 
architecture. Furthermore, a high level of standard-compliancy and re-usability within 
existing runtime environments is supported. In particular, the following contributions 
should be taken into account: 
  Dynamic adaptation to specific learning contexts at runtime 
  Reuse and integration of available learning resources  services and data 
  Automatic allocation of learning resources based on comprehensive semantics 
  High reusability across learning contexts 
  Platform- and standard-independence 
  Decrease of development costs 

Furthermore,  our  approach  can  lead  to  contributions  for  developing  domainspecific  SWS  applications  in  general,  since  we  consider  mappings  between  the 
WSMO  standard  and  higher-level  process  modeling  as  well  as  learning  process 
modeling  standards.  This  enables  the  development  of  complex  SWS  based 
applications and therefore several benefits are envisaged: 
  Re-usability of SWS based applications based on semantic mappings with existing 

process metadata standards 

  Utilization of established standard-compliant software environments to implement 

complex SWS based architectures 

Since  our  framework  is  developed  only  in  parts  currently,  next  steps  have  to  be 
concerned  with  the  implementation  of  complete  ontological  representations  of  the 
introduced semantic layers as  well as of current E-Learning  metadata standards and 
their mappings. For example, currently the Semantic Process Model Layer is not used 
and semantic mappings between the Learning Process Model Ontology and available 
process  metadata  standards  are  only  developed  in  extracts.  Nevertheless,  the 
availability  of  appropriate  Web  services  aimed  at  supporting  specific  process 
objectives has to be perceived as an important prerequisite for developing SWS based 
applications. To provide  more valid quantifications of the  expected benefits,  further 
case  studies  are  needed  to  illustrate  the  formalized  measurements  introduced  in  the 

S. Dietze, A. Gugliotta, and J. Domingue 

sections above. Besides that, future work could also be concerned with the mapping 
of  semantic  process  models  across  different  process  dimensions    e.  g.  business 
processes or learning processes to enable a complete integration of a SWSOA in an 
organizational process environment. 
