User-Centric Faceted Search for Semantic

Portals

Osma Suominen, Kim Viljanen, and Eero Hyv onen

Semantic Computing Research Group (SeCo),

Helsinki University of Technology (TKK), Laboratory of Media Technology

University of Helsinki, Department of Computer Science

firstname.lastname@tkk.fi
http://www.seco.tkk.fi/

Abstract. Many semantic portals use faceted browsing, where the facets
are based on the underlying indexing ontologies of the content. However, in
many cases, like in medical applications, the ontologies may be very large
and complex, and do not provide the end-user with intuitive facet hierarchies for conceptualizing the content, for formulating queries, and for
classifying the search results. We argue that in such cases end-user facets
should be separated from the annotation ontologies, and show how to generalize the semantic view-based search paradigm to take into account this
fact. A user-centric card sorting method is proposed for designing intuitive views for the end-users and a method for mapping its facets onto the
indexing ontologies and search items is presented. The system has been
implemented in a prototype of the semantic portal TerveSuomi.fi, a national health promotion portal in Finland.

1 Introduction

Faceted search (i.e., faceted browsing and view-based search) [1,2,3], is a search
paradigm developed originally in the field of information retrieval. The idea
of the scheme is to analyze and index search items along multiple orthogonal
taxonomies that are called subject facets or views. From the end-users viewpoint
searching is then reduced to the selections of categories along the facets. This idea
has later been developed into semantic faceted search [3,4,5], where the facets
are based on ontological structures, such as subclass and part-of hierarchies. The
usefulness of faceted search has been demonstrated in many applications [5,6]
and the first commercial products are already on the market1.

A limitation of semantic faceted search is that facets based on indexing ontologies do not always provide the end-user with natural categorizations of the
content for formulating queries or for organizing search result lists. In many
domains, very large and complex ontologies are used for indexing by domain
professionals. The point of view of indexing may differ substantially from the
point of view of the end-user, who also may not be familiar with the professional
terminology. The ontologies may also be too general or too specific for her needs.
1 http://www.siderean.com/, http://www.express.ebay.com/, http://endeca.com/

E. Franconi, M. Kifer, and W. May (Eds.): ESWC 2007, LNCS 4519, pp. 356370, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007
?

?

?
The main hypotheses underlying this paper is that end-users, such as ordinary
citizens, often conceptualize the domain of discourse in terms of categories that
are different from the ontological representations used by the domain specialist
and content indexers. To bridge the semantic gap between end-users and pro-
fessionals, we need 1) a method for finding out the end-user facets and search
categorizations about the domain, and 2) a method for mapping the facet categories onto the content indexed along ontologies. To solve the facet creation
problem, we present a user-centric card sorting method [7,8,9] for creating intuitive search facets for the end-users, and present results of applying the method
in creating the facets for the prototype of the national semantic health promotion portal TerveSuomi.fi [10,11] in Finland. To address the mapping problem,
we show how the user-centric facets can be mapped onto the ontologies used for
describing the content, and be used for answering queries.

The paper is organized as follows. We first present a general architecture and
a method for answering faceted queries based on user-centric facets and indexing ontologies. After this the method is applied to our case study by describing
ontological metadata and the indexing ontologies which are used to describe
the content. Based on this, card sorting methods for creating user-centric facets
are discussed and applied for the TerveSuomi.fi portal, and a prototype implementation of the system is presented. Finally, contributions of the work are
summarized, related work discussed, and future research suggested.

2 Extending Faceted Search Architechure

In semantic faceted search the documents are annotated along different facets
that typically correspond to the elements (fields) of the metadata (annotation)
schema used. For example, in MuseumFinland [5] the collection artifact metadata
schema has nine resource-valued properties such as Artifact type and Material
whose values are taken from a set of seven orthogonal indexing ontologies. A
single ontology, such as Places, can be used for expressing values of several
different elements, such as Place of Manufacture and Place of Usage. When
the same place is selected in the Place of Manufacture or Place of Usage
facet for querying, different result sets are obtained. Although facets share hierarchical structures of the indexing ontologies, the facet categories are different
from the corresponding ontology concepts and have different facet-wise URIs.
The resulting facet hierarchies will be called faceted ontologies.

By using a set of logical projection rules each facet-URI can be associates
with a set of related search items [12]. The extension ext(S) of a facet-URI S is
the set of all search items associated with it and any of its subcategories. The
faceted search query in semantic faceted search with n facets is a conjuctive
Boolean expression Q = S1  ...  Sn where each Si is a Boolean expression of
the facet ontology category (URIs). The result set is obtained by interpreting
the logical operations of Q as set operations over the search item set E in the
following way: S  T  ext(S)  ext(T ), S  T  ext(S)  ext(T ), S  T 
S  T  ext(S)  ext(T ), and S  E  ext(S).

O. Suominen, K. Viljanen, and E. Hyv onen

Fig. 1. Components of an end-user-centric view-based semantic search framework

In MuseumFinland, faceted ontologies are used directly as querying facets
(with some filtering). In the case of TerveSuomi.fi this is not feasible but a set
of m user-centric facets is created for formulating the query QU = U1  ... Um,
where Ui is a category in a user-centric facet i. In order to map such queries
onto queries at the faceted ontology level, each user-centric facet category can
be defined as a Boolean expression of the faceted ontology categories. This means
that queries expressed in terms of end-user facet categories can be reduced into
faceted ontology queries that can be processed with a semantic faceted search
engine such as Ontogator [13].

Figure 1 depicts how the search documents can be found using user-centric
facets, indexing facets and indexing ontologies in our view-based semantic search
scheme. The documents are indexed with ontologies using resource-valued metadata fields dc:subject and dc:audience whose values are taken from the indexing ontology (e.g., MeSH). The document A tells about (dc:subject) aged people
(elderly people in layman terms) and is intended for children (dc:audience). Sim-
ilarly, the document B is about preschool children and is intended for adults. The
corresponding two faceted ontologies, projected from the indexing ontologies, are
seen in the middle left in different namespaces s (subject) and a (audience).
Some of the extension of the categories are: ext(s:Aged)=ext(s:Adult)={A},
ext(s:Child)={B}, ext(a:Child)={A} and ext(a:Adult)=ext(a:AgeGroup)={B}.
The extensions can be projected by simple logic rules based on the metadata.
If faceted ontologies were used for searching (like in MuseumFinland), then the
?

?

?
selection s:Adult would return the document A and a:Adult would return the
document B. By introducing end-user facets, the queries can be expressed in
terms of new facet categories. For example, the end-user facet category Adults is
defined as Adults  ext(s : Adult)  ext(s : Aged), and the document A would
not be returned with the facet selection Adults, because the document is about
aged people which has been excluded from the end-user facet category Adults.
This model can be extended to deal with uncertainty and relevance by using
the fuzzy view-based search approach presented in [10] in the following way.
Fuzzy annotations can be used if exact classifications are not appropriate. For
example, the boundary between children and adults is fuzzy. Therefore we could
say that the dc:audience of the document B in figure 1 is not the crisp set {mesh :
Adult} but rather the fuzzy set {(mesh : Adult, 0.8), (mesh : Child, 0.2)} indicating that the document is targeted to some degree also to children. In [11]
a method for determining such fuzzy annotations based on ontologies and the
tf-idf method is presented. In this way the extensions of the indexing facets can
be seen as fuzzy sets where the membership values are based on fuzzy annotations and are interpreted as a measure of relevance. By defining the Boolean
operators used in faceted search as fuzzy Boolean operators, the relevance of
hits in the search results can be determinedan important feature missing in
the traditional faceted search paradigm. In the example above, the document
B would be less relevant when looking for material targeted to children than
to adults. It is also possible to generalize the mappings into fuzzy mappings by
attaching a membership function value to them, indicating only partial match
between an end-user category and its definition in terms of the facet ontology
categories, and by interpreting the mapping as a fuzzy inclusion.

3 Ontological Metadata for a Health Promotion Portal

When building a semantic portal, one key decision is to choose which ontologies are used for indexing the content and whether existing ontologies can be
used compared to building custom ontologies. Typically suitable ontologies exist,
which have been created for a similar domain but a different purpose. In such
cases the decision has to be made between using them as-is, modifying them to
suit the purposes of the portal, or creating a new ontology from scratch.

Using an existing, established ontology has several advantages. Creating a new
ontology requires substantial amounts of manual work, which can be avoided by
reusing an existing ontology. An existing and established, large ontology is also
more likely to have broad and deep coverage of concepts within its domain,
which will allow documents to be annotated to very specific concepts, whereas
a custom-made ontology might only cover the topic areas and concepts that are
relevant for the need of the semantic portal. Finally, reusing a shared ontology
furthers the vision of the Semantic Web [14] by allowing semantic interoperability
between different systems, as long as they use the same ontology (or a compatible
one, interlinked by semantic mappings). On the other hand, existing ontologies
may differ from the goals of the portal in their scope or the point of view. These

O. Suominen, K. Viljanen, and E. Hyv onen

and other problems, such as licensing and technical issues, involved in reusing
existing ontologies have to be balanced against the benefits.

In the case of the health promotion portal TerveSuomi.fi, the information items
of interest are web-accessible publications such as web pages and PDF documents,
and they are described using Dublin Core2 metadata such as dc:subject which
contains the subject topic(s) of the given document. We decided to use the
following ontologies3 as indexing ontologies for the subject field: the Finnish
General Upper Ontology (YSO)4 [15] which is based on the General Finnish
Thesaurus YSA5 that is widely used in Finland for indexing contents of various kinds, Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)6 and the European Multilingual
Thesaurus on Health Promotion (HPMULTI)7. The reason for combining them
(see also Table 1) was that none of them was alone adequate for describing the
topics of the whole variety of content documents in the portal. YSO is broad
but too general with regard to medical content. On the other hand, MeSH is
too focused on clinical healthcare while HPMULTI has very narrow coverage,
focusing exclusively on health promotion terminology.

Table 1. Core subject ontologies of the TerveSuomi.fi portal

Name
Publisher National Library

of
Finland & FinnONTO

# concepts 23 000
Languages Finnish;

Intended
use
Intended
user group

Examples
of concepts

Swedish
under

English

and
construction
Cataloging of material
published in Finland
Librarians

Travellers
Water pipes
Cities
Vegetables

of

MeSH
National Library
Medicine, USA
23 000
English; Finnish and
Swedish
translations
available
Cataloging of biomedical documents
Medical professionals;
librarians within the
field of medicine
Metabolic Syndrome X
Endocrine Disruptors
Biopsy, Fine-Needle
DNA Damage

HPMULTI
European Commission

1 200
Multilingual, including
Finnish, Swedish and
English
Cataloging of material
on health promotion
Professionals
in health promotion

involved

Traffic accidents
Behavioural change
Voluntary work
Sunburn

To prevent the creation of internal semantically incompatible islands within
the portal, corresponding concepts in each ontology had to be mapped to each
other. Mapping the ontologies was done using three complementary approaches:

2 http://dublincore.org
3 The term ontology is used in a broad sense, covering also thesauri in the sense that

they are formal, explicit classifications for describing the content of documents.

4 http://www.seco.tkk.fi/ontologies/yso/
5 http://vesa.lib.helsinki.fi
6 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/
7 http://www.hpmulti.net
?

?

?
a) using available, existing mappings between MeSH and HPMULTI; b) creating
automatic mappings between MeSH and YSO based on textual matching of
concept labels; and c) manually mapping HPMULTI to YSO. The result was a
interlinked combination ontology, where YSO provides the upper concepts and
MeSH and HPMULTI the more exact concepts.

When analysing the ontologies, we noticed that these ontologies were created
for use by professionals and their intended use is somewhat different from their
use within the portal. This disparity between the points of view of the ontologies
and the users of the portal manifests itself in many ways. First, the concept hierarchies are often inappropriate for the portal. MeSH e.g. uses deep hierarchies
with complex subclassification criteria, and YSO contains many generic concepts
that would probably only be confusing as facet categories. Second, concepts in
professional classifications have typically been labelled using professional terminology instead of layman terms used by the end-users. On the other hand, there
are many terms in everyday use that are not used by professionals due to their
ambiguity. A portal must also be able to deal with queries based on such terminology even if it is not considered appropriate from a professional perspective.
As an example of the problems involved, consider the MeSH top-level categories
Anthropology, Education, Sociology and Social Phenomena, Biological Sciences
and Technology and Food and Beverages. Such categories in a facet would not
be very good starting points for a person looking for information about diet-
ing. Another user might not realize that information about breast cancer can be
found under the MeSH concept Breast Neoplasms.

4 Creating User-Centric Search Facets with Card Sorting

To solve the mismatch between the indexing ontologies and the expectations
of the end-users, we propose using user-centric design practices to construct
a custom classification system for the portal based on the users expectations
and their mental models, with the intent of later mapping it to the underlying
ontological concepts to provide semantically sound faceted browsing and other
functionalities.

A practical method for gathering information about the end-users mental
models of an information space, i.e., how users of a website tacitly group, sort
and label tasks and content, is the card sorthing method [7,8,9]. A card sorting
study is typically performed using index cards, with each card bearing the title
and possibly a short description of an individual document. The study is then
performed on volunteers that are asked to sort the cards into piles based on
intuitive feeling of similarity or relateness of the given cards, and to give the piles
descriptive names. This variation of card sorting where the categories (piles)
are not given beforehand but are created by the participants is called open
card sorting [9,16]. Card sorting doesnt directly give the designer a finished
categorisation structure, but provides insight into the design choices for creating
such a structure.

O. Suominen, K. Viljanen, and E. Hyv onen

4.1 Selecting Card Contents

When using card sorting for creating user-centric facets for organizing ontologically indexed content, we propose using the ontological concepts as values of
the index cards. To avoid overwhelming the participants of the study, only the
most frequently used indexing concepts (based on a sample of indexed content)
excluding overly general concepts should be used in the cards.

In our case, we created a list of all the concepts that occurred in our annotated
content items (n=523). These 1722 concepts were then ranked by their frequency
of occurrence. Concepts with only a few documents were pruned, as well as overly
general concepts such as health and health promotion. Finally, concepts judged
to be uninteresting or unnecessary from the point of view of the study were
eliminated. These included, e.g., geographical locations, individual organizations,
abstract concepts such as Development and Promotion as well as concepts that
were considered very similar to others that were already on the list8. The pruning
brought down the number of concepts to 177, which was deemed acceptable for
the card sorting exercise. The labels of the concepts were printed on index cards
together with numeric identifiers for ease of analysis.

4.2 Performing the Card Sorting

The study participants should be representative of the expected users of the
system. Nielsen recommends using 15 participants [17] while Maurer & Warfel
recommends seven to ten individuals [16]. Each participant is advised to group
the cards into piles according to their meaning or topical similarity. Participants
are asked to think aloud, especially when facing difficult decisions. During the
exercise, the facilitator takes notes of important events and insightful comments
made by participants during the experiment. If a pile becomes very large, the
participants are instructed to split it into smaller parts. After sorting the cards
into piles, they are asked to write down a descriptive label for each pile.

In our case, the card sorting study was performed on volunteers that were
chosen to represent potential users of the system. A total of ten individuals of
varying ages and backgrounds participated, with three of them doing the exercise
as a group while the others performed the study alone. Thus, a total of eight
rounds were performed. The raw data obtained during the card sorting study is
a set of labeled piles of cards such as those shown in Figure 2.

4.3 Creating the Result Categories Based on the Card Piles

When analyzing card sort results, both qualitative and quantitative aspects need
to be considered [9]. When card sorting is used for getting input into the design
of website navigation, gaining insight from the data is of foremost importance;
whether that requires a rigorous statistical analysis depends on the situation
at hand. In many projects, simply eyeballing the data may provide enough

8 E.g., only a sample of the dozens of food items such as Meat and Cheese were kept.
?

?

?
Fig. 2. Examples of card piles created by study participants

insight to create a workable design [8]. In our case, we used a spreadsheet template [18] to calculate some metrics such as card co-occurrence and the average
number of cards in each category, but did not perform a full-fledged statistical
cluster analysis. However, automatic tools have been created that perform cluster analysis and create tree diagrams that might be used directly as a basis for
constructing web site navigation [19].

To create the result categories, we used the following processing steps: First,
the categories created by individual participants were manually clustered to create a standardized set of categories for the purposes of analysis. As an example of
the clustering process, the category Body and its parts created by one participant
was considered the same as category Anatomy created by another participant,
and these were both mapped to the standard category Body part. The clustering resulted in 29 standard categories and a mapping of each participants
categories to these. Sometimes similar categories created by a single participant
were mapped to the same standard category for the purposes of analysis (e.g.,
Body and its parts and Teeth were both mapped to Body part), and not all standard categories were present in all user categories (e.g., not all participants had
included a category for Weight control).

The second step of analysis was to enter the raw data about user-created
categories and their contents (individual concepts) into the spreadsheet, using
the above defined mappings.

The third step was to actually analyze the data, looking for patterns of in-
terest. The analysis spreadsheet revealed, for example, that there was a high
agreement about the existence of a category for body parts (all participants
had included such a category) as well as the contents of that category. E.g., all
participants had placed the concepts Stomach and Skeletal system in that cat-
egory. On the other hand, while three participants had included a category for
well-being, there was low agreement about the contents of that category. The
interpretation for these results was that participants (and, by extension, users of

O. Suominen, K. Viljanen, and E. Hyv onen

the portal) have a clear mental model of body parts as a category distinct from,
say, food and nutrition issues, while a category for lifestyle doesnt invoke such
a clear notion of distinctness. Based on the analysis, we were able to pick good
candidates for top-level facets as well as construct part of their contents. The
analysis revealed that Body part, Group of people and Life event were popular
categories. Perhaps more importantly, they were at least somewhat orthogonal
towards each other and the rest of the categories, so they were chosen to be
presented as separate facets. The rest of the categories were then used to create
a fourth facet called Topic.

For each of the remaining categories, we had to decide whether to a) discard
the category altogether (in cases of low agreement), b) use it as a top-level category or c) place it below a top-level category in the hierarchy. The hierarchical
relations between categories could not directly be seen from the card sorting
analysis. However, hints about these could be found in the notes made during
the card sorting sessions, e.g., situations where a participant had split a large
pile into smaller components.

Some of the discarded categories included Oversensitivities, Disease prevention and self-help and Health problems. The resulting hierarchy is quite shallow;
additional levels may need to be added using other methods such as laddering
[20]. However, for the purposes of our portal we have expanded the hierarchy
simply by examining the underlying ontologies and building up the hierarchy
by mirroring their structure, while trying to make sure that the terminology
and groupings are suitable for end-users. We feel that while the design of lower
hierarchy levels could benefit from user-centric design methods, the issues here
are not as critical as the choice of facets and their topmost categories.

4.4 Finalizing and Evaluating the Categorisation

When an initial version of the facets is created using the card sorting method
described above, the result should be evaluated and possibly reviewed both by
additional user testing and by domain experts. One way for evaluating the result
categories with users is to do new rounds of card sorting using the closed card sort
method where the categories are given beforehand and the study participants are
asked to sort the cards into those piles. The intuitiveness of the categories can
be estimated based on how well the results of the closed card sorting matches
the initial facets.

In our case, the user testing of the Topic facet (see Figure 3) using the closed
card sorting method was done with two volunteers who were asked to sort the
ontological concepts into the suggested top-level categories. The results were
encouraging: participants placed nearly all concepts in the category that was
intended by the designer. More user evaluations would probably need to be done
to find subtler errors.

Additionally, an expert review of the initial facets was done by health promotion experts, which revealed some problems. The category Catastrophes &
Epidemies was considered problematic: the two concepts are not very closely
related and lumping them together may send false signals to users of the portal.
?

?

?
 
?

?

?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
?

?

?
 
?

?

?
 
?

?

?
 
 
?

?

?
Fig. 3. The finalized end-user facets with some examples of the concepts

A new look into the analysis process revealed that these two concepts had been
paired together during the clustering phase, and in fact only one user had created
a category where both aspects were present  a clear mistake in the clustering.
Thus, separating the two aspects into their own top-level categories was an easy
decision. Another problem discovered by domain experts was that there was no
category for issues related to occupational health, such as the hazards of dangerous chemicals used at work. Such concepts were not very well represented in the
set used for the card sort, possibly because the initial set of documents lacked
documents specific to occupational health. A new top-level category for occupational health issues was created, with subcategories taken from ontologies as
well as classifications used on existing websites on the topic. The finalized facets
are presented in Figure 3.

More generally, the lesson learned was that skewed initial data and errors
during the analysis may cause subtle errors in the hierarchy. However, using user
evaluations and expert reviews helps alleviate at least some of the problems.

5 Mapping User-Centric Facets to Ontologies

When the initial user-centric facets have been created using the method above,
the facets should be logically mapped to the ontological facets as described in
section 2. Since the card sorting is done using a selection of typically used ontological concepts, and since the relations between the standard categories and
these concepts are known, these relations can be directly used as mappings between the facets and the facet ontologies. To make the mapping comprehensive,
additional concepts are needed, which must be added manually. E.g., if the concept Food was used in the card sorting but the concept Nutrition was not, the
latter might be relevant also for a facet category of Nutrion and Food.

We have decided to represent the facet hierarchies described in the previous chapter in RDF using the SKOS Core vocabulary9 and their connections
to the underlying ontologies using the SKOS Mapping vocabulary10. Each facet
is described as a skos:ConceptScheme and each facet category is represented
as a skos:Concept with a human-understandable skos:prefLabel. The facet

9 http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/core/ (URI prefix skos)
10 http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/mapping/ (URI prefix skosmap)

O. Suominen, K. Viljanen, and E. Hyv onen
?

?

?
 
?

?

?
Fig. 4. Examples of mappings between facet and ontology concepts. The URI prefix
topic refers to the Topic facet and mesh to the indexing ontology MeSH.

hierarchies are represented using skos:broader and skos:narrower relation-
ships. Mappings to the underlying ontological concepts are represented using
skosmap:narrowMatch. This mapping is a subset of the mappings described in
Section 2; such more complex mappings can also be expressed using the SKOS
Mapping vocabulary and will likely be used in the future. An example of mappings between facet categories and ontological concepts is shown in Figure 4.

This representation implies, by the SKOS inference rules, that a category
within a facet contains (is the subject of) all documents that are annotated
with one of the ontological concepts that the category has been mapped to.
In addition, the category subsumes its child categories, and the ontology concept is the subject of all its narrower concepts. Thus, in Figure 4, the category topic:weight control will contain all documents indexed against any
of the MeSH concepts in the figure due to the skos:broader and skosmap:
narrowMatch relations present.

6 Prototype Implementation

As a proof of concept, the methods discussed have been implemented in the
prototype of TerveSuomi.fi11 where the faceted search functionality has been
created using the faceted search engine Ontogator [13]. Figure 5 shows the user
interface, where the user has selected the category Diet from the Topic facet
and the category Pregnancy from the Life event facet. The result of this faceted
search query is the list of links to web pages. The user could now either visit

11 http://www.seco.tkk.fi/applications/tervesuomi/
?

?

?
Fig. 5. TerveSuomi.fi portal user interface

some of the resulted web pages or modify the query by selecting, e.g., additional
facets or by clicking on context based semantical recommend links on the right.

7 Discussion

This paper argued that card-sorting combined with mappings provides a promising approach for designing and implementing semantic view-based search based
on user-centric facets.

7.1 Contributions

The main benefits of separating end-user facets from content indexing ontologies
are: First, more intuitive and useful user interfaces can be provided. Second, the
same ontologically annotated metadata can be re-used for different use cases and
interfaces without changing the metadata or the content by defining new alternative user-centric facets and mappings. This flexibility would not be achieved
if the metadata were described using application-specific or user-centric categorizations directly. For example, the same metadata could be used to create both
a professional facet and a citizens facet to the same content, where the professional facet is more directly based on the indexing ontologies and the citizen
facets more on the various information needs of ordinary life.

O. Suominen, K. Viljanen, and E. Hyv onen

The downside of using user-centric facets is the extra work needed in creating
them and in mapping search categories onto annotation ontologies. Also, if the
card sorting is based on non-representative example annotations, the resulting
user-centric facets might not be optimally designed when more content is added
to the portal. Therefore, readjustments to the user-centric facets might be needed
based on, e.g., feedback from the users.

7.2 Related Work

In earlier semantic portals based on the faceted browsing paradigm, the facets
have been automatically created from the underlying ontological hierarchies using projection rules (e.g. [12]). A distinction can be made between systems where
the ontologies are created to become facets in the user interface and systems
that use pre-existing general purpose ontologies. The former group includes MuseumFinland [5] and SWED12, whereas /facet13 [6] is an example of the latter
approach. The problems of matching the hierarchical structure of the ontology
with user needs and expectations only become apparent in the latter case, as the
point of view of the original ontology may differ a lot from the end-users mental models of the information space. In /facet, the automated facet generation
sometimes results in a user interface that is hard to use [6].

Another approach for creating a navigational hierarchy based on an ontology
is presented by Stoica & Hearst [21,22]. Their system uses the WordNet lexical
ontology as a basis for creating a hierarchical classification which can then be
used in faceted browsing. The Castanet algorithm simplifies the WordNet IS-A
hierarchy by eliminating branches that arent represented in the document collection as well as unnecessary levels of the hierarchy. The resulting taxonomies
can be used either as-is or after some manual adjustments. However, the relationship of Stoica & Hearsts work with ontological metadata is weak: WordNet is
only used as a basis for creating the navigational hierarchies, and the document
metadata is later assumed to reference the newly created taxonomy directly.

Card sorting has been previously used in the construction of ontologies as a
means of knowledge elicitation. While card sorting is usually performed manually
outside the ontology engineering process, a computerized card sorting plugin has
been developed for the Prot eg e14 ontology editor [23]. However, the focus of this
work is on the ontology creation process itself; there is no direct intent of using
the resulting ontology in a search-oriented user interface.

7.3 Future Work

We are currently implementing a more finalized prototype of the semantic portal
TerveSuomi.fi. After this, user tests should be done to evaluate the prototype and
the underlying hypotheses such as the end-user-centric facets. We are currently
also investigating how ontologies could be used to model health care services

12 http://www.swed.org.uk
13 http://slashfacet.semanticweb.org
14 http://protege.stanford.edu
?

?

?
using methods presented in [24]. In the future, the portal may be extended to
incorporate access to personal medical records and health care services.

Acknowledgements

We thank Markus Holi and Petri Lindgren for their input to the work reported in
this paper. This work is part of the FinnONTO project15, funded mainly by the
National Funding Agency for Technology Innovation (Tekes) and the Ministry
of Social Affairs and Health. The TerveSuomi.fi project is co-ordinated by the
National Public Health Institute in Finland (Project Coordinator Eija Hukka).
