Ways to Develop Human-Level Web Intelligence:

A Brain Informatics Perspective

Ning Zhong

Department of Life Science and Informatics
Maebashi Institute of Technology, Japan &

The International WIC Institute/BJUT, China

zhong@maebashi-it.ac.jp

Abstract. In this paper, we briefly investigate several ways to develop
human-level Web intelligence (WI) from a brain informatics (BI) per-
spective. BI can be regarded as brain sciences in WI centric IT age
and emphasizes on a systematic approach for investigating human information processing mechanism. The recently designed instrumentation
(fMRI etc.) and advanced IT are causing an impending revolution in
both WI and BI, making it possible for us to understand intelligence in
depth and develop human-level Web intelligence.

1 Introduction

The concept of Web intelligence (WI) was first introduced in our papers and
books [13, 24, 27, 29, 31]. Broadly speaking, WI is a new direction for scientific
research and development that explores the fundamental roles as well as practical
impacts of artificial intelligence (AI)1 and advanced information technology (IT)
on the next generation of Web-empowered systems, services, and environments.
The WI technologies revolutionize the way in which information is gathered,
stored, processed, presented, shared, and used by virtualization, globalization,
standardization, personalization, and portals.

As more detailed blueprints and issues of WI are being evolved and specified [13, 29, 31, 36], it has been recognized that one of the fundamental goals
of WI research is to understand intelligence in depth and develop wisdom Web
based intelligent systems that integrate all the human-level capabilities such as
real-time response, robustness, autonomous interaction with their environment,
communication with natural language, commonsense reasoning, planning, problem solving, decision making, learning, discovery and creativity.

Turing gave the first scientific discussion of human-level machine intelligence
[23]. Newell and Simon made a start on programming computers for general
intelligence and investigated human problem solving in a behavior based approach [16]. McCarthy argued that reaching human-level AI requires programs
that deal with the commonsense informative situation, in which the phenomena

1 Here the term of AI includes classical AI, computational intelligence, and soft com-

puting etc.

E. Franconi, M. Kifer, and W. May (Eds.): ESWC 2007, LNCS 4519, pp. 2736, 2007.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007

N. Zhong

to be taken into account in achieving a goal are not fixed in advance [15]. Laird
and Lent proposed using interactive computer games that are the killer application for human-level AI research, because they can provide the environments
for research on the right kinds of problem that lead to the type of incremental
and integrative research needed to achieve human-level AI [10].

The new generation of WI research and development needs to understand
multiple natures of intelligence in depth, by studying integrately the three intelligence related research areas: machine intelligence, human intelligence, and
social intelligence, as shown in Figure 1, towards developing truly human-level
Web intelligence. Machine intelligence (also called AI) has been mainly studied as
computer based technologies for the development of intelligent knowledge based
systems; Human intelligence (also called brain sciences) studies the nature of
intelligence towards our understanding of intelligence; Social intelligence needs
a combination of machine intelligence and human intelligence for establishing
social networks that contain communities of people, organizations, or other social entities [29]. Furthermore, the Web can be regarded as a social network in
which the Web connects a set of people (or organizations or other social enti-
ties). People are connected by a set of social relationships, such as friendship,
co-working or information exchange with common interests. In other words, it is
a Web-supported social network or called virtual community. In this sense, the
study of WI is of social network intelligence (social intelligence for short).

Web Intelligence (WI)

Combining three
intelligence related areas

Understanding
intelligence in depth

Machine Intelligence

Human Intelligence

Social Intelligence

Brain
Sciences

Fig. 1. The relationship between WI and other three intelligence related research areas

In the rest of the paper, we briefly investigate three ways to develop humanlevel Web intelligence from a brain informatics (BI) perspective. BI can be regarded as brain sciences in WI centric IT age [34, 35]. Although brain sciences
have been studied from different disciplines such as cognitive science and neuro-
science, BI represents a potentially revolutionary shift in the way that research is
undertaken. BI is proposing to study human brain from the viewpoint of informatics (i.e. human brain is an information processing system) and use informatics (i.e.
WI centric information technology) to support brain science study, in particular,
WI provides urgent research needs.
?

?

?
2 Web Based Problem Solving with Human Level

Capabilities

A more concrete issue of WI is the development and application of a Webbased problem-solving system for portal-centralized, adaptable Web services
[8, 13, 22, 29, 31].

Problem-solving is one of main capabilities of human intelligence and has
been studied in both cognitive science and AI [16], where it is addressed in conjunction with reasoning centric cognitive functions such as attention, control,
memory, language, reasoning, learning, and so on, using a logic based symbolic
and/or connectionist approach. Although logic based problem-solving is per-
fect, mathematical systems with no real time and memory constraints, Webbased problem-solving systems need real-time and dealing with global, multiple,
huge, distributed information sources.

The core of such a system rests on the Problem Solver Markup Language
(PSML) and PSML-based distributed Web inference engines for network rea-
soning, in which the following essential support functions should be provided:
 The expressive power and functional support in PSML for complex adaptive,

distributed problem solving;

 Performing automatic reasoning on the Web by incorporating globally distributed contents and meta-knowledge, automatically collected and transformed from the semantic Web and social networks, with locally operational
knowledge-data bases;

 Representing and organizing multiple, large-scale knowledge-data sources for

distributed network reasoning;

 Combining multiple reasoning methods in PSML representation and distrib-

uted inference engines, efficiently and effectively;

 Modeling user behavior and representing/managing it as a personalized

 Including an emotional factor in developing the Web based reasoning and

model dynamically;

problem solving system.

A possible way as an immediate step to implement certain distributed reasoning capabilities of the future PSML is to make use of an existing logic language
coupled with agent technologies. We have demonstrated one possible implementation of such capabilities. In particular, our proposed implementation, called
-PSML, is based on the combination of OWL with Horn clauses, and able to
couple global semantic Web/social networks with local information sources for
solving problems in a large-scale distributed Web environment [21, 22].

Furthermore, in order to develop a Web based problem-solving system with
human level capabilities, we need to better understand how human being does
complex adaptive, distributed problem solving and reasoning, as well as how
intelligence evolves for individuals and societies, over time and place [20,26,35].
In other words, ignoring what goes on in human brain and focusing instead on
behavior has been a large impediment to understand how human being does
complex adaptive, distributed problem solving and reasoning.

N. Zhong

In the light of BI, we need to investigate specifically the following issues:

 What are the existing thinking/reasoning models in AI, cognitive science,

and neuroscience?

 How to design fMRI/EEG experiments and analyze such fMRI/EEG data to
understand the principle of human reasoning and problem solving in depth?
 How to build the cognitive model to understand and predict user profile and

behavior?

 How to implement human-level reasoning and problem solving on the Web

based portals that can serve users wisely?

As a result, the relationships between classical problem solving and reasoning and
biologically plausible problem solving and reasoning need to be defined and/or
elaborated.

3 Reasoning Centric Thinking Oriented Studies in

Human Information Processing System

Human intelligence related research studies the nature of intelligence towards
our understanding of intelligence. The capabilities of human intelligence can be
broadly divided into two main aspects: perception and thinking. So far, the main
disciplines with respect to human intelligence are cognitive science that mainly
focuses on studying mind and behavior based cognitive models of intelligence,
as well as neuroscience that mainly focuses on studying brain and biological
models of intelligence. In cognitive neuroscience, although many advanced results
with respect to perception oriented study have been obtained, only a few of
preliminary, separated studies with respect to thinking oriented and/or a more
whole information process have been reported [6]. Figure 2 gives a global picture
on reasoning centric thinking oriented functions and their relationships in human
information processing system.

Our purpose is to understand activities of human information processing sys-

tem by investigations in the following two levels:

 investigating the spatiotemporal features and flow of human information
processing system, based on functional relationships between activated areas
of human brain for each given task;

 investigating neural structures and neurobiological processes related to the

activated areas [19].

More specifically, at the current stage, we want to understand:
 how a peculiar part (one or more areas) of the brain operates in a specific

 how the operated part changes along with time;
 how the activated areas work cooperatively to implement a whole informa-

time;

tion processing;
?

?

?
Decision-Making 

emotion

Problem-Solving

memory

deduction

Planning

GrC

uncertainty

Reasoning

Commonsense/nonMR

Learning

induction abduction

Computation

stability

Discovery

attention

Creativity

Language

Fig. 2. Reasoning centric thinking oriented functions and their relationships (GrC:
Granular Computing [25]; AOC: Autonomy Oriented Computing [14]; nonMR: nonmonotonous reasoning)

 how the activated areas are linked, indexed, navigated functionally, and what

are individual differences in performance;

 how a cognitive process is supported by neurobiological processes.
We need to study experimental cognitive neuroscience, data mining, intelligent agents, data and knowledge grids, the semantic Web and wisdom Web in
a unified way [1, 2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 28, 34]. We have been developing a full process
from designing fMRI/EEG experiments based on WI needs for discovering new
cognitive WI models. Such a full process means a systematic approach for mea-
suring, collecting, modeling, transforming, managing, and mining multiple human brain data obtained from various cognitive experiments by using fMRI and
EEG [33, 34].

As a step in this direction, we observe that fMRI brain imaging data and EEG
brain wave data extracted from human information processing mechanism are
peculiar ones with respect to a specific state or the related part of a stimulus.
Based on this point of view, we propose a way of peculiarity oriented mining
(POM) for knowledge discovery in multiple human brain data, without using
conventional imaging processing to fMRI brain images and frequency analysis
to EEG brain waves [17, 32, 33, 34]. The proposed approach provides a new way
for automatic analysis and understanding of fMRI brain images and EEG brain
waves to replace human-expert centric visualization. The mining process is a
multi-step one, in which various psychological experiments, physiological mea-
surements, data cleaning, modeling, transforming, managing, and mining techniques are cooperatively employed to investigate human information processing
mechanism.

Figure 3 gives the global picture of an example about how to investigate the
spatiotemporal features and flow of human information processing system. In
the cognitive process from perception to reasoning, data are collected in several
event-related time points, and transformed into various forms in which POM

N. Zhong

Thinking 
-----
 Perception

Reasoning  Language  Memory  Attention  Vision

tk

tj

ti

t1

transformation
transformation

transformation
transformation

transformation
transformation

POM/MDA

POM/MDA

POM/MDA

POM/MDA

Explanation/Synthesis

Fig. 3. Investigating the spatiotemporal features and flow of human information
processing system

centric multi-aspect data analysis (MDA) can be carried out efficiently and ef-
fectively. Furthermore, the results of separate analysis can be explained and
combined into a whole flow.

4 A Data-Brain Model and Its Construction

The Data-Brain is a brain database with all of data related to all major aspects
and capabilities of human information processing mechanism for systematic investigation and understanding of human intelligence. The Data-Brain provides
a holistic view at a long-term, global field of vision to understand the principle,
models and mechanisms of human information processing system [9, 34, 35].

The key questions are how to obtain such data by systematic fMRI/EEG
experiments, how to manage such huge multimedia data for systematic investigation and understanding of human intelligence, as well as how to analyse such
data from multi-aspect and multi-level for discovering new cognitive models. A
new conceptual model is needed to represent complex relationships among multiple human brain data sources, which are obtained by systematic fMRI/EEG
experiments. Furthermore, the following supporting capabilities are requested to
build such a Data Brain:
 It is a grid-based, simulation and analysis oriented, dynamic, spatial and

 It deals with multiple data sources, multiple data forms, multiple levels of

multimedia database;

data granulation;

 It provides multiple views and organizations;
 It includes various methods for data analysis, simulation, visualization, as

well as corresponding knowledge and models.

At first, agents for data collecting, storing and retrieving are deployed on the
Grid platform, like Globus, as a standard Grid service. OGSA-DAI is used to
?

?

?
build database access applications [5,37]. The aim of OGSA-DAI is to provide the
middleware glue to interface existing databases, other data resources and tools
to each other in a common way based on the Open Grid Services Architecture
(OGSA). This middleware is based on the GGF-defined OGSI specification and
layered on top of the Globus toolkit 3 OGSI implementation (GT3 Core).

Multiple data sources are collected by various cognitive fMRI/EEG experi-
ments, modeling and transformation, and they are recorded to the corresponding
databases through the Grid service on the distributed sites. Furthermore, the
data-flow is a collection of descriptions for the dynamic relationship among multiple data sources on the data-grid. In the current study, data sources from
cognitive fMRI/EEG experiments, to be collected on the data-grid, include:

 human multi-perception mechanism for studying the relevance between au-

ditory and visual information processing;

 human deductive/inductive reasoning mechanism for understanding the

principle of human reasoning and problem solving in depth;

 human computation mechanism as an example of human problem solving

system;

 human decision-making mechanism from developing Web based decision-

making support system with an emotional factor;

 human learning mechanism for acquiring personalized student models in an

interactive learning process dynamically and naturally.

In order to build a Data Brain, a systematic methodology of cognitive experimental design needs to be developed, so that multiple human brain data
sources obtained by fMRI/EEG experiments are interrelated and can be utilized
for multi-purpose, not only a specific one. Event-related experimental designs
have become an important methodology in EEG/fMRI research to evaluate the
high level characteristics of human information processing in the central nervous system [18]. There are, at present, two main methods called event-related
potential (ERP) and event-related fMRI for event-related experimental designs.
ERP is a tiny signal embedded in the ongoing EEG. By averaging the traces,
investigators can extract this signal, which reflects neural activity that is specifically related cognitive events [7]. ERPs are best suited for addressing questions
about the time course of cognition rather than elucidating the brain structures
that produce the electrical events. ERPs also provide physiological indices of
when a person decides to response, or when an error is detected. On the other
hand, event-related fMRI follows the same logic as used in ERP/EEG studies
and provides the spatial resolution. Thus, event-related fMRI will further allow
fMRI and EEG to be combined in paradigms that are identical across methods.
By using such techniques, it is now becoming possible to study the precise spatiotemporal orchestration of neuronal activity associated with perceptual and
cognitive events [18], as well as systematic collection of human brain data for
building a Data Brain.

N. Zhong

5 Conclusion

BI emphasizes on a systematic approach for investigating human information
processing mechanism, including measuring, collecting, modeling, transforming,
managing, and mining multiple human brain data obtained from various cognitive experiments by using fMRI and EEG. The proposed methodology attempts
to change the perspective of cognitive/brain scientists from a single type of experimental data analysis towards a holistic view at a long-term, global field
of vision to understand the principle, models and mechanisms of human information processing. New generations of WI research and development need to
understand multi-nature of intelligence in depth. The recently designed instrumentation (fMRI etc.) and advanced IT are causing an impending revolution in
both WI and BI, making it possible for us to understand intelligence in depth
and develop human-level Web intelligence.

Acknowledgments

I would like to express my gratitude to Enrico Franconi, Michael Kifer, Wolfgang
May, Dieter Fensel and other organizers of ESWC 2007 for the kind invitation
and the excellent organization. I am grateful to all my research collaborators, as-
sistants, and students who have, over the years, together contributed to the development of Web Intelligence (WI) and Brain Informatics (BI). Special thanks
to Jiming Liu, Yiyu Yao, Jinglong Wu, Benjamin Wah, and Shengfu Lu for our
joint projects and discussions. I am very grateful to people who have joined or supported the WI and BI communities, members of the WIC advisory board, WIC
technical committee, and WIC research centres, as well as keynote/invited speakers of IEEE/WIC/ACM WI-IAT conferences. This work is partially supported by
the grant-in-aid for scientific research (No. 18300053) from the Japanese Ministry
of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.
