System Description: An Orienteering Strategy  

to Browse Semantically-Enhanced  

Educational Wiki Pages 

Luciano T.E. Pansanato1 and Renata P.M. Fortes2 

1 Universidade Tecnologica Federal do Parana  Campus de Cornelio Procopio, 

Av. Alberto Carazzai, 1640, 86300-000  Cornelio Procopio, PR, Brazil 

2 Departamento de Ciencias de Computacao, Instituto de Ciencias Matematicas e de 

Computacao, Universidade de Sao Paulo  Campus de Sao Carlos 

Caixa Postal 668, 13560-970  Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil 

luciano@utfpr.edu.br, renata@icmc.usp.br 

Abstract. Wikis have been adopted along the years, aiming to provide an easy 
and simple support to people keep the information systems on the Internet up-
to-date, and making possible efficient collaborative authoring. As the number of 
pages  and  corresponding  contents  increases,  wiki  users  face  difficulties  when 
browsing  for  wiki  pages.  This  paper  presents  a  system  prototype  based  on 
orienteering  to  browse  semantically-enhanced  educational  wiki  pages.  The 
results of a user-based evaluation of the system prototype are also presented.  

Keywords: Semantic Web, Metadata, Wiki, Interactive Retrieval. 

1   Introduction 

Information seeking activities play an important role in a wide range of tasks based on 
information  systems.  In  Wikis,  the  support  for  information  seeking  activities  is 
important to enable users to find the information they  need. However, browsing for 
information in Wikis may be difficult when users are supported only by the traditional 
keyword search paradigm. 

The keyword search paradigm is popular because of its ability to identify quickly 
the  pages  containing  specific  information.  However,  keyword  search  is  not  an 
efficient  means of finding information in several situations. For example: (a) a user 
may be uncertain of what he is looking for until the available options are presented; 
(b) the target cannot be expressed by keywords or (c) the exact terminology used in 
the pages is unknown, and (d) in cases where a great deal of information and context 
should  be  obtained  along  with  the  pages  (and  not  only  the  final  page).  In  such 
situations,  other  paradigms  such  as  traditional  browsing  may  be  more  useful  than 
keyword search [1]. 

We  have  observed  this  problem  with  the  CoTeia1  [2],  a  Computer  Supported 
Collaborative  Learning  (CSCL)  tool  used  to  complement  face-to-face  lectures  with 
                                                           
1 http://incubadora.fapesp.br/projects/coteia/ 

E. Franconi, M. Kifer, and W. May (Eds.): ESWC 2007, LNCS 4519, pp. 809818, 2007. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2007 

L.T.E. Pansanato and R.P.M. Fortes 

collaborative learning activities at Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Computing 
/  University  of  Sao  Paulo  (ICMC/USP).  CoTeia  is  a  wiki-based  asynchronous 
collaborative  tool  analogous  to  CoWeb  [3].  CoTeia  users,  in  particular  faculty, 
frequently  look  for  wiki  pages  to  reuse  their  material.  CoTeia  has  been  used  since 
2001  and  contains  a  significant  amount  of  teaching  material.  Although  CoTeia 
provides a keyword search tool, we have observed many cases where users engage in 
an exhaustive browsing to find what they are seeking. 

We agree that typical wiki-based environments, such as CoTeia, can be enhanced 
by metadata, which may strongly influence information seeking techniques and tools. 
Semantic  MediaWiki  is  also  a  well-known  wiki  behind  Semantic  Wikipedia  [4]. 
However, the ease in using metadata to find wiki pages (or other kind of information 
objects)  is  related  to  the  existence  of  appropriate  support  to  information  seeking 
strategies.  The  main  objective  of  our  research  is  to  investigate  and  develop  an 
interactive  support  inspired  by  an  orienteering  strategy  [1,  5]  to  browsing  for  wiki 
pages, which uses an infrastructure of Semantic Web. Orienteering denotes a strategy 
in  which  people  satisfy  a  particular  information  need  through  a  sequence  of  small 
steps (or actions) to narrow the focus of the goal. At each step, prior information and 
local context are used to decide the next step. 

We  have  developed  a  prototype  for  integrating  a  variety  of  tools  to  support  an 
orienteering strategy. We argue that an information seeking environment should make 
available  several  categories  of  tools  (including  keyword  search),  enabling  users  to 
choose the appropriate tool or the best combination of tools (that is, the best strategy) 
in agreement with different levels of users ability, background, preferences, and kind 
of  information  that  they  are  looking  for  at  moment.  It  enables  users  to  prioritize 
different  ways  their  choices  of  tools  to  each  step  in  an  orienteering  strategy.  We 
expected  that  users  take  advantage  of  this  kind  of  environment  to  carry  out 
information  seeking  tasks  as  an  alternative  to  the  one-size-fits-all  approach  of  the 
keyword search paradigm. 

Section 2 describes the orienteering strategy and the techniques we have explored 
to support information seeking activities. Sections 3 and 4 present the prototype and a 
preliminary user-based evaluation which points to its effectiveness. Sections 5 and 6 
are dedicated to related work and conclusions respectively. 

2   Strategies and Tools 

In our  work,  we exploit the levels of  information  seeking  activities as described by 
Bates  [6].  Based  on  empirical  studies  of  the  information  seeking  behavior  of 
experienced library users, Bates distinguishes four levels of activity: 

1. A  move is an identifiable thought or action  that is a part of information seeking. 

For example, locating some portion of text in a wiki page. 

2. A  tactic  is  one  or  a  handful  of  moves  made  to  further  an  information  seeking 
activity.  For  example,  broadening  or  narrowing  a  query  to  retrieve  a  larger  or 
smaller number of wiki pages. 

3. A stratagem is a complex set of moves and/or tactics, and generally involves both 
a  particular  information  domain  anticipated  to  be  productive  by  the  user,  and  a 
?

?

?
mode of tackling the particular organization of that domain. For example, finding 
all wiki pages which are related to a particular course. 

4. A  strategy  is  a  plan  for  satisfying  an  information  need,  and  may  include 
combinations  of  all  the  previously  mentioned  types  of  information  seeking 
activities. For example, performing a keyword search to retrieve wiki pages related 
to specific terms describing a subject, browsing through those considered relevant 
and then finding references in the text to books and articles. 

We  are  interested  in  providing  an  interactive  support  to  help  users  to  find  wiki 
pages at CoTeia. The support provided for moves and tactics is implemented as a set 
of tools and these are integrated in an environment. Combining the tools users  may 
compose  stratagems  and  strategies.  Thus,  in  this  work  a  tool  is  a  software  program 
that implements one or more methods or techniques to support an information seeking 
activity; and an environment is a software program that integrates diverse tools.  

Subsection 2.1 describes the underlying orienteering strategy used to integrate the 
tools  which  has  influenced  the  choice  of  the  tools  as  well  as  some  extensions.  The 
tools are briefly discussed in Subsection 2.2.  

2.1   Orienteering Strategy  

Orienteering is a sport of finding ones way across country on foot using a map and a 
compass. The main strategy consists in using the information on the current position 
to make better choices about the way to reach the next checkpoint or the final target. 
Furthermore,  the  orienteer  must  constantly  concentrate,  make  decisions,  and  keep 
track of the path covered.  

A similar strategy has been described in studies of information seeking behavior in 
the literature [1, 5]. Orienteering involves using both prior and contextual information 
to  narrow  in  on  the  actual  information  target,  often  in  a  series  of  steps 
(moves/tactics/stratagems, according to Bates, or simply actions), without specifying 
the entire information need up front. For example, first one can submit a query to a 
search  engine  to  get  into  the  proximity  of  the  information  that  satisfy  the  target 
information need, and then explore the links retrieved to find the desired information. 
Other works also described this strategy [7, 8], though not under that name. 

We have elected the following categories of techniques that could help the user to 
engage  in  an  orienteering  strategy:  combining  browsing  and  searching;  showing 
context;  previewing  content;  keeping  interaction  history;  and  narrowing  toward  the 
goal. The latter is a key feature of an orienteering strategy. It consists in starting with 
a general query and using small steps to narrow down the information space until the 
user finds what they are looking for. 

2.2   Orienteering Tools 

We have implemented common tools and extended others to incorporate metadata in 
their  mechanism,  i.e.  a  Resource  Description  Framework  (RDF)  model  about  a 
collection  of  wiki  pages  used  in  educational  activities.  Methods  for  automatic  

L.T.E. Pansanato and R.P.M. Fortes 

metadata  generation  were  explored  to  populate  the  RDF  model  as  described  in 
previous work [9, 10]. The following tools were implemented: 
  Keyword  search.  This  tool  is  a  search  engine  which  searches  previously  indexed 
wiki pages for specified keywords and returns a list of those where the keywords 
were  found.  In  spite  of  this  approach  being  straightforward,  it  works  for  its 
purpose:  to  obtain  a  list  of  wiki  pages  relating  to  the  keywords  the  user  entered. 
Some search engines can use relevance ranking that many users find disconcerting: 
some pages can be ranked high even if they do not contain all the keywords. 

  Facet browse. Faceted browsing is one way to use faceted metadata to allow users 
to  find  information.  Metadata  can  have  several  facets:  attributes  in  various 
orthogonal  sets  of  categories.  For  example,  in  the  domain  of  educational  wiki 
pages,  possible  facets  might  be  authors  (professors  or  students).  This  tool  (Facet 
browse)  allows  users  to  filter  a  set  of  items  (e.g.  wiki  pages)  by  progressively 
selecting  from  only  valid  values  (instances)  of  facets.  The  list  of  valid  values  is 
filtered to show only those that have results available. Thus, it is impossible to get 
an  empty  result.  The  combination  of  facets  and  hierarchy  can  help  the  user  to 
decide how to start and to explore the collection. 

  Highlight. This tool displays the occurrences of query terms within the context of 
the document retrieved. It is useful to support local exploration because most users 
do not read pages carefully when they scan text for what they are looking for. We 
extend  this  technique  to  highlight  also  names,  locations,  email  addresses,  and 
phone  numbers.  The  knowledge  about  peoples  names  and  locations  is  harvested 
from ICMC/USP website and added inside the RDF model. 

  Flag.  This  tool  implements  a  preview  technique  that  consists  in  automatically 
flagging  a  result  which  contains  certain  content  so  it  can  be  found  easily  among 
other  results.  For  example,  results  of  documents  that  contain  names,  locations, 
email addresses, dates, or times. It is useful for users to be able to see at a glance 
whether the results they get in response to an action have a particular content. 

  Work memory. The underlying technique of this tool consists in providing a special 
memory  resource  which  can  store  results  and  some  operations  to  handle  them. 
Basically, we implemented the same memory functions of a typical calculator: M+ 
(sum), M- (difference), MR (recall), and MC (clear). This support is important in 
cases where the goal consists of a collection of results that should be obtained from 
a  variety  of  different  strategies,  not  just  at  the  end  of  a  strategy.  For  example, 
collecting links to wiki pages which contains educational material (for reuse) may 
involve  the  storage  of  intermediary  results  to  compose  the  final  list  of  those 
considered relevant. 

  Sort.  This  tool  sorts  the  results  by  relevance,  as  determined  by  the  number  and 
location of matched words in the wiki page, and by any metadata of wiki pages in 
the RDF model. While all search engines sort results by relevance as default, a few 
of  them  can  sort  by  other  option  (e.g.  Ask,  http://www.ask.com/,  allows  to  sort 
saved results by date or title). 

  Group. Some search engines attempt to classify results automatically into concepts 
(or  domains),  such  as  Vivisimo,  http://vivisimo.com/.  The  drawback  of  this 
 
?

?

?
technique  is  that  the  categories  automatically  generated  are  not  always  well 
organized.  This  tool  (Group)  implements  a  straightforward  improvement  by 
exploiting  the  available  metadata  in  the  RDF  model  to  organize  the  results 
according to the same category layout that is used by the tool for faceted browsing. 
  Undo  and  Restart. The  reverse  of  actions  is  supported  by  means  of  undoing  and 
starting over the task. The Undo tool allows  user to cancel any performed action 
and  consequently,  the  results  will  reflect  on  the  new  sequence.  The  Restart  tool 
allows  user  to  begin  again  from  scratch.  These  tools  help  to  keep  the  interaction 
process under user control. 

3   Prototype 

We  have  developed  a  prototype  which  integrates  the  orienteering  tools  described  in 
previous  section.  The  prototype  has  been  used  to  browse  approximately  4,230  wiki 
pages stored in two CoTeia repositories2. Fig. 1 shows an example of interaction with 
the prototype. The interface is divided into three parts: the set of tools on the left, the 
history of actions on the top right, and the results and content area on the bottom right. 
Using a tool often corresponds to a move, tactic, or stratagem (discussed in Section 2), 
and  this  interaction  is  called  action  in  the  interface.  The  sequence  of  performed  
actions during a strategy is showed in the history in the top right.  The history serves as 
important  aid  to  reduce  working  memory  load.  Any  particular  information  seeking 
activity  may  include  other  behaviors  and  cognitions  that  cannot  be  captured  by  the 
prototype. 

When the user performs an action, the results (i.e. a list of links to wiki pages in 
this case) to that action are presented. The next action has effect on the current set of 
results.  This  is  an  important  aspect  in  the  interaction  process  of  the  user  with  the 
prototype: the tools are integrated so that the results obtained in one are used as the 
input to the next. 

Fig. 1 shows the result of a hypothetical interaction in which the user has chosen 
different tools to look for wiki pages with material (slides) used in a particular course. 
First,  the  user  selected  the  term  SCE0225  Hipermidia  (A)  in  the  facet  Course  to 
refine the entire collection of all wiki pages to a set of those related with the course. 
Second,  the  user  performed  a  keyword  search  (B)  to  narrow  the  current  set  of  wiki 
pages (from previous tool) to those which contain the word aula (lecture). Next, the 
user sorts the results alphabetically by Title (C) and follows a link to the wiki page 
entitled Aula a Aula (D). The wiki page is showed in the content area (E). Next, the 
highlight tool is used to highlight the word Aula (F) in the content of the wiki page 
(the highlight tool does not appear in the figure). Finally, the flag tool is used to puts a 
mark (a red lozenge) (G) on the results which contain one or more peoples names.  

The  prototype  was  built  using  PHP  and  MySQL.  We  have  used  AJAX 
(Asynchronous  JavaScript  and  XML)  programming  techniques  to  allow  better  user 
interactions in the interface. The RDF model is manipulated and searched using RAP 
(RDF API for PHP, http://sourceforge.net/projects/rdfapi-php/). 

                                                           
2 (1) http://coteia.icmc.usp.br/coteia/ and (2) http://safedevel.icmc.usp.br/coweb/ 

L.T.E. Pansanato and R.P.M. Fortes 

Fig. 1. Screenshot of the prototype 

 

4   User-Based Evaluation 

This  section  presents  the  evaluation  we  conduct  to  test  and  evaluate  the  prototype, 
and, through the users interaction with the prototype, to gain knowledge about it. 

4.1   Aims 

We  had  three  goals  for  the  evaluation.  First,  we  were  interested  in  validating  if  the 
users  could  get  relevant  information  using  the  prototype.  Second,  we  wanted  to 
confirm  if  the  users  use  different  strategies.  Finally,  we  were  interested  in  studying 
step-by-step  the  strategies  that  users  follow  to  browsing  for  wiki  pages  using  the 
prototype and their preferences concerning the available tools. 

4.2   Methodology 

We have combined a variety of methods to gather data about the user experience with 
the  prototype.  Our  methodology  combined:  (a)  Questionnaire,  (b)  Think  Aloud,  (c) 
Interview,  and  (d)  User  Log  Recording.  The  participants  consisted  of  15  professors 
(11 women, 4 men) at ICMC/USP. They were all experienced users of search engines, 
searching  for  information  daily.  The  participants  were  regular  users  of  the  CoTeia 
with  2-6  years  of  experience  and  weekly  they  access  wiki  pages  for  reading  and/or 
editing. Thus, the participants are potential end-users of the prototype. 
?

?

?
The  participants  completed  a  set  of  tasks  that  involved  browsing  for  educational 
material for reuse. We defined five tasks in four different task scenarios (types), based 
on Shneidermans definition [11]: specific fact-finding, extended fact-finding, openended browsing and exploration of availability (see Table 1). We were interested in 
covering the largest number of scenarios using the smallest number of tasks. 

The  tasks  were  presented  to  the  participants  in  agreement  with  the  concept  of 
simulated  work  task  situation  [12].  A  simulated  work  task  situation  is  an  open 
description of the context/scenario of a given situation. It then works as the trigger of 
the participants information need and the base for relevance judgment. The objective 
is  to  ensure  the  largest  possible  realism  by  the  involvement  of  potential  users  who, 
based  on  the  simulated  work  task  situation,  develop  individual  and  subjective 
information need interpretations. Individually, the participants use the prototype and 
assess  relevance  of  the  obtained  results  in  relation  to  their  perceptions  of  the 
information need and the underlying simulated work task situation. 

Table 1. Five tasks in four scenarios 

 
 
 
 

 

 

Tasks 

T1: Look for a particular exercise. 
T2: Look for the e-mail of a course monitor. 
T3: Look for evaluation criteria recently 
published by other professors.  
T4: Look for a new approach used to teaching a 
particular topic. 
T5: Look for the learning material available to a 
particular course. 

Scenarios 

specific fact-finding 

extended fact-finding 

open-ended browsing 

exploration of availability 

 
 
 
 

 

 

The evaluation was comprised of four sessions as follows: (a) a survey session, (b) 
a  training  session,  (c)  a  task  session,  and  (d)  an  interview  session.  The  survey  was 
designed to collect demographic information and participants experience with search 
tools  and  experience  with  CoTeia.  A  training  session  was  given,  including  an 
overview of the prototype so that the participant could become familiar with the tools 
and  the  environment.  After  the  training  session,  participants  completed  tasks  while 
thinking  aloud  about  their  strategies.  The  participants  were  instructed  to  articulate 
what  they  are  thinking  and  what  they  feel  while  working  with  the  prototype.  The 
utterances  were  registered  using  audio  recording.  In  connection  with  each  task,  the 
interactions  of  the  participants  with  the  prototype  were  registered  using  log-file 
recording. All participants were requested to complete the same tasks. No time limit 
was  set  for  any  of  the  tasks.  After  each  task  participants  answered  questions  about 
relevance of the results obtained and the usefulness of the prototype concerning that 
task. After performing the tasks, participants were interviewed for their perceptions of 
the prototype that they had experienced. 

4.3   Results and Observations 

After  each  task,  participants  completed  a  short  questionnaire  about  the  results 
obtained and the usefulness of the prototype for the task. The judgments were made 

L.T.E. Pansanato and R.P.M. Fortes 

on 7-point Likert scales (1 = none, 7 = extreme). The participants assigned an average 
rating of 5.92 (SD = 0.90) for relevance and 6.07 (SD = 0.81) for usefulness. These 
results  support  our  first  goal:  the  users  could  get  relevant  information  using  the 
prototype. 

By  analyzing  the  user  log  we  found  out  that  participants  used  different  tools  to 
complete  the  tasks.  The  average  number  of  different  tools  per  task  was  3.24  (SD  = 
1.48).  We  have  also  observed  different  number  of  times  tools  were  used,  different 
choices of tools, and different sequences chosen to perform each task. Additionally, 
these  differences  were  detected  among  participants  for  a  same  task.  In  general,  the 
results  confirmed  our  hypothesis  for  the  second  goal:  users  use  different  strategies. 
We intend to investigate the  users  strategies in detail to improve the integration of 
each tool within the environment. 

Fig. 2 shows how often the tools were actually used. Facet Browse and Keyword 
Search were the most used tools. The tools provided ways of search/retrieval results, 
and  participants  chosen  to  begin  with  Facet  Browse  (62.5%)  more  frequently  than 
with  Keyword  Search  (37.5%).  Unexpectedly,  Work  Memory  has  a  somewhat  high 
percentage  of  usage;  however,  few  participants  (3)  made  extensive  use  of  Work 
Memory while others (9) did not consider this tool in their tasks. 

Fig. 2. Percentage of time tools were used 

 

In  general,  participants  considered  available  facets  as  representative  of  the  wiki 
pages.  Course  (31.55%),  Learning  Material  Type  (16.67%),  and  Learning  Activity 
Type  (11.90%)  were  the  most  used  metadata  in  faceted  browsing.  One  of  the 
participants  requested  that  the  term  (year/semester)  concerning  Course  should  be 
included  in  the  interface.  These  results  have  motivated  the  need  for  specific 
vocabularies. 

Participants  commented  favorably  about  the  approach  of  the  prototype  and  the 
available tools. Some (6) followed a strategy and after having completed the task they 
said that could improve the strategy. Participants were specifically asked to comment 
about  the  control  of  the  navigation  process.  All  participants  stated  that  they  felt  in 
control  by  using  the  history  feature.  Furthermore,  when  asked  participants  did  not 
?

?

?
stated  getting  lost  while  using  the  prototype.  Initially,  some  participants  (3)  did  not 
understand that, after cancel (undo) an action, the results reflect the resultant sequence 
of actions. However, as the participants continued to use the prototype, they perceived 
this  feature  and  tried  to  exploit  it.  At  the  end  of  the  interview,  most  of  participants 
indicated they intend to use the prototype in the future. 

5   Related Work 

Many Semantic Wikis have been described in the literature, e.g. Semantic MediaWiki 
[4], Platypus Wiki [13], WikSAR [14], SemperWiki [15]. These Wikis use semantic 
information  (metadata)  to  offer  improved  navigation,  browsing,  and  searching.  In 
general, they are primarily focused on semantic navigation (e.g. providing additional 
information  on  the  relation  a  link  describes)  and  semantic  search  (e.g.  allowing  a 
semantic  query  on  the  underlying  knowledge  base).  SemperWiki  has  also  provided 
faceted browsing [16]; however, it does not integrate this technique with others. 

Our  proposal  integrates  several  tools  in  an  environment  to  help  browsing  and 
searching.  The  prototype  provides  an  interactive  support  to  information  seeking 
strategies  based  on  orienteering.  Users  may  choose  an  appropriate  tool  or  a 
combination of tools to take steps along the way to satisfy their information needs. 

6   Conclusions 

Browsing for information in Wikis can become difficult as the number of pages and 
corresponding  contents  increases.  We  present  a  prototype  developed  to  demonstrate 
our initial ideas combining searching tools to compose a strategy of orienteering. An 
evaluation showed that the prototype is useful to find relevant information in CoTeia 
repositories and provided insight regarding the tools and the underlying orienteering 
strategy. 

Concerning future work, our main efforts address experiments with other types of 
user, in particular students, to investigate their interactions and performance using the 
prototype.  We  also  plan  to  recognize  some  repeating  strategies  that  can  yield  to 
patterns. 
 
Acknowledgments. Our thanks to FINEP, FAPESP and UTFPR for funding parts of 
this research. 
