The Current State of SKOS Vocabularies

on the Web

Nor Azlinayati Abdul Manaf1,2, Sean Bechhofer1, and Robert Stevens1

1 School of Computer Science, The University of Manchester, United Kingdom

{abdulman,seanb,robert.stevens}@cs.man.ac.uk

2 MIMOS Berhad, Technology Park Malaysia, 57000 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

Abstract. We present a survey of the current state of Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS) vocabularies on the Web. Candidate
vocabularies were gathered through collections and web crawling, with
478 identified as complying to a given definition of a SKOS vocabulary.
Analyses were then conducted that included investigation of the use of
SKOS constructs; the use of SKOS semantic relations and lexical labels;
and the structure of vocabularies in terms of the hierarchical and associative relations, branching factors and the depth of the vocabularies.
Even though SKOS concepts are considered to be the core of SKOS vo-
cabularies, our findings were that not all SKOS vocabularies published
explicitly declared SKOS concepts in the vocabularies. Almost one-third
of the SKOS vocabularies collected fall into the category of term lists,
with no use of any SKOS semantic relations. As concept labelling is core
to SKOS vocabularies, a surprising find is that not all SKOS vocabularies
use SKOS lexical labels, whether skos:prefLabel or skos:altLabel, for
their concepts. The branching factors and maximum depth of the vocabularies have no direct relationship to the size of the vocabularies. We also
observed some common modelling slips found in SKOS vocabularies. The
survey is useful when considering, for example, converting artefacts such
as OWL ontologies into SKOS, where a definition of typicality of SKOS
vocabularies could be used to guide the conversion. Moreover, the survey results can serve to provide a better understanding of the modelling
styles of the SKOS vocabularies published on the Web, especially when
considering the creation of applications that utilize these vocabularies.

Introduction

We present a survey of Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS) vocabularies on the Web. The aim of this survey is to understand what a typical SKOS
vocabulary looks like, especially in terms of the shape, size and depth of the
vocabulary structure. We are also interested in determining the extent of usage
of SKOS constructs. The results of this survey will equip us with a better understanding of the modelling styles used in the SKOS vocabularies published on the
Web. This may be important when considering the creation of an application
that utilizes these vocabularies, for example, when converting artefacts such as

E. Simperl et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2012, LNCS 7295, pp. 270284, 2012.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012
?

?

?
Emotion 

skos:narrower 

skos:prefLabel 

skos:narrower 

skos:broader 

skos:prefLabel 

skos:prefLabel 

Joy 

Love 

skos:altLabel 

Affection 

skos:prefLabel 
Beauty 

skos:related 

skos:definition 

Strong feelings of attraction 
towards, and affection for another 
adult, or great affection for a friend 
or family member 

represent skos:Concept 

Fig. 1. An example of SKOS constructs usage

OWL ontologies into SKOS, where some typicality of SKOS vocabularies may
be useful to guide the conversion.

SKOS1, accepted as a W3C Recommendation in August 2009, is one of a
number of Semantic Web knowledge representation languages. Other such languages include the Resource Description Framework (RDF)2, the RDF Schema
(RDFS)3, and the Web Ontology Language (OWL)4. SKOS is a language designed to represent traditional knowledge organization systems whose representation has weak semantics that are used for simple retrieval and navigation.
Such representation includes thesauri, subject headings, classification schemes,
taxonomies, glossaries and other structured controlled vocabularies.

The basic element in SKOS is the concept which can be viewed as a unit of
thought; ideas, meanings or objects, that is subjective and independent of the
term used to label them [1]. These concepts can be semantically linked through
hierarchical and associative relations.

Figure 1 shows an example of the usage of SKOS constructs. There are
four skos:Concept in the figure, representing the concept of Emotion, Love,
Joy and Beauty. The skos:broader and skos:narrower properties are used
to show that the concepts are hierarchically arranged, while the skos:related
property is used to show the associative relations between the concepts. SKOS
provides three properties for associating lexical labels to conceptual resources;
skos:prefLabel, skos:altLabel and skos:hiddenLabel. SKOS documentation properties such as skos:definition are used to provide additional textual
information regarding the concept.

One of SKOS aims is to provide a bridge between different communities of
practice within the Library and Information Sciences and the Semantic Web
communities. This is accomplished by transferring existing models of knowledge
organization systems to the Semantic Web technology context [1]. Knowledge
organization system (KOS) is a general term, referring to the tools that present
the organized interpretation of knowledge structures [2]. This includes a variety

1 http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/
2 http://www.w3.org/RDF/
3 http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/wiki/RDFS
4 http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/wiki/OWL

N.A. Abdul Manaf, S. Bechhofer, and R. Stevens

of schemes that are used to organize, manage and retrieve information. There
are several types of KOS. Hodge [3] groups them into three general categories:

Term lists (flat vocabularies): emphasize lists of terms, often with defini-

tions; e.g., authority files, glossaries, dictionaries, gazetteers, code lists;

Classifications and categories (multi-level vocabularies): emphasize the
creation of subject sets; e.g., taxonomies, subject headings, classification
schemes; and

Relationship lists (relational vocabularies): emphasize the connections be-

tween terms and concepts; e.g., thesauri, semantic networks, ontologies.

We wish to find how many SKOS vocabularies are publicly available for use on
the Web and how many fall into one of the listed categories. Additionally, we
are interested in learning what the SKOS vocabularies look like in terms of size,
shape and depth of the vocabulary structure. We are interested in understanding
which of the SKOS constructs listed in the SKOS Reference document [1] are
actually being used in the SKOS vocabularies and how often these constructs
are used.

Related Work. While research has attempted to characterize Semantic Web
documents such as OWL ontologies and RDF(S) documents on the Web [4,5,6],
to the authors knowledge there is no attempt at characterizing SKOS vocabu-
laries. Our approach is similar to the work produced by Wang et. al. [4], which
focused on OWL ontologies and RDFS documents.

2 Materials and Methods

The steps carried out in this survey are:

1. Preparing a candidate SKOS vocabulary corpus.
2. Identifying SKOS vocabularies.
3. Collecting survey data.
4. Filtering out multiple copies of the same SKOS vocabularies.
5. Analysing the corpus of vocabularies.

Apparatus. All experiments were performed on a 2.4GHz Intel Core 2 Duo
MacBook running Mac OS X 10.5.8 with a maximum of 3 GB of memory allocated to the Java virtual machine. Two reasoners were used: JFaCT, which
is a Java version of the FaCT++ reasoner, and Pellet. We used the OWL API
version 3.2.45 for handling and manipulating the vocabularies.

Preparing a candidate SKOS vocabulary corpus. We employed several methods
to gather the candidate SKOS vocabularies to be included in our corpus. First,
we gathered vocabularies from two dedicated collections, which are the SKOS

5 http://owlapi.sourceforge.net/
?

?

?
Implementation Report6 and the SKOS/Datasets7. We chose the collections as
a primary source because the vocabularies listed in these collections were compiled by the SKOS Working Group through its community call. We manually
downloaded the vocabularies listed in these collections and stored them locally.
In the second method we utilised Semantic Web search engines such as Swoogle8
and Watson9. Collecting vocabularies from these sources may enable us to gain
some insights into the use of SKOS vocabularies in the community. We made
use of the API provided by both search engines to programmatically gather the
results from the relevant search. For both search engines, we used thesaurus,
skos and concept as search terms. At this point, we collected the URIs of the
vocabularies as our analysis tools will retrieve the documents from the Web given
the URIs. We also used the Google search engine, using search keywords skos
and relevant filetypes, which are .skos, .owl, .rdf, .ttl, .nt, .n3 and
.xml. We considered these terms as keywords in identifying SKOS vocabularies because some of them are the terms used as construct names in the SKOS
data model.

Our third method used a Web crawler. We used an off-the-shelf web crawler
called Blue Crab web crawler10, which could be configured to crawl based on
user specific settings.

Identifying SKOS vocabularies. For the purposes of this survey, we used the following definition of SKOS vocabulary. A SKOS vocabulary is a vocabulary that
at the very least contains SKOS concept(s) used directly, or SKOS constructs
that indirectly infer the use of a SKOS concept, such as use of SKOS semantic
relations.

Each candidate SKOS vocabulary was screened in the following way to identify

it as a SKOS vocabulary:

1. Check for existence of direct instances of type skos:Concept; if Yes, then

accept the vocabulary as a SKOS vocabulary.

2. Check for existence of implied instances of skos:Concept due to domain
and range restrictions on SKOS relationships (for example the subject of a
skos:broader, skos:narrower or skos:related relationship is necessarily
a skos:Concept); if Yes, then accept the vocabulary as a SKOS vocabulary.

3. Otherwise, do not accept this vocabulary as a SKOS vocabulary.

Consider the following vocabulary snippets written in Manchester Syntax11.
Vocabulary 1 and Vocabulary 2 are accepted as SKOS vocabularies based
on tests in Step 1 and Step 2, respectively. Meanwhile, Vocabulary 3 is not

6 http://www.w3.org/2006/07/SWD/SKOS/reference/20090315

/implementation.html

7 http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/wiki/SKOS/Datasets
8 http://swoogle.umbc.edu/
9 http://kmi-web05.open.ac.uk/WatsonWUI/
10 http://www.limit-point.com/products/bluecrab/
11 http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-manchester-syntax/

N.A. Abdul Manaf, S. Bechhofer, and R. Stevens

accepted as a SKOS vocabulary according to our definition, even though this
vocabulary uses SKOS constructs such as skos:prefLabel and skos:altLabel.

Vocabulary 1:
Individual: Emotion

Vocabulary 2:
Individual: Love

Vocabulary 3:
Individual: Love

Types:

Concept

Types:

Thing

Individual: Love

Facts:

Types:

Thing

Facts:

Types:

Concept

broader Emotion

prefLabel "Love",
altLabel "Affection"

Individual: Beauty

Individual: Emotion

Types:

Concept

Types:

Thing

Collecting survey data. Since we are interested in both the asserted and inferred
version of the SKOS vocabularies, we performed the data recording in two stages;
with and without invocation of an automatic reasoner such as Pellet or JFaCT.
The data collected without invocation of an automatic reasoner may suggest
the actual usage of SKOS constructs in those vocabularies. As for the rest of
the analysis, such as identifying the shape and structure of the vocabularies, we
need to collect the data from the inferred version of the vocabularies, hence the
use of an automatic reasoner.

In the first stage of data collection, no automatic reasoner is invoked, since
we are interested in the asserted version of the SKOS vocabularies. For each
candidate SKOS vocabulary, we count and record the number of instances for
all SKOS constructs listed in the SKOS Reference [1]. We also record the IRI of
all Concept Scheme present in each SKOS vocabulary.

In the second stage of data collection, we applied a reasoner, and collected

and recorded the following for each SKOS vocabulary:

1. Number of SKOS concepts.
2. Depth of each SKOS concept and maximum depth of the concept hierarchy.
3. Total number of links for skos:broader, skos:narrower and skos:related

properties.

4. Total number of loose singleton concepts (concepts that are not connected

to any other concepts).

5. Total number of root concepts (concepts with only skos:narrower relation,

but no skos:broader relation).

6. Maximum number of skos:broader property.

Filtering out multiple copies of the same SKOS vocabularies. We use the recorded
information in the previous stage to filter structurally identical SKOS vocabu-
laries. We compare the Concept Scheme IRI to search for duplicate vocabularies.
For two or more vocabularies having the same Concept Scheme IRI, we compare the record for each SKOS construct count. We make a pairwise comparison
between each SKOS construct count, taking two vocabularies at a time.
?

?

?
1/ If the two vocabularies have identical records, we then check the content
of these vocabularies. This is done by making a pairwise comparison between
the instances of skos:Concept in one vocabulary to the other. If the two vocabularies have the same instances of skos:Concept, then one copy of these
vocabularies is kept and the duplicate vocabulary is removed. Otherwise, follow
the next step.

2/ If the two vocabularies do not have identical records or identical instances
of skos:Concept, we assume that one vocabulary is a newer version of the other.
We check, if the two vocabularies belong to the same category (either Thesaurus,
Taxonomy, or Glossary), then we keep the latest version of the vocabulary and
remove the older version. Otherwise, both vocabularies are kept.

Analysing the survey results. In analysing the collected data, we found that some
of the vocabularies that are known to be SKOS vocabularies, fail in Step 2 (to
be identified as a SKOS vocabulary). We manually inspected these vocabularies.
We found several patterns of irregularity in the vocabulary representation and
considered them as modelling slips made by ontology engineers when authoring
the vocabularies. For each type of modelling slip, we decide whether the error is
intentional or unintentional, and if fixing the error would change the content of
the vocabulary. If the error is unintentional and fixing the error does not change
the content of the vocabulary, then we can apply fixing procedures to correct
the modelling slips. All fixed vocabularies were included in the survey for further
analysis.

We calculated the mode, mean, median and standard deviation for the occurrence of each construct collected from the previous process. The analysis focused
on two major aspects of the vocabularies; the usage of SKOS constructs and the
structure of the vocabularies. In terms of the usage of SKOS constructs, we
analysed which constructs were most used in the SKOS vocabularies. As for the
structural analysis of the SKOS vocabulary, we introduced a SKOS metric, M,
with eight tuples as follows:

M =< S,D,L,R,MAXB,FH,BH,FA >

(1)
where S is the size of vocabulary (represented by the number of SKOS con-
cepts), D is the maximum depth of vocabulary structure, L is the number of
loose singleton concepts in the vocabulary, R is the number of root nodes of the
vocabulary structure, MAXB is the maximum skos:broader relation for each
concept in the vocabulary, FH is the average hierarchical forward branching fac-
tor, BH is the average hierarchical backward branching factor and FA is the
average associative forward branching factor.

According to [7], branching factor is the measure of the number of links coming in to or going out from a particular node. For a directed graph, there are
two types of branching factor, namely forward branching factor (FBF) and
backward branching factor (BBF). The FBF is the number of arcs or links
going out from a node. The BBF is the number of arcs or links coming into a
node.

N.A. Abdul Manaf, S. Bechhofer, and R. Stevens

a

d

b

c 

a

d

e

b

c 

g

h

f 

e

(a) Example 1

(b) Example 2

Fig. 2. Example graphs for determining the structure of vocabulary

The FBF for hierarchical relations is calculated based on the number of
skos:narrower relations of a particular concept. Whereas the BBF for hierarchical relations is calculated based on the number of skos:broader relations
of a particular concept. As for associative relations, both FBF and BBF are
calculated based on the number of skos:related relations of a particular con-
cept. Since the skos:related relation is symmetric, both FBF and BBF for
the associative relation of a particular vocabulary is the same.

We suspect that the branching factor values for each concept in a particular SKOS vocabulary are non-uniform. Therefore, we calculated the average
FBF and average BBF for both hierarchical and associative relations. Note that
we ignored the loose singleton concepts when calculating the average branching
factors. The average hierarchical FBF, FH , average hierarchical BBF, BH and
average associative FBF, FA are given by the following equations:

FH =

n
Tn

,

BH =

b
Tb

, FA =

r
Tr

(2)

where n, b, and r are the total number of skos:narrower, skos:broader and
skos:related relations, respectively, and Tn, Tn and Tn are the total number
of concepts with skos:narrower, skos:broader and skos:related relations,
respectively.

Figure 2 shows two graphs illustrating two different structures of example
SKOS vocabulary. Each circle represents a SKOS concept and each directed link
between two circles represents a skos:narrower relation. The SKOS metric for
Figure 2(a) and 2(b) are given by:

M S D L R MAXB FH BH FA
MA 5 2 0 1

MB 8 2 3 1
?

?

?
Note that even though the FH and BH for both examples are the same because
each example has the same skos:narrower and skos:broader relations, the
structure of both example is different. However, by looking at the S,L,R, we
may distinguish the structure of Example 1 from Example 2.
Following the categories of KOS discussed in Section 1, we also defined some
rules using the SKOS metric, M, to categorise the vocabularies in our corpus:
?

?

?
saurus.

 If all D,FH,BH,FA > 0, then this vocabulary is categorised as a The-
 If all D,FH,BH > 0 and FA = 0, then this vocabulary is categorised as a
 If all D,FH,BH,FA = 0, then this vocabulary is categorised as a Glossary .
 If the vocabulary does not belong to any of the above category, then this
vocabulary is categorised as Others. For example, the vocabulary uses only
associative relation but not hierarchical relations.

Taxonomy .

3 Result and Observation

We collected 303 candidate SKOS vocabularies from the first method of corpus
collection12. As for the second method, we collected 4220 URIs13. We collected
2296 URIs of candidate SKOS vocabularies from the third method14. This gives
a total of 6819 candidate SKOS vocabularies.

After the SKOS vocabulary identification stage, 1068 vocabularies were identified as SKOS vocabularies according to our definition of SKOS vocabulary. The
filtering of structurally identical SKOS vocabularies resulted in the exclusion of
603 identical SKOS vocabularies and 11 older versions of SKOS vocabularies,
which gave us 454 SKOS vocabularies for further analysis.

Typology of modelling slips Based on our analysis of the collected result, we
determined three types of modelling slips as follows:
Type 1: Undeclared property type. Each property used in the vocabulary is not
explicitly typed as any of the property types such as owl:objectProperty,
owl:dataProperty, owl:annotationProperty, etc. An example of this modelling slip is the use of skos:broader or skos:narrower properties in the vocabulary without explicit declarations as owl:ObjectProperty; such as through an
owl:import of SKOS core vocabulary. This can cause tooling like the OWLAPI
to treat the property as owl:annotationProperty. The fixing procedure for this
type of modelling slip was to add the declarations for SKOS related properties.
Applying the fixing procedure fixed 18 SKOS vocabularies.
Type 2: Inconsistent. We found 20 SKOS vocabularies were inconsistent. We
classify the reasons for inconsistent vocabularies into:
- unintentionally typing an individual that is supposed to be an instance of
skos:ConceptScheme class to also be an instance of skos:Concept class. The
fixing procedure for this type of modelling slip was to remove the declaration of
skos:Concept class from the individual. Applying the fixing procedure fixed 5
SKOS vocabularies.
- unintentionally using skos:narrower construct to relate between a member
and its collection. We found that the skos:member property was declared in the

12 This figure is valid as at 8 December 2010.
13 as at 2 March 2011.
14 Note that the web crawler runs for approximately three months, ended on 17 May

2011.

N.A. Abdul Manaf, S. Bechhofer, and R. Stevens

Table 1. Summary results

Table 2. Exclusions

Stages
Corpus preparation:
- 1st method
- 2nd method
- 3rd method
SKOS vocabularies identifica-
tion
- 1st method
- 2nd method
- 3rd method
Structurally identical filtering
Fixing modelling slips:
- Type 1
- Type 2
Total SKOS vocabularies

vocabs
?

?

?
Exclusion type
Plain
pages/blogs/forum
Ontologies that are not SKOS
vocabularies
File not found
Connection refused
Network is unreachable
Connection timed out
Parsing error
Actual SKOS Core vocabulary
Failed to load import ontology
Modelling slips (Type 2 & Type
3)
Total exclusion

vocabs
?

?

?
23 (14 & 9)

vocabulary but never used. The fixing procedure for this type of modelling slip
was to replace the skos:narrower property with the skos:member property to
show the relationship between a member and its collection. Applying the fixing
procedure fixed 1 SKOS vocabulary.
- invalid datatype usage such as invalid dateTime datatype, invalid integer
datatype, invalid string datatype, etc. This mistake was considered unfixable
errors. There were 14 SKOS vocabularies excluded from the survey.

Type 3: Use of unsupported datatype. This was issued by the reasoner when
encountering user-defined datatype. Note that this is not exactly a modelling
slip instead a result from some limitations of the reasoner, thus, hindered us
from getting the required data. To deal with this case, we first checked whether
the user-defined datatype was actually in use to type the data in the vocabulary.
If the datatype was not in use, we excluded the datatype from the datatype list
and reclassified the vocabulary. There were 9 vocabularies excluded from the
survey.

Fixing the modelling slips resulted in 24 additional SKOS vocabularies included in the corpus, which gave us the final number of 478 SKOS vocab-
ularies. The summary figures and reasons for exclusion are presented in Ta-
bles
found at
http://www.myexperiment.org/packs/237.

and 2. The

results

full

and analysis

can be

Figure 3(a) shows the percentage of the SKOS construct usage. For each
SKOS construct, a SKOS vocabulary was counted as using the construct if the
construct is used at least once in the vocabulary. In this stage, we only counted
the asserted axioms in each of the SKOS vocabularies.

Of all

the SKOS constructs

that are made available in the SKOS
Recommendation[1] skos:Concept, skos:prefLabel, and skos:broader are
the three most used constructs in the vocabularies, with 95.6%, 85.6% and 69.5%,
?

?

?
The Current State of SKOS Vocabularies on the Web
?

?

?
                      
?

?

?
(a) Usage
?

?

?
(b) Usage

Fig. 3. Construct Usage and Vocabulary Types

respectively. 28 out of 35 SKOS constructs were used in less than 10% of the
vocabularies. There were eight SKOS constructs that were not used in any of
the vocabularies.

The rules in Section 2 were used to categorise the vocabularies following the
types of KOS as described in Section 1. Figure 3(b) shows a chart representing
different types of SKOS vocabulary. As shown in this figure, 61% or 293 of the
vocabularies are categorised as Taxonomy. The second largest type is Glossary
with 27% or 129 vocabularies. 11% or 54 vocabularies fell into the Thesaurus
category.

The remaining 1% or 2 vocabularies were categorised as Others. Further inspection revealed that the two vocabularies in the Others category are a Glossary with 4 skos:related properties on 2 pairs of the concepts (out of 333
concepts) and a snippet of a real SKOS vocabulary intended to show the use of
skos:related property. We decided to reclassify these two vocabularies into the
Glossary category for the first one and the Thesaurus category for the other.

N.A. Abdul Manaf, S. Bechhofer, and R. Stevens
?

?

?
(a) Thesaurus
?

?

?
 
?

?

?
(b) Taxonomy
?

?

?
(c) Glossary

Fig. 4. Size of vocabulary and its maximum depth of vocabulary structure

Figure 4 plots the size of SKOS vocabularies and the maximum depth of the
vocabulary structure. Each subgraph represents different categories of SKOS
vocabulary; Thesaurus, Taxonomy and Glossary. Within each category, the vocabularies are sorted according to their size in descending order. The size of
SKOS vocabulary was calculated based on the number of SKOS concepts in the
vocabulary. The maximum depth of vocabulary was calculated based on hierarchical relations; skos:broader and skos:narrower; in the vocabulary. Figure 4(a) shows that the smallest size of vocabulary for the Thesaurus category
is 3 concepts and the largest is 102614 concepts. The maximum depth of the
vocabulary structure ranged from 1 to 13 levels. For the Taxonomy category as
shown in Figure 4(b), the smallest size of vocabulary was 2 concepts and the
largest was 75529 concepts. The maximum depth of the vocabulary structure
ranged from 1 to 16 levels. Figure 4(c) plots size of vocabularies from the Glossary category. The smallest size of vocabulary is 1 concept and the largest is
40945 concepts. The maximum depth of the vocabulary structure for the Taxonomy category ranged from 1 to 16 levels. Note that there was no maximum
depth for the Glossary category because there are no hierarchical relations were
present in the vocabularies of this category.

Figure 5(a) and 5(b) show the number of loose concepts, root concepts and
maximum skos:broader relations for each vocabulary structure. For the Thesaurus category, the loose concepts ranged from 0 concept (which means all
concepts are connected to at least another concept) to 4426 concepts. The root
concepts ranged from 1 root to 590 root concepts. The maximum skos:broader
?

?

?
(a) Thesaurus
?

?

?
(b) Taxonomy
?

?

?
(c) Thesaurus - branching factors

(d) Taxonomy - branching factors

Fig. 5. (a) Number of loose concepts, root concepts, maximum skos:broader rela-
tions, hierarchical branching factors, and associative branching factors of vocabulary
structure

relations ranged from 1 relation to 37 relations. Only 11 out of 54 vocabularies
had a single parent (mono-hierarchy) and the rest had at least 2 parent concepts.
As for the Taxonomy category, the loose concepts ranged from 0 concept to
3638 concepts. The root concepts ranged from 1 concept to 258 concepts. The
maximum skos:broader relations ranged from 1 relation to 13 relations. 223
out of 293 vocabularies had more than 1 skos:broader relations, which meant
that these were poly-hierarchy graphs.

Figure 5(c) and 5(d) show the number of hierarchical and associative branching factor for the Thesaurus and Taxonomy category. For the Thesaurus cate-
gory, the smallest hierarchical FBF was 1 branch and the largest was 24 branches.
The smallest hierarchical BBF was 1 branch and the largest was 7 branches. As
for the associative FBF, the smallest was 1 branch and the largest was 4 branches.
For the Taxonomy category, the smallest hierarchical FBF was 1 branch and the
largest was 2143 branches. The smallest hierarchical BBF was 1 branch and the
largest was 13 branches.

4 Discussion

As shown in Figure 3(a), of all the SKOS constructs that are available in the
SKOS standards, only 3 out of 35 SKOS constructs are used in more than 60%

N.A. Abdul Manaf, S. Bechhofer, and R. Stevens

of the vocabularies. These constructs are skos:Concept, skos:prefLabel and
skos:broader. Note that the skos:Concept construct usage is not 100%, due
to not all vocabularies explicitly typing their individuals as skos:Concept in
their vocabularies. However, these vocabularies use other SKOS constructs such
as semantic relations that infer the individuals as skos:Concept due to its domain and range constraints. In some SKOS applications available on the Web
like SKOS Reader15, being able to recognise SKOS concepts is the key to display a SKOS vocabulary. Sometimes, these applications are not equipped with
automatic reasoner that could infer the SKOS concepts. Therefore, not explicitly typing the resources as SKOS concepts in a SKOS vocabulary could prevent
certain SKOS applications like SKOS Reader from behaving properly.

We found that skos:broader relations are used more frequently compared
to skos:narrower relations, with 69.5% over 23.6% of vocabularies. Note that
skos:narrower is an inverse relation of skos:broader. In those vocabularies where the ontology engineers only specify either one of these relations we
think they may be taking advantage of its semantic property to infer the inverse relation. However, we found that 77 vocabularies specified both relations,
skos:broader and skos:narrower, for any pair of concepts that had either re-
lation. 7 of these vocabularies were originated from traditional KOS via some
form of conversion process. Various works on converting from traditional KOS
to SKOS can be found in [8,9,10,11].

Note also that the skos:prefLabel construct is not used in all of the vo-
cabularies. Further analysis revealed that some vocabularies use rdfs:label for
labelling their concepts. There are 25 out of 35 SKOS constructs used in less than
10% of the vocabularies. Some of these constructs are SKOS mapping proper-
ties, which are expected to be used in vocabularies that define alignment to other
vocabularies. Other constructs that fell into this portion are mainly the SKOS
documentation constructs and SKOS extended (SKOS-XL) constructs. The result also showed that more than 1000 vocabularies excluded from the survey
used some of the SKOS constructs such as lexical labelling and documentation
constructs.

From the results shown in Figure 3(b), the largest category of 61% of the vocabularies in our corpus are categorised as a Taxonomy. All the three categories,
Thesaurus, Taxonomy and Glossary, are consistent with the KOS categories.

The results we found in this survey corresponded to some extent to the result
of the Controlled Vocabulary Survey16 conducted by the Semantic Web Company published in June 2011. They conducted an online survey, involving 158
participants which aimed to investigate and learn more about some aspects related to controlled vocabularies. Amongst the foci of interests are; i) preferred
knowledge models, ii) main application areas, iii) importance of standards, and
iv) trends in organization sizes. The result of their survey revealed that taxonomies and ontologies seem to be the preferred knowledge models. Semantic

15 http://labs.mondeca.com/skosReader.html
16 http://poolparty.punkt.at/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/
Survey Do Controlled Vocabularies Matter 2011 June.pdf
?

?

?
search, data integration and structure for content navigation are the main application areas for controlled vocabularies. Standards like SKOS have gained
greater awareness amongst the participants, which shows that the web-paradigm
has entered the world of controlled vocabularies.

The result shows that there is no direct relationship between size of vocabulary
and its maximum depth of vocabulary structure. We can see from the graph that
the maximum depth of small vocabularies is almost similar to the maximum
depth of large vocabularies for both the Thesaurus and Taxonomy categories.

For the Thesaurus category, 43 out of 55 or 80% of the vocabularies have
maximum skos:broader relations more than one. This means that at least
one of the concepts in these vocabularies has more than one broader concept,
which make them poly-hierarchy graphs. 93% of the vocabularies have more
than one root concept, which means that these vocabularies have shape of multi-
trees. As for the Taxonomy category, 76% of the vocabularies have maximum
skos:broader relations more than one and 81% of the vocabularies have more
than one root concept.
As for the hierarchical and associative branching factors result, we found one
anomaly to the Taxonomy category where one of the vocabularies had depth, D
of 1 and only one root concept. One particularly noteworthy value of the metric is
that the hierarchical FBF, FH is 2143, which is one less than the total vocabulary
size, S, which is 2144. This vocabulary is an outlier, with a a single root node
and a very broad, shallow hierarchy. If we were to exclude this vocabulary, the
range of hierarchical FBF for the Taxonomy category is between 1 and 56. The
hierarchical FBF alongside hierarchy depth are important in determining the
indexing and search time for a particular query[12].

5 Conclusion

Our method for collecting and analysing SKOS vocabularies has enabled us
to gain an understanding of the type and typicality of those vocabularies. We
found out that all but two of the SKOS vocabularies that we collected from the
Web fell into one of the categories listed by the traditional KOS; flat vocabularies (Glossary), multi-level vocabularies (Taxonomy) and relational vocabularies
(Thesaurus). In the future, we plan to select several SKOS vocabularies from
each category and study them in more detail in terms of the use and function of
the vocabularies in applications.
Based on the results of this survey, a typical taxonomy looks like a polyhierarchy that is 2 levels deep, with a FBFH of 10 concepts and a BFFH of 3 concepts.
A typical thesaurus also looks like a polyhierarchy that is 6 level deep, with a
FBFH of 3 concepts and a BFFH of 2 concepts, additionally having associative
relationships, FBFA of 1 concept.

In this survey, we collected 478 vocabularies that according to our definition
are SKOS vocabularies. Three years after becoming a W3C Recommendation,
the use of SKOS remains low. However, our total of SKOS vocabularies may
be artificially low, with some being hidden from our collection method. The

N.A. Abdul Manaf, S. Bechhofer, and R. Stevens

reasons for some of these vocabularies not being publicly accessible by an automated process could be due to confounding factors such as proprietary issue,
vocabularies stored within SVN, etc. However, we are confident that we have
done our best to deploy various methods in collecting SKOS vocabularies that
are publicly available on the Web.

Acknowledgements. Nor Azlinayati Abdul Manaf is receiving the scholarship
from Majlis Amanah Rakyat (MARA), an agency under the Malaysian Govern-
ment, for her doctorate studies. Many thanks to the reviewers who gave insightful
comments and suggestion to improve this paper.
