A Semantic Policy Sharing Infrastructure

for Pervasive Communities

Vikash Kumar

The Telecommunications Research Center Vienna (FTW), Austria

kumar@ftw.at

Abstract. We propose a policy sharing infrastructure that enables a semantic rule created in one set of environmental, physical and contextual
settings to be translated, while maintaining the underlying semantics, for
use in a situation when those settings/parameters change. With an aim
to enable sharing of useful intelligence described in the form of policies,
we base our discussions on smart home and mobile commerce use cases.

Keywords: Policy sharing, Semantic Rules, Smart homes, mCommerce.

Introduction and Motivation

Rules are increasingly being used in semantic applications as well as in traditional
IT systems to provide a formal and powerful way of representing information like
individual preferences, privacy constraints etc [1,2]. To make such systems more
versatile, there have been many initiatives that aim to transform a rule created
in one semantic standard to one created in another [3,5,10]. However, in all these
cases there is no provision for a rule or a policy1to be shared or reused among
applications where its semantic meaning is preserved even while the context and
other parameters of respective application environments change. This thesis will
elaborate on a solution for an intelligent semantic policy sharing infrastructure
that enables the agents of an application across different settings, context, envi-
ronments, etc. to share and reuse semantic policies amongst themselves. For this
we identify variables that affect the definition of a policy at different usage sites
of the application and provide them as input to an underlying translation engine.
The investigations are carried out in the use case of a smart home community
as well as in an mobile commerce (m-commerce) setting.

Smart meters are increasingly being installed in common households in most
countries and at the same time there is an increasing tendency of people residing
in living communities like in apartments of a common large building in the
current urban landscape. A natural next step in such a scenario would be to
further utilize the advantages of Information Communication Technologies (ICT)
in creating connected urban environments which promote increased partnerships
among residents of a living community through better information sharing and
transparency [11,12]. A part of such information sharing and exchange of ideas

1 A policy consists of one or more rules.

E. Simperl et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2012, LNCS 7295, pp. 859863, 2012.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

V. Kumar

can be in the form of policies that the resident of an apartment creates for energy
saving and/or better user experience in his/her respective home.

In the m-commerce use case, we aim to use telecommunications (telco) specific
information like identity, location, etc. in providing personalized advertisements
(ads) to users based on their own preferences set in the form of policies. The
proposed infrastructure would enable them in getting better recommendations
by sharing efficient policies among acquaintances in a Web 3.0 environment.

The main research question to be investigated in this thesis is: For the same
application, can a semantic policy created for one set of physical, environmental
and contextual conditions and settings be effectively translated and applied into
another different set of settings while preserving its core idea? Along the way,
this work will also show how to translate the benefits achieved (in terms of
cost/energy savings, etc.) by application of a policy from one environment to
another.

2 Related Work

There has been considerable interest in the areas of rule interchange and profile
matching in the semantic web community. RuleML[6] (Rule Markup Language)
was the first initiative aimed at creating a unifying family of XML-serialized
rule languages that includes all the web rules. The REWERSE I1 Rule Markup
Language(R2ML) furthered this cause by proposing a comprehensive XML rule
format by integrating languages like OCL, SWRL and RuleML [10].

W3C launched the Rule Interchange Format(RIF) [5] working group in 2005
tasked with producing a core rule language using which rules can be represented
across all systems. The RIF framework for rule-based languages consists of a set
of dialects which formally describes information about the syntax, semantics and
XML serialization of a language. A semantics-enabled layered policy architecture
has been proposed in [3] as an extension of W3Cs Semantic Web architecture
aimed at facilitating the exchange and management of policies created in multiple
languages across the web.

Several projects have tried to utilize the benefits of smart meters and build
applications and services around data collected by them [9,11,12]. Several others
have suggested the use of mobile specific enablers for providing privacy aware
services based on semantic rules for mobile users [13,14].

While this thesis takes inspirations from the existing works in the direction of
rule interchange and sharing, the unique feature of the proposed infrastructure
will be the translation of a policy created in one set of conditions into that in
another set of conditions for the same application in a privacy aware man-
ner. Therefore the focus wont be on application or language independence as
proposed in other approaches.

3 Approach and Methodology

In order to re-use the ideas and best practices of different users, the first requirement would be to serialize their preferences and policies in a common format
?

?

?
Fig. 1. The policy sharing infrastructure

(possibly RIF-BLD [5]) which could easily be adapted from one array of settings to another. Thereafter, for the translation, we need to first identify the
static and dynamic parameters of a rule and then replace the dynamic ones with
those matching the new set of conditions. For example, user X s policy: Send
me all offers for iPad3 from Saturn electronic store will be translated for user
Y as Send me all offers for Samsung Galaxy tab from Amazon where Y is
interested in electronic ads but his/her profile shows an inclination for Samsung
products (rather than Apple) and the shopping behavior shows transactions
mostly from Amazon (rather than Saturn). The italicized and underlined parts
represent the static and dynamic contents of the rule respectively. Other inferences affecting this translation obtained by reasoning over user profile and
domain ontology, their online behavior and system policies may be facts like
iPad3 is a device in Tablet category while Saturn is a shop in the category Electronic Store. A suitable technique for such a matching of ontology concepts needs
to be developed. Another ontology containing the meta-policy information and
other rules governing policy translation would be a part of this infrastructure.
A central repository (Figure 1) will collect all the user policies annotated with
their respective metadata containing information about their static and dynamic
parameters, the perceived quantifiable advantage(s) achieved by their applica-
tion, etc. It will also contain user and environment data like profile, preferences,
temperature, etc. that will substitute the dynamic parameters of a rule.

V. Kumar

A Policy Translation Engine performs the actual translation of individual
rules in a policy from one setting to another using data available in the repository.
It also computes the perceived savings attained by the application of the policy
in both the settings and recommends the translated policy to interested users.
The overall research is planned in various phases described below.

Preliminary Study & Analysis. A study of state of the art in various aspects
of this project will be taken up. This would include a survey of existing rule based
service enablers, semantic rule interchange standards, utilizing data from smart
homes and personalized recommendation based m-commerce initiatives.

Specification of the Infrastructure. Based on the above inputs, a specification of the proposed semantic policy sharing infrastructure will be laid out
including formal definitions of individual components.

Prototype Implementation. The prototype implementation would be done in
several stages comprising of development of each module of the system followed
by an integration phase. The modules envisaged as of now are (i) policy creation
& modification tool, (ii) ontology development, (iii) the underlying policy translation module, (iv) intelligent context manager and recommendation engine for
adaptation in telco scenario and (v) integration.

Prototype Evaluation. A separate user evaluation will be conducted for each
module individually and for the prototype as a whole in context of both the use
cases based on various parameters like accuracy, user acceptance, etc.

4 Preliminary Results

At the end of this thesis, we expect to have a working prototype of the policy
translation infrastructure in the mentioned use cases. The focus of smart home
use case would be to allow sharing of effective energy saving policies in a resident community and the evaluations would investigate the semantic similarity
of the translated policy along with preciseness of calculated savings data. The
m-commerce use case will primarily aim at using sharable policies as a tool for
preserving user privacy while still being able to infer useful information from
their publicly shared data for ad recommendations. Evaluations will be based
on relevance of ads served by effect of original and translated policies.

5 Conclusions

In this paper, we introduced the idea of a semantic policy translation infrastructure and described some related work which would form a starting point of the
research carried out in this thesis. Thereafter, we also mentioned some preliminary results of the work so far. According to the methodology shown in Section
3, the next major steps are to complete the policy translation engine, context
management system as well as the policy recommendation tool. Finally, we intend to test our hypothesis through extensive user tests of the infrastructure
proposed in this paper.
?

?

?
Acknowledgments. This work has been partially supported by FFG funded
SESAME-S project [4] and partly by APSINT [8]. The Telecommunications Research Center Vienna (FTW) is supported by the Austrian government and the
City of Vienna within the competence center program COMET. Thanks to Dr.
Anna Fensel and Prof. Gabriele Kotsis for supervising this work.
