 

Identifying Complex Semantic Matches 

Brian Walshe 

KDEG & FAME, Department of Computer Science and Statistics,   

Trinity College Dublin 

walshebr@scss.tcd.ie 

Abstract.  One-to-one  correspondences  are  not  always  sufficient  to  accurately 
align  ontologies,  and  instead  complex  correspondences  with  conditions  and 
transformations  may  be  required.  Correspondence  patterns  provide  models 
which  can  be  used  to  guide  the  process  of  developing  complex  correspon-
dences.  However,  it  is  necessary  to  first  identify  which  pattern  to  apply  to  a 
given  alignment  problem.  This  PhD  proposes  the  development  of  algorithms, 
methods  and  processes  for  refining  elementary  correspondences between  concepts or relations into complex ones by identifying which correspondence pattern best represents a given correspondence. To date an evaluation of a system 
to  refine  correspondences  between  classes  in  the  YAGO  and  DBpedia   
ontologies has been completed. This evaluation showed that for a subsumption 
correspondence,  a  training  set  of  30  instances  of  the  class  being  mapped  was 
sufficient to refine the match to a conditional one 89% of the time. Hence we 
have shown that this is a promising approach for correspondences with a conditional  element,  and  correspondences  with  a  translation  element  will  be   
examined next. 

1  Motivation 

When organizations wish to work together, integrating their data is usually a significant challenge. As each organizations data resources have often been developed in-
dependently,  they  are  subject  to  heterogeneity    primarily  semantic,  syntactic  and 
structural. The use of ontologies has long been identified as an effective way of facilitating the integration process, seeing use in diverse fields, including for example, biomedicine and high-energy physics [1]. 

Suitable techniques for discovering and describing matches between ontologies are 
still very much an open problem [2]. Matching ontologies is a demanding and error 
prone  task.  Not  only  does  it require  expert  knowledge  of  the  matching  process,  but 
also  an  in-depth  understanding  of  the  subject  the  ontologies  describe,  and  typically 
knowledge of the principals used to construct the ontologies. The ontologies can differ in scope, granularity and coverage, they can use different paradigms to represent 
similar concepts, or use different modeling conventions [3]. Therefore producing high 
quality  correspondences  is  typically  semi-automated    an  expert  user  approves  and 
refines match candidates produced by an automatic semantic matcher tool [4].   

Semantic matcher tools typically focus on detecting schema-level equivalence rela-
tions.  However  elementary  correspondences  between  named  ontology  elements  are 
often not sufficient for tasks such as query rewriting, instance translation, or instance 

E. Simperl et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2012, LNCS 7295, pp. 849853, 2012. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 

B. Walshe 

mediation.  Complex  correspondences  which  contain  conditions  and  transformations 
are necessary to satisfy these real-world use cases. Recent semantic matching research 
has  produced  a  taxonomy  of  complex  correspondences,  called  Correspondence  Patterns by Scharffe [5]. As of version 4.0, the INRIA Alignment API [6] has introduced 
the Expressive  Declarative  Ontology  Alignment  Language (EDOAL)  for expressing 
complex relationships of this nature, but support among semantic matchers for discovering matches that make full use of EDOAL is still limited. 

While  progress  has  been  made  in  matching  research,  the  potential  use  cases  for 
semantic matching have also expanded with the realization of a web of data as Linked 
Data. Linked Open Data (LOD) represents a large amount of the content contained in 
the current Semantic Web, with DBpedia [7] currently describing 3.64 million things, 
1.83 million of which are classified in a consistent ontology1. As these sources overlap  and  complement  each  other,  mapping  between  them  is  important.  However  the 
shallow  taxonomies  typically  used  in  LOD  sources  means  that  complex  alignments 
are required if we wish to use this instance data with the richer structure found in a 
richer  ontology.  For  example  an  instance  of  type  AmericanFilmDirector  in  YAGO 
must become an instance of type Person, with the occupation attribute set to Director 
and  nationality  set  to  American  if  it  is  to  be  understood  in  terms  of  the  DBpedia 
schema.   

The  research  question  for  this  PhD  is  as  follows:  To  what  extent  can  elementary 
semantic matches be refined to complex matches  containing constraints and transformations  using a semi-automatic process based on classifying the matches against 
the  Correspondence  Patterns  scheme.  In  this  context  elementary  matches  are  ones 
which match named ontology elements using relations such as subsumption. Existing 
semantic  matching  tools  rely  primarily  on  analyzing  the  structural  information  in 
ontologies,  however  as  many  data  sources  on  the  Semantic  Web  contain  large 
amounts of instance data, this work will focus on techniques which use instance data 
to discover relationships in the structural data. 

The following section of this paper outlines the state of the art in semantic matching and related techniques, as well as some of the shortcomings of current solutions. 
Section  3  discusses  the  proposed  research  approach,  and  the  research  methodology 
that  will  be  employed.  Section  4  outlines  some  preliminary  results  from  an  initial 
experiment. 

State of the Art 

This section outlines a survey of the state of the art in the semantic matching process, 
including  tools,  processes  and  formats  for  describing  matches.  It  also  includes  a 
summary of schemes for classifying forms of heterogeneity, as well as machine learning tools which will be of benefit in identifying complex matches. 

While  it  is  held  as  impossible  to  completely  automate  the  alignment  process  [4], 
several  tools  have  been  developed  to  assist  a  human  operator  with  the  endeavor. 
These include both automated candidate match generation [8], and graphical interfaces to assist with discovering and confirming correspondences between ontologies [9]. 
                                                           
1   http://blog.dbpedia.org/2011/09/11/dbpedia-37-released-including-15-localized-editions/ 

 
?

?

?
The INRIA Ontology Alignment API [6] provides a comprehensive set of automated 
match generators, drawn from the methods described by Shvaiko and Euzenat [8]. It 
also provides a format for describing matches, so that they may be exchanged. 

Current  semantic  matching  tools  focus  on  discovering  equivalence  ()  relation-
ships,  and  less  commonly  less  general  (),  more  general  ()  and  disjointness  () 

relationships.  Schemes  exist  for  classifying  more  detailed  forms  of  relationships, 
these  include  Correspondence  Patterns  [5],  and  the  THALIA  framework  [10].  The 
EDOAL [6] language provides a method for describing more complicated correspon-
dences,  using  an  OWL-like  syntax,  and  was  developed  in  conjunction  with  correspondence patterns. As yet, there are few matchers capable of generating the complex 
matches that EDOAL allows [6]. Ritze et. al. [11] describe a first attempt process for 
detecting  complex  matches,  and  Svab-Zamazal  et.  al.  [12]  provide    a  set  of  pattern 
based tools for describing and managing these matches by relating them to ontology 
design principals. 

The field of Machine Learning provides many tools which could be of use in analyzing matches between the less structured elements found in Linked Data. The Weka 
suite [13] provides a range of these tools as both an API and as part of a GUI. These 
include  attribute  selection  tools  such  as  Information  Gain,  and  regression  analysis 
tools. 

Research Approach and Methodology 

The  focus  of  this  research  will  be  on  the  development  of  algorithms,  methods  and 
processes  for  refining  elementary  semantic  relationships  such  as  equivalence  into 
more complex correspondences with conditions and transformations. The novelty of 
this approach lies in the use of instance element information to identify a correspondence pattern that best applies to a given ABox relationship and then using the pattern 
to guide the production of a complex correspondence. 

For example, the  Class  by  Attribute  Value correspondence pattern occurs when a 
class  in  one  ontology  is  equivalent  to  a  class  in  a  second  ontology  defined  by  instances  with  a  specific  property  value.  This  pattern  can  be  detected  by  the  use  of 
attribute selection methods, and once detected a declarative alignment may be created 
specifying the classes that match and the attribute and value condition necessary for 
the match to hold true. Section 4 outlines an experiment where an Information Gain 
based attribute selection method was used to detect correspondences of type Class by 
Attribute Value and Class by Attribute Existence.     

A further pattern is that of the Property  Relation Correspondence, where a property in one ontology corresponds with a relation in another ontology. Here clustering 
could  be  used  to  group  data  values  in  the  range  of  the  property  so  they  may  be 
matched to the individuals in the range of the relationship. This would allow the creation  of  a  declarative  match  consisting  of  a  metric  and  cutoff  point  matching  to  a 
named  individual.  Property  Value  Transformations  are  another  form  of  correspondence  that  can  occur.  This  pattern  would  be  detected  when  the  values  of  matched 
properties for matched instances differ in some consistent way. For numerical proper-
ties, linear regression could be used to investigate  what transformation is occurring, 
for example unit conversions or combinations such as o1#price+o1#tax  o2#price. 

B. Walshe 

Many of the techniques that will be investigated are reliant on analyzing instance 
data contained in the ontologies, and one possible limitation is that if the ontologies 
being mapped do not have suitable instance data these techniques will not be applica-
ble.  Because  of  this  there  will  be  a  focus  on  Linked  Data,  as  Linked  Data  sources 
contain large amounts of instance data, and often overlap  to some extent.  A  further 
obstacle to this research will be the ability to measure the effectiveness of the matching techniques against a standard test set such as those used by the OAEI [14]. 

The methodology of this PhD consists of a literature review to establish the current 
state of the art in semantic matching tools, methods for their evaluation, and formats 
available  for  describing  alignments.  Following  from  this,  techniques  for  detecting 
restriction type Correspondence Patterns such as Class by Attribute Value and Class 
by Attribute Existence and converting them to complex alignments will be developed. 
Techniques for analyzing Property Value Transformation correspondence patterns by 
regression or other means shall also be developed. A suitable test suite to evaluate the 
these techniques will be required, which should be made public to allow comparison 
with other matchers capable of producing complex matches 

To date a tool has been developed which is capable of refining class matches to include declarative restrictions. An experiment was carried out to evaluate the ability of 
this system, and the results are described in the following section. 

Current Work 

An evaluation was carried out of the ability of a system to refine elementary correspondences between the class Person in DBpedia [7] and several classes of occupation 
in  YAGO  [15]  to  produce  complex  correspondences.  Using  matched  instances  of 
these classes that had been identified in both sources, attribute selection was used to 
test  if  restriction  type  matches  were  occurring  between  the  classes,  and  determine 
which  attribute  these  restrictions  were  dependent  on.  This  evaluation  demonstrated 
that  the  Information  Gain  measure  is  a  suitable  scoring  function  for  finding  the 
attribute and attribute value to condition matches of type Class by Attribute Value and 
Class  by  Attribute  Existence.  This  Information  Gain  function  allowed  us  to  reliably 
select a gold standard correspondence pattern  consisting of an attribute and value to 
condition  as our top result in two of the four mappings tested, and reliably returns 
the  best  correspondence  pattern  in  the  top  five  results  for  all  four  test  cases.  In  the 
cases where the search algorithm did not return the best correspondence pattern as the 
top result, this was because there were several patterns that could be considered valid 
and selecting the best among these was difficult. The IG score requires that a suitable training set of instances be used, and the evaluation demonstrated that a random 
sample of 30 instances was sufficient to rank the gold standard attribute and attributevalue pair in the top 5 results at least 89% of the time. The results of this experiment 
have been accepted for publication at the DANMS 2012 workshop. 
 
Acknowledgement.  This  research  is  supported  by  the  Science  Foundation  Ireland 
(Grant  08/SRC/I1403)  as  part  of 
the  FAME  Strategic  Research  Cluster 
(www.fame.ie).   

 
?

?

?
Identifying Complex Semantic Matches 

1.  Weidman, S., Arrison, T.: Steps toward large-scale data integration in the sciences: sum-

mary of a workshop. National Academy of Sciences, 13 (2010) 

2.  Shvaiko, P., Euzenat, J.: Ontology matching: state of the art and future challenges. IEEE 

Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (preprint, 2012) 

3.  Klein, M.: Combining and relating ontologies: an analysis of problems and solutions. In: 

Proc. of Workshop on Ontologies and Information Sharing, IJCAI, pp. 5362 (2001) 

4.  OSullivan, D.: The OISIN framework: ontology interoperability in support of semantic in-

teroperability. PhD thesis, Trinity College Dublin (2006) 

5.  Scharffe, F.: Correspondence patterns representation. PhD thesis, University of Innsbruck 

(2009) 

6.  David, J., Euzenat, J., Scharffe, F., Trojahn dos Santos, C.: The alignment API 4.0. Seman-

tic Web 2(1), 310 (2011) 

7.  Bizer, C., et al.: DBpedia - A crystallization point for the Web of Data. Web Semantics: 

Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web (7), 154165 (2009) 

8.  Shvaiko, P., Euzenat, J.: A Survey of Schema-Based Matching Approaches. In: Spaccapie-
tra, S. (ed.) Journal on Data Semantics IV. LNCS, vol. 3730, pp. 146171. Springer, Heidelberg (2005) 

9.  Falconer,  S.M.,  Storey,  M.-A.:  A  Cognitive  Support  Framework  for  Ontology  Mapping. 
In: Aberer, K., Choi, K.-S., Noy, N., Allemang, D., Lee, K.-I., Nixon, L.J.B., Golbeck, J., 
Mika,  P.,  Maynard,  D.,  Mizoguchi,  R.,  Schreiber,  G.,  Cudre-Mauroux,  P.  (eds.)  ASWC 
2007 and ISWC 2007. LNCS, vol. 4825, pp. 114127. Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 

10.  Hammer, J., Stonebraker, M., Topsakal, O.: THALIA: Test Harness for the Assessment of 
Legacy Information Integration Approaches. In: Proc. of the Int. Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE), pp. 485486 (2005) 

11.  Ritze, D., Meilicke, C., Svab-Zamazal, O., Stuckenschmidt, H.: A pattern-based ontology 
matching approach for detecting complex correspondences. In: Proc. of Int. Workshop on 
Ontology Matching, OM (2009) 

12.  Svab-Zamazal, O., Daga, E., Dudas, M.: Tools for Pattern-Based Transformation of OWL 

Ontologies. In: Proc. of Int. Semantic Web Conference (2011) 

13.  Hall, M., Frank, E., Holmes, G., Pfahringer, B., Reutemann, P., Witten, I.H.: The WEKA 
data  mining  software:  an  update.  ACM  SIGKDD  Explorations  Newsletter 11(1),  1018 
(2009) 

14.  Euzenat, J., et al.: First results of the Ontology Alignment Evaluation Initiative 2011. In: 

Proc. of 6th Int. Workshop on Ontology Matching, OM 2011 (2011) 

15.  Suchanek,  F.M.,  Kasneci,  G.,  Weikum,  G.:  Yago:  A  large  ontology  from  wikipedia  and 
wordnet.  Web  Semantics:  Science,  Services  and  Agents  on  the  World  Wide  Web 6(3), 
203217 (2008) 

 
