Quality Assurance in Collaboratively Created

Web Vocabularies

Christian Mader

University of Vienna, Faculty of Computer Science

christian.mader@univie.ac.at

Abstract. In recent years, controlled vocabularies have become available on the Web using SKOS1, i.e. they are linked to each other in order
to be used in an interoperable way. Well-crafted controlled vocabularies
are beneficial for, e.g., search and retrieval systems that provide functionalities like search term completion, query expansion or the ability
for inter-domain queries. Some of these vocabularies are created collaboratively by experts, holding expertise in different domains. In order to
support vocabulary contributors to create high quality vocabularies, we
propose a method that semi-automatically ensures vocabulary quality in
collaborative authoring processes. The proposed approach tackles this
issue by (i) defining a set of criteria that serve as a metrics to measure
vocabulary quality and (ii) introducing a method to continually assess
and improve this quality. As a result of our approach, the developed vocabularies are expected to better fit the intentions of the contributors
and are more useful for reuse and adoption on the Web of Data.

1 Motivation

Most institutions that build and publish controlled vocabularies create them
for search and retrieval purposes, with specific functionalities in mind like, e.g.,
query expansion or faceted search [9]. However, shortcomings during the vocabulary creation process impinge upon these functionalities, affecting the effectiveness of the systems backed by these vocabularies, e.g., in terms of recall
and precision. Among the problems arising in that context are missing relations
between concepts, ambiguous labeling or lack of documentation. Furthermore,
duplicate or abandoned entries, or logical contradictions might also be introduced in the vocabulary creation process.

However, when publishing a vocabulary on the Web, additional requirements
have to be taken into consideration. Contributing to the Linked Data cloud involves providing references to other data sources in order to connect disparate
data into a single global data space [6]. With the increasing availability of
vocabularies expressed in SKOS, finding and utilzing a well-accepted and wellmaintained vocabulary becomes even more challenging. Furthermore, as a consequence of the ever-changing nature of the Web, resources might also become
unavailable, introducing the problem of broken links.

1 Simple Knowledge Organization System, http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/

E. Simperl et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2012, LNCS 7295, pp. 870874, 2012.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012
?

?

?
All of these issues could be subsumed under the term controlled vocabulary
quality. It is important for various reasons: as mentioned above, quality assurance measures primarily aim to improve search and retrieval use-cases, since
this traditionally has been a very common motivation for creation of controlled
vocabularies. However, they can also serve to enhance the usage experience for
human users who directly interact with the vocabulary itself, e.g., for getting an
overview about the covered domain or incorporating changes.

Especially in open linked environments, vocabulary quality is crucial for acceptance of a vocabulary by others, which in turn is a key concept of the Linked
Data principles. Once published as Linked Data, controlled vocabularies can
and should be referenced, enhanced, and reused, and with the building blocks
being of high quality, this is expected to happen to a much greater extent.

Research questions addressed in the proposed approach encompass: (i) what
does vocabulary quality mean in open, collaboratively maintained environments
and how can it be measured? (ii) how can quality assessment be integrated with collaborative vocabulary development environments? (iii) how does vocabulary quality assessment affect the quality of collaboratively created vocabularies?

2 Related Work

Existing standards for thesaurus construction [2,10] and manuals [3,7] propose
guidelines and best practices for testing and evaluating controlled vocabularies.
Many of them are hardly suitable for automatic assessment because additional
knowledge about the creation process, target user group or intended usage would
be required. [1] mentions vaguely formulated guidelines like, e.g., inclusion of
all needed facets or adherence of the term form to common usage, whereas
others, like both BT and RT relationships occur between the same pair of
terms [3] are more precise and better suited for algorithmic evaluation. However,
these guidelines are not specific for a concrete representation (e.g., SKOS) or
form of publication (e.g., Linked Data, relational database, hardcopy).

In [8], Kless & Milton provide a list of measurements constructs for the intrinsic quality of thesauri, examining a thesaurus as an artifact itself, i.e. isolated
from an application scenario. As stated by the authors themselves, the constructs
(e.g., Conceptual clarity or Syntactical correctness) are solely based on
theoretical analysis and application to existing thesauri is subject to their future work. Although undeniably useful for assessment by humans, algorithmic
methods to measure the defined constructs are not covered. Furthermore, multilinguality and, since the paper focuses on intrinsic quality metrics, collaborative
aspects of the creation process were not taken into consideration.

In the field of ontology engineering, metrics have been developed to evaluate
and validate ontologies [5,11]. Common to these metrics is the fact that they are
designed to be applied to general ontologies and instance data. As a consequence,
they either do not deal with specific requirements in development of controlled
vocabularies and applicability of the metrics for measuring vocabulary quality is
still unclear.

C. Mader

Various initiatives that create controlled vocabularies publish details of their
construction and validation process on the Web, such as the National Cancer
Institute thesaurus (NCIt) or Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Despite
employing different guidelines and (proprietary) tools [4], certain methods (e.g.,
duplicate checks) can be abstracted that prove useful in other domains.

3 Proposed Approach

In recent years, SKOS has been adopted by many organizations2 as a technology for expressing vocabularies on the Web in a machine-readable format. As
a consequence, our approach focuses on processing vocabularies represented in
the SKOS language.

The overall goal of the approach is to ensure iterative improvement of a controlled vocabularys quality in a collaborative development process. The View
in Figure 1 constitutes contributors taking part in the collaborative process. At
the core of the work is the Quality Controller component, which is based on
a catalog of quality criteria (cf. Table 1) and acts as a proxy between view and
model, managing quality assessment, user notification, and concurrency issues.
Upon instantiation the quality controller is parameterized with a vocabulary
(the model). Every contributor has to register at the quality controller by providing contact information and gets her own working copy of the vocabulary. The
quality of this working copy is analyzed on every relevant modification. Based
on this analysis, notification messages are created, containing information about
quality issues. These messages are then disseminated to the contributor who
can now decide to fix the issues or keep the current state of the vocabulary.
Eventually the changes of the contributor are synchronized with the model.
?

?

?
Fig. 1. Conceptual overview of the proposed approach

Quality assessment of the vocabulary is not only triggered on user interaction,
but also after a certain period of time. This is due to the fact that (i) the
model might also be changed by contributors bypassing the quality controller
and (ii) because the quality of the vocabulary may be affected by changes and
independent evolution of other vocabularies on the Web.

Based on existing research and evaluation of SKOS vocabularies available on
the Web, a (preliminary) catalog of quality criteria (cf. Table 1) has been identified that can be automatically evaluated. The fact that at least one violating

2 e.g., AGROVOC, GEMET, Standard Thesaurus Wirtschaft.
?

?

?
Table 1. Identified quality criteria

Qual. Criterion Description
Loose Concepts Concept with no hierarchical or associative

Weakly
Components
Cyclic Relations Cycles break the hierarchy, might reveal log-

relations to other resources.
Subgraphs within the vocabulary that are
not connected to each other.

Conn.

Lack of External
Links
Unavailable
Resources
Low Concept In-
degree

tency

Inconsis-

Deprecated Property Usage
Poor internation-
alization
Ambiguous
beling
Unconnected Related Concepts

La-

of Docu-

Lack
mentation

ical problems.
No linkage to resources in foreign namespaces (external resources).
Resources must be dereferencable via their
HTTP URIs (no broken links).
Concepts that serve as link targets in other
vocabularies.
Conflicts with consistency criteria of SKOS
reference or invention of new terms within
SKOS namespace.
Some properties have been removed from
the current SKOS version.
Inclusion of language tags and concepts labeled with same set of languages.
SKOS labels are pairwise disjoint; avoid
identical labels for different concepts.
Concepts labeled (slightly) different but
mean the same and are not hierarchically
or associatively connected.
Usage of properties documenting vocabulary
concepts in human-readable form.

Example of Impact
No hierarchical query
expansion
Obstructive for understanding and querying
No drill-down search
possible
Gathering knowledge
from other domains
Information content

Impression on the vocabulary acceptance
Standard conformance

Interoperability

Translation use-cases

Retrieval precision

Expose structural mis-
conceptions

Disambiguation

vocabulary for each criterion could be found on the Web indicates practical
relevance of this catalog.

4 Research Methodology

In a first step, as a problem definition and state-of-the-art survey, existing
publications targeting data quality, vocabulary and thesaurus development as well
as ontology building principles will be reviewed. It is important to find out to what
extent quality criteria in these areas exist and to elaborate on their importance to
controlled vocabularies. Based on the findings in the first step, we propose a set
of general quality criteria for controlled vocabularies. The result of this step
is a list of criteria together with algorithms that allow for programmatic evalua-
tion. After that, implementation of the tools, i.e. a library (API) that creates
a metrics based on the quality criteria, will be started. In the course of an analysis step, existing vocabularies available on the Web will be evaluated against the
quality criteria. Community feedback collected in this step might lead to adjusting and reformulating the quality criteria which target research question (i). To

C. Mader

evaluate the approach, instantiating (or integrating into) a collaborative vocabulary development process is essential, addressing research question (ii). A valid
setting would be to assign two comparably skilled groups of users with the task of
concurrently creating a vocabulary. The continuous quality assessment of the approach will be activated for both groups, with only one group getting support by
the automatic feedback mechanism. That way it is possible to track the evolution
of vocabulary quality in both groups, obtaining information how the quality assessment influences development and contribute to research question (iii). If those
groups that are supported by automatic quality feedback, develop higher-quality
vocabularies, the proposed approach is said to be successful.

5 Preliminary Results and Conclusion

Based on the identified criteria, qSKOS3, an open source library for vocabulary
quality assessment, has been created. First results4 in utilizing the library on
various vocabularies were promising and it will be continually updated based on
the communitys feedback and as research progresses. qSKOS also provides the
basis for further research regarding quality implications in collaborative settings.
