A Reuse-Based Lightweight Method for Developing 

Linked Data Ontologies and Vocabularies 

Maria Poveda-Villalon 

Ontology Engineering Group. Departamento de Inteligencia Artificial 

Facultad de Informatica, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid  

Campus de Montegancedo s/n  

28660 Boadilla del Monte. Madrid. Spain 

mpoveda@fi.upm.es 

Abstract.  The  uptake  of  Linked  Data  (LD)  has  promoted  the  proliferation  of 
datasets  and  their  associated ontologies  for  describing different  domains. Particular LD development characteristics such as agility and web-based architecture necessitate the revision, adaption, and lightening of existing methodologies 
for ontology development. This thesis proposes a lightweight method for ontology development in an LD context which will be based in data-driven agile de-
velopments, existing resources to be reused, and the evaluation of the obtained 
products considering both classical ontological engineering principles and LD 
characteristics.  

Keywords: ontology, vocabulary, methodology, linked data. 

1  Motivation and Research Questions 

The Linked Data (LD) initiative enables the easy exposure, sharing, and connecting of 
data on the Web. Datasets in different domains are being increasingly published according to LD principles1. In order to realize the notion of LD, not only must the data 
be available in a standard format, but concepts and relationships among datasets must 
be defined by means of ontologies or vocabularies2. 

New vocabularies to model data to be exposed as Linked Data should be created 
and published when the existing and broadly used ontologies do not cover all the data 
intended for publication. Based on the guidelines for developing and publishing LD 
[5], LD practitioners should describe their data (a) reusing as many terms as possible 
from those existing in the vocabularies already published and (b) creating new terms, 
when available vocabularies do not model all the data that must be represented. During  this  apparently  simple  process  several  questions  may  arise  for  a  data  publisher. 
This  PhD  thesis  proposal  aims  to  develop  a  lightweight  method  to  guide  LD  
                                                           
1  http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html 
2  At this moment, there is no clear division between what is referred to as vocabularies and 
ontologies (http://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/ontology). For this reason, we will 
use both terms indistinctly in this paper. 

E. Simperl et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2012, LNCS 7295, pp. 833837, 2012. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 

M. Poveda-Villalon 

practitioners through the process of creating a vocabulary to represent their data. The 
ambition is to maintain the advantages, whilst offering solutions to cover the insuffi-
ciencies.  The  proposed  method  will  be  mainly  based  in  reusing  widely  deployed  
vocabularies, describing data by means of answering the following questions:  
  Where and how can vocabularies be found? 
  Which vocabularies or elements should be reused? 
  How much information should be reused? 
  How to reuse elements or vocabularies? 
  How to link elements or vocabularies?  
  How should terms be created according to LD and ontological principles? 

State of the Art 

The 1990s and early years of the new millennium have witnessed a growing interest 
in  methodologies  that support the creation of ontologies.  All these approaches have 
facilitated  major  progress,  transforming  the  art  of  building  ontologies  into  an  engineering  activity.  However,  the  existing  methodologies  should  be  reviewed  and 
adapted to support ontology development and evolution in the Linked Data context. 
For  example,  the  well-known  traditional  methodologies  as  METHONTOLOGY  [3, 
2],  On-To-Knowledge  [9]  and  DILIGENT  [7],  as  well  as  the  NeOn  Methodology 
[10],  propose  time  and  resource  consuming  activities  instead  of  simple  and 
(semi)automatic  processes  as  is  desirable  in  an  LD  application  development.  Other 
approaches  propose  agile  methodologies  for  ontology  development,  however,  these 
are  often  unsuitable  when  working  with  Linked  Data.  The  eXtreme  Method  [6]  assumes  that  the  requirements  are  set  at  the  beginning  and  are  unchanging,  which  is 
unrealistic while working with ontology evolution using LD. Other works as the XD 
Methodology [8] consider Ontology Design Pattern as the only kind of resource to be 
reused during the development, or do not consider ontological resource reuse as is the 
case of RapidOWL [1] instead of basing the development in reusing the terms already 
available in the  LD cloud. In addition, none of  the above  mentioned  methodologies 
consider particular requirements of ontologies and vocabularies that are going to be 
used in a LD environment. Within the literature on Linked Data [5], some high-level 
guidelines have been outlined to create vocabularies; however no concrete processes 
and detailed guidelines have been proposed to carry out such a development. There-
fore,  to  the  best  of  the  authors  knowledge  there  are  no  methodological  approaches 
that help ontology developers to build ontologies or vocabularies to be used in an LD 
context taking into account its particular characteristics, following a lightweight approach and providing detailed methodological guidelines for the proposed activities. 

Proposed Approach 

This  PhD  thesis  proposal  investigates  how  traditional  and  heavy  methodologies  for 
the development of ontologies and ontology networks could be lightened and adapted 
to an LD context by considering its particular requirements. A lightweight method for 
?

?

?
ontology  development  with  a  data-driven  approach  will  be  created  including  techniques  and  tools  to  carry  out  each  of  the  proposed  activities.  Ontology  evaluation 
techniques  according  to  LD  principles  and  architecture  will  also  be  developed  in  a 
pattern-based way in order to make their application highly automated and reusable. 

As Fig. 1 illustrates, the proposed method consists of a workflow of activities based 
on the data intended for publication. With the aim of following a data-driven ontolo-
gy/vocabulary  development  rather  than  the  competency  question  development  [4], 
used in the majority of existing methodologies, this workflow starts with a term extraction activity. The next step is to search for available vocabularies and ontologies 
already used in LD following the approach proposed in [5]. Subsequently, through the 
next steps, the available resources will be selected and integrated in order to produce a 
first  model  describing  the  data,  for  which,  methodological  guidelines  will  be  pro-
vided. Finally, this model will be completed, in case it does not cover all the data to 
be represented, and evaluated before publishing and making the data available.  

Data-driven approach

Term 

extraction

Data   

... 


text

sensors

New data?

Yes

Use & 
Publish

Evaluate

Search 

Select

Integrate

Can you 
represent  
all your 
data?

No

Technological contribution
Access to and reuse ontologies 
and vocabularies already used in 
the LD cloud

Methodological contribution
LD Vocabularies assessment based on

(cid:129) LD Principles
(cid:129) Knowledge modelling criteria

Technological contribution
OOPS!  OntOlogy Pitfall Scanner!
http://www.oeg-upm.net/oops

Methodological contribution
Guidelines for reuse:

(cid:129) How much information should be reuse?
(cid:129) How to reuse elements or vocabularies?
(cid:129) How to link elements or vocabularies? 

Technological contribution
OOPS!  OntOlogy Pitfall Scanner!
http://www.oeg-upm.net/oops

Complete

Methodological contribution
Guidelines for development:

(cid:129) According with LD principles
(cid:129) Avoiding mistakes

 

Fig. 1. Lightweight method for building Linked Data ontologies and vocabularies 

As  well as the  methodological contributions, Fig. 1 also shows  the technological 
products that  will be provided in this PhD thesis including technological  support to 
access ontologies and vocabularies already used in LD cloud and OOPS!, an ontology 
validation tool. Table 1 presents the contributions that will be provided by this thesis 
in order to throw light upon the open questions presented in Section 1.  

M. Poveda-Villalon 

Planned Research Methodology 

The research methodology to be followed will consist of prototype development from 
which a high level abstraction will be extracted. Results are evaluated at each iteration 
and used to inform the approach, which is fine-tuned until the results are satisfactory. 
Initially, the state of the art in ontology development will be analyzed with a par-

ticular emphasis on problems involved with working in an LD environment. 

Once the problem is defined, a first prototype of the agile method for ontology development presented in Section 3 will be proposed together with a first version of the 
technological application supporting it. This method will include prescriptive methodological guidelines for the proposed steps, namely, Search, Select, Integrate, Complete  and  Evaluate.  These  guidelines  will  be  provided  in  a  pattern-based  manner 
whenever possible with the aim of enhancing their applicability and reusability. 

Following this, an experimentation phase based on controlled experiments will be 
carried  out  over  the  obtained  results  taking  as  use  cases  the  Ontology  Engineering 
Group3 LD developments. The experimental results will be used to improve the method  and  associated  technological  support.  At  least  another  iteration  to  evaluate  the 
results and improvements will be carried out before proposing the final solution. 

To conclude, the  method  will be analyzed a) from a  user  point of view by questionnaires to measure applicability; b) by controlled experiments involving the evaluation  of  ontologies  developed  for  Linked  Data  applications  carried  out  within  the 
authors  group  (e.g:  GeoLinkedData,  UPMLinkedData,  EcoGeoLinkedData,  etc.)  as 
initial evaluation environment and developments carried out by external organizations 
during a later evaluation step; and c) by comparison with other methods. The technological  support  will  be  compared  with  other  tools  with  a  similar  purpose,  gathering 
measures  of:  time  spent  by  user  in  evaluating  an  ontology,  usability  tests,  and  user 
satisfaction after using the tool. 

Table 1. Proposed steps, addressed open questions and PhD contributions 

Step(s)  Addressed Open Question(s) 

Search 

1. Where and how can vocabularies be 

found? 

Select 

2. Which vocabularies or elements 

should be reused? 

3. How much information should be 

reused? 

4. How to reuse elements or vocabula-

Integrate 

ries? 

5. How to link elements or vocabularies? 

Complete  
Evaluate 

6. How should terms be created according to LD and ontological principles? 

PhD Contributions 
 Comparative study of the indexes or registries 

for ontologies used in LD cloud. 

 Techniques to access vocabularies. 
 Guidelines for assess and select vocabularies or 

elements to be reused. 

 Tool for evaluating vocabularies with respect to 

a set of modeling criteria 

 Guidelines for ontology pruning and merging. 
 Guidelines for providing links between vocabu-

laries and elements. 

 Guidelines for developing and enriching ontological terms according to LD criteria and ontological foundations. 

 Guidelines and technological support for ontology evaluation according to modeling criteria. 

                                                           
3 http://www.oeg-upm.net/ 

A Reuse-Based Lightweight Method for Developing Linked Data Ontologies 

Conclusion  

Describing  data  by  means  of  vocabularies  or  ontologies  is  crucial  for  the  Semantic 
Web  and  LD  realization.  LD  development  characteristics  such  as  agility  and  webbased  architecture  force  the  revision  and  lightening  of  existing  methodologies  for 
ontology  development.  This  paper  briefly  presents  the  motivation  and  the  proposed 
approach of the thesis, the main goal of which is to propose a lightweight method for 
ontology  development  in  an  LD  context  following  a  data-driven  approach.  Such  a 
method will be developed together with technological support to ease its application 
and will be based in agile developments and the evaluation of the obtained products 
considering both classical ontological engineering principles and LD characteristics. 

The next steps consist of analyzing particular characteristics of LD developments 
and  proposing  a  first  prototype  both  for  the  method  and  its  technological  support. 
Following this, the obtained results will be evaluated in order to improve them in an 
iterative way.  

 

Acknowledgments. This work has been supported by the Spanish project BabelData 
(TIN2010-17550). I would also like to thank Asuncion Gomez-Perez and Mari Carmen  Suarez-Figueroa  for  their  advice  and  dedication  and  Edward  Beamer  for  his 
comments and revisions. 
