 

Tackling Incompleteness in Information Extraction  

A Complementarity Approach 

Christina Feilmayr 

Johannes Kepler University Linz, Altenberger Strae 69, 4040 Linz, Austria 

cfeilmayr@faw.jku.at 

Abstract.  Incomplete  templates  (attribute-value-pairs)  and  loss  of  structural 
and/or semantic information in information extraction tasks lead to problems in 
downstream information processing steps. Methods such as emerging data mining  techniques  that  help  to  overcome  this  incompleteness  by  obtaining  new,  
additional information are consequently needed. This research work integrates 
data  mining  and  information  extraction  methods  into  a  single  complementary 
approach  in  order  to  benefit  from  their  respective  advantages  and  reduce  incompleteness in information extraction. In this context, complementarity is the 
combination  of  pieces  of  information  from  different  sources,  resulting  in  (i) 
reassessment of contextual information and suggestion generation and (ii) better 
assessment of plausibility to enable more precise value selection, class assign-
ment,  and  matching.  For  these  purposes,  a  recommendation  model  that  determines which methods can attack a specific problem is proposed. In conclusion, 
the improvements in information extraction domain analysis will be evaluated.  

Keywords: Information Extraction, Data Mining, Text Mining, Interestingness 
Measures, Information Integration. 

1  Motivation 

Imperfections  in  information  extraction  (IE)  manifest  as  negative  characteristics  of 
the information retrieved, such as unreliability, ambiguity, uncertainty, inconsistency, 
incompleteness  and  imprecision.  Fully  correct,  complete,  and  precise  IE  from 
unstructured text is not feasible with current IE methods. Inaccurate IE yields noisy 
and incomplete datasets with many missing values. In the case of the semantic web, 
this  means  inaccurate  statements  predominate,  resulting  primarily  in  erroneous 
annotations and ultimately in inaccurate reasoning on the web.  

Incomplete data collection in IE tasks, especially in  scenario template (ST) produc-
tion, has serious consequences in subsequent processing. Information and model quality 
decreases proportionally with the number of values missing from template slots. Incompleteness  generally  results  in  indecisiveness,  which  means  that  on  the  one  hand  value 
selection, class assignment, and matching and mapping processes in IE domain analysis 
are profoundly affected by incomplete knowledge sources (ontologies, lexica), missing 
values in template attributes (originating from upstream IE tasks, e.g., natural language 
processing),  missing  descriptive  context  information,  and  missing  or  incomplete  constraints (e.g., quality, background, syntactical, lexical or morphological constraints) and 

E. Simperl et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2012, LNCS 7295, pp. 808812, 2012. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 
?

?

?
conditions (in terms of recurrent occurring collocations/co-occurrences, concept depen-
dencies). On the other hand, downstream processing is affected by erroneous and incomplete template slots. Incompleteness in IE causes inaccurate inference of semantic classes 
and inaccurate plausibility assessment.  

In this context, this thesis focuses on the incompleteness problem in IE and analyzes the applicability of complementarity, and its impact on improving the IE process.  

Proposed Approach  

While  tackling  the  above-mentioned  problems  primarily  necessitates  a  reassessment 
of contextual information, it also requires strategies for predicting missing values and 
generating  suggestions  for  missing  slot  values.  Consequently,  methods  that  obtain 
new,  additional  information  such  as  text  and  data  mining  are  needed.  Further,  a 
means of exploiting available context information to establish meaningful constraints, 
conditions, and thresholds for value selection, class assignment, and the matching and 
mapping procedures is required. Finally, a procedure must be devised to combine the 
information  obtained,  evaluate  and  estimate  its  reliability,  and  incorporate  the 
available contextual information. 

2.1  Contribution of the Research Work 

to  be 

integrated.  Hence, 

This research work responds to these requirements by considering the application of 
the principle of complementarity an approach known from the field of information 
integration  to  IE,  examining  the  impact  of  redundancy  on  the  probability  of 
correctness. Complementarity is defined as the combination of pieces of information 
from  different  sources,  taking  their  respective  levels  of  reliability  into  account  [1]. 
These pieces of information are the outputs of several data mining methods and text 
mining  tasks.  Therefore  it  enables  the  alignment  of  (intermediate)  information 
extraction  results  with  results  from  data  mining  methods  (or  rather  complete  text 
mining  tasks).  Using  complementarity  allows  several  data  mining  and  text  mining 
threefold:  (i)  A 
tasks 
recommendation model, which supports the user in selecting appropriate text mining 
tasks  and  data  mining  methods  (in  accordance  with  the  identified  incompleteness 
types).  Integrating  several  information  sources  (complementarity)  supports  (ii) 
efficient reassessment of contextual information and suggestion generation using 
prediction. Analysis of different sources according to confidence and interestingness 
yields  (iii)  better  identification  of  material  with  high  information  potential  and 
leads  thereby  to  better  plausibility  assessment.  In  summary,  these  three  elements 
contribute  to  better  value  selection,  class  assignment,  matching  and  mapping,  and 
consequently to more robust IE results. This makes IE results become more precise 
(in statistical terms), more certain (in terms of confidence values) and more reliable 
(confirmed by human) evaluation.  

the  main  contribution 

is 

2.2  The Complementarity Approach 

Different  types  of  incompleteness  require  different  approaches  to  attacking  the 
problems  involved.  Problems  of  incompleteness  are  subdivided  into  schema-level-
problems  regarding  template  design  and  instance-level-problems  that  refer  to 

C. Feilmayr 

incompleteness in the attribute-value-pair level. Consequently, incompleteness in IE 
is classified into missing (i) attribute values, (ii) structural information (class labels, 
relationships  between  and  within 
information 
(conditions, constraints, and contextual information).  
 

templates),  and  (iii)  semantic 

Tr a d i t i o n a l 

NLP Pre-
Processor

Named Entity 
Recognition

Co-Reference 
rence 
tionn
Resolution

Template 
ate
Prod.od
Element Prod.

Template 
ate 
Prod.od
Relation Prod.

Scenario 

Template Prod.

 
Filled Extraction 

Templates

N o v e l 

Evaluation

Interpretation / 

Typification

a

b
Semantic 
Assessment

c
Answer 
Validation

b

Attribute-Value 

Assessment

ss

a

d

Fusion

e

Refined 

Information

 

L e g e n d 

a

Selection of data mining method 
depends on incompleteness type 

b

Integration of existing  
data mining sources 

c

Evaluation of utility and 
ranking of relevant answers 

d

Supplemention of existing extracted 
information with newly generated information 

e

Refined information in slots and possibly 
new features for further processing 

 

Fig. 1. General Approach of Complementarity 

After the type of incompleteness has been identified, the appropriate data mining 
methods must be selected. As already mentioned, the thrust of the new IE approach is 
to integrate text and data mining into IE. Possible integration approaches are: (i) identification of collocations and co-occurrences, which can be used to resolve contradic-
tions, perform  word  sense disambiguation, and validate semantic relations; (ii) con-
straint-based  mining,  which  can,  for  example,  learn  different  kinds  of  constraints 
(e.g.,  data  type  constraints);  (iii)  identification  of  frequent  item  sets  (associations), 
which  can  also  be  used  as  constraints  for  ST  and  template  merging;  (iv)  prediction 
provides  additional  evidence  for  missing  slot  values.  (i)-(iii)  are  approaches,  which 
are applied to assess semantics, and (iv) to assess attribute-values. New information in 
the form of constraints, conditions, or even suggestions for slots is generated and used 
to improve IE results. The results are evaluated for a selected set of features (using 
standard  measures  of  the  respective  data  mining  method,  e.g.,  accuracy,  and/or  selected interestingness measures [4]) that might impact the construction of answers in 
the presence of incompleteness. These features are combined in a flexible utility function  (adapted  from  [7])  that  expresses  the  overall  value  of  information  to  a  user.  
Determining  utility  means  that  first  the  utility  is  calculated  for  each  answer,  and 
second, if fusion is performed, the utility of the new value must be calculated in order 
to  determine  whether  it  is  more  appropriate  than  the  available  alternatives.  Conse-
quently, the utility value allows us to (i) define a meaningful ranking of candidates for 
filling incomplete templates and (ii) discover the best fusion. 

A possible single point of failure is the automatic determination of the incompleteness  type.  Thus,  the  processable  incompleteness  types  must  be  selected  with  care. 
Another  possible  limitation  occurs  if  measures  of  interestingness  are  insufficiently 
meaningful:  This  renders  the  determined  utility  value  useless  and  leads  (depending  
 

 
?

?

?
on the ranking and filtering methods used) to too much additional information being 
selected for fusion and even more contradictory, uncertain, and (semantically) imprecise information being produced.  

Background 

In  the  early  PhD  phase,  the  literature  review  focused  mainly  on  the  general  idea  of 
integrating  data  mining  into  IE.  In  [3],  the  author  discussed  the  role  of  IE  in  text 
mining applications and summarized initial research  work on the integration of data 
mining into IE. These first initiatives have been successful, but they discuss relatively 
simple problems. Most importantly, the projects [6], [8], and [10] demonstrate that the 
information extracted by such an integrated approach is of high quality (in terms of 
correctness, completeness, and level of interest). 

To the best of the authors knowledge, there is no other research activity ongoing 
that deals with the integration of data mining into IE to overcome the specific problem  of  incompleteness.  There  are  some  well-established  approaches  based  on  complementarity in the knowledge fusion community. A general overview of knowledge 
fusion  is  given  in  [1].  Nikolov  [9]  outlined  a  knowledge  fusion  system  that  makes 
decisions depending on the type of problem and  the amount of domain information 
available.  Zeng  et  al.  [11]  implemented  a  classifier  to  acquire  context  knowledge 
about data sources and built an aggregation system capable of explaining incomplete 
data. Ciravegna et al. [2] proposed an approach based on a combination of information  extraction,  information  integration,  and  machine  learning  techniques.  There,  
methodologies of information integration are used to corroborate the newly acquired 
information,  for  instance,  using  evidence  from  multiple  different  sources.  How  to 
exploit  redundancy  in  terms  of  IE  and  question  answering/answer  validation  are  
described in [2] and [5], respectively.  

Planned Research Work 

The methodology comprises the following steps: 
Requirements  Analysis  (completed).  First,  the  requirements  of  IE  domain  analysis 
(regarding the incompleteness problem) had to be identified by means of an in-depth 
problem  analysis  that  yielded  a  comprehensive  summary  of  problematic  IE  issues, 
their intra- and interdependencies, and their impact on IE accuracy.  
Classification  of  Data  Mining  Methods  (in  progress).  Based  on  the  requirements 
and  problem  analysis,  several  incompleteness  types  are  identified  and  the  available 
data mining methods classified accordingly.  
Conceptual  Design  and  Method  Selection.  For  each  incompleteness  type,  suitable 
IE  and  data  mining  methods  and  techniques  must  be  selected.  Based  on  the 
knowledge gained, a conceptual design for the interface between IE and data mining 
will  be  developed  and  a  detailed  conceptual  design  of  complementarity  created. 
Features  that  might  impact  the  construction  of  answers  in  the  presence  of 
incompleteness must be identified.  

C. Feilmayr 

Evaluation  of  Test  Scenarios.  The  research  work  will  conclude  with  a  three-part 
analysis demonstrating the improvements in IE domain analysis:  (i) the first part is a 
non-optimized  information  extraction  process  that  provides  the  baseline;  (ii)  the 
second part integrates a gold standard for a specific problem in order to highlight the 
seriousness  of  the  incompleteness  problem;  (iii)  the  third  part  is  an  information 
extraction  process  using  complementarity  in  order  to  overcome  the  incompleteness 
problem. In comparison to (i) and (ii) the third part of evaluation should highlight the 
improvements in reducing incompleteness. Moreover, an expert evaluation is planned, 
which evaluate the several outcomes of complementarity modules.  
 
Acknowledgement.  This  work  is  supported  by  an  Austrian  research  grant  (FIT-IT 
Semantic  Systems  Dissertation  Fellowship  Project)  from  BMVIT  (project  nr. 
829601).  
