Achieving Interoperability through Semantic

Technologies in the Public Administration

Chiara Di Francescomarino, Mauro Dragoni, Matteo Gerosa, Chiara Ghidini,

Marco Rospocher, and Michele Trainotti

{dfmchiara,dragoni,gerosa,ghidini,rospocher,mtrainotti}@fbk.eu

FBK-irst, Via Sommarive 18 Povo, I-38123, Trento, Italy

Abstract. In this paper we report the experience of using semantic based tools
and technologies for (collaboratively) modeling administrative procedures and
their related documents, organizational roles, and services, in the Italian Public
Administration (PA), focusing in particular on the interoperability aspects faced
during the modelling process. This experience, the reported lessons learned and
next steps identified, highlight the potential and criticality of using web 2.0 semantic technologies and tools to enhance participatory knowledge sharing, inter-
operability, and collaboration in the modeling of complex domains in the PA.

1 Introduction

In the last few years, the Public Administrations (PA) of several countries around the
world have invested effort and resources into modernizing their services in order to
improve labor productivity, as well as, PA efficiency and transparency. The recent contributions and developments in ICT (Information and Communication Technology) can
boost this modernization process, as shown by the support the ICT can provide to the
replacement of paper-based procedures with electronic-based ones (dematerialization
of documents) within the PA. An important contribution of the ICT, in supporting the
dematerialization of documents, is the production of proper and precise models of the
administrative procedures of the PA and of the specific entities related to these proce-
dures, such as the documents involved in the procedures, the organizational roles performing the activities, and the services needed to manage the electronic documents in an
archival system. In fact, by following a model-driven approach [8,15], the availability
of these models is a key factor towards both (1) the re-design and re-engineering of the
administrative procedures, in order to replace paper-based documents with electronicbased ones, and (2) the definition of an appropriate archival system able to safely store,
catalogue, manage, and retrieve the electronic documents produced within the PA. The
definition of these models, which can act as reference models at the national level
and enhance interoperability as described in [15], is often made complex, among the
other problems, by the heterogeneity of procedures, document typologies, organizational structures, terminologies, and so on, present at regional or local level, due for
instance to different regional laws or traditions.

In this paper, we report the experience of using semantic based technologies and
a wiki-based modeling tool, MoKi [10], in the context of the ProDe Italian national
project, in order to build national reference models for the management of electronic

E. Simperl et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2012, LNCS 7295, pp. 793807, 2012.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

C. Di Francescomarino et al.

documentation in the Public Administration (PA). These models aim at representing
both the domain entities and the processes in several fields of the PA with the focus
on document management. Due to internal reasons the project didnt adopt available
standard conceptual schemata for the representation of data and processes, but the different regional actors were initially asked to model their administrative procedures in
a bottom up manner. This fact originated highly heterogeneous representations, which
needed to be shared, reconciled, and eventually re-defined in terms of a common conceptual schemata subsequently adopted within the project, and in terms of common
(pre-existing and ad-hoc) terminologies and meta-data. Here we highlight how MoKi
was used to support participatory knowledge sharing and collaboration within the modeling activities of the different regions involved in the project in the spirit of the Web
2.0, and we report some lessons learned and future steps in our work, especially emphasizing the aspects related to the collaboration of PA employees of different regions, the
reconciliation of local PA procedures into high level interoperable ones, the confluence
of terminologies into shared lexicons, as well as the mapping between organizational
and technological layers.

The contribution of the paper is twofold: first, it identifies the different interoperability aspects that originated in the context of the creation of reference models in a
national project, it classifies them in light of standard interoperability models such as
the European Interoperability Framework for European public services (EIF) [4], and
it provides an overview of how MoKi and semantic based technologies have been used
to face these issues. Second, it provides an attempt to report lessons learned and future
steps especially related to how semantic-wiki based systems can support distributed
modeling, the confluence of terminologies into shared lexicons, the adoption of (stan-
dard) pre-existing terminologies and metadata when available, and the integration of
different entities for the construction of complex models. This contribution extends the
work presented in [3] where the experience of the ProDe project was analyzed by looking at the usefulness of MoKi to support the collaboration process between knowledge
engineers and domain experts in their modeling activities, and where aspects related to
interoperability and construction or usage of shared knowledge were not considered.

The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we report related works concerning:
(i) the usage of Semantic Web technologies in the PA domain, (ii) reference interoperability frameworks for the PA and (iii) model driven approaches towards interoperabil-
ity. Section 3 provides an overview of ProDe and of the interoperability aspects in it.
Section 4 describes how a semantic-based platform, based on the MoKi tool, has been
implemented to face interoperability issues, while Section 5 presents how each interoperability aspect has been addressed within the ProDe project, what we learned from
the experience and what we plan to do next. We conclude in Section 6 with some final
remarks.

2 Related Works

Several works have focused on the application of Semantic Web technologies in the PA
domain. We recall a few of them which have some commonalities with the work presented in this paper. In [17], the authors present a web-based knowledge management
system that, by providing an up-to-date and accurate legal framework, supports (i) civil
?

?

?
servants in the composition of administrative acts and (ii) civil servants, citizens and
businesses in reasoning and substantiating administrative acts by means of precedents
and opinions. In the context of the SAKE EU project, [19] proposes an ontology-based
approach for the systematic management of changes in knowledge resources in public administrations. Successful applications of semantic wiki based technologies in the
eGovernment domain have been reported in [11,20], to favour the management and
sharing of information and knowledge.

Some interoperability frameworks have been defined to grant the interoperability between different systems in the context of complex infrastructures. The Levels of Information Systems Interoperability (LISI) [1] initiative of the US Department of Defense
aims to identify the stages through which systems should logically progress, or ma-
ture, in order to improve their capabilities to interoperate. LISI considers five increasing levels of sophistication regarding system interaction and the ability of the system
to exchange and share information and services. Each higher level represents a demonstrable increase in capabilities over the previous level of system-to-system interaction.
A more recent framework, adopted by the European Commission, is the European Interoperability Framework for European public services (EIF) [4]. It defines a set of
recommendations to support the delivery of European public services, by classifying
the interoperability aspects to be addressed according to different interoperability levels (legal, organizational, semantic and technical).

Following the definition provided in [15], the approach taken in the ProDe project
can be classified as a model-driven approach, where models have been systematically
used as primary artifact for the definition of common procedures within different regions and for the engineering of the document management system. Of the three modeling sub-categories defined in [15], the models developed in ProDe cover the first and
the second, that is, the specification of (domain) data - provided by means of OWL
ontologies - and the specification of processes - provided by means of BPMN represen-
tations. The approach taken in ProDe, and the conceptual model developed to represent
data, bring some relation with the effort carried put in the UK Government Common
Information Model [13], where a reference model is defined to support the elicitation
and setting out of the Requirements specifications for e-service development. Differently from [13], where the models are centered around the notion of e-service, the data
models of ProDe are centered around the notion of document. Given the importance of
documents within the project, data have been described in terms of the MoReq metadata standard [2], which in turn can be represented in terms of Dublin Core Metadata
[5] as specified in [2]. Concerning the modeling of process knowledge, [15] classifies
the efforts of the PA in two different families: (i) process modeling, and (ii) service
modeling. In ProDe, the objective was to model general processes that are common to a
large number of PA, and can therefore be classified as a process modeling effort. In that
respect, the approach follows the one accomplished by SAP in the encoding of generic
process models for different fields on its Solution Maps [16].

The ProDe project has been conceived keeping in mind the technological framework
realized in ICAR1, a national project addressing the establishment of the Italian Public
Connectivity and Cooperation System (SPC).

1 http://www.progettoicar.it/

C. Di Francescomarino et al.

3 Interoperability Aspects within ProDe

ProDe2 is an Italian project with the aim of defining a national reference model for
the management of electronic documentation (dematerialized document) in the Public
Administration. This reference model follows an archival science perspective, and can
be used for the identification of guidelines and functions needed to safely store, clas-
sify, manage, and retrieve, electronic documents produced within the PA in an archival
system.

The project has a duration of 30 months (May 2010-October 2012) and the workplan is composed of 11 tasks assigned to 11 teams (task-teams) each one coming from
one among 10 Italian regions. The 11 tasks are divided in 4 central tasks and 7 peripheral tasks. The 4 central tasks are in charge of guiding the activities and developing a
common framework in which all the regions could recognize themselves. Each of the 7
peripheral tasks provides instead a specific expertise on a different sector of the PA and
is in charge of guiding the modeling of administrative procedures for the sector it has
been assigned to. Thus, the central tasks provide the main expertise in archival science,
while the peripheral tasks provide domain expertise in different fields of the PA.

The setting and objectives of the project shows that interoperability aspects, of various nature and involving diverse actors and entities, play an important role within
ProDe, In the following, we first briefly summarize the interoperability aspects as they
naturally arose within the project, and then show how they relate to a standard interoperability framework such as EIF.
Users Interoperability. The development of a reference model for managing the
dematerialization of documents demands the involvement of actors with different back-
grounds, modeling skills, and responsibilities, spanning from experts in archival sci-
ence, experts in laws, business process analysts, and knowledge engineers. Supporting
the collaboration and cooperation among these actors to achieve the development of a
shared reference model is even more crucial in ProDe, as (i) users from different regions distributed over Italy are required to contribute to the definition of such model,
and (ii) the domains of the documents considered for dematerialization are various (e.g.,
healthcare, human resources, material resources, and so on).
Procedures Interoperability. The Italian legislation provides regions with a high degree
of independence/freedom in writing new laws and in organizing their own structure to
answer the citizens needs. This explains why the 10 regions participating in the ProDe
project: (i) have different levels of dematerialization; (ii) refer to different laws and
regulations; (iii) use different methods, structures and terms for representing their administrative procedures. Nevertheless, as one of the goals of the project is to develop an
archival system based on a common reference model shared by all the regions, this heterogeneity has to be taken into account in that the administrative procedures in place in
the various regions, being understood their specificity, have to be compatible/compliant
with the common conceptualization adopted.

Lexicon Interoperability. The freedom of Italian regions in self-organizing their structure and regulations is also reflected in the heterogeneity of the lexicon adopted in

2 http://www.progettoprode.it/Home.aspx
?

?

?
their administrative procedures. Indeed, it often happens that each region has its own
name for designating documents reporting the same information, thus severely hindering comprehension of the process across regions.

Formal Language Interoperability. The management of document dematerialization requires to deal with different entities and artifacts: for instance, the (i) nature and properties of the documents to be dematerialized, (ii) the procedures and activities to store,
catalogue, manage, and retrieve these document, and (iii) the actors involved in these
activities. These entities have diverse intrinsic nature and are commonly formally represented with different modeling languages: for instance, documents and actors can
be suitably modeled with declarative formalisms (e.g. ontologies), while business processes formalism are more appropriate to correctly represent procedures and
activities.

In modeling the processes of a
Organizational and Technological Interoperability.
complex organization like a PA, it is common to identify at least two conceptual levels
at which these processes take place: the organizational layer, comprising the activities,
roles, processes, and organizational structure of the PA, and the technological layer,
managing the set of information systems and software solutions that the PA uses to
perform (part of) its activities. Although the conceptual connection between these two
layers is rather evident, making it explicitly established and formalized in an integrated
architecture enables to offer to complex organizations additional added-value services,
like (i) verifying that the information systems supporting the organization are complaint
with its processes, (ii) monitoring the execution of the organization processes, and (iii)
checking (and possibly improve) the organization efficiency.

Placing ProDe Interoperabilities within the EIF. The interoperability issues encountered and identified in the ProDe project do not perfectly map to the four interoperability
layers proposed by EIF[4]. This is mainly due to the different goals of the project and
the framework: EIF is a set of recommendations that specify how European administrations should communicate with one another within the EU and across Member States
borders in order to provide services; the ProDe project, instead, aims at defining national
reference models of PAs procedures and domain entities, starting from the existing
local ones. This means that, for example, procedures carried out locally, are aligned at
an abstract level, leaving regions the freedom to detail them according to their needs, so
that the abstract version of a process model developed by a region can be used as base
for the specificities of other regions.

Nevertheless, the interoperability aspects that came out within ProDe, are explicitly

or implicitly related to the EIF interoperability layers. In detail:

 lexicon interoperability and formal language interoperability are related to the EIF
SEMANTIC INTEROPERABILITY level. Both the interoperability aspects, in fact,
deal with language heterogeneity that, hampering a common understanding, requires the provision of a precise meaning associated either to a shared vocabulary
or to the relationships existing among different formal languages.

 procedures interoperability lies in the middle between the EIF LEGAL and
ORGANIZATIONAL INTEROPERABILITY layers. The aspect deals, in fact, with the

C. Di Francescomarino et al.

legislation and organizations procedure heterogeneity and the consequent need of
their alignment, though at an abstract level.

 users interoperability relates to both the SEMANTIC and, at a higher level, the ORGANIZATIONAL INTEROPERABILITY layer. The interoperability among users with
different backgrounds, competencies and roles, in fact, demands, on one hand, the
achievement of a common understanding of their different views and, on the other,
their collaboration for the achievement of their mututally agreed goals.

 organizational and technological interoperability is orthogonal to the EIF layers:
it in fact deals with the connection of the ORGANIZATIONAL and the TECHNICAL
levels.

4 Toward Achieving Interoperability in ProDe

In order to face the interoperability issues described in the previous section, and to create a common reference model shared by all the regions belonging to the project, a common conceptual schema was proposed to the experts of the different task-teams to guide
the modeling of their administrative procedures, the related documents, and the services
to be provided by the document management system. This conceptual schema, whose
simplified version is graphically depicted in Figure 1 using an Entity-Relationship no-
tation, was developed by the experts in archival, computer, and organizational sciences
working in the central tasks of the ProDe project, and it represents an extension of the
one presented in [3]3. In detail, the new entity Service is used to describe the functionalities required to the document management system by a given task in order to handle
the documents managed within the task.

Fig. 1. The conceptual schema

3 We omit an in depth description of the ProDe conceptual schema. The interested reader can

refer to [3] for a detailed description.
?

?

?
The second, and more important, contribution towards the achievement of interoperability was the customization and usage of a platform based on MoKi [9], a tool for
collaborative modeling of integrated processes and ontologies, in order to obtain models following the conceptual schema presented in Figure 1. The platform developed for
the ProDe project (hereafter referred to as the ProDeMoKi Platform) provides a set
of MoKi installations: one installation for each of the peripheral tasks, hereafter named
P T1, . . . , P T7, and a single installation CT for all the central tasks, where each MoKi
installation P T1, . . . , P T7 was connected with the one for the central task CT . The
main idea of this platform is that, by using CT , the central tasks are able to create and
manage entities (e.g., metadata for the description of documents) that are subsequently,
and automatically, made available to P T1, . . . , P T7 (e.g., to describe their documents),
thus favoring convergence and re-use.

Next we show in detail the general architecture of the MoKi tool.

4.1 The MoKi Architecture and Tool

MoKi4 [9] is a collaborative MediaWiki-based [12] tool for modeling ontological and
procedural knowledge. The main idea behind MoKi is to associate a wiki page, containing both unstructured and structured information, to each entity of the ontology and
process model. From a high level perspective, the main features of MoKi are:

 the capability to model different types of conceptual models, described in different formal languages, in an integrated manner. This feature is grounded on two
different characteristics of MoKi. First of all, MoKi associates a wiki page to each
concept, property, and individual in the ontology, and to each (complex or atomic)
process in the process model. Special pages enable to visualize (edit) the ontology and process models organized according to the generalization and the aggrega-
tion/decomposition dimensions respectively. The ontological entities are described
in Web Ontology Language (OWL [18]), while the process entities are described
in Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN [14]). Second, MoKi has extended
the functionalities of the BPMN Oryx editor [6], to annotate process elements with
concepts described in the ontology, or to incorporate data objects formalized in the
ontology. The integrated procedural and ontological knowledge is then exported in
a comprehensive OWL model following the approach described in [7].

 the capability to support on-line collaboration between members of the modeling
team, including collaboration between domain experts and knowledge engineers.
MoKi is an on-line tool based on MediaWiki, thus inheriting all the collaborative features provided by it. In addition MoKi facilitates the collaboration between
domain experts and knowledge engineers by providing different access modes to
the description (both structured and unstructured) of the elements contained in the
model. In details, the current general version of MoKi is based on three different
access modes5:

4 See also http://moki.fbk.eu
5 The reader is referred to [10], where the architecture of MoKi has been presented in more
details, by describing also how domain experts and knowledge engineers are able to exploit
these different access modes in order to work collaboratively for modeling ontologies.

C. Di Francescomarino et al.

Fig. 2. The template used to insert metadata information

tent;

 an unstructured access mode (for all users) to view/edit the unstructured con-
 a fully-structured access mode (for knowledge engineers) to view/edit the com-
 a lightly-structured access mode (for domain experts) to view/edit (part of) the

plete structured content; and

structured content in a simplified way, e.g. via light forms.

These features have been proved extremely important in the context of the ProDe
project. In fact, the scenario addressed in the project required the modeling of administrative procedures, usually better described using a business process modeling notation,
enriched with knowledge which typically resides in an ontology, such as the classification of document types, organizational roles, and so on. Moreover, the modeling team
was composed by an heterogeneous group of domain experts and knowledge engineers
situated in different Italian geographical regions.

Indeed, in the context of the ProDe project, many of the modeling actors involved in
the ProDe project were not familiar with ontology modeling. Therefore, we facilitated
the usage of MoKi by providing personalized lightly-structured access mode for each
typology of entities that the users had to model (the ones in the Document management
component, and Organizational structure component in Figure 1). An example of one
of these personalized views is reported in Figure 2. The figure shows the template used
for defining metadata entities.
refer

to this version of MoKi providing personalized

Hereafter, we will

lightly-structured access mode as ProDeMoKi.
?

?

?
5 Interoperability in ProDe: What We Did, What We Learned and

What We Will Do Next

The ProDeMoKi Platform has been extensively used by 2 central task-teams and 6 peripheral task-teams6 for the last 12 months. Overall, 2255 wiki pages have been created,
6809 revisions realized, 710 pages deleted and 71 pages renamed by both peripheral and
central task users. Moreover, as comprehensively presented in [3], ProDeMoKi Platform users have been interviewed, by means of an on-line questionnaire, about the ease
of use and the usefulness of the ProDeMoKi tool, in order to collect their subjective
impressions.

The analysis of the huge amount of usage data (collected analyzing the MediaWiki
database and the server log files), the users subjective perception, and the concrete
experience in the field gained during the project, allowed us to derive interesting observations about the support provided by semantic technologies to the different interoperability aspects demanded by ProDe (described in Section 3). In the following we report,
for each of these interoperability aspects, the way in which it has been addressed by the
ProDeMoKi Platform, the lessons we learned from the project experience and from
the ProDeMoKi Platform usage, and some challenging ideas for future steps. Finally,
we summarize some further related lessons learned.

5.1 Users Interoperability

The users involved into the ProDe project have different background based on their
working area within the PA. Indeed, the domain experts, belonging to each of the peripheral task-teams, are specialized in specific topics, like healthcare, human resources,
and financial resources. The MoKi platform provides a web-accessible knowledge sharing system that permits to all users - both within the same team and across different
ones - to cooperate and to provide feedbacks about the modeled processes, and how
documents are described in the platform.

Lessons Learned. In the evaluation of ProDeMoKi described in [3], we observed that
about 45% of the users considered the collaboration support provided by ProDeMoKi
one of the major strength of the tool and that users positively perceive its overall usefulness for the collaborative modeling of documents and processes. Such a usefulness is
perceived more strongly by employees working in teams constituted by more than two
persons (on average the usefulness of ProDeMoKi has been judged 3.8 out of a 5-point
Likert scale for teams with more than two persons versus 2.8 for those with less than
three). As presented in [3], there exists, in fact, a strong positive correlation between
the size of the subjects team and his/her feedback about the ProDeMoKi usefulness
for collaborative purposes. A similar relation (with the task-teams size) was also found
for the perceived usefulness of the ProDeMoKi log history functionality. This function-
ality, although not frequently used by the peripheral task users (64 times in total), has
been exercised 42% of times by the most productive (223 documents and 418 processes

6 Two central and one peripheral task-teams are not required to use the ProDeMoKi Platform

in this phase of the project.

C. Di Francescomarino et al.

and tasks) and among the most numerous (4 modelers) task-teams, thus remarking its
usefulness in case of large models and of collaborative work. These results show that
the ProDeMoKi tool is particularly useful in situations in which users work in team on
the same models.

Furthermore, the ProDeMoKi Platform is able to support the collaborative work of
users with different backgrounds, by providing simplified views according to the roles
and the specific competencies of the involved actors. Indeed, besides offering simplified
views customized on the base of the specific domain (i.e., administrative procedures)
to non-technical experts, the platform also tailors its interface to the specific actors
needs, e.g., offering different functionalities to the central and the peripheral task users.
The extensive use of these views (the lightly-structured access mode of documents
and the fully-structured access mode of processes have been accessed respectively 931
and 2533 times by the peripheral task users, while the central task-teams accessed the
lightly-structured access mode of metadata and services 127 and 166 times, respec-
tively) confirmed the usefulness of these simplified and customized views.

Next steps. We plan to better investigate with controlled experiments the collaboration
mechanisms occurring among the different actors involved in the creation of interoperable models. The results and the feedback obtained will allow us to exploit the semantic
web technologies to further support ProDeMoKi users in their modeling activities.

5.2 Procedures Interoperability

One of the aim of the ProDe project is to provide an archive of procedures representing
the administrative processes of all the regions involved in the project. To this purpose,
the ProDeMoKi Platform permits to all peripheral tasks to archive the process models
they are in charge to deal with, and to make these models available to the users of the
other peripheral and central tasks. This way, all users of the other tasks are able to verify
the compliance between the processes stored in the archive and the ones actually used
in their local government.

Lessons Learned. Differently from what happened in the modeling of document types
and organizational aspects, where it was possible to identify relations and commonalities between the different models (taxonomies) produced by the different perhiperal
task-teams already at the early stage of modeling, the formal representation of PA procedures generated a number of extremely different and heterogeneous process models.
Such a variety and heterogeneity, due to granularity issues, different modeling styles,
lack of guidelines and reference standards, and to the difference among regional proce-
dures, hampered the convergence to the ProDe archive of procedures commonly agreed
by all the participant regions. In this scenario the ProDeMoKi Platform enabled the
identification of these diverging modeling styles from the very early stages of the project
by allowing participatory knowledge sharing and fostering the communication and the
discussion among regions, and held an crucial role in supporting the process of converging towards a uniform common model. Currently, the model contains 109 processes
modeled by 6 peripheral task-teams (with an average of 18 processes per task-team).
?

?

?
5.3 Lexicon Interoperability

The lexicon interoperability is one of the crucial issues of the ProDe project. As explained in Section 3, it is critical in order to avoid ambiguity problems that the domain
experts are able to use a common lexicon for describing both the document properties
and the atomic activities used in each process.

The effort spent during the project to this purpose was mainly devoted to: (i) the
adoption of (standard) pre-existing terminologies and metadata (e.g. MoReq), when
available; (ii) the creation of a shared vocabulary agreed among the different regions
for the service definition.

The architecture of the ProDeMoKi Platform provides a mechanism to link the CT
installation and the P T1, . . . , P T7 ones in order to grant the semantic interoperability
of the used dictionaries, thus supporting regions in both these activities. Indeed, on
one side, this linking functionality provides the tool with the capability to enable the
definition of a common set of shared objects, that allowed the 4 central tasks to define
a common set of metadata, services, functionalities and indicators to be used by all the
peripheral tasks. On the other side, this functionality supports task-teams in reconciling
synonyms and in mapping specific terms to more general and shared ones. This way, it
allows them to come up with a common dictionary, based on MoReq, to be used by the
peripheral tasks for describing both the document properties (metadata) and the services
invoked by each atomic task.

Lessons Learned. The results of the effort spent on the convergence to a common dic-
tionary, clearly appear in the reduction of the ambiguity of document and activity names
in successive versions of the models created. For example, the number of different activities modeled dropped from more than 170, in the first version of the Modello di
riferimento, to 22 in the last version, with a relative reduction of about 87%.

Next steps. The definition of high level models commonly agreed by all the participant
regions, as well as the use of a shared set of metadata and of a common dictionary, represent the first step towards the possibility of (semi-)automatically verifying the compliance of the high level models to both national and regional laws, that is of primary
importance for the PA. Moreover, the shared vocabulary of terms, fostering the definition of a mapping between the specific regional procedures and the commonly agreed
models, could allow to verify the compliance of regional models to both national and
local norms, and to support their adaptation to changes in the regulations.

5.4 Formal Language Interoperability

The complexity of PA procedures demands for the modeling and integration of different entities and artifacts. Each ProDeMoKi in the ProDeMoKi Platform permits
to model the ontology of the documents, the processes in which they are used, and
roles of the users involved in each process. To grant the interoperability of the formal
languages used to describe these different conceptual models, the platform permits to
build integrated models in which the entities defined in different formal languages can
be semantically related, in order to better represent the PA procedures. An example is

C. Di Francescomarino et al.

Fig. 3. The BPMN diagram enriched with documents

reported in Figure 3 in which the BPMN diagram shows how document entities are
connected with processes.

Lessons Learned. The importance of the interoperability among the formal languages
used for describing the different conceptual models of the PA procedures can be grasped
also from the data related to the ProDeMoKi Platform usage. For example, 3.32 documents have been used, on average, in each process diagram, with peaks of about 20
different documents in a process (as shown in the boxplot in Figure 4a). Moreover, the
same document has been used on average by 0.82 processes, including cases in which
the same document has been used by 4/5 different processes (Figure 4b). Users themselves are aware of the importance of such a facility: in fact, 45% of them judged such
a capability of ProDeMoKi one of its major strengths.

5.5 Organizational and Technological Interoperability

As illustrated in Section 3, identifying and linking the organizational and the technological layers becomes a necessity when dealing with complex organizations like the
PA, as occurred in the ProDe project.

Such an interoperability is achieved in the ProDeMoKi Platform thanks to the connection between each ProDeMoKi installation of the peripheral tasks with the one used
in the central tasks. Indeed, as explained in Section 3, one of the goal of the central tasks
is to define the services that can be invoked by each process modeled by the peripheral
tasks. This way, the users of the peripheral tasks are able both to verify the completeness
of the services provided, and to map these services with the organizational procedures
and roles of their local government.

Lessons Learned. The conceptual difference between the organizational and technological layers is rather evident. However, we learned that the interoperability between
?

?

?
(a) Distribution of documents in processes per task-team

(b) Distribution of processes containing
the same document per task-team

Fig. 4. Document and process integration

these two conceptual layers is hard to reach in the context of the ProDe project. This
is mainly due to the several differences in the regions organizations, that make the
creation of a clear mapping between services, roles and procedures a challenging task.

Next steps. After having identified and modeled these two layers, the next step will
be to draw formal relations between them. Being able to link these layers, for example
determining when a certain technological component accomplishes a certain step in the
business process, could allow us to monitor the PA organizational process by monitoring
the progress of the corresponding process at the software layer. More importantly, when
faced with a change in the organizational process we could automatically modify the
technological process to reflect this change.

5.6 Additional General Lesson Learned

Among the peculiar findings of the project, we observed that PA employees are technological advanced users, even more than what we expected. Indeed, ProDeMoKi users
not only work with a personal computer everyday for their job (mainly to write and read
documents), but they are also people living in a world where the use of web technologies
is constantly increasing. People navigate the Internet at home looking for news, events,
restaurants; they use social networks to stay in touch with friends, online calendar to
organize their lives and wikipedia when they want to research a specific topic.

Although PA employees dont commonly use Semantic Web technologies during
their job, they use it everyday in their spare time. This is the reason why, for them, the
use of a tool based on the same concept of the popular Wikipedia wasnt too challeng-
ing. We were surprised to discover that not only almost all the interviewed ProDeMoKi
users frequently visit websites like wikipedia, but more than half of them edited at least
one wiki page prior to use ProDeMoKi.

This familiarity with Semantic Web technologies allowed them to quickly learn how
to use ProDeMoKi. Before the beginning of the modeling activities (February 2011),

C. Di Francescomarino et al.

the PA employees have been trained with a learning session of 1 day, in which all the
features of ProDeMoKi have been illustrated, and hands-on exercises proposed. After
this session, the time spent for learning was very limited (on average, 1-2 days) and
the learning process did not require the involvement of ProDeMoKi developers (the
preferred approach was the autonomous training).

The proliferation of Semantic Web technologies, that we can envisage for a next
future, could allow the quick and easy adoption of platforms like the ProDeMoKi Plat-
form, as well as the growth of communities around these technologies. A further lesson
we learned from the ProDe project, indeed, is the importance to actively involve users in
the development process of the project, making them collaborating as part of a commu-
nity. In the context of ProDe, the active participation and collaboration of PA employees
of different regions, allowed to develop a common lexicon (by sharing knowledge and
discussing), to refine models and procedures (by confronting them with those of other
regions), and could allow, in the future, to keep alive the attention in maintaining and
evolving the models built together as the PA procedures change.

6 Conclusions

The paper reports our experience in the construction and usage of solutions based on
Semantic Web technologies in the context of ProDe, a national project involving Italian
Public Administrations. In particular, it presents how these technologies enabled the
collaborative modeling of administrative procedures and their related documents, organizational roles, and services, and contributed to deal with the interoperability issues
emerged in the context of project. More specifically, the features provided by the MoKi
tool and its customizations to face the specific needs of the project allowed to promote
interoperability among: users, PA procedures, terminologies, conceptual models, and
the different conceptual layers required by the project.

Taking advantage of the experience and of the lessons learned during the project,
we plan, for the future, to better investigate and support the collaboration and interoperability mechanisms among users with different competencies and roles, as well as
to explore techniques and approaches for (i) enabling the compliant evolution of PA
procedures and laws; and (ii) monitoring the execution of PA procedures to check their
compliance to models.
