Impact of Using Relationships
between Ontologies to Enhance
the Ontology Search Results

Carlo Allocca, Mathieu dAquin, and Enrico Motta

Knowledge Media Institute (KMi), The Open University, Walton Hall,

Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, United Kingdom
{c.allocca,m.daquin,e.motta}@open.ac.uk

Abstract. Using semantic web search engines, such as Watson, Swoogle
or Sindice, to find ontologies is a complex exploratory activity. It generally requires formulating multiple queries, browsing pages of results, and
assessing the returned ontologies against each other to obtain a relevant
and adequate subset of ontologies for the intended use. Our hypothesis is
that at least some of the difficulties related to searching ontologies stem
from the lack of structure in the search results, where ontologies that are
implicitly related to each other are presented as disconnected and shown
on different result pages. In earlier publications we presented a software
framework, Kannel, which is able to automatically detect and make
explicit relationships between ontologies in large ontology repositories.
In this paper, we present a study that compares the use of the Watson
ontology search engine with an extension, Watson+Kannel, which provides information regarding the various relationships occurring between
the result ontologies. We evaluate Watson+Kannel by demonstrating through various indicators that explicit relationships between ontologies improve users efficiency in ontology search, thus validating our
hypothesis.

Introduction

From the users perspective, the most important aspect of Semantic Web Search
Engines (SWSEs) [7] is the ability to support the search for ontologies which
match their requirements. Indeed, finding ontologies is a complex and creative
process which requires a lot of intuition. In addition, it also requires manual
analyses of the content of candidate ontologies to choose the ones that are adequate to their intended use. For these reasons, the automatic Ontology Selection process has been studied in several different contexts in the recent years
[4,5,14,18,22,26,27,29,31] with the aim of improving the methods used to collect,
assess and rank candidate ontologies. However, the more user-centric Ontology
Search process, here defined as the activity of browsing the results from a SWSE
to identify the ontologies adequate to the search goal, has not been researched

 This work was funded by the EC IST-FF6-027595 NeOn Project.

E. Simperl et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2012, LNCS 7295, pp. 453468, 2012.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

C. Allocca, M. dAquin, and E. Motta

that

efficient

one

of

the

Our

view is

that

Swoogle

represent different

issues hampering
the results generated by SWSEs,

extensively until now. Such an activity is becoming crucial for the rapidly growing set of scenarios and applications relying on the reuse of existing ontologies.
ontol-
such as Watson
ogy search is
(http://watson.kmi.open.ac.uk),
(http://swoogle.umbc.edu)
or Sindice (http://sindice.com), are not structured appropriately. These
systems return flat lists of ontologies where ontologies are treated as if they were
independent from each other while, in reality, they are implicitly related. For
example, the query Conference Publication currently1 gives 218 ontologies as
a result in Watson. The first two pages of results list several items, including
http://lsdis.cs.uga.edu/projects/semdis/sweto/testbed_v1_1.owl,
http://lsdis.cs.uga.edu/projects/semdis/sweto/testbed_v1_3.owl and
http://lsdis.cs.uga.edu/projects/semdis/sweto/testbed_v1_4.owl.
(isPrevVer-
that
sionOf ). Another
common situation is when an ontology has been
translated in different ontology languages. This is the case in the first
(http://reliant.teknowledge.com/DAML/Mid-level-ontology.owl)
and
second (http://reliant.teknowledge.com/DAML/Mid-level-ontology.daml)
results of the query student university researcher  in Watson or the second (http://annotation.semanticweb.org/iswc/iswc.daml)
third
(http://annotation.semanticweb.org/iswc/iswc.owl) results of the same
query in Swoogle. These ontologies are obviously two different encodings of
the same model. Analogously,
it is not hard to find ontologies connected
through other, more sophisticated relations such as different levels of similarity
(isLexicallySimilarTo, regarding the vocabulary, and isSyntacticallySimilarTo,
regarding the axioms), as well as the relationship between ontologies that
originate from the same provenance, as expressed through their URIs having
the same second level domain2 name (ComesFromTheSameDomain).3

ontology

versions

of

the

same

and

It is our view that the failure of these systems to provide structured views of
the result space hamper the ontology search process as the result space becomes
unnecessarily large and full of redundancies. Hence, we have been investigating
the hypothesis that making explicit the relations between ontologies and using
them to structure the results of a SWSE system would support a more efficient
ontology search process. In previous publications [1,3], we presented a software
framework, Kannel, which is able to detect and make explicit relationships
between ontologies in large ontology repositories. In this paper we present a
comparative study evaluating the improvement brought by extending a SWSE
(Watson) by making explicit the relationships between ontologies and presenting
them in the results of the ontology search task (the Watson+Kannel system).
To this purpose, we have used a task-oriented and user-centred approach [20].

1 That is, on 16/12/2011.
2 A second-level domain (SLD) is a domain that is directly below a top-level domain

such as com, net and org, see
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second-level_domain

3 In [1,3] are reported the formal definitions of the above ontology relations.
?

?

?
Based on a sample of users with a suitable profile, we randomly allocated them
into two groups and asked them to perform three ontology search tasks to the
best of their ability using either the Watson system alone or Watson+Kannel.
We then evaluated the differences in the way the two groups performed in these
tasks, showing through concrete measures as well as responses to questionnaires
that the inclusion of relationship between ontologies in the results of a SWSE
system improves the efficiency (and to a smaller extent, the satisfaction) of users
involved in ontology search tasks.

In the next section, we briefly describe the systems we used in this study.
In Section 4, we describe the methodology adopted to evaluate our hypothesis.
In Section 5, we discuss the results of our study. In Section 2, we discuss the
relevant related work and in Section 6 we summarise the key contributions of
this work and outline our plans for future work.

2 Related Work

The discussion of the related work follows two main directions. The first is related
to the process of developing Semantic Web Search Engine systems, while the
second concerns different types of relationships between ontologies that have
been studied in the literature. Most of the research work related to the ontology
search task concerns the development of SWSE systems [7], including: Watson
[8], Sindice [28], Swoogle [11], OntoSelect [4], ontokhoj [5] and OntoSearch [32].
All these systems have the aim of collecting and indexing ontologies from the
web and providing, based on keywords or other inputs, efficient mechanisms to
retrieve ontologies and semantic data. To the best of our knowledge, there is
no study regarding the comparison of the above ontology search engines. The
most common issues addressed by these systems are Ontology Selection - how to
identify/select automatically the set of relevant ontologies from a given collection
[26,27]  and Ontology Evaluation how to assess the quality and relevance of
an ontology [14,27]. Several studies have contributed to the solution of both the
above problems, including approaches to ranking ontologies [18] and to select
appropriate ontologies [22,29,31]. These works focus on the mechanisms required
to support SWSE systems in automatically identifying ontologies from their
collections and presenting them in a ranked list to the users. However, Ontology
Search, as the activity of using a SWSE to find appropriate ontologies, has not
been considered before from an user-centric point of view. Furthermore, we can
find in literature many works related to the field of Search Engine Usability and
how humans interact with search engines [17], but such studies have not yet been
applied to SWSEs.

Ontologies are not isolated artefacts: they are, explicitly or implicitly, related to each other. Kleshchev [21] characterised, at a very abstract level, a
number of relations between ontologies such as sameConceptualisation, Resem-
blance, Simplification and Composition, without providing formal definitions for
them, and without providing mechanisms to detect them. Heflin [19] was the first

C. Allocca, M. dAquin, and E. Motta

to study formally some of the different types of links between ontologies, focusing on the crucial problems of versioning and evolution. Although, these
links are available with one of the most used web ontology language (OWL),
they are rarely used [2]. Several approaches have focused on the comparison
of different versions of ontologies in order to find the differences [16]. In par-
ticular, PROMTDIF [25] compares the structure of ontologies and OWLDiff
(http://semanticweb.org/wiki/OWLDiff) computes the differences by entail-
ment, checking the two set of axioms. SemVersion [30] compares two ontologies
and computes the differences at both the structural and the semantic levels.
Gangemi in [15] defined the ontology integration as the construction of an ontology C that formally specifies the union of the vocabularies of two other ontologies A and B. The most interesting case is when A and B commit to the
conceptualisation of the same domain of interest or of two overlapping domains.
In particular, A and B may be related by being alternative ontologies, truly overlapping ontologies, equivalent ontologies with vocabulary mismatches, overlapping
ontologies with disjoint domain, or homonymically overlapping ontologies. There
also exists an extensive collection of works, including [10,12,13,33], that propose
formal definitions of the ontology mapping concept. Most of them formalise mappings between concepts, relations and instances of two ontologies, to establish
an alignment between them, while we focus on relationships between whole on-
tologies. Finally, studies have targeted ontology comparison in order to identify
overlaps between ontologies [23] and many measures exist to compute particular
forms of similarity between ontologies [9].

All these studies discuss particular relations separately. While they contribute
interesting elements for us to build on, we focus here on assessing the impact of
providing various ontology relations to users of SWSE systems.

3 Systems Used

Kannel is an ontology-based framework for detecting and managing relationships between ontologies for large ontology repositories. Watson is a gateway
to the Semantic Web that collects, analyses and gives access to ontologies and
semantic data available online. These two systems have already been detailed
in [3,8] respectively. Therefore, in this section we only describe the integration
of Watson with Kannels features to explain in more details how Kannel is
used on top of Watsons repository and integrated into its interface.

Watson+Kannel4 is an extension of Watson where Watsons ontology space
has been processed by Kannel to detect implicit relationships between ontologies (similarity, inclusion, versioning, common provenance). In addition, two
relationship-based mechanisms were added to the Watson ontology search interface (see Fig. 1). They are:

4 The Watson+Kannel integration can be tested at

http://smartproducts1.kmi.open.ac.uk:8080/WatsonWUI-K.
?

?

?
Fig. 1. Watsons interface with Kannels features (i.e., Watson+Kannel)

C. Allocca, M. dAquin, and E. Motta

Link mechanism which provides additional ontology links5 to the ontologies
in the search result space, depending on the relationships they share with
others. For example, three ontology links (3 similar results, 3 other versions
and 57 results from the same domain) have been added to the second result in
Fig. 1, meaning that there are three ontologies similar to this one in Watson,
three other versions and fifty seven that come from the same second level
domain.

GroupBy mechanism which provides a feature to support the re-grouping of
ontologies in the search result according to a selected ontology relation. For
example, in Fig. 1, the search results have been grouped according to the
versioning relationship (as it is the one marked as selected), meaning that
different versions of the same ontology appear as a single item, represented
by the latest version and links to the others. Different levels of similarity
(lexical, regarding the vocabulary, and syntactic, regarding the axioms), as
well as common provenance can also be used to group results.

4 Methodology

The general aim of this study is to evaluate whether the inclusion of ontology
relationships to structure the results of a SWSE system, as described in the previous section, improves ontology search. In particular, we consider the following
two major aspects to be evaluated:

User efficiency: It is envisaged that ontology relations could benefit users by
making the ontology search process more efficient, i.e., requiring less time and
effort (as measured by indicators such as the number of pages and ontologies
visited).

User satisfaction: It is also hypothesised that, by showing better structured
and connected search results, users of the Watson+Kannel system would
be more satisfied and more confident with the results of their ontology search
activity.

The comparative study of Watson and Watson+Kannel is based on a taskoriented and user-centred approach [20] that involved participants, tasks and
data collections as detailed below.

4.1 Participants

Sixteen members of the Open University, from PhD students to senior researchers,
participated to the evaluation. They were randomly divided into two groups and
asked to perform three ontology search tasks to the best of their ability6 using

5 The available links are based on the similarity, versioning, common provenance and

inclusion relationships as they are described in [1,3].

6 In this work, we considered the tasks to be successfully achieved when the users were

satisfied with the ontologies they found.
?

?

?
either Watson or Watson+Kannel. We call W the group of 7 participants
who used Watson only and W+K the group of 9 participants who used Wat-
son+Kannel. To make the evaluation unbiased, several requirements had to be
fulfilled regarding the ability of users to use the specific systems. The following
criteria were used to select participants:

1. Experience with computers and web search engines was necessary.
2. A reasonable degree of understanding of what an ontology is and how

ontologies might be used in concrete scenarios was needed.

3. A general understanding of what a SWSE is and how it could be used to
search ontologies (without necessarily having a direct experience of any of
them) was required.

Fig. 2. Profiles of the participants in the two groups W and W+K. Answers to the
corresponding questions could range from 0 to 5. The average is shown.

Fig. 2 gives an overview of the profiles of the participants with respect to
their experience of different aspects of the evaluation and our three requirements expressed above. It can be seen from the chart that both groups included
participants who declared extensive experience of computers in general (Comp
Exp) and of Web search engines in particular (Search Exp). In both cases participants had on average a medium to good experience with ontologies (Ont Exp).
They generally knew Watson, even if they had not extensively used it before (if
at all, see Watson Exp) and some of them had some knowledge of other SWSEs
(such as Swoogle and Sindice, see OtherSWSE ). When asked about their level
of satisfaction with SWSEs, especially in supporting ontology search tasks, participants in both groups gave on average a rather neutral answer (Ont Search
Satisf ). Moreover, it is worth mentioning that the participants were not aware
of the overall goal of the study and were not part of the Watson and Wat-
son+Kannel development teams. Thus, regardless of what system they used,
they simply performed the ontology search tasks to their best ability, which
was actually the only condition needed to ensure the validity of the evaluation.
From these results, it appears that participants in our evaluation matched the
target audience, as expressed through the requirements above, and formed two
homogeneous groups with respect to their experience of the systems involved.

C. Allocca, M. dAquin, and E. Motta

4.2 Tasks

Each individual participant was asked to realise three different ontology search
tasks that are described (as presented to the participants) below:

Task 1 - Modelling. You want to develop an ontology about recipes, where
you are going to represent the cooking process reusing existing ontologies
from the web. Your task is to use Watson (or Watson+Kannel) to find
ontologies to cover the topic of recipes and processes dealing with cooking.

Task 2 - Annotation. Consider the two links provided7. They are both about
the same domain, which is books. Consider them as webpages to which you
want to add semantic annotations based on ontologies. To achieve this goal,
you need to find ontologies using Watson (or Watson+Kannel) that can
be used to annotate the above web pages.

Task 3 - Extension. Consider the KMi web page, http://kmi.open.ac.uk/
people/. As you can see, for each person, there is a RDF description represented using the FOAF ontology (http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/). Imagine that we want to extend the KMi people semantic description including
information about the books they have published, the events (conferences,
workshops, etc.) they attend and the projects they work on. Your task is to
use Watson (or Watson+Kannel) to find ontologies that you think would
be suitable to be used for such an extension of the existing representation.

4.3 Data Collection

The data for evaluation is collected from two main sources: questionnaires
and videos. Regarding the first: two main questionnaires were designed for this
evaluation. One, regarding the background of users, was filled in by the participants before realising the tasks (cf. participant profiles in Fig. 2). The other
one, filled in after realising the tasks, included questions regarding the users
satisfaction and confidence in the results obtained for the three ontology search
tasks. Questions in this second questionnaire asked how users felt they succeeded
with the tasks, how confident they were about having explored a significant part
of the relevant ontology space and their overall opinion about the ability of the
tool to support them in the tasks. Videos capturing the screen of participants as
they realised the given ontology tasks were used to collect concrete information
regarding the performance of users in these tasks. Analysing the videos, we were
able to measure the average time taken for each task, the number of pages visited
and the number of ontologies inspected.

7 http://www.amazon.co.uk/Shockwave-Rider-John-Brunner/dp/0345467175/ref=

sr 1 1?ie=UTF8&qid=1284638728&sr=1-1-spell
and http://www.booksprice.com/compare.do?inputData=top+gear&
Submit2.x=0&Submit2.y=0&Submit2=Search&searchType=theBookName.
?

?

?
5 Results

The results of our evaluation are presented from both the users efficiency and
satisfaction perspectives. We also discuss how the different ontology relationships
included in Watson+Kannel were used to support ontology search in the
W+K group.

5.1 User Efficiency

The diagrams in Fig. 3 show the main results of the typical efficiency of the

two groups (W and W+K) with respect to the three following measures:

Time is the time in minutes taken to realise the task, i.e., between the beginning
of the session, until the user was satisfied with the results obtained. This is
the most obvious way to assess the performance of users in ontology search.
Page is the number of pages of results an user would have viewed in order to
realise a task. This gives an indication of the effort required in browsing the
results of the SWSE to identify relevant ontologies.

Link is the number of links followed to realise the task, which corresponds to

the number of ontologies being inspected.

It clearly appears in Fig. 3 that our hypothesis (that including ontology relationships in the results of an ontology search system would make the ontology
search task more efficient) has been confirmed. Indeed, for the indicator Time
and Page, the differences between the W and W+K groups show a significant
improvement (taking into account the three tasks, the T-test result for Time
was 0.017 and for Page was 0.013, at significance level  < 0.05). While we can
observe a difference for the Link indicator, this difference was not shown to be
statistically significant (T-test result was 0.27). For example, in Task 3, it typically took 2.5 minutes less to achieve the task when using Watson+Kannel,
and required inspecting only half as many result pages and two third of the links
compared to when using Watson only.

It is worth noticing however that there are significant discrepancies in the
results obtained for the three different tasks as shown in Fig. 3. In particular, it
appears that the differences between W and W+K are less significant in Task 1.
One of the possible explanations for this phenomenon is that it took some time
for participants in group W+K to explore and learn the features provided by
Watson+Kannel that were not present in Watson. To support this interpre-
tation, we analysed the videos corresponding to the group W+K to determine
to what extent the features provided by Kannel were used in the three ontology search tasks. As shown in Fig. 4, the features of Kannel (especially, the
ontology relation links) were used significantly less for Task 1 than they were for
Tasks 2 and 3 (see charts A and B). It appears that, after Task 1, users learnt
to use the ontology relation mechanisms provided by Watson+Kannel more
efficiently (see charts C  regarding the Link mechanism  and D  regarding
the GroupBy mechanism).

C. Allocca, M. dAquin, and E. Motta

TimeW TimeW_K

PageW PageW_K

LinkW

LinkW_K

(a) Performance profiles for Task 1.

TimeW TimeW_K

PageW PageW_K

LinkW

LinkW_K

(b) Performance profiles for Task 2.
?

?

?
TimeW TimeW_K

PageW PageW_K

LinkW

LinkW_K

(c) Performance profiles for Task 3.

Fig. 3. Performance profiles for the three ontology search tasks, regarding the Time,
Page and Link indicators. Each box represent the median (black line), the quartiles
(top and bottom of the box), min and max values for each indicator, in each group
for each task. Grey boxes correspond to the profiles of the W group, white boxes
correspond to the W+K group.
?

?

?
Fig. 4. Use of the ontology relation features in Watson+Kannel by group W+K. (A)
shows the average number of ontology relation links followed and the number of times
the group by mechanism was applied in each task; (B) shows how many participants
used these mechanisms in each task. The diagrams (C) and (D) show the distributions
of the number of uses (number of times a feature is used  x axis  by number of users
 y axis) for Link and GroupBy respectivly.

5.2 User Satisfaction

Fig. 5 summarises the answers to the five questions asked after the users realised
the tasks:

1. Are you satisfied with your success with the tasks?
2. Are you satisfied with the ontologies retrieved through Watson?
3. Are you confident that you have seen most of the relevant, retrieved ontolo-

gies?

4. Are you satisfied with the search results?
5. Give an indication of your overall opinion regarding your experience of the

tested system.

Each question was given an answer from 0 to 5, 0 being the most negative and
5 the most positive. Surprisingly, considering that users of the Group W+K
performed significantly better than the ones of the Group W, there are only
very small differences between their answers to most of the user satisfaction
questions. Generally, users ranked both systems highly, with the exception of

C. Allocca, M. dAquin, and E. Motta

Fig. 5. Median answers to the 5 user satisfaction questions in the two evaluation groups

Fig. 6. Use of the 6 relations by the W+K group over the three ontology search tasks

Question 3. Question 3 relates to a clear shortcoming of SWSE systems, i.e., the
ability to understand and check the whole set of results. This result is consistent
with what reported in [24], which shows that expert users tend to rank usability
high in systems, regardless of the task performance.

5.3 Analysis of the Ontology Relationships

In addition to the users efficiency and satisfaction, we briefly discuss the extent
to which different relations were used to support ontology search. Measures of
the use of the Link and GroupBy functions in the Watson+Kannel system
over the three tasks in group W+K are summarised in the charts of Fig. 6.
?

?

?
There, it is shown that ComesFromTheSameDomain and SimilarTo (especially
in groupBy) are the two most used ontology relationships. One could argue that
this is due to the fact that these relations are significantly more present in the
Watson repository than any of the others. However, we cannot actually establish a clear correlation between the number of instances of a relationship and
its use for the three tasks. Indeed, ComesFromTheSameDomain is only second
in number of relationships (with about four million instances), while SimilarTo
is two orders of magnitude more present (more than 100 million instances).
More importantly, the third most popular relationship, isPrevVersion, is the least
present in the repository with only about 2,800 instances, compared to 14,000
for isIncludedIn (isSyntacticallySimilarTo and isLexicallySimilarTo overlap to a
large extent with SimilarTo and with each other, therefore both have more than
100 million instances). A possible explanation for these results is therefore that
the three popular relationships (ComesFromTheSameDomain, SimilarTo and isPrevVersionOf ) represent notions that are useful in supporting ontology search.
In other terms, being able to discover ontologies that have the same provenance,
have a high degree of domain overlap, or represent evolutions of other ontologies
appears more natural to users than the use of the isIncludedIn relation. We can
also envisage that these three relations are more directly understandable and
verifiable than the three others which were less used. Another observation is
that relationships with very large numbers of instances (and therefore appearing for many ontologies in the search results) are generally used more with the
GroupBy mechanism than with the Link mechanism. This appears natural
as rare relationships have less impact then more common ones when used to
structure the search results through the GroupBy mechanism.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we have presented an evaluation of our hypothesis that, in the context of a Semantic Web Search Engine, making explicit the relationships between
ontologies and using them to structure the results of a SWSE system leads to a
more efficient ontology search process. This evaluation was based on the comparative study of the Watson search engine and its extension Watson+Kannel
through a task-oriented and user-centred approach. Both the feedback obtained
from questionnaires and concrete performance measures show an improvement
in efficiency when performing the ontology search task with Watson+Kannel.
The current study also provides the basis for several promissing research direc-
tions. Firstly, we are interested in extending the evaluation of our hypothesis
by conducting a comparative study of other ontology search engines such as
Swoogle and Sindice with their Kannels extension (Swoogle+Kannel and
Sindice+Kannel respectively). Secondly, we are interested in building on this
work to provide novel ontology ranking solutions. Thirdly, this work also provides the basis for novel empirical studies. In particular, we plan to analyse
relationships between ontologies at scale to understand better the ontology engineering practices behind the modelling process. For example, different ontology
versions provide data about the development process of ontologies, showing how

C. Allocca, M. dAquin, and E. Motta

they reach stability or adapt to changes in the domain. Thus, once we have
detected the links between different versions of ontologies, it becomes possible
to explore how such ontologies evolve on the Semantic Web, in particular with
the aim of discovering relevant high level ontology evolution patterns, which can
be used to focus ontology search around notions such as stability and activ-
ity. Finally, from a practical point of view and as part of our broader work on
building a framework for the management of relationships between ontologies
(see e.g., [3]), one of our future directions of research is to extend the set of
relationships between ontologies that can be considered by our system. One of
the most interesting aspects here concerns providing mechanisms to explore not
only single, atomic relations between ontologies, but also the relations derived
from the combination of others (e.g., compatibility and disagreement [6]).
