Semantics Visualization for Fostering Search Result 

Comprehension 

Christian Stab, Kawa Nazemi, Matthias Breyer, Dirk Burkhardt,  

and Jorn Kohlhammer 

Fraunhofer Institute for Computer Graphics Research IGD 

64283 Darmstadt, Germany 

{christian.stab,kawa.nazemi,matthias.breyer,dirk.burkhardt, 

joern.kohlhammer}@igd.fraunhofer.de 

Abstract. Current search engines present search results in an ordered list even 
if semantic technologies are used for analyzing user queries and the document 
contents.  The  semantic  information  that  is  used  during  the  search  result 
generation  mostly  remains  hidden  from  the  user  although  it  significantly 
supports  users  in  understanding why  search  results  are  considered  as  relevant 
for  their  individual  query.  The  approach  presented  in  this  paper  utilizes 
visualization  techniques  for  offering  visual  feedback  about  the  reasons  the 
results were retrieved. It represents the semantic neighborhood of search results, 
the relations between results and query terms as well as the relevance of search 
results and the semantic interpretation of query terms for fostering search result 
comprehension.  It  also  provides  visual  feedback  for  query  enhancement. 
Therefore, not only the search results are visualized but also further information 
that  occurs  during  the  search  processing  is  used  to  improve  the  visual 
presentation  and  to  offer  more  transparency  in  search  result  generation.  The 
results  of  an  evaluation  in  a  real  application  scenario  show  that  the  presented 
approach considerably supports users in assessment and decision-making tasks 
and alleviates information seeking in digital semantic knowledge bases.  

Keywords: Semantic Search, Information Visualization, SemaVis, Search User 
Interface, Visual Query Enhancement. 

Introduction 

The  optimal  use  of  information  and  knowledge  plays  a  major  role  in  global 
competition  and  forms  the  basis  for  competitiveness  of  industrial  companies. 
Thereby, semantic technologies provide adequate linking tools for heterogeneous data 
sources  as  well  as  the  generation  of  a  broader  context  that  facilitates  information 
access  and  enables  data  exchange  between  different  systems  [1].  With  the  ongoing 
establishment  of  semantic  technologies  like  the  Resource  Description  Framework 
(RDF)1, the Web Ontology Language (OWL)2 and semantic-oriented query languages 
                                                           
1 http://www.w3.org/RDF/ 
2 http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/ 

E. Simperl et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2012, LNCS 7295, pp. 633646, 2012. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 

C. Stab et al. 

like  SPARQL3 these developments are not only limited to specific domains but also 
adopted in daily search processes of web-based search engines [2]. In both, domainspecific applications and  web-based search engines, the results of search processing 
are  usually  presented  in  sorted  lists.  In  most  cases  the  ordering  of  list  entries 
represents the relevance of the results for the individual search of the user according 
to various criteria [3]. So the most relevant result is placed in the first row followed 
by  less  important  ones.  Using  this  kind  of  result  presentation,  the  semantic 
information  of  the  documents  that  is  used  during  search  result  generation  and  the 
analysis  of  search  terms,  remains  in  most  cases  hidden  from  the  user,  though  this 
information considerably supports users in information-seeking tasks and selection of 
appropriate documents for further examination.  

According to Hearst [4] efficient and informative feedback is critically important 
for designing search user interfaces. This includes in particular feedback about query 
formulation  and  about  reasons  the  particular  results  were  retrieved.  However, 
relevance indicators besides list ordering such as numerical scores or special icons are 
less frequently used because the meaning of the relevance score is opaque to the user 
[5] in these presentations. This is because the majority of existing relevance indicators 
only presents a single relevance per search result that summarizes all criteria instead 
of offering a more fine-grained insight to search result processing.  

In order to offer users an adequate tool that provides nevertheless the possibility to 
assess  the  relevance  of  retrieved  search  results,  we  developed  a  novel  approach  that 
utilizes  information  visualization  techniques  and  semantic  information  that  emerges 
during  search  result  generation.  The  major  contributions  and  benefits  of  our  approach 
are:  
  Support  for  relevance  assessment:  The  presented  approach  supports  users  in 
assessing the relevance of search results and offers more transparency in the search 
result generation process.  

  Query-Result-Relation visualization: The visual representation of relations between 
query terms and search results as well as the retrieved semantic meaning of query 
terms  offers  a  fine-grained  visual  overview  of  search  result  relevancies  and 
facilitates the information seeking and decision making process.  

  Visual  feedback  for  query-enhancement:  The  illustration  of  additional  attributes 
and possible terms related to a given search request allows users to narrow search 
results and to refine the individual search process. 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  In  the  next  section  we  introduce  our 
approach  for  presenting  search  results  in  semantic  domains  and  give  a  detailed 
description of all parts and features. Then we introduce the application scenario of the 
visualization and give an overview of its domain.  We present the evaluation that we 
have performed to compare our approach to already existing solutions followed by a 
related  work  section,  a  discussion  and  a  prospect  of  future  work.  As  a  detailed 
description of the whole search process with all technical aspects is beyond the scope 
of this paper, we only briefly describe the semantic background processing and focus 
on  the  aspects  of  the  visualization  component  and  the  advantages  of  semantics  for 
visualizing search results.  
                                                           
3 http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-protocol/ 

Semantics V

Visualization for Fostering Search Result Comprehension 

Visualizing Sear

rch Results in Semantic Domains 

The  visualization  approac
visualization framework tha
for  presenting  semantic  in
providers,  modular  present
that  facilitate  the  developm
semantically modeled envir
visualization component be

ch  is  part  of  the  SemaVis-Framework4,  an  adapt
at contains different aspect-oriented visualizations [6, 7
nformation.  The  framework  also  provides  different  d
tation  models  and  a  script-based  configuration  langu
ment  and  integration  of  novel  visualization  techniques
ronments. In the following we will give an overview of 
efore introducing the details in succeeding sections.  

tive 
7, 8] 
data 
uage 
s  in 
f the 

 

Fig.  1.  Semantics  visualizati
semantic meanings of query te

ion  of  search  results  showing  query-result-relations,  retrie
erms and result relevancy for an exemplary search 

eved 

The  visualization  compo
that positions  nodes in a tw
edges and nodes of the grap
physical system reaches a m
the graph. In contrast to co
force  to  every  node  and  ed

onent  is  mainly  based  on  a  force-based  layout  algorit
wo-dimensional  space by assigning different  forces to 
ph. By adapting these forces in an iterative simulation, 
mechanical equilibrium resulting in an aesthetical layou
ommonly used force-based algorithms that assign the sa
dge  respectively,  our  approach  utilizes  a  weighted  mo

thm 
the 
the 
ut of 
ame 
odel 

                                            
4 http://www.semavis.com 

C. Stab et al. 

based  on  similarities  emerged  during  the  semantic  retrieval  process.  Another 
difference is that the visualization distinguishes between different node types:  
  Attribute nodes are not positioned by the force-based algorithm. Instead, they are 
placed by a second layout algorithm in a circular form during the initialization of 
the visualization and users are allowed to freely move them on the surface (Fig. 1 
shows an example).  

  Result  nodes  represent  the  hits  found  for  the  given  search  query.  They  are 
suspended between the attribute nodes and are positioned by the force-based layout 
algorithm according to their similarities and relations to the attribute nodes.  

Figure 1 shows an example with five attribute nodes and five result nodes. The weighting 
of the attraction and repulsion of the nodes and edges according to the retrieved similarity 
values  arranges  the  result  nodes  closer  to  more  similar  attributes.  So  the  best  hit  that 
matches to all attributes is placed near the center of the visualization. 

2.1  Visualizing Query-Result-Relations 

Giving adequate  feedback about the reasons the results  were retrieved is one of the 
major  challenges  for  designing  adequate  search  user  interfaces.  This  is  especially 
important  for  semantic  search  engines,  in  which  the  meaning  of  query  terms  is 
interpreted  by  means  of  semantically  modeled  entities,  because  the  interpretation 
might be highly ambiguous. For example the query term ford might be interpreted as 
the  name-attribute  of  a  car  manufacturer,  as  the  surname-attribute  of  the  famous 
inventor  or  the  title-attribute  of  an  activity  for  crossing  rivers.  Each  of  these 
interpretations will deliver a completely different result set. So it is not sufficient to 
only present the relations between query terms and results, but it is also necessary to 
point  out  the  semantic  interpretation  of  the  given  query  terms  to  allow  an 
unambiguous assessment of retrieved results.  

To  meet  these  demands  and  to  provide  an  adequate  tool  that  allows  users  to 
unambiguously  determine  the  most  relevant  result  for  their  individual  search,  our 
approach visualizes both query-result-relations and the interpreted semantic meaning 
of query terms. Therefore, each term of the given query is presented in an attribute 
node  of  the  visualization.  The  interpreted  semantic  meaning  emerged  during  search 
processing  is  visible  in  the  label  of  the  attribute  node.  So  for  every  possible 
interpretation  a  new  node  is  created  that  represents  the  query  term  and  its  semantic 
meaning. The relations between search results and the instantiated5 attribute nodes are 
depicted as directed and weighted edges between attribute nodes and result nodes. As 
mentioned  above,  the  weighting  of  an  edge  is  derived  from  the  retrieved  similarity 
between  the  result  and  the  attribute  node,  whereby  the  results  are  placed  nearer  to 
more relevant query terms and attribute nodes respectively.  
 

                                                           
5 instantiated in this context means that a query term is assigned to a specific attribute. 
?

?

?
Fig. 2. Left: The visualization of query-result-relations reveals that only one of the five results 
is semantically related to the queried application area. Right: The visual representation of the 
identified  semantic  meanings  of  query  terms  avoids  mistakes  and  ambiguity  in  result 
assessment tasks.  

Figure  2  shows  the  result  visualization  of  the  query  kuka  robots  in  construction 
industry,  where  the  term  kuka  is  identified  as  manufacturer,  the  term  robot  as 
function  carrier  and  construction  industry  as  application  area.  The  visualization 
reveals that only one of the results is related to the queried application area whereas 
other results are related to the given manufacturer (Figure 2 left). The second example 
shows the visualization of the results for the query  cylinder. The given term is on 
the  one  hand  identified  as  shape  of  an  object  and  on  the  other  hand  as  a  specific 
function  carrier.  By  visualizing  the  connections  between  search  results  and  related 
interpretations  of  the  query  term,  users  can  easily  recognize  the  results  that  match 
their initial search intention.  

2.2 

Semantic Neighborhood and Hierarchical Attributes 

Search results in semantic domains are not only retrieved by analyzing the content of 
resources but also by considering the semantic information and the semantic structure 
respectively.  For  example  a  resource  that  matches  to  only  one  of  the  given  query 
terms is higher rated in the result list when the remaining terms match to semantically 
related  resource.  In  some  cases,  semantic  search  processing  enables  the  retrieval  of 
highly  relevant  resources  even  if  the  given  query  terms  are  not  contained  in  the 
resources.  Especially  in  such  cases  where  semantic  structures  are  responsible  for 
result  generation,  it  can  be  a  very  time-consuming  and  tedious  task  to  identify  the 
right  results  for  the  individual  search  process.    So  it  is  important  to  provide  an 
adequate presentation that allows users to unambiguously assess the retrieved results 
and enables them to comprehend why specific results are considered as relevant. To 
offer this kind of feedback the proposed approach presents related resources that are 
responsible  for  result  retrieval  and  their  related  attributes  in  expendable  attribute 
nodes. Thus each of these nodes contains resources from the semantic neighborhood 
of retrieved results that are of some relevance for the result generation. The labels of 
these  expandable  attribute  nodes  are  derived  from  the  conjoint  concept  in  the 
semantic structure to indicate their meaning. 

C. Stab et al. 

 

Fig. 3. The visualization of the semantic neighborhood combined with query-result-relations 
reveals why search results are retrieved during semantic search processing 

Figure  3  shows  an  example  of  two  hierarchically  structured  attribute  nodes.  The 
expandable  attribute  node  on  the  left  side  contains  five  different  objects  (bottle, 
carton, etc.) and two elementary attribute nodes that are instantiated with given query 
terms. Each of the five object nodes is suspended between the inner attribute nodes to 
display  the  relations  and  relevancies  to  the  current  search.  Finally,  the  relations 
between search result and query terms are represented by highlighting the path from a 
result  over  the  related  resource  up  to  the  instantiated  attribute  nodes.  So  the 
visualization indicates the indirection in search result processing and reveals parts of 
the semantic neighborhood that are responsible for search result retrieval.  

2.3  Mapping Results Relevance to Visual Properties 

Beside  the  visualization  of  relations  between  query  terms  and  retrieved  results  the 
proposed  approach  utilizes  different  similarity  values  that  emerge  during  the  result 
retrieval process for improving the visualization: 
  Partial similarities are a measure between attribute nodes and results that represent 
the  relevance  of  a  retrieved  resource  to  a  given  query  term  (encapsulated  in  an 
attribute node).  

  Result similarities are aggregated values of all partial similarities that correspond 

to the overall relevance of a retrieved result. 

In  order  to  make  the  optimum  use  of  these  values,  each  similarity  is  mapped  to 
specific  visual  properties  like  length,  color  and  size  that  can  be  preattentively 
perceived [9]. On the one hand the size and color intensity of result nodes are adjusted 
according  to  the  result  similarity.  Thereby  the  resource  that  has  the  highest  overall 
similarity for a specific search query is presented most conspicuous whereas resources 
with  minor  similarities  are  visualized  less  notable  (Figure  1).  On  the  other  hand 
partial similarities are used to adapt the weights of edges between results and attribute 
?

?

?
nodes.  This  results  in  different  lengths  of  the  visible  connections  and  indicates  the 
relevance between specific query terms and search results.  

2.4  Visual Feedback for Query Enhancement 

Several studies revealed that it is a common search strategy for the user to first issue a 
general query, then review a few results, and if the desired information is not found, 
to  reformulate  or  to  enhance  the  query  [4,  10,  11].  Transferred  to  the  presented 
visualization, this refinement strategy corresponds to substitutions or reassignments of 
attribute  values  because  these  are  directly  related  to  the  terms  of  the  current  search 
query. On the one hand the instantiation of further attributes defines a more specific 
search  condition  and  on  the  other  hand  the  removal  of  attribute  values  results  in 
wider-ranged search spaces. In contrast to commonly used search user interfaces, the 
influence  of  changing  search  conditions  is  immediately  visible  in  the  visualization. 
The representation of query-result-relations reveals which of the current search results 
fulfill new conditions (Figure 4) and provides an immediate visual feedback for the 
query refinement task.   

 
Fig.  4.  The  visual  recommendation  of  additional  attributes  and  possible  terms  for  query 
enhancement offers a visual tool for narrowing search results 

To  ensure  that  users  are  aware  of  additional  attributes  the  visualization 
recommends attributes that are not instantiated by the given query but related with the 
current result set. These recommendations are visualized as additional attribute nodes 
and labeled with a question mark to encourage users to instantiate them for narrowing 
their search. The size of the recommended attribute nodes is mapped to their influence 
to  the  current  result  set.  So  attribute  nodes  whose  instantiation  will  cause  major 
changes  of  the  result  set  are  represented  larger  than  attribute  nodes  whose 
instantiation  will only affect  smaller parts. By selecting a  specific recommendation, 
users  are  able  to  select  different  values  for  instantiating  the  attribute  node  and 
narrowing their retrieved results (Figure 4).  

C. Stab et al. 

Application Scenario 

The developed visualization approach is applied in the field of mechanical engineering 
and automation technology  where highly complex processes and diverse user groups 
are  involved.  The  processes  in  these  domains  range  from  initial  development  over 
construction  and  production  steps  up  to  sales  and  consumer  services.  So  the  same 
resource is treated in different contexts and various software systems. To ensure that 
each employee in these complex processes has access to the appropriate information at 
the right time, semantic technologies are used to link different knowledge bases and to 
provide a novel way to access information.  

In  this  context  the  objective  of  the  visualization  is  to  provide  a  homogeneous 
access  to  the  combined  knowledge  base  for  a  variety  of  users.  The  focus  of  the 
investigation is predominantly on providing  more transparency in search processing 
and to offer a tool that enables users to unambiguously assess the results of individual 
search  processes.  Additionally  the  aspect  of  recommending  further  dimensions  for 
improving and narrowing the result set plays a major role in the investigation of the 
introduced visualization tool. In the current state the visualization is fully integrated in 
the search platform6. 

Evaluation 

For  evaluating  our  approach  we  performed  a  user  study  in  which  we  compared  the 
visualization with a common list presentation (Figure 5). The study is mainly focused 
on answering the question whether our visualization approach can support the user in 
assessing  search  results  and  if  our  approach  satisfies  the  needs  of  searchers.  For 
verification  of  our  assumption  we  investigated  the  task  completion  time  and 
formulated the following hypothesis: 
  H1: There is a difference in task completion time between the list presentation and 

the visualization in assessing search results. 

Additionally  to  the  task  completion  time  we  measured  the  user  satisfaction  as  a 
subjective evaluation criterion. 

4.1  Experimental Design 

According to the hypothesis that contains one independent variable with two different 
conditions (list presentation and visualization) the design of our experiment is based 
on a basic design [12]. Additionally, we decided to use a within-group design for our 
experiment  where  each  participant  accomplishes 
in  each  

the  given 

tasks 

 

                                                           
6  Demonstration  is  available  at  http://athena.igd.fraunhofer.de/Processus/semavis.html  Note 
that the knowledgebase of the online demonstrator is currently only available in German and 
contains  only  selected  resources.  Possible  queries  for  demonstration  are  kuka  roboter 
bauindustrie, glattes stuckgut handhaben and glas transportieren. 
?

?

?
Visualization for Fostering Search Result Comprehension 

Fig. 5. List p

presentation of search results used for the evaluation 

 

condition  (in  this  case  the
designed  experiments,  in 
individual  differences  betw
Possible  learn-effects  whe
systematic  randomization  o
were advised to disregard 
show the solution of tasks b
Altogether the experime
every  participant  with  both
the focus of the evaluation 
the investigation of the  wh
terms for every task. So eve
thus also the same visual re
by other factors.  

e  different  user  interfaces).  In  contrast  to  between-gro

within-group  designs  less  participants  are  needed 
ween  the  participants  are  isolated  more  effectively  [1
en  switching  between  conditions  are  controlled  by
of  condition-  and  task-ordering.  Furthermore  participa
the knowledge  from previous conditions and to explic
by means of elements in the user interface.  
ent contains three tasks that  had to be accomplished  fr
h  conditions  (list  presentation  and  visualization).  Beca
is the comparison of two different user interfaces and 
hole search process,  we  were able to pre-assign the qu
ery participant retrieves the same results for every task 
epresentation and the evaluation outcome is not influen

oup 
and 
12]. 
y  a 
ants 
citly 

rom 
ause 
not 
uery 
and 
nced 

In the first task participa
and the terms of the given 
task  with  the  difference  t
instead  of  only  flat  attribut
relevant  item  for  a  specifi
found  in  each  condition,  w
participant  gets  the  same  v
limit  for  each  task  was  se
participant could not solve 
minutes.  

ants had to identify the relations between each search re
query. The second task was of the same type as the  f
that  the  result  contains  hierarchical  structured  attribu
tes.  In  the  third  task  participants  had  to  identify  the  m
ic  search  situation.  To  ensure  that  the  solution  could
we  performed  several  pretests.  We  also  ensured  that  e
visual  presentation  for  each  task  and  condition.  The  ti
et  to  three  minutes.  If  a  wrong  answer  was  given  o
a task, the completion time of the task was also set to th

esult 
first 
utes 
most 
d  be 
each 
ime 
or  a 
hree 

C. Stab et al. 

4.2 

Procedure 

Altogether  17  participants,  mainly  graduates  and  students  attended  the  evaluation. 
The  average  participant  was  between  24  and  29  years  old.  The  participants  were 
mainly  involved  in  computer  science  (M  =  4.65;  SD  =  0.6)7  and  had  no  previous 
knowledge of the engineering domain. After a general introduction to the user study 
and an explanation of the procedure and tasks, participants got a brief introduction to 
both systems in systematically randomized ordering. Both systems were queried with 
a reference query and participants had the chance to ask questions about the systems. 
After each task participants had to rate their overall satisfaction with the system on a 
scale from 1 to 9 and three additional questions concerning their subjective opinion of 
the  system  on  a  Likert  scale  from  1  (strongly  disagree)  to  5  (strongly  agree).  After 
participants  had  completed  all  tasks,  they  had  to  answer  a  brief  demographic 
questionnaire.  

4.3  Results 

Figure 6 shows the average task completion times for each of the three tasks and both 
conditions. The direct comparison of the average task completion times reveals that 
participants performed better with our visualization approach (avg(t) = 51.3 sec; SD = 
25.8)  compared  to  the  list  presentation  (avg(t)  =  88.1  sec;  SD  =  30.1).  A  pairedsamples t-test also suggests that there is a significant difference in the task completion 
time  between  the  group  who  used  the  list  presentation  and  the  group  who  used  our 
visualization approach (t(50)=7.8028, p<0.05).  

Fig. 6. Left: Task completion times. Right: Average user satisfaction 

 

Hence the null hypothesis is refuted and the alternative hypotheses confirmed. The 
comparison  of  means  also  indicates  that  users  performed  significantly  faster  with  
the visualization approach compared to the list presentation. So we can proceed from 
the  assumption  that  visualizing  search  results  taking  semantic  information  into 
account has a positive effect on the efficiency when assessing search result relevance. 

                                                           
7 Measured on a five point scale (5 = very much experience; 1 = very little experience) in the 

demographic part of the questionnaire. 
?

?

?
The  evaluation  of  satisfaction  ratings  indicates  that  participants  feel  more 
comfortable  with  our  visualization  approach  instead  of  the  commonly  used  list 
presentation. The list visualization obtained an average rating of 5.31 with a standard 
deviation of 1.91 whereas the visualization obtained an average rating of 7.57 and a 
standard  deviation  of  1.10.  Additionally,  the  result  of  the  question  Would  you  use 
the  system  in  the  future  for  similar  searching  tasks?  confirms  the  assumption  that 
users  prefer  the  visualization  to  the  list  presentation  (list:  M  =  3.14;  SD  =  0.87; 
visualization: M = 4.25; SD = 0.77)8.  

Related Work 

Although  the  objective  of  semantic  technologies  was  not  focused  on  presenting 
semantics  to  end-users,  there  are  several  other  approaches  that  benefit  thereby. 
SemaPlorer [13] is an interactive application that allows users to visualize the search 
results  of  multiple  semantics  data  sources.  The  user  interface  of  SemaPlorer  also 
provides  a  geographic  visualization  and  a  media  view  for  visualizing  geospatially 
annotated  data  and  picture  galleries  respectively.  However,  this  approach  is  mainly 
focused  on  combining  search  results  from  different  heterogeneous  knowledge  bases 
and  faceting  the  search  by  predefined  facets.  The  Relfinder  interface  [14]  supports 
users in interactively discovering relations between resources in semantic knowledge 
spaces. Users can prompt two or more resources and the relations between them are 
shown  in  a  graph-based  visualization.  Although  this  approach  demonstrates  the 
benefit of communicating semantic knowledge to users, it is strictly limited to relation 
discovery between two or more resources.  

There are also different approaches for using information visualization techniques 
for  search  user  interfaces.  To  name  only  a  few,  the  Microsoft  Academic  Search 
interface  [15]  incorporates  geographic,  graph-based  and  temporal  visualization 
techniques for exploring publications or authors and offers also an stacked area chart 
for analyzing trends in the field of computer science. SkylineSearch [16] is a search 
interface  that  supports  life  science  researchers  in  performing  scientific  literature 
search.  It  leverages  semantic  annotations  to  visualize  search  results  in  a  scatterplot 
plotting  relevance  against  publication  date.  Even  though  semantic  annotations  are 
used  for  search  processing  and  estimating  relevance  values,  semantic  knowledge  is 
not  directly  presented  to  the  user.  The  WebSearchViz  [17]  is  an  approach  for 
visualizing  web  search  results  based  on  the  metaphor  of  the  solar  system.  It  offers 
users  the  possibility  to  observe  the  semantic  relevance  between  a  query  and  a  web 
search  result  by  the  spatial  proximity  and  distance  between  objects.  However  the 
system  does  not  visualize  semantic  interpretations  of  search  results  or  semantic 
structures. 

Another commonly used and useful approach for visualizing result relevancy is the 
term highlighting technique [18] where the terms of the given query are highlighted in 
the surrogates of search result lists. For example the BioText System [19] represents 

                                                           
8 Measured on a five point Likert scale. 

C. Stab et al. 

beside extracted figures from relevant articles, query terms highlighted in the title and 
boldfaced in the text excerpts for communicating reasons the particular results  were 
retrieved. Even though term highlighting can be useful for improving search result list 
presentations,  it  does  not  reveal  the  semantic  interpretation  of  search  results  and 
prevent users from scanning the whole result list for getting an overview.  

Discussion 

The  introduced  approach  was  applied  and  evaluated  in  the  field  of  mechanical 
engineering  and  automation  technology.  Although  this  domain  contains  highly 
complex processes and different kinds of heterogeneous users, domain experts were 
able to semantically design it and build a comprehensive model that enables different 
stakeholders  the  access  to  heterogeneous  resources.  In  such  well-defined  domains, 
aspects like data diversity, user roles and processes are in some way controllable and 
the data access methods can be accurately aligned to specific tasks of the stakeholder. 
The  results  of  the  evaluation  showed  that  the  proposed  visualization  approach 
performed very well in the present domain.  Nevertheless, further investigations are 
needed to prove if the proposed approach is also transferable to other domains and if 
it can be seamlessly integrated in semantic web search engines.  

Currently,  most  search  user  interfaces  are  based  on  result  list  presentations  and 
usually  show  the  titles  and  surrogates  of  the  results.  Cause  of  the  publics  great 
familiarity  with  this  commonly  used  search  result  presentation,  there  is  a  certain 
degree  of  risk  with  the  introduction  of  a  novel  approach  in  user  interfaces.  Even  if 
novel  approaches  provide  a  variety  of  extended  features  and  easier  information 
access,  the  success  of  each  innovation  in  user  interfaces  is  measured  by  the 
acceptance  of  the  users.  Although  the  results  of  the  evaluation  show  that  the 
introduced  visualization  approach  performed  well  in  a  controlled  experimental 
environment and users are convinced of its benefits, there is still the need to prove if 
visualization techniques  will  be applicable in  web search engines. However, current 
trends  show  an  increased  use  of  information  visualization  techniques  in  search  user 
interfaces. 

Conclusion and Future Work 

In this paper we introduced a novel approach for visualizing search results in semantic 
knowledge bases. The results of the evaluation showed that the utilization of semantic 
information 
in  search  results  visualization  successfully  fosters  search  result 
comprehension and supports user in assessing retrieved resources. Also the approach 
performed  well  for  presenting  different  semantic  interpretations  of  query  terms  and 
query-result-relations  respectively.  The  visual  recommendation  of  novel  dimensions 
and immediate visual feedback for query refinement additionally fosters the common 
search strategies of users and offers more transparency in search result processing. 

For future work we plan the extension of query refinement features. In particular 
we plan to implement the removal and change of attribute values that is not included 
?

?

?
in  the  current  version.  Furthermore  the  multiple  instantiation  of  attributes  may  be  a 
useful extension of the introduced concept.  

Acknowledgements. This work has been carried out within the Core-Technology Cluster 
(Innovative  User  Interfaces  and  Visualizations)  of  the  THESEUS  research  program, 
partially funded by the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology. We thank 
H.  J.  Hesse,  R.  Traphoner  and  C.  Dein  (THESEUS  PROCESSUS,  Attensity  Europe 
GmbH) for the inspiring discussions, the provision of the data and the support during the 
development of the data connection. We are also grateful to all participants that spend their 
time participating in the evaluation. 
