From Web 1.0 to Social Semantic Web: Lessons
Learnt from a Migration to a Medical Semantic

Wiki

Thomas Meilender1,2, Jean Lieber2, Fabien Palomares1, and Nicolas Jay2

1 A2ZI, 3 route de Boncourt, 55200 Commercy, France

{thomas.meilender,fabien.palomares}@a2zi.fr

2 Universite de Lorraine, LORIA, UMR 7503, Vanduvre-les-Nancy, F-54506, France

CNRS, LORIA, UMR 7503, Vanduvre-les-Nancy, F-54506, France

Inria, Villers-les-Nancy, F-54600, France

{thomas.meilender,jean.lieber,nicolas.jay}@loria.fr

Abstract. Oncolor is an association whose mission is to publish and
share medical guidelines in oncology. As many scientific information websites built in the early times of the Internet, its website deals with unstructured data that cannot be automatically querried and is getting
more and more difficult to maintain over time. The online contents access and the editing process can be improved by using web 2.0 and semantic web technologies, which allow to build collaboratively structured
information bases in semantic portals. The work described in this paper
aims at reporting a migration from a static HTML website to a semantic wiki in the medical domain. This approach has raised various issues
that had to be addressed, such as the introduction of structured data in
the unstructured imported guidelines or the linkage of content to external medical resources. An evaluation of the result by final users is also
provided, and proposed solutions are discussed.

Keywords: semantic wikis, decision knowledge, medical information
systems.

1 Introduction

During the two last decades, the Internet has totally changed the way information is published and shared in most of scientific areas, including medicine. First
websites in web 1.0 were made of static pages and hyperlinks allowing limited
interactions between editors and readers. Then, information sharing has evolved
with the rising of web 2.0 by allowing users to contribute to the contents. Numerous studies have shown the position impact of such evolutions on medical
information systems [11,23]. Participative web applications can be implemented
and used in a collaborative way to build large databases. Finally, semantic web
has appeared. Semantic web aims at creating and sharing formalized information
in order to make it available for both humans and machines. Social semantic web

E. Simperl et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2012, LNCS 7295, pp. 618632, 2012.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012
?

?

?
is considered as the merging of web 2.0 and the semantic web, i.e. a web where
shared formal information is edited collaboratively.

The Kasimir research project started in 1997. It aims at providing tools to
assist decision making by practitioners and, more generally, decision knowledge
management in oncology. The project is conducted in partnership with Oncolor,
an association gathering physicians from Lorraine (a region of France) involved
in oncology. On its static website, Oncolor publishes more than 140 medical
guidelines written in HTML in a web 1.0 fashion. This base is built through a
consensus between medical experts and is continually updated according to the
oncology state of the art and to local context evolutions. In order to facilitate
the creation, maintenance and publication of guidelines, Oncolor has expressed
the need for more efficient and collaborative tools. Moreover, it would be a great
benefit if the knowledge contained in guidelines was formalised and made available for semantic systems, particularly for Kasimir, since knowledge acquisition
is a bottleneck for building knowledge systems.

In this paper, an application of a semantic wiki approach for medical guideline
edition is reported.1 The expected benefits are twofold: first, online collaborative
work is simplified by the use of wikis and second, semantic technologies allow the
creation of additional services by making use of external medical resources such
as terminologies, online ontologies, and medical publication websites. However,
despite the effort of the semantic wiki community to simplify its systems, it is
still hard for medical expert to create semantic annotations. This issue involves
the need of taking into account structured and unstructured content but also,
when this is possible, to include dedicated tools for formalising data. In these
cases, implementation and development of semantic wiki extensions are required.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the application context. The migration of static Oncolor website to a collaborative
system is presented in Section 3, while Section 4 relates the addition of semantic
annotations and services. After a report on our evaluation study in Section 5,
some related work is introduced in Section 6. Section 7 is a discussion about the
benefits of the system, as well as ongoing and future work.

2 Context

2.1 Application Context

Oncolor Website and Oncology Guidelines. One of Oncolors objectives
is to create and to keep up to date oncology guidelines. Clinical guidelines are
sets of recommendations on treatments and care of people with specific diseases.
They aim at improving treatment quality and patient support by standardising
cares. They are based on clinical evidence, clinical trials and consensus between
medical experts from different specialties such as oncology, surgery, etc.

More than 140 guidelines have been edited to give recommendations about
treatment of many different cancers as well as typical situations such as pain
1 http://oncowiki.a2zi.fr

T. Meilender et al.

treatment or dental care. Since guidelines are intended for both medical staff
and patients, editors have exploited various kinds of formats in order to be both
precise and didactic. Most guidelines follow the same structure. The first part
introduces the guideline with few sentences that explain which circumstances
imply the use of the guideline and the treatments that will be proposed. The next
part is a textual description of clinical and paraclinical investigations that can
lead to the starting point of the guideline. This starting point is often a staging
step allowing to classify the patient according to international classifications.
These classifications are presented as simple tables. Depending on classifications
results, decision trees guide the reader to the next step that details the medical
recommendation available in various formats, such as medical publications in
PDF or hypertext links to distant resources. Finally, guidelines conclude with
advice about medical supervision and sometimes with a lexicon of specifics terms.
As in all medical information systems, data quality in oncology is critical.
Each guideline should be reviewed every second year by experts. Two kinds of
editors can be identified in the reviewing process:
 Medical experts contribute with their technical knowledge. They are gathered in committees under the supervision of coordinators that make sure the
guidelines are complete and the consistent. Most medical experts have poor
computer skills, limited to word processing and Internet browsing.

 Oncolor staff manages communication between the committee members and
creates the final guideline layout. They also check that guidelines are up to
date and propose new ways to facilitate their diffusion, while public health
physicians check the consistency of the information base. Most of Oncolor
employees do not have more computer skills than medical experts, except
for a computer graphic designer. Particularly, Oncolor does not have a webmaster in its staff.

Guidelines are made available on the Oncolor website [2], which also contains
various information about local healthcare services and provides links to dedicated tools. This site also stores other Oncolor projects, including a thesaurus
of pharmacological products which is closely related to oncology guidelines. It
contains information about drugs used in cancer treatment.

Created in the mid 1990s, this website was completely made using a commercial WYSIWYG HTML editor. The resulting HTML code is not readable, due
to successive technology evolutions. The first created pages were done using only
HTML and then, in the past 15 years, CSS, Javascript and XHTML were intro-
duced. Few pages also use ASP. All these evolutions have led to the construction
of weird pages where only the visual aspect is important and in which document
structure is hard to identify. Over the years, updating the website is becoming
more and more complex for Oncolor staff. All the pages edited on the Oncolor
website must be validated to follow the principles of HONcode certification [1]
which guarantee the quality and the independence of the content.

In this context, Oncolor has been asked to integrate a collaborative tool to
simplify the guideline creation and maintenance process. Moreover, it would be
of great benefits for Oncolor to keep track of all changes in the guidelines. That
?

?

?
is why the system has to propose a versioning file system and some social tools
to allow communication between experts during updating process.

The Kasimir Research Project. Started in 1997, Kasimir is a multidisciplinary project also involving industrial (A2ZI) and academic (LORIA, CNAM
Laboratory of Ergonomics) partners. Kasimir aims at providing software to assist
decision making by practitioners and more generally decision-making knowledge
management in oncology. The Kasimir projects recent work mainly focuses on
semantic web as a background for formalizing, sharing, and exploiting pieces
of knowledge [9]. The last version of the KatexOWL toolkit and, particularly,
the framework EdHibou [4], use semantic web technologies such as SparQL and
OWL for storing and exploiting pieces of knowledge. It can automatically generate simple user interfaces for decision support thanks to user-friendly forms that
guide practitioners around the knowledge base.

To fill its scientific contribution, Kasimir needs to use more widely its tools
by taking advantage of real world data sources. However, few guidelines are
currently available for EdHibou: they need to be formalised, i.e. transformed
into a knowledge base using a formalism that can be handled by an inference
engine. Until now, this complex step required two experts: a medical domain
expert writing guidelines and validating the final results, and a knowledge engineer formalising them. It seems that if medical domain experts could formalise
the guidelines themselves in a machine-understandable way, the process would
be simplified. Even if this goal seems very difficult to reach for now, it would be
a good evolution if formalisation tools could help experts make simple semantic
annotations.

2.2 Scientific Context
Medical Resources. To build efficient tools, it is important to take into account numerical digital resources already available. Among them, large websites
reference scientific communications in the domain of medicine, such as the wellknown Pubmed [3]. Pubmed provides an easily configurable search engine that
can be called through distant requests. Publications are indexed using a specific
controlled vocabulary, Medical Subject Headings (MeSH [20]). MeSH contains
more than 25,000 descriptors, most of these accompanied by a short description
or definition, some links to related descriptors, and a list of synonyms or very
similar terms. In the French context, Cismef [10] uses a French traduction of
MeSH to index medical online resources with a French vocabulary.

Beyond the already-cited MeSH, many controlled vocabularies have been used
to structure medical applications [8]. Among resources available in French, the
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems
(ICD-10) is probably one of the simplest. ICD-10 is a medical classification
that provides codes to classify diagnoses and causes of death and is organised
as a simple hierarchy. ICD-10 is widely used in medical information systems,
but semantic applications generally use other vocabularies due to its lack of semantic depth. Considered the most comprehensive, SNOMED is a multiaxial,

T. Meilender et al.

hierarchical classification system including coverage of diseases, clinical findings,
therapies, procedures and outcomes. About 270,000 concepts are described by
unique identifiers with several labels and can be used to describe complex situation by using semantic relations and modifiers. It is interesting to note that
MeSH, ICD-10, SNOMED and other ontologies such as Galen are integrated in
the terminology integration system Unified Medical Language System (UMLS).
Moreover, many semantic web systems provide freely questionable online infor-
mation. For example, BioPortal [5] is a repository of biomedical ontologies whose
functionalities include the ability to browse, search, and visualise ontologies. More
specialised, DrugBank [25] provides an annotated database of drugs and drug target information. Many other resources are available, such as Bio2RDF [6], which
allows an access to Pubmed with linked data, or LinkedCT [12] which indexes clinical trials. The information resources cited above and many more can be interlinked
by using DBpedia [7].

Wikis and Semantic Wikis: The Migration Process. Traditional wikis are
usually based on a set of editable pages, organised into categories and connected
by hyperlinks. They became the symbol of interactivity promoted through web
2.0. One of the founding principles of wikis, which is also the principal vector
of their popularity, is their ease of use even by persons that lack considerable
computer skills. Wikis are created and maintained through specific content management systems, the wiki engines, while wikitexts enable structuring, layout,
and links between articles. At this point, an idea has emerged: to exploit stored
pieces of knowledge automatically.

Indeed, a limit use to the wikis is illustrated by the querying of the data
contained in their pages. The search is usually done through word recognition
by strings, without considering their meaning. For example, the system cannot
answer a query like: Give me the list of all currently reigning kings. The solution used in Wikipedia is a manual generation of lists. However, the manual
generation of all the lists answering queries users may raise is, at the very least,
tedious, if not impossible. This has motivated the introduction of a semantic
layer to wikis. Moreover, it would be interesting if information contained in
wikis were available through external services.

Semantic wikis were born from the application of wiki principles in the semantic web context. A semantic wiki is similar to a traditional one in the sense
that it is a website where contents are edited in a collaborative way by users and
are organised into editable and searchable pages. However, semantic wikis are
not limited to natural language text. They characterise the resources and the
links between them. This information is formalised and thus becomes usable by
a machine, through processes of artificial reasoning. Thus, semantic wikis can be
viewed as wikis that are improved by the use of semantic technologies as well as
collaborative tools for editing formalised knowledge.

Semantic wikis corresponds to both Oncolor and Kasimir needs: guidelines can
be written in a collaborative way and semantic technologies allow to formalise
and extract structured content.
?

?

?
3 From Web 1.0 to Web 2.0

3.1 Choosing a Semantic Wiki Engine

The first part of the migration was choosing the most adapted semantic wiki en-
gines. Whereas many semantic wiki engines have emerged for the last 10 years,
only four open source projects seem active at this time: AceWiki [17], KiWI [22],
Ontowiki [13], and Semantic Mediawiki [16]. AceWiki uses ACE (Attempto Controlled English), a sub-language of English that can be translated directly into
first order logic. However, Oncolor guidelines are already written in French and
the development of a controlled language for French medical guidelines that
covers all the contents would be tedious. Ontowiki and KiWI focus on RDF
triple edition by proposing dedicated interfaces such as dynamic forms. Their
approaches are very strict and do not seem reconcilable with importation of unstructured contents. Moreover, no large scale implementation of these engines
can be found and, their development and user communities are limited. So, less
extensions are available and the support is weak.

Semantic Mediawiki (SMW) seems to be the best solution. SMW is an extension of Mediawiki, the engine used by Wikipedia. For the sake of simplicity
for users, it integrates the RDF triples editing in its wikitext. In this way, it
enables the creation of typed links that can also be used for indicating the attributes of the page. Another interesting point of SMW is its popularity: there is
a large community of developers around it, and this community produces many
extensions, such as editing forms, the integration of an inference engine, etc.
For instance, the Halo extension2 proposes forms, an auto-completion system,
the integration of a SPARQL endpoint and much more. The only limitation for
our migration is that SMW does not provide extensions that allow to draw the
trees that are frequently used in the guidelines, but we have developed a decision
tree editor, as will be discussed further. Tutorials and community support make
the installation of SMW simple. Less than one hour is needed to install it for
anybody with average computer skills.

3.2 Importing Guideline Content

Once the semantic wiki had been installed, a specific skin that corresponds to
Oncolor graphics standards has been built to customise the application. The
next part of the work was to import guidelines in the wiki. However, in order
to correspond to wiki syntax, content had to be formatted into wikitext. For
each guideline, the HTML content was extracted and HTML pages were merged
when guidelines did contain more than one page. The table of contents was
automatically extracted and marked up when possible. However, the state of
the HTML code made impossible to systemically identify document structure.
It can be noted that the migration would have been simpler if CSS had been
used from the start. Then, unnecessary content such as browsing elements and
2 http://www.projecthalo.com/

T. Meilender et al.

Fig. 1. An excerpt of guideline in the wiki

JavaScript functions was removed. A parser was also used to transform HTML
into wikitext when simple tags were detected (images, tables, etc.). Moreover, by
using a parser and context analysis, specific fields were identified. The objective
was to identify interesting information about a guideline such as the date of its
last update or keywords. Moreover, by examining website folder structure, an
anatomical classification of the guideline has been identify. This classification
was reused as a base for guideline categorisation in the wiki.

Despite of all our efforts, the layout of the imported guidelines had to be
checked then. Due to the critical nature of the information, this checking was
done by Oncolor staff. On average, a person needed half a day to check each
guideline.

Additionally, the Oncolor thesaurus of pharmacology was imported. As its
content is closely related to guidelines, it was important to let it available in the
same information system. One page per described drug was created. In this case,
the simplicity of the HTML pages made the migration easier.

To migrate guidelines, Mediawiki import capacities were used. They allow to
import wikitext content from text files. In the wiki, some templates were built to
highlight the fields previously identified. An excerpt of a resulting page is shown
in Figure 1. All the guidelines are presently in the wiki.

3.3 User Right Management

In the usual philosophy of wikis, everybody can edit pages, even anonymously.
Although the importance of the information availability for the public, medical
data are critical and the guidelines must be approved by Oncolor experts to be
in public access. Moreover, if an expert modifies a guideline, the modification
?

?

?
has to be checked by the coordinator in charge of the guideline. During the
revision period, modifications are numerous and each of them implies a complete
review of the guideline and its layout. To allow private modifications, a special
namespace has been created, that can be viewed as a workspace for the experts.
Final versions are shown on the main namespace, and each guideline has an
equivalent in the new namespace where experts can add their contributions.
When a guideline is considered as correct and complete by the coordinator in the
workspace, the page is simply copied to the final location in the main namespace.
According to this revision process, three kinds of users have been identified:

 anonymous users, that can read pages of the main namespace,
 medical experts, that can read pages of the main namespace and edit pages

in the workspace,

 administrators, that can edit all pages, even wiki system pages.

3.4 KcatoS, a Decision Tree Editor

Decision trees were imported from the previous website as bitmap pictures. At
this point, guideline updates can also be simplified by proposing an online ed-
itor. KcatoS is a Mediawiki extension that allows the collaborative drawing
of decision trees. KcatoS decision tree language is a graphical representation
based on a small set of geometrical figures connected by directed edges. This representation was directly inspired by the graphics standards of Oncolor. Indeed,
guidelines use visual representations that can mostly be viewed as trees. An advantage to use these graphics standards is that Oncolor experts already know
them. We want to preserve Oncolors graphic semantics in order to facilitate the
understanding of guidelines by physicians.

From a semantic point of view, each kind of node has its own meaning; e.g.

rounded rectangles represent medical situations, etc.

4 Introducing and Exploiting Formalised Knowledge

4.1 Extracting Decision Knowledge from Decision Trees

Most of the time, decision trees can be considered as structures from which
a meaning can be extracted. In order to avoid ambiguities and to guarantee
guideline consistency, classical syntactical rules of decision trees are used. A
syntactic module can be used to check if the edited tree respects the rules. Thus,
KcatoS can propose an export algorithm that allows to transform decision trees
into OWL.

export

algorithm defines

and
Recommendation. The first one represents some patient information while the
second one represents the description of the decision proposed by the system.
These classes are linked by the property hasRecommendation. This means that
for each situation there is a recommendation that is associated to it.

Situation

KcatoSs

two

classes:

T. Meilender et al.

Fig. 2. The KcatoS decision tree editor interface

A tree is read using depth-first search. Each node is transformed using rules

which take into account the shape and its ancestors.

The export algorithm creates many concepts and properties. Including all
of them in the semantic wiki would decrease the ease of navigation because
it would lead to the creation of numerous pages. In order to avoid these page
creations, translated trees are stored in a specific file and linked to the wiki.
Thus, created ontologies are made available for other semantic web applications.
From a technical point of view, OWL API [15] is used to perform the export.

4.2 Using Semantic Tools of Wiki

Extracting the whole semantics of a guideline is a tedious job that has to be done
by a medical expert with skills in knowledge engineering. As Oncolor does not
have this kind of specialist in its staff, formalising the guidelines would be a great
investment. Moreover, it is still difficult for non-specialists to understand the
benefits that semantics could bring to medical information system. That is why
the key idea of the project is to insert step-by-step useful semantic annotations
into the guidelines in order to increase Oncolor interest in the semantic web
technologies. The first way to introduce semantics is to exploit identified fields
extracted during the guideline migration. To improve their visualisation and
their update, SMW templates and queries mechanisms were used.

SMW proposes many ways to edit semantic annotations. The more basic way
to create annotations is wikitext, which can be improve thanks to templates.
Templates are generic pre-developed page layouts that can be embedded in several wiki pages. They can also manage variables that are instantiated in the
?

?

?
corresponding page. For instance, a template is used to generate the box in the
top right corner of the page shown in Figure 1. The template used to create this
box is generic enough to be applied to all guideline pages, and its use allows
flexible modifications. As template use is simple (and can be further simplified
by associating forms to them), they provide a simple way to create annotation
fields that can be filled by any users without specific skills.

Then semantic annotations can be exploited by SMW inline query engine.
Using a simple query language, semantic search can be done directly in a page
and results are displayed as tables, lists, etc. Combined to templates, semantic queries are a simple way to create dynamic content relying on semantic
annotations.

{{#ask:[[Category:Guideline]] [[last Update::<{{#time:d F Y|2 years ago}}]]
|?last Update
| sort = last Update
| format=template
| [...]
}}

(a) Excerpt of inline query that requests the guidelines that are out-of-date
(translated from French).

(b) Results of the query.

Fig. 3. An excerpt of inline query that requests the guidelines that are out-of-date,
and the wiki page that contains the result

A use of templates and inline queries is shown by the management of the
dates in the guidelines. Every guideline has at least one date that indicates the
date of the last validated update. This date is entered in a template in which
it is associated with a property which links the date to the guideline. Then, a
maintenance page is created to highlight the guidelines that are out-of-date. The
query is shown in Figure 3(a) while its result, that can be seen in Figure 3(b),
is displayed as a table thanks to specific templates. Moreover, another query is
added in the template present on each guideline which shows a warning if the
guideline has to be updated.

T. Meilender et al.

Templates are also used to link guidelines to external publication resources.
To create the link, the first step was to define a common vocabulary between
guidelines and publication website. Then, templates were designed to allow easily
semantic annotations in guideline using MeSH vocabulary. Cismef, which indexes
a large amount of medical publication in French, already indexes Oncolors guidelines using terms from the MeSH thesaurus. These terms were imported in the
wiki as a base that can be freely edited. As PubMed also uses this thesaurus to
index this document, requests to PubMed and Cismef can be automatically built
using templates and inline queries. Each request is dedicated to the guideline it
belongs to and provides publications that are indexes by the same terms. Thus,
it provides a bibliography tool useful for staff and provides further information
to the reader.

4.3 Querying Resources of Web of Data

To show another view of the semantic web, we tried to investigate on external
structured data sources that could bring additional information to the wiki. So,
an extension was created to query external sources using SPARQL. In this part,
pharmacology thesaurus was used. The idea was to explore external resources by
building SPARQL requests based on the name of the drug studied in a current
page. The target of the searches was Drugbank, specialised in drug description,
and DBpedia, a generalist knowledge base. Thus, for most of the drugs, we get
additional information in the semantic web. An example is shown in Figure 4.
However, most information are in English and we deplore the lack of available
French information source. This module is no longer online pending the Oncolor
board is approval of the use of external data sources and the validation of the
ones that can be exploited.

5 Evaluation

To carry out the evaluation, the opinions of the users have been investigated.
People asked were the four main contributors from Oncolor staff: two public
health physicians, a computer graphic designer, and a medical secretary.

The first interesting point is that, before the beginning, the only thing they
knew about wikis was Wikipedia and none had ever contributed to a wiki. Despite this, three contributors thought that less than one day of self-training is
needed to learn wikitext and to be an efficient contributor. The only difficulties are related to particular layouts (tables and references) and wiki advanced
functions dealing with user management and page history. The only reluctance
to migrate to a wiki was guideline quality. They agreed a concern with that
the old system was time-consuming, but it had the advantage to produce high
quality guidelines. Experiments were led to update Oncolors old website and
semantic wiki with the same modifications. They show that the quality did not
suffer of the change and that the efficiency of updating has been increased by
the semantic wiki.
?

?

?
Fig. 4. Example of data that can be imported from DBpedia and Drugbank about
Gemcitabine using SPARQL queries

Our panel cited the main advantages they see in using a wiki. They have agreed
that wikis are collaborative tools that allow more reactivity and more flexibility
in the update process. It has also been said that wikis improve conditions of
employment by allowing distant work, which was impossible with the previous
system. Moreover, they recognised that the wiki increases the quality of the
editing process and of the guideline themselves by allowing the standardisation
of the guideline and by simplifying the work on its layout.

In our system, the preferred contribution is the query to medical publication
websites Pubmed and Cismef which propose automatically a bibliography related to a guideline. The previous system did not permit that kind of function
that has been judged very useful. It is really important for the project that
Oncolor staff appreciated this contribution that is relying on semantic web tech-
nologies. Moreover, all participants declared that they are interested in using
MeSH annotations and want to lead further this experimentation.

6 Related Work

It already exists many medical wikis (e.g. medical portal of Wikipedia,
http://wikisr.openmedicine.ca, http://askdrwiki.com, www.ganfyd.org,
etc.) but only few of them use semantic web technologies. OpenDrugWiki [18],
which also uses SMW, is a wiki used as a back-office system for editing, merging
from different sources, and reviewing information about drugs.

The closest semantic wiki to the one introduced in this paper is probably CliPMoKi [21]. CliP-MoKi is a SMW-based tool for the collaborative encoding in a
distributed environment of cancer treatment protocols. The wiki mainly relies

T. Meilender et al.

on semantic forms and focuses totally on structured content while our project
aims at migrating already existing unstructured data.

Semantic wikis have already been experimented in various domains. Particu-
larly, the building of a semantic portal for the AIFB Institute described in [14]
shows how important the technical settings are for increasing wiki performances
and how difficult it is to find the right balance between structured and unstructured data. This last issue has also been tackled in [24].

7 Lessons Learnt and Future Work

In this paper, a migration from a web 1.0 website containing medical data to a
semantic wiki has been described. The first step was the migration of data from
an HTML website to a collaborative solution, Semantic Mediawiki. The second
step consisted in adding a semantic layer to show the benefits that semantic web
technologies could bring.

Among the difficulties we have met, the analysis of the HTML version of the
guidelines was hard because of the use of invalid code. This is the result of the
use of different HTML editors that follow the evolution of the standard over a
decade. It appears that a correct use of HTML and CSS would have simplified
the migration, particularly the identification of tables of content and specific
fields. Moreover, medical information is critical and its migration implies a long
work of verification by medical experts. According to Oncolor members, about
70 days of work were necessary to check and correct all the guidelines.

Once the semantic wiki has been installed, the use of traditional wiki tools
for edition was easily learnt by Oncolor staff. However, we have noticed that the
creation and the use of semantic annotations remain difficult for non knowledge
expert although semantic wikis seem to be a simple approach. For example,
SMW inline query language is hard to handle for non computer specialists and
template construction also requires computer skills. Some tools have yet to be
implemented to improve this aspect in the philosophy of semantic forms and the
Halo project.

Another problem was to find the right balance between structured and unstructured data. The advantage of structured data is the typing that enables to
easily reuse data in the semantic web context. However, structured data are still
difficult to edit and exploit, as shown in the context of semantic wikis. Moreover,
most of existing information sources are unstructured, and tedious work would be
necessary to transform them. This job would be expensive and time-consuming
so its benefits have to be shown first to non semantic web experts. Our methodology was to add semantic annotations step-by-step to improve the semantic
wiki quality. Until now, our work has consisted in showing the improvements so
that future developments will be upon Oncolor request.

Introducing structured information yields benefits when it is done in accordance with already existing resources. In the medical domain, numerous thesauri
and information sources have been created, and it is hard for no medical specialists to determine which ones can be used. This choice has to be made according to
?

?

?
the goal of the application with the approval of medical specialists. For instance,
it was hard to determine which thesaurus will be used to index guidelines. We
finally have chosen MeSH upon Oncolor request, although SNOMED or UMLS
seem more complete and CIM-10 seems more simple. The reason was that the
link to medical publication websites is useful for editors and provides additional
information for the readers.

Finally, the use of data from semantic web is a major concern in the medical
domain, due to the critical nature of the data. Using external resources seems to
cause a kind of reluctance in clinicians. Each source has to be first approved by
medical authorities before it can be exploited by a medical system. Particularly,
all sources must at least follow the principle of the HONcode certification.

Currently, our work focuses on minor technical adaptation of the wiki to Oncolor needs. Our next task will be to increase gradually the semantic annotations
presence. The long-term goal is to obtain a structured knowledge base that contains all the information provided by oncology guidelines. For such a project to
be successful, several issues have to be taken into account. The project must
be able to rely on several medical experts to structure and check information.
From this point of view, Oncolor will have a crucial role of support to play and
so, their satisfaction is really important. Moreover, to complete the formalisa-
tion, resources that are more expressive than MeSH will be needed. SNOMED
or UMLS seem to be better options. Finally, the scale of this final ontology will
require significant improvement in ontology engineering tools, particularly for
the edition and the maintenance.
