Semantic Modelling of User Interests Based on

Cross-Folksonomy Analysis

Martin Szomszor1, Harith Alani1, Ivan Cantador2, Kieron OHara1,

and Nigel Shadbolt1

1 Intelligence, Agents, Multimedia

School of Electronics and Computer Science
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK

{mns03r,h.alani,kmo,nrs}@ecs.soton.ac.uk

2 Escuela Politcnica Superior

Universidad Autnoma de Madrid

28049 Madrid, Spain

ivan.cantador@uam.es

Abstract. The continued increase in Web usage, in particular participation in folk-
sonomies, reveals a trend towards a more dynamic and interactive Web where individuals can organise and share resources. Tagging has emerged as the de-facto
standard for the organisation of such resources, providing a versatile and reactive
knowledge management mechanism that users find easy to use and understand. It
is common nowadays for users to have multiple profiles in various folksonomies,
thus distributing their tagging activities. In this paper, we present a method for
the automatic consolidation of user profiles across two popular social networking
sites, and subsequent semantic modelling of their interests utilising Wikipedia as
a multi-domain model. We evaluate how much can be learned from such sites, and
in which domains the knowledge acquired is focussed. Results show that far richer
interest profiles can be generated for users when multiple tag-clouds are combined.

1 Introduction

With the growth of Web2.0, it is becoming increasingly common for users to maintain a presence in more than one site. For example, one could be bookmarking pages
in del.icio.us, uploading images in Flickr, listening to music in Last.fm, blogging in
Technorati, etc. The nature of these pursuits naturally leads users to express the relevant aspects of their interests, which are likely to be different across the sites. If such
multiple identities and distributed activities could be brought together independently of
the Web 2.0 sites, far richer user profiles could be generated.

There would be a number of potential gains for recommender systems from the
greater profile depth. Usually, such systems monitor in-house user activities over a
certain period of time to build up profiles that support recommendations. As a result,
they will be limited to the activities of users within those systems, and thus may fail
to capture other user interests, resulting in potential recommendations, and eventually
transactions, being lost. Furthermore, a fuller set of user activities can be captured when
expanding data gathering to multiple sites, thus ensuring dynamic updates. For exam-
ple, if someone reduces their use of Last.fm for a few months, their opinions of the

A. Sheth et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2008, LNCS 5318, pp. 632648, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008
?

?

?
latest music may not be properly captured, leading to a tailing-off of recommendation
quality.

There is a strong push towards opening up social networking to support portability
of data across various sites. Many popular sites are racing to develop tools to allow their
users to port their personal profiles to other sites. Within days from each other in May
2008, Google, MySpace, and Facebook announced new initiatives for increasing social
profile portability called Friend Connect1, Data Availability [16], and Connect[18] re-
spectively. Efficient cross-linking of user profiles should reduce tag-cloud maintenance,
and facilitate search and retrieval of tagged resources from multiple sites. Tagging, a
fast spreading activity where users assign terms to online resources, is an important
discourse within the Web 2.0 phenomenon. Tags serve various purposes, such as for
resource organisation, promotions, sharing with friends, with the public, etc. [14,1].
However, studies have shown that tags are generally chosen to reflect their users in-
terests. Golder and Huberman [8] analysed tags on del.icio.us, and found that (a) the
overwhelming majority of tags identify the topic of the tagged resource, and (b) almost all tags are added for personal use, rather than for the benefit of the public. These
findings lend support to the idea of using tags to derive user profiles. But tags are free
text, and thus suffer from various vocabulary problems [15,8,10]. If it were possible to
clean such tags and render them somewhat more standardised, this could be helpful to
improve tag-cloud compatibility.

The issue of modelling user interests based on cross-folksonomy activity is likely
to become increasingly significant. In a recent survey, Ofcom found that 39% of UK
adults with at least one folksonomy profile have indeed two or more profiles [19]. It has
even been predicted that by 2010, each of us will have between 12 and 24 online identities [21]. Users are often forced to create separate accounts to participate in different
activities. There are signs that many of these users are keen to link up their separate
accounts. For example, many Last.fm users provided their Flickr or del.icio.us account
URL as their homepages.

In this paper we will explore an approach for unifying distributed user profiles, and
building semantic profiles of interests using FOAF and Wikipedia ontologies. The next
section will review related work. Section 3 provides a full description of the approach,
followed by an experiment in section 4 and an evaluation of results in section 5. Discussion and future works are covered in sections 6 and 7 respectively.

2 Related Work

2.1 Analytic Studies
The spread of tagging and the derivation of folksonomies is providing valuable data
sources and environments for studying various user-related issues, such as online be-
haviour, tagging patterns, incentives for sharing, social networking, and opinion forma-
tion. A number of studies have focused on analysing user incentives and motivations
behind tagging: Marlow and colleagues studied the effect of system design on tagging
style, and the various incentives behind tagging [14]. Similarly, Ames and Naaman
[1] studied the reasons why people tag images in Flickr, and articulated a taxonomy

1 http://www.google.com/friendconnect/

M. Szomszor et al.

of social and functional motivations. They found that users tag for various reasons,
such as for organising their resources, sharing them with others, or simply to promote
their work. As noted above, the motivations behind tagging tend to be almost always
personally-focused [8], and the connection between tagging practice, user preferences
and maximally effective profiling.

In a study from Yahoo! on the del.icio.us data, Li and colleagues found that tags are
better representatives of users interests than the keywords of the tagged Web pages,
because (a) they offer a higher level of content abstraction, and (b) they are better
representations of the users perception of that content [12]. The authors investigated
matching users based on the similarity of tag clusters in del.icio.us. In our work how-
ever, we are interested in identifying the specific interest of the users as an independent
attribute, and not only the similarity of his/her interests with others.

Investigations in related fields have shown that there are interesting correlations between social networking environments and the domains to which they relate. For in-
stance, De Choudhury and colleagues found a correlation between certain blogs and
the movement of the stock market [5], while Singla and Richardson analysed MSN
Messenger chat logs and the search queries of the chatters, and found that those who
exchanged short messages frequently were more likely to issue similar search queries
[22]. In our work, we are investigating the correlation between user tagging activities
across multiple folksonomies.

2.2 Normative Accounts of Tagging Practice

Tags are free text, and users can tag resources with any terms they wish to use. On the
one hand, this total freedom simplifies the process and thus attracts users to contribute.
It also avoids the problem of forcing users into using terms they do not feel apply,
a situation that arrises when vocabularies are enforced. For these reasons, the lack of
constraints seems essential. On the other hand, it generates various vocabulary prob-
lems: tags can be too personalised, made of compound words, mix plural and singular
terms, meaningless, synonymous, etc. [15,8,10]. This total lack of control is resulting
in some sort of tagging chaos, thus obstructing search [10] and analysis [12].

Guy and Tonkin [10] suggest that users should be educated about how to author better
tags, and that systems should implement procedures to check for problematic tags and
suggest alternatives. While such steps could be useful for improving tag quality, in our
work we follow the approach of cleaning existing tags using a number of term filtering
processes. In the same spirit of our tag filtering, Hayes and colleagues [11] in their work
on tag clustering have performed a number of filtering operations, such as stemming,
stop word removal, tokenisation, and removal of highly frequent tags. Clustering of tags
has been used by Begelman and colleagues for tag disambiguation [2], where similar
tags were grouped together to facilitate distinguishing between their different meaning
when searching.

2.3 Collection and Semantic Representation of User Interests

This paper is mainly concerned with learning about user interests, and there is a strong
tradition of work in this area. Mori and colleagues investigated extracting information
from web pages using term co-occurrence analysis to build FOAF files [17]. Diederich
?

?

?
and Iofciu [7] tried to identify user interests based on tag clustering. However, the tags
used were in fact DBLP keywords, resulting in a system serving a different purpose
to free tagging. Demartini suggests using the history of users edits in Wikipedia to
find out about their expertise [6]. Such an approach will obviously only work for users
who actively edit Wikipedia pages. In contrast, the work reported in this paper exploits
the resources of Wikipedia, but our primary interest is in identifying and semantically
representing the general interests of users, based on what they tag and how they tag
across several folksonomies.

Semantic representation should ideally involve associating user interests with appropriate URIs, thus moving folksonomy user profiles closer to the Semantic Web and
moving the agenda of using Semantic Web technology to organise collectively assembled information characteristic of Web 2.0 [9]. Semantically-Interlinked Online Communities (SIOC) is an ontology that provides a foundation for semantically representing
user activities in blogs and forums [3]. To facilitate representing tags with URIs, Meaning Of A Tag (MOAT) was developed as a framework to help users manually select
appropriate URIs for their tags from existing ontologies [20], in contrast to the work reported in this paper, which explores the strategy of automating the selection of URIs to
maintain the essential simplicity of tagging. Specia and Motta [23] investigated reusing
existing ontologies to link tags automatically with pre-crafted concepts and relations.
Here we are concerned with selecting URIs that represent topics, and not just any concept in any ontology.

The novelty of the work reported here is in the amalgamation of multiple Web 2.0
user-tagging histories to build up personal semantically-enriched models of interest.
Correlating different folksonomies is a very new art, and has received surprisingly very
little attention so far. In a previous study, we compared the tag clouds of users in both
Flickr and del,icio.us and found that they tend to be more similar to each other than to
other users tag clouds [24]. That indicated that users often carry some of their tagging
selections and patterns across different folksonomies, and this insight is an important
motivation for this work.

3 An Architecture for Building Semantic Profiles of Interest

The objective of this work is to supply an architecture that constructs a model of user
interests by examining their interaction with various folksonomy sites. We are working
under the assumption that the tags used most often by an individual correspond to the
topics, places, events, and people they are most interested in. To maximise the utility of
such profiles, semantic modeling is essential - tags themselves are only string literals
and have no explicit semantics so there are no relationships between terms. For exam-
ple, resources related to programming languages may be tagged in del.icio.us using the
terms perl, c++, or python. While it is clear to the user that these tags are related,
such a relationship is not modeled within the folksonomy. Hence, our approach relies
not only on identifying the most important tags used, but also correlating them to a URI
that has explicit references describing its semantics.

While previous semantic profiling work has concentrated on using well defined ontologies for this purpose, it is not practical for a general solution since information

M. Szomszor et al.

within folksonomy sites such as del.icio.us and Flickr is extremely diverse. Further-
more, folksonomies are dynamic systems that constantly evolve to accommodate new
terminology and trends. Therefore, we decided to use Wikipedia categories to model
user interests because Wikipedia covers a wide range of topics and is constantly updated by the community. Referring to the example above, the Wikipedia categories for
perl and c++ are both subcategories of Programming language families.

Broadly, the architecture is split into four sections, as depicted in Figure 1:

1. Account Correlation. The first step is to identify the accounts held by a particular
individual across a range of social networking sites. By using the Google Social
Graph API, we are able to take a URL denoting the user (such as their homepage)
and discover the various accounts they hold.

2. Data Collection Module. Once the user accounts have been identified, the Data
Collection Module harvests a complete history of their tagging activity within each
site.

3. Tag Filtering. After collecting an individuals raw tagging activity, we utilise a
Tag Filtering architecture, developed in previous work [24], to filter and merge tags
into a canonical representation. This stage allows us to resolve compound nouns
(for example, the tags second life and second-life are merged), cater for
misspellings, identify acronyms, and identify synonyms.

4. Profile Building. The final stage in the process consumes an individuals filtered
tag-clouds and attempts to match each term to a Wikipedia category. Once the list
of categories has been generated, a FOAF file is generated to express their interests
using references to Wikipedia category URLs.

The following Subsections give a more detailed account of each of these processes.

3.1 Account Correlation

Many users create multiple profiles across a range of folksonomy sites to meet different
social and information requirements. Since many of these sites are provided by different

Fig. 1. An Architecture for building Semantic Profiles of Interest
?

?

?
vendors, there are no provisions made to explicitly link accounts that belong to the same
individual. In previous work [24], we matched user accounts between del.icio.us and
Flickr by examining the usernames chosen by individuals. If the same username was
found in both systems, and the string given as their real name was identical in both
profiles, the accounts were matched. While such an approach is not particularly robust,
the accuracy can be increased by matching other profile information such as age, sex,
and location.

Through closer examination, it was apparent that many social networking sites supplied users with a field in their profile page to link to another resource that described
them, such as a homepage or blog URL. When we examined a number of Last.fm pro-
files, we found that many individuals linked to their del.icio.us or Flickr profile. This
kind of approach is more robust than matching on strings only since it is unlikely that
two accounts that point to the same URL are not owned by the same individual. Fortu-
nately, Google recently released an implementation of this matching technique as part
of their Social Graph API 2 providing our profile building architecture with a powerful
account tracing facility.

3.2 Data Collection

The Data Collection module is responsible for harvesting information from a range of
social networking sites. In the case of sites such as Flickr and Last.fm, public APIs are
provided that allow us to download a complete history of user tagging activity. For other
sites, such as del.icio.us, public APIs are very limited so custom screen-scraping scripts
were developed.

3.3 Tag Filtering

When users choose to tag a resource, be it a web page, photo, or video, they are free
to choose any tag(s) they please. While it has been shown that this uncontrolled behaviour does result in meaningful structures at the global level, the tag-clouds of particular individuals often contain misspellings, synonyms and morphologic variety. As
a result, important correlations between resources and users are sometimes lost simply
because of the syntactic mismatches in the tags they have used. To cater for this prob-
lem, we developed a tag filtering architecture that cleans and reduces user generated
tag-clouds [24].

The filtering process is a sequential execution of different morphologic filtering mod-
ules: the output from one filtering step is used as input to the next. The output of the
entire filtering process is a set of new tags and their frequencies. Figure 2 provides a
visual representation of the filtering process where a set of raw tags is transformed into
a set of filtered tags and a set of discarded tags. Each of the numbers in the diagram
corresponds to a step outlined below:

Step 1: Syntactic Filtering. After the raw tags have been loaded, they are passed to
the Syntactic Filter. First, tags that are too small (with length = 1) or too large (length
> 25) are removed. Due to discrepancies regarding the use of special characters (such

2 http://code.google.com/apis/socialgraph/

M. Szomszor et al.

Fig. 2. The tag filtering process

as accents, dieresis and caret symbol), special characters are all converted to their base
form. For example, the tag Z urich is converted to Zurich.

Tags containing numbers are also filtered according to a set of custom heuristics: To
maintain salient numbers, such as dates (2006, 2007, etc), common references (911,
666, etc), or combinations of alphanumeric characters (7up, 4x4, 35mm), we consider
the global tag frequency and discard any unpopular tags. Finally, common stop-words,
such as pronouns, articles, prepositions, and conjunctions are discarded. After syntactic
filtering, tags are verified against WordNet. If the tag has an exact match in WordNet,
we pass it directly to the set of filtered tags to avoid unnecessary processing.

Step 2: Compound Nouns and Misspellings. If the tags were not found in WordNet,
we consider possible misspellings and compound nouns. It is common for users to
misspell tags, for example, the use of barclona instead of barcelona. To solve
this problem, we make use the Google did you mean mechanism. When a search term
is entered, Google will check to see if more relevant search results would be found
using an alternative spelling. Because Googles spell check is based on occurrences of
all words on the Internet, it is able to suggest common spellings for proper nouns (e.g.
names and places) that would not appear in a standard dictionary.

The Google did you mean mechanism also provides an excellent way to resolve
compound nouns. Since most tagging systems prevent users from entering white spaces
into the tag name, users create compound nouns by concatenating two nouns together or
delimiting them with a non-alphanumeric character such as a or -. This is an obvious
source of complication when aligning folksonomy activity: users do not consistently use
the same compound noun creation schema. By entering a compound terms into Google,
we can resolve the tag into its constituent parts. For example, the tag sanfrancisco
is corrected to san francisco. After using Google to check for compound nouns
and misspellings, the results are validated against WordNet. Any unmatched or unprocessed tags are passed to Step 3.
?

?

?
Step 3: Wikipedia Correlation. Many of the popular tags appearing in communal tagging systems do not appear in grammatical dictionaries, such as WordNet, because they
correspond to nouns (such as famous people, places, or companies), contemporary terminology (such as web2.0 and podcast), or are widely used acronyms (such as tv
and diy). In order to provide an agreed representation for such tags, we correlate them
to their appropriate Wikipedia page. For example, when searching Wikipedia using the
tag nyc, the entry for New York City is returned. If the search term ny is used, the entry
for New York state is returned. The advantage of using Wikipedia to agree on tags from
folksonomies is that Wikipedia is a community-driven knowledge base, much like folksonomies are, so it will rapidly adapt to accommodate new terminology. For example,
Wikipedia contains extensive entries for terms such as web2.0, ajax, and blog.

Step 4: Morphologically Similar. An additional issue to be considered during the tag
filtering process is that users often use morphologically similar terms to refer to the
same concept. One very common example of this is the discrepancy between singular
and plural terms, such as blog and blogs. Using a custom singularisation algorithm,
and the stemming functions provided by the snowball library3, we reduce morphologically similar tags to a single tag. The shortest term in WordNet is used as the representative term.

Step 5: WordNet Synonyms. The final step in the filtering process is to identify tags
that are non-ambiguous synonyms, and merge them. This process must be carefully
executed because many terms have ambiguous meaning. The algorithm for this process
is present in [24] and explained in full with pseudocode.

3.4 Building Profiles of User Interests

The final stage of our profile building architecture turns a set of filtered tag-clouds to a
single FOAF file representing as many of the users interests as possible. To accomplish
this, a three-stage process is followed: (Stage 1) Each filtered tag-cloud is transformed
to a weighted list of Wikipedia categories. For example, if a del.icio.us and Flickr account are discovered for a particular individual, a separate category list is generated for
each. (Stage 2) then combines these category lists and filters out the uncommon terms
to produce the final interest list. (Stage 3) turns this list into an RDF representation
using the FOAF and Wikipedia ontologies.

The process of transforming a filtered tag-cloud to a Wikipedia category list (Stage

1) is explained below:

1. Identify Wikipedia Page: For every tag, we attempt to identify its corresponding Wikipedia page. For example the tag perl is matched to the Wikipedia page
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perl.

2. Extract Category List: For some terms, such as directory, the page returned
by Wikipedia is a disambiguation page - one that does not define the term itself, but
simply references a list of other pages associated with the title. In these cases, no
Wikipedia category is found and we move on to the next tag. In the cases where a
page is found, the list of categories (found at the bottom of the page) is extracted.

3 http://snowball.tartarus.org/

M. Szomszor et al.

3. Selection of Representative Categories: Initially, we believed it would be useful to record all the categories associated with a particular page. For example, the
Wikipedia page for Blogs is associated with the categories Blogs, Blogging, Digital
Revolution, Internet terminology, Politics and technology, and Technology in soci-
ety. However, due to the diversity of categories used in Wikipedia, the final category
list was often be dominated by spurious terms such as host cities of the summer
olympic games (from the entry for London), Christmas nomenclature and lan-
guage (from the entry Christmas), as well as Wikipedia specific meta-categories
such as needs more sources. To compensate for this, we decided to only include
a category if: a) there is only one category associated with the page, b) the category
matches the page name exactly to maximise accuracy, or c) the category is a pluralisation of the page name (e.g. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blog has the
category http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Blogs) . If an appropriate category is found, a weight is associated to it corresponding to the frequency
of the tag. If more than one tag is matched to the same category, the category weight
is the sum of all the tag frequencies.

For Stage 2, a global category list is generated by combining all the category lists generated from stage 1. If a category appears in more than one list (e.g. the user has used
the same tag in del.icio.us and Flickr), its final weight is the sum of all weights. These
final lists often have a characteristic long-tail: For most users, there are many categories
that appear with a weight of only 1 or 2. Since these categories are the product of a tag
with a low frequency, and therefore do not necessarily correspond to something which
the user is particularly interested in, they are filtered out - the final category list contains
only categories with a weight above the average for that user.

Finallly, Stage 3 constructs the RDF profile of interest using the FOAF interest
property to link the person to each of the Wikipedia categories. Figure 3 presents a
partial example FOAF file (for an anonymous user), emphasising how tags extracted
from del.icio.us and Flickr tag-clouds are associated with Wikipedia categories. In
this example, the popular tags Flickr, Youtube, C++, and Perl have been extracted from their del.icio.us tag-cloud and correlated with the appropriate Wikipedia
categories. Such terms are often related by a common super category such as On-
line Social Networking and Programming Languages. From their Flickr tag-cloud,
the terms London, and Southampton have been correlated. Furthermore, the tag
cloisters has been correlated to the category Church Architectures, a match that
would not be possible without semantic techniques.

4 Experiment

To build a suitable test-set to evaluate our semantic profiling architecture, we bootstrapped our system with a list of 667,141 del.icio.us users obtained in previous work
[4]. For each user that specified an account url in their del.icio.us profile, we queried
the Social Graph API to find all other accounts held. By filtering out those who also
held a Flickr account, as well as those with low activity (i.e. less than 50 distinct tags
in del.icio.us and Flickr), we obtained a final list of 1,392 users. For each individual,
a complete history of their tagging activity was harvested using the Data Collection
?

?

?
Fig. 3. An example FOAF file. Its contents relates to the users tag clouds, and the categories
matched are represented in the Wikipedia hierarchy.

Module. The table below provides a summary of the data collected. In general, users
had posted more information in Flickr, using a wider variety of tags.

Del.icio.us

Flickr

Total Posts
Distinct Tags

1,134,527
138,028

Total Posts
Distinct Tags

2,215,913
307,182

After collecting the user tag-clouds, they were filtered and then passed to the Profile
Builder which constructed a list of Wikipedia categories describing their interests (see
section 3).

5 Evaluation of Results

We present and evaluate our semantic profiling architecture in four ways: (1) the performance of the Tag Filtering and mapping to Wikipedia entries, (2) the difference between
the most common categories (or interests) in del.icio.us and Flickr, (3) the amount learnt
from merging profiles from the two folksonomies, and (4) the accuracy of the matching
of tags to Wikipedia categories (concepts).

5.1 Tag Filtering and Category Matching

The process of correlating a raw user tag to a Wikipedia category follows three steps: i)
first the tag is filtered ii) it is matched to a Wikipedia page, and iii) a suitable category
is selected. The table below provides as summary of how many terms were matched
during the filtering step, the page matching step, and the category selection step.

M. Szomszor et al.

d
e
h
c
t
a

s
m
r
e

f

o

 
r
e
b
m
u

Raw Delicious Tags
Filtered Delicious Tags
Wikipedia Entries
Wikipedia Categories

Users

(a) Matching del.icio.us tags to Wikipedia ontology. Graph shows how many tags the user had
in the raw tag cloud, how many tags were filtered, how many corresponded to a Wikipedia entry,
and finally how many categories were selected to represent the given tag cloud.

d
e
h
c
t
a

s
m
r
e

f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u

s
e
i
r
o
g
e
a
c
 
w
e
n

t

 
f

o

 
r
e
b
m
u

Raw Flickr Tags
Filtered Flickr Tags
Wikipedia Entries
Wikipedia Categories

(b) Same as graph above but for Flickr tag clouds.

Users

Increase in Categories
Quadratic Fit

Flickr activity (number of distinct tags)

(c) Category increase from adding Flickr to del.icio.us. Graph shows that the higher the user
activity is in del.icio.us or in Flickr, the more new Wikipedia categories are found.
?

?

?
Tag Filtering

Wikipedia Page Matching

Wikipedia Category Matching

del.icio.us

Flickr

Average Std. Dev. Average Std. Dev.
90.6% 6.8% 90.7% 8.0%
70.6% 9.6% 59.1% 12.2%
40.9% 7.2% 41.5% 7.5%

On average, 40.9% of del.icio.us tags and 41.5% of Flickr tags were correlated to
a Wikipedia category (see 5.4). Figures 4(a) and 4(b) provide detailed plots representing each of these steps. For every user, four points are plotted corresponding to the
number of terms matched at each stage (including the number of raw tags). For both
del.icio.us and Flickr, the general trends are approximately the same, but there are some
anomalies. For example, user 928 has 571 del.icio.us tags, yet only 7 were matched
with a Wikipedia category. On closer examination of this users activity, we discovered that many posts were made using a single tag that itself was a concatenation of
many tags. For example, popular tags were culture.humor, politics.party,
and tech.computers.

5.2 Global Category View

To understand the difference in what can be learnt from a users del.icio.us and Flickr
activity, we generated a global category frequency table. Each time a tag was matched
to a category, we increment the global frequency by the number of times that tag was
used. The following table shows the top 15 categories found in del.icio.us and Flickr.

del.icio.us

Flickr

Wikipedia Categ. Total Freq. Wikipedia Categ. Total Freq. Wikipedia Categ. Total Freq. Wikipedia Categ. Total Freq.
design
music
tools
arts
maps
games
technology
humor

51,674
46,623
40,943
37,610
36,513
34,947 washington
32,843
22,290

blogs
photography
video
software
teaching
how-to
news

travel
68,319
41,356
london
34,318 music
28,746
22,120
19,533
17,737

holidays
japan
surnames
given names
birthdays

69,215
45,063
35,795
29,966
26,912
21,549
18,032
15,816

australia
festivals
cats
family
concerts

dogs

51,617
42,504
38,230
37,100
35,374
33,924
32,206

These results are a good indication of the types of interest one can learn from the
two different domains. Del.icio.us tells us about the bookmarking habits of the user, and
subsequently, the topics they are interested in reading about on the Web. For example,
design, software, and humor account for many of the posts made. In Flickr, the
tags tell us more about locations and events. This shows that it is very likely to learn
about other user interests when such different folksonomies are correlated.

5.3 Learning More about Users

One central argument behind our approach is that different online profiles for an individual tell us different things about what that person is interested in. In Section 5.2
(above), we summarised the different types of categories we learnt from del.icio.us and

M. Szomszor et al.

Flickr. To evaluate this at a user level, we consider the difference in profiles that would
be generated if only their del.icio.us tag-cloud is used versus a profile generated from
del.icio.us and Flickr. The underlying hypothesis is that one should increase the number
of categories found by including their Flickr profile. On average, 94.8 new categories
were found (15 were with above average frequency and thus added to the profile on-
tology) for the individuals in our test-set, with a standard deviation of 100. This high
variation is accounted for by the fact that many users have a high activity in del.icio.us,
but a low activity in Flickr (or vice versa). To account for this, the plot given in Figure
4(c) shows the number of new categories added for a user as a function of the their flickr
activity.

5.4 Evaluating Category Matching

To evaluate the approach in terms of how well it identifies the relevant Wikipedia categories from tags, we generated a random sample of 100 users, and randomly selected
from their tag clouds 1 tag from del.icio.us and 1 from Flickr. The following procedure
was then followed:

1. Open the del.icio.us and Flickr pages for the user.
2. Open the list of resources that the user tagged with the randomly selected tag.
3. Establish from the content of these resources, as well as from the other tags in those

postings, what the interest is likely to be.

4. Check if that interest is in the list of Wikipedia categories selected for that user.

The table below summarises the results of this evaluation.

Represented with correct Wikipedia concepts Unresolved Ambiguous

del.icio.us

Flickr
?

?

?
As the table shows, about 13% of the tags lead to Wikipedia disambiguation pages,
and thus were discarded (see Future Work section). On average, 64.5% of the tags
were correctly represented with a Wikipedia Category. However, 22.5% of the tags
were not mapped to any Wikipedia concepts, a situation that arrises when the tag is
not well covered in Wikipedia (i.e. no Wikipedia entry was found), or when there is no
unique category for representing it (i.e. multiple categories, non of which with the same
label as the given tag - section 3). As noted earlier, our system currently ignores highly
ambiguous terms in Wikipedia, hence the true accuracy of the results according to the
results above is 76.7% for del.icio.us and 71.6% for Flickr (average is 74.2%).

During this evaluation, two false positives were found (i.e. tag mapped to the wrong
category). Those were the tags oracle, and labrador. The first was represented with
the Wikipedia category Divinity, whereas the user was interested in Oracle the data-
base. As for labrador, which was used to tag photos of a dog in Flickr, was incorrectly
mapped to a city in Canada. To avoid such cases, a disambiguation process is required
as explained in section 7.
?

?

?
6 Discussion

There were some interesting properties of the strategy reported here of using Wikipedia.
The use of a rich source like Wikipedia means that tags that cannot be matched can still
gain from matching related tags. For example, one user tagged a resource with KL.
This we were unable to match against Wikipedia, but other tags for similar resources
by the user matched to Kuala Lumpur and Malaysia.

Some ambiguities are the result not of using ambiguous terms so much as the abstraction with which interests are represented, which may render the exact nature of the
interest opaque. Again, other tags of the user may help resolve the abstraction down to
a level which is meaningful. For instance, one person tagged a resource with time.
This is over-general and not too helpful. However, when we looked at other tags for this
user on comparable posts, it became clear that the particular interest of the user was
astronomy, in which the concept of time plays a specific role. Both time and astron-
omy were selected for this user as interests, but it is clear that the real interest lies in
the combination of the two.

At the other end of the abstraction spectrum, specific tags do not map easily onto concepts when considered as an expression of interest. Examples of specific tags include
names of individual (non-celebrity) people, including friends and family of the tagger.
These by their nature were more likely to turn up in Flickr than in, say, del.icio.us.
Similarly, low-frequency tags were found to be less likely to indicate users interests,
especially if the frequency did not grow over time. Again, exploiting the richness of
the tag-cloud aided investigation of such anomalous issues, so for example one person
tagged some contact visa, which is perhaps not best characterised as an interest, but
a better expression of their interests  travel  emerged from their other tags.

In the current implementation, tags that lead to a Wikipedia disambiguation page
(e.g. directory) are discarded and hence are not represented with an interest. As, noted,
with the free text structure of tags, ambiguity and unclarity are endemic problems, and
various methods for disambiguation have been proposed in the literature (see section
2). Some of these methods are based on clustering the whole collection of tags (e.g.
[2]), or resources [13]), but such techniques are more suitable for static environments
where the data do not change too often. In the world of tagging, this is hardly the case.
Hence, we need less demanding methods to disambiguate tags, to cope with the highly
dynamic nature of folksonomies, even if those methods could never be perfect (see next
section).

An alternative approach to disambiguation is proposed in [23] where pairs of tags
(e.g. apple and computer) are searched for in a collection of ontologies, and the ontology that contains both concepts will define the disambiguated domain. This approach
has a number of limitations, such as when multi-domain ontologies exist (WordNet,
Cyc), or when the tags are not found in any single ontology.

Nevertheless, representing user interests with an ontology enables us to benefit from
the hierarchical structure when dealing with the users interests at different levels of
granularity. For example, if someone is interested in Visualbasic, Perl, and C++,
then one can infer that this person is into Programming languages. The hierarchy can
show how general the user interest is, so one user may use the tag music very often,
while another might tag with jazz or Hip hop, which are more specific concepts

M. Szomszor et al.

than music. People tag with different levels of specificity, and this usually reflects
their level of expertise in the subject [8,25]. More specific concepts (i.e. interests in our
case) can be found at lower levels in the ontology hierarchy.

7 Future Work

According to Wikipedia, the majority of terms can be disambiguated (e.g. iTunes
could be the device or the store, furniture is the object or the UK band). We will
investigate using the distance between Wikipedia categories to disambiguate the tags.
For example, if the user tagged a resource with apple and computer, then these
will match to Wikipedia categories with the same labels, but there will be ambiguity to
resolve. The path between these two concepts in the Wikipedia ontology is shorter if
apple is matched to the technological concept, than if it was matched to the fruit. One
approach is to select the category with the shortest path to represent this interest.

The use of an ontology will allow recommendation systems to find out how specific
the user interest is, and use this information to fine tune recommendations. Inferring
interests by analysing links or paths in the ontology can help uncover implicit interests.
For example if the user is found to be interested in Science fiction and in Books then
the system might assume that the user will be interested in science-fiction books. This
can be refined further depending on, for example, places or authors of interest to the
user. We plan to explore using the profiles of interest we produced for making crossdomain recommendations. In addition, we plan to expand this work to also include
last.fm accounts, which we have already gathered for all the users in our current dataset.
Cross-domain interests could also be served, given the range of social networking sites and activities, by exploring the taggers social environment. Both Flickr and
del.icio.us now allow users to form links with others (e.g. friends, groups). Such social links could be explored for further interest and recommendation analysis. We are
currently collecting this information for the users in our dataset and will investigate
whether there is a correlation between social links and user interests.

8 Conclusions

This paper investigated a novel idea of merging users distributed tag clouds to build
richer profile ontologies of interests, using FOAF interest properties and Wikipedia cat-
egories. We experimented with over 1300 users with high activities in both del.icio.us
and Flickr, and the result showed that on average 15 new concepts of interest were
learnt for each users when expanding tag analysis to their tag cloud in the other folk-
sonomy. We have also introduced a process to clean the data to maximise tag-cloud
matching. Our initial evaluation showed that on average, 72% of the filtered tags have
been correctly represented with a Wikipedia category (i.e identification of interest).

Acknowledgement

This research has been supported by the TAGora project funded by the Future and
Emerging Technologies program (IST-FET) of the European Commission under the
?

?

?
contract IST-34721. The information provided is the sole responsibility of the authors
and does not reflect the Commissions opinion. The Commission is not responsible for
any use that may be made of data appearing in this publication.
