Contracting and Copyright Issues for Composite

Semantic Services

Christian Baumann

SAP AG, SAP Research CEC Karlsruhe

Vincenz-Prienitz-Str. 1, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany

ch.baumann@sap.com

Abstract. In business webs within the Internet of Services arbitrary services shall be composed to new composite services and therewith creating
tradeable goods. A composite service can be part of another composite
service and so on. Since business partners can meet just for one transaction not having regular business which justifies frame contracts, ad-hoc
automated contracting needs to be established. In addition services have
an intangible character and therefore are prone to illegal reproduction.
Thus intellectual property rights have to be considered.

Our research approach is to assess the applicability of copyright law
for semantic web services and develop a concept for automated contract-
ing. Methodologies to be used are in the field of ontology modeling and
reasoning.
Keywords: semantic web service, intellectual property rights, copyright,
automated contracting.

1 Research Problem

The interconnectivity utilized by internal networks or the internet and the rise
of Service-oriented architectures (SOA) lead to changes in e-business. Reusable
components - so called services - can be used to compose individual applications
(composite services) fitting for a specific problem. Recently semantic technology
is applied to provide semantic services, which allow to more efficiently build
composite services out of atomic services. This contributes to the vision of the
Internet of Services (IoS) [13] [8], where services become similar to tradeable
goods on the internet.

However, the building blocks of the IoS, the services, are more than just technical web services. Services comprise business models, business processes and a
technical aspect (see Figure 1) to enable a business web [1]. With the rise of such
new business areas participants have substantial interest in the protection of their
own (intangible) property, such as copyright. This challenges jurisdictions to
provide a legal framework within which business web participants can trade and
conclude contracts safely. Typically existing legal regulations are being transfered

 The project was funded by means of the German Federal Ministry of Economy and
Technology under the promotional reference 01MQ07012. The authors take the
responsibility for the contents.

A. Sheth et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2008, LNCS 5318, pp. 895900, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

C. Baumann

to newly risen business areas, and, if not possible, extended or newly created and
passed by the jurisdiction. The advance in information technology, for example,
required an adaption in copyright laws worldwide in the past decade, because
the costs for information exchange and duplication of digitally recorded work
became insignificant [12, pp. 23].

The IoS is envisioning a business web with seamless business-
to-business (B2B) integration by
semantic information exchange
and arbitrary reusability of an
intangible, tradeable good: the
service. To realize the vision, intensive research is currently un-
dertaken. The project TEXO1
within the research program
THESEUS, for example, looks
into business webs in the IoS.
Within such a business web some
services are thought to being composed, e.g. the services a, b, c, to a composite
service, e.g. s. These services may all be provided by some legally independent
entities, A, B, C and S. The composite service s may also be part of another
composite service, let us say z. This short illustration shows the complexity of
the IoS and gives an idea on how important representation and control over ones
own intellectual property is. Maybe A, B, C do not want to be included in a
mashup z or at least receive some payment for this.

Fig. 1. Service Categorization [1]

Furthermore not only the technology for automated composition of a composite service is required, but also the legal foundation of concluding contracts. Typically frame contracts are being negotiated offline and only afterwards automated
negotiation of some service levels is carried out. However, in the IoS this is not suf-
ficient, since business partners may meet just for one transaction, and therefore an
explicit offline negotiation of contracts causes too high transaction costs. Hence
an automated way for contracting in the IoS is required, with which participants
are able to meet on the same eye level, which prevents dominant players.

The example above even shows two different contracts. Let us assume the
legal entity Z is the customer of S, integrating s in his own composite service z.
Internally A, B, C and S have to conclude a contract, externally S and Z also
need to conclude a contract. In this scenario, the intellectual property rights
need to be considered and passed through during automated contracting.

This leads us to the research problem we want to discuss:

1. In a scenario of collaborative development of new (composite) web services
(trade goods), current copyright law is adequate as a legal foundation to
protect the exploitation rights of ones own web service.

2. The non-functional property exploitation rights can be represented and formalized with semantic technology for being utilized during automated contracting of service composition. Sound modeling with e.g. ontologies can

1 http://theseus-programm.de/scenarios/en/texo/, visited 05.05.2008.
?

?

?
provide abstractness and flexibility for later extension for the implementation of automated contracting.

Ensuring an adequate handling of exploitation rights can raise trust and transparency in the IoS, therewith boosting its innovation power and give an incentive
for participation.

2 Related Work

This section discusses state of the art in the field of copyright and contracting
issues for composite semantic services. First, legal aspects are depicted, then
related work in the area of semantic web is looked at.

The concept of a web service has taken little notice in the jurisprudence2
so far. The same is true for the extension with a semantic annotation or the
development of composite web services within SOA. The categorization of web
services to a special type of contract is an open research question, e.g. [9] is
discussing aspects of different contract types. The categorization is important
because of the transfer of rights of the contractual object and the further use
of this intellectual property. Also collaborative composite service development
is not explicitly discussed. For linking and framing of websites copyright law is
applicable, e.g. [11], however, this is not settled for composite services and an
interesting question for the thesis.

In the research project SESAM3 self organizing distributed electronic markets
in the area of power markets were analyzed. One outcome of the research is the
concept of an electronic legal mediator [5] for the process of concluding contracts
without any offline steps [4]. This was required, since no central instance was
available and contracts had to be concluded hourly. Thus software agents were
designed to perform the negotiations between different parties. In contrast to
power markets the IoS is, however, not as regulated and has a much lower entry
barrier for new participants. As a result the electronic legal mediator is not suitable for on open business web in the IoS, since it only covers a very specific area
of contracting in the power market. The IoS, however, requires a flexible framework for automated contracting and the management of intellectual property for
the development of composite services.

The research project TrustCoM4 was put up to build an environment for trust,
security and contract management for B2B collaboration based on SOA. The
main legal aspect was to enforce and monitor contracts for virtual organizations.
This was achieved by implementing contractual terms and conditions as policies
within the SOA infrastructure. These common regulations provide transparency
for the virtual organizations facilitating trust. Moreover a risk management to
reduce uncertainty in regards to the applicable statuary laws is provided. To
provide predefined terms for the automated contracting in order to facilitate

2 In this discussion we limit the legal scope to german jurisdiction.
3 http://www.internetoekonomie.uni-karlsruhe.de/, visited 08.05.2008.
4 http://www.eu-trustcom.com/, visited 08.05.2008.

C. Baumann

trust is a concept we also pursue, however, in TrustCoM negotiation involves
only the SLA, with no reference to the other non-operational aspects of the
collaboration that would normally appear in a legal document [3, p. 29]. These
non-operational aspects are the non-functional properties we want to enable, also
including negotiation capabilities of intellectual property aspects for composite
services.

Automated contracting facilitated by semantic technologies is shown in [10].
Lamparter is using his own core policy ontology, a ontology of bids and a contract ontology, which are based on the foundational ontology DOLCE5. Although
automated matchmaking and contract formation using semantic annotation is
achieved, a pre-negotiated umbrella contract [10, p. 123] is set as a precon-
dition. The contracting process is only covering some functional service level
agreements, leaving non-functional contractual terms for the offline negotiation
of the umbrella contract. Intellectual property rights for service composition is
not considered.

In the area of semantic web and law a lot of work is done in the representation
of legal knowledge. A key challenge is to give access to existing judgments and
represent regulations for educational training of young judges [2]. Also design
patterns for legal ontology construction are discussed [6]. Laarshot et al. [14]
tried to bridge the gap between legal concepts and actual cases to advice with
ontology-based reasoning on possible liability situations. The works mentioned
do not discuss automated contracting and representation of intellectual property
rights in the semantic environment. However, their work is important for the
formalization of legal aspects.

As a foundational ontology in the area of modeling legal aspects, the Legal
Knowledge Interchange Format (LKIF) is enabling the translation between legal
knowledge bases [7]. It is based on the foundational ontology DOLCE. The LKIF
consists of a combination of OWL-DL and SWRL. We think LKIF is a good
foundation for further formalization in the area of automated contracting and
representation of intellectual property rights.

3 Contribution and Evaluation

The results of the research problem as stated in Section 1 will be integrated into
the research program THESEUS6, project TEXO. The legal analysis in copyright
law will be reflected in the ontology for the service description framework. The
techniques for formalization and reasoning over exploitation rights will make a
contribution to the overall context of automated contracting during composition
of semantic web services. The methodologies used will be in the field of ontology modeling and reasoning to find possible collisions during negotiation and
enabling a management of intellectual property rights during contracting.

The evaluation will also be carried out within the project TEXO. The use case
scenario Eco Calculator of the project comprises composition of semantic web

5 http://www.loa-cnr.it/DOLCE.html/, visited 08.05.2008.
6 http://theseus-programm.de/, visited 05.05.2008.
?

?

?
services including different legal entities and an end customer. The scenario will
be used to justify the legal analysis and serve as an evaluation for the topic of
automated contracting for semantic web services, in particular the exploitation
of intellectual property rights.

4 Work Plan

The Ph.D. thesis is located in between the research areas of law and the semantic web. Figure 2 illustrates the interdisciplinary research field. The academic
research partners are from Universitt Karlsruhe (TH)7: In the area of intellectual property Institute for Information Law8 and for the semantic web domain
Institute of Applied Informatics and Formal Description Methods (AIFB)9.

Fig. 2. Interdiciplinary Research Area

Following different phases of the
Ph.D. thesis are outlined. It is differentiated into current status, work
in progress and planned work.
Current Status. The overall work
time for the Ph.D. thesis is planned
to be three years. Three months
have passed now. The current status is as outlined in this paper.
Work in Progress. The current work is to investigate and assess the applicability of copyright law for collaborative semantic service development. The scope
is set to german copyright law, with the option to extend to international copyright acts. In parallel the possibilities of formalization of such intellectual property rights for semantic web services is assessed. The next planned step is a
paper in 2008 to discuss copyright issues for collaborative semantic web service
development.
Planned Work. Until end of 2008 the utilization of semantic modeling of intellectual property rights and semantic reasoning during automated contracting
is planned to be assessed. Until 2009/12 the legal analysis and the concept for
the technical formalization of intellectual property rights within the context of
semantic services shall be finished. Until 2010/12 the concept of automated contracting and the incorporation of intellectual property rights into the contracting
process shall be ready. The Ph.D. thesis manuscript is planned to be available
in 2011/02.
