Improving an RCC-Derived Geospatial Approximation 

by OWL Axioms 

Rolf Grutter, Thomas Scharrenbach, and Bettina Bauer-Messmer 

Swiss Federal Research Institute WSL, An Institute of the ETH Board, Zurcherstrasse 111, 

{rolf.gruetter,thomas.scharrenbach,bettina.bauer}@wsl.ch 

CH-8903 Birmensdorf, Switzerland 

Abstract. An approach to improve an RCC-derived geospatial approximation is 
presented  which  makes  use  of  concept  inclusion  axioms  in  OWL.  The  algorithm used to control the approximation combines hypothesis testing with consistency  checking  provided  by  a  knowledge  representation  system  based  on  
description logics. Propositions about the consistency of the refined ABox w.r.t. 
the  associated  TBox  when  compared  to  baseline  ABox  and  TBox  are  made. 
Formal proves of the divergent consistency results when checking either of both 
are provided. The application of the approach to a geospatial setting results in a 
roughly  tenfold  improved  approximation  when  using  the  refined  ABox  and 
TBox. Ways to further improve the approximation and to automate the detection of falsely calculated relations are discussed. 

Keywords: Geospatial approximation, Region Connection Calculus, Web Ontology Language, hypothesis testing, consistency checking. 

1   Introduction 

Topological relations play an important role for the description of geospatial phenom-
ena. Accordingly, the Open GIS (OGIS) standard defines topological set operators for 
the  retrieval  of  data  in  terms  of  spatial  relations  [1].1  It  is  implemented  by  todays 
geographical  information  systems.  However,  there  is  currently  no  means  to  couple 
geometrical computations with symbolic reasoning services provided by a knowledge 
representation system. Such a coupling (or an alternative procedure with a similar ef-
fect) is necessary if users should be supported in constructing spatio-thematic queries 
which are consistent with their conceptualization of a given domain of discourse. 

The coupling of geometrical computations with symbolic reasoning can be anticipated  if  the  thematic  (i.e.,  terminological)  representation  in  the  semantic  layer  of  a 
system is complemented by a spatial representation. Ideally, the spatial representation 
uses topological relations which are compliant with the OGIS standard. It should also 
be based on a formalism which allows inferring implicit knowledge from the knowledge explicitly represented. Both requirements are fulfilled by the Region Connection 
Calculus (RCC) [2, 3]. 
                                                           
1  The  OGIS  consortium  is  formed  by  major  software  vendors  to  formulate  an  industry-wide 

standard related to GIS interoperability. 

A. Sheth et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2008, LNCS 5318, pp. 293306, 2008. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008 

R. Grutter, T. Scharrenbach, and B. Bauer-Messmer 

A popular method for representing the terminology of a domain together with thematic descriptions in terms of the terminology is description logic, in the context of 
the Semantic Web particularly the Web Ontology Language (OWL) [4]. Therefore, in 
order to complement the thematic representation with a spatial representation, ways to 
combining OWL with RCC must be explored. 

The  herein  presented  work  explores  how  an  RCC-derived  geospatial  approximation can be improved by OWL axioms. It builds on an approach published in [5]. The 
idea is to calculate or approximate geospatial settings based on attributes which can 
easily be queried from spatial databases such that the process can be automated. For 
instance,  non-administrative  regions,  such  as  biotopes,  may  be  stored  in  data  tables 
together  with the administrative regions (e.g., cantons), they overlap, or administrative  regions,  such  as  communes,  may  be  stored  together  with  the  administrative  regions they are externally connected to. This information about the connectedness of 
regions can be used as a starting point for the calculation of more complex relations 
such as partOf. The calculated relations allow constructing and querying complex concepts with both thematic and spatial references such as public_park_containing_a_lake  
park (cid:138) public (cid:138) contains.lake which is taken from [6]. The contribution of the work, 
however, is not limited to the geographical domain. It rather adds to the knowledge 
about the combination of quantitative numerical approaches with qualitative symbolic 
(i.e., logic) approaches in general. The presented approach is related to previous work 
on  combining  RCC  with  OWL  [7,  8]  by  addressing  the  calculation  of  a  geospatial 
world  description  for  assertion  in  the  ABox  of  a  knowledge  base.  Reasoning  with 
both RCC and OWL will make use of the asserted world description. 

The paper is organized as follows: In section 2, related work is discussed. An introduction to RCC is provided in section 3. In section 4, a geospatial approximation is 
presented which is derived from RCC. In section 5, the theoretical results are applied 
to  a  geospatial  setting.  The  approach  is  discussed  in  section  6.  Section  7  concludes 
with an outlook on future work. 

2   Related Work 

Spatio-thematic reasoning with the description logic ALCRP(D) has been introduced 
in  [9].  The  authors  define  an  appropriate  concrete  domain  DP  for  polygons.  RP 
stands  for  role  definitions  based  on  predicates.  More  specifically,  ALCRP(D)  extends  ALC(D)  [10]  by  a  role-forming  operator  which  is  based  on  concrete  domain 
predicates. The new operator allows the definition of roles with very complex properties and provides a close coupling of roles with concrete domains. A detailed account 
of ALCRP(D) is provided in [11]. In order to ensure termination of the satisfiability 
algorithm for the concrete domain DP, the authors impose restrictions on the syntactic 
form of the set of terminological axioms which impose tight constraints on modeling 
spatio-thematic structures [9, 11]. 

With  the  intention  to  augment  a  description  logic  like  ALC  with  some  kind  of 
qualitative spatial reasoning capabilities, a rich variety of extensions to ALC is investigated in [12]. As a basic extension the author introduces role inclusion axioms of the 
form S  T (cid:139) R1 (cid:137) ... (cid:137) Rn which constrain the models I to SI  TI  R1

I  ...  Rn
( stands for the composition of roles). A set of these role inclusion axioms is referred 
?

?

?
to by the author as a role box. In previous work it has been shown that concept satisfiability in a related logic called ALCRA, enforcing role disjointness on all roles R and S 
(RI    SI  =  ),  is  undecidable.  In  [12]  specializations  of  ALCRA  which  specifically 
consider the family of RCC related calculi are investigated. Using role axioms of the 
above introduced form, the author shows for both ALCIRCC5 and ALCIRCC8 that satisfiability of concepts quantifying over roles (R.C) can be undecidable in a practical 
application. 

A general property of concrete domains that is sufficient for proving decidability of 
DLs equipped with them and General Concept Inclusions (GCIs) is identified in [13]. 
The authors further present a tableau algorithm for reasoning in DLs equipped  with 
such concrete domains. In order to obtain their first result, they concentrate on a particular kind of concrete domains which they call constraint systems. According to the 
authors, a constraint system is a concrete domain that only has binary predicates, and 
these  predicates  are  interpreted  as  jointly  exhaustive  and  pairwise  disjoint  relations. 
The authors show that the spatial constraint system which is based on the real plane 
and the RCC-8 relations has the required property and that the description logic which 
allows  defining  concepts  with  reference  to  this  constraint  system  is  decidable.  As  a 
description logic they introduce ALC(C) which is ALC extended with two constraint 
constructors. 

In [14] the authors aim at representing qualitative spatial information in OWL DL. 
On  the  basis  of  the  (assumed)  close  relationship  between  the  RCC-8  calculus  and 
OWL DL they extend the latter with the ability to define reflexive roles. The extension of OWL DL with a reflexive property is motivated by the requirement that such a 
property, in addition to the transitive one, is needed in order to describe the accessibility relation. In order to represent RCC-8 knowledge bases the authors use a translation 
in which regions are expressed as non-empty regular closed sets. The RCC-8 relations 
are then translated into (sets of) concept axioms in OWL DL. The classes denoted by 
the introduced concepts are instantiated by asserting for each concept an individual in 
the ABox in order to ensure that the classes cannot be empty. 

It seems to be more intuitive to define the RCC relations in terms of role descriptions than to translate them into concept axioms. In [15] it is shown that the extension 
of SHIQ with complex role inclusion axioms of the form S  T (cid:139) R is undecidable, 
even when these axioms are restricted to the forms S  T (cid:139) S or T  S (cid:139) S, but that 
decidability can be regained by  further restricting them to be acyclic.  Complex role 
inclusion  axioms  of  the  unrestricted  form  are  supported  by  the  description  logic 
SROIQ  which  serves  as  a  logical  basis  for  OWL  1.1  [16].  However,  in  order  to 
axiomatize the composition of RCC relations, a language must support an extension 
of the unrestricted form of role inclusion axioms, namely S  T (cid:139) R1 (cid:137) ... (cid:137) Rn. If decidability should be preserved, complex role inclusion axioms are, therefore, not a solution  to  the  translation  problem  of  RCC.  Axioms  defining  the  basic  RCC  relations 
require additional role constructors such as intersection and complement. Extensions 
of SHIQ with these kinds of role constructors have, to our knowledge, not been investigated  so  far.  SROIQ  supports  negation  of  roles  (i.e.  complement)  but  not  
intersection. 

R. Grutter, T. Scharrenbach, and B. Bauer-Messmer 

To  summarize,  the  existing  approaches  show  that  the  combination  of  formalisms 
for thematic and spatial reasoning is not straightforward. In order to uphold decidabil-
ity, approaches based on ALC require that the resulting language is constrained. This 
bears on its expressivity for modeling spatio-thematic structures. SHIQ and SROIQ 
do not provide for the expression of role inclusion axioms of the form S  T (cid:139) R1 (cid:137) 
... (cid:137) Rn which is a requirement for spatial reasoning with RCC. The approach based 
on SHOIN(D) (OWL DL) requires only a minimal extension of the language which 
has been considered in the draft to OWL 1.1 [17]. However, the notion of regions as 
sets in the abstract object domain prevents RCC from effectively combining with domain ontologies. The reason for this is that OWL DL requires type separation: a class 
cannot be an individual (or a property) at the same time [18]. Yet, in order to classify 
regions  in  a  domain  ontology  they  must  be  represented  as  individuals,  and  not  as  
concepts. 

Furthermore,  in  [19]  it  is  proposed  to  encode  spatial  inferences  in  the  Semantic 
Web Rule Language (SWRL) [20]. Even though not explicitly mentioned, the examples  are  provided  in  a  RCC-like  style.  SWRL  uses  Horn-like  rules  which  are  combined with OWL DL (and OWL Lite). Horn rules do not allow complex heads (which 
refer to the expressions on the right hand side of the implication connective). How-
ever,  complex  heads  in  terms  of  disjunctions  are  required  in  order  to  formalize  the 
RCC composition axioms. 

In [6] a generic architectural framework for building ontology-based information 
systems is presented which covers regions in the system design space instead of isolated points. The  framework  introduces  a  graph-based  substrate  data  model  and a 
substrate query language. An ABox can be seen as a substrate, an ABox with an associated TBox as a substrate with a background theory. A substrate can also encode 
geometric  or  spatial  structures  in  a  geometric  substrate  which  is  called  an  SBox 
(Space  Box).  The  authors  propose  four  options  to  solve  the  spatial  representation 
problem: (1) Use an ABox, (2) use a map substrate, (3) use a spatial ABox, (4) use 
an  ABox  +  RCC  substrate. The  herein  presented  work  addresses  the  fourth  representation option. 

3   The Region Connection Calculus 

The Region Connection Calculus (RCC) is an axiomatization of certain spatial concepts and relations in first order logic [2, 3]. The basic theory assumes just one primitive dyadic relation: C(x, y) read as x connects with y. Individuals (x, y) can be interpreted as denoting spatial regions. The relation C(x, y) is reflexive and symmetric. 

Using the primitive relation C(x, y) a number of intuitively significant relations can 
be defined. The most common of these are illustrated in figure 1 and their definitions 
together with those of additional relations are given in table 1. The asymmetrical relations P, PP, TPP and NTPP have inverses which we write, in accordance with [3], as 
Ri, where R  {P, PP, TPP, NTPP}. These relations are defined by definitions of the 
form Ri(x, y) def R(y, x). 

 
 
?

?

?
Fig. 1. RCC family tree (for the entire names of the relations cf. table 1) 

 

Of  the  defined  relations,  DC,  EC,  PO,  EQ,  TPP,  NTPP,  TPPi  and  NTPPi  have  been 
proven to form a jointly exhaustive and pairwise disjoint set, which is known as RCC-
8.  Similar  sets  of  one,  two,  three  and  five  relations  are  known  as  RCC-1,  RCC-2, 
RCC-3 and RCC-5, respectively: RCC-1 = {SR}, RCC-2 = {O, DR}, RCC-3 = {ONE, 
EQ, DR}, RCC-5 = {PP, PPi, PO, EQ, DR}. RCC also incorporates a constant denoting 
the universal region, a sum  function and partial functions  giving the product of any 
two overlapping regions and the complement of every region except the universe [3]. 

Table 1. RCC relations 

(primitive relation) 

def z[C(z, x)  C(z, y)] 
def z[P(z, x)  P(z, y)] 

SR(x, y)  def (x, y) 
C(x, y) 
DC(x, y)  def C(x, y) 
P(x, y) 
O(x, y) 
DR(x, y)  def O(x, y) 
EC(x, y)  def C(x, y)  O(x, y) 
EQ(x, y)  def P(x, y)  P(y, x) 
ONE(x, y)  def O(x, y)  EQ(x, y) 
PP(x, y)  def P(x, y)  P(y, x) 
PO(x, y)  def O(x, y)  P(x, y)  P(y, x) 
TPP(x, y)  def PP(x, y)  z[EC(z, x)  EC(z, y)]  (Tangential Proper Part of) 
NTTP(x, y)def PP(x, y)  z[EC(z, x)  EC(z, y)](Non-Tangential Proper Part of) 

(Spatially Related) 
(Connects with) 
(DisConnected from) 
(Part of) 
(Overlaps) 
(DiscRete from) 
(Externally Connected to) 
(EQual to) 
(Overlaps Not Equal) 
(Proper Part of) 
(Partially Overlaps) 

R. Grutter, T. Scharrenbach, and B. Bauer-Messmer 

According to [2], regions support either spatial or temporal interpretation. In case 
of spatial interpretation, there is a variety of models among which to choose. The authors provide some examples such as interpreting the relation C (connects with) in 
terms of two regions whose closures share a common point or stating that two regions 
connect when the distance between them is zero. 

In  order  to  check  consistency  of  a  knowledge  base  holding  spatial  relations,  socalled composition tables are used (cf. the composition table for RCC-5 in table 2). 
The entries in these tables share a uniform inference pattern which can be formalized 
as composition axioms of the general form x, y, z. S(x, y)  T(y, z)  R1(x, z)  ...  
Rn(x, z) where S, T, and Ri are variables for relation symbols. 

A similar approach which is based on the description of topological relations between two spatial regions was introduced as the 9-intersection model in [21]. In this 
model, eight out of nine relations can be interpreted in the same way as we interpret 
the  RCC-8  relations,  namely  as  spatial  relations  between  polygons  in  the  integral 
plane [7]. Only the ninth relation is specific for the model. Since it is based on a topological framework  and not on a logical one  the 9-intersection model is harder to 
combine with OWL DL than RCC. 

Table 2. RCC-5 composition table (T(x, z) def {DR(x, z), PO(x, z), EQ(x, z), PP(x, z), PPi(x, z)}) 

PO(x, y) 
DR(x, z) 
PO(x, z) 
PPi(x, z) 

EQ(x, y) 

DR(x, z) 

T(x, z) 

PO(x, z) 

PO(x, z) 

EQ(x, z) 

PP(x, z) 

PP(x, y) 

DR(x, z) 

DR(x, z) 
PO(x, z) 
PP(x, z) 
PP(x, z) 

PP(x, z) 

PPi(x, y) 
DR(x, z) 
PO(x, z) 
PPi(x, z) 

PO(x, z) 
PPi(x, z) 

PPi(x, z) 
PO(x, z) 
EQ(x, z) 
PP(x, z) 
PPi(x, z) 

 

DR(x, y) 

DR(y, z) 

T(x, z) 

PO(y, z) 

EQ(y, z) 

PP(y, z) 

DR(x, z) 
PO(x, z) 
PP(x, z) 
DR(x, z) 

DR(x, z) 
PO(x, z) 
PP(x, z) 

PPi(y, z) 

DR(x, z) 

PO(x, z) 
PP(x, z) 

DR(x, z) 
PO(x, z) 
PPi(x, z) 

PPi(x, z) 

PPi(x, z) 

T(x, z) 

4   An RCC-Derived Geospatial Approximation 

In order to approximate a geospatial setting we derive a hypothesis for the RCC relation P(x, y) from its definition in table 1 (section 4.1). For each pair of connecting re-
gions, this hypothesis is tested against the role assertions in the ABox of a knowledge 
base (section 4.2). If the hypothesis is not falsified it is checked whether its assertion 
causes an inconsistency of the knowledge base or not. If the knowledge base remains 
consistent the relation P(x, y) is asserted in the ABox. 

We compare two procedures which use different levels of knowledge. The baseline 
approximation uses baseline knowledge in terms of the concept Region which is used 
?

?

?
for  asserting  individual  regions  in  the  ABox  of  the  knowledge  base.  The  improved 
approximation uses additional knowledge from cartographic analysis. In particular, it 
distinguishes communes as a special kind of regions and introduces a property restriction  which  constrains  the  values  of  the  property  to  some  communes.  Since  the  approach is generic and can be applied to similar problems in other domains as well, the 
algorithm and the axioms of TBoxes T1 (baseline) and T2 (constrained) are introduced 
in an abstract way. The notation used for the DL axioms is taken from [22]. 

4.1   Deriving a Hypothesis from RCC 

The relation P(x, y) (x is a part of y) plays a key role in the definitions of the RCC 
relations (cf. table 1): It is directly defined by the primitive relation and, conversely, a 
number of relations are defined in terms of P(x, y). For this reason, we use the definition of the relation P(x, y) as a starting point for our geospatial approximation. Since 
P(x,  y) is directly defined by  the primitive relation it  will  be sufficient to assert the 
primitive relation in an input representation. The theory defines the relation P(x, y) as 
follows: 

P(x, y) def z[C(z, x)  C(z, y)]. 

In accordance  with the  Semantic Web philosophy, this definition assumes an open 
world: x is a part of y if and only if for any imaginable region z the following holds: If z 
connects with x then z also connects with y. In order to adapt the definition to the closed 
world  of  a  practical  application  we  replace  the  universal  quantifier  by  a  conjunction 
ranging over all regions represented. In a closed world the condition on the right hand 
side of the expression is no longer sufficient  but still necessary (cf. below)  for the relation P(x, y). Accordingly, we replace the equality sign by an inclusion sign. 
                                          P(x, y) (cid:139)  zi[C(zi, x)  C(zi, y)]                                            (1) 

with 1  i  n, n the number of regions represented. 

In the minimum case (i = 1) the region x connects only with itself (remember that 
the relation C is by definition reflexive) and it holds that x = y = z. In the maximum 
case (i = n) all regions, including x (y, respectively) connect with x (y, respectively). 
Intuitively, the calculation of P(x, y) is expected to be more precise with a high number of regions zi represented. 

Note  that  from  an  epistemic  viewpoint  the  shift  from  an  open  world  to  a  closed 
world limits the range of the proposition  which is originally formalized as a definition  from the partially unknown universe to a known subset thereof. Both the universal proposition and the middle range proposition cannot be empirically verified but 
only falsified.2 The first cannot be verified as a matter of principle: It is not possible 
to test for the infinite number of all imaginable regions z connecting with x whether 
they also connect with y. The second cannot be verified because the condition on the 
right hand side of the expression is not sufficient. However, both can be falsified: A 
single observation of a region z connecting with x but not with y is sufficient to falsify 
the hypothesis that x is a part of y. Following this line of argumentation a calculus for 
P(x, y) is not expected to be sound. Instead, the question is whether it is complete or 
                                                           
2 The expression middle range is adopted from the Middle Range Theory [23]. 

R. Grutter, T. Scharrenbach, and B. Bauer-Messmer 

not.  In  a  practical  application  it  is  further  of  interest  how  good  a  calculus  approximates the geospatial setting and how the approximation can be controlled. 

The question  whether a calculus  using formula (1) is complete or not can be answered by referring to the reflexive and symmetric properties of the primitive relation 
C(x, y). If z = y and x connects with y the formula C(y, x)  C(y, y)  C(x, y)  C(y, 
y) evaluates to true for P(x, y). Thus, the condition that x connects with y is sufficient 
for hypothesizing that x is a part of y. This means that a calculus using formula (1) is 
expected  to  be  complete  in  a  practical  application.  P(x,  y)  is  generalized  to  the  hypothesis T(a, b) in the next section. 

4.2   Combining Hypothesis Testing with Consistency Checking 

The  algorithm  used  to  control  the  RCC-derived  geospatial  approximation  combines 
hypothesis testing with consistency checking provided by a knowledge representation 
system based on description logics. Generically, it proceeds as follows: 

FUNCTION  geospatialApproximation 
Input: 
Output: 

hypothesis T(., .), knowledge base KB = {ABox, TBox} 
counter 

/* the set of pairs of individuals in ABox */ 

counter  0 
M  {(a, b)}  ABox 
?

?

?
2  WHILE M is NOT empty 
?

?

?
13  ENDWHILE 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SELECT (a, b)  M 
IF T(a, b) is NOT falsified in ABox THEN 

M  M \ (a, b) 

ABox  ABox  T(a, b) 
IF KB is consistent THEN 
?

?

?
ABox  ABox \ T(a, b) 

counter  counter + 1 

For the consistency check in step 6 two different TBoxes are alternatively applied: 

TBox T1 consisting of axioms 01 and 47 or TBox T2 consisting of axioms 07: 
?

?

?
C (cid:139)  

D (cid:139) C 
D (cid:139) (S.D) 
R. (cid:139) C 
 (cid:139) R.C 
S (cid:139) R 
T (cid:139) S 

CI  I 
RI  I  I 
DI  CI 
DI  \ {a  I | b. (a, b)  SI  b  DI} 
{a  I | b. (a, b)  RI}  CI 
I  {a  I | b. (a, b)  RI  b  CI} 
SI  RI 
TI  SI 
?

?

?
The  concept  description  S.D  introduced  by  axiom  3  is  interpreted  as  the  set  of 
those individuals each of which is in relationship SI to some individuals of the set DI. 
The concept D is interpreted as a possibly improper subset of the complement of this 
set. Together with a refinement of the model in the ABox  a subset of the individuals 
in CI are also members of the interpretation of the included concept D  axiom 3 is 
responsible for the divergent result of the consistency check when using two different 
TBoxes T1 or T2. 

Proposition 1. Asserting the role T(a, b) in the ABox A1 = {C(a), C(b)} results in an 
ABox A1' = {C(a), C(b), T(a, b)} which is consistent w.r.t. T1. 

Proof 
(T (cid:139) S)  T(a, b)  S(a, b) 
(S (cid:139) R)  S(a, b)  R(a, b) 
(R. (cid:139) C)  R(a, b)  C(a) 
(C (cid:139) )  C(a)  (a) 
( (cid:139) R.C)  R(a, b)  C(b) 
(C (cid:139) )  C(b)  (b) 

Axiom 7 
Axiom 6 
Axiom 4 
Axiom 0 
Axiom 5 
Axiom 0 

Proposition 2. Asserting the role T(a, b) in the ABox A2 = {D(a), D(b)} results in an 
ABox A2' = {D(a), D(b), T(a, b)} which is inconsistent w.r.t. T2. 

Proof 
(T (cid:139) S)  T(a, b)  S(a, b) 
(D (cid:139) (S.D))  S(a, b)  (D)(a) 
(D)(a)  D(a)  (a) 

Axiom 7 
Axiom 3 
 

5   Applying the Approach to a Geospatial Setting 

In order to demonstrate the approach, we use a sample of 44 two-dimensional spatial 
regions (polygons) from four layers of a productive GIS. The spatial regions refer to 
districts, communes, biotopes and are located in the canton of Zurich, Switzerland (cf. 
figure 2). The regions are asserted as individuals in the ABox of the knowledge base. 
For inference with TBox T2 38 out of 44 regions are asserted as communes. The connections between regions  which  were identified by cartographic analysis  are asserted as role assertions of type connectsWith. Overall, there are 262 relations asserted 
in our sample. The knowledge base is created from an OWL ontology using the reasoner Pellet (version 1.4). Most descriptions in the ontology are written in OWL DL. 
Only  for  the  description  of  the  role  partOf  the  OWL  1.1  feature  irreflexiveProperty  is 
used. The description logic expressivity of the ontology is ALHI for T1 and ALCHI 
for T2. The algorithm used to compute formula (1) and to control the approximation as 
described in section 4.2 (steps 013) is programmed in Java. It accesses the knowledge base at the WonderWeb OWL API.3 
                                                           
3 http://wonderweb.semanticweb.org/ 

R. Grutter, T. Scharrenbach, and B. Bauer-Messmer 

 
Fig.  2.  Regions  in  the  canton  of  Zurich.  The  dark  grey  shaded  region  depicts  Albiskette-
Reppischtal, a biotope of national interest. Regions with bold borderlines depict districts. Regions with regular borderlines depict communes. Note that the district of Zurich and the commune of Zurich share the same geometry, in terms of RCC: EQ (Bezirk_Zurich, Zurich). 

 

spatiallyRelated 

The TBoxes T1 (axioms 01 and 47) and T2 (axioms 07) are instantiated as fol-
lows. Intuitively, axiom 3 says that communes must not overlap each other. The intuition behind axioms 4 and 5 is that regions are spatially related to each other. 
0  Region (cid:139)  

2  Commune (cid:139) Region 
3  Commune (cid:139) (overlaps.Commune)  CommuneI  \ {a  I | b. (a, b)  over-
4  spatiallyRelated. (cid:139) Region 
5   (cid:139) spatiallyRelated.Region 
6  overlaps (cid:139) spatiallyRelated 
7  partOf (cid:139) overlaps 

lapsI  b  CommuneI} 
{a    I  | b.  (a,  b)    spatiallyRelatedI} 
 RegionI 
I    {a    I  | b.  (a,  b)    spatiallyRelatedI  b  RegionI} 
overlapsI  spatiallyRelatedI 
partOfI  overlapsI 

RegionI  I 
spatiallyRelatedI  I  I 
CommuneI  RegionI 
?

?

?
Using  TBox T1  the  algorithm  calculates  109  relations  of  type  P(x,  y).  The  cartographic evaluation results in 27 relations being falsely calculated as P(x, y) whereas 
they are relations of type EC(x, y). Using TBox T2 instead of T1 the algorithm calculates 85 relations of type P(x, y). In this case only three relations of type EC(x, y) are 
falsely calculated as P(x, y). In both cases all relations of type P(x, y) verified by cartography  are  identified  as  such.  As  expected,  the  calculations  are  complete  but  not 
sound in our sample. The approximation with T2 is roughly ten times better than that 
with T1. 

To give an example, one of the relations of type EC(x, y) which is falsely calculated 
as P(x, y) using TBox T1 refers to the relation between Geroldswil and Oetwil (cf. figure 2). Since all regions connecting with Geroldswil also connect with Oetwil the relation between them is (falsely!) assumed to be of type P(x, y). Since TBox T2 introduces the restriction that Geroldswil and Oetwil  which are both communes  must 
not  overlap,  partOf(Geroldswil,  Oetwil)  is  removed  from  the  ABox  of  the  knowledge 
base in step 9 of the algorithm (cf. section 4). 

At  http://webgis.wsl.ch/rcc-webclient/faces/rcc-client.jspx  the  presented  approach 
can be tested against the constraint (TBox T2) and the unconstraint (TBox T1) ontol-
ogy, respectively.4 The reader is encouraged to perform tests on their own by uploading a custom ontology. For being processible a custom ontology has to be consistent 
either with T1 or with T2. 

6   Discussion 

The three relations which are falsely calculated as P(x, y) in our sample  even with 
the  improved  algorithm    are  connectsWith(Bezirk_Affoltern,  Aesch),  connectsWith  (Be-
zirk_Dietikon, Wettswil), connectsWith(Albiskette-Reppischtal, Oberrieden). As can be seen 
from figure 2 the communes Aesch, Oberrieden and Wettswil share the property of being 
adjacent to the surrounding area. The question, therefore, is whether the assertion of 
additional connections between the border areas and the surrounding area in the ABox 
of the knowledge base would further improve the approximation. In our sample also 
the  districts  Bezirk_Affoltern  and  Bezirk_Dietikon  and  the  biotope  of  national  interest  
Albiskette-Reppischtal  connect  with  the  surrounding  area.  For  this  reason  we  do  not  
expect  an  improvement  in  this  case.  However,  an  improvement  can  be  expected  in 
other cases. 

Another question is whether the detection of the falsely calculated relations can be 
automated. This would substantially reduce the effort of a manual cartographic verifi-
cation. To a certain degree this is indeed possible by introducing further axioms in the 
TBox of the knowledge base and by further refining the model in the ABox. With respect to the first, qualified number restrictions can be introduced, for instance in order 
to encode the restriction that communes may be part only of a single district. With respect to the last, those regions which are districts can be asserted as such. Qualified 
number restrictions are not supported by OWL DL. However, they are considered in 
the draft to OWL 1.1 (there a qualified number restriction is called an objectMinCardi-
nality) [17]. 
                                                           
4 Please contact the authors if you wish to access the service and it is no longer maintained. 

R. Grutter, T. Scharrenbach, and B. Bauer-Messmer 

8  District (cid:139) Region 
9  Commune (cid:139)  1 partOf.District  CommuneI  {a  I  |{b | (a, b)  partOfI  b 

DistrictI  RegionI 

 DistrictI}|  1} 

In our sample axioms 8 an 9 (together with a further refined model) are expected to 
cause  an  inconsistency  of  the  knowledge  base  when  asserting  the  relations  part-
Of(Aesch, Bezirk_Affoltern) and partOf(Wettswil, Bezirk_Dietikon) in the ABox (cf. step 5 
of the algorithm introduced in section 4). This because the relations partOf(Aesch, Be-
zirk_Dietikon)  and  partOf(Wettswil,  Bezirk_Affoltern)  are  (truly!)  asserted  in  the  ABox. 
Conversely,  the  falsely  calculated  partOf-relation  between  Oberrieden  and  AlbisketteReppischtal would not be detected. 

7   Conclusion and Outlook 

We  presented  an  approach  to  improve  an  RCC-derived  geospatial  approximation 
which makes use of concept inclusion axioms in OWL. The algorithm used to control 
the  approximation  combines  hypothesis  testing  with  consistency  checking  provided 
by a knowledge representation system based on description logics. We made propositions  about  the  consistency  of  the  refined  ABox  w.r.t.  the  associated  TBox  when 
compared to baseline  ABox and TBox and provided formal proves of the divergent 
consistency results when checking either of both. The application of the approach to a 
sample  of  44  two-dimensional  regions  which  are  related  to  each  other  through  262 
spatial relations resulted in a roughly tenfold improved approximation when using the 
refined ABox and TBox. 

Since we expect the approximation to be more precise with a high number of regions represented a next step will be to evaluate the approach on different scales. In 
addition  to  precision  of  the  approximation  the  impact  of  scalability  on  performance 
will also be of interest. 

For productive use it would be desirable to assess the degree of imprecision and to 
provide a measure of confidence along  with the approximation. This  measure could 
then be put into relationship with the inherent imprecision of the data. Real data are 
error-prone.  For  instance,  the  shape  of  the  biotope  of  national  interest  AlbisketteReppischtal  which  is  geometrically  computed  in  figure  2  is  different  from  the  shape 
which is reconstructed based on the textual description of the biotope (which is held 
in  the  same  database!):  According  to  the  textual  description,  Albiskette-Reppischtal 
should also overlap the commune Wettswil which it does not geometrically. 

Provided the relations of type P(x, y) can be sufficiently well approximated for a 
given  spatial  setting,  a  next  step  is  to  calculate  the  RCC-5  relations  by  using  their 
definitions in table 1 and the relationships between RCC species in figure 1. The relations between individual regions can then be asserted in terms of RCC-5 in the ABox 
of  a  knowledge  base.  Based  on  this,  a  full-fledged  spatio-terminological  reasoning 
service as outlined in [7, 8] can be developed. 

Since the presented approach is generic in nature it can be applied to other domains 

as well. It will be interesting to identify relevant problems in these domains. 
 
?

?

?
Acknowledgments. The authors sincerely thank Jurg Schenker and Martin Hageli for 
the fruitful discussions and leadership that made this research possible. They also acknowledge the stimulating discussions and exchange of ideas with Prof. Dr. rer. nat. 
habil. Ralf Moller from Hamburg University of Technology. This research has been 
funded and conducted in cooperation with the Swiss Federal Office for the Environment (FOEN). 
