Semantic Relatedness Measure Using Object Properties

in an Ontology

Laurent Mazuel and Nicolas Sabouret

Laboratoire Informatique de Paris 6 - LIP6, 104 av du President Kennedy,

75016, Paris, France

	
		
	

Abstract. This paper presents a new semantic relatedness measure on ontologies which considers especially the object properties between the concepts. Our
approach relies on two hypotheses. Firstly, using only concept hierarchy and object properties, only a few paths can be considered as semantically corrects
and these paths obey to a given set of rules. Secondly, following a given edge
in a path has a cost (represented as a weight), which depends on its type (is-a,
part-o f , etc.), its context in the ontology and its position in this path. We propose an evaluation of our measure on the lexical base WordNet using part-o f
relation with two different benchmarks. We show that, in this context, our measure outperforms the classical semantic measures.

1 Introduction

Whereas semantic similarity focuses on common points in the concepts definitions, semantic relatedness permits to take into account functional relations between concepts.
Thus, as stated by Resnik [1], semantic similarity represents a special case of semantic
relatedness, that only uses the subsumption relation of the knowledge representation.
For example, car and gasoline have a low similarity degree but a high relatedness
degree [1]. However, automatic computation of a relatedness degree is considered to be
much more difficult than computing a similarity measure. For this reason, much work
on semantic measures has focused on computing similarity degrees using well-known
hierarchy of concepts (e.g. MeSH [2], WordNet [3]). Recent work on relatedness measure tries to adopt a different point of view with the use of glosses [4,5], since a gloss
contains a functional description of the concept (by means of other concepts), or terms
frequencies in Internet using search engine [6,7]. However, no work, since work of
Hirst & St-Onge in 1998 [8], has focused on the issue of semantic relatedness using
heterogeneous relations in a graph-based knowledge representation, as semantic network or ontology limited to hierarchy and object properties. In this paper, semantic relatedness between two concepts in a semantic net can be materialized by a path, starting
from one concept, following different kinds of relations (subsumption (is-a), meronymy
(part-o f ) or any other domain specific relation) to the other concept. However, the Hirst
& St-Onge measure assumes that all edges have the same weight (i.e. the informationcontent of all edges is uniform in the ontology), which has been demonstrated to be an
incorrect hypothesis [1].

A. Sheth et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2008, LNCS 5318, pp. 681694, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

L. Mazuel and N. Sabouret

Computing semantic relatedness in graph-based knowledge base rather that using
glosses is however a challenging and important issue. Indeed, the great majority of existing Human-Machine interaction systems with Natural Language (questions/answering
systems, dialogue systems...) makes use of ontologies for the semantic interpretation of
requests [9,10,11]. Moreover, in web services composition, it is often interesting to compute the semantic similarity between two ontologies before searching for an alignment
(to avoid useless attempts if the ontologies dont represent the same data) [12,13]. However in most work, this ontology is reduced to a hierarchy of concepts and the semantic
interpretation relies only on similarity measure, although the literature underlines the
need for semantic relatedness measures [14,9,15].

Some recent work has tried to define semantic relatedness using complex ontology
languages, as OWL-Lite [16]. For instance, in [15], the authors take into account nega-
tion, intersection or disjunction of classes, to compute the relatedness between web
services. However, these approaches are currently not evaluated nor implemented and
remain at a theoretical point of view. Hence, define a semantic relatedness measure
based on ontology limited to concept hierarchy and object properties which can be
evaluated can be seen as a first step towards semantic relatedness in complex and real
ontologies.

In this paper, we present and evaluate a new semantic relatedness measure on an ontology voluntarily limited to concept hierarchy and object properties with the following
attributes:

 It considers a set of patterns to filter the paths which are not semantically correct.
Actually, when using more relations than only the subsumption, there exists a lot
of paths between two concepts and only a sub-set of these paths are semantically
correct (i.e. their structure correspond to a semantic meaning).

 It uses the information-theoretic definition of semantic similarity to weight the hi-

erarchical edges in the graph,

 It computes the weight of non-hierarchical edges.
 It combines these three points in a unique measure.

The next section presents related work on semantic similarity and semantic relatedness.
Moreover, it outlines the problem of finding a semantically correct path in a graph-based
knowledge representation. Section 3 presents our approach for computing semantic relatedness using subsumption links and heterogeneous links. Section 4 presents the evaluation and discusses the results.

2 Related Work

The first part of this section presents work on similarity measures. The second part deals
with semantic relatedness measures and discusses the problem of finding a semantically
correct path in a given ontology.

2.1 Semantic Similarity Measures
This kind of measures is also called taxonomic measures or attributional measures [17].
An intuitive way to compute quickly semantic similarity between two nodes of a hierarchy is to count the number of edges in the shortest path between these two nodes.
?

?

?
The idea captured with this hypothesis is that the semantic distance of two concepts is
correlated with the length of the shortest path to join these concepts. This measure was
firstly defined by Rada [2]:

distrad(c1,c2) = len(c1,c2)

where len is the length of the shortest path (in terms of the number of edges) between
c1and c2 in the hierarchy. However, this measure relies upon the assumption that each
edge carries the same amount of information, which is not true in most ontology [1].
Thus, many other formulae extend this measure by computing weights on edges using
additional information, like the depth of each concept in the hierarchy [18,19] or the
closest common parent of the two nodes [20,19]. All these methods are called edgebased measures.

On the contrary, node-based measures associate a weight to each node. This weight
represents the information content (IC) of the concept1. The more specialised a concept
is, the more the weight will be. The first node-based similarity measure, proposed by
Resnik in [1], is defined by the information content of the closest common parent (ccp)
of the two concept c1and c2:

simres(c1,c2) = IC(ccp(c1,c2))

where IC(c) is the information content of the concept c. Many other propositions have
been made after Resnik to combine the IC of the two target nodes and their ccp (e.g.
[22,23]).

An interesting attempt to mix node-based and edge-based methods is the Jiang &
Conrath measure [23]. They define their distance measure as derived from the edgebased notion (by analogies with the Rada measure [2]) by adding the information
content as a decision factor. In this measure, each edge is linked to a weight and the
semantic distance is computed by adding all the edge weight along the shortest path.
The weight LS(x,y) (LS for link strength) of an edge {x,y} between the node x and
the node y is computing regarding to their information content:

LS(x,y) = |IC(x) IC(y)|

Then, the Jiang & Conrath measure is defined as:

distJC(c1,c2) =

LS(x,y)



{x,y}sp(c1,c2)

= IC(c1) + IC(c2) 2 IC(ccp(c1,c2))

where sp(c1,c2) is the shortest taxonomic path between c1and c2.

1 We dont focus in this article on the way to compute the information content of a concept. The
most classical ways are the Resniks approach with a corpus [1] and the Secos approach with
taxonomy analysis [21].

L. Mazuel and N. Sabouret

Fig. 1. Example of paths with relations. The black arrows represent is-a links.

2.2 Semantic Relatedness Measures and Notion of Semantically Correct Path

This kind of measures is also called relational measure [17]. For instance, these measures can capture the semantic link between couples like gasoline-car or bee-honey [1].
To do this, they have to consider several kinds of relations (and not only the taxonomic
relation) as partO f , madeWith, etc. However, using different kinds of relations will
give rise to the problem of multiple existing paths. Indeed, if the shortest path is unique
in a hierarchy, many possible paths exist and are conceivable in a graph-based knowledge representation although most of them are not correct semantically [24,8]. For this
reason, any relational measure must provide (implicitly or explicitly) a set of constraints
to ensure that a path is semantically correct.

For instance, in Aleksovskis work [24], a path is considered to be semantically correct if and only if no hierarchical links appear after a non-hierarchical one. Hence,
the path2 {cover,includes,hood, part-o f ,airplane,is-a,aircra f t} in figure 1 is incorrect for Aleksovski since (airplane,is-a,aircra f t) follows the non-hierarchical relation
(hood, part-o f ,airplane).

In [8], Hirst & St-Onge associate a direction in Upward, Downward and Horizontal for each relation type and give three rules to define a semantically correct path in
terms of the three directions. It is interesting to note that the rule R1 of Hirst & StOnge (i.e. No other direction may precede an upward link) subsumes the conclusion
of Aleksovski work (is-a being an Upward link). Finally, Hirst & St-Onge enumerate
only 8 patterns of semantically-correct paths which match their three rules: {U, UD,
UH, UHD, D, DH, HD, H}. The difficulty is to determine the direction of each relation.
For instance, considering the WordNet [25] relations, the authors define in their paper

2 In this article, we will
{x1, e1,2, x2, e2,3, ...,xn} where xi are nodes and ei,i+1 are links type.

represent a path in a graph using a set-notation as
?

?

?
the hypernymy and meronymy relations as Upward link, the hyponymy and holonymy
relations as Downward links and the synonymy and antonymy relations as Horizontal
links. As a consequence, for Hirst & St-Onge, the path from jeep to airplane in figure 1 is semantically correct (pattern UD) whereas the path from bicycle to hood is
not (Upward link after a Downward link), even if these two paths have both the same
length.

Once a semantically-correct path has been found, one must evaluate its cost so as to
determine whether the concepts are semantically close or far (taking into account that
several candidate paths can exist). In Hirst & St-Onges work, the semantic relatedness
value is computed by the following formula:

relhso(c1,c2) = C len(c1,c2) k turns(c1,c2)

where C and k are constant defined empirically (C = 8 and k = 1 in [8]), len the length of
the shortest path between c1and c2 considering all relations and the patterns and turns
the number of changes of direction in this path. The main drawback of this measure is
that it considers, as Rada measure does with similarity, that each edges of each types
represents the same information content. However, apart Hirst & St-Onge measure, few
work has been made on semantic relatedness measures using heterogeneous relations.
In the next section, we define our semantic relatedness measure, which mixes the
information theoretic approach of non-uniformity of the hierarchical edge values, the
Hirst & St-Onge patterns to find semantically correct paths and a new proposition to
compute a non-hierarchical link weight.

3 Our Semantic Relatedness Measure

Preliminary note. The measure we present in this section is analogue to a distance (i.e.
a non-relatedness measure): the lower is the score, the higher are the concepts related.
However, we will show in section 3.3 a linear transformation from this distance measure
to a bounded relatedness measure.

Our work is based on the assumption (used in information-theoretic measure for simi-
larity) that two different hierarchical edges do not carry the same information content,
and extends this assumption to non-hierarchical links. We first present the computation of a weight for a single-relation path. We then explain how it can be combined for
mixed-relation paths. Finally, we present our measure on the set of semantically correct
weighted paths.

3.1 Single-Relation Path

We call single-relation path a path whose edges are all of the same type X. For instance,
in figure 1, the path { jeep,is-a,car,is-a,wheeled_vehicle,is-a,vehicle} is a singlerelation path of type is-a. To compute the weight W of a single-relation path, we separate hierarchical relations (X is the is-a or the includes relation) and non-hierarchical
relations.

Let us consider a path pathX(x,y) between two concepts x and y in the ontology,

following only the relation X:

L. Mazuel and N. Sabouret

 If X is a hierarchical relation, we chose to consider the Jiang & Conrath definition

for the weight of an edge (see section 2.1):

W(pathX{is-a,include}(x,y)) = |IC(x) IC(y)|

Note that even if is-a and includes are symmetric relation, the definition of single relation-path does not allow them to be in the same path. For instance, the path
{ jeep,is-a,car,is-a,wheeled_vehicle,includes,bicycle} is not a single-relation
path but the mix of the two single relation-path { jeep,is-a,car,is-a,wheeled_
vehicle} and {wheeled_vehicle,includes,bicycle}. This definition is consistent
with the similarity measure of Jiang & Conrath defined in section 2.1.

 If X is not a hierarchical relation, we cannot use the information content of nodes,
because this value is computed regarding to the hierarchy structure ([21,1]). We
then suggest a new proposition for computing this weight. This weight formula is
based upon two parts:

1. A static weight TCX , which corresponds to the strength of a given relation
type. This strength will represent the maximum information content that this
kind of link can carried. For a given link of type X, if we have TCX < 1, then
this type of link is considered being informative and the cost of this edge must
be low. For TCX = 1, the cost will be equals the cost of a hierarchical link and
for TCX > 1 the edge will be costly. This allows us to study if different kinds of
relations carry different types of information. For instance, in most system the
meronymy will have a TChasPart inferior to 1 and the antonymy relation will,
in the contrary, have a TCantonymy superior to 1.

2. A formula to compute the impact of the length of the path for the cost of the
path. We want that the cost of a path with a single relation X must respect the
following properties: 1) it increases with the length of the path, 2) it is bounded
by TCX which represents the worst possible value for an X-relation path (i.e.
the value of an infinite-length path that uses only X relations) and 3) it follows
a polynomial function to be compared with the log progression of IC value for
hierarchical links.

Actually, information-theoretic measures [1,3] have outlined the adequacy of the log
function to compute the weight of a node (and, by extension, an edge). However, to
respect our three requirements and since the log function is not bounded, we use the
n/n+1 function to simulate a logarithmic bounded function (figure 2).

As a consequence, the weight of pathX(x,y) when X is not a hierarchical relation, is

defined by:

W(pathX(x,y)) = TCX 

 |pathX(c1,c2)|
|pathX(c1,c2)| + 1
?

?

?
3.2 Mixed-Relation Path

Let us consider a path path(x,y) between two concepts x and y in the ontology. It can
be factorized as an ordered set of n single-relation sub-paths such as:
?

?

?
Fig. 2. The progression of the function n/n+1, which is bounded and close to the log function

path(x,y) = pathX1(x,z1) pathX2(z1,z2) ... pathXn(zn1,y)

Therefore, there exist several possible factorizations of a given path path(x,y). We
define the minimal factorization Tmin(path(x,y)) as the factorization which minimizes
the value n. As a consequence, in the minimal factorization Tmin(path(x,y)) of n sub-
paths, we have the property i  [1,n  1], Xi = Xi+1.3 This property can be used to
build the Tmin(path(x,y)) factorization.

For instance, in the figure 1, Tmin(path( jeep,ob ject)) =


{ jeep, is-a, car} ,
{car, has-part, hood},
{hood, is-a, cover, is-a, ob ject}




Note that { jeep,is-a,car} and {hood,is-a,cover,is-a,ob ject} are two disjoint subpaths in Tmin(path(x,y)) even if they have the same link type, because they dont have
any common nodes.

We finally suggest to define the weight of the path as the sum of the weights of all
sub-paths of the minimal factorization. Hence, the weight of the mixed path path(x,y)
is then defined as the sum of all sub-paths of Tmin:


W(path(x,y)) =

W (p)

pTmin(path(x,y))

For instance, let consider the preceding path path( jeep,ob ject) with4 IC( jeep) =
1.0, IC(car) = 0.68, IC(hood) = 1.0, IC(cover) = 0.55, IC(ob ject) = 0.08 and the
relation factor TChas-part = 0.4. The weights of the three single-relation paths are:
3 Proof by contradiction: Assume that in Tmin(path(x, y)) with n sub-paths, i  [1, n 1], Xi =
Xi+1. This would mean that pathXi(zi, zi+1) pathXi+1(zi+1, zi+2) is a single-relation sub-path.
Thus, there exists a factorization of path(x, y) with n 1 single-relation sub-paths, which is
smaller than the minimal factorization Tmin(path(x, y)). This is a contradiction. Therefore, in
Tmin(path(x, y)), we have the property i  [1, n 1], Xi = Xi+1.
4 The five IC values are real values computes with Seco algorithm [21] and WordNet 3.0.
?

?

?
 W({ jeep, is-a, car}) = |IC( jeep) IC(car)| = 0.32
 W({car, has-part, hood}) = 0.4 1
 W({hood, is-a, cover, is-a, ob ject}) = |IC(hood) IC(ob ject)| = 0.92
And finally, we sum these weights and we obtain that the weight of this path from jeep
to ob ject is W(path( jeep,ob ject)) = 0.32 + 0.2 + 0.92 = 1.44.

1+1 = 0.2

3.3 Final Measure
To compute the semantic distance between two concepts, we consider only the semantically correct paths between these two concepts and we will select the best one.

We chose to use the Hirst & St-Onge rules (see section 2.2) to filter the semantically
correct paths. Let us consider two concepts c1and c2. We note (c1,c2) the set of acyclic
paths between c1and c2 and HSO : (c1,c2)  B the function such that HSO(p) is
true if and only if p is a valid path w.r.t. Hirst & St-Onge patterns. Our semantic distance
between c1and c2is then defined as follows:

dist(c1,c2) =

{p(c1,c2)|HSO(p)=true}W(p)

min

Let consider again the example path( jeep,ob ject). The path using the part-o f relation gives a weight of 1.44. The hierarchical path between jeep and ob ject is (fig-
ure 1) { jeep,is-a,car,is-a,wheeled_vehicle,is-a,vehicle,is-a,ob ject} and its weight
is |IC( jeep) IC(ob ject)| = 0.92. Thus, in this example, the relational path does not
give more information than the hierarchical path and the final semantic score obtained
is: dist( jeep,ob ject) = 0.92. It is an expected result, since ob ject is a very general
concept and does not contain relations with other concepts. On the contrary, if we consider the distance from jeep to hood the relational path { jeep,is-a,car,has-part,hood}
correspond to a weight of 0.52 whereas the hierarchical path (using the ccp ob ject) correspond to a weight of 1.50. In this last example, the relation path gives the final result:
dist( jeep,hood) = 0.52.

Note that, by construction, the hierarchical path between c1 and c2 (correspond-
ing to the semantic similarity measure) is a semantically correct path and has value
distJC(c1,c2).5 Thus, since dist(c1,c2) is the minimum value considering all semantically correct paths, dist(c1,c2)  distJC(c1,c2). As a consequence, if IC is bounded
between [0,ICmax] (which is the case with the Seco formula [21], with ICmax = 1.0), the
weight of a path can be bounded in [0,2 ICmax] (2 ICmax being the maximal value of
the Jiang & Conrath distance). Thus, our distance measure can, if necessary, be linearly
transformed into a relatedness measure [1,23]:

rel(c1,c2) = 2 ICmax dist(c1,c2)

4 Evaluation

The purpose of our evaluation is to show the relevancy of our hypothesis on weight and
path-validity for semantic relatedness measure. In this section, we present the evaluation
on two different benchmarks using WordNet relations and several values for TCX .
5 Our measure can be seen as a relatedness generalisation of the Jiang & Conrath similarity

measure.
?

?

?
4.1 Implementation

The Miller & Charles test [26] is well-know for semantic measure evaluation (e.g.
[3,23,22,1]). This test is composed of 30 couples of words. For each couple of words,
a significantly number of persons had associated a value between 0 and 4 of syn-
onymy judgment. This gives us a vector of 30 semantic rates which can be used as a
benchmark for semantic computation. Testing a semantic measure simply consists of
computing the correlation factor (usually the Pearson-product moment correlation fac-
tor) between this Miller & Charles vector and the vector generated by the computer
using the semantic measure.

However, since this test was defined for synonymy judgment, its accuracy to test a
semantic relatedness measure is not evident. Most of the chosen couples do not have any
functional relationship and the subjects were explicitly asked to evaluate the synonymy
between the words. Only a few couple (such as journey-car or furnace-stove) appears to have a possible non-hierarchical relation. It is interesting to note that in known
similarity evaluations (as [3]), these couples are the ones which mostly differ from the
human reference. However, since semantic similarity represents a special case of semantic relatedness, a semantic relatedness measure should at least work on the Miller
& Charles test, even if it does not allow to validate the relational aspects of the mea-
sure. This is the reason why we first evaluate our measure on the Miller & Charles
benchmark. The human reference for the Miller & Charles test was taken in [3].

Table 1. Pearson product-moment correlation factor for Rada, Resnik, Lin, Jiang & Conrath,
Hirst & St-Onge and our approach (TCX = 0.4)

Measures

Miller & Charles WordSimilarity-353

Correlation

Rada
Resnik

Lin

Jiang & Conrath
Hirst & St-Onge

Our measure, TCX = 0.4

0.638
0.804
0.836
0.880
0.847
0.902

0.249
0.375
0.377
0.362
0.380
0.400

Then, we needed another benchmark with to test the relational part of our mea-
sure. We have found the WordSimilarity-3536 test [27], that was essentially constructed
with couples of words which are relationally connected (e.g. computer-keyboard,
telephone-communication, etc.). Classical similarity measures logically tend to fail
this test (i.e. their correlation factors are very low). We can expect that our measure will
outperform similarity measure, but we will see that the choice of the ontology can limit
this impact.

To compute our semantic score, we will consider as an ontology the noun sub-part
of the lexical base WordNet 3.0 [25], since this knowledge base is easily accessible and

6 

		

		

L. Mazuel and N. Sabouret

Fig. 3. Correlation factor evolution regarding to the TCX factor in Miller & Charles and WS-353
test. The maximal value is obtained for TCX = 0.4 in both test.

contains a large number of concepts. For the WS-353 test, we have removed 9 couples
of words that did not exist in the noun part of WordNet (e.g. the couple fighting-
defeating). Because of WordNet relation definition, we will consider only the part-o f
relations for non-hierarchical relations7. Moreover, we chose to consider only one fixed
maximal weight TCX for all the 6 part-o f relations of WordNet.

Since we cannot anticipate the correct value for this TCpart-o f , we evaluated all values from 0 (free non-hierarchical links) to 1.5 (very costly non-hierarchical links) by
steps of 0.05.

7 In WordNet, it is separated in three meronym relations (meronym_member, meronym_part,
(holonym_member, holonym_part,

meronym_substance) and three holonym relations
holonym_substance).
?

?

?
Fig. 4. Example of semantically bad path for Hirst & St-Onge patterns. From water to
Mars, the shortest path in a graph-based view is not semantically correct since the last link
(terrestrial_planet, includes, Mars) is not authorised.

The information content IC of a given node is computed using the Seco formula [21],
which does not require a corpus to give a good representation of IC and is bounded by
[0,1]. We consider for correlation comparison 4 classical similarity measure (Rada [2],
Resnik [1], Lin [22] and Jiang & Conrath [23]) and one relatedness measure (Hirst &
St-Onge, see section 2.2).8

The results are given in the table 1. The evolution of the correlation factor regarding

to the value of TCX is given in the figure 3.

4.2 Discussions

In both tests, our measure outperforms the correlation of the others measures. More-
over, to our knowledge, it is the first time that a semantic measure based on WordNet
reaches a correlation of 0.4 for the WS-353 test (see Strube work [5] for the last known
evaluation).

Since, the Miller & Charles test is based on similarity, the major part of couples use
a hierarchy-only path and, thus, our result corresponds to the Jiang & Conrath result.
However, some results are different with the use of non-hierarchical link. For instance,
if we consider the furnace-stove couple, the common closest concept is artifact,
which makes a weak relation. Using relation, our measure was able to find the path
furnace has-part grate part-o f stove which uses the functional common property
between the two concepts. This path is also identified by the Hirst & St-Onge measure,
but the Hirst & St-Onge suffers from the uniformity hypothesis for the edge weight.
Our measure takes advantages of the two paradigms: the semantically correct path for
semantic relatedness and the information-theoretic approach to refine result.

Also note that no relevant link for the journey-car couple was found, neither by our
measure nor by the Hirst & St-Onge one. This comes from the fact that the common-
sense relation between these two concepts is not expressed in terms of meronym/
holonym relations as defined in WordNet. This underlines the lack of relation types
in WordNet, which is a limitation to computes semantic relatedness.

8 To be able to compare correlation factors, we have recalculated them for all these measures

with WordNet 3.0.

L. Mazuel and N. Sabouret

As expected, relatedness measures (Hirst & St-Onge and our) do better than similarity measure on the WS-353 test, since this test correspond to couples of words which
are connected relationally. Relatedness measures can find relational functions between
words (e.g. keyboard-computer, etc.) whereas similarity measures only consider the
hierarchy. In addition, the Hirst & St-Onge patterns permits to invalidate some path
which are very shorter than the hierarchical, but incorrect in a semantic point of view
(figure 4). However, some couples were not connected in WordNet and, thus, by our
measure (e.g. telephone-communication, etc.). This can be explained, again, by the
lack of relations types in WordNet. Moreover, as stated by Strube [5], the WS-353 test
contains many couples which are connected by common-sense link and that cannot be
connected in WordNet (e.g. popcorn-movie, etc.). Then, it explains why it is very
difficult to obtain a good correlation using WordNet for this test. For this reason, we
believe that it will be very difficult to go beyond the 0.35-0.4 limit on the WS-353 test
using only WordNet as an ontology.

5 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we have presented a new semantic measure to evaluate the semantic relatedness between two concepts. This measure makes use of the Hirst & St-Onge [8] patterns for semantically correct paths and the information-theoretic paradigm introduced
by Resnik [1]. We have implemented our hypotheses on WordNet with the Miller &
Charles [26] and the WS-353 test [27] and have shown that our measure outperforms
known measures.

Note that by construction, our relatedness measure is always higher than the Jiang
& Conrath similarity measure. Thus, we should always fail on couples with a J&C
result higher than the human reference. However, one can hardly conceive an ontology
that contains a relation between two concepts that are not associated from the human
point of view. This would mean that this knowledge base would not be consistent with
the domain. Moreover, if these links yet exists, we can study for a new weight allocation
to invalidate it.

In addition, the evaluation underlines the lack of non-hierarchical relations in Word-
Net, as first mentioned in [8]. For instance, in WordNet, there is no relational path
between concepts like journey-car or telephone-communication. This allows us to
conclude that to use the capabilities of a semantic relatedness measure on ontologies,
we need a real domain ontology. For this reason, our next aim is to test the impact of
our measure on the performance rate of our semantic heterogeneity management system
for multi-agent system [28]. Firstly, this measure will be used to enhance the alignment
of the two agents ontologies, and secondly will be used for semantic interpretation of
requests exchanged. This kind of result will allow us to conclude for the scalability of
our approach in different applications.

Another open issue is the allocation of the weight for each link type. In our evalua-
tion, we used a single TCX and the best results are obtained in both tests for TCX = 0.4.
However, there is no proof that this value will always lead to the best result, nor than
having one single TCX for all edges is appropriate. One idea could be to query a domain expert to fix an initial set of value the weights TCX . The expert should know what
?

?

?
kind of relation is important for semantic proximity. Since we consider the application
of our semantic heterogeneity system in semantic interpretation of natural language
commands (considering that an user is a special agent [29]), we think that the user feedback can be used as a background knowledge for a reinforcement learning algorithm
[30,31] on the weight evolution. When the user confirms the systems interpretation of
the command (i.e. the selected path in the ontology), the TCX factor on the concerned
edges will decrease. On the contrary, if the user denies the command, the TCX factor
will increase. This algorithm, currently in study, should be in charge to learn the optimal weight (or to accurate the expert weight) of the TCX function, regarding to a given
ontology.

Our final objective is to propose and to evaluate a measure of semantic similarity
for more complex language of knowledge representation. For instance, Hau & al [15]
has proposed a similarity measure based upon the Lin measure template [22] which
considers OWL restriction, cardinality, intersection, etc. Alas, this measure was neither
evaluated nor implemented and remains a theoretical proposition. We believe that, based
on such work, it is however possible to extend our measure to model specific relations
between concepts, such as intersection or disjunctive classes.
