Semantic Enrichment of Folksonomy Tagspaces

Sofia Angeletou

Knowledge Media Institute (KMi)

The Open University, Milton Keynes, United Kingdom

S.Angeletou@open.ac.uk

Abstract. The usability and the strong social dimension of the Web2.0
applications has encouraged users to create, annotate and share their
content thus leading to a rich and content-intensive Web. Despite that,
the Web2.0 content lacks the explicit semantics that would allow it to be
used in large-scale intelligent applications. At the same time the advances
in Semantic Web technologies imply a promising potential for intelligent
applications capable to integrate distributed content and knowledge from
various heterogeneous resources. We present FLOR a tool that performs
semantic enrichment of folksonomy tagspaces by exploiting online on-
tologies, thesauri and other knowledge sources.

1 Background and Research Problem

The large-scale content annotation and metadata generation has been realised as
Web2.0 applications have become very popular. Despite that, Web2.0 lacks the
explicit semantics that would allow the content to be used in large-scale intelligent applications. At the same time the advances in Semantic Web technologies
imply a promising potential for intelligent applications capable to integrate distributed content and knowledge from various heterogeneous resources. There is
significant discussion that the combination of Semantic Web and Web2.0 will
lead to an interoperable, intelligent Web ([4,8,10]). The goal of this work is to
identify methods for the automatic semantic enrichment of Web2.0 generated content with a focus on folksonomies.

Folksonomies are Web2.0 systems whose basic elements are users, resources
and tags. A resource is a content object depending on the folksonomy (a photo in
Flickr1, a bookmark in Del.icio.us2, a video in YouTube3 and so on). A tag can be
any sequence of characters a user can attach to a resource. However the semantics
of tags, and as a result the semantics of the resources, are not known and are not
explicitly stated. This often hampers the resource retrieval within the individual
system as well as the integration of resources in cross platform applications.
The goal of this work is to identify the meaning of the tags attached to a

1 http://www.Flickr.com
2 http://del.icio.us
3 http://www.youtube.com

A. Sheth et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2008, LNCS 5318, pp. 889894, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

S. Angeletou

resource, to obtain the formal semantics that correspond to these tags
and to attach the formal semantics to the resource, automatically creating
in that way a semantic layer on top of folksonomy tagspaces. The realisation of
the above raises the following research questions.

 How can folksonomies tagspaces be semantically enriched auto-
matically? This research question can be further analysed into the following
questions. How to discover automatically the meaning of tags based on their
context? How can the Semantic Web be exploited for the semantic enrichment of the tags and what other resources are required in case the Semantic
Web falls short of that task?

 How can the enriched tagspaces be evaluated in terms of content
retrieval against the non enriched tagspaces? What performance measures
should be established to measure content retrieval in folksonomies before
and after the semantic enrichment?

In the following we describe the existing research on folksonomies and present
our work.

2 Related Work

Folksonomy research has focused on comprehending the inherent characteristics
of tagging and exploring the semantics that emerge from it. The early works
on folksonomies explore the structure, the types of tags and the user incentives of folksonomies ([7] and [12]). There are also works (see [14] for a detailed
analysis of the specific methods) based on the assumption that frequent cooccurrence of tags translates to a semantic association among them. These works
use various statistical methods to identify clusters of related tags without defining the exact relations among them. An exception is the work detailed in [14],
where, in addition to clustering the tags, the semantic relations among them are
identified.

More recent research on folksonomies aligns them with knowledge resources
such as WordNet and ontologies. For example, in [9] the authors describe a
method that presents tag clusters as navigable hierarchical structures derived
from WordNet. Using a combination of WordNet based metrics they identify the
possible WordNet sense for each tag. They extract the path of this tag from the
WordNet hierarchy and they integrate it into the hierarchical structure of the
cluster. The TagPlus system [11] uses WordNet to disambiguate the senses of
Flickr tags by performing a two step query. The system returns all the possible
WordNet senses that define a tag and the user selects (disambiguates) which
sense he wishes. Another work aligning folksonomies to a user selected ontology is
described in [1]. The system queries the Web with a variety of linguistic patterns
between the ontological concepts and the tags. Each tag is categorised under the
concept to which it was more related by the Web Search results.
?

?

?
The existing works present methods for tag disambiguation and tag cluster
enrichment. Our work aims to address the following additional issues. First,
the existing works require some initialising from the users side (e.g., a priori
selecting ontology or knowledge resources for the relevant categories of tags) or
they require user contribution to perform the disambiguation of the tags. Our
goal is to perform semantic enrichment of folksonomies entirely automatically
(i.e., without user contribution). Second, we aim to investigate how by using
other knowledge resources (e.g., thesauri) and the Semantic Web we can achieve
more precise and more complete enrichment of tags compared to the enrichment
from single resources (i.e., one ontology, WordNet and so on).

3 FLOR

The goal is to transform a flat folksonomy tagspace into a rich semantic repre-
sentation. We aim to annotate folksonomy resources with Semantic Entities
(SEs) rather than raw text tags. However, since tags are the basic description
of resources the connection of tags to SEs is the first step prior to connecting
the resources to SEs. A SE can ideally be a Semantic Web Entity, SWE (class,
relation, instance) defined in an online ontology. Our goal is not just to connect
tags to SWEs but also to bring in other knowledge related to these SWEs. In
case no SWE exists for a tag the goal is to query other knowledge resources for
Semantic Entities.

We present FLOR4, a FoLksonomy Ontology enRichment tool, which
takes as input a set of tags (either the tagsets of individual resources or clusters derived by the statistical analysis of folksonomies) and automatically relates
them to relevant semantic entities (classes, relations, instances) defined in online ontologies. The output of FLOR is a semantically enriched tagset. FLOR
performs three basic steps as described in the following.

Fig. 1. FLOR Phases

4 http://flor.kmi.open.ac.uk/

S. Angeletou

3.1 PHASE 1: Lexical Processing

Due to the freedom of tagging as a basic rule of folksonomies, a wide variety of
different tag types are in use. Understanding the types of tags is the first step
in deciding which of them are meaningful and should be taken into account as
a basis of the semantic enrichment. Previous work ([7]) has identified different
conceptual as well as syntactic categories of tags. For example, there are tags
containing special characters, numbers, concatenated tags or tags with spaces
and a big number of non-English5 tags. The Lexical Processing phase is executed
in two steps. The Lexical Isolation step uses a set of heuristics to identify which
tags will not be further processed by FLOR. The Lexical Normalisation step
aims to bridge the naming conventions used in folksonomies, ontologies and
other knowledge resources by producing a list of possible lexical representations
for each tag that will be enriched.
Running Example: Consider the tagset {buildings, corporation, bw,
england, road, neil101}. Phase 1 isolates the tags {bw, neil101} which
cant be further processed by FLOR. The Lexical Normalisation step generates the following lexical representations for the tag: buildings : {building,
buildings}. The rest of the tags are already in a normalised form.

3.2 PHASE 2: Sense Definition and Semantic Expansion

Due to polysemy, the same tag can have different meanings in different contexts.
For example, the tag jaguar can describe either a car or an animal or an operating system depending on the context in which it appears. The first step of this
phase Sense Definition and Disambiguation performs sense disambiguation
for the tags. The technique described in [2] has been implemented using WordNet based similarity metrics. Alternative strategies such as [15] and [5] are also
considered. Another issue that this phase addresses is the Semantic Web sparse-
ness. While online ontologies might not contain concepts that are syntactically
equivalent to a given tag, they might contain concepts that are labeled with one
of its synonyms. To overcome this limitation, we perform Semantic Expansion
for each tag as described in [2]. A combination of thesauri and other knowledge
sources is considered in order to achieve an optimal semantic expansion.
Running Example: The Sense Definition step maps a WordNet sense to each of
the tags returned from the previous phase. The result in this case is: [building:
a structure that has a roof and walls and stands more or less permanently
in one place], [corporation: a business firm whose articles of incorporation
have been approved in some state], [road: an open way (generally public) for
travel or transportation], [england: a division of the United Kingdom]. Next
the Semantic Expansion returns the synonyms and the hypernyms for each
tag, i.e.: [building: SYNONYMS (edifice) - HYPERNYMS (structure, con-
struction, artefact)], [corporation: SYNONYMS (corp) - HYPERNYMS (firm,
business, concern)], [road: SYNONYMS (route), HYPERNYMS (way, artefact,

5 FLOR deals only with English tags.
?

?

?
object)], [england: SYNONYMS (-), HYPERNYMS (European Country, European Nation, land)].

3.3 PHASE 3: Semantic Enrichment
The last phase of FLOR identifies the Semantic Entities that are relevant for
each tag by leveraging the results of Phases 1 and 2. The relevant Semantic
Web Entities are selected during the Entity Discovery step by querying the
WATSON Semantic Web Gateway [6], which gives access to all online ontologies.
Then in the Entity Selection step we filter the SWEs in order to identify the
ones that correctly correspond to the tags. Finally the Relation Discovery step
identifies relations between the SWEs using the SCARLET, semantic relation
discovery algorithm [13].

Running Example: The Semantic Enrichment phase links the tags to ontological entities. For example the following semantic information has been attached to the tag: [building: subClassOf (Infrastructure, Manmade Structure,
HumanShelterConstruction, SpaceInAHOC ) - superClassOf (Restaurant, Rail-
roadStation)]. The same happens for the rest of tags.

The output of FLOR for a resource is a semantic layer, containing the defin-

itions of the concepts described in the resource and their relations.

4 Current Status and Outlook

FLOR was designed on the basis of the results presented in [3] where the characteristics of folksonomies versus the characteristics of ontologies were identified.
The first functional version of FLOR has been implemented and the results
have been manually evaluated. Applying FLOR on a dataset of 250 photos from
Flickr with a total of 2819 tags we obtained the results reported in [2]. FLOR
enriched approximately the 49% of the tags with enrichment precision of 93%.
The main conclusion from this experiment was that folksonomy tagspaces can be
automatically enriched with formal semantics extracted from online ontologies
and thesauri. Yet, the Relation Discovery (Step 3) of Phase 3 still needs to be
implemented. Also the evaluation of FLOR in a large-scale experiment is part
of the ongoing work. Additionally the manual evaluation of FLOR revealed the
shortcomings of the FLOR algorithm and provided the basis for future work.
This is broken down to the following tasks:

 Testing and evaluation of FLOR in a large-scale retrieval task (M24 )
 Relation Discovery of Phase 3 (M24 )
 Enhancement of Sense Discovery and Semantic Expansion of Phase 2 (M30 )
 Testing and evaluation of the improved version of FLOR (M32 )

Finally the expected contribution of this work is:
 Methodology for semantic enrichment of a set of keywords
 Concept based annotation and retrieval
 Folksonomy content retrieval evaluation strategy.

S. Angeletou

Acknowledgements

This work was funded by the NeOn project sponsored under EC grant number
IST-FF6-027595.
