Bringing the IPTC News Architecture into the

Semantic Web

Rapha el Troncy

CWI Amsterdam, P.O. Box 94079, 1090 GB Amsterdam, The Netherlands

raphael.troncy@cwi.nl

Abstract. For easing the exchange of news, the International Press
Telecommunication Council (IPTC) has developed the NewsML Architecture (NAR), an XML-based model that is specialized into a number of
languages such as NewsML G2 and EventsML G2. As part of this archi-
tecture, specific controlled vocabularies, such as the IPTC News Codes,
are used to categorize news items together with other industry-standard
thesauri. While news is still mainly in the form of text-based stories, these
are often illustrated with graphics, images and videos. Media-specific
metadata formats, such as EXIF, DIG35 and XMP, are used to describe
the media. The use of different metadata formats in a single production
process leads to interoperability problems within the news production
chain itself. It also excludes linking to existing web knowledge resources
and impedes the construction of uniform end-user interfaces for searching
and browsing news content.

In order to allow these different metadata standards to interoperate
within a single information environment, we design an OWL ontology
for the IPTC News Architecture, linked with other multimedia metadata standards. We convert the IPTC NewsCodes into a SKOS thesaurus
and we demonstrate how the news metadata can then be enriched using natural language processing and multimedia analysis and integrated
with existing knowledge already formalized on the Semantic Web. We
discuss the method we used for developing the ontology and give rationale for our design decisions. We provide guidelines for re-engineering
schemas into ontologies and formalize their implicit semantics. In order to demonstrate the appropriateness of our ontology infrastructure,
we present an exploratory environment for searching and browsing news
items.

1 Introduction

Nearly every European citizen reads, watches or listens to the news, at home,
while commuting to and from work, at work and even as part of their work. As
voting citizens, we need to understand local, national and international politics
to allow us to cast our vote. As company employees, we need to understand the
state and development of local, national and international economies to enable
us to understand our markets. As part of our leisure time, we want to know
about our favorite sports teams, the lives of our soap idols or the most recent

A. Sheth et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2008, LNCS 5318, pp. 483498, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

R. Troncy

books available. Nowadays, this information is online, and hence easily accessible
from anywhere.

In existing news workflow processes, news items are typically i) produced
by news agencies, independent journalists or citizen media, ii) consumed and
enhanced by newspapers, magazines or broadcasters then finally iii) delivered
to end users. News items are typically accompanied by a set of metadata and
descriptions that facilitate their storage and retrieval. However, much of the
metadata is lost because of interoperability problems occurring along the work-
flow. In addition, at the end user interface, opportunities for making use of
the available metadata are often lost. Consequently, users are forced to explore news information in environments that contain large amounts of irrele-
vant, unreliable and repeated information, with insufficient access to background
knowledge.

Our ultimate goal is to create an environment that facilitates end-users in
seeing meaningful connections among individual news items (stories, photos,
graphics, videos) through underlying knowledge of the descriptions of the items,
their relationships and related background knowledge. This requires semantic
metadata models to improve metadata interoperability along the entire news
production chain. The underlying research problem tackled in this paper covers
the two ends of the news workflow spectrum: how to model and represent semantic multimedia metadata along the news workflow and the consequences of
this modeling at the user interface.

The contribution of this paper is twofold. On one hand, we report on the
modeling of the ontologies for the IPTC family of languages and we convert
the IPTC NewsCodes into SKOS thesaurus for demonstrating how the news
metadata can be automatically enriched and further integrated with the knowledge already formalized on the Web. We generalize our approach and provide
guidelines for re-engineering schemas into ontologies and formalize their implicit
semantics. On the other hand, we discuss these modeling decisions with respect
to their consequences on the end-user interfaces. We present exploratory interfaces for searching and browsing news that require rich semantic descriptions of
the data.

This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we briefly introduce
the main news and multimedia standards used by the media industry. Readers
who are already familiar with these formats can skip this section. In Section 3,
we discuss the existing methods for engineering ontologies from schemas and
porting thesauri to the Semantic Web. We also present the existing attempts for
integrating multimedia and news ontologies. We detail in Section 4 the steps for
building an ontology-based news infrastructure. We discuss the design decisions
and we provide guidelines for re-engineering schemas into ontologies. In order
to demonstrate the appropriateness of our ontology infrastructure, we present a
semantic search system for multimedia news in the Section 5. Finally, we give
our conclusions and outline future work in Section 6.
?

?

?
2 News and Multimedia Standards

2.1 News Standards

Historically, the International Press Telecommunication Council (IPTC) has
developed NITF1 and NewsML, two XML-based languages for describing the
structure and the content of news articles. These languages proved, however, to
be inadequate to describe all kind of multimedia news and were often judged
too verbose. Recently, IPCT has released the News Architecture framework
(NAR2) which provides the framework for the second generation of IPTC G2
standards.

NAR is a generic model

that defines four main objects (newsItem,
packageItem, conceptItem and knowledgeItem) and the processing model associated with these structures. Specific languages such as NewsML G2 or EventsML
G2 are then built on top of this architecture. For example, the generic newsItem
is specialized into media objects (textual stories, images or audio clips) in
NewsML G2.

Finally, IPTC maintains a number of controlled vocabularies called the IPTC
NewsCodes, that are used as values while annotating news items. Among others,
the Subject Codes is a thesaurus of 1300 terms used for categorizing the main
topics (subjects) of each news items.

2.2 Multimedia Standards

Although the NAR architecture defines the basic concepts for representing the
various media (text, photo, audio, video, graphics), a multitude of other standards are used in the media industry [12].

Pictures taken by a journalist come with EXIF3 metadata related to the
image data structure (height, width, orientation), the capturing information (fo-
cal length, exposure time, flash) and the image data characteristics (transfer
function, color space transformation). Both Kanzaki4 and Norm Walsh5 have
proposed an RDFS ontology of EXIF and services for extracting and converting
the metadata stored in the header of the images.

These technical metadata are generally completed with other standards aiming at describing the subject matter. DIG356 is a specification of the International Imaging Association (I3A). It defines, within an XML Schema, metadata
related to image parameters, creation information, content description (who,
what, when and where), history and intellectual property rights. In collaboration with Ghent University, we have recently modeled these metadata blocks into

1 News Industry Text Format: http://www.nitf.org/
2 http://www.iptc.org/NAR/
3 Exchangeable Image File Format:

http://www.digicamsoft.com/exif22/exif22/html/exif22 1.htm

4 http://www.kanzaki.com/ns/exif
5 http://sourceforge.net/projects/jpegrdf
6 http://www.i3a.org/resources/dig35/

R. Troncy

a DIG35 ontology7, following the same guidelines detailed in Section 4. XMP8
provides a native RDF data model and predefined sets of metadata property definitions such as Dublin Core, basic rights and media management schemas for
describing still images. IPTC has itself integrated XMP in its Image Metadata
specifications9. PhotoRDF10 is also an attempt to standardize a set of categories
for personal photo management using Dublin Core and a minimal RDF schema
defining 10 terms for the dc:subject property.

Video can be decomposed and described using MPEG-7, the Multimedia Content Description ISO Standard [15]. This language provides a large and comprehensive set of descriptors including multimedia decomposition descriptors,
management metadata properties, audio and visual low-level features and more
abstract semantic concepts. The ambiguity and lack of formal semantics of
MPEG-7 have been largely pointed out, and several OWL ontologies modeling
this standard have been proposed and recently compared [18]. Among them, the
Core Ontology for Multimedia Annotation (COMM) proposes to re-engineer completely MPEG-7 using DOLCE as upper ontology and multimedia design patterns [1]. From the broadcast world, the European Broadcaster Union11 (EBU)
has recently adopted the NAR architecture for describing videos, providing some
extensions in order to be able to associate metadata to arbitrary parts of videos
and to have a vocabulary for rights management.

In conclusion, we end up with an environment that uses numerous languages
and formats, often XML-based, that leads to interoperability problems within the
news production chain itself and that excludes linking to other vocabularies and
existing web knowledge resources. We propose to use Semantic Web languages for
leveraging all these standards and ease their integration. This requires a proper
ontology infrastructure. Based on the related literature detailed in the next section
and our own experience, we discuss the rationale of the design decisions and we
formulate guidelines for modeling ontologies from existing schemas.

3 Related Work

Many approaches have been reported to build ontologies [11]. For example,
Uschold and Gr uninger methodology [20] provides the general steps for the whole
process of ontology engineering while Methontology [6] proposes to build the
ontology at the knowledge level using a set of intermediate representations. Specific methods focus on the conceptualization of the ontology, that is, how to
structure the taxonomy of concepts [4]. These methodologies, however, do not
consider the (supposedly easier) case where a schema (UML diagrams, XML
Schema, thesaurus) formalizing already the domain pre-exists but still needs to
be ported to the Semantic Web.

7 http://multimedialab.elis.ugent.be/users/chpoppe/Ontologies/index.html
8 Adobes Extensible Metadata Platform: http://www.adobe.com/products/xmp/
9 http://www.iptc.org/IPTC4XMP/
10 http://www.w3.org/TR/photo-rdf/
11 http://www.ebu.ch
?

?

?
3.1 Porting Schemas and Thesauri to the Semantic Web

Semantic Web and object-oriented languages are compared in [14] which further
explains how to develop ontology-driven software. The SKOSification of thesauri in the cultural heritage domain has lead to a general method for porting
thesauri to the Semantic Web [22,3,2]. This method advocates four steps (prepa-
ration, syntactic conversion, semantic conversion, standardization) and provides
a number of guidelines for each step. Our method follows the same recommendations and add more guidelines regarding the modeling of existing UML diagrams
in OWL ontologies.

The alignment of the resulting thesaurus with existing semantic web resources
is particularly addressed in [17], that leads to the AnnoCultor12 conversion tool.
We have used this tool for converting the IPTC NewsCodes into SKOS thesauri.

3.2 NewsML and Multimedia Ontologies

Various attempts for building a news ontology have been reported. NEWS13 is a
completed EU project that aims to combine Semantic Web technologies and web
services for improving the news agencies workflow. The project has developed a
lightweight RDFS news ontology (in English, Spanish and Italian) based on the
IPTC Subject Codes for categorizing the news items and on NITF and NewsML
for the metadata management [7,9]. The Neptuno14 research project has also
modeled a lightweight RDFS news ontology representing a newspaper archive.
The ontology is again a mix between news management metadata based on the
NewsML standard and on the IPTC Subject Codes aligned with a news agency
thesaurus for categorizing the news items [5]. Finally, MESH15 is an ongoing EU
project that focuses on multimedia analysis for enriching automatically news
metadata and deliver personalized news summary. A news ontology seems to
have been developed but it is not available.

In contrast to these projects, our approach is to decouple the thesauri used
in the metadata values from the ontology that describes the management of
the news items according to the journalist point of view. This separation of
concern provides a more flexible infrastructure where the Subject Codes can
be aligned to other thesauri. We expose these aligned thesauri on the Semantic
Web, providing dereferencable URIs for every terms. Furthermore, we conform
to the latest standard for the news metadata (NAR) and we design the ontology
to be linked with other media ontologies.

The XML Semantics Reuse methodology consists in converting automatically XML Schemas into OWL ontologies16. This methodology is used in the
journalism domain for converting the NewsML and NITF document formats,
the IPTC Subject Codes taxonomy and the MPEG-7 multimedia format into

12 http://sourceforge.net/projects/annocultor
13 http://www.news-project.com/
14 http://seweb.ii.uam.es/neptuno/
15 http://www.mesh-ip.eu/
16 See the ReDeFer project: http://rhizomik.net/redefer

R. Troncy

OWL/RDF [10]. The resulting ontology, however, fails to capture the intended
semantics of these standards that cannot be represented in XML Schema [18].
It recreates the complex nested structures used in the original schema (e.g. the
definition of intermediate containers defining the XML Schema types and ele-
ments) that should generally not be modeled in the ontology. We advocate, on
the contrary, to re-engineer the ontology following some good practices that we
detail in the next section.

4 Building a Semantic Web Infrastructure for News

As we have described in the Section 2, NAR is a generic model for describing the
news items as well as their management, packaging, and the way they are ex-
changed. Interestingly, this model shares the principles underlying the Semantic
Web:

 News items are distributed resources that need to be uniquely identified like

the Semantic Web resources;

 News items are described with shared and controlled vocabularies.

NAR is however defined in XML Schema and has thus no formal representation of its intended semantics (e.g. a NewsItem can be a TextNewsItem, a
PhotoNewsItem or a VideoNewsItem). Extension to other standards is cumbersome since it is hard to state the equivalence between two XML elements.

By modeling a NAR ontology, we do expect the following benefits:

 Better control of NewsML G2 descriptions enabled by logical consistency

check;

 Enhanced search of news items enabled by logical inferences from the the-

saurus and the knowledge formalized on the web;

 Unified semantic interfaces for searching and browsing seamlessly news con-

tent and background knowledge.

In the following, we describe the necessary steps for modeling such an ontology infrastructure. The various interconnected ontologies (NAR, NewsML-G2,
EventsML-G2) are available at http://newsml.cwi.nl/ontology/.

4.1 Step 1: Modeling the NAR Ontology

The first step aims to capture formally the intended semantics of NAR and
the family of IPTC G2 standards. Even though these models exist in UML
diagrams, their ontologisation is not trivial. We discuss below the rationale of
our modeling decisions.

Flattening the XML structure. XML Schema provides the means to have
very rich structure but is rather limited when expressing the meaning of this
structure as the language is (only) concerned with providing typing and structuring information for isolated chunk of data. Consequently, the NAR model
?

?

?
defines intermediate structures and containers whose only goal are to group a
number of properties without particular semantics. These structures should not
be represented in the ontology, as they will generate blank nodes in the RDF
graph at the instance level, complexifying its visualization in any Semantic Web
browser. While modeling the ontology, we therefore advocate to flatten the XML
structure keeping only the properties that will be instantiated.

Reification. Statements about news items need often to be reified. For ex-
ample, an editor registered as team:md can classify a news item as diplomacy
at 2005-11-11T08:00:00Z. Using the RDF reification and the N3 syntax, this
yields the following statements:

{<> nar:subject cat:11002000} dc:creator

dc:modified

team:md ;
2005-11-11T08:00:00Z.

The RDF reification having no model theory semantics, we advocate the use of
Networked Graphs where the relationships between graphs are described declaratively using SPARQL queries and an extension of the SPARQL semantics [16].

Modeling unique identifiers. News items metadata make use of numerous
thesauri that implements a coding scheme for identifying the terms in order to
be language agnostic. For example:

<pubStatus code="stat:usable"/>
<locCreated code="city:Paris"/>
<creator code="team:DOM"/>
<subject code="cat:04000000"/>
<subject code="isin:NL0000361939"/>
<subject code="pers:021147"/>

IPTC has therefore defined the notion of QCODES (by analogy to the XML
QNAMES) with the following properties:

 Each coding scheme is associated with a URI. That URI must resolve to a

resource (or resources) containing information about the scheme.

 The prefix represents the URI of the scheme within which the local part is

allocated.

 There are almost no constraints on the values of the local part. For example,

the local part (the code) is allowed to start with a digit.

 The two taken together must form a legal URI.
 This URI should provide access to a definition of the concept represented by

that code within that scheme, i.e. it is dereferencable.

The tuple prefix:localname is however not identical to a CURIE17 since the
two parts (scheme and code) have each a meaning. For solving this issue, we
advocate the slash rule, i.e. the concatenation of the scheme URI, a slash and
the code, for the construction of a valid and dereferencable code URI.
17 http://www.w3.org/TR/curie/

R. Troncy

4.2 Step 2: Linking with Media Ontologies

As we have discussed in the Section 2.2, other multimedia standards such as
EXIF, Dublin Core, XMP, DIG35 or MPEG-7 are used in the media industry.
These standards have generally been converted into OWL ontologies and can
thus be integrated within our ontology infrastructure. Therefore, this step consists in adding OWL axioms stating the relationship between resources defined
in different but strongly overlapping ontologies. For example, the NAR ontology
contains the following axioms:

nar:subject owl:equivalentProperty dc:subject
nar:Person owl:equivalentClass foaf:Person

Semantic Web search engines such as Sindice18, Watson19 or Falcon20 are
useful tools for discovering concepts and properties defined in other ontologies
that share the same semantics as the ones defined in our news infrastructure and
could be linked to them.

4.3 Step 3: Converting IPTC News Codes into SKOS Thesaurus

The IPTC NewsCodes define 36 thesauri used as metadata values in the NAR
architecture. Although the terms are sometimes organized in a taxonomy, the
subsumption relationship is not explicit but instead encoded into the coding
scheme identifying the terms. For example, cancer (cat:07001004) is narrower
than disease (cat:07001000) which is narrower than health (cat:07000000)
because they share a number of digits. We have converted these thesauri into
SKOS, an application of RDF, making the subsumption relationships explicit
(skos:narrower, skos:broader).

This RDF compatibility allows us to define some concepts in the NAR ontology
in terms of owl:Restriction: the value of a property can be a skos:Concept or
must come from a given skos:ConceptScheme. For example, the nar:subject
object property is defined as having all its values from the IPTC Subject Codes
skos:ConceptScheme.

Finally, we have exposed all these thesauri at http://newsml.cwi.nl/
NewsCodes/ following the Best Practice Recipes for Publishing RDF Vocabularies21 and Cool URIs for the Semantic Web22 notes. Each term is thus identified by
a dereferencable URI. Consequently, sending an http request with the requested
type Accept:text/html will deliver the original XML human readable version
from IPTC of the thesauri, while the requested type Accept:application/
rdf+xml will return the SKOS/RDF machine processable version of the
thesaurus.

18 http://sindice.com/
19 http://watson.kmi.open.ac.uk/WatsonWUI/
20 http://www.falcons.com.cn/
21 http://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-vocab-pub/
22 http://www.w3.org/TR/cooluris/
?

?

?
4.4 Step 4: Enriching the News Metadata

Once the NAR ontology has been modeled, linked to other media ontologies, and
the thesauri converted into SKOS, the conversion of the metadata of individual
news items into RDF according to this ontology infrastructure is straightforward.
However, we advocate a further step aiming at enriching semantically the news
metadata following the linked data principle23. In our case, we apply linguistic
processing of textual news items and visual analysis of photo and video news
items in order to extract more semantic metadata (Figure 1).

Fig. 1. Metadata enrichment of NewsItems

The linguistic processing consists in extracting named entities such as per-
sons, organisations, locations, brands, etc. from the textual stories. Named Entity Recognizers such as GATE24, SPROUT25 or the most recent OpenCalais
infrastructure26 can be used. Once the named entities have been extracted, we
map them to formalized knowledge on the web available in Geonames for the
locations, or in DBPedia for the persons and organisations. Visual analysis provides additional metadata useful for organizing the results of a semantic news
search engine. For example, an unsupervised clustering of photo news items can
be obtained using texture and color histograms, allowing to distinguish the photos of a football player such as Zinedine Zidane on the field, versus in a suit
while he receives some award.

5 Semantic Search of Multimedia News

In order to demonstrate the appropriateness of our ontology infrastructure, we
present an exploratory environment for searching and browsing news items. We

23 http://linkeddata.org/
24 http://gate.ac.uk/
25 http://sprout.dfki.de/
26 http://www.opencalais.com/

R. Troncy

use the Cliopatria27 semantic search web-server [13,21]. ClioPatria is a SWIProlog based platform for Semantic Web Applications that provides a scalable
in-core RDF triple store and joins the SWI-Prolog RDF and HTTP infrastructure with a SeRQL/SPARQL query engine, interfacing to the The Yahoo! User
Interface Library (YUI) and libraries that support semantic search. In contrast to
client-only architectures such as Similes Exhibit, ClioPatria has a client-server
architecture. The core functionality is provided as HTTP APIs by the server.
The results are served as presentation neutral data objects and can thus be combined with different presentation and interaction strategies. We have decided to
use this open source software as it allows us to create customized presentations
for searching and exploring news items, while being based on Semantic Web
technologies and benefit from inference reasoning and SPARQL querying.

In the following, we present first the dataset used in our experiment (Sec-
tion 5.1). We show then how we use the semantic metadata as dimensions for
presenting the results of semantic search (Section 5.2) and for guiding a faceted
browser like interface (Section 5.3) in the news domain.

5.1 Dataset

The dataset used in our experiment consists of the ontology infrastructure detailed previously, 60000 news stories in English, 40000 news stories in French,
2557 photos and 8 hours of broadcasted video (Table 1).

Following the four steps detailed in the Section 4, we have processed the news
items in order to enrich the metadata. We have used SPROUT together with a
specific football gazetteer in order to extract named entities from the caption of
the 2557 photos contained in our dataset. The use of a domain specific ontology
allows us to extract more semantic information such as the role of a football
player (goalkeeper, middlefielder), the name of a team, etc. The Figure 2 (resp. 3)
shows the algorithm for linking the entities of type Person (resp. Location) with
DBPedia (resp. Geonames).

This processing step provided 217 DBPedia persons and 426 Geonames loca-
tions. The assessment of the results shows that the Geonames web service tend
to return primarily a US city when a single string is passed as an argument. For-
tunately, news items contain always information about the city and the country
yielding accurate recognition of the location mentioned in the story. The few
errors we noticed come from an incorrect typing of the named entity from the
SPROUT system, e.g. Australia as been typed as a Person. More sophisticated
disambiguation heuristics such as IdentityRank [8] can be further employed to
minimize these errors.

5.2 Semantic Search of News Items

The Figure 4 shows the result for the query Lyon in our semantic search
system. The news items are grouped according to the path in the RDF graph

27 http://e-culture.multimedian.nl/software/ClioPatria.shtml
?

?

?
Table 1. Number of RDF triples loaded in our semantic search web-server

Description

General ontologies: NAR, NewsML-G2, DC, VRA, FOAF
Domain specific ontologies: Football ontology
Thesauri: IPTC NewsCodes, INA Thesaurus
External resources: Geonames, DBPedia
AFP News Feed in English from June and July 2006
AFP Photos from the 2006 World Cup
INA Broadcast Video from June and July 2006
Total

Number of
RDF triples
7,336
104,358
34,903
53,468
804,446
61,311
1,932
1,067.754

For each named entity of type Person recognized, do:

1. Construct a SPARQL query for DBPedia using the rdfs:label property and all

supported languages and return the first resource

2. Construct a SPARQL query for the Football ontology using the dolce:firstName

and dolce:lastName properties and return the first resource

3. If a resource is found both in DBPedia and in the Football ontology, then add a

owl:sameAs statement between these two resources

4. If no resource is found in DBPedia and in the Football ontology, then create a new

instance of Person in the knowledge base

Fig. 2. Pseudo algorithm for linking the extracted named entities with DBPedia

that leads to the property for which the value has matched the query. In our
case, the system returns the news items where Lyon occurs in the title,
the headline, the slugline, etc. Each group can be collapsed or expanded.
Furthermore, the information about the type of news item allows us to customize
the visual rendering of each group: text news items have a snippet view displaying
the first three lines of the stories, while photo news items are displayed in a
thumbnail carousel.

Interestingly, the last group of result contain a single news photo item depicting three football players. The metadata of this photo does not contain the
string Lyon. Instead, the caption of this photo mentions Juninho Pernam-
bucano, recognized by SPROUT as a football player, later on linked with the
DBPedia resource identifying this person. DBPedia contains information about
this person such as his birthdate and all the past teams where he played. Among
them, Lyon is his current club and this is why this image has been retrieved,
even though at the end of the list because of the length in the RDF graph
necessary to reach this term.

Similarly, the query for Saksamaa returns a single group of 679 photos while
none of them contain this term in the metadata. Again, the explanation is that all
these photos have been captured in Germany (during the World Cup), a named

R. Troncy

For each named entity of type Location recognized, do:

1. Get the location and if available the broader location
2. Construct a textual query for Geonames with either the exact location name or

with both terms and return the first resource, for example:
http://ws.geonames.org/search?maxRows=1&type=rdf&name equals=Germany
or http://ws.geonames.org/search?maxRows=1&type=rdf&q=Berlin,Germany

Fig. 3. Pseudo algorithm for linking the extracted named entities with Geonames

Fig. 4. Search for Lyon in the semantic search engine

entity recognized by SPROUT as a location, later on linked with Geonames.
The Geonames resource contains information about all the alternative names of
Germany in all languages, Saksamaa being the Ethiopian name of Germany.

5.3 Semantic Browsing of Multimedia News
Additionally to the semantic search interface, we provide a faceted browser like
interface for better exploring the news dataset. Facets correspond to properties
of interest in the metadata, and can be selected by the end-user. We have defined a soccer view gathering the properties subject, slugline, locCreated,
location and person. Using the information provided by Geonames, we are
able to propose more views for presenting the information. The Figure 5 shows
such a view, where the football player Zinedine Zidane has been selected as
?

?

?
Fig. 5. Browsing the photos captured in France during the World Cup finale

Fig. 6. Video local view: arbitrary temporal segment can be played

R. Troncy

a filter: the red flags correspond then to the countries mentioned in the news
stories, while the blue flags correspond to the cities where the news stories have
been produced.

Interestingly, this view allows the end-user to immediately distinguish between
the two sluglines FBL-WC2006-MATCH64-ITA-FRA and FBL-WC2006-MATCH64-
FRA-ITA that look really similar but actually correspond to the news stories
produced in Italy (Italian point of view) and in France (French point of view).
Such a subtlety is hard to see in the metadata while the map view gives an
immediate insight of the data.

Finally, the Figure 6 shows the local view of a video resource. The metadata
corresponds to a particular sequence in a TV news broadcast program. Arbitrary
sequences of a video can be played in the semantic browser using the tcin and
tcout buttons. An auto-play has been considered but the non-ability of the
current web infrastructure to address temporal fragments of a video file prevent
such a functionality [19].

6 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we have described a method composed of four steps for building
an ontology-based news infrastructure. These guidelines are complementary to
the development of ontology design patterns and best practices for publishing
semantic web vocabularies that is central in the web of data. We have discussed
the design decisions regarding the modeling of the NAR ontology from existing
XML Schemas. At the ontology level, we advocate to flatten the XML struc-
ture, to identify properly the resources and to reuse as much as possible existing
ontologies. At the instance level, we recommend to enrich and link the metadata with existing SKOS thesauri and formalized knowledge existing on the web
such as DBPedia and Geonames. The NAR ontology is currently reviewed by
the IPTC and could be endorsed by the standardisation body. We presented
a semantic search system and various exploratory interfaces for searching and
browsing news items. These interfaces use the richness of the semantic metadata
for grouping, ranking and presenting the results of a given query. The system is
publicly available at http://newsml.cwi.nl/explore/search.

Time is an essential dimension in the news domain and our system provides also a timeline view. Nevertheless, reasoning on time information is a
complex task. From the representation point of view, we plan to include the
Time Ontology28 and the temporal relations module from the DOLCE upper ontology in order to propose histogram views aggregating the stories per
topic and per day, week or month. Our current system works on static,
pre-processed and staged data. A natural evolution is to create a dynamic environment where incoming news feed is processed in live and immediately available to the end-user. Finally, an evaluation of the system by AFP journalists is
planned.

28 http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/
?

?

?
Acknowledgments

The dataset used has been kindly provided by AFP for the news stories and the
photos, and by INA for the videos. The author would like to particularly thank
Laurent Le Meur from AFP for fruitful discussions on the design of the NAR
ontology. The author would also like to thank the following colleagues at CWI,
Amsterdam (Lynda Hardman, Michiel Hildebrand, Michiel Kauw-A-Tjoe, Zeljko
Obrenovic and Jacco van Ossenbruggen) and at IBBT Multimedia Lab, Ghent
University (Erik Mannens, Ga etan Martens and Chris Poppe) for their feedback
on the prototype and earlier versions of this paper. The research leading to this
paper was supported by the European Commission under contract FP6-027026,
Knowledge Space of semantic inference for automatic annotation and retrieval
of multimedia content - K-Space.
