Deploying Semantic Web Technologies for Work

Integrated Learning in Industry -

A Comparison: SME vs. Large Sized Company

Conny Christl1, Chiara Ghidini2 Joanna Guss3, Stefanie Lindstaedt4,

Viktoria Pammer4, Marco Rospocher2, Peter Scheir4, and Luciano Serafini2

1 ISN-Innovation Service Network, Zg. Hajdina 159, 2250 Ptuj, Slovenia

conny.christl@innovation.at

2 FBK-irst. Via Sommarive, 18. 38100 Trento, Italy

{ghidini,rospocher,serafini}@fbk.eu

3 EADS France - Innovation Works. 12, Rue Pasteur - BP76 - 92150 Suresnes, France

4 Know-Center and Graz University of Technology, Knowledge Management Institute

joanna.guss@eads.net

Inffeldgasse 21a, 8010 Graz, Austria

{slind,vpammer,pscheir}@know-center.at

Abstract. Modern businesses operate in a rapidly changing environ-
ment. Continuous learning is an essential ingredient in order to stay competitive in such environments. The APOSDLE system utilizes semantic
web technologies to create a generic system for supporting knowledge
workers in different domains to learnwork. Since APOSDLE relies on
three interconnected semantic models to achieve this goal, the question
on how to efficiently create high-quality semantic models has become one
of the major research challenges. On the basis of two concrete examplesnamely deployment of such a learning system at EADS, a large corpora-
tion, and deployment at ISN, a network of SMEs-we report in detail the
issues a company has to face, when it wants to deploy a modern learning
environment relying on semantic web technology.

1 Introduction

In the past years we observed a slow but steady uptake of semantic web technologies in businesses. Increasingly search capabilities, data integration and web
service communication enabled by semantic web technologies lead to improved
business processes, savings in cost and time and heightened efficiency and com-
petitiveness. However, obtaining the needed semantic models has remained a
challenge and an art. This challenge is aggravated in situations where not only
one model e.g. an ontology, is needed, but a whole network of models needs to
be created and later maintained. This contribution reports about the experiences gained during the creation of three interlinked models (process, domain
and learning goal model) at two application organizations (EADS and ISN).

A. Sheth et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2008, LNCS 5318, pp. 709722, 2008.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008

C. Christl et al.

These experiences were obtained in the context of the EU-funded integrated
project APOSDLE1 (Advanced Process-Oriented Self-Directed Learning Envi-
ronment). APOSDLE aims at improving the productivity of knowledge workers
by providing learning support during work task execution within the everyday
work environment of the user, and by utilizing general organizational resources
(documents as well as people) for collaborative learning.

This new learning paradigm of technology-enhanced work-integrated or organizational learning (see [1] for possible scenarios) puts one requirement on
technology in the center of attention: Flexibility. In contrast to traditional e-
learning systems, it is therefore not desirable to create a system specifically
matched to one enterprise and one domain. The developed software system must
be as generic as possible. Deployment of the system in a new organization or in
a new domain must not require substantial software changes.

Further analysis shows that in a system envisioned as APOSDLE, domainspecific knowledge must exist in some form. The system must know about different users, their competencies and learning needs and about the tasks users
perform and which digital resources (text documents, multimedia documents
etc.) are helpful in which situation (user/task/learning need).

Within the project APOSDLE environments are employed at four application
partners. We focus on two of them that also represent two extremes, EADS a
large enterprise and ISN a network of SMEs. Although we describe the experiences related to a specific system, we think that our reports are of interest to
a wider audience, as APOSDLE relies on many standard semantic web technologies and consequently inherits both their advantages and disadvantages.

2 APOSDLE Semantic Web Technologies

Semantic web technologies enable switching the learning domain of APOSDLE
without software changes, and without hand-crafting domain-specific learning
material.

Instead, customization to a domain of application happens by the creation
of formal models that capture the necessary aspects of the domain of applica-
tion. These formal models encapsulate the knowledge that otherwise would be
implemented within the program code. In APOSDLE Changing the domain of
application means just changing the models.

In general, different formalisms for encoding domain-specific knowledge could
have been used, that would not count as semantic web technologies as understood by the semantic web community. However, at the time of project start
of APOSDLE, description logics and OWL seemed the most broadly developed
and advanced technology, with a lot of supportive tools such as ontology edi-
tors, reasoners, programming frameworks and APIs, and well-understood the-
ory. Learning material is created ad-hoc by analyzing available organizational
resources (textmining) and reusing it.

1 APOSDLE-Advanced Process-Oriented Self-Directed Learning Environment,

http://www.aposdle.org
?

?

?
Fig. 1. The APOSDLE Knowledge Base and its relation to other components

In the following we illustrate the realization of this hybrid approach within
the APOSDLE system: Firstly, we illustrate the (integrated) schema of semantic models developed inside APOSDLE and proposed as a basis for categorization and retrieval in work-integrated learning, then we illustrate the technology
and techniques used to support the construction of these semantic models, and
thirdly we illustrate the approach used to connect the semantic models to the
resources of the organizational memory (classification).

2.1 The Semantic Models

One of the key problems to solve when trying to build a flexible generic system
is to identify the basic knowledge that the system must have in order to deliver
the worker with context-sensitive learning events, tailored to her specific learning
goals, work situation and learning needs. The model we propose, hereafter called
APOSDLE knowledge base, is depicted in Fig. 1. In a nutshell, the APOSDLE
Knowledge Base contains all the necessary information about the tasks a user
can perform in a certain organization, the learning goals required to perform
certain tasks, a description of the domain of affairs (application domain) of the
organization, and, finally, specific APOSDLE categories used to classify tasks,
learning goals and learning resources. The main idea is that starting from the
context-sensitive situation of a user,

which includes her current task(s), APOSDLE is able to determine the learning goals of the user and then use the information contained in the APOSDLE

C. Christl et al.

Knowledge Base to select appropriate resources, so called knowledge artifacts
and transform them into learning events2 proposed to the user for attaining the
missing learning goals [2].

A knowledge artifact (KA) is defined in APOSDLE as a document, or part
thereof, together with two types of metadata: the learning domain concept addressed /described within the document (piece) and the material use type3of the
document (piece) [2].

2.2 Building the Semantic Models

Only one of the four models depicted in Fig. 1, the APOSDLE Categories, is
an APOSDLE-inherent structure. The others are by nature domain / organization dependent and need to be provided every time the APOSDLE system is
configured and deployed for a new organization / domain.

Despite the recent advances of formal modeling and semantic web, we can
safely assumeand this is the situation we had to face within the running of
the projectthat most of the organizations interested in using the APOSDLE
system neither have formal models already available, nor all the skills needed to
develop them. Therefore, as part of the APOSDLE project we have developed
an Integrated Modeling Methodology (IMM)[3] as a series of steps, techniques
and tools to support the construction of the semantic models depicted in Fig.1.
To be effective and tailored to the APOSDLE system, such a methodology had
to satisfy some important requirements:
Provide the organization with high level tools useful to specify knowledge in natural language, to minimize the need to become familiar with formal languages.
Support an integrated development of the three models (domain, tasks, and
learning goals) in order to ensure a conceptual consistency among these models
and an easy formal integration. Support the creation of formal models which
are described using different languages (YAWL and OWL)Encourage knowledge
engineers and domain experts from the organization to work together in a collaborative manner and become the main actors of the modeling phase4.

The first important semantic technology used to support modeling inside
APOSDLE is a semantic wiki5. The choice of a semantic wiki as the main tool
for informal modeling was made for several reasons: first it provides a state of
the art collaborative tool which has made possible an active collaboration among
all the actors involved in the modeling activities; second it provides a uniform
tool for the informal specification of the different models (domain model, task
model, learning goal model) using natural language; third, the natural language

2 Learning events are a kind of amalgamation of knowledge artifacts following instruc-

tional principles. To read more about learning events, see for instance [2].

3 Within APOSDLE five material use types have been defined: The material use De-

finition, Example, Howtodo, Main points, More about [2].

4 In the event of unavailable knowledge engineers, or knowledge engineers not enough
skilled to follow the process in an autonomous manner, we provided some coaching.

5 We used Semantic MediaWiki (http://www.semantic-mediawiki.org).
?

?

?
descriptions inserted in a semantic wiki can be structured according to predefined templates, and with the help of semantic constructs like attributes and
relations. As a consequence the informal descriptions in natural language contain enough structure to be automatically, or semi-automatically, translated in
OWL ontologies, thus allowing the reuse of informal descriptions for automatic
ontology creation.

The second technology used to support informal modeling (and in particular knowledge elicitation) within APOSDLE were techniques of term extraction
to provide lists of candidate concepts. These techniques, illustrated in [4] [2]
have also proven useful to reduce the burden of modeling and speed up the
process.

The informal models described in the semantic wiki were translated to formal

models.

manually,

 The domain model was (semi-) automatically translated to an OWL ontology,
 The task model was formalized by using YAWL [5]. This had to be done

 The learning goal model was formally specified with a custom tool, the TaskCompetency Tool (TACT for short)6 by connecting relevant learning goals7
to tasks.

2.3 Connecting Semantic Models and Resources

To allow for retrieving learning content the formal models have to be connected
to the resources of the respective organization (annotation). The annotation
process is one of the key challenges in any system that relies on semantic anno-
tations. Semantic annotations in the present system are based on the Aboutness
of resources [6]. This means that we annotate (parts of) documents with a set
of concepts the content of the document is about. Basically, two options exist.

 Manual annotation: The resulting annotations are probably of good quality,
given that motivated and competent persons perform the annotation. The
large drawback is the large effort that manual annotation requires.

 Automatic annotation: The resulting annotations are of lower quality than
manual annotation given any state-of-the art technology of natural language
processing or statistically-based classification. The advantage is of course
that it is faster.

In APOSDLE, manual annotation is used to create an initial set of knowledge
artifacts of good quality. These are used on the one hand as high-quality learning

6 This Tool is developed by APOSDLE Team [2].
7 A learning goal is regarded as the combination of a Learning goal Type and a Do-
main Concept. Learning goal types specify the type and degree of knowledge and
skills the person must or typically wishes acquire about this topic. Within APOSDLE Learning Goal Types are Remember, Understand, Create and Apply.
The domain concept defines the content or topic that the learning goal is about.

C. Christl et al.

material, and on the other hand as training material for automatic classification.
Manual annotation can be performed again during usage of APOSDLE, when a
user opens a retrieved knowledge artifact and wants to edit it. Automatic annotation is performed at regular intervals. Assignment of domain concepts can be
seen as classical text classification problem of assigning documents to a set of
predefined classes [7]. A basic algorithm, using Support Vector Machines (SVM)
and k-Nearest neighbor algorithms, has been modified to incorporate knowledge about hierarchical relations between the classes, i.e. the domain concepts
assigned to pieces of text [8].

Retrieval of learning content can be performed based on the semantic anno-
tations. A detailed description of the approach taken in APOSDLE for retrieval
and further references are described by Scheir, Ghidini and Lindstaedt [9].

3 APOSDLE in Application Context

APOSDLE is adapted to four application partner domains. In this section the
two most oppositional are compared to each other. On the one site EADS as
large company, on the other side ISN, as network of SMEs. The main focus of
our attention in this section is on describing shortly the application domains or-
ganization, their motivation for using APOSDLE as well as some major activities
necessary to deploy APOSDLE.

3.1 Application Domains, Challenges and Motivation for Using

APOSDLE

EADS8 is the largest aerospace company in Europe active in the fields of civil
and military aircraft, space, defense systems and services. EADS Innovation
Works (IW) decided to implement the APOSDLE system in the Simulation Do-
main. This is due to the growing importance of simulations and the necessity
to have quicker operational performances of engineers in this domain. The simulation teams are in charge of designing, developing and achieving numerical
simulations of electromagnetic problems or phenomena (Electromagnetic (EM)
compatibility, simulations of EM attacks on aeronautical systems or subsystems,
etc.). They are composed of engineers who are EM physicists or mathematicians
and Soft/Hardware Specialists. The simulation experts are located in different
countries and cities and rarely available to help newcomers in learning. Moreover the time allowed to maintain up-to-date worker skills or to acquire new
knowledge has to be reduced. The simulation activities require a high level of
knowledge and expertise. EADS IW is emphatically interested to introduce an
innovative task- and process-oriented learning tool such as APOSDLE to support
the simulation development process.

On the other side ISNInnovation Service Network9 is a service and research
company in the field of innovation- and knowledge management composed of a

8 EADSEuropean Aeronautic Defense and Space Company EADS N.V., http://

www.eads.net

9 ISNInnovation Service Network (ISN), http://www.isn.eu
?

?

?
network of SMEs in Slovenia and Austria. ISN is supplemented by more than
40 further partners from universities, competence centers and service companies
acting as a pool of experts. All experts are or intend to be specialized in a few,
very specific fields such as specific management methods, patent management,
creativity methods, etc. In order to stay competitive at ISN each network partner
needs to continuously improve her skills in the focus field, rapidly learn aspects
of other fields relevant to one customer project, and apply both within the cus-
tomers situation. Since the network partners are increasingly involved in partner
projects, the time for learning and improvement of competencies becomes more
limited. On the other hand, more in-depth and more diverse know-how is asked
for by the customers. Thus, within ISN the focus of the APOSDLE domain is
on project processing and management in order to provide specialized knowhow in the area of innovation and knowledge management to their customer
organizations.

Currently at both organizations there is no common learning resources database or system that can support the knowledge worker. Learning during work
task execution is done by using templates, guidelines, project documentation
or internet resources and with few sharing effort to the collective. The initial
motivation for implementing APOSDLE at ISN and EADS is therefore to create
a common knowledge base which integrates resources from different repositories
and backend systems for all knowledge workers in order to improve knowledge
acquisition, reuse and sharing.

3.2 Using Semantic TechnologyDeriving from an Analysis of

Competitive Approaches

At the moment there are several different approaches in the field of knowledge
management and e-learning which aim at meeting above mentioned challenges.
Desktop search engines (e.g. Google Desktop) or ontology based search engines
are often used for knowledge retrieval within organizations (e.g. KINOA10 at
EADS IW). On the other side knowledge sharing is supported by providing
collaboration tools like e-mail, document sharing (e.g. Groove is used at ISN) or
instant messaging (e.g. Skype is used at ISN). Even social networking platforms
support collaborating and sharing knowledge with each other.

Frequently companies have implemented e-learning systems or learn management systems (LMS) in order to provide employees the possibility to further improve their skills. However knowledge worker in very knowledge intensive domains
like at EADS or ISN often do not have the time for explicit learning. They need
flexible real-time support within their current work task. Additionally developing
an e-learning System is an expensive and time consuming task [1].

By using the potential of semantic web technologies successful approaches of
knowledge management and e-learning are combined within APOSDLE. Therefore the essential benefit for ISN and EADS by using APOSDLE is:

10 KINOAmanagement and sharing of written information content with shared on-

tologies.

C. Christl et al.

 Learning during execution of work tasks.
 Collaboratively sharing knowledge within the work environment.
 Learn from resources already available within the organization.

4 Customization and Usage of APOSDLE

Both ISN and EADS defined one knowledge engineer (KE), who is responsible
for the elicitation of knowledge from the domain experts (DE) and guides the
entire modeling process. The DE provides the fundamental knowledge about the
domain of the users of APOSDLE and their learning needs. The DE also specifies
the pool of resources to be used for knowledge extraction.

Modeling corresponds to customizing the existing APOSDLE system to a
specific domain, with a focus on exactly those tasks and competencies that are
interesting for the users. Modeling is also very often the bottleneck in many
semantic web applications, i.e. the applications would be good, or would work
if only there were enough / more appropriate models. Therefore we think it of
interest to describe the modeling that was necessary at ISN and EADS in order
to deploy and use APOSDLE. We followed the Integrated Modeling Methodology (IMM) [3]. Below we describe the steps prescribed by the IMM and the
corresponding experiences at EADS and ISN.

4.1 Informal Modeling

Informal modeling follows a knowledge elicitation phase, in which a number of
relevant elements, be it terms, phrases etc. elicited from DE are collected. The
goal of the informal modeling phase is that the knowledge engineer enters, after
reviewing and filtering them, these first results into a semantic wiki. In a second
stage the informal models, i.e. described in natural language, are formalized and
connected to each other.

Knowledge elicitation from domain experts. The first stage in APOSDLE
models design for Electromagnetic Simulation domain consisted in collecting relevant resources and interviewing experts: At EADS three simulation domain
experts (EM physics specialists and mathematics expert) were interviewed sepa-
rately, during two hours. The discussions focused on simulation process, knowledge needs and difficulties that occur at each simulation development task. As at
ISN each domain expert is expert in a very special knowledge field, seven domain
experts were interviewed according to a developed guideline asking about tasks
they perform, learning needs they have and resources they use for both working
and learning. Further the Card Sorting Technique [10] was used to approve the
elicited domain knowledge.

Knowledge elicitation from resources. As one way of externalizing domain
knowledge is in the form of documents written in natural language, documentbased ontology engineering aims at using information available in documents
?

?

?
Fig. 2. Filled template for EADS task

to create formal knowledge representations. We used the discovery tab, a plugin for Protg OWL, [4] to discover knowledge from text-documents. Grouping
documents to form clusters of different topics, gives an overview of the domain
covered by the documents. By using statistical and natural language processing
methods, relevant terms are extracted from a set of documents. Furthermore, the
terms can be grouped by synonymity. Within discovery tab, standard text mining
methods have been used. For relevant term extraction, various pre-processing
techniques, such as stop-word lists and stemming are employed [4].

Informal modeling with semantic wiki. Using pre-defined templates we
have automatically created a page for each one of the elements (concepts or
tasks) of the models we wanted to obtain via the wiki. Thus, the domain experts,
knowledge engineers and APOSDLE technology partners located in different
cities and countries had the possibility to access the models, refine them or
comment. The filled template for a task is shown in Fig. 2 and is tailored to the
information we needed to obtain for APOSDLE.

As shown the information required in the template is very basic. Nevertheless it allows guiding the modeling team to provide all the information that was
needed by the particular application. In addition templates contained also hints
to guide the early alignment of models. For instance the template for task description asks also for knowledge required to perform this task, and this has a
clear connection with the domain and learning goal models.

Advantages and Difficulties. The experts were in general very busy and
tied up in heavy workloads. However their involvement in modeling activity
is strongly required. The knowledge elicitation only from documents risks to
build up very theoretical and over-complicated knowledge schemes that passes
by real knowledge needs. The main difficulty that occurred at this stage of modeling activity consisted in putting the right definition behind the terms used by
experts or extracted from documents. Several terms are common to some experts but used to evoke different concepts: e.g. at EADS the term model can
mean mathematical model, simulation model, data model, numerical model, etc.
Some specialists use also different terms to designate the same concepts. Another
problem was a lack of documentation, for instance at EADS a large number of
simulation knowledge is not really formalized and can be stored in individuls
repositories or on desktops.

C. Christl et al.

Currently the Discovery Tab [4] is based on WordNet11 and Apaches Wordnet12 package . Thus, it was difficult to automatically extract terms from German
(ISN) or French (EADS) documents.

The results of the interviews as well as documents analysis allowed the EADS
and ISN Knowledge Engineer to create a very first version of the informal models in the Semantic MediaWiki, define some learning scenarios and knowledge /
learning needs. Because of both the complexity the domain has and the information needed for the semantic wiki, the informal modeling activity was quite time
and resources consuming. However, it turned out that a semantic wiki is very
useful for the internal model revision as it allows queries about special relations,
shows up all relations a concept/task has to another concepts/task etc.

For the EADS Simulation domain the informal modeling process required
about 2.5 person months. Altogether 43 EADS domain concepts and 22 tasks
were identified, classified, and described. The modeling process at ISN required
3 person months and 140 concepts and 31 tasks were defined for describing their
domain.

4.2 Formal Modeling and Resources Annotation

Based on the KEs semantic descriptions of tasks and concepts in the wiki tem-
plates, Semantic MediaWiki generates machine-readable documents in RDF for-
mat. These are transformed into an OWL model. The formal domain model
could then be viewed and revised by knowledge engineers in the Prot eg e editor.
Basically most of the informally given information was correctly formalized
checking the formal models some specific relation types (e.g. the relationtype
has result) that could not be translated to OWL had to be defined anew. Additionally some concepts arising from not deleted wiki pages in the ontology
had to be deleted. The task model was manually defined by technology partners in YAWL [5] starting from the informal descriptions provided in the semantic wiki. The final step for the task model is the application of formal
checks provided by the YAWL editor. These checks result in a debugging of
the YAWL specification. This outcome is complemented by a transformation
of the YAWL specification to an OWL file containing the complete list of
tasks [3].

Once the task and the domain model were formalized knowledge engineers
linked with the TACT Tool [2] respective concepts and learning goals to every
task. For instance for to the task Characterize Physical Phenomena to be simu-
lated (Fig.2) the learning goal Understand and the concept Radiation was
defined (among others).

Finally, the resources annotation was carried out using the annotation tool
[2](Fig. 2 shows an example. The annotation tool consists of a pdf-viewer plus the
custom functionality to create knowledge artifacts (KA), i.e. to assign domain
concepts and material use concepts. The annotation process at EADS and ISN

11 http://wordnet.princeton.edu/
12 http://lucene.apache.org/java/2 0 0/api/org/apache/lucene/wordnet
?

?

?
Fig. 3. The Annotation Tool

was composed of 2 main stages. The first one consisted in selecting an initial set
of relevant documents (the training corpus). This set of representative resources
dealing with the model concepts was manually annotated using APOSDLE annotation tool. For example, at ISN a piece of text within an article containing
a definition about the concept Brainstorming was annotated with the respective concept and the material use type Definition. At EADS 60 knowledge
artifacts were created from 25 documents. The Knowledge Engineer dedicated 3
days for training corpus building. The results from ISN are very similar. About
100 knowledge artifacts from 50 documents were created within 5 days.

In the second stage the resources annotation process was done automatically.
This means that a set of concepts for a document based on a training set of
previously annotated documents is suggested. Finally the KE checked these automatic annotations randomly.

Advantages and Difficulties. In total at EADS 150 knowledge artifacts were
created from 55 documents. Because of the unavailability of domain experts, the
complexity of Simulation Activity and difficulty to collect the right resources
the annotation process for APOSDLE Prototype at EADS required about 1.5
person months. At ISN the Annotation process required 1 person moth. And
about 200 (KA) were created of 150 documents.

4.3 APOSDLE in Use
Both at EADS and at ISN the prototype of the APOSDLE system was not
yet connected to other live systems. Especially at EADS are high security and
privacy settings, therefore we decided to first test the system itself, before connecting it to other sources. At EADS the APOSDLE Prototype was used by 10
evaluation users located in Toulouse and Suresnes. They had different levels of
knowledge of Simulation Domain and different learning objectives. At ISN installation of APOSDLE Prototype was carried out at the Headquarters in Graz
and 10 users were integrated in the evaluation process.

As APOSDLE is a quite complex system we decided to accompany the installation with user trainings. These Trainings have been carried out by the respective

C. Christl et al.

knowledge engineers. Generally users are not familiar with the models based and
semantic technology approach used in APOSDLE-thus a lot of conceptual questions concerning tasks and related learning goals as well as retrieved resources that
depend on task, learning goal and competency arose.

5 Challenges for Semantic Web Technologies in Industry

Although the evaluation of the APOSDLE system is still ongoing and validated
assumptions concerning the models and the system can not be made, we figured
out the main points to be addressed for future development.

5.1 Models

A very important point concerns the granularity of the models. For this prototype we tried to find out a balance between not too generic and not too specialized models. In consequence it was quite difficult to find a right formulation of
a task in order to meet all demands like comprehensibility, feasibility, not too
complex etc. and at the same time matching this with a task type (some tasks
may cover more than one task type) and a specific concept (required knowledge).
For instance we decided to model the task Select appropriate tools for method.
The concept method has about 15 sub concepts. As it would have been too
much effort to model 15 different tasks and assign the related learning goals and
concepts, we decided to follow this quite generic way.

However, after using the real system we identified a need to enrich the domain
model in order to allow learners and experts acquire / exchange knowledge on
more specific topics (e.g. at EADS measures, different kinds of simulation models and resolution methods). Currently we are working on enabling the KE to
represent more complex structures in the formal models.

5.2 Modeling Process

In addition to models, the modeling process also needs to be improved. Firstly
we want to integrate more already existing classification like e.g. files structures.
Secondly the Discovery Tab could be enriched by new functionalities, e.g. the
possibility of associating to the extracted term the snippets of texts and the
documents it comes from.

For next model development we will directly use one semantic wiki for each
partnerfor this prototype we used one semantic wiki for all application domains
and encountered some overlapping in concepts and tasks of different domains.
The application domains also want to integrate the possibility of a graphical
representation of the models and its relations in the semantic wiki.

5.3 Resources Annotation

Based on early results of the evaluation we assume that the quality of the annotations has a huge impact on the users confidence in APOSDLE system.
?

?

?
The resources provided by APOSDLE have to be relevant to the learner context (domain, task and especially his/her learning objective). Based on our first
impressions the manual resource annotations are very good. Assumptions concerning the automatic annotation can not be made at the moment. Therefore it
is an open issue, if it would be worth to spend the effort for annotating all documents manually in the case users are not satisfied with automatically provided
annotations. The current approach is, that every APOSDLE user can add, edit
or delete an annotation to a documentthus the more users give their feedback
on the annotations, the better the documents are annotated. During the evaluation phase we started the discussion whether we should follow this approach.
Reasons for this are that (a) it is not easy to annotate a document, some people
may not do this because it is too complicated. (b) Domain experts mentioned
that adding, editing or deleting an annotation is quite subjective, because e.g.
domain experts would annotate a document in a different way as others would
do this.

6 Conclusion

The paper at hand presented a detailed report of experiences and issues a company has to face, when it wants to deploy a modern learning environment relying
on semantic web technologies.

Although the described application domains represent two extremes, both
could follow without major differences the same modeling approach in order to
deploy a complex system like APOSDLE. Thus, it is not primarily important to
which companywhether a large enterprise or a network of SMEsit is deployed,
but to have a clear idea of the domain to be modeled and the users that will use
the system. Thus, we will evaluate clear criteria and develop a kind of guideline
for which domain and for which granularity of models our modeling approach is
suitable.

The IMM approach enables also persons not skilled in knowledge engineer-
ing, object-oriented modeling or ontology-building to run through our proposed
modeling process. The semantic wiki enabled the knowledge engineer to describe
the respective domain in natural languagethis information can then (semi-) automatically extracted and translated to OWL. With the development of tools,
which can be easily applied in industryeven more business problems could benefit from the potential of semantic web technologies. We will continue to apply
and improve the collaborative approach to improve and extend the deployment
of semantic technologies in industry.

Acknowledgements. APOSDLE is partially funded under the FP6 of the European Commission within the IST work program 2004 (FP6-IST-2004-027023).
The Know-Center is funded within the Austrian COMET ProgramCompetence
Centers for Excellent Technologiesunder the auspices of the Austrian Ministry
of Transport, Innovation and Technology, the Austrian Ministry of Economics
and Labor and by the State of Styria. COMET is managed by the Austrian
Research Promotion Agency FFG.

C. Christl et al.
