Distributed Policy Management in Semantic Web 

Ozgu Can and Murat Osman Unalr 

Department of Computer Engineering, Ege University, 

35100 Bornova, (cid:248)zmir, Turkey 

{ozgu.can, murat.osman.unalir}@ege.edu.tr 

Abstract.  With  the  growth  of  Internet  and  the  fast  development  of  semantic 
web technologies, the access and usage of information will become much more 
easier.  However,  the  security  of  information  gathering  for  both  information 
suppliers  and  demanders  is  a  critical  issue.  Policies  determine  the  ideal 
behaviors  for  web  concepts.  The  concepts  of  policy,  policy  languages  and 
policy ontologies must be determined, effective tools for policy definition and 
management must be developed.  

1   Introduction 

In the web environment some concepts are very important: which resources can users 
or  the  services  access  (security),  how  will  the  user  information  going  to  be  used 
(privacy) and if these users are trusted or not (trust). Policies specify who can use a 
service  and  under  which  conditions,  how  information  should  be  provided  to  the 
service,  and  how  the  provided  information  will  be  used  [1]. Two  main  components 
exist  to  secure  the  semantic  web:  a  policy  language  which  defines  security 
requirements and distributed policy management approach [2]. A security framework 
based  on  distributed  policy  management  can  be  developed  with  using  a  semantic 
policy language. 

In  the  literature,  there  are  various  policy  ontology  and  policy  language  projects. 
The  most  popular  ones  are  KAoS1,  Rei2  and  Ponder3  policy  languages,  and  a 
framework, Rein4, which uses the Rei policy language concepts for policies. 

2   Research Approach 

In  our  work,  we  are  going  to  examine  existing  policy  ontologies,  KAoS,  Rei  and 
Ponder, then we will determine the requirements of policy ontologies and the missing 
points  of  the  existing  policy  ontologies.  Through  these  requirements  we  will 
constitute  a  new  policy  ontology.  Our  aim  is  to  create  an  effective  new  policy 
ontology which overcomes the missing points of the existing policies and answers the 
                                                           
1 http://ontology.ihmc.us/kaos.html 
2 http://rei.umbc.edu/ 
3 http://www-dse.doc.ic.ac.uk/Research/policies/ponder.shtml 
4 http://groups.csail.mit.edu/dig/2005/05/rein/ 

I. Cruz et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2006, LNCS 4273, pp. 970  971, 2006. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006 
?

?

?
users  requests  in  a  better  manner.  Authorizations  and  obligations  are  the  policy 
concepts in KAoS; rights, prohibitions, obligations and dispensations are Rei policy 
language  concepts  and  Ponder  has  authorizations,  obligations,  refrains  and 
delegations.  In  the  policy  ontology  we  will  have  rights,  prohibitions,  obligations, 
dispensations and speech acts: delegate, revoke, cancel and request . 

One  of  the  existing  works  is  a  plug-in  application,  POLICYTAB  [3],  which  is 
compatible with Protege. In this thesis, we want to develop an OWL based plug-in for 
Protege Ontology Editor to define policy specifications. Policy rules will be expressed 
by  using  Semantic  Web  Rule  Language  (SWRL).  We  will  also  develop  a  policy 
engine to interpret and reason over policies.  

There are three policy approaches: rule-based, ontology-based and hybrid [4]. We 
are going to use hybrid approach in our work. Hybrid approach is based on both rulebased  and  ontology-based  approaches.  We  will  also  focus  on  policy  conflicts  and 
policy validation.  

Our ontology will be developed with OWL ontology language on Protege ontology 
editor. We will use SWRL for rules, RACER reasoning engine, OWL-QL for queries 
and Java. 

3   Conclusions and Future Work 

Our  prerequisite  work  is  to  create  our  policy  ontology  and  to  work  on  a  resource 
sharing  scenario  where  policies  can  be  applied.  Our  scenario  is  based  on  our 
universitys  academic  rules  and  regulations.  Now  we  are  constituting  our  ontology 
concepts. After that we are going to create our ontology by using Rei.  We also want 
to  develop  our  policy  engine  and  effective  mechanisms  to  solve  policy  conflicts. 
Finally we will work on policy validation methods. 
