Active Semantic Electronic Medical Record 

A. Sheth1, S. Agrawal2, J. Lathem1, N. Oldham2, H. Wingate2, P. Yadav2,  

and K. Gallagher2 

1 LSDIS Lab, University of Georgia 

Athens, Georgia 30602 

{amit, lathem}@cs.uga.edu 

{subodh, noldham, ppyadav, kgallagher}@athensheartcenter.com 

2 Athens Heart Center 
Athens, Georgia 30606 

Abstract.  The  healthcare  industry  is  rapidly  advancing  towards  the  widespread 
use  of  electronic  medical  records  systems  to  manage  the  increasingly  large 
amount of patient data and reduce medical errors.  In addition to patient data there 
is  a  large  amount  of  data  describing  procedures,  treatments,  diagnoses,  drugs, 
insurance  plans,  coverage,  formularies  and  the  relationships  between  these  data 
sets.    While  practices  have  benefited  from  the  use  of  EMRs,  infusing  these 
essential  programs  with  rich  domain  knowledge  and  rules  can  greatly  enhance 
their  performance  and  ability  to  support  clinical  decisions.      Active  Semantic 
Electronic  Medical  Record  (ASEMR)  application  discussed  here  uses  Semantic 
Web  technologies  to  reduce  medical  errors,  improve  physician  efficiency  with 
accurate  completion  of  patient  charts,  improve  patient  safety  and  satisfaction  in 
medical practice, and improve billing due to more accurate coding.  This results in 
practice efficiency and growth by enabling physicians to see more patients with 
improved  care.  ASEMR  has  been  deployed  and  in  daily  use  for  managing  all 
patient records at the Athens Heart Center since December 2005. This showcases 
an application of Semantic Web in health care, especially small clinics. 

Keywords:  Ontology,  Rules,  Electronic  Medical  Record  (EMR),  Electronic 
Health  Record,  Clinical  Decision  Support,  RDQL,  Web  Services,  Semantic 
Annotation, Active Semantic Document. 

1   Introduction 

The most cumbersome aspect of health care is the extensive documentation which is 
legally  required  for  each  patient.    For  these  reasons,  physicians  and  their  assistants 
spend  about  30%  of  their  time  documenting  encounters.    Paper  charts  are  slowly 
being  phased  out  due  to  inconvenience,  inability  to  mine  data,  costs  and  safety 
concerns.    Many  practices  are  now  investing  in  electronic  medical  records  (EMR) 
systems  which  allow  them  to  have  all  patient  data  at  their  fingertips.    Although 
current adoption by medical groups (based on a 2005 survey [1]) is still below 15% 
with  even  less  adoption  rate  for  smaller  practices,  the  trend  is  clearly  towards 
increasing adoption. This trend will accelerate as regulatory pressures such as Pay-4-
Performance become mandatory thus enhancing the ROI sophisticated systems can 

I. Cruz et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2006, LNCS 4273, pp. 913  926, 2006. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006 

A. Sheth et al. 

achieve.  This  paper  focuses  on  the  first  known  development  and  deployment1  of  a 
comprehensive  EMR  system  that  utilizes  semantic  Web  and  Web  service/process 
technologies.   It is based on  substantial collaboration between practicing physicians 
(Dr. Agrawal is a cardiologists and a fellow of the American Cardiology Association, 
Dr.  Wingate  is  an  emergency  room  physician)  at  the  Athens  Heart  Center  and  the 
LSDIS  lab  at  UGA.    More  specifically,  we  leverage  the  concept  and  technology  of 
Active  Semantic  Documents  (ASDs)  developed  at  the  LSDIS  lab.  ASDs  get  their 
semantic feature by automatic semantic annotation of documents with respect to one 
or more ontologies. These documents are termed active since they support automatic 
and  dynamic  validation  and  decision  making  on  the  content  of  the  document  by 
applying  contextually  relevant  rules  to  components  of  the  documents.    This  is 
accomplished by executing rules on semantic annotations and relationships that span 
across ontologies.   

Specifically,  Active  Semantic  Electronic  Medical  Record  (ASEMR)  is  an 
application  of  ASDs  in  health  care  which  aims  to  reduce  medical  errors,  improve 
physician  efficiency,  improve  patient  safety  and  satisfaction  in  medical  practice, 
improve  quality  of  billing  records  leading  be  better  payment,  and  make  it  easier  to 
capture  and  analyze  health  outcome  measures.    In  ASMER,  rules  specified  in 
conjunction with ontologies play a key role. Examples of the rules include prevention 
of  drug  interaction  (i.e.,  not  allowing  a  patient  to  be  prescribed  two  severely 
interacting  drugs,  or  alerting  the  doctor  and  requiring  his/her  to  make  specific 
exceptions when low or moderate degree of interactions are acceptable) or ensuring 
the  procedure  performed  has  supporting  diagnoses.  ASDs  display  the  semantic  (for 
entities defined in the ontologies) and lexical (for terms and phrases that are part of 
specialist  lexicon  ,  specific  items  related  to  the  clinics,  and  other  relevant  parts  of 
speech)  annotations  in  document  displaced  in  a  browser,  show  results  of  rule 
execution, and provide the ability to modify semantic and lexical components of its 
content in an ontology-supported and otherwise constrained manner such as through 
lists, bags of terms, specialized reference sources, or a thesaurus or lexical reference 
system  such  as  WordNet  [11].    This  feature  allows  for  better  and  more  efficient 
patient care and because of the ability of  ASDs  to offer  suggestions  when rules are 
broken or exceptions made.   

ASEMR is currently in daily and routine use by the  Athens Heart Center (AHC) 
and  eight  other  sites  in  Georgia.    ASEMRs  have  been  implemented  as  an 
enhancement of AHC's Panacea electronic medical management system. Panacea is a 
web-based, end-to-end medical records and management system, and hence it is used 
with  respect  to  each  patent  seen  at  AHC.  This  has  enhanced  the  collaborative 
environment  and  has  provided  insights  into  the  components  of  electronic  medical 
records and the kinds of data available in these systems.  The preliminary version was 
implemented during  Summer 2005 and tested in early  fall. The current  version  was 
deployed and has been fully functional since January 2006.  Parts of ASMER we will 
focus on in this paper are:  

 

the  development  of  populated  ontologies  in  the  healthcare  (specifically 
cardiology) domain  

                                                           
1 Preliminary deployment in September 2005, full deployment in January 2006. 
?

?

?
 

Active Semantic Electronic Medical Record 

the development of an annotation tool that utilizes the developed ontologies 
for annotation of patient records  
the  development  of  decision  support  algorithms  that  support  rule  and 
ontology based checking/validation and evaluation.  

The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows.    Section  2  makes  a  case  for 
semantics  through  a  motivating  scenario  (for  brevity,  only  one  example  is  given).  
Section 3 describes the knowledge and rules representation.  The application is detailed 
in  Sections  4  and  the  implementation  details  are  given  in  Section  5.    Section  6 
evaluates the approach and provides statistics which support the growth of the practice 
since the use of the EMR.  Section 7 lists related work and Section 8 concludes with 
future work. 

2   Motivating Scenario and Benefits 

In  addition  to  the  complexity  of  todays  healthcare,  medical  practitioners  face  a 
number of challenges in managing their practices.  One of the challenges is the need 
to  improve  the  quality  of  care,  adhere  to  evolving  clinical  care  pathways,  reduce 
waste and reduce errors (with associated  need to develop and report quality of care 
measures).  Another  challenge  is  that  of  medical  billing.  Lets  investigate  the  latter 
further.    Each  insurance  company  follows  Local  Medical  Review  Policy  (LMRP) 
which  are  policies  specifying  which  diagnosis  justify  the  medical  necessity  of  a 
procedure.  If the appropriate codes are not given in accordance with these LMRPs, 
the insurance will not pay for the charge.  Because of these rigid requirements many 
claims are rejected and the amount of time for receiving a payment is prolonged and 
in many cases the physicians are not reimbursed for their services.  If correct coding 
compliance is enforced by the system at the point of charge entry on the superbill (the 
bill  of  all  charges  and  diagnoses  for  a  visit)  the  problem  of  procedures  without 
supporting diagnosis codes is eliminated.  Table 1 contains a partial list of ICD9CM 
codes that support medical necessity for CPT 93000 EKG which were taken from the 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services [3]2. 

The primary diagnosis code selected for the EKG must be one of the supporting 
diagnosis  codes  listed  above.    There  are  additional  complex  rules  such  as  certain 
ICD9CM codes should not be selected together and certain procedures should not be 
billed for in the same claim.  In section 4.2, we will present our approach which uses 
a combination of OWL ontologies and rules to validate data in a superbill to ensure 
coding  compliance  by  presenting  the  appropriate  subset  of  linking  diagnosis  codes 
when  a  procedure  is  selected.    Due  to  the  creation  of  more  accurate  and  compliant 
claims, this approach has the potential to eliminate coding errors which would result 
in improved financials. 
 
                                                           
2  ICD9-CM  stands  for  The  International  Classification  of  Diseases,  9th  Revision,  Clinical 
Modification;  these  codes  are  used  to  denote  the  diagnosis.  CPT  (Current  Procedural 
Terminology) codes are used to denote treatments. Payment is done based on the treatment, 
but the bill must contain acceptable diagnosis for that treatment.  

A. Sheth et al. 

ICD9CM 

244.9 
250.00 
250.01 
242.9 
272.2 
414.01 

Table 1. Medical Necessity for EKG 

Diagnosis Name 

HYPOTHYROIDISM 

DIABETES MELLITUS TYPE II 
DIABETES MELLITUS TYPE I 

HYPERTHYROIDISM 

MIXED HYPERLIPIDEMIA 

CAD-NATIVE 

780.2-780.4 

SYNCOPE AND COLLAPSE - DIZZINESS AND 

780.79 

785.0-785.3 

GIDDINESS 

OTHER MALAISE AND FATIGUE 

TACHYCARDIA UNSPECIFIED - OTHER ABNORMAL 

HEART SOUNDS 

786.50-786.51 

UNSPECIFIED CHEST PAIN - PRECORDIAL PAIN 

786.59 

OTHER CHEST PAIN 

In  addition  to  greater  facilitation  of  billing  process,  physicians  benefit  from  the 
clinical  decision  support  that  can  be  provided  by  a  system  which  has  rich  domain 
understanding through the use of ontologies and rules.  Patients benefit as well as this 
ability  allows  better  patient  care,  increased  safety  and  satisfaction.    Checks  such  as 
preferred drug recommendations lead to prescription drug savings for patients leading 
to improved satisfaction.  The most important benefit we seek from ASEMR with its 
proactive semantic annotations and rule-based evaluation is the reduction of medical 
errors that could occur as an oversight. Ultimately the proof of these support features 
will  be  manifest  by  improved  outcome  data  for  example  better  Medpar  scores 
(medicare beneficiary morbidity and mortality data) for Physicians.    

3   Knowledge and Rules Representation 

We  employ  a  combination  of  OWL  [6]  ontologies  with  RDQL[9]  rules  in  order  to 
supply  the  document  with  rich  domain  knowledge.    The  rules  provide  additional 
domain  knowledge  and  compensate  for  the  limitations  of  the  OWL  language.2.1   
Ontologies.  A more complex rule specification (and corresponding rule processing) 
capabilities may be needed in future, but for our current purpose this was more than 
adequate and this choice also provided efficient implementation alternative. 

We  utilize  three  ontologies  to  represent  aspects  of  the  domain.    The  practice 
ontology  contains  concepts  which  represent  the  medical  practice  such  as  facility, 
physician, physician assistant, and nurse.  The infrastructure of the medical practice is 
given  by  the  concepts  and  relationships.    The  practice  ontology  was  created  in 
conjunction  with  experts  in  the  medical  field.  Parts  of  our  own  databases  were  the 
source for populating this ontology. 

The  Drug  ontology  contains  all  of  the  drugs  and  classes  of  drugs,  drug 
interactions,  drug  allergies,  and  formularies.  Capturing  such  information  reduces 
medical errors and increases patient safety. Furthermore, prescribing drugs from the  
 
?

?

?
formularies  of  the  patients  insurance  plans  improves  patient  satisfaction.    License 
content  (Gold  Standard  Media)  equivalent  to  physican's  drug  reference  was  the 
primary source for populating this ontology which is shown, in part, in figure 1.       

Dosage Form

Intake Route

Formulary

Indication

has_formulary

has_indication

Drug

has_interaction

Interaction

has_type

has_class

reacts_with

Type

MonographClass

Non-Drug Reactant

Physical Condition

CPNUMGrp

Allergy

Pregnancy

Generic

BrandName

Fig. 1. Partial View of Drug Ontology 

 

The  Diagnosis/Procedure  ontology  includes  concepts  such  as  medical  conditions, 
treatments,  diagnoses  (ICD-9),  and  procedures  (CPT). 
  Licensed  SNOMED 
(Systematized  Nomenclature  of  Medicine--Clinical  Terms)  [8]  content  is  used  for 
populating this ontology.   A key enhancement involved linking this ontology to the 
drug  ontology.  This  allows  powerful  decision  support  by  giving  the  system 
specialized domain knowledge.  We will use this representation to enable the system 
to suggest treatments and drugs based on the patients condition or diagnosis.  User or 
user group specific frequently used codes lists are supported by this ontology.  This 
allows  customizability  such  that  each  area  of  the  practice  will  be  given  procedures 
and diagnosis codes which frequently apply to their area.   

For  example,  procedures  such  as  Dipiridamol  injections  and  Muga  scans  are 
generally  administered  in  the  area  of  Nuclear  medicine  and  should  therefore  the 
remainder of the clinical staff should not be bothered with those procedures cluttering 
their  view.    Each  area  has  customizable  frequent  lists  such  as  Nuclear,  Pacemaker 
Evaluation, Echocardiograph, etc.  

Medical records of patients are automatically annotated using the ontologies listed 
above and are displayed in a browser. Drugs, allergies, physicians and facilities (e.g., 
physicians  or  facilities  the  patient  is  referred  to),  treatments,  diagnosis,  etc.  are 
automatically annotated. The physician has the ability to pull up a contextual list or 
even  a  visual  subset  of  the  relevant  ontology  and  pick  alternative  choices.  In  some 

A. Sheth et al. 

cases,  alternatives  are  provided  in  ranked  order  list  (e.g.,  other  physicians  with  the 
same specialty in the same area and accepting the same insurance as the patient). 

3.1   Rules 

ASEMRs  support  active  features  by  executing  relevant  rules  over  semantic 
annotations to support the following initial sets of capabilities:  

  drug-drug interaction check,  
  drug  formulary  check  (e.g.,  whether  the  drug  is  covered  by  the  insurance 
company  of  the  patient,  and  if  not  what  the  alternative  drugs  in  the  same 
class of drug are),  

  drug dosage range check,  
  drug-allergy interaction check,  
  ICD-9 annotations choice for the physician to  validate and choose the best 

possible code for the treatment type, and  

  preferred  drug  recommendation  based  on  drug  and  patient  insurance 

information  

The benefits of combining the use of ontologies and rules are two-fold. First, the 
rules allow the system to make decisions.  Second, using rules the system can become 
declarative  to  the  extent  that  additional  relationships  and  facts  can  be  added  at  any 
time without changing the code.  For example, if the relationship cancels_the_effect 
is added to the ontology coupled with a rule indicating which drug or combinations of 
drugs  cancel  the  effect  of  drugX,  then  the  capability  of  the  system  is  enhanced 
without  any  code  modifications.    This  allows  for  a  great  deal  of  extensibility  and 
flexibility  such  that  one  could  even  define  classes  of  drugs,  such  as  blood  thinners, 
which cancels the effects of other classes of drugs. Rules allow for more flexibility, 
enhanced reasoning power and extensibility. 

4   Application 

The  following  section  details 
two  components  which  utilize  semantic  web 
technologies and are currently deployed and in use by at least eight beta sites.  The 
evaluation  section  contains  an  analysis  of  the  effect  of  this  semantic  health  record 
application on one practice.   

4.1   Active Semantic Documents 

Physicians  are  required  to  thoroughly  document  each  patient  encounter.      Reports 
usually  contain  a  problem  list,  family  history,  history  of  present  illness,  review  of 
symptoms, impressions and plans.   Data acquisition and data entry is a painstaking 
process  which  usually  results  in  late  hours  for  the  physician.    One  alternative      is 
dictation.  While  dictation  maybe  faster  for  the  physician,  it  has  many  negative 
drawbacks including lack of structured data for analysis and mistakes in transcription 
that have to be corrected.  It is clear from our experience that a better solution is an 
application which understands the domain   thus facilitates the structured entry of 
?

?

?
data  by  offering  relevant  suggestions  in  a  customizable  point  and  click  interface  l 
generating complete and coherent reports.  The  Active Semantic Documents (ASD) 
EMR  both  expedites  and  enhances  the  patient  documentation  process.    The  support 
and speed provided by them enables physicians and physician assistants to complete 
all of  their patient documentation  while the patient is still  in the room allowing the 
physician to provide better care with a greater volume of patients. 

The  annotation  view  pictured  in  figure  2  is  an  Active  Semantic  Document.    The 
annotations  facilitate  the  creation  of  the  document  by  performing  annotations  of 
ICD9s,  words  and  sentences  within  the  report,  and  drugs.    Three  drug  related 
annotations  can  be  seen  in  figure  2  under  the  Current  Medications  section.    The 
drug  Coumadin  has  a  level  three  interaction  warning.    Holding  the  cursor  over  this 
warning  displays  the  name  of  the  drug  with  which  it  interacts.      The  yellow  F 
annotation warns that the drug is not covered under the patients insurance formulary.  
The  annotations  can  also  be  extended  to  also  semantically  enhance  the  monograph.  
The green A annotation warns that the patient is allergic to this drug. Clicking on the 
Explore button allows the user to write a prescription for this drug, change quantities, 
or  view  the  monograph  for  this  drug.    Exploring  the  drug  allows  for  semantic 
browsing, querying for such details as how many patients are using this class of drug, 
and  for  performing  decision  support.    Figure  3  shows  the  exploration  of  the  drug 
Tasmar. 

Fig. 2. An application of Active Semantic Documents 

 

4.2   Coding of Impressions 

Section 2 described a scenario in which the complexity of medical billing is remedied 
by  enforcing  correct  coding  at  the  point  of  data  entry  by  the  nurse,  physician,  or 
assistant.    As  a  patient  is  seen,  orders  and  diagnoses  are  marked  by  the  healthcare  

A. Sheth et al. 

provider  on  an  encounter  sheet  or  superbill.    It  is  imperative  at  this  time  that  a 
diagnosis  which  supports  medical  necessity  for  a  procedure  be  given  in  order  to 
facilitate the billing process.  This application employs a novel semantic approach for 
entering charges into the encounter sheet based on domain knowledge taken from the 
procedure and diagnosis ontology.  This application allows for diagnoses to be taken 
directly  from  the  documentation  described  in  the  previous  section.    Furthermore, 
when  orders  are  placed  the  subset  of  diagnoses  codes  which  are  defined  to  support 
medical necessity for that order are shown.  This method ensures that the charges will 
be  entered  correctly  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  process.    The  semantic  encounter 
sheet  is  shown  in  figure  4.    As  users  select  orders  from  the  right  column,  the  left 
column  automatically  populates  with  the  linking  diagnosis  codes  which  support 
medical necessity. The doctor is required to validate this choice, and ontology enables 
him/her to easily consider alternatives. 

y

Formulary_1498

Tasmar

generic/brandname

Telcapone

belongsTo

belongsTo

CPNUMGroup_2119

interacts_with

interacts_with

classification

CPNUMGroup_2118

CPNUMGroup_206

Neurological Agents

COMT Inhibitors

Fig. 3. Exploration of the neighborhood of the drug Tasmar 

Fig. 4. Semantic Encounter Sheet 

 

 
?

?

?
5   Implementation Details 

The  Panacea  database  holds  all  information  about  a  patient  and  the  patients  visits 
including the patient demographics,  medications before the visit,  medications added 
during  the  visit,  past  and  present  problems,  diagnoses,  treatment,  doctors  seen, 
insurance information, and a text description of the visit.  The method of data entry 
and data storage ensures that it is well structured and can trivially be converted into a 
single large XML.  It is important to note that the text description is not simply stored 
as one large string but as a tree structure which can be lexically annotated far faster 
and with better accuracy compared with using natural language processing. A detailed 
discussion of this is out of the scope of this paper. 

After the XML is created annotations must be applied in order to assert the rules.  
Since the structure and schema of the XML is  known a  priori, annotation is simply 
performed  by  adding  metadata  to  the  correct  tags.    The  correct  tags  are  identified 
using XPath.  This approach has a much higher accuracy them most types of semantic 
annotation techniques.  This is a result of knowing the structure of the XML prior to 
the annotation. 

The  module  that  creates  the  XML  and  the  module  that  annotates  the  XML  are 
separate  entities  on  different  servers  and  implemented  in  different  languages.    This 
was necessary as the legacy code is in ASP and most wide spread tools for XML and 
ontology querying are written in Java.  The two modules communicate by passing the 
XML from the ASP to the Java server via a REST based web service.  The addition of 
Web 2.0 technologies such as REST services allows much of the requests to generate 
from the client instead of the server.  This gives the application the ability to  mask 
latency  and  allow  easy  integration  in  to  client  side  scripting.    This  solution  offers 
much more than fixing the heterogeneity created by the two languages.  This solution 
also  offers  scalability  and  extensibility.    Allowing  the  memory  and  IO  intensive 
ontology  querying  to  be  done  independently  of  the  application  server  frees  up 
resources which may be used elsewhere. 

After annotation a third module applies rules to the annotations.  The rules used are 
written in  RDQL.   A rule either checks  for the existence  of an edge or its absence.  
For example, an 'interaction' relationship should not exist between two drugs or there 
should  be  a  relationship,  'covered',  between  a  drug  and  patients  insurance.    When 
these rules are broken  metadata is added to the previously added annotations in the 
form of properties.  Once all of the annotations have been applied and the rules are 
asserted,  the  annotated  XML  makes  its  way  back  to  the  client  where  an  XSLT  is 
applied.  The XSLT turns the XML into HTML which can be made interactive and 
presented to the user for review and edits.   

Currently  Panacea  annotates  doctors,  problems,  diagnosis,  drugs,  and  patient 
demographics semantically.  The rest of the document is annotated lexically.  Queries 
that could be ran against these annotation include but are not limited to: 

  drug-drug interaction check,  
  drug  formulary  check  (e.g.,  whether  the  drug  is  covered  by  the  insurance 
company  of  the  patient,  and  if  not  what  the  alternative  drugs  in  the  same 
class of drug are),  

  drug dosage range check,  

A. Sheth et al. 

  drug-allergy interaction check,  
  ICD-9 annotations choice for the physician to  validate and choose the best 

possible code for the treatment type, and  

  preferred  drug  recommendation  based  on  drug  and  patient  insurance 

information  

Figure 5 depicts the architecture of the Active Semantic Document component of 

Panacea. 

 

Fig. 5. ASEMR Architecture 

 

6   Deployment and Evaluation 

At AHC, the main site of deployment, the application accommodates between 78 and 
80 patient encounters per day, most of which are seen within a four hour time frame.  
The  AHC,  with  two  physicians,  two  to  four  mid-level  providers,  eight  nurses,  and 
four  nuclear  and  echo  technicians,  relies  on  Panacea/ASEMR  for  fully  Web-based 
paperless  operations  for  all  functions  except  for  billing  (which  is  currently  under 
development).      The  semantically  annotated  document  creation  in  conjunction  with 
workflow solutions such as patient tracking has allowed the AHC to operate in real 
time  mode  such  that  the  physicians  and  their  assistants  are  able  to  complete  all 
documentation  for  the  patients  visit  during  the  encounter.      Prior  to  deploying 
ASEMR,  majority  of  charts  were  completed  in  Panacea  after  patient  hours,  often 
requiring mid-level providers to complete them over the weekend. 

As  a  result  of  Panacea  deployment  first,  followed  by  its  ASEMR  extension,  the 
AHC has greatly increased the volume of patients which they are able to care for, and 
?

?

?
importantly,  without  increasing  its  clinical  staff.    Figure  6  shows  the  growth  of  the 
AHC since March of 2004.  This data was obtained by querying the database for the 
number of appointments scheduled.  The development of Panacea began in the year 
2002 and the ASEMR was deployed in December 2005; it became fully operational in 
January  2006.    In  other  words,  data  prior  to  December  2005  reflects  pre-semantic 
situation (as Panacea did not have any semantic/ontological/rule support, and the data 
after  January  2006  reflect  situation  after  deploying  the  semantic  technology.    The 
number  of  clinical  staff  members  and  facility  remained  relatively  consistent 
throughout the entire sample period.  The AHC saw growth in 2005 as they scheduled 
around  1000-1200  patients  per  month.    The  patient  volume  for  the  year  2006  has 
started  at  a  consistent  growth  rate  of  25-30%,  with  March  peaking  around  1400 
appointments  scheduled  per  month.    Even  with  this  increase  in  patient  volume,  the 
physician assistants are able to accompany the physicians to the hospital immediately 
after clinic hours instead of charting until late evening hours.  Before the deployment 
of the new annotation view supported in ASEMR the mid-level providers remained in 
the office an additional 4-5 hours charting after the clinic closed.  Main reason for the 
work  remaining  after  clinical  hours  related  to  the  need  to  insure  consistency, 
completeness and correctness of the patient record (e.g., the CPT and ICD9 codes that 
form parts of billing information captured as part of coding of impressions).   Since 
ASEMR  addressed  these  issues  through  semantics  and  rules.    Since  the  time  we 
completed  the  training  of  clinical  staff,  all  charts  are  completed  before  the  clinic 
closes, and in most cases a chart is completed while the patient is still in the office.   

s
t
n
e
m
t
n

i

o
p
p
?

?

?
jan

feb

m ar

apr

m ay

aug

jun jul
Month

sep

oct

nov

dec

Fig. 6. Athens Heart Center Practice Growth 

A. Sheth et al. 

Even  with  this  increase  in  patient  volume,  the  physician  assistants  are  able  to 
accompany  the  physicians  to  the  hospital  immediately  after  clinic  hours  instead  of 
charting until late evening hours.  Before the deployment of the new annotation view 
supported in ASEMR the mid-level providers remained in the office an additional 4-5 
hours charting after the clinic closed.  Figures 7 and 8 show the dramatic change in the 
number of charts completed on the same day versus the number of charts backlogged at 
the end of the day for pre-deployment and post-deployment months respectively. 

s
t
r
a
h
?

?

?
Same Day
Back Log

Jan 04

M ar 04

M ay 04

Jul 04

Sept 04

N ov 04

Jan 05

M ar 05

M ay 05

Jul 05

Month/Year

Fig. 7. Chart Completion before the preliminary deployment of the ASMER 

s
t
r
a
h
?

?

?
Same Day

Back Log

Sept

Nov 05

Jan 06

Mar 06

M onth/Ye ar

 

 

Fig. 8. Chart Completion after the preliminary deployment of the ASMER 

We have observed improvement in the patient satisfaction such as through the use 
formulary check as this could reduce patient costs through the check for medication 
with lower co-payments and insurance coverage, and the benefits associated with the 
use coding impression on improved billing as the basis of improved medical records 
and  billing.  Our  next  challenge  is  to  measure  these  improvements  and  benefits 
quantitatively  as  part  of  an  effort  to  develop  and  share  return  on  investment  (ROI) 
measures.  As  an  aside,  this  work  has  in  part  enabled  us  to  be  an  active  member  of 
?

?

?
W3Cs  interest  Group  on  Semantic  Web  for  Heath  Care  and  Life  Sciences,  and 
provide the perspective of semantic Web applications and deployments in health care 
arena with a focus on smaller practices [10]. 

Given  that  this  work  was  done  in  a  live,  operational  environment,  it  is  nearly 
impossible  to  evaluate  this  system  in  a  clean  room  fashion,  with  completely 
controlled environment  no doctors office has resources or inclination to subject to 
such an intrusive, controlled and multistage trial. Evaluation of an operational system 
also  presents  many  complexities,  such  as  perturbations  due  to  change  in  medical 
personnel and associated training.  In this context,  we believe we have been able to 
present convincing evaluation of the benefits of a semantic technology.   

7   Related Work 

Some other healthcare applications have benefited from the use of ontologies.  Chen 
et  al.  have  experimented  with  step-wise  automation  of  clinical  pathways  for  each 
patient, in particular, according to the patients personal health condition at the time 
of consultation in [4]. Their approach uses ontologies and web services; however, this 
approach  does  not  propose  the  use  of  rules  to  supplement  domain  knowledge  to 
compensate for the limitations of OWL. BioDASH [2] is a Semantic Web prototype 
of  a  Drug  Development  Dashboard  that  associates  disease,  compounds,  drug 
progression  stages,  molecular biology, and pathway  knowledge  for a team of  users. 
This  work  mentions  use of rule-based processing using off-the-shelf RDF inference 
engines,  and  the  use  of  rules  to  filter  and  merge  data.      Kashyap  et  al  present  a 
semantics-based  approach  to  automate  structured  clinical  documentation  based  on  a 
description logics (DL) system for ontology management in [5].  This paper describes 
the use of document and domain ontologies. Onto-Med Research Group has designed 
Onto-Builder  [7],  a  tool  designed  to  support  the  construction  and  administration  of 
Data Dictionaries in the field of clinical trials.  This standard Data Dictionary is then 
used in the collection and analysis of clinical trials data. Quality assurance in carrying 
out clinical trials and uniformity are some benefits to such ontology.   

We also note that as a SW in Use track paper, we focus on discussing a deployed 
system  demonstrating  the  use  of  semantic  web,  rather  than  attempt  to  distinguish 
research contributions with respect to years of research in AI and decision support in 
healthcare, some of which took much longer to mature and find operational use than 
the new newer technologies.  The newer technologies encompassing Semantic Web, 
SOA and Web 2.0 offer many practical advantages, including ease of use, deployment 
and  maintenance,  which  we  have  not  discussed  in  detail  due  to  space  limitations. 
Resources such as OpenClinical (http://www.openclinical.org/), where this system is 
also listed, provide extensive complementary material covering research, applications 
and demonstrations.  

8   Conclusion and Future Work 

The approach proposed in this paper combines three ontologies with rules in order to 
enhancing  the  accuracy  of  EMRs  both  by  providing  clinical  decision  support  and 
improving  the  correctness  of  medical  coding  therefore  reducing  the  number  of 
rejected claims.  We have presented a semantic approach which improves patient care 

A. Sheth et al. 

and  satisfaction,  and  enables  healthcare  providers  to  complete  all  charge  entry  and 
documentation before the patient has left the office. At this time, we are unaware of 
any application similar to ASEMR that is in daily use, especially at small practices in 
any field of health care. During ISWC 2006, we have planned to organize group visits 
to  AHC  (which  is  5  minutes  from  the  conference  venue)  to  enable  all  interested 
persons  to  observe  the  use  of  ASEMR  in  person  (a  canned  demo  is  at 
http://lsdis.cs.uga.edu/projects/asdoc/).  This  work  also  demonstrate  successful 
collaboration between academic research and small medical clinics.  For business and 
legal  reasons,  we  are  unable  to  present  some  details  such  as  error  detection  and 
reduction in this paper. 

The  ASEMR  approach  can  be  extended  to  provide  decision  support  on  a  deeper 
level.  For example, semantic associations [12] can be discovered to find even obscure 
relationships  between  symptoms,  patient  details,  and  treatments.    Semantic  alerts  will 
also be explored in future versions such as when a physician scrolls down on the list of 
drugs and clicks on the desired drug, any  study, clinical trial, or news  item about the 
drug  and  other  related  drugs  in  the  same  category  can  be  displayed.    In  addition 
ontologies  can  be  utilized  to  find  contradictions  and  mistakes  in  the  medical  report. 
Another key area of extension that we are also working on include coupling this system 
with a billing system with higher degree of automation (e.g., with better workflow and 
better validation of billing data) than current state of the art in medical billing. 

Acknowledgements.  We  thank  M.  Eavenson,  C.  Henson,  and  D.  Palaniswami  at 
LSDIS for their effort in ontology design and population.  
