NEWS: Bringing Semantic Web Technologies

into News Agencies

Norberto Fern andez, Jos e M. Bl azquez, Jes us A. Fisteus, Luis S anchez,

Michael Sintek, Ansgar Bernardi, Manuel Fuentes,

Angelo Marrara, and Zohar Ben-Asher

The NEWS Consortium
info@news-project.com

Abstract. In the current Information Society, being informed is a basic necessity. As one of the main news bussiness actors, news agencies
are required to provide fresh, relevant, high-quality information to their
customers. Dealing with this requirement is not an easy task, but, as
partners of the NEWS (News Engine Web Services) project, we believe
that the usage of Semantic Web technologies could help news agencies
in achieving that objective. In this paper we will describe the aims and
main achievements of the NEWS project, that was just completed.

1 Introduction

The news business is based on producing news items about current events and delivering them to customers. Customers want to receive information about events
as soon as they occur. Customers do not want to be bothered with useless infor-
mation, that is, they want to get information only about events of interest.

Dealing with both requirements, information freshness and relevance, is not
easy to do. For instance, state of the art workflows at the news agencies try
to address the relevance requirement by adding metadata to news items. These
metadata are used to filter the news items according to the interests of each
customer. But currently the metadata are added manually by the journalists
and this is a time consuming task. Of course the negative effect of this metadata addition overhead can be reduced by restricting the metadata to be added
to a few, easy to add, items: news item priority, keywords, editing location,
category (economy, sports, ...), etc. This is the approach currently followed by
the agencies. For instance, the categorisation is currently done based on small
(, 10 categories), in-house, category systems, easy to learn and use by the jour-
nalists. Finer grained annotations of the news items contents (like basic entities
occurrence) are not currently added. The effect of these restrictions on the set

 The NEWS Consortium is composed of news agencies Agencia EFE S.A. and Agenzia ANSA S.C.R.A.L., the Deutsches Forschungszentrum f ur K unstliche Intelligenz
GmbH Research Institute, Ontology Ltd. and Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
university.

I. Cruz et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2006, LNCS 4273, pp. 778791, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006
?

?

?
of annotations to be added, is that high quality information filtering services are
difficult to implement, which is opposite to the relevance requirement.

So, the current situation at news agencies as the Spanish EFE or the Italian
ANSA is that customers access the news content either as a streaming according
to their profiles (categories and other basic metadata), push distribution mode,
or making free text queries over a news item repository, pull distribution mode.
This of course results in receiving a lot of non-relevant content that the customer
should manually filter. Additionally due to the fact that queries over news agen-
cies repositories are keyword-based, multilingual information retrieval is not
feasible: the customer gets news items in the language of the terms (s)he has
introduced in the free text query.

The NEWS [1] EU IST project aims at providing solutions which help news
agencies to overcome limitations in their current workflows and increase their
productiveness and revenues. In order to reach this aim, the NEWS project
makes use of state-of-the-art Semantic Web technologies. In that sense, the work
developed in this project covers mainly three topics:

Annotation: Implementing a semantic annotation component which automatically produces metadata annotations for news items. In the context of
NEWS, the core of this semantic annotation component is the natural language processing (NLP) engine of Ontology Ltd.

Intelligent Information Retrieval: Developing intelligent components for the
news domain, with multilingual and multimedia capabilities, which use semantic annotations and ontologies to allow the development of intelligent
services for the news domain. In the context of NEWS we have developed
a Heuristic and Deductive Database (HDDB) component and the NEWS
Ontology [2], which covers the main concepts required in the news domain.
User Interface: We have developed a Web based interface that allows the jour-

nalists to access to all the system functionalities.

The components of the NEWS system interact by means of Web Services. The
combination of Semantic Web technologies with Web Services results in a quite
flexible and open architecture easy to extend, to integrate into the legacy agen-
cies workflows and with good interoperability properties with other systems. In
this paper, we will describe all the NEWS components. A first version of them
is currently being tested in real conditions in EFE news agency. The rest of this
paper is organized as follows: section 2 describes the annotation component, section 3 describes the HDDB component and section 4 describes the NEWS GUI.
Finally, sections 5, with references on some related work, and 6, with concluding
remarks, close this paper.

2 Annotation Engine

NEWS realized the automated annotation of news items using NLP engines for
several languages. While originally focussed on text this can also support multimedia news item processing. The next two subsections provide a brief technical

N. Fern andez et al.

introduction to the annotation engines and to some experiments that we have
performed in the context of NEWS with multimedia news item processing.

2.1 Natural Language Processing Engine

In the context of the NEWS project we are using the natural language processing
engine of Ontology Ltd., which provides news item categorization, abstract generation and named entity recognition (persons, organizations, locations). This
engine categorizes into the International Press Telecommunication Council [3]
(IPTC) categorization system known as Subject Code NewsCodes, (a.k.a. Subject Reference System or SRS) which contains more than 1300 categories.

The engine is based on a hybrid approach to natural language processing,
which combines linguistic techniques, based on patterns and linguistic rules, with
statistical techniques, used to automatically identify and evolve the linguistic
rules. There are a diversity of features that the statistical model of Ontology
Ltd. learns and later uses to process texts:

Word stems: The Ontology Ltd. annotation engine performs the linguistic
tasks of stemming and part-of-speech tagging (a.k.a morphological normal-
ization).

Complex features: These are pairs, triples and higher-order tuples of related
words, e.g. the verb buy with the noun company serving as its object. Such
pair of words conveys a more specific notion than the isolated terms buy and
company and should be treated as one complex feature. The detection of this
and other syntatic role dependencies in a large variety of phrase structures
is performed using linguistic processing.

Concept classes: Words and expressions that in a specific context play similar
roles are grouped into one class and are analyzed statistically as a collective
feature (in addition to their treatment as individual features). In the context
of Mergers & Acquisitions, for example, one may want to consider the shared
meaning of the verbs buy, sell, and purchase and the noun acquisition. Concept classes can be organized in a hierarchy, either as a tree or as a more
general graph, allowing a class to have more than one conceptual parent.

All types of features coexist in the categorization and extraction engines of
Ontology Ltd. and interact with each other. In the NEWS project, Ontologys
engines process news in Spanish, English and Italian languages.

2.2 Dealing with Multimedia News Items

News agencies not only produce textual news items, but also multimedia items
such as photographs, audio and video. In the context of the NEWS project,
we have analyzed how these multimedia items can be processed by the natural
language processing engine in order to generate automatic annotations about
them.
?

?

?
Photographs in a news agency have normally attached a textual description,
and some management metadata, such as the date, categories, location or author.
The NEWS system can analyze the textual description and annotate persons,
locations and organizations related to the photograph. We are evaluating the
integration of the NEWS system with the photograph archive of the Spanish
news agency EFE, called Fototeca. The archive contains now over 2 million photographs and about 1500 new ones are added daily into it.

Regarding audio and video news items, our approach consists in using a
speechtotext tool to transcribe the content of the audio track. The resulting
text can be processed by the natural language processing engine. The state
oftheart speechtotext tools provide highquality transcriptions and support
many languages. In the environment of NEWS, however, there are some draw-
backs: major speechtotext tools require the system to be previously trained
by the speaker, but training for every journalist is not possible; audio tracks of
news items are normally recorded in noisy environments with portable equip-
ment, and transferred to the agencies by lowquality channels (e.g. conventional
or cellular telephone lines); punctuation marks and capital letters normally need
to be dictated in the speech, which is impossible in recorded news items.

We have performed two experiments in order to evaluate the impact of the
abovementioned drawbacks in the quality of the annotations, using a commercial speechtotext tool: Dragon Naturally Speaking. In the first experiment, we
trained Dragon for one male user and one female user. We applied it to five
different audio news items provided by the EFE news agency. When the gender
of training and the one of the analysed speaker match we obtained a rate of
70%80% of correctly transcribed words. Gender mismatch however lead to very
poor results.

In a second experiment, we evaluated the impact of the loss of punctuation
marks. Our experiment was run over a collection of 171 news items. Each news
item was processed twice: once the original version and once without punctuation marks. Comparing annotations of the two versions of each news item, we
found that the average error rate is about 20%, considering that an error is an
annotation in the original item nor present in the modified one, or vice versa.

Although not perfect, experiments show that our approach produces medium
quality annotations without human intervention, and is a feasible alternative to
a highcost manual annotation system.

3 Heuristic and Deductive Database

The Heuristic and Deductive Database component has three main functions in
the NEWS system architecture:

 It acts as a Deductive Database (DDB) which stores the news items and their
metadata. This repository can be queried by users (pull distribution mode),
or used to implement subscription-based push services. It consist basically
of three elements:

N. Fern andez et al.

tology and the metadata of the news items.

 A relational database, which stores the information in the NEWS On-
 A text indexing engine, Lucene [4], used to allow keyword-based queries
 An inference engine which allows basic reasoning (transitive closure com-

over the textual contents of news items.

putation) with the NEWS Ontology.

 It uses some heuristics in order to perform context-aware instance identification (so the H in HDDB), mapping entities found by the natural language
processing tool to instances in the NEWS Ontology.

 It uses the information inside the NEWS Ontology and the Lucene index in

providing basic event recognition features.

The next three subsections will describe in more detail some of the key components of the HDDB: the NEWS Ontology, the instance identification algorithm
and the event recognition feature.

3.1 The NEWS Ontology

As stated in section 1, the main objective of the NEWS project is to apply
Semantic Web technologies in the journalism domain. Applying Semantic Web
technologies to a certain domain of interest requires the definition of ontologies
to model such domain. In the context of the NEWS project, we have developed
the NEWS Ontology. It is a lightweight RDFS [5] ontology which is composed
of three modules:

Categorization Module: Provides the vocabulary for automatic news catego-
rization. It is based on IPTCs Subject Code NewsCodes. The Subject Codes
set is a three level hierarchy that consists of Subjects, Subject Matters and
Subject Details. The top level contains 17 different Subjects. The full set
has about 1300 categories. In the categorization taxonomy module, concrete
categories from NewsCodes are defined as RDFS classes.

Management Metadata Module: Taking as basis DC [6], PRISM [7], the
management metadata included in news representation standards as NITF
[8] or NewsML [9] and the management metadata currently used by news
agencies, we have developed a vocabulary to be used in annotating news
items with management metadata. It covers, among others, topics like authorship information, news item priority and news item media type.

Content Annotation Module: Provides the basic vocabulary for news content annotation. As in principle almost anything in the world can appear
in a piece of news, we have decided to rely on a generic top-level ontology.
It is inspired in SUMO/MILO [10] and consist of more than 200 classes
and about 100 properties. The module was also populated with instances
taken from different information sources like ISO country codes standard
ISO 3166:1997-1, CIA WorldFact Book [11], NASDAQ companies codes,
SUMO/MILO instances, Web sources as Wikipedia [12], etc. As a result the
current version contains more than 11,000 instances of different classes: coun-
tries, cities, companies, persons, etc. In order to deal with multilingualism,
?

?

?
we have added to the different components in the ontology labels in Ital-
ian, Spanish and English. To relate the labels with the ontology elements,
we are using Simple Knowledge Organization System, SKOS [13] properties
(preferred label, alternative label, description).

3.2 Context-Aware Instance Identification

As we have seen, the NLP engines are able to extract basic entities from text.
But in order to achieve fine-grained retrieval results it is not enough to figure out,
that the extracted text string Bush represents a person, we need to know who
is that person by mapping the entity with an instance in the NEWS Ontology.
In order to deal with this problem, the NEWS consortium has developed the
IdentityRank algorithm based on PageRank [14]. Basically this algorithm exploits all the information provided by the natural language processing engine
(categories, entities) and the news item timestamp as context for entity disam-
biguation. It is based on two principles:

Semantic coherence: Instances typically occur in news items of certain SRS
categories, e.g. president Bush in news items of politics category. Also the
occurrence of a certain instance gives information about the occurrence of
other instances. For example, the spanish F1 driver Fernando Alonso usually
appears in news items where the F1 Team Renault is also mentioned.

News trends: Important events typically are described with several news items
covering a certain period of time. For instance when the former Pope died,
news items describing such event where composed during several days, most
of them including instances as Vatican or John Paul II.

The process to run the algorithm starts by defining a set of candidate instances
for each entity detected in the news item by the natural language processing
engine. This can be done by matching the entity text with the labels (in the
appropriate language) of the NEWS Ontologys instances. The entity type should
also be matched with the instance class to define a candidate instance, so for
example we do not considered an instance of class Region to be a candidate for
an entity of type person.

Once we have all candidate instances of all the entities, we define a semantic network with all these instances. In such semantic network nodes represent
candidate instances for the entities in a news item and arcs between two nodes
appear when the two instances have cooccured in the past in at least one news
item. The category and the timestamp information are taken into account in
giving initial weight to the nodes in the semantic network, so if an instance has
recently appeared in news items, its node is given more weight. If the instance
usually appears in news items of the same SRS category/ies as the news item
being considered, its node is also given more weight.

Once the semantic network is defined, we apply the IdentityRank to it. In
contrast to classical PageRank, the weight of a node or instance is not divided
uniformly between all adjacent nodes, but we give weights to arcs. If two instances typically cooccur, a bigger weight is given to the arc which connects

N. Fern andez et al.

these instances. In any case, both algorithms deliver a ranking of the nodes
in the network. By looking at such ranking, we can find in our case the most
relevant instances which can be mapped to the entities in the news item.

We have carried out a basic experiment with 30 news items from EFE news
agency where the entity Georgia of type location appears with an ambiguous
meaning, representing either the US state or the Asian country. The results of
the experiment indicate that the algorithm produces a correct mapping entityinstance in about the 80% of the situations, but of course more extensive tests
need to be performed.

3.3 Event Recognition

News agencies produce news items that describe events, so automatic event
recognition is an attractive feature for them. In order to deal with this require-
ment, in NEWS we had to deal with two complementary aspects: defining what
an event type is at the NEWS Ontology and implementing an event type recognition facility.

In NEWS, an event type definition includes a set of SRS categories, which
are expected to be associated with the event, and a set of language dependant
patterns manually defined by the ontology maintainer. These patterns have an
SPO (Subject-Predicate-Object) structure, where subject and object are defined
as one of the following three entity types: person, organization or location, and
the predicate can include a verb and/or some free text. The P part of the SPO
pattern is compulsory, but S and O are optional. Examples of valid patterns
could be the following:
S-P-O ORG - (buy|bought|has bought) - ORG
S-P PER - (say|said|has said)
P-O (visit|visited|has visited) - LOC

The event recognition software is based on the Lucene span query facility,
so uses the information in the Lucene index at the HDDB. Basically a span
provides information about where a match of a certain token (piece of text,
usually a word) has taken place in a document. That position information can
be used later in queries. For the purposes of this paper we are mainly interested
in the following kinds of Lucene span queries1:

SpanTermQuery: Matches spans containing a term. Basically allows to find a

certain term or token in a document and its position/s.

SpanNearQuery: Matches spans which are near one another. Developers could
specify the slop, the maximum number of intervening unmatched positions,
as well as whether matches are required to be in-order. For instance, a span
near query could be built by combining two span term queries and providing
the slop, the maximum number of positions between the results of such
queries.

1 See the Lucene 1.9.1 package org.apache.lucene.search.spans.
?

?

?
SpanOrQuery: Matches the union of its clauses. It is used to combine (with

OR logical operator) other span queries.

So, the patterns that we have introduced previously are converted inside the
HDDB to rules, each of which consists of a set of span queries to Lucene of the
types described above. For instance given the pattern:

ORG buys|bought|has bought|will buy ORG

and assuming that the natural language processing engine has found the following entities of type organization: Intel Corporation and Microsoft inside a
news item, the following query would be generated to check the news item for
occurrences of the pattern and the corresponding event type:

SpanNear(

SpanNear(SpanTerm(Intel), SpanTerm(Corporation), SLOP=1),
SpanOr(

SpanTerm(buy),
SpanTerm(bought),
SpanNear(SpanTerm(has), SpanTerm(bought), SLOP=1),
SpanNear(SpanTerm(will), SpanTerm(buy), SLOP=1)

),
SpanTerm(Microsoft),
SLOP=15

)

If the news item matches the query and is an instance of one of the SRS
categories associated to the event (or of one of their subcategories) then an
association between the event type and the news item is stored in the relational
database of the HDDB.

Note that the mechanism that we have described is based on text queries,
so it is language dependent. We make it compatible with our requirement of
multilinguality by providing versions in spanish, english and italian for each
pattern. In order to make the process of pattern definition simpler to the ontology maintainer, we have implemented a Web Service which receives as input a
pattern with a verb in infinitive form and generates variants for the pattern and
translations to the different languages. For instance, given the pattern in italian:
bambini vb:giocare calcio (note that the infinitive in the initial pattern is marked
with vb:) the suggestion service provides the following alternatives:

en: children (play|played|has played) soccer
es: ni nos (juega|jug o|ha jugado) f utbol
it: bambini (gioca|ha giocato) calcio

As automatic translation is used in pattern generation, the ontology main-

tainer should carefully check the results of the process.

4 Graphical User Interface

In order to allow the journalists to access all the NEWS system functionalities, we
have developed a Web based graphical user interface accessible via conventional

N. Fern andez et al.

browser. This interface is implemented using Java Server Pages which are served
by an Apache Tomcat [15] engine.

The first step that the journalist should perform in order to access the system
is authentication. After that, (s)he will have some tabs organized according to
the functionalities offered by the system. These tabs are:

Latest News: Push news item retrieval based on user profile.
Browse Knowledge Base: Pull news item retrieval by browsing the NEWS

knowledge base.

Query: Pull news item retrieval by querying.
Create NewsItem: News item creation.
Edit Profile: Personalization and user profile definition.

4.1 Latest News

This is the tab being shown by default when the user logs in into the system.
Basically its role is to show the latest news items stored in the HDDB filtered
according to the information on the user profile (categories, languages, date
ranges). These news items are sorted by timestamp, so the first being shown
to the user is the most recent one. The information in this tab is refreshed
periodically with a period defined by the user in his/her profile.

4.2 Browse Knowledge Base

The NEWS GUI allows different possibilities for browsing the knowledge stored
into the HDDB. These are:

Browse by Categories: Allows the user to find the news items that belong to
a set of categories of the IPTC categorization system and that have occurred
in a specific date range. The user can select one or more categories from any
of the levels and (s)he will get the news items that belong to any of those
levels or to one of their sublevels, and that occurred in the specified date
range.

Browse by Instances: Allows the user to get news items that contain a concrete instance. The tree with the classes of the NEWS Ontology content
module is displayed. The user can browse this tree to select the class that
contains the instance (s)he looks for. After clicking on the name of the class,
(s)he has to click on a Find Instances button. This will retrieve all the instances that appear in any news item stored in the database in the selected
date range. Finally, the user has to select one of the instances in order to
get the news items that contain this instance in the selected date range.

Browse by Properties: Performs a function similar to that of the previous
one: find news items that contain instances. However, in this case, these instances are not selected directly, but through the use of properties. First of
all the user selects the class of the instance (s)he looks for (for example the
class Human). When clicking on that class a list of the properties which have
?

?

?
the class as domain or range (for instance Human works at Organization)
appears. By selecting a certain property (like works at) a set of instances are
shown to the user. If the initially selected class is the domain of the property,
the instances are those in the range (Organizations in our example) and vice
versa. By clicking on an instance (for example Ferrari) the user is looking
for news items which mention the instance/s of the initially selected class
which are related with the selected instance by the selected property (that
is, news items talking about Humans that work at Ferrari in our example).
Browse by Events: This tab (see figure 1) allows users to get news items
related to a concrete event. Events (see 3.3) are related to the IPTC categorization system so the tree with these categories is shown in order to ease
the task of finding them. Once the category is selected, a query is sent to
the HDDB to get the events that are related to the category. Finally, the
user has to choose one of the available events before sending the query and
retrieving news items.

Fig. 1. NEWS Browse by Events Window

4.3 Query

This tab allows the user to introduce queries in order to retrieve news items that
satisfy certain criteria. Two kinds of queries can be performed: keyword-based
basic queries and advanced queries, where additional restrictions on metadata
information can also be specified. The process of performing a basic query is the
following:

1. The user enters the terms of the query in the text field.
2. The system tries to match the terms of the query with known instances or
entities in the knowledge base in order to perform a semantic search. If there
are several possibilities, the user is requested to disambiguate the query.

N. Fern andez et al.

3. The system looks in the knowledge base for news items that match the enti-
ties/instances selected in the previous step. If there are not selected entities
nor instances, a full text search is performed.

4. The user can click on a result in order to retrieve the full text of the news
item and its metadata, including the entities and instances it is related to.
The advanced query interface permits restricting these results by filtering

them by SRS category, news agency, etc.

4.4 Create NewsItem
This tab guides the journalist through the news item creation process, which
includes:
1. Manual typing of the content of the news item and some management meta-

data like priority or edition location.

2. Automatic categorization and annotation of the news item. The results are
shown to the user who can validate both the categories and the entities
recognized by the annotation engine. During this step the instance identification process takes also place using the information provided by the NLP
engine and a Web service at the HDDB to run the IdentityRank algorithm.
The results of this process can also be validated by the journalist. The GUI
also allows the manual addition of new categories, entities and instances to
the news item.

3. Automatic recognition of event types using a Web service at the HDDB and

event type validation (and/or addition) by the journalist.
Finally, the news item is sent to the HDDB where it is stored.

4.5 Edit Profile
One of the functionalities required by the news agencies was the possibility of
adapting the system to the user. In order to achieve this task the GUI provides
the Edit Profile tab. In this tab the user can modify, among others, the following
properties:

 Language of the user interface.
 Refresh time of the Latest News tab.
 Preferred categories, language/s and date range for news item filtering in

Latest News tab.

5 State of the Art

The news domain has a number of features that make it interesting for running
experiences using Semantic Web technologies in real business: data heterogeneity,
huge amounts of information to manage, multilinguality, etc. Taking this into
account it is not strange to find in the state of the art several projects related
with the topic of applying Semantic Web technologies to the journalism domain,
like for instance:
?

?

?
NAMIC. The News Agencies Multilingual Information Categorisation project
[16] had as main objective to develop and bring to marketable stage advanced NLP technologies for multilingual news customisation and broadcasting throughout distributed services. Though dealing with multilingual and
categorization issues in the context of professional journalism, as NEWS,
the application of technologies as ontology-based reasoning or a Web Service
based architecture were not considered.

KIM. The KIM Platform [17] provides a Knowledge and Information Management (KIM) infrastructure for automatic semantic annotation, indexing,
and retrieval of unstructured and semi-structured content. Though the KIM
platform can be integrated in different contexts, it has not been designed
taking news agencies specific requirements, as compatibility with journalism standards like SRS, into account.

PENG. The Personalized News Content Programming project [18,?] aims at
defining a news content composition and programming environment that
provides news professionals with a flexible tool for a user customizable fil-
tering, retrieval and composition of news. Though dealing with the news
domain, this is done from a general perspective so again some specific requirements of the news agencies like multilinguism are not directly covered.
MESH. The Multimedia Semantic Syndication for Enhanced News Services
project [20] will create multimedia content brokers acting on behalf of users
to acquire, process, create and present multimedia information personalized
(to user) and adapted (to usage environment). It is an EU funded project
that has just started (march 2006) so at the moment there are not available
results that can be compared with NEWS achievements.

6 Conclusions and Lessons Learned

In this paper we have described the main achievements of the NEWS project,
which has as main objective to bring the Semantic Web technologies into the
news domain. Among these achievements we can cite:

1. The development of an ontology for the domain of interest.
2. The design and implementation of annotation mechanisms (categorization,
entity extraction and event recognition) in the languages of interest (English,
Spanish and Italian).

3. The development of algorithms which allow to match entities detected by

the annotation engine to instances in an ontology.

4. The development of intelligent components which exploit the annotations
and the information in the NEWS Ontology to perform semantic information
retrieval dealing with the multilingualism requirement.

5. The design and implementation of proper user interfaces that allow the jour-

nalists to access all the system functionalities in a personalized manner.

A first prototype of the NEWS system has been recently deployed at EFE.
We refer the interested reader to [21] for more information on that. Another

N. Fern andez et al.

prototype is available for public access at [22]. As main lessons learned during
the project lifecicle we can cite the following:

Integration into existent workflow: NEWS components were required to be
easily integrable and interoperable with legacy tools and workflows. In order
to do so, we have developed our components as Web services, which provide
a modular and flexible solution. For instance, in principle it is possible that
the agencies use only some components, or replace in the future ours with
others performing similar operations.

Response time: It is crucial in the news domain, where freshness information
is a very important concern. In the context of NEWS this requirement of
news agencies had one important consequence: reduce reasoning process,
which is complex and time consuming. In our case, we have reduced reasoning
to query expansion over the NEWS Ontology.

Scalability: Our applications should be able to handle thousands of new news
items each day, and to manage repositories containing millions of items. The
consequences in NEWS were clear:

 Use as much as possible well-known scalable technologies as relational

databases and classical text indexing engines.

 Avoid reasoning to do things which can be easily implemented and per-

formed by classical procedural mechanisms.

 Use offline mechanisms to perform complex operations if possible. For
instance, the training process of Ontology Ltd. engine is performed previously to deployment in news agency.

Human Interface: If, as it is the case of NEWS tools, a non technician human
user is going to interact with our systems, the design of the human interface
is a crucial issue. Multilingual issues, usability, reliability and completeness
(it has sufficient options to access all the available functionalities) are all
factors to be taken into account. In that sense our experience when deploying
the system in news agencies was that classical tree-based ontology browsing
mechanisms (that for instance we provide at the GUI to browse the SRS
tree and the NEWS Ontology content module tree) were not well accepted
by journalists because for them it is sometimes difficult to know where to
find the class that they need. As a possible workaround to this problem we
provided keyword based navigation to allow to the journalists to look for a
specific class by name, but using personalized views of the ontologies is a
possibility to be explored in the future.

Acknowledgements

This work has been partially funded by the European Comission under contract
FP6-001906 in the framework of the Information Society Technologies (IST)
programme.
?

?

