The Semantic Web and Networked Governance:

Promise and Challenges

Jane E. Fountain

National Center for Digital Government
University of Massachusetts at Amherst

fountain@polsci.umass.edu

Abstract. The virtual state is a metaphor meant to draw attention to
the structures and processes of the state that are becoming increasingly
aligned with the structures and processes of the semantic web. Semantic Web researchers understand the potential for information sharing,
enhanced search, improved collaboration, innovation, and other direct
implications of contemporary informatics. Yet many of the broader democratic and governmental implications of increasingly networked governance remain elusive, even in the world of public policy and politics.
Governments, not businesses, remain the major information processing entities in the world. But where do they stand as knowledge man-
agers, bridge builders and creators? As they strive to become not simply information-based but also knowledge-creating organizations, public
agencies and institutions face a set of striking challenges. These include
threats to privacy, to intellectual property, to identity, and to traditional
processes of review and accountability. From the perspective of the organization of government, what are some of the key challenges faced by
governments as they seek to become networked? What best practices are
emerging globally? And in the networked world that is rapidly emerging
and becoming institutionalized, how can public, private and nonprofit
sectors learn from one another?

1 About the Speaker

Jane E. Fountain is Professor of Political Science and Public Policy and the
Director of the Center for Public Policy and Administration at the University
of Massachusetts Amherst. She is also the founder and director of the National
Center for Digital Government which was established with support from the
National Science Foundation to build research and infrastructure in the field of
research on technology and governance.

Fountain is the author of Building the Virtual State: Information Technology and Institutional Change (Brookings Institution Press, 2001) which was
awarded an Outstanding Academic Title in 2002 by Choice. The book has become a classic text in the field and has been translated into and published in
Chinese, Japanese and Portuguese. Fountain is currently researching the successor volume to Building the Virtual State, which will examine technology-based

I. Cruz et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2006, LNCS 4273, pp. 997998, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

J.E. Fountain

cross-agency innovations in the U.S. federal government and their implications
for governance and democratic processes, and Women in the Information Age
(to be published by Cambridge University Press), which focuses on gender, information technology, and institutional behavior.

Professor Fountain also directs the Science, Technology, and Society Initiative (STS) and the Women in the Information Age Project (WITIA). The STS
Initiative serves as a catalyst for collaborative, multi-disciplinary research partnerships among social, natural and physical scientists. WITIA examines the
participation of women in computing and information-technology related fields
and, with its partner institutions, seeks to increase the number of women experts
and designers in information and communication technology fields.

She has served on several governing bodies and advisory groups in the public,
private and nonprofit sectors in the U.S. and abroad. Her executive teaching
and invited lectures have taken her to several developing countries and governments in transition including those of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
Nicaragua, Chile, Estonia, Hungary, and Slovenia as well as to countries including Japan, Canada, New Zealand, Australia and the countries of the European
Union.
?

?

?
258, 559

Davies, Rob
de Boer, Victor
de Niet, Marco
Decker, Stefan
Delbru, Renaud

Della Valle, Emanuele
Dellschaft, Klaas
Dengel, Andreas
Dietzold, Sebastian
Dimitrov, Dimitar
Dimitrov, Dimitre A.
Ding, Li
Dokulil, Jir 
Domingue, John
?

?

?
201, 959

Embury, Suzanne M.
Euzenat, J erome

16, 371

Facca, Federico Michele
Falkman, G oran

Felic ssimo, Carolina Howard
Fern andez, Norberto
Ferrucci, David
Finin, Tim 242
Fisteus, Jes us A.
Fluit, Christiaan
Fokoue, Achille
Fountain, Jane E.
Fox, Peter

Fuentes, Manuel
Fujii, Kunihiro
Fukazawa, Yusuke
?

?

?
Galizia, Stefania
Gallagher, K.
Garcia, Jose
Gardiner, Tom 654
Gil, Yolanda
Goble, Carole A.
Grimnes, Gunnar Aastrand
Gruber, Tom 994
Gugliotta, Alessio
Guo, Weisen

Gustafsson, Marie

201, 959

1, 982

Agrawal, S.
Alani, Harith
Aleman-Meza, Boanerges
Amin, Alia
Arenas, Marcelo
Arpinar, I. Budak
Aswani, Niraj
Auer, S oren
Aurnhammer, Melanie

72, 967
?

?

?
Bao, Jie
Basters, Ulrich
Bechhofer, Sean
Belhajjame, Khalid

Ben Hassine, Ahlem 130
Ben-Asher, Zohar
Bench-Capon, Trevor
Benedict, James
Bernardi, Ansgar
Bernstein, Abraham 144
Bizer, Christian
Bl azquez, Jos e M.
Bontcheva, Kalina
Brambilla, Marco
Brewster, Christopher
Brockmans, Saartje
?

?

?
72, 967

Cabral, Liliana
Cafarella, Michael
Can,  Ozg u

Caragea, Doina
Celino, Irene
Celma, `Oscar
Ceri, Stefano
Cerizza, Dario
Chen, Huajun
Cheung, Kwok
Chugh, Abhita
Cimpian, Emilia
Cinquini, Luca
Colomb, Robert M.
Cunningham, Hamish
?

?

?
Darnell, J. Anthony
Das, Amar K.
