Towards a Usable Group Editor for Ontologies 

Jan Henke 

Digital Enterprise Research Institute (DERI) 

Technikerstrae 21a 

6020 Innsbruck 

jan.henke@deri.org 

Abstract.  Ontologies  represent  a  shared  understanding  of  some  domain  of 
interest. Therefore, tools to develop ontologies have to support this sharing in 
some way. However, current tools lack support of this important aspect, if they 
tackle  it  at  all.  Beyond  this,  each  interactive  system  cannot  be  limited  to  its 
utility but must also make sure that this is provided in a usable way. However, 
current  ontology  editors  mostly  make  the  impression  of  research  prototypes, 
thus not caring too much about this aspect. These two problems are crucial: If 
we dont support collaborative ontology development, produced ontologies will 
always  lack  being  product  of  a  social  process.  Also  if  the  tool  support  lacks 
usability,  the  ontology  engineering  community  cannot  expect  to  spread  their 
ideas to a wider non-expert audience. Therefore the PhD thesis in process tries 
to tackle these problems and to advance the state of the art. It combines these 
two  aspects  as  they  intervene  with  each  other  thus  making  an  integrated 
approach more promising. The improvements will be thoroughly evaluated with 
regard to both utility and usability. 

Ontology development is a collaborative effort [1]. Although a number of tools like 
e.g. [2] support this idea, these approaches never really reached maturity. 
Ontology development is also an interactive task, thus tool support cant be limited to 
utility  but  has  to  be  sufficiently  usable  as  well.  Unfortunately  current  tools  have  a 
clear lack in this respect. 

The  combined  existence  of  these  two  problems  makes  ontology  development  at 
present-day a cumbersome task. This is a major issue as it makes hardly sense to talk 
about the potential and the exploitation of ontologies as long as the basic step of their 
creation is so poorly supported. 

The focus of the PhD thesis in progress is to advance the state of the art by tackling 
both  the  collaborative  and  the  usability  aspects.  Respectively,  the  evaluation  of  the 
approach  will  concentrate  on  both  usability  and  collaboration  support.  User  tests  as 
well as heuristic evaluations will be performed. 

Integrating  high  usability  and  sufficient  collaboration  support  into  a  single 
ontology editing environment has driven this research in the direction of ontological, 
groupware,  and  usability  engineering.  The  overlap  between  these  areas  shapes  the 
domain of this thesis. 

The  three  foci  of  the  thesis  are  applied  to  each  other.  In  the  respective  sections, 
requirements  are  identified  and  matched  against  the  current  state  of  the  art.  Among 

I. Cruz et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2006, LNCS 4273, pp. 978  979, 2006. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006 
?

?

?
others, OilEd [3], Protege [4], OntoEdit [5], Ontolingua [1] CES [6] and Quilt [7] 
are considered. 

Design  principles  to  be  followed  are  elaborated.  Successively,  the  architecture 

components are addressed. 

As  proof  of  concept,  a  reference  implementation  will  be  provided.  The  tools  are 

selected before the actual realization is addressed. 

It  shall  be  evaluated  if  the  state  of  the  art  could  really  be  advanced.  Both 
collaboration  support  and  usability  of  the  developed  tool  have  to  be  considered  for 
this purpose. 

The  here  described  PhD  thesis  will  show  how  the  current  state  of  the  art  of 
ontology editors can be improved by allowing for collaboration and increasing overall 
usability. The approach will be prototypically implemented. This prototype again will 
be evaluated thoroughly. 

The prototype implementation is a currently ongoing endeavor. Main future work 

is to realize the collaboration support and to setup and run the user tests. 
