The Semantic Web: Suppliers and Customers

Rudi Studer

Institute AIFB, Universit at Karlsruhe (TH)

D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany

studer@aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de

Abstract. The notion of the Semantic Web can be coined as a Web of
data when bringing database content to the Web or as a Web of enriched
human-readable content when encoding the semantics of web-resources
in a machine-interpretable form.

It has been clear from the beginning that realizing the Semantic Web
vision will require interdisciplinary research. At this the fifth ISWC, it
is time to re-examine the extent to which interdisciplinary work has
played and can play a role in Semantic Web research, and even how Semantic Web research can contribute to other disciplines. Core Semantic
Web research has drawn from various disciplines, such as knowledge representation and formal ontologies, reusing and further developing their
techniques in a new context.

However, there are several other disciplines that explore research issues very relevant to the Semantic Web in different guises and to differing
extents. As a community, we can benefit by also recognizing and drawing from the research in these different disciplines. On the other hand,
Semantic Web research also has much to contribute to these disciplines
and communities. For example, the Semantic Web offers scenario that often ask for unprecedented scalability of techniques from other disciplines.
Throughout the talk, I will illustrate these points through examples from
disciplines such as natural language processing, databases, software engineering and automated reasoning.

The industry also has a major role to play in the realization of the Semantic Web vision. I will therefore additionally examine the added value
of Semantic Web technologies for commercial applications and discuss
issues that should be addressed for broadening the market for Semantic
Web technologies.

1 About the Speaker

Rudi Studer is Full Professor in Applied Informatics at the University of Karlsruhe,
Institute AIFB (www.aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de/WBS). His research interests include
knowledge management, Semantic Web technologies and applications, ontology
management, data and text mining, service-oriented architectures, peer-to-peer
systems, and Semantic Grid.

Rudi Studer is also director in the research department Information Process
Engineering at the FZI Research Center for Information Technologies at the

I. Cruz et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2006, LNCS 4273, pp. 995996, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006

R. Studer

University of Karlsruhe (www.fzi.de/ipe) and one of the presidents of the FZI
Research Center, as well as co-founder of the spin-off company ontoprise GmbH
(www.ontoprise.de) that develops semantic applications. He is the current president of the Semantic Web Science Association (www.iswsa.org) and Editor-in-
chief of the journal Web Semantics: Science, Services, and Agents on the World
Wide Web (www.websemanticsjournal.org ).

He is also engaged in various national and international cooperation projects being funded by various agencies such as Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG),
the European Commission, the German Ministry of Education and Research, and
by industry.
