Enabling an Online Community
for Sharing Oral Medicine Cases
Using Semantic Web Technologies

Marie Gustafsson1,2, Goran Falkman1, Fredrik Lindahl2, and Olof Torgersson2

1 School of Humanities and Informatics, University of Skovde,

PO Box 408, SE541 28 Skovde, Sweden

{marie.gustafsson, goran.falkman}@his.se

2 Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology

SE-412 96 Goteborg, Sweden

{lindahlf, oloft}@cs.chalmers.se

Abstract. This paper describes how Semantic Web technologies have
been used in an online community for knowledge sharing between clinicians in oral medicine in Sweden. The main purpose of this community is
to serve as repository of interesting and difficult cases, and as a support
for monthly teleconferences. All information regarding users, meetings,
news, and cases is stored in RDF. The community was built using the
Struts framework and Jena was used for interacting with RDF.

1 Introduction

For a community to learn, ongoing learning by its members is vital. One means
of supporting the transfer of individual knowledge into community knowledge is
using computer supported tools, which can aid in making the knowledge com-
municable, consensual, and integrated into the community [1,2]. Further, tools
supporting remote collaboration and consultation are important to all specialties
of medicine [3,4], but especially for smaller fields, such as oral medicine, where
specialists may be geographically dispersed.

The members of the Swedish Oral Medicine Network (SOMNet) are clinicians
located at about ten different care-giving facilities throughout Sweden. They hold
monthly teleconferences to discuss difficult and interesting cases. These remote
meetings are currently supported by PowerPoint presentations. The clinicians
have identified a need for a more structured online bank of cases covered at
meetings, to serve as a collective memory for the group, and to provide better
support for follow-ups of the discussed cases. It is believed that in creating,
maintaining, and using this bank of cases, community learning will be enhanced.
The building of an online community for SOMNet is part of the SOMWeb
(Swedish Oral Medicine Web) project. The project aims to obtain further knowledge about how interactive, user-centred knowledge-based systems supporting
 The work presented in this paper was supported by the Swedish Agency for Innova-

tion Systems.

I. Cruz et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2006, LNCS 4273, pp. 820832, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006
?

?

?
evidence-based oral medicine should be designed, implemented and introduced
in the daily clinical work [5]. Work on achieving the above aim is divided into
three partially overlapping objectives: (1) The formalization of clinical processes
and knowledge, (2) the development of web services for oral medicine, and (3)
the construction of an intelligent web community.

To further frame the work of this online community, SOMWeb is in turn
based on a medical information system called MedView, which contains the
basis of SOMWeb in the form of elaborated content when it comes to services
for knowledge management, together with an established user community [6]. To
provide rapid prototyping and deployment of applications in daily clinical work,
and to support the harmonization of clinical processes and knowledge within
oral medicine, MedView has been developed in collaboration between experts
within SOMNet and experts in computer science.

This paper describes an online community supporting processes of sharing
and discussing cases in oral medicine. Previous work on objective one above,
the formalization of clinical processes and knowledge in oral medicine [7], has
described how Semantic Web technologies can be used to describe and encode
medical examinations in oral medicine. This representation of cases will be underlying to the examinations stored in the online community. Semantic Web
languages will also be used to describe other parts of the community, such as
users, meetings, and news. A general description of the SOMWeb community,
with no focus on the use of Semantic Web technology, has been shown as a
software demonstration [8].

We begin by giving some background on use of Semantic Web technologies in the
life sciences and in online communities. After a description of the current forms of
collaboration in SOMNet and a survey of the clinicians desires of a more advanced
system, we will present design choices we have made in constructing the SOMWeb
community. The implementation of the community is described and some initial
results reported. This is followed a short discussion, conclusions, and future work.

2 Semantic Web Technologies

This section will cover arguments for using Semantic Web technologies in medical
informatics and in online communities. By Semantic Web technologies we refer
foremost to using ontologies and the Web Ontology Language1 (OWL), describing data using Resource Description Framework2 (RDF), and using SPARQL3
as a query language and data access protocol for RDF data. Connected with
these are other Semantic Web technologies, such as use of inference and rules.

2.1 Semantic Web and the Life Sciences
The life sciences are often mentioned as an area where Semantic Web technologies
could give great improvements. Indeed, the W3C has an interest group devoted
1 http://www.w3.org/2004/OWL
2 http://www.w3.org/RDF
3 http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/

M. Gustafsson et al.

to the subject4. Areas where Semantic Web technologies can be applied include
integration of heterogeneous data, locating relevant data sources and tools, retrieving relevant information, using inference to gather new insights, sharing
formal annotations, creating rich and well-defined models of biological systems,
and embedding models and semantics within online publications [9,10].

2.2 Semantic Web and Online Communities

A web portal collects information for a group of users that have common in-
terests [11], and using Semantic Web technologies can help portals increase the
consistency of information and quality of information processing [12]. In relation
to online communities and web portals it is also relevant to mention Content
Management System (CMS), which is software for facilitating collaborative creation and organization of documents and other content.

When describing people using Semantic Web technologies, the Friend of a
Friend (FOAF) vocabulary5 is often used. FOAF as a project aims to create a
Web of machine-readable homepages describing people, the links between them
and the things they create and do. Indeed, several initiatives for online Semantic
Web communities use FOAF in one way or another.

Semantic Web Advanced Development for Europe (SWAD-Europe) presents
how Semantic Web tools and standards can be used to build a decentralized
information portal [13], as used in the Semantic Web Environmental Directory
(SWED) demonstrator. Each of the environmental organizations that want to
be in the directory provides RDF descriptions of their organizations, constructed
using a web-based data entry tool. The data is then hosted on the organizations
own web site (similar to FOAF).

Another approach to adding Semantic Web technology support for communities has been to enable the sharing of forum posts and such between different
communities, by defining a common format for these posts, as is done in the
Semantically Interlinked Online Communities (SIOC) [14]. Its goal is to interconnect online communities in helping to locate relevant and related information.
The ontology and interface will let users searching in one forum find information
on forums from other sites using a SIOC-based system architecture. The SIOC
ontology outlines main classes, such as Site, Forum, Post, Event, Group, and
User and properties of these. Mappings to e.g., FOAF are also provided.

SEmantic portAL (SEAL) [15] uses ontologies for dealing with the requirements of typical community web sites. Such requirements are information integration and web site management. The system architecture of SEAL includes
a knowledge warehouse and the Ontobroker [16] system for inferencing. Community users and software agents access the Ontobroker through modules for
navigation, query, templates for adding data, and an RDF generator.

The Semantic Web Research Community (SWRC) ontology [17] is an ontology for representing knowledge about researchers and research communities.

4 http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/hcls/
5 http://www.foaf-project.org/
?

?

?
Main concepts of this ontology are, among others, Organization, Project, Per-
son, Topic, Publication, and Event. The SWRC ontology is used and extended
by several portals based on the SEAL approach.

3 An Analysis of Current Forms of Collaboration in

SOMNet

SOMNet aims to act as a hub and filter for knowledge in oral medicine, by providing a forum where cases in oral medicine can be presented and discussed in
distributed meetings. SOMNet meetings are organized around monthly telecon-
ferences, where about ten clinics participate. The majority of the attendants are
experts in oral medicine and the individual clinician has the opportunity to get
feedback from colleagues from all over Sweden. Mainly two kinds of cases are
presented: cases considered interesting for a wider audience and cases where the
submitting clinician wants advice regarding diagnosis and treatment.

The forms of cooperation and opinions of SOMNet have been investigated
by observing their meetings and through informal interviews with selected participants and the secretary who coordinates the meetings. Before the SOMWeb
initiative, submission of cases was handled by e-mailing PowerPoint presentations to the meeting coordinator, who then e-mailed submitted cases to clinics
intending to participate. During the teleconference meeting, each clinic opened
their local copy of the file presenting the case. The clinician who had submitted
the case presented the details of the case, after which the community discussed
it. When a case had been presented and discussed, the file was closed and attendants opened their local copy of the next case. They repeated this process until
all submitted cases had been discussed or the time allotted to the meeting was
up. At the meetings, no collective written notes were taken, and there was no
central repository of handled cases.

The described procedure had several major problems: (1) The opportunities
for collective and individual learning were limited by the lack of shared written
notes from the meetings. (2) It was difficult to go back and check previously
discussed cases as there was no shared record of treated cases. (3) Relevant
information may be lacking in the case presentation, as there was no agreed upon
template of what had to be included. It was left entirely up to the submitting
individual what text and image information to include. (4) There were recurring
problems of cases that could not be opened by all attendees, due to differences
in versions of the software and platform used to produce the presentations.

Learning from earlier meetings is thus hindered by the lack of access to and
reminders of previous cases, and by difficulties in structured comparison of different cases. Even with these problems, the participating clinicians value the
opportunity to share experiences with other experts in the field enough to keep
participating in the meetings, both by sending in cases and joining for discussion.
The introduction of a common web-based repository was a first step towards improving the IT-maturity of the SOMNet meetings. In this repository, the presentations are stored as HTML documents rather than as PowerPoint presentations.

M. Gustafsson et al.

The new practice makes administration simpler and provides a bank of difficult and
interesting cases. Since December 2003, when the clinicians first started using the
repository, eighty-four cases from seventeen SOMNet meetings have been added.
A web-based questionnaire was distributed to all SOMNet participants to further examine the needs a wishes of the users. The results indicated that the participants considered SOMNet valuable and wanted it to continue in a similar way: as
a forum for the most part dedicated to the discussion of submitted cases. Around
seventy-five percent of the respondents also said that they wanted to be able to
have access to the collection of treated cases. Ability to share cases and treatment
methods and papers directly with other clinicians was of interest to a majority of
the respondents. When the questionnaire was discussed at a later meeting, participants agreed that it was important to introduce a system that would allow the
community to in a more organized manner follow up previously discussed cases.
They also emphasized the importance of means to search the database of cases.

4 System Design

This section begins with the requirements we have previously identified for an
ontology in oral medicine. We then present design choices for the oral medicine
community which have lead us to use Semantic Web technologies and to build
our own system, rather than using an existing Content Management System.

In [7], we presented the following requirements for an ontology for oral medi-
cine, based on experience with the MedView system and interviews with domain
experts and developers:
 We need the possibility and ability to utilize external sources of knowledge.
 The relation between the conceptual models of fundamental clinical concepts
in use, e.g., examination templates, lists of approved values for terms and
groups of related terms and their corresponding concrete entities must be
formally examined.

 Relations and interactions between different entities of the ontology must
be captured, e.g., that a certain answer to a specific question in a given
examination template triggers another question.

 A stronger typing of elements is needed.
 We need to be able to capture different kinds of meta-data, e.g., who is the
creator of a specific examination template and what the purpose (scientific
or clinical) is of the introduction of a specific examination template.

 The localization of data has to be addressed rigorously: How to provide
different language-based versions of the defined concepts, definitions and
terms?

 We need to differentiate between different views of the underlying data, to
be utilized for, e.g., information visualization and intelligent user interfaces.
Based on these requirements an ontology for examinations in oral medicine
was designed in OWL. Individual examination instances are encoded in RDF.
Given that the examinations are an important part of the oral medicine commu-
nity, and that these have Semantic Web representations, using such technologies
?

?

?
for other relevant community concepts seems natural. Based on this, along with
the analysis given in Sec. 3 we have made the following design choices:
 The community should be constructed in cooperation with its users, foremost
to adapt it to the users needs, but also as the development of the online
community can be seen as part of a learning process in the SOMNet users.
 The examinations should have a central role in the community and be rep-

resented in RDF, motivations for which are given above.

 The examinations to be presented at meetings should be entered online,

using forms created from user-defined examinations, represented in OWL.

 Community data should be stored in RDF, to allow interaction with e.g.,
examination data and hopefully other related online communities in medi-
cine.

 Community data will be stored centrally, rather than distributed as in e.g.,
[13], as the member clinicians and clinics cannot be expected to have access
to local hosting.

 Where possible, existing ontologies for representing community data should

be reused.

 To allow integration with the existing tools of the project, Java technologies

should be used in realizing the community.

 The constructed community should allow for browsing and visualizing cases,

as well as query support and search.

 To adapt to the needs of the users, the community should have basic user
modeling support, with the long term goal of providing a more intelligent
user interface.

 Our plans to use intelligent user interfaces and to keep a high degree of user
customizability of the web interface in order to increase the clinicians trust in
the system [18], point away from using a CMS in favor of using a lower-level
framework with greater flexibility and end-user control.

While using a CMS would have given us a framework enabling rapid development
of some aspects of our system, other aspects, e.g., generating web-based case
entry forms from user-defined specifications, would still have to be custom-made
from scratch.

5 Implementation

This section describes how the community data is represented using Semantic
Web technologies and how Java web technologies are used to create the community framework.

5.1 Semantic Web Technologies
One part of the SOMWeb project is the formalization of clinical concepts and
processes in oral medicine. Taking the knowledge model of MedView as a
starting point, initial ontologies for examinations in oral medicine has been
constructed [7] using OWL. There is one ontology for describing examination

M. Gustafsson et al.

templates and one for classes of values that the examination templates use. The
examination instances constructed using the ontology are stored as separate
RDF-files.

The description of examination templates is further divided so that one cen-
tral OWL-file describes aspects common to all MedView examinations. This
describes general things: classes such as Examination, ExaminationCategory,
and a property hasExaminationCategory for connecting an Examination instance to ExaminationCategory instances. We also have properties corresponding to the different input-types, such as MultipleExaminationProperty, and
VASExaminationProperty. The reason for explicitly representing things that
could be handled using cardinality constraints in OWL is to be able to use older
MedView datahandling classes to handle examinations. Until those modules can
be rewritten, we are using both cardinality constraints and the explicit properties
such as SingleExaminationProperty.

All

individual examination templates refer to this central OWL-file. In
SOMWeb the main templates used right now describes what to enter when first
entering the case into the system, as well as templates for consultations from the
teleconference meeting and for consultations held after the initial examination
data was entered. Such an examination template OWL-file contains definitions
of the categories that can or need to be included in an examination constructed
from that template. Examples of subclasses of ExaminationCategory in current
use are PatientData, GeneralAnamnesis, and MucosChangeAnamnesis. In each
examination template we also describe properties associated with the template,
such as hasAllergy, as subproperties of the properties described in the general
examination description OWL-file, such as MultipleExaminationProperty. For
each property, there are also properties pertaining to description and instruc-
tions, to be shown to the user. Any relevant cardinality constraints are described,
as well as the ordering of the categories and the properties within the categories,
using rdf:list. Properties are connected to an ExaminationCategory subclass
and a value class using owl:allValuesFrom restrictions.

The value list ontology is very simple, right now it only contains classes, with
no subhierarchies, and their instances. Thus, we have classes such as Allergy and
Diagnosis, with instances such as peanutAllergy and hairyTongue, respectively.
It can be argued that this means that two patients who have examinations that
assert that hasDiagnosis hairyTongue have the same hairy tongue, and that it
would be more correct to have a class HairyTongue with separate instances for all
patients with a diagnosis of hairy tongue. However, it was decided that the added
complexity of this approach was not compensated by its benefits.

There is currently no use of inference, and the ontologies are not very complex.
The examination templates are constructed by a Java program that takes a
template in the old XML format and outputs one in OWL. The value list ontology
is created by reading the old text file of values and constructing corresponding
classes and instances. At first there were attempts to structure this value list so
that there were more subclasses, for example for different kinds of diagnoses and
allergies. However, this process meant dealing with large amounts of instances
?

?

?
Semantic Web 

Research Community 

Ontology

imports classes and properties from

somwebCommunityOntology

somwebExamination

Ontology

described by

described by

users.rdf

cases.rdf

meetings.rdf

news.rdf

examination 

rdf-files

Fig. 1. The figure shows how the different RDF-files and OWL ontologies are related.
The RDF-files for persons, meetings, cases (examination metadata), and news are described in the somwebCommunityOntology. The examinations are stored in separate
RDF-files, and are described in the somwebExaminationOntology. The examination
ontology consists of one OWL-file describing general concepts and then one for each
kind of examination used in the community.

and needed much end-user input. Our end-users have not yet had the time to
look at this, and we have no good interface for them to do it in. Therefore we
decided to go ahead with the unstructured value classes, with the argument that
we can add more subclasses later.

In addition to storing the examinations in RDF, other community data, regarding users, meetings, news, and case metadata, is also represented in RDF.
What should be included in descriptions of users, meetings, and case metadata is
described in OWL. Some of the user-descriptions are related to relevant FOAFclasses and properties. Meeting-descriptions make use of classes and properties
of the Semantic Web Research Community ontology [17]. For interacting with
the Java parts of the community, Jena6 is used. Figure 1 shows how these components are related.

5.2 Java Web Technologies
SOMWeb is built on Java Enterprise technology, using Apache Tomcat7 as the
core web container. The system is an extension of the Apache Struts Model-2 web
application framework8. Model-2 frameworks (a variation of the classic Model-
View-Controller (MVC) design paradigm) are based on the idea that Java Servlets
execute business logic while presentation resides mainly in server pages. As stated
6 http://jena.sourceforge.net/
7 http://tomcat.apache.org
8 http://struts.apache.org/

M. Gustafsson et al.

Fig. 2. Overview of the SOMWeb system architecture. The model layer contains persistence classes that read RDF-files for users, meetings, cases, and news and constructs
objects of the corresponding Java classes used by the system. These classes are also
used for making changes to the RDF model and writing to file.

in [12], reusing mature technology gives a Semantic Web portal improved usability,
reliability, and scalability.

The SOMWeb system is a layered architecture, conceptually divided into four
main layers  the view layer, the session layer, the model layer, and the foundation layer as depicted in Fig. 2. The view layer is comprised of Java Server
Pages (JSP) using Expression Language (EL) constructs, with custom tags and
functions in addition to tags from the Java Standards Tag Library (JSTL) and
the various Apache Struts tag libraries. Styling and layout of content is done
using Cascading Style Sheets (CSS). The session layer has components dealing
with the current user session, and is responsible for transforming the applica-
tions internal state into the presentation JavaBeans used by the server pages.
The model layer has components making up the applications internal state, and
is roughly divided into the major functional areas provided by the system. Here
we also have persistence classes, which read the RDF-files for users, meetings,
cases, and news and creates objects of the corresponding Java-classes used by the
system. These persistence classes are manually constructed, but in the future we
are considering using Jastor9 to simplify their updating. While the generation
of user input forms from OWL is handled by the SOMWeb system, for handling examination data we use the previously developed MedView system and
its datahandling functions, which have been adapted to using OWL and RDF.
9 http://jastor.sourceforge.net/
?

?

?
6 Results

The initial SOMWeb community supports case data entry according to userdefined templates, managing online meetings and assigning cases to these, viewing upcoming and archived meetings and their corresponding cases, and adding
comments to cases. Users can use free text search over examination data. Administrators are provided basic user handling, create an manage meetings, and
post news.

Fig. 3. The figure shows screenshots of some key parts of SOMWeb: overview of cases
at a meeting (top), case presentation with pictures and text description generated from
examination data (left), and part of an examination data entry form (right). All text
is in Swedish.

Figure 3 shows screenshots of core system aspects, such as structured case entry
 the user is presented with a blank form based on a user-defined OWL description
of the examination, in which the user enters case data. The examination description
is created in a separate editor for specifying the content of the examination, and the
user never interacts with the OWL representation. The types of questions posed
and the allowed values are determined by the underlying OWL description. After

M. Gustafsson et al.

submission, the case data is stored as RDF and a summary of the case information
can be presented (also shown in Fig. 3).

Shown in the case presentation is administrative information along with a
system-generated medical record. The record is constructed from the submitted case data and generated by the mGen document generator, using natural
language processing technology, as described in [19]. If more information about
a case becomes available, the owner can use forms specifically tailored for this
purpose to add new data. Each such data occasion is reflected in the case summary and a record is generated for each occasion. The owner of a case can also
schedule the case for initial discussion at a SOMNet meeting, as well as selecting
a meeting at which the case should be considered again, for possible follow-up
and re-evaluation.

7 Discussion

While the ontologies used in the SOMWeb community are fairly simple, we believe that it is still motivated to use OWL and RDF in our application, both
because it, among other things, gives us access to tools for interacting with the
RDF content and because we can return in the future and refine our ontology. In
the old MedView representation there was no support for refining the knowledge
model by subclassing the value classes, and a separate aggregration representation was used for this. When instead using OWL, this can be achieved using one
representation. Indeed, Knublauch et al. [20] argue that the breadth of the OWL
language offers a migration route from entry level, hand-crafted taxonomies of
terms, to well defined, normalized ontologies capable of supporting reasoning.
Thus, at first a semantically simple ontologies such as these is enough to make a
Web application able to generate user interface forms from class definitions and
describe schema useful for integration. Then, later in the ontologys life cycle,
additional expressivity can be added as developers find they need it.

However, OWL and RDF are still fairly young technologies, with the effect
that developers are not as familiar with it as with for example regular XML,
which means that initially more time is spent getting familiar with new nomenclature and new APIs. In designing the larger examination template ontologies,
the initial barriers were larger than for the community data ontology. We were
faced with confusion in the usage of domain and range, as well as a lack of
support for representing for example numeric ranges. Also, for the examination
template ontology there was more of a feeling that the right choices had to be
made, which sometimes lead to stalled progress.

SOMWeb has been designed to support the collaborative work in SOMNet (and
similar organisations), especially the tasks of setting up and holding meetings, from
the perspectives of the different types of users. Focusing on behavioural aspects of
clinical research  modelling and implementing the workflows of SOMNet, makes
SOMWeb more of a workflow management system [21] than a traditional CMS.

While this project has the goal of constructing an online community, it was
found that what the clinicians wanted was not so much to discuss the cases
?

?

?
online, but to have a common memory there, where they could contribute and
find cases. The informal communication was less sought after, and was taken care
of in teleconferences and in person or by phone. A drawback of this is that no trail
is left after these conversations, which might have benefited those not present.

8 Conclusions and Future Work

We have shown how Semantic Web technologies can be used to support online
collaborative work in a small medical speciality. The SOMWeb online community
uses RDF for representing central components such as medical examinations and
case metadata, community users, scheduled teleconference meetings, and news
messages. Where relevant, classes and properties from the FOAF and SWRC
ontologies have been reused. These RDF representations interact with the larger
Apache Struts framework through the Jena API.

By using RDF for representing the underlying information of SOMWeb we
hope to gain increased interoperability, and the ability to use SPARQL. Future
work includes allowing users to pose structured queries on the collected data,
rather than using free text search, allowing precise answers rather than pieces of
documents that match the keyword. However, the users of SOMWeb have little
knowledge that the underlying representation of their online community is RDF,
and there should not be a need for them knowing this. Therefore, the structured
queries need to be characterized in a manner graspable without understanding
a more complex underlying design.

There is currently no support in the community for informal communication,
through for example online forums, but such features will soon be provided
and eventually be compatible with SIOC. While the information of SOMWeb
is only available by password identification, we believe that using RDF is still
very useful, since we get the possiblity of reusing concepts from larger community
ontologies such SIOC. An enticing possibility is to connect several related medical
online communities of practice through SPARQL web services.
