Where the Social Web Meets the Semantic Web

Tom Gruber

tomgruber.org
RealTravel.com

Abstract. The Semantic Web is an ecosystem of interaction among
computer systems. The social web is an ecosystem of conversation among
people. Both are enabled by conventions for layered services and data ex-
change. Both are driven by human-generated content and made scalable
by machine-readable data. Yet there is a popular misconception that the
two worlds are alternative, opposing ideologies about how the web ought
to be. Folksonomy vs. ontology. Practical vs. formalistic. Humans vs.
machines. This is nonsense, and it is time to embrace a unified view. I
subscribe to the vision of the Semantic Web as a substrate for collective
intelligence. The best shot we have of collective intelligence in our lifetimes is large, distributed human-computer systems. The best way to get
there is to harness the people power of the Web with the techniques
of the Semantic Web. In this presentation I will show several ways that
this can be, and is, happening.

1 About the Speaker

Tom Gruber is a researcher, inventor, and entrepreneur with a focus on systems
for knowledge sharing and collective intelligence. He did foundational work in
ontology engineering and is well-known for his definition of ontologies in the context of Artificial Intelligence. The approaches and technologies from this work are
precursors to the infrastructure for todays Semantic Web. At Stanford University in the early 1990s, Tom was a pioneer in the use of the Web for collaboration
and knowledge sharing. He invented HyperMail, a widely-used open source application that turns email conversations into collective memories, which chronicled
many of the early discussions that helped define the Web. He built ontology
engineering tools and established the first web-based public exchange for ontolo-
gies, software, and knowledge bases. During the rise of the Web, Dr. Gruber
founded Intraspect, an enterprise software company that pioneered the space of
collaborative knowledge management. Intraspect applications help professional
people collaborate in large distributed communities, continuously contributing
to a collective body of knowledge. His current project is RealTravel.com, which
aspires to be the best place on the web to share knowledge and experiences about
travel. RealTravel provides an environment for a community of travel enthusiasts
to create beautiful travel journals of their adventures, share them with friends
and family, and learn from other like-minded travelers.

I. Cruz et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2006, LNCS 4273, p. 994, 2006.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006
