Semantic Web 1 (2009) 15
IOS Press

Converting the PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS
Lexicon into RDF with lemon

Editor(s): Sebastian Hellmann, AKSW, University of Leipzig, Germany; Steven Moran, LMU Munich, Germany; Martin Brummer, AKSW,
University of Leipzig, Germany; John P. McCrae, CITEC, Bielefeld University, Germany
Solicited review(s): Sebastian Hellmann, AKSW, University of Leipzig, Germany; John P. McCrae, CITEC, Bielefeld University, Germany;
three anonymous reviewers

Riccardo Del Gratta, Francesca Frontini, Fahad Khan, Monica Monachini a,
a Istituto Di Linguistica Computazionale A. Zampolli - Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche,
Via Moruzzi 1
Pisa, Italy
E-mail: first.last@ilc.cnr.it

Abstract. This paper describes the publication and linking of (parts of) PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS (PSC), a large scale Italian
lexicon, to the Semantic Web and the Linked Data cloud using the lemon model. The main challenge of the conversion is
discussed, namely the reconciliation between the PSC semantic structure which contains richly encoded semantic information,
following the qualia structure of the Generative Lexicon theory and the lemon view of lexical sense as a reified pairing of a lexical
item and a concept in an ontology. The result is two datasets: one consists of a list of lemon lexical entries with their lexical
properties, relations and senses; the other consists of a list of OWL individuals representing the referents for the lexical senses.
These OWL individuals are linked to each other by a set of semantic relations and mapped onto the SIMPLE OWL ontology of
higher level semantic types.

Keywords: lemon, linked data, generative lexicon, RDF, OWL, lexical resource

1. Introduction

The central aim of the linked data movement is to
make it easier to use and to share data distributed
at various locations across the web by setting up a
standardized way of structuring, describing, and interlinking datasets [3]. In the linked data model, data
is formatted according to the Resource Description
Framework (RDF)1 model. The RDF triples are used
to link together data resources which are referred to
by their Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs). Linked
open data refers to linked data freely available for
download and use.

The language resources and technology (LRT) community is becoming increasingly active within the

*Corresponding author. E-mail: riccardo.delgratta@ilc.cnr.it.
1http://www.w3.org/RDF/

linked data movement. This is the result of a greater
awareness of the opportunities that linked data offers
for setting up the kind of general LRT infrastructure
variously described in the LRT literature as the Lexical Web [4] and as a Lexical Linked Space [10].
LRT research has traditionally put great emphasis on
the standardisation, linking, and reusability of lexical
resources (LRs) and the linked data movement makes
it far easier to achieve these core aims.

The increased awareness of the importance of linked
data within the LRT community has resulted in a trend
towards the conversion of language resources, in particular lexicons, using the RDF format. This has the
added benefit that these language resources can also be
linked to other kinds of resources on the linked data
cloud, such as for example DBpedia.

By now there has been extensive work carried out
on the publication of lexical resources as linked data.

1570-0844/09/$27.50 c 2009  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

R. Del Gratta et al. / Converting the PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS Lexicon into RDF with lemon

Among the most important studies in this area are [9,1]
describing the conversion of the Princeton WordNet,
and [13] for the multilingual resource EuroWordNet.
This paper describes the conversion of a subset
of the lexical entries, namely all of the nouns, from
a large-scale, multi-layered Italian lexicon PAROLE
SIMPLE CLIPS (PSC) as linked open data using the
lemon model. This process included the full conversion of the semantic layer of the lexicon into Web Ontology Language (OWL), as well as the creation of
a resource containing the lexical entries of PSC and
containing all the nouns of PSC lexicon; these two resources were then linked using the LexicalSense
object of lemon to map between them.

2. Lexical Ontologies with lemon

lemon (LExicon Model for ONtologies)2 [14] is a
descriptive model that supports the linking together of
a computational lexicon with with an ontology, where
the ontology provides the semantics for the lexical entries in the lexicon.

lemon defines a core and a set of additional modules
that together serve to describe the basic morphological
and syntactic data typically associated with the lexical
entries in a lexicon. It also allows the addition of semantic data to a given lexical entry though mapping
the lexical entry to a concept in an ontology via an intermediate lexical sense object. This entails a clear separation between the linguistic and ontological levels of
a lexical resource which in turn enables the reuse and
plugging in of different ontologies to the same lexical
resource.

As mentioned above, this paper describes the (par-
tial) conversion of a lexical resource into the RDF for-
mat. The lemon framework was adopted for this purpose for a number of reasons. It was, the authors felt,
an extremely efficient and easy to use model. In addition it has become one of the popular models available
for publishing computational lexicon as linked data,
indeed, one might argue it is almost a de facto standard3 among the LR community. Most notably it has
been taken up by the Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing (UKP) Lab at the Technische Universitat Darmstadt and the Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF) for
the conversion of several resources [19,6]. Finally the

definition lemon is heavily based on Lexical Markup
Framework (LMF)[7,8], a format with which the authors of this paper have had substantial previous expe-
rience.

3. SIMPLE and SIMPLE-OWL

PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS (PSC) is a multi-layered
Italian language lexicon that was developed in successive stages within the framework of three major
lexical resource projects, PAROLE, SIMPLE, CLIPS.
PAROLE [16] and SIMPLE [12] were consecutive
European projects which resulted in the creation of
a wide ranging Italian language lexicon PAROLESIMPLE (in addition to similar lexicons in 11 other
European languages) that was structured into differ-
ent, interconnected layers; CLIPS4 was an Italian national project which enlarged and refined the Italian
PAROLE-SIMPLE lexicon.

The lexical information in PSC is encoded at different descriptive levels; these are the phonetic, mor-
phological, syntactic and semantic layers. The semantic layer of PSC, SIMPLE, is largely based on Pustejovskys Generative Lexicon (GL) theory [15,2].

GL theory is based on the idea that the meaning of
each word in a lexicon is structured into components,
one of which, the qualia structure, consists of a bundle of four orthogonal dimensions. These dimensions
allow for the encoding of four separate aspects of the
meaning of a word: the formal, namely that which allows the identification of an entity within a hierarchy;
the constitutive, what an entity is made of; the telic,
that which specifies the function of an entity; and finally the agentive, that which specifies the origin of an
entity. These qualia structures are used within GL theory in order to explain polysemy in natural languages.
The semantic layer of PSC, which we will refer to
as SIMPLE, is actually based on the notion of an extended qualia structure [17], which is, as the name
suggests, an extension of the notion of qualia structure
found in GL in which a hierarchy of different constitu-
tive, telic, and agentive relations has been defined, as
we will see below.

SIMPLE contains a language independent ontology
of 153 semantic types common to all of the different
language lexicons that were developed as part of the
PAROLE SIMPLE projects, as well as  60k so called

2http://www.lemon-model.net/.
3An extensive list of
http://www.lemon-model.net/

lemon users

can be

found at

4CLIPS stands for Corpora e Lessici dellItaliano Parlato e

Scritto

semantic units or USems representing the meanings
of lexical entries in the lexicon. SIMPLE also contains
66 relations organised in a hierarchy which is structured around the four main qualia roles:

 FORMAL (is-a);
 CONSTITUTIVE, such as produced-by;
 TELIC, such as used-for object-of-the-activity;
 AGENTIVE, such as caused-by.
as well as a series of lexical relation relations organized into 5 main classes: and 4 sets of lexical rela-
tions

 SYNONYMY e.g. car/automobile
 POLYSEMY e.g. chestnut for fruit and color
 ANTONYM e.g. fast/slow
 DERIVATION e.g. jewel/jewelry
 METAPHOR e.g. chicken for coward
For example, the lexical entry limone (which means
lemon in English) has three USems each one subsumed
by a different semantic type.

USem1450limone type: Fruit
USem76884limone type: Color
USemD2244limone type: Plant
Among these three USems, the PSC semantic framework implements different types of relations. E.g.,
qualia relations such as:

USem1450limone is-a USemD2369frutto,
USem1450limone produced-by USemD2244limone,
USem1450limone object-of-the-activity

USemD598mangiare,

and lexical relations such as:

USem1450limone polysemy-plant-fruit

USemD2244limone,

USem1450limone polysemy-vegetal-entity-color

USem76884limone.

Previous work [18] on the construction of an OWL
ontology, SIMPLE-OWL, based on the semantic type
ontology that was informally presented in the SIMPLE specifications, began with the extraction of the
semantic types (e.g.,Plant, Flower, Color etc.).
Relations were then induced between these semantic
types by generalising relations between USems (e.g.,
is-a and contains) and the features associated with
them (e.g., plus_edible), and adding a number of
well-formedness constraints. SIMPLE-OWL was induced from the SIMPLE lexicon using a bottom-up
strategy. As well as formalizing the typical ontological
relations derived from the qualia structure, SIMPLE-

OWL also contains the lexical relations. The SIMPLEOWL ontology was the starting point of the work described in this paper.

4. Converting the PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS

Lexicon into lemon and linking to
SIMPLE-OWL

In this section we explain how the (partial) conversion of PSC into lemon was carried out, paying particular attention to the distinction between the meaning of
LexicalSense in lemon and the concept of USem
in PSC.

As described above the lemon model requires a lexical sense object to mediate between a lexical entry and
the meaning of that entry as provided by a vocabulary
item in an ontology.

The main problem faced in this conversion related
to the fact that it was not always possible to identify
PSC USems with lexical sense objects in lemon.

This becomes evident when one comes to consider
how the lemon model is defined and its various components descibed in works such as [5] and the lemon
cookbook. Given that one of the definitions of a lexical sense is as a reification of word-meaning pairings,
it would seem that explicitly lexical relations such as
those relating to synonymy and hyponymy, were better placed between lexical senses; whereas more conceptual relations, namely those explicitly pertaining, or
that seem to pertain to the extensions of words were
better placed in an ontology.

Of course there are grey areas,5 but, given the emphasis placed on the distinction between a lexicon and
an ontology, the authors of this paper felt that it was
better to place such as relations such as producedby or
object-of-the-activity in the ontology itself.

In SIMPLE however no such division is made and
USems can be linked both by relations which which
are clearly lexical (polysemy, derivation, ...) and those
which relate to the meaning of lexical entries (such as
producedby, hasparts, ...) rather than as senses qua reified word-meaning pairings.

For this reason the decision was taken to duplicate
each USem from SIMPLE both as a lemon lexical
sense and as an individual in an ontology; the former
was then linked to the latter using the lemon reference
relation. The aforementioned ontological individuals

5Most works on lexical semantics for example consider that

meronymy relations to be lexical relations.

R. Del Gratta et al. / Converting the PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS Lexicon into RDF with lemon

were then mapped onto their types in the SIMPLEOWL ontology.

This allows one to properly distinguish between the
SIMPLE relations: so that SIMPLE lexical relations
are now encoded between lemon lexical senses in a
lexicon, whereas SIMPLE qualia relations now relate
items in an ontology. In addition to this it was decided
to use the is-a relation among USems also to induce
the narrower/broader relations among lexical items as
defined by the lemon model. We partizioned the final
conversion into the following datasets:

 SIMPLE-OWL types, which contains the defini-

tions of both semantic types and relations.

 SIMPLE Entries which contains the list of all
USems in SIMPLE converted into OWL named
individuals. These are then connected to their semantic type in SIMPLE-OWL through rdf:type.

 pscLemon which contains the lexical items of
SIMPLE converted into lemon lexical entries,
with part of speech information and list of senses.

With the following sets of relations among items:
 Extended qualia relations as defined in SIMPLE-

OWL, holding between individuals;

 Lexical relations, as defined in SIMPLE-OWL,

holding between lexical senses;

 Induced narrower/broader relations, as defined by
the lemon model, holding between lexical senses.
Here a set of examples are given to clarify the pro-
cedure.6 First of all the lexical entries and their senses
need to be instantiated:
limone a lemon:LexicalEntry.

limone_1 a lemon:LexicalSense.
limone_2 a lemon:LexicalSense.
limone_3 a lemon:LexicalSense.
Each lexical sense connects a lexical entry to a
corresponding USem in SIMPLE Entry through a
lemon:reference:7
limone_1 a lemon:LexicalSense;

lemon:reference inds:USem1450limone

Then lexical relations are instantiated among lexical
senses in the pscLemon resource. In lemon we have:
limone_1 a lemon:LexicalSense;

lemon:reference inds:USem1450limone;
simple:PolysemyPlant-Fruit

limone_2.

6Here and in other examples, we have used the Turtle notation.

See http://www.w3.org/TR/turtle/

7The namespaces inds and simple in the following examples are

defined in section 5.

The last information to be added to the pscLemon
resource concerns the narrower/broader relations. Using the the is-a qualia relation it is inferred that the
sense limone_1 is narrower than the sense frutto_1
which gives:

limone_1 a lemon:LexicalSense;

lemon:reference
lemon:narrower
simple:PolysemyPlant-Fruit limone_2.

inds:USem1450limone;

frutto_1;

The SIMPLE Entry resource contains the relations
among concepts (USems) and the link between each
concepts and the general ontological types defined
in SIMPLE-OWL ontology. As stated above, this resource contains only the set qualia relations.

1450limone

a simple:Fruit, owl:NamedIndividual;
simple:hasProducedby
simple:hasIsa

D2369frutto.

D2244limone;

Figure 1 represents the interrelations among the

three resources described above.

5. Structure of the data and distribution

The whole dataset produced for this paper is hosted
at http://www.languagelibrary.eu/owl/simple/
(here-
after base) and licensed with an Open Data Commons Attribution License. 8 The access page contains
links to:

 the indexes of PSC lexical entries and of PSC ontological referents, containing the lists of individual URIs for online access;

 a compressed version of lexicon and ontology for

download.

The resource files are stored under sub-folders of
base, according to their specific content. Table 1
shows the resources and their namespaces. The corresponding Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) of the
resources are the concatenation of base with name

As explained in Section 2, so far only the nouns have
been extracted from the PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS lex-
icon. The number of entries that have been processed
is 31232 USems (corresponding to all of the nouns
in the lexicon), out of an original total of  60k,
corresponding to 18610 lexical entries. Once pro-
cessed, the data provided a different number of effective subject-predicate-object triples, as shown in Ta-

Fig. 1. Schema of the example.

Table 1

Resources and namespaces

Resource
SIMPLE-OWL Ontology
SIMPLE Entries
pscLemon

Table 2

Files, units and triples

Original Units

50, 502

31, 444

File
SIMPLE-OWL
Ontology
SIMPLE Entries
pscLemon

Namespace
base
base/inds
base/psc

Triples
6, 332

247, 264

372, 296

To limit the number of files in a each folder, a file
system structure was created under the namespaces
base/psc and base/inds, based on the first characters of the hash coding of the lexical entry, as shown
in Figure 2. The correct URIs for each entry can be
found in the two aforementioned index files.

base/psc/2/299/limone
base/inds/2/299/USem1450limone
base/inds/2/299/USemD2244limone
base/inds/2/299/USem76884limone

Fig. 2. Example of folder structures

ble 2: Notice that, while the downloadable versions
of lexicon and ontology are collected in two big files
of entries, the online version is organized according
to the linked data paradigm in such a way that each
entry constitutes a single file. For example there is
a file limone which contains the lemon lexical entry
for limone; and there are three distinct files (one
file for each sense of limone): USem1450limone,
USemD2244limone and USem76884limone to
describe the information extracted from PSC.

8http://www.opendefinition.org/licenses/odc-by

6. Conclusion and future work

The solution presented above seems to go a large
part of the way towards reconciling the lemon philosophy of separating the lexical and ontological layers
of lexical resources with the representation of the multiple dimensions of meaning instantiated by SIMPLE.
This differentiates the present solution from possible
solutions in which all SIMPLE semantic relations are
encoded directly among lexical sense objects without
reference to an external ontology.

In a recently submitted paper[11], a proposal was
presented for translating the PSC verbs into RDF. In

R. Del Gratta et al. / Converting the PAROLE SIMPLE CLIPS Lexicon into RDF with lemon

this proposed model, a verb sense can have an associated syntactic frame as well as a predicative semantic
frame. These syntactic and semantic frames are then
further specified as regards their arguments using for
example the LMF property has Argument. Syntactic frames are described independently of specific
verbs in PSC (for example the class of transive frames
that take avere as an auxiliary). In addition different
mappings between syntactic and semantic frames have
the status of independent objects in PSC. Both of these
design decisions have been closely adhered to in the
proposed model.
