Semantic Web 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

Multilingual Linked Data
John P. McCrae a,, Steven Moran b, Sebastian Hellmann c, Martin Brummer c
a CITEC, Bielefeld University, Germany. Email: jmccrae@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de
b University of Zurich, Switzerland. Email: steven.moran@uzh.ch
c AKSW Research Center, University of Lepizig, Germany. Email:
(hellmann|bruemmer)@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

Abstract. The interaction of natural language processing and the Semantic Web have lead to the creation of a new paradigm
known as Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD), whereby traditional language resources are made available as linked data.
Conversely, the publication of corpora, machine-readable dictionaries as linked data has opened new resources to Semantic Web
researchers and allowed new tools to be developed. In this special issue, we present recent development of tools and resources
for creating and publishing language resources as linked data and tools to exploit this data to enable a multilingual Semantic
Web.

Keywords: natural language processing, linked data, multilingualism, corpus, lexicon, linguistics

1. Introduction

In recent years, researchers in natural language processing (NLP) and linguistics have discovered Semantic Web technologies and employed them to better publish and connect their resources. It has been shown that
linked data allows better data integration than existing models of linguistic data, due to the ecosystem of
tools provided by the Semantic Web, such as queryand
federation. In addition, the Semantic Web has already
been used by several authorsto define data categories
and enable better resource interoperability. The utility
of this method of publishing language resources has
lead to the interest of a significant sub-community in
linguistics.

Language resources consists of a wide range of multilingual and monolingual data that may be of particular interest to researchers in linguistics or those
building natural language processing systems. These
resources can broadly be split into four main cate-
gories: Firstly, corpora which consist of collections of
texts, with or without annotations or intra-document
links; secondly, lexical resources describe the nature of
single words, multiword expressions or terms; thirdly,

language descriptions contain broad information about
languages (e.g., grammars) as well as inter-language
comparison. Finally, there is a group of resources,
which capture metadata about language resources. It is
important to note that all of the above resource types
are generally in multiple languages and often feature
multimedia content.

The papers in this special issue follow on from
the 2012 Multilingual Linked Open Data for Enterprise (MLODE) Workshop which was held on the
25th September 2012 in Leipzig, Germany as part of
the 2012 Software Agents and Services for Business,
Research and E-Sciences (SABRE) conference. During the workshop, practical development and collaboration was established between many institutes that
lead to papers presented in this issue. In addition, the
workshop hosted the Monnet Challenge, a competition to develop the best new linked data language re-
sourses, which was won by Gilles Serraset of the DBnary project, whose resource is described in this special issue.

2. The Linguistic Linked Open Data Cloud

One of the major efforts to document and measure the growing adoption of linked data in computa-

1570-0844/0-1900/$27.50 c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

McCrae et al. / Multilingual Linked Data

Fig. 1. The Linguistic Linked Open Data Cloud as of November 2014

tional linguistics has been by means of the Linguistic
Linked Open Data (LLOD) Cloud Diagram (cf. Figure 1) for which the most recent version may be found
at and http://linguistic-lod.org. This resource similar to the Linked Open Data (LOD) Cloud
Diagram, depicts resources and the links in between
them, however in this case the resources are limited to
those of relevance to computational linguistics. In the
LLOD diagram, we three authorities (i.e. nodes with a
high number of inbound links) are evolving: in addtion
to DBpedia the existing nucleus of the main cloud
two resources, i.e. LexInfo and LexVo, provide impor-

tant local nuclei for linguistic linked data. The former
resource, is used by several papers in this special issue,
and the second is described by its own paper in this
special issue.

In this special issue we have collected a number of
papers that describe the state of research into multilingual linked data and which exemplify the gamut of
language resources. Firstly, Emilio Labra Gayo et al.
describe practical design consideration of publishing
multilingual linked data; this work is now continued by
the W3C community group on Best Practices for Multilingual Linked Open Data. Next, Sherif and Ngonga

Ngomo describe their linked data representation of the
Quran, a highly multilingual corpus. Several papers in
this issue, namely Serrasset, Villegas and Bel, EckleKohler et al. and Del Gratta et al., describe the publishing of lexical resources drawn from existing projects
such as PAROLE, Uby or Wiktionary. Then, Westphal
et al. describe PanLex a resource, which describes over
7,000 languages and as such is vital for work in comparative linguistics and anthropology. Finally, de Melo
and Chiarcos describe two distinct and complementary
resources for describing languages and linguistic data.
As can be seen from this special issue, the growing
adoption of linked data methods in linguistics has enabled new and interesting research paths not only for

researchers in linguistics but also the Semantic Web.
We believe that this continued collaboration between
the communities can only lead to new and exciting
discoveries and improved systems built on top of this
data.

Acknowledgments. This special

issue was supported by a grant from the EUs 7th Framework Programme provided for the project LIDER (GA no.
610782). We would like to thank all members of the
Working Group for Open Linguistics (OWLG, http:
//linguistics.okfn.org/) and the DBpedia
Community for their commitment to building the LOD
