Semantic Web 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

A Dialogue with Linked Data: Voice-based
Access to Market Data in the Sahel

Editor(s): Christophe Gueret, Data Archiving and Networked Services (DANS), KNAW; Stephane Boyera, SBC4D; Mike Powell, IKM
Emergent; Martin Murillo, Data Connectivity Initiative  IEEE
Solicited review(s): Michalis Vafopoulos, National Technical University of Athens, Greece; Martin Murillo, Data Connectivity Initiative 
IEEE; Ivana Marenzi, L3S Research Center, Hannover, Germany

Victor de Boer a,, Nana Baah Gyan a, Anna Bon b, Wendelien Tuyp b, Chris van Aart a,
Hans Akkermans a
a Department of Computer Science, VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Email: {v.de.boer, n.b.gyan, c.j.vanaart, j.m.akkermans}@vu.nl
b Center for International Cooperation, VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Email: {a.bon, w.tuyp}@vu.nl

Abstract. The Linked Data movement has facilitated efficient data sharing in many domains. However, people in rural developing
areas are mostly left out. Lack of relevant content and suitable interfaces prohibit potential users in rural communities to produce
and consume Linked Data. In this paper, we present a case study exposing locally produced market data as Linked Data, which
shows that Linked Data can be meaningful in a rural, development context. We present a way of enriching the market data with
voice labels, allowing for the development of applications that (re-)use the data in voice-based applications. Finally, we present
a prototype demonstrator that provides access to this linked market data through a voice interface, accessible to first generation
mobile phones.

Keywords: Voice Interface, Linked Data for Africa, Linked Market Data

1. Introduction

Development and use of the Web of Data has until now mainly focused on developed countries, as was
the case with the Web of Documents before it. 4.5
billion people -mainly in developing countries- currently can not access the World Wide Web. The reasons for this include infrastructural ones such as a
lack of high bandwidth Internet connections and reliable power supplies as well as socio-economic issues
such as the high cost of buying Personal Computers,
language mismatches and lack of reading and writing
abilities [1]. For our case study in Mali, only 1.8% of
the population has Internet access1, only 10% has ac-

*Corresponding Author
1http://www.internetworldstats.com/

World Statistics, Miniwatts Marketing Group.

Internet

cess to the electricity network2, and only 26.2% is liter-
ate3. Furthermore, there is a need for knowledge sharing systems to deal with specific use cases and content
relevant to people in the target communities. Locally
relevant content can be an incentive for people to access and use the knowledge sharing systems [1].

Currently, a number of efforts are being undertaken
to bridge this so-called digital divide in the World
Wide Web, including the recent forming of the Web
Foundation. As was argued in [2], while the Web of
Documents has been around for 20 years, as engineers

2http://www.developingrenewables.org/

energyrecipes/reports/genericData/Africa/
061129\%20RECIPES\%20country\%20info\%20Mali.
pdf

3http://www.indexmundi.com/facts/

indicators/SE.ADT.LITR.ZS Index Mundi 2011

1570-0844/0-1900/$27.50 c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

V. de Boer et al. /

of the much newer Web of Data, we have the opportunity to not let the digital Linked Data divide grow
too large. To avoid a seemingly unbridgeable gap, we
should consider the underprivileged majority and these
barriers as we design Linked Data architecture, describe use cases and provide access to that Linked
Data.

1.1. Mobile technologies

One way of overcoming the infrastructural and literacy barriers is to turn to simple mobile phones, GSM
architecture and voice technologies to build knowledge
sharing services. In Africa, mobile telephony has become the primary mode of telecommunication [3]. In
2006, an estimated 45 percent of Sub-Saharan African
villages were covered by a mobile signal[4]. And in
2009, Africa showed the fastest rate of subscriber
growth, introducing 96 million new mobile subscribers
in a period of only twelve months [5]. The widespread
availability of mobile phones and increasing level of
coverage creates great opportunities for new services.

1.2. Linked Data for knowledge sharing in rural

areas in developing countries

Linked Data as a paradigm is very much suitable
for knowledge sharing in developing countries. Linked
Data approaches provide a particularly light-weight
way to share, re-use and integrate various data sets using Web standards such as URIs and RDF. It does not
require the definition of a specific database schema for
a dataset [6]. We assume that the majority of the use
of the locally produced data will also be consumed lo-
cally. Although the specifics of the locally produced
data will differ from use case to use case and from region to region, Linked Data provides us with a standard
way of integrating the common elements of the data.
Also, because we do not impose a single overarching
schema on the data, data reuse for new services is eas-
ier, both within a region and across regions. In Section
4.2, we present an example of a prototype application
reusing linked market data.

An additional advantage is that Linked Data is wellsuited for localization efforts. Linked Data is very
much suited for dealing with multilinguality as its
core concepts are resources rather than textual terms.
Where the Web of Documents, by design, is language-
specified, Linked Data is designed to be language ag-
nostic, which suits our purpose of multilingual and

voice-based access well. In Section 4.3, we elaborate
on our efforts to attach voice labels to the data.

The combination of Linked Data, mobile services
and voice technology allows us to integrate and share
locally relevant information, while at the same time
allowing local stakeholders to access the data using
available hardware and voice interfaces. In this paper,
we describe a prototype solution based on Linked Data
for a specific use case in the rural Sahel region that
allows voice-based access to the data.

1.3. Contributions

The contributions of this paper are the following.
 We describe a knowledge sharing use case in
Mali, Africa and a Market Information System
(MIS) adapted to the local context, RadioMarche
(RM). Regarding the above mentioned chal-
lenges, RM is not dependent on Internet infras-
tructure, and has voice-based and sms-based in-
terfaces. We describe the current status of deployment of this system..

 The market data gathered using RadioMarche
have been converted to and exposed as Linked
Open Data. In Section 4.1, we discuss the data,
its model and opportunities for re-use. We show
how our design choices offers opportunities to
link aggregated market information to datasets
from other domains. The resulting data provides
an open innovation platform to develop services
with augmented reasoning capabilities for local
entrepeneurs, NGOs, governments, policy mak-
ers, traders and scientists.

 We propose a method of adding voice information
to the linked data produced in this way through
the use of pre-recorded audio files, accessible
through the Web, thus allowing for re-use of this
data in voice-based applications, relevant in the
low-literate, low-infrastructure context. We also
describe a partial implementation of this voice
data for the RadioMarche Linked Data case.

 We have developed a prototype voice application
that uses this data. This proof-of-concept demonstrator provides voice-based access to the RadioMarche linked data. This demonstrator is described in Section 4.4.

2. Related Work

We can find many efforts towards the usage of mobile technologies in an ICT for Development (ICT4D)

context. In 2013 the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) organized a forum discussing how mobile and broadband connectivity can be a tool in global
economic development 4. There are many international
research initiatives and practitioners turning to mobile services for information sharing in rural developing areas. Examples include SPIDER 5, IDRC 6 or the
Nethope network of ICT4D practitioners 7. Success
stories of such mobile services include studies in fishing villages in India [7], grain markets in Niger [8] or
crop markets in Uganda [9].

Related work on voice technologies started in the
1930s in research on speech recognition. The first
commercial deployments of voice-based services took
place in the early 1970s. Major achievements on
language recognition took place in the 1980s and
1990s, but this was mainly focused on English. While
Text-To-Speech and Speech Recognition are key in
voice application development, the creation of the
VoiceXML standard by the W3C Voice Browser
group, in 1999, further facilitated the development of
voice applications [10].

Agarwal et al. from IBM Research India, developed a system to enable authorship of voice content for 2G phone in a Web space, they named the
WWTW (World-Wide Telecom Web). The whole system creates a closed web space, within the phone
network. Linking from one voice site to the other is
done through a protocol HSTP, created by IBM. Especially the lack of open search possibility constrains its
growth [11].

Several automated Market Information Systems
(MIS) have been developed and built to support farmers and agricultural trade in developing countries. One
of the well-known systems is ESOKO 8, an online market system, developed and built in Ghana. ESOKO enables sellers and buyers to exchange market informa-
tion. Google started a project in Uganda in 2009, partnering with MTN and Grameen Foundation to develop
mobile applications that serve the needs of poor and
other vulnerable individuals and communities, most of
whom have limited access to information and communications technology [12]. This system is based on
SMS but does not allow voice access.

4http://www.itu.int/en/wtpf-13/
5https://spidercenter.org/
6http://www.idrc.ca/
7http://nethope.org/
8http://www.esoko.com/

The Web Foundation has started the Open (Gov-
ernment) Data to "Conduct country level actions and
global actions to increase the impact and benefits of
Open Data worldwide" [13]. This effort focuses on
opening government data in developing countries such
as Ghana. Our data is initially designed to be produced
and consumed by the regional farmers themselves.
Linking our regional data to the (Linked) Open government data could increase the value of both datasets.
A related project on Linked Data for developing countries is described by Gueret et al. [14]. The SemanticXO is a system that connects rugged, low-power,
low-cost robust small laptops for empowerment of
poor communities in developing countries.

3. The RadioMarche Market Information System

Our efforts center around, RadioMarche [15,16], a
web-based information system developed within the
VOICES project9 aimed at stimulating agricultural
trade in the Sahel region. The RadioMarche system is a
MIS that supports local farmers of Non-Timber Forest
Products (NTFPs) such as honey, tamarind and shea
nuts. It was introduced under support of a local partner
NGO, Sahel Eco10, in the Tominian Area in Mali.

RadioMarche is used to distribute up-to-date market information via community radio in the area. A
Sahel Eco staff member receives offerings from local
farmers representatives in the form of an SMS text
message, containing information about a product of-
fer: quantity, quality, price, name of the seller, village,
phone number, etc. The SMS information is entered
manually into a web form. The information is then accessible for employees of local community radio stations through either the Web or through a first generation mobile-phone accessible voice interface.

For the voice interface, the market data is converted
to audio files using a slot-and-filler Text to Speech
(TTS) system [17]. This audio is produced in multiple languages, including "small" languages spoken in
the region such as Bambara and Bomu. The generated audio is made accessible through an interactive
voice response (IVR) system using the open standardized VoiceXML11 language. Radio station personnel
can access the market information in their specific lan-

9http://www.mvoices.eu
10http://www.saheleco.net
11http://www.w3.org/TR/voicexml20/

V. de Boer et al. /

tool12 of the ClioPatria semantic framework [18]. The
XMLRDF tool allows us to convert XML documents
to arbitrary RDF structures in an interactive way, using simple RDF graph rewriting rules. The conversion
is run whenever the RadioMarche database is updated
to ensure the database of the deployed version and the
linked data store of our prototype are synchronized.
The RDF triples are stored in a triple store13.

We utilize PURLs for the resource URIs with an
appropriate namespace chosen14. An HTTP request to
these PURL URIs is redirected to the ClioPatria server.
Through ClioPatrias Linked Data package, the RDF
data is accessible as Linked Open Data. The result of
an HTTP request for a resource is either a humanreadable web page or the raw RDF triples describing
the resource depending on the accept header in the
HTTP request. For example rm:village_Samoukuy/
shows all information about the Samoukuy village. A
SPARQL endpoint is also provided15.

As of March 2013, 90 market offerings are in the
triple store. These market offerings are made by 17
different farmers, living in 16 different villages spread
across 6 regional zones. The market offerings contain the quality, quantity and type of the product as well
as the price and contact information. Furthermore, offerings are grouped in so-called communiques, designed to be sent to local radios for broadcast. In total,
the market data consists of 1,952 triples.

We have manually added a number of mapping

links:

 Zones and villages are mapped to GeoNames16
concepts. Not all villages identified in the GeoNames dataset, speaking to the remote nature of the
data.

 The product types were mapped to the Agrovoc
thesaurus17 which contains in up to 21 languages
covering topics related to food, nutrition, agricul-
ture, fisheries, forestry, environment and other related domains.

12http://semanticweb.cs.vu.nl/xmlrdf/
13The triple store is available at http://semanticweb.cs.

vu.nl/radiomarche/

14http://purl.org/collections/w4ra/

radiomarche/

15http://semanticweb.cs.vu.nl/radiomarche/

sparql/, an interactive SPARQL query environment is provided
at
http://semanticweb.cs.vu.nl/radiomarche/
flint/

16http://www.geonames.org/
17http://www.fao.org/agrovoc/

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the linked market data prototype
demonstrator.

guage using their phone and broadcast the audio to the
public.

RadioMarche has been deployed from November 2011-November 2012 in the Tominian region in
Mali. Feedback from this pilot phase was positive and
showed that indeed the system was used to distribute
market information in the region more effectively. In
fact, the demand for honey offered became so large
that the supply could not cope [16]. For this reason,
the RadioMarche system is at the time of writing not
collecting and disseminating new offerings. However,
Sahel Eco is currently looking to restart the service,
embedding the service in other efforts that stimulate
the value-chain. One key lesson here is that even a successful ICT deployment is not sustainable if further up
or down the value-chain the requirements created by
the new situation can not be met.

4. The Linked Market Data Demonstrator

In this section we describe a prototype demonstrator developed in parallel which exposes the market
data gathered through the RadioMarche system using
Linked Data approaches, so that new opportunities for
product and service innovation in agriculture and other
domains can be unleashed.

4.1. The linked market data

The high-level setup of the Linked Data prototype
demonstrator and how it relates to RadioMarche is
shown in Figure 1. To obtain the Linked Data, we
translate a copy of the up-to-date market information from the RadioMarche prototype deployed in the
Tominian region to RDF triples using the XMLRDF

      ClioPatria Linked Data server Linked Data Cloud Linked market data      Locally deployed RadioMarche instance Market data XMLRDF rewrite rules Voice browser (Voxeo Evolution) VoiceXML-to-SPARQL Web access Voice access V. de Boer et al. /

Fig. 2. Screenshot of the "Ecomash" prototype application. This application uses linked external information from GeoNames, DBPedia and
Agrovoc to display data on a map and provide background information [19].

 Some zones and villages as well as products are

mapped to DBpedia18 resources.

 To facilitate reuse of this e-business data, we have
therefore established a partial mapping from our
schema to the GoodRelations vocabulary [20]. In
total 7 classes and 9 properties are mapped to
GoodRelations classes and properties.

 Similarly, we have added 5 mappings from RM
classes and properties to the FOAF vocabulary19.

4.2. Ecomash

To show the added value of linking the locally produced market data to these external sources on the Web
of Data, we have developed prototype mashup applica-
tion, Ecomash. This application was based on requirements put forward by our local NGO partner. Figure
2 shows a screenshot of this mashup application. This
application is designed to be used by this and other
NGOs to monitor local markets. Local product offerings can be filtered in an interactive table or browsed
via an interactive map (using the GeoNames links) and

18http://en.dbpedia.org/
19http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/

external product information (from the DBPedia and
Agrovoc links) are presented to the user[19].

4.3. Linked voice data

RDF allows for a single resource, identified by a
URI (eg. rm:shea_nuts) to have multiple language
labels (eg. Shea Nuts@en and Amande de Kar-
ite@fr). For widely spoken world languages, such as
English, French or Chinese, good off-the-shelf TTS
systems are available, which can be used by voicebased systems to utter a product name in that lan-
guage. However, for smaller languages, these TTS systems do not exist. In our case, the Bambara and Bomu
languages of the RadioMarche stakeholders lack such
systems. In this case, augmenting the data with voice
labels increases the opportunities for re-using this market data for voice-applications. Since this concerns a
limited amount of data within a closed domain, it is
feasible to record voice labels for the data items.

We propose voice labels, that are complementary to
rdfs:label constructs and link web-accessible wave
files, identified through URIs to RDF resources. For
this purpose, we introduce the speakle:voicelabel

V. de Boer et al. /

triple
repre-
Fig. 3. Example RDF graph snippet of
sented using ellipses,
labels are represented using arrows. The namespace
http://purl.org/collections/w4ra/radiomarche/ is abbreviated to rm:. The figure shows how web-accessible multilingual
audio files are related market data resources. Note that only a small part of the market data related to offerings and product types is shown.

in the
typed relations between resources and to literal

linked market data

store. Resources have URIs

and are

properties20. To allow for multilingual voice labels,
we furthermore define language-specific voice label subproperties (speakle:voicelabel_en, speakle:
voicelabel_fr etc.). Rather than have a literal as
range, the voice label property points to an audio web
resource such as a wave file. Voice applications can
fetch these audio files when needed and insert them
into the voice user interface as needed. The speakle
schema is currently very limited but can be extended
to allow -for example- for audio labels of different
speakers. In Figure 3, we show how in the case of
our linked market data audio and literal labels can be
mixed, for different languages. As a proof of concept,
for our Linked Market Data demonstrator, we recorded
a number of audio labels in Dutch and English21 and
added them to the Linked Data using the voice label
triples.

20The current namespace for the speakle schema is http://

purl.org/collections/w4ra/speakle

21Languages spoken by the authors

4.4. Voice-based access to Linked Data

As presented in the previous sections,

the RadioMarche linked market data can be browsed through
a web interface or can be re-used in mashup appli-
cations. However, as stated, our goal is to provide
a voice-based interface that allows market information access for users having a first-generation mobile
phone. As a proof-of-concept, we have implemented
a voice-based interface to the linked market data. The
voice application is built using VoiceXML [10], the
industry standard for developing voice applications.
The application allows limited browsing of the latest
market offerings. We have implemented a partial bilingual interface, in English and Dutch, using the voice
labels in the voice interface.

The prototype voice application is running on the
Voxeo Evolution platform22. This platform includes a
voice browser, which is able to interpret VoiceXML
documents, includes (English) TTS and provides a

22http://evolution.voxeo.com

rm:offering0001 rm:shea_butter rm:1000 rdfs:label rdfs:label Amande de Karite@fr Shea Nuts@en speakle:voicelabel_ba rm:audio_shea_nl.wav rm:audio_shea_ba.wav speakle:voicelabel_nl rdfs:label 1000 speakle:voicelabel_ba rm:audio_1000_nl.wav rm:audio_1000_ba.wav speakle:voicelabel_nl rm:Mazankuy_Diarra rm:kilo rdfs:label kilo@en speakle:voicelabel_ba rm:audio_kilo_nl.wav rm:audio_kilo_ba.wav speakle:voicelabel_nl rm:has_contact V. de Boer et al. /

number of ways to access the Voice application.
These include the Skype VoIP number +99000936
9996162208 and the local (Dutch) phone number
+31208080855. When any of these numbers is called,
the voice application accesses a VoiceXML document.
This document defines the dialogue structure for the
application. In the current demonstrator, the caller is
presented with two options, to browse the data by product or region, or to listen to the latest offering. The
caller presses the code on his or her keypad (Dual Tone
Multi-Frequency or DTMF). The voice application interprets the choice and forwards the caller to a new
voice menu. For products, the caller must select the
type of product (press 1 for Tamarind, press 2 for
Honey, etc.), for regions the caller is presented with
a list of regions to choose from. The application then
accesses a PHP document on the remote server, the
choice is passed as a HTTP GET variable.

In the PHP document a SPARQL query corresponding to the user choice is constructed. This SPARQL
query is then passed to the Linked Market Data server,
which returns the appropriate results in the correct lan-
guage. For a product query, all (recent) offerings about
that product are returned, including the links to the
wave files of the quantity, unit, contact information etc.
For each result the PHP code inserts the URLs of the
voice resource into the VoiceXML code at the appropriate spot. In this way, a sequence of audio files is
played to the caller, providing him or her with the requested information. Figure 4 shows a fragment of the
VoiceXML code.

Of course, the current method of accessing the data
is only one of many possible actions. In a different
voice application a caller could be presented with advanced filtering options (enter the maximum price for
offerings of product X, enter a date range for product offerings) or combinations of data queries. How-
ever, because of the slow and linear nature of voice interfaces -when compared to visual user interfaces- options have to be limited more than with visual inter-
faces. This means that in our research we will identify useful services on this data and provide Voice-to-
SPARQL mappings for these services.

5. Discussion and work in progress

The previous sections describe first efforts into exposing locally produced data in rural areas in developing countries as linked data. We have described a
small prototype voice application that provides access

<vxml version = "2.1" >

<property name="inputmodes" value="dtmf" />
<form id="result">

<block>

<prompt>

These are the top three current
offerings for Tamarin
<break time="0.5s"/>
<audio src="http://.../AndiaKalakodio_en.wav"/>
offers
<audio src="http://.../450_00_en.wav"/>
<audio src="http://.../Kg_en.wav"/> for
<audio src="http://.../250_00_en.wav"/>
<audio src="http://.../CFA_en.wav"/>
<break time="0.5s"/>
...
<break time="0.5s"/>

</prompt>
<goto next="mytest.xml"/>

</block>

</form>

</vxml>

Fig. 4. Example VoiceXML code snippet, generated by the PHP
code, using the results from a SPARQL query. For brevity, the URLs
of the audio files are abbreviated (...). Note that the introduction The
following..., offers and for are to be interpreted by the (in this
case English) TTS. These utterances are considered part of the application and it would be the responsibility of the application developer rather than the (linked) data provider to provide audio versions
for them.

to this data. Currently, to allow for easy testing, this access is in English and Dutch only. However, for the RadioMarche system, a great number of audio recordings
-used in the slot-and-filler TTS- are available that correspond to the data items in the Linked Market Data.
We can use these to add Bambara and Bomu voice labels to the linked data. We are currently planning on
realizing this full integration. Any missing items, such
as the application-specific utterances would have to be
recorded locally.

5.1. Sustainability

As stated in Section 3, the RadioMarche service is
currently online but not accepting or distributing new
offerings due to issues in different parts of the value
chain. Sahel Eco is currently looking at restarting the
service, which would result in a steady flow of new
market information into the database and therefore in
the linked data store.

To ensure sustainability, we are currently transferring the hardware and software that runs the service to
a local business partner23. Local ownership and control is one of the key issues for the sustainability of
rural ICT projects [21]. Within the VOICES project,

23http://yeleman.com/

V. de Boer et al. /

multiple business models have been developed to analyze the financial sustainability of the RadioMarche
project [22].

One issue concerns the costs of phone calls for accessing the voice interface. Interviews with stakeholders confirm a willingness to pay for phone calls to a
system, given that some economic benefit is gained
from the call. However, we are looking at ways of limiting these costs. One opportunity is allowing for access to data via (cheaper) SMS text messages. Simple
text queries can be processed by the MIS and replies
can be presented in SMS text messages. An added
benefit is that the answer is stored on the users de-
vice. However, in our specific case study, most users
have a low literacy level and are not comfortable using
text messages. The arrival of higher-generation mobile
phones (i.e. feature phones) allows the development of
text-to-voice applications that can generate voice messages out of the text. This would overcome the literacy barrier, while still cutting costs. However, currently such phones are not available in our case study
context.

Another way of reducing costs for end users is
having other stakeholders reimburse costs made for
calling. We are currently investigating various value
propositions which involve different local stakeholders
including local entrepreneurs, NGOs, farmers, potential buyers and community radio stations broadcasting
the market data.

Currently, the linked market data and the voice interface demonstrator are still maintained using the Voxeo
Evolution platform, PURL servers and the VU University Amsterdam web server. The voice application is
also only reachable through a Dutch local phone number or Skype access. Sustainability of the linked data
and the client application is currently ensured through
the stability of the Linked Data platform at the University and the ability to convert new data as it is gathered
in the RadioMarche system. Even beyond the VOICES
project, this service will be maintained at the univer-
sity. However, to ensure sustainability in the long run,
this infrastructure would also have to be moved to
the rural regions itself as much as possible. The Orange Emerginov platform24 can provide the web server
and voice browser technology needed for this infrastructure and include local Malian phone numbers. The
Linked Data servers, voice-interfaces and client applications can be moved to this platform at testing or

deployment time. A second option is entirely local.
This version has the data and applications running on
a web-connected dedicated laptop that is be deployed
locally. The voice channel is provided by a local voice
browser and a GSM gateway (2N OfficeRoute) device
connected to the laptop that allows phone calls to be
handled by the system on the laptop.

Before deploying a next version of the system, user
evaluation of the voice interface and the system as a
whole is necessary.

5.2. Related linked data sets under production

In a number of related projects, we are producing
linked data sets that will be related to the linked market
data as well as to external sources.

Meeting Scheduler. Within the VOICES project we
have developed a voice system for a second use case:
a meeting scheduling system [16]. This system Tabale provides local NGOs with a more effective way
to transfer agricultural knowledge about non-timber
forest products to their farmer community. The services developed in this case study provide voice access
to personal and scheduling information. By integrating
this information with the market information from Ra-
dioMarche, personal profiles can be enriched with information about the type of products that specific farmers have been producing within a given period. Here a
new scheduling and notification service can re-use the
market information within a region.

Pluvial data. We have developed a crowdsourcing
platform to transform photocopied data about rainfall
in the Bankas area in Mali to Linked Open Data [23].
This platform targets the diaspora, e.g. people originally from the region that have since moved to developed countries, where they might have better access
to web browsers. The pluvial Linked Data acquired
in this way will be linked to the aforementioned data.
This can be exploited by our partner NGO as well as
other NGOs to analyze for example correlations between rainfall and market offerings.

IDS data. The Institute for Development Studies recently published an API exposing more than 30.000
publications about development research25. We have
developed a wrapper around the IDS API to expose its
content as high quality Linked Data, enriching it with
connections to other Linked Data datasets26. These include both general datasets such as DBPedia or GeoN-

24http://www.emerginov.org/

25http://api.ids.ac.uk
26http://api2lod.appspot.com/

ames as well as datasets with information from developing countries that are currently being realized.

IATI data We have also produced a linked data
from the International Aid Transparency Initiative
(IATI)27, which lists transparency data about development projects. The data is linked to external resources
to reuse and visualize this data. Our aim is to link this
more general development-related data to the results of
those development efforts in the field, through for example funding organizations. By linking the data that
describes project results to the IATI data, NGOs can
increase their own transparency and accountability. At
the same time, we are investigating voice-based access
to this transparency linked data using the voice labels
as described here, which would allow people in rural
areas to query the aid data that concerns them.

By integrating the Linked Market data with these
and other datasets, we can create a Web of Data that
is relevant to as well as accessible for people living in
developing areas, bridging the digital divide.

6. Conclusions and further work

In this paper, we have described a Linked Data set
derived from a Market Information System currently
deployed in Mali, Africa. This Linked Data set is up-
to-date and available for re-use. This dataset represents
data that is relevant to the different stakeholders in the
specific region and therefore shows that Linked Data
could be valuable within that region. We have established links to related datasets and vocabularies allowing for new applications that use the integrated data.
We show one such mashup application, the Ecomash
prototype. This case study shows that indeed meaningful Linked Data can be produced and used in a rural,
development context. We show that this data can be
enriched by establishing links to external sources. We
also describe how this data can be reused in new and
useful ways, including through a prototype mashup ap-
plication.

We also show how the linked data paradigm allows
the market data to be easily expanded with audio re-
sources, allowing for development of applications that
(re-)use the linked data in voice-based applications.
We have also developed one such voice-based application allowing access to the linked market data.

In terms of this specific case, future work includes
the further development and user testing of the ap-

plication. For this, further localization is needed and
requires adding French, Bambara and Bomu audio
labels. Using this, we can recreate the current RadioMarche voice user interface using the (Voice)
Linked Data. The choice for English and Dutch makes
that the proof-of-concept is not directly deployable
in rural areas in Mali as is. However, since the RadioMarche systems audio fragments are nearly iden-
tical, we actually have gathered most of the French,
Bambara and Bomu audio fragments over the course of
the project. We are currently converting some of these
audio resources and linking them to the data as voice
labels in the manner described in 4.3. As far as gathering new voice fragments is concerned, for specific
domains scripts have to be constructed that cover all of
the data items. As an illustration of the effort needed,
we have made an example of such a script used in the
RadioMarche MIS available for download28. Further-
more, future work to show the added benefit of the
Linked Data approach is to also develop different voice
applications that reuse these audio linked market data
voice labels.

We are currently also looking at adding voice labels
to different linked data, for example cultural heritage
information in the Netherlands. This could be used in
a voice-based application aimed at -for example- users
with accessibility issues.

We are also investigating methods of gathering
voice fragments using crowdsourcing initiatives [24].
Crowdsourcing can be a good way of producing large
amounts of voice fragments for relatively small cost.
This would allow for larger-scale projects and make
further progress towards a voice accessible Web of
Data.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Mary Allen and
Amadou Tangara of Sahel Eco, Stephane Boyera, Max
Froumentin, Aman Grewal and the farmers and radio employees in Mali for their collaboration. We
would also like to thank Christophe Gueret, Henk
Kroon and Rokhsareh Nakhaie for their involvement.
This research is partly funded by the European Union
through the 7th Framework Programme (FP7) under
grant agreement Num. 269954.

27http://iatistandard.org/

28http://www.few.vu.nl/~vbr240/voices/

recording_script.pdf
