Public spending as LOD: the case of Greece 

Editor: Jens Lehmann, AKSW, University of Leipzig, Germany; Oscar Corcho, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Spain 
Solicited review(s): Prateek Jain, IBM Research, USA; Danh Le Phuoc, DERI Galway, Ireland; Hugh Glaser, University of 
Southampton, UK  

Michalis Vafopoulosa, Marios Meimarisb, Ioannis Anagnostopoulosa, Agis Papantonioua, Ioannis Xidi-
asa, Giorgos Alexioub, Giorgos Vafeiadisa, Michalis Klonarasa and Vassili Loumosa 

aSchool of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece 
bInstitute for the Management of Information Systems, Research Center Athena, 6 Artemidos st. Marousi, 
Greece 

Abstract. The Public Spending (PS) project is the first attempt to generate, curate, interlink and distribute daily updated public spending data in LOD formats that can be useful to both expert (i.e. scientists and professionals) and naive users. The PS ontology is based on the UK payments ontology and reuses, among others, the W3C Registered Organization  Vocabulary  and  the  Core  Business  Vocabulary.  RDFized  data  are  linked  to  product  classifications, 
Geonames  and  DBpedia  resources.  Online  services  contain  advanced  search  features  and  domain  level  information 
(e.g. local government), simple and complex visualizations based on network analysis, linked information about payment entities and SPARQL endpoints.  During February 2013, the growing dataset consists of approximately 2 million 
payment decisions valued 44.5 billion euros forming 65 million triples.  

Keywords: public expenditure, Open data, Big data, Registered Organization Vocabulary, economic LOD.  

1. Introduction 

introduced  by  Michalis  Vafopoulos 

The Public Spending project (PS) [13] is a research 
effort 
to 
generate,  curate,  interlink  and  publish  daily  updated 
economic data in LOD formats for both scientists and 
mass audience. The online service includes advanced 
search features and domain level data, visualizations 
based  on  network  analysis, 
linked  data  about 
payment  entities  and  SPARQL  endpoint  provision. 
To the best of our knowledge, PS is the first project 
worldwide  to  undertake  the  above  tasks  to  such  an 
extent.   

The  PS  dataset  contains  information  about  the 
public  expenditure  which  originates  from  the  GTI 
program1 API and business information provided by 
official  Tax  Information  System.  The  RDFized 
information that is obtained on a daily basis from the 
aforementioned sources, consists of approximately 2 
million payments valued  44.5 billion that have been 

1 et.diavgeia.gov.gr/en   

through 

paid from 3.900 payers to 204.000 payees and form 
63  million  triples  (Table  1).  The  dataset  is  publicly 
the  web 2   and  a  SPARQL 
available 
endpoint 3.  Data  are  also  available  in  RDF/XML 4 
dumps  under  the  CC-Attribution  3.0  license,  given 
that the original data is also available under the same 
license. 

#decisions 

amount  

( in billions) 

#triples 
(millions) 

Table 1: agreggated data of PS from October 2010 until 

89K 
1.031K 
1.978K 
2.141K 

February 2013. 

The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 
is  about  the  source  for  the  data  and  topic  coverage. 
The  purpose  of  the  linked  dataset  is  discussed  in 

2 publicspending.net/greece (in Greek) 
3 publicspending.net/greece/data (in Greek)  
4 datahub.io/dataset/public-spending-in-greece  

the  dataset  and  other  metrics  of  use.  Creation, 
maintenance  and  update  mechanisms  as  well  as 
policies  to  ensure  sustainability  and  stability  are 
analysed  in  Section  5.  Section  6  is  about  domain 
modeling and use of established vocabularies,  while 
Section 7 refers to the quality, quantity and purpose 
of  links  to  other  datasets.  Examples  and  critical 
discussion  of  typical  knowledge  modeling  patterns 
used  are  provided  in  Section  8.  Section  9  refers  to 
known shortcomings of the dataset and discusses the 
way forward. 

2. Source for the data and topic coverage 

In this section the data sources will be described. The 
modelling  of  the  domain  in  a  unified  ontological 
schema will be discussed in Section 7. 

2.1. The Greek Transparency Initiative (GTI) 

to  publish  online 

Beginning  October  1st,  2010,  all  government 
institutions  are  obliged 
their 
decisions  with special attention to issues of national 
security and sensitive personal data. Each document 
is  digitally  signed  and  assigned  a  unique  number 
certifying  that  the  decision  has  been  uploaded. 
Furthermore, the decisions cannot be implemented if 
they  are  not  uploaded  on  the  GTI  portal,  which 
introduces  an  unprecedented  level  of  transparency 
within  all  levels  of  the  Greek  public  administration. 
Its  main  objectives  concern:  (a)  the  safeguarding  of 
transparency  of  the  governmental  actions,  (b)  the 
elimination of corruption by exposing it more easily 
when it takes place, (c) the observance of legality and 
good  administration, 
reinforcement  of 
citizens  rights,  such  as  the  participation  in  the 
Information  Society,  (e) 
the  enhancement  and 
modernization  of  existing  publication  systems  of 
governmental decisions and (f) the availability of all 
governmental  decisions  in  formats  that  are  easy  to 
access, navigate and comprehend by citizens. 

 The most important innovation of the program is 
the combination of closely interrelated legal choices, 
operational  processes  and  technological  strategies. 
The  technological  implementation  model  that  is 
based  on  an  agile  strategy  of  open  content  enacts 
the  dissemination  and  re-use  of  Public  Sector 
Information  (PSI),  providing  the  necessary  tools  for 
thorough  access  to  it.  Users  are  able  to  build 
applications  with  added  value  using  the  programs 

(d) 

the 

content  so  as  to  enhance    extra  functionality.  The 
REST-like  Open  Data  API  provides  access  to  all 
decisions  and  supplementary  information  issued  by 
the  Greek  Public  Authorities.  The  data  provisioning 
is  compliant  with  a  specific  Transparency  Law  and 
are  available  under 
the  Creative  Commons  - 
Attribution  license  (CC  BY  3.0  GR).  The  latest 
version of the API5 supports a taxonomic structure of 
its content that is returned by default in XML format 
but JSON, atom and RSS are also available.   

2.2. Greek Tax Information System  

The  second  data  source  is  THE  Tax  Information 
System  (TAXIS) 6  that  handles  citizens  and  legal 
entities  taxation-related  information.  TAXIS  also 
provides a web service for querying business entities. 
The  service  utilizes  the  Web  Service  Definition 
Language (WSDL) and querying is performed in the 
the  entitys  VAT 
form  of  SOAP  calls  with 
registration  number  as 
the  reference  key.  The 
response contains metadata about the business entity, 
including  contact  details,  activity  descriptions, 
registration  dates  and  current  operational  status.  
Business activities are described with the use of the 
Classification  of  Products  by  Activity 
(CPA) 
vocabulary. Within the scope of PS, the web service 
is  used  for  querying  legal  entities  on  their  first 
appearance as payment agents and the response data 
are RDFized and stored as payment agent metadata. 
In  addition,  the  Greek  Tax  Authorities  during  2012 
have started to publish a list of the biggest debtors to 
the  Greek  government,  including  both  physical  and 
legal entities. 

2.3. Topic coverage 

The  data  from  GTI  contain  detailed  information 
about payers, payees, payment categories, as well as 
descriptive  data  related  to  the  spending  action  (e.g. 
amount,  official  decision  documents  etc.  [12]).  The 
data  retrieved  from  TAXIS  create  an  underlying 
business  register  layer  providing  information  that 
uniquely identifies agents as business entities. These 
include  data  such  as  formal  names,  addresses,  legal 
status descriptions and contact details. 

5 opendata.diavgeia.gov.gr/?lang=en  
6 gsis.gr 

The purpose of the dataset is to enable consumption 
of  the  provided  data  by  interested  parties,  either 
passively  or  actively.  Passive  consumption  refers  to 
parties that seek to explore the data in intuitive ways, 
such as graphs and statistics. With this motivation, a 
series  of  daily-updated  visualizations  are  available. 
We  have  deployed  several  applications  on  the  basis 
of this dataset, the functionality of which is described 
as follows. 

Visualizations:  time-series  graphs  of  aggregate 
payments, bar and pie charts of top 10 measurements 
of  aggregate  spending  by  dimension  (e.g.  payers, 
payees  and  CPV 7)  and  by  timeframe  (day,  week, 
month,  year  and  overall).  Advanced  spending 
profiles of organizations and geographical areas. 

Search/Advanced  Search  functionality:  users  can 
search  through  several  dimensions  such  as  payment 
agents,  individual  payments,  geographical  areas, 
signers and so on, and access static descriptions such 
as  business  information,  as  well  as  dynamically 
updated  information  which  includes  spending  data, 
linked  data  mashups  (e.g.  Dbpedia).  However,  each 
of  these  dimensions  carries  a  further  and  distinct 
breakdown  of  characteristics.  For  instance,  payment 
agents  can  be  searched  based  on  their  name,  legal 
form, geographical location, classification of activity 
and so on, while individual payments can be searched 
in  combination  to  minimum  or  maximum  payment 
amount,  a  range  of  date  and  specific  procurement 
category.  For  this  reason,  each  case  was  treated 
separately  at  the  design  of  the  advanced  search 
interface. The relevant queries provide mashups that 
are in turn visualized in the form of profiles.  

Domain  level  information:  focused  analysis  has 
been  conducted  in  the  spending  domains  of  local 
government, education, physical persons, companies, 
health  and  energy.  Statistics  and  visualizations  are 
presented in the portal for each domain seperately.  

Aggregation of spending data: users can see public 
spending  information  related  to  payment  agents, 
(payers/payees),  which  are  registered  to  operate  in 
the postal code area the user is located.  

Crowdsourced  payment  annotation:  the  ability  to 
discover  and  annotate  individual  payments  is  also 
supported.  Specifically,  when  a  description  of  a 
particular  payment  is  shown,  the  user  can  indicate 
errors  in  the  payment  metadata,  comment  and 
suggest  appropriate  corrections.  These  are  usually 
data entry errors but can also be logical errors, as will 

7 Common Procurement Vocabulary.   

that 

be discussed in Section 9. Active consumption refers 
to usage from developers, researchers, policy makers 
and  professionals  in  order  to  create  novel  results, 
mashups and applications.  
The  PS  dataset  is  directly  re-used  as  data  feeds  in 
third party websites and as an input to reserarch (see 
for  instance  [5]  and  [6]  or  the  Greek  Legal  Entities 
Faceted  Browser 8 ),  data  journalism,  blogs  and 
political discussions. Innovative visualizations and an 
important use of PS in the official policy assessment 
are briefly presented.  

Network Analysis: Although network analysis has 
been  extensively  implemented  in  many  types  of 
networks,  has  not  yet  been  applied 
in  public 
payments.  Network  modelling 9   is  based  on  the 
observation 
the  spending  data  could  be 
represented  as  a  payment  network.  The  network  is 
formulated  by  the  payments  coming  from  public 
agents  (payers)  and  are  directed  to  payees  (mainly 
private  but  could  also  be  public).  Nodes  are  either 
payers  or  payees,  linked  through  a  payment  that  is 
uniquely characterized by its amount, timestamp and 
category  (CPV).  According 
the  public 
payments network of Greece is connected and sparse. 
It  has  115.734  strongly  and  86  weakly  connected 
components.  Also, power law  has been identified at 
the  indegree  distribution.  Figure  1  depicts  the  top 
payment agents in the Greek spending network.  

to  [15] 

Policy assessment: a few  months after its official 
launch,  the  PS  project  attracted  the  attention  of 
government authorities. In this context, at the time of 
the  writing  of  this  paper,  the  operator  of  the  GTI 
program has already assigned to the PS team various 
tasks  in  respect  to  operations  optimization  i.e.  data 
quality  improvements,  usage  monitoring  reports, 
statistics  on  dataset  slices  and  custom  reports.  The 
outcome  of  this  bi-directional  collaboration  has 
proved to be of important value to both parties. First, 
the  official  operator  took  into  account  most  of  our 
suggestions  with  regards  to  the  data  architecture  in 
the  ongoing  development  of  the  next  version  of  the 
program  and  second,  the  dataset  itself  has  been 
evolved  to  become  more  stable,  structured  and 
functional. 

8 http://linkeddata.ihu.edu.gr:8080/rdf-browser/  
9 For a comprehensive introduction to network modelling refer 

to Section 2.5.1 of 10/3/2014 9:42:00 AM.    

as well as policies to ensure sustainability 
and stability 

Generation of triples is done using a combination 
of  external  data  sources,  as  has  been  briefly 
discussed.  Each  data  source  is  treated  separately,  as 
not  all  types  of  data  exhibit  the  same  degree  of 
dynamicity,  the  same  need  for  maintenance  or  the 
same  periodicity  of 
instance, 
geopolitical  entities,  such  as  regions,  do  not  change 
and thus their resource representations no not require 
particular  curation,  contrary  to  business  registry 
entities  which  are  updated  in  an  unpredictable  way. 
Decisions  are  continuously  being  added  to  the  GTI 
program,  but  the  backend  mechanism  of  the  PS 
project  adds  new  decisions  once  a  day  for  load- 
balancing. 

creation.  For 

Figure 1: top payment agents in the Greek public spending 
network  from  October  2010  until  February  2013  (node  size: 

Weighted Degree Centrality and node color: Degree Rank) [15].  

Information  about  businesses  is  added  on  first 
appearance  and  checked  for  updates  regularly. 
Ontological schemas and vocabularies are treated and 
maintained  separately.  All  methods  are  written  in 
Java  and  triple  models  are  generated  and  uploaded 
using  the  Jena  framework  [4].  There  are  two  main 
types  of  method  invocation  for  content  generation: 
periodical  and  on-demand.  Periodical  generation  of 
Linked  Data  refers  to  the  process  of  retrieving  and 
converting  data  in  a  timely  fashion  and  following  a 
strict schedule (e.g. new decisions every day), while 
on-demand  generation  refers  to  generating  triples 
from 
(e.g. 
maintaining 
resources,  CPV/CPA 
resources,  etc.).  In  the  case  of  routine  invocation, 

static  data  whenever  appropriate 

geopolitical 

requesting,  validating  and  cleaning  data,  as  well  as 
converting  to  RDF  and  uploading  them  to  the 
dedicated  triple  store  is  packed  in  several  Java 
methods that are implemented in a procedural routine 
way at the beginning of every day in six steps: 
1.  Decision retrieval. Decisions that are submitted in 
the GTI program are retrieved using a RESTful API. 
Users can request full descriptions of decisions based 
on  several  search  parameters,  such  as  date  of 
submission, issuing organization, signer etc. in XML, 
JSON,  RSS  or  atom.  Not  all  formats  return  full 
descriptions  of  decisions,  and  for  this  reason  the 
created methods handle XML and JSON formats. A 
mechanism  has  been  deployed  that  selects  between 
the two, based on current server responsiveness and 
availability.  
2.  Response  parsing.  The  responses  are  parsed  and 
stored  in  temporary  Java  class  objects  that  were 
written  to  represent  individual  decisions.  Each  field 
value  from  the  response  is  validated  and  treated 
separately  during  runtime,  specifically:  (a)  string 
literals  are  cleaned  up  from  encoding  errors  and 
unprintable  characters,  (b)  number 
literals  are 
formatted  and  decorated  appropriately,  (c)  errors  in 
number punctuation are identified and corrected and 
(d)  entities  are  given  URIs  within  the  PS  domain. 
URI minting is based on uniqueness, and most of the 
entities  have  been  assigned  unique  IDs  by  the  data 
sources they stem from. These include legal entities, 
individual payment decisions and so on. 
3.  Triple  model  creation.  A  triple  model  is  created 
using  Jena.  Within 
retrieved 
information  is  given  structure  with  the  use  of 
appropriate  mapping  rules  to  the  PS  ontologies  and 
vocabularies. 
4.  Business  registry  information  retrieval.  For  each 
payment agent (either payer or payee) that appears in 
the  triple  store  for  the  first  time,  their  VAT 
registration number is used to form a request, which 
is in turn sent to TAXIS web service for legal entities 
and  freelancers.  This  returns  as  XML,  the  business 
information associated with the particular agent. The 
response 
the 
appropriate  triples  are  created  and  stored  in  the 
model. For names and addresses, the string values are 
transliterated  from  Greek  to  English  using  the  ISO 
843. The agents are linked to CPA and geographical 
resource URIs accordingly. 
5.  Triple  upload.  The  resulting  triple  model  is 
uploaded  to  the  triple  store  using  the  Virtuoso  Jena 
provider methods. These act like a bridge between a 
local  Jena  runtime  environment  and  a  remote 
Virtuoso store. 

is  parsed  and  cleaned-up  and 

the  model, 

the 

several  measures  are  derived  that  are  used  as 
references to the datasets qualitative and quantitative 
characteristics. These include aggregated amounts of 
payments  by  timeframe,  number  of  payers  and 
payees, number of decisions etc. These are stored in a 
dedicated named graph for statistics. 
In  the  case  of  generation  from  static  sources,  the 
process is similar to the above, but does not require 
the  same  degree  of  automation,  as  there  is  always 
some control over the process and its execution. The 
appropriate methods are invoked on demand and the 
generated data are uploaded after being checked  for 
the consistency in a manual way. Figure 2 illustrates 
a  flow-activity  diagram  in  respect  to  the  processes 
described  above.  Figure  3  represents  the  overall  PS 
architecture of data retrieval, conversion and storage. 

5. Domain modeling and use of established 

vocabularies 

Essentially,  three  distinct  ontology  schemas  have 
been  deployed,  as  the  data  were  distinguished  in 
three  domains,  namely  spending,  organizations  and 
geography.  The  domain  modelling  process  of  each 
one  will  be  described  in  brief  in  the  following, 
mainly focusing on the spending ontology as it forms 
the backbone of the whole model schema. 

The PS spending ontology has been designed as an 
extension  of  the  UK  Payments  ontology10,  adjusted 
for  the  Greek  public  domain.  Public  decisions  are 
the  psgr:Decision  core  class, 
represented  by 
instances  of  which  are  associated  with  the  decision 
metadata  extracted  from  GTI,  following  a  similar 
approach to the UK ontology. Such metadata include 
dates,  subject  descriptions,  submission  timestamps 
etc.  These  metadata  apply  to  all  different  types  of 
decisions.  Since  payments  are  not  the  only  decision 
type available, we adopt an open-world approach on 
how decision instances are associated with their type. 
Therefore,  while 
instance  holds 
information  on  the  payment  itself,  its  associated 
decision object holds metadata that is shared among 
different  types  of  decisions.  This  approach  aims  at 
extendibility and scalability, given that other types of 
decisions  will  be  added  to  the  dataset  in  the  future. 
Payment 
the 
psgr:Payment class, which contains information that 
relates a payment with a payer and a payee, as well 

represented  with 

instances  are 

a  payment 

10 data.gov.uk/resources/payments  

the 

as a CPV code and a net payment amount. In order to 
retrieve  the  payer  and  the  payee  associated  with  a 
particular  payment  instance,  the  psgr:payer  and 
psgr:payee properties must be used. Furthermore, the 
psgr:paymentAmount  property  yields 
total 
amount of the payment (in ), typed as an xsd:double 
literal. 

CPV  codes  are  associated  with  a  particular 
payment  instance  via  the  psgr:cpv  property  (Figure 
4).  It  is  important  to  note  that  since  payers,  payees 
and  CPV  codes  refer  to  resources  (as  opposed  to  a 
payment  amount  which,  in  principle,  is  a  literal), 
querying  for  these  will  return  the  URIs  associated 
with the particular resources,  which then have to be 
further  described  in  order  for  the  information  to  be 
human-consumable.  The  ontology  can  be  accessed 
online  from  its  IRI.  Concerning  the  organizations, 
psgr:PaymentAgent  is  the  main  class  in  the  PS 
ontology  (Figure  5).  All  payers  and  payees  fall  into 
this  class  and  are  identified  uniquely  by  their  VAT 
registration number. However, apart from the agents 
unique  identification,  name  and  association  with 

Figure 2: UML activity  diagram of the daily routine 

payment decisions that are drawn from GTI, we also 

(e.g.  TAXIS) 

use  external 
to  draw 
information  that  is  independent  from  payments. 
Among  business  entities,  the  main  classification 
factor  is  their  legal  form.  A  lot  of  work  has  been 
done for creating reference vocabularies for business 
entities,  but  these  are  generic  as  countries  use  their 
own legal classifications. This being also the case for 
PS  as  all  the  types  of  legal  entities  retrieved  from 
TAXIS are plain string literals. 

xml static instances 

(organizations, units, tags, 

signers)

Diavgia API

xml decisions

Python 
Libraries

csv decisions

Jena 
(Local)

Ontology Schema

Java Libraries

rdf decisions and 
static instances

Virtuoso 

Jena 
Provider

Virtuoso Quad Store

SPARQL Endpoint

Figure 3: Retrieval, conversion and storing. 

Figure 4: Decisions refer to payments, payers and payees. 

for  Greece  by 

To  this  end  an  organizations  ontology 11   was 
designed  to  reflect  business  entities  in  Greece  also 
providing  mappings  with 
the  Core  Business 
Vocabulary  (CBV) 12  and  the  W3C  vocabulary  for 
registered  organizations13  at  the  ontological  level  in 
the  form  of  class  subsumption.  Within  PS,  business 
entities  are  represented  as  formal  organizations,  as 
defined in the W3C vocabulary. 
 However,  as  there  exists  a  distinction  between 
physical and non-physical business entities, this issue 
is  covered  by  differentiating  between  the  two  with 
the  use  of  appropriate  classes.  Physical  entity  is  no 
different  than  the  foaf:Person  class  of  the  FOAF 
vocabulary [3]. Furthermore, the class LegalEntity is 
designed  as  equivalent  with  Legal  Entity  from  the 
CBV. The main types of business entities have been 
modeled 
labels. 
Mappings  from  literals  to  classes  were  performed 
with the use of Jena and some basic NLP methods on 
the string descriptions of the legal forms. Within the 
PS  dataset  each  payment  agent  is  associated  with  a 
postal  code.  Given  that,  we  have  provided  a  class, 
psgrGeo:PostalCodeArea,  to  describe  areas  defined 
by postal codes. Postal code areas belong to broader 
areas  which  can  be  municipalities  and  regions.  This 
pattern created the need for an ontology to efficiently 
describe  it.  The  psgrGeo:isPartOf/hasPart  property 
connects PS ontology classes. Each class provides a 
generic set of properties in order to represent the area 
that  it  refers  to.  These  sets  of  properties  include 
names, postal codes, LAU/NUTS14 level, latitude and 
longitude.  Since  the  ontology  only  describes  the 
structure  that  is  mentioned  above,  the  dataset  is 
connected by the owl:sameAs property with DBpedia 
[2]  and  Geonames  in  order  to  further  extend  it,  as 
will be discussed in the following section. 

their  English 

6. Quality, quantity and purpose of links to other 

datasets 

As  it  has  been  mentioned,  each  payment  is 
associated  with  a  particular  CPV  and  each  business 
agent is assigned a unique CPA by the Greek taxation 
authority,  which  is  available  in  the  PS  dataset. 

11 publicspending.net/organizationsOntology.owl  
12 joinup.ec.europa.eu/asset/core_business/description  
13 w3.org/TR/vocab-org/  
14 geovocab.org  

unique  standard.  For  instance,  the  European  Union 
uses the CPV, while the USA follows NAICS15. The 
MOLDEAS  project  [1]  is  an  effort  to  align  this 
plethora of classification systems and publish them as 
RDF with controlled semantics, following SKOS [8] 
modelling principles.  

URIs  representing  CPV  and  CPA  codes  in  our 
dataset  are  linked  (with  owl:sameAs  links)  to  their 
corresponding  codes  within  the  MOLDEAS  dataset, 
paving 
the  way  for  comparisons  on  different 
classifications  of  spending  (Table  2).  Recently,  [10] 
introduced  a  stepwise  method  based  on  NLP  and 
semantics  to  address  the  unfication  of  corporate 
names.  The  second  area  of  interlinking  refers  to 
geopolitical 
is  associated  with 
business  register  entries.  Given  that  each  business 
agent  is  associated  with  geospatial  information  (in 
the form of associations with postal code areas), we 

information 

that 

Table 2: number and purpose of PS interconnections (up 

to February 2013). 

In particular,  we performed the  mapping between 
postal  codes  and  postal  code  areas  (i.e.  geopolitical 
areas  uniquely  defined  by  postal  codes  in  a  1:1 
fashion) in order to create postal code area resources 
and, in turn, link to geopolitical resources at different 
hierarchical  levels.  This  enables  the  association  of 
spending  and  business  register  data  with  resources 
that  exist  within  DBpedia  and  Geonames,  so  the 
formation  of  queries  such  as  finding  statistical 
information  of  spending  by  area,  or  spending  by 
population,  becomes  trivial.  Furthermore,  as  we 
traverse the DBpedia graph we can associate the PS 
dataset  with  a  large  amount  of  external  resource 
nodes  with  a 
them 
potentially 
semantically, 
interesting queries. Currently, we are building direct 
connections of the payment agents to Greek, English 

linking  path  connecting 

answers 

giving 

to 

Figure 5: PS spending ontology has been designed as an extension of the UK Payments ontology adjusted for the Greek public domain. 

have  identified  and  linked  the  relevant  geopolitical 
resources  (regions,  regional  units,  municipalities, 
country)  with  their  representations  in  DBpedia  and 
Geonames (Table 2). 

the  geopolitical  region 

that 
(e.g.  distinction  between 

and  Live  DBpedia  [9].  The  linking  is  done  in  the 
geoinformation level since we decided not to link the 
the 
authority,  but 
authority  serves 
the 
authority  Municipality  of  Athens  and  the  region 
that  is  governed  by  this  authority).  This  procedure 
has been completed for local government authorities 
and  is  ongoing  for  the  payees  coming  from  the 
private sector. Already, we have identified more than 
1000  private  agents  having  a  canonical  name.  In 
addition, we initiated the linking with data related to 

DBpedia 

payment 
agents 

number 
purpose 

MOLDEAS 

Geonames 

product 

classifications 

geonames 
resources 

15 census.gov/eos/www/naics/  

2012  have  started  to  publish  an  updated  list  of  the 
biggest  debtors  to  the  government,  including  both 
physical  and  legal  entities.  However,  the  data  was 
published  as  plain  HTML  with  no  actual  URIs  or 
web resource identifiers of any sort. For this reason, 
we had to mint our own URIs and generate triples to 
represent  this  information  in  our  dataset.  A  cross 
search  between  payees  and  debtors  of  the  public 
concluded  that  416  entities  are  both  payees  and 
debtors to the public during February 2013.  

7. Examples and critical discussion of typical 

knowledge modeling patterns used 

Being  pragmatic  within  the  context  of  the 
aforementioned  methodologies, 
in  other  words 
following simple approaches as compared to heavy 
ones  such  as  commonKADS  [11],  was  the  chosen 
path. Adopting heavy ontology engineering within 
LOD  initiatives,  not  only  hinders  Web  Scientists 
[7,14]  to  provide  mere  outcomes  but  affects  the 
performance  and  flexibility  of  underlying  schemas. 
However, a strong  motivation for economic  LOD is 
for  their  respective  datasets  to  be  able  to  support 
interoperability,  not  just  between  authorities  in  the 
same country, but at an international level as well, so 
that  comparisons  can  be  feasible  and  meaningful. 
This means that the established vocabularies and data 
should  be  structured  in  ways  that  are  descriptive 
enough to support the linkages. For instance, there is 
no  unambiguous  1:1  matching  of  legal  entity  types 
between  countries.  The  Registered  Organization 
Vocabulary 16   is  a  higher  level  vocabulary,  but 
perhaps 
its 
expressiveness 
representing 
organizations  that  are  recognized  by  some  official 
authority,  and  registered  within  it.  An  interesting 
research topic for future work is to create a mapping 
schema  of  close  matches  between  different  types  of 
legal  entities,  or  a  vocabulary  that  aggregates  most 
commonly  used  close-matching  legal  entity  types 
from 
higher-level 
superclasses  (e.g.  a  generic  class  to  represent  all 
company types that bear close resemblance, such as 
PLC, SA). Without this step, there is no direct way of 
bringing companies from different countries down to 
a common denominator and compare. 

too  high 
is 

this  purpose,  as 

for 
limited 

to 

different 

countries 

under 

16 w3.org/TR/2013/NOTE-vocab-regorg-20130801  

8. Known shortcomings of the dataset and future 

directions 

Since  the  first  initiation  of  the  GTI  project  more 
than 30K public organizations in Greece use the web 
application to upload every single decision, which is 
digitally  signed.  Throughout  the  investigation  we 
noticed  that  there  are  several  errors  derived  mainly 
during  the  data  entry  phase,  due  to  the  lack  of 
appropriate  restrictions  and  validation  mechanisms. 
Serious  limitations  have  to  do  with  data  format 
errors  (e.g.  numbers  as  strings),  incorrect  entries 
(e.g.  VAT  or  payee  name)  and  missing  values 
(mainly CPV codes). 

Having identified the major data format errors, we 
have developed a series of automatic error correction 
mechanisms. As a result of this, nearly 200K and 4K 
decisions  with  erroneous  VAT  entries  and  CPV 
entries  have  been  identified,  respectively.  These 
corrections reflect a total amount of expenditures that 
reaches the level of 10 billion euros. 

Syntactic or semantic types of errors mainly drive 
incorrect  entries.  Syntactic  errors  on  the  VAT  or 
payee  name  are  corrected  by  calling  the  TAXIS 
service.  Semantic  errors  are  much  harder  to  handle 
since  they  involve  manual  detection  and  correction. 
Since  the  launching  of  PS,  it  was  noticed  that  for 
several physical entities (individuals), the amount of 
received payments was enormous and in the majority 
of  the  cases  unreasonable.  A  closer  investigation 
revealed a significant problem, which arose due to an 
erroneous  procedure  that  some  users  follow  during 
the  data  entry.  To  be  more  specific,  let  us  consider 
the  case  where  a  social  security  authority  (payee) 
receives X euros to provide the welfare allowance for 
Y beneficiaries. Each one of the Y beneficiaries has a 
distinct  VAT  registration  number.  Nevertheless,  in 
most of the cases in the GTI program, a sole physical 
entity such as the legal representative of the payee or 
even in some specific cases a random representative 
out  of  all  beneficiaries  (usually  the  person  whose 
name  apperars  first  in  alphabetical  order)  is  stated 
erroneously  as 
the  corresponding  payee.  This 
procedure  occurs  as  a  solution,  mainly  because 
there 
is  no  multiple  VAT  registration  number 
provision  to  complex  payments.  As  a  result,  some 
physical  persons  along  with  their  VAT  registration 
numbers are loaded with huge payments, which are 
totally irrelevant to their income. Trying to provide a 
solution,  we  followed  a  semi-automatic  procedure 
that  helped  us  clean  the  respective  data.  Through 
SPARQL queries we gathered the top 2000 physical 

who  were  labelled  as  payees  from  the  beginning  of 
the  GTI  program  up  to  the  end  of  September  2012. 
Then  for  each  separate  record,  we  reviewed  and 
cleaned  their  top  10  payments.  The  total  amount  of 
updated/cleaned payments reached the level of 550M 
euros.  

Data  cleansing  was  only  performed  to  the  extent 
that  the  meaning  and  intention  of  the  data  was  not 
compromised.  In  any  case,  we  track  provenance  by 
marking  up  decisions  as  complete, 
faulty  or 
corrected.  In  the  case  of  faulty  and  corrected 
decisions,  we  include  the  information  of  what  was 
faulty  and/or  fixed.  Apart  from  providing  the  users 
with  digested  financial  information  regarding  public 
organizations  (which  until  now  was  only  estimated 
by  speculation  and  sometimes  sketchy  data),  the 
dataset and the applications provide a direct view of 
the  quality  of  the  original  data  uploaded  by  each 
organization.  For  instance,  there  are  organizations 
that consistently abuse the upload form and provide 
incomplete    erroneous  data.  These  findings  have 
been  reported  to  the  official  authorities  who  in  turn 
took action to further discipline the organizations and 
upgrade  the  application.  Interestingly  enough,  we 
have  received  feedback  from  many  public  workers 
responsible for uploading payment data on behalf of 
their organization that they use our set of applications 
(e.g. aggregated profiling, error reporting) in order to 
identify and correct faulty data. Having stabilized the 
daily  update  process,  our  future  direction  is  to 
interlink  with  foreign  datasets  (e.g.  US,  UK  and 
Australia) to enable cross-country comparisons in the 
public expenditure domain. 
