The REPENER Linked Dataset 

Editor(s): Oscar Corcho, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Spain; Jens Lehmann, University of Leipzig, Germany 
Open review(s): Danh Le Phuoc, DERI, Galway, Ireland; Raul Garcia-Castro, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Spain; Michael Lutz, European Commission  Joint Research Centre, Italy 

Alvaro Siciliaa,*, German Nemirovskib, Marco Massettia and Leandro Madrazoa 
a ARC Enginyeria i Arquitectura La Salle, Universitat Ramon Llull, Barcelona, Spain 
E-mail: {asicilia, mmassetti, madrazo}@salle.url.edu 
bBusiness and Computer Science Albstadt-Sigmaringen-University of Applied Sciences Albstadt, Germany  
E-mail: nemirovskij@hs-albsig.de 

Abstract. The dataset presented in this paper constitutes one of the outcomes of REPENER, a research project co-funded by 
the Spanish National RDI plan. It contains integrated information of the Spanish territory regarding energy certification, building monitoring, and geographical data. The integration has been carried out by means of semantic technologies. The adherence 
to the Linked Data principles guarantees the application of standard methods of accessing data as well as the links to the existing dataset on the Web of Data. The dataset is a knowledge base for end-users. It can be useful for stakeholders involved in the 
improvement of energy efficiency of buildings to improve their decision-making.  

Keywords: energy efficiency, energy certification, data integration process, ontology, Linked Data 

1.  Introduction 

Nowadays,  improving  the  energy  efficiency  of 
new and existing buildings is a key issue in European 
Union  policies.  In  order  to  design  and  build  more 
efficient  buildings,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  better 
knowledge  of  the  relationship  between  design  and 
operation,  that  is,  between  the  initial  design  objectives  and  the  actual  performance  of  the  building. 
Likewise,  the  improvement of existing buildings requires  an  extensive  knowledge  of  their  actual  per-
formance.  Altogether,  there  is  a  need  to  have  integrated  access  to  energy  information  at  the  different 
stages of the building life-cycle from design to construction  and  to  operation.  In  fact,  having  access  to 
the  information  on  request  and  with  the  appropriate 
quality has become crucial for stakeholders involved 
in the improvement of building energy performance. 
Having  access  to  this  information  may  help  in  the 
design of new buildings, in the renovation of existing 
ones,  and  in  the  tuning  of  building  energy  management systems. 

*Corresponding author.  

The dataset presented in this paper combines data 
from multiple sources in order to create a knowledge 
base which helps end-users in their decision making 
process. It contains energy-related data including the 
physical and environmental characteristics of a build-
ing,  use  profiles  and  consumption  values.  This  dataset  is  one  of  the  outcomes  of  the  REPENER  research project [1]. The data is exploited by a Semantic  Energy  Information  System  (SEiS)  which  provides services to different user profiles to analyze the 
data. 

This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the main features of the data sources. Section 
3 presents the data modelling. Section 4 describes the 
current use of the dataset including the SEIS services. 
Section 5 presents the related work. And, finally, in 
section 6 the conclusions are summarized. 

2. The REPENER dataset 

The goal of the dataset is to collect data from the 

different stages of the building life-cycle.  

repener:BuildingLocation

owl:sameAs

sumo:City

aemet:WeatherStation

repener:closestStation

repener:hasProjectData

repener:hasBuildingLocation

repener:ProjectData

repener:hasPerformance

repener:hasMainBuildingUtilisation

repener:MainBuildingUtilisation

repener:Performance

repener:hasEnergyPerformance

repener:hasBuildingProperties

repener:EnergyPerformance

repener:BuildingProperties

repener:hasBuildingGeometry

owl:sameAs

repener:hasCity

sumo:ClimateZone

Spanish gazetteer source

geoes:Municipio

External datasets

repener:hasCO2Emissions

repener:CO2Emissions

repener:hasCertificate

LEAKO source

repener:Certificate

ICAEN source

repener:BuildingGeometry

Fig. 1. REPENERs ontology excerpt. 

http://www.ontologyportal.org/SUMO.owl#

Prefixes
sumo: 
repener: http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.edu/repener/lod/ontology
aemet:  http://aemet.linkeddata.es/ontology
geoes: 

http://geo.linkeddata.es/ontology

The dataset is the result of the integration of three 
data  sources:  energy  certifications  provided  by  the 
Catalan Energy Institute (ICAEN), consumption data 
facilitated  by  Leako  and  geographic  information 
from the Geographical Information National Institute 
(CNIG).  

Energy  certifications  of  buildings,  collected  by 
public  administrations,  specifically  by  ICAEN 1  are 
the first and main source of data. The data comprises 
energy certifications and their simulated performance 
during  several  stages  of  the  building  life-cycle  including  design  and  refurbishment.  ICAEN  provides 
data in a single spreadsheet in which each row is an 
energy certificate of a specific building. Each energy 
certification  contains  the  energy  rating  of  the  build-
ing, energy consumptions, types of the HVAC (Heat-
ing,  ventilation,  and  air  conditioning)  systems,  and 
geometric  features  such  as  the  built  surface.  The 
ICAEN  facilitated  more  than  1800  energy  certifications of  which 202  were  selected because they contained simulation data. Since some relevant attributes, 
such as consumptions and emissions were not availa-
ble,  approximation  values  have  been  derived  from 
existing studies on the energy consumption of buildings [2], the standard values of ISO [3] while taking 
into account the Spanish regulations. 

The second source of data contains monitoring data  of  buildings.  It  is  provided  by  Leako2,  a  Basque 
company  dedicated  to  HVAC  installation,  distribution and control, which maintains a Paradox database 
of energy consumption data (e.g., thermal consumption  for  air  and  water  heating,  and  water  consump-

tion) and indoor conditions (e.g., air temperature) for 
several buildings.  

Information  National 

In the first place, we initially considered using the 
GeoLinkedData.es  dataset 3 ,  but  because  it  lacked 
detailed data about cities (such as population, surface, 
or elevation), the Spanish gazetteer provided by the 
Geographical 
Institute 
(CNIG) 4 was selected instead. It is a Microsoft Access database  which stores  geographical data on the 
populated  areas  of  the  Spanish  territory  including 
their population, area, elevation and geometry specified  in  Universal  Transverse  Mercator  (UTM)  coor-
dinates. This source does not include a climate zone 
classification which is relevant for the SEIS services 
as  described  in  section  4.  For  this  reason,  we  have 
estimated  the  climate  zone  for  each  populated  area 
based  on  the  Spanish  Building  Code  (CTE)  which 
provides  a  distribution  of  climate  zones  per  capital 
province. 

3. Dataset modelling 

REPENERs ontology has been used to specify the 
data  schemas  of  the  individual  sources  mentioned 
above  in  a  single  model.  A  comprehensive  description of the ontology design process is provided in [4]. 
The  domain  of  the  ontology  is  the  building  energy 
performance.  It  adopts  many  elements  from  energy 
standards such as the energy certification of buildings 
defined by the DATAMINE project [5] and the ISO 
CEN  standards  that  follow  the  European  Directive 

1 http://www.gencat.cat/icaen 
2 http://www.leako.com 

3 http://geo.linkeddata.es 
4 http://www.cnig.es 

standards  cover  some  areas  of  the  core  ontology. 
They  are  defined  as  follows:  general  project  data 
(e.g., location and use), performance indicators (e.g., 
energy  consumption  and  CO2  emissions),  building 
properties  (e.g.,  geometric  characteristics),  outdoor 
environment  (e.g.,  outdoor  temperature  and  solar 
radiation), operation (e.g., occupation, comfort levels, 
thermostat regulation), and certification (e.g., energy 
efficiency rating and certification-process  methodol-
ogy). 

REPENERs  ontology  uses  an  upper-ontology. 
The Suggested Upper Merged Ontology (SUMO) [6] 
has  been  selected  because  it  can  be  applied  for  reasoning  and  inference  purposes.  It  includes  domainrelated units of measure such as meter, watt, or joule. 
The  REPENER  ontology  is  coded  in the  OWL  DLLiteA  formalism  which  outperforms  in  terms  of 
computability  in  specific  cases  such  as  conjunctive 
queries  over  large  data  volumes  the  conventional 
OWL  language.  The  ontology  embraces  71  classes 
and  100  properties  in  DL-LiteA  style,  implemented 
with 858 axioms. Figure 1 shows a small part of the 
ontology  including  classes,  object  properties,  and 
links to external datasets (repener:closestStation and 
owl:sameAs).  

3.1. Data transformation 

The dataset has been created and updated through 
an  ETL  (Extract,  Transform  and  Load)  process, 
which converts the data sources into RDF according 
to  REPENERs  ontology.  The  components  of  the 
process can be seen in Figure 2. The challenge of the 
process resides in the heterogeneity of the sources 
spreadsheets,  Paradox  database,  and  Microsoft  Access with a direct impact on the extract phase. The 
implementation  of  the  three  phases  is  described  be-
low: 

Extract.  Paradox  is  an  obsolete  database  which 
does  not  provide  interfaces  to  be  used  by  current 
tools. For this reason, a script has been implemented 
to  move  the  contents  of  the  Paradox  files  to  a 
MySQL database which is reachable by a D2R Serv-
er. In addition, the data extracted from Paradox files 
have been aggregated from hourly to monthly values 
since the SEIS services do not require low levels of 
data  aggregation.  The  ICAEN  spreadsheet  has  been 
also migrated to a MySQL database.  

Transform.  This  phase  consists  on  creating  a 
D2RQ  [7]  mapping  file  for  each  source.  Mappings 
have been carried out by ontology engineers, translat-

as 

such 

classes, 

ing each table and column of the databases to reflect 
the  correct  term  and  property  from  the  ontology. 
re-
Some 
pener:ConditionedFloorArea,  have  to  relate  themselves to units of measure. For this reason, additional 
mappings  have  been  done.  Furthermore,  resources 
contain  annotation  properties  such  as  rdfs:label.  Fithe  use  of  building  (re-
nally, 
pener:mainBuildingUtilisation)  have  been  converted 
through D2RQ language constructs to the classification  provided  by  the  DATAMINE  project  [5],  an 
international  domain  reference.  In  this  way,  third 
parties  from  other  countries  are  able  to  understand 
the data. 

the  values  of 

Load. Since all three sources have been mapped to 
the  same  ontology,  their  integration  directly  merges 
the  three  RDF  dumps.  The  resulting  file  has  been 
uploaded to a Virtuoso server5. 

The  dataset  updating  is  carried  out  manually  and 
the  ETL  process  is  executed  with  the  new  data  because the data sources update frequency is very low. 

SEIS Web site

Data portal (Pubby)

SPARQL Endpoint

Virtuoso Server
ETL process

MySQL

MySQL

Leako

Spanish gazetteer 

Spreadsheet

Fig. 2. Components of the REPENER dataset creation process. 

Microsoft Access

Paradox

3.2. URI design 

under 

found 

All  elements  of  the  dataset  have  this  base  URI: 
http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.edu/repener/lod/.  The 
concepts and properties of REPENERs ontology can 
be 
URI: 
http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.edu/repener/lod/ontol
ogy/{class|property}. Each concept has some annotation  properties  such  as  rdfs:label,  rdfs:comment,  re-
pener:reference,  and  repener:author.  Comment  and 
reference  properties  are  important  because  of  their 
usage on REPENERs website6, helping users to un-

this 

5 http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com 
6 http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.edu/repener 

standard data is based on. An example of a concept is 
repener:CO2emissions 
(see 
http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.edu/repener/lod/ontol
ogy/CO2emissions).  

Regarding the resources, the URI pattern, selected 
to  identify  the  instances,  uses  Patterned  URIs  solution [8]. This pattern was selected as people are able 
to  read  it  and  it  is  easily  generated  from  a  database 
where identifiers (for example primary keys) are always  present.  Furthermore,  adding  a  class  name  to 
the  base  URI  mitigates  the  problem  of  generating 
different individuals with the same identifier but different class. Generally, the Natural Keys pattern [8] 
has  been  applied  to  model  the  URI  identifiers  (for 
example, 
http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.edu/repener/lod/resour
ce/city/Lloret_de_Mar).  In  this  case,  a  text  property 
of  the  resource  has  been  converted  using  the  urify7 
pattern  which applies a URL encoding and converts 
the spaces to underscores. In some cases, the identifier has been created following URL Slug pattern [8] 
to ease dataset exploration. 

3.3. Data linking 

The ETL process described in the previous 3.1 Data  transformation  section  has  been  the  first  step  of 
the  data  integration  process.  The  second  step  is  to 
interconnect  the  data  from  the  different  sources  in 
order  to  provide  combined  access  to  data  that  has 
originated  from  different  sources  and  domains.  We 
have  adopted  two  strategies  to  connect  the  data 
sources:  

 The same URI patterns in different data sources 
have  been  used  to  model  the  same  type  of  re-
sources. This can be done if the sources contain 
the same values for describing the data. For ex-
ample,  sumo:ClimateZone  in  which  resources 
are generated by both the ICAEN source and the 
Spanish  gazetteer.  In  both  sources,  the  climate 
zones are identified with a character and a num-
ber,  based  on  the  Spanish  Building  Code.  For 
instance,  a  climate  zone  resource  such  as  C2 
(see 
http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.edu/repener/lod/p
age/climatezone/C2)  contains  data  from  both 
sources. 

 When  the  strategy  previously  described  could 
not  be  applied,  internal  links  between  the  data 

7 http://d2rq.org/d2rq-language#dfn-uri-pattern 

were  generated.  The  SILK  framework,  described  in  [9],  has  been  used  to  connect  the 
building location resources (from ICAENs and 
Leakos  sources)  with  the  populated  places 
(from  the  Spanish  gazetteer)  using  owl:sameAs 
relations. 

The data sources have also been connected to external  datasets,  such  as  the  Aemet  meteorological 
dataset 8  and  the  GeoLinkedData.es,  thus  enriching 
the  Web  of  Data  with  Spanish  geospatial  data.  In 
total, 783 links have been established with the Aemet 
dataset  and  7160  links  with  the  GeoLinkedData.es 
dataset. 

The Aemet dataset provides climate data from the 
Spanish  Meteorological  Office  gathered  from  204 
weather  stations  across  Spain.  This  connection  is 
relevant  since  the  outdoor  environmental  properties 
of the buildings can be enhanced with the data monitored  by  the  Aemets  weather  stations.  The  SILK 
framework  has  been  configured  to  discover  re-
pener:closestStation  links  between  repener:City  and 
aemet:WeatherStation instances using a geographical 
distance  measure  with  a  maximum  distance  of  50 
kilometres between the city and the station.  

The  GeoLinkedData.es  dataset  publishes  diverse 
information sources of the National Geographic Institute of Spain (IGN-E) and the National Statistic Institute in Spain (INE), among others [10]. Some of the 
data in this dataset complements those of REPENER. 
This  is  an  advantage  for  users  since  they  then  have 
access to different but complementary information of 
the  same  domain.  The  connection  to  the  Geo-
LinkedData.es  dataset  is  significant  due  to  the  presence of geographical relations between other entities. 
the  cases  of  province  capitals  (ge-
These  are 
oes:esCapitalDe) 9   and  parts  of  a  region  (ge-
oes:formaParteDe) 10.  Furthermore,  this  dataset  already  contains  links  to  the  GADM  dataset  which 
provides different geometry descriptions of a spatial 
element for different scales. In this case, an aggregation  of  a  character-based  distance  measure  (Le-
venshtein)  and  a  geographical  distance  have  been 
designed  to  generate  owl:sameAs  links  between  re-
pener:City and geoes:Municipio instances. The geographical distance is useful as it voids false positives 
when cities with the same name are located in different areas.  

8 http://aemet.linkeddata.es/ 
9 http://geo.linkeddata.es/ontology/esCapitalDe 
10 http://geo.linkeddata.es/ontology/formaParteDe 

4.1. Examples of energy efficient buildings 

Data is accessible through the SPARQL endpoint 
provided  by  the  Virtuoso  server,  used  by  REPENERs data portal and by the SEIS end-user services. 
The data portal has been implemented with the Pub-
by11, a tool which provides ontology and data following the Linked Data principles. 

The  dataset  includes  the  outputs  of  the  ETL  process as well as the links generated to internally connect  the  sources  and  the  links  to  external  datasets. 
Table 1 provides a summary of the main features of 
the dataset. 

Table 1 

Overview of the dataset features 

http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.e
du/repener/void/repener.ttl 
http://www.seis-system.org 
http://datahub.io/dataset/repene
r-building-energy 
http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.e
du/repener/repener.owl 
http://creativecommons.org/lice
nses/by/3.0/ 
http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.e
du/repener/lod/resource/ 
http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.e
du/repener/sparql 
http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.e
du/repener/lod 
http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.e
du/repener/lod/page/ontology/T
otalPrimaryEnergy 
http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.e
du/repener/lod/page/building/0
01B00126908P0 
150297 

VoID file 

Homepage 
DataHub entry 

Ontology file 

License 

Base URI for instances 

SPARQL endpoint 

Graph name 

Example class 

Example resource 

Number of triples 
Number of distinct subjects 
Number of distinct objects 
owl:sameAs links 
repener:closestStation links 

4. Dataset exploitation 

The  dataset  is  mainly  exploited  by  the  four  enduser services  which have so far been integrated into 
the  SEIS  system12.  SEIS  accesses  REPENERs  dataset  endpoint  directly  to  retrieve  the  data.  Further-
more, the labels and tooltip descriptions are retrieved 
from  REPENERs  ontology  with  SPARQL  queries. 
In  the  next  sections  the  four  SEIS  services  are  de-
scribed.  

11 http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/pubby/ 
12 http://www.seis-system.org 

Users of this service wish to explore cases of ener-
gy-efficient buildings which meet a particular design 
criteria. Firstly, users specify the city or postal code 
of the location of the building. The main  use of the 
building  (e.g.,  Residential  or  Office)  also  has  to  be 
specified.  Afterwards,  users  specify  the  energy  uses 
and performance indicators that are important in their 
context. A list of the buildings which meet the inputs 
from  the  users  is  retrieved  from  the  dataset  by  submitting SPARQL queries to the endpoint. The ener-
gy-efficient buildings are visualized in a table showing the different performance indicators. The results 
can also be explored graphically, in a  heat  map implemented on top of Google Maps showing the energy  efficiency  concentrations.  Once  a  building  is  se-
lected, a report of its main attributes is shown to the 
users. The report is structured according to the main 
taxonomy of the REPENERs ontology. 

4.2. Performance benchmarks 

This service benchmarks the main performance indicators  of  the  dataset  of  buildings  before  and  after 
its  refurbishment.  The  indicators  included  are:  heat-
(repener:HeatingConsumption), 
ing  consumption 
CO2 emissions (repener:CO2emissions), among oth-
ers. Users provide the location and a main use to filter buildings included in the benchmark. The benchmark  of  the  performance  indicators  is  shown  to  the 
user  in  two  separated  columns,  one  for  energy  efficient  buildings  and  another  for  the  non-efficient 
buildings. Two values are displayed for each indica-
tor,  before  and  after  the  renovation  of  buildings.  In 
addition, and as a way of providing more information, 
its percentage of improvement is shown. In this way, 
users  can  find  out  the  common  values  of  energyefficient  buildings  and  compare  them  with  the  ones 
that correspond to non-efficient buildings. 

4.3. Energy efficient design patterns 

The goal of this service is to identify the correlations  between  the  design  variables  and  the  energy 
performance  of  energy-efficient  buildings.  The  service recognizes the common properties of the buildings such as prevalent orientation of the window area 
(repener:PrevalentOrientationOfWindowArea), 
or 
(re-
solar 
pener:SolarContributionForHotWater).  This  kind  of 
analysis helps the users to identify which design op-

contribution 

water 

for 

hot 

case of refurbishment. 

4.4. Enter a building simulation 

This service is carried out by an energy consultant 
who  uploads  the  data  of  a  simulation  to  the  system 
with the final goal of ranking and comparing it with 
the existing data in the dataset. The data provided by 
the users is entered following the ontology structure, 
ensuring  the  compatibility  with  the  existing  data. 
Once the data is uploaded, the system ranks the input 
building within the list of buildings. Furthermore, the 
service compares the input building  with the benchmarks of energy efficient buildings and all buildings. 

4.5. Example query 

repener:value ?climatezone. 

The  dataset  can  be  accessed  directly,  submitting 
SPARQL queries to the endpoint. The following query  is  an  example  of  retrieving  building  properties 
from the dataset: 

prefix repener: 
<http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.edu/repener/lod/ontology/> 
prefix geo: <http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos#> 
prefix sumo: <http://www.ontologyportal.org/SUMO.owl#> 
SELECT ?bid ?floorArea ?lat ?long ?primaryenergy ?station 
FROM <http://arcdev.housing.salle.url.edu/repener/lod> 
WHERE { 
  []   repener:hasBuilding ?b; 

  FILTER (regex(?climatezone, "C2", "i")). 
  ?b   a <http://www.ontologyportal.org/SUMO.owl#Building>; 
repener:hasProjectData [repener:hasBuildingLocation ?bl]; 

repener:hasBuildingProperties 
[repener:hasBuildingGeometry [repener:hasConditionedFloorArea 
[repener:conditionedFloorAreaValue ?floorArea]]]; 

[repener:hasTotalPrimaryEnergy 
[repener:totalPrimaryEnergyValue ?primaryenergy ]]]; 

  ?bl  owl:sameAs ?c. 
  ?c   geo:lat ?lat; 

  OPTIONAL { 

sumo:hasPerformance [repener:hasEnergyPerfomance 

?c repener:closestStation ?station. } 

repener:buildingId ?bid. 

geo:long ?long. 

} order by ?primaryenergy 

This query retrieves a list of buildings  with some 
of their attributes. The properties are: the building ID, 
conditioned  floor  area,  geographical  coordinates  of 
the  location,  the  primary  energy  use  of  the  building 
and the closest weather station using the links of the 
Aemet dataset. This last property is optional since not 
all of the building locations have a link to a weather 
station. The list is ordered by the primary energy use 
and filtered by the C2 climate zone. 

5. Related work 

Recent projects such as Reegle13 use Linked Open 
Data  technologies  to  access  energy-related  data  that 
has  been  obtained  from  open  sources  [11].  In  the 
same line, the Open Energy Information (OpenEI) 14 
online platform provides with free and open access to 
energy-related  data,  models,  tools,  and  information 
which has been made available via Linked Open Data standards. With regard to these projects, the distinguished features of the dataset of REPENER are the 
scale  and  source  of  the  data.  While  Reegle  and 
OpenEI  platforms  offer  energy-related  data  at  a  national level policies, regulations, energy production 
or renewable resource REPENERs dataset collects 
data for specific buildings including physical charac-
teristics,  environmental  characteristics,  use  profiles, 
and performance indicators from different phases of 
the building life-cycle. 

6. Conclusions 

In this paper we have presented a dataset which integrates data from different sources according to REPENERs ontology. One of the difficulties  has been 
to integrate various sources which use three different 
storage systems, including an obsolete Paradox data-
base.  A  data  integration  process  based  on  semantic 
technologies  helped  to  overcome  this  problem.  REPENERs  dataset  has  been  linked  to  the  datasets  of 
Aemet and GeoLinkedData.es which cover the entire 
Spanish  territory.  The  links  connecting  the  different 
datasets  enable  the  development  of  new  services  by 
third  parties,  such  as  a  correlation  analysis  between 
building  energy  data,  weather  observations,  and  demographic data. 

The  main  shortcoming  of  the  dataset  is  its  size 
which is relatively  small (18962 entities at  this  mo-
ment) as compared to the average size of the Linked 
Data cloud (591632) 15. In spite of these figures, this 
dataset  is  bound  to  grow  for  two  reasons.  Firstly, 
users can upload an energy simulation calculation to 
the SEIS system. Secondly, a new law has been implemented  which  requires  all  existing  buildings  to 
have an energy certification. As a result of the application of this law, ICAEN has collected 50.000 new 
certifications so far, including those from new build-

13 www.reegle.info 
14 www.openei.org 
15 http://stats.lod2.eu/stats 

such  as  office,  commercial,  educational,  sports  and 
trade  facilities,  among  others.  Even  though  the  current coverage of the certifications source is restricted 
to Catalonia, its ultimate purpose is to encompass the 
whole of Spain. 

To increase its visibility the REPENER dataset has 
been registered in DataHub.org, a metadata repository  for  Open  Data  which  runs  under  the  license  of 
Creative Commons Attribution.  

REPENERs  dataset  can  contribute  to  the  improvement of energy-efficient buildings, giving endusers  the  opportunity  to  make  more  informed  decisions  based  onto  the  qualified  data  obtained  from 
multiple sources they now have access to.  

Acknowledgments  

REPENER  has  been  supported  by  the  research 
program  BIA  2009-13365,  funded  by  the  Spanish 
National  RDI  Plan  2009-2012.  Fatima  Galan  has 
participated  in  the  ontology  modelling  and  Marta 
Salgado in the implementation of the SEIS system. 
