Semantic Web 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

The Semantic Web for all

Editorial

Christophe Gueret a
a Data Archiving and Networked Services (DANS), Anna van Saksenlaan 51, 2593 HW Den Haag, The Netherlands
E-mail: christophe.gueret@dans.knaw.nl

Stephane Boyera b
b SB Consulting (SBC4D), 5 rue de la Champagne 31100 Toulouse, France
E-mail: stephane@sbc4d.com

Mike Powell c
c IKM Emergent Programme, Kaiser Friedrich Strae 11, D-53113 Bonn, Germany
E-mail: mike@ikmemergent.net

Martin Murillo d
d Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index (ND-GAIN), 1400 E. Angela Blvd., Suite 117, South Bend, IN 46617, USA
E-mail: murillo@ieee.org

Abstract. Over the past few years Semantic Web technologies have brought significant changes in the way structured data is
published, shared and consumed on the Web. Emerging online applications based on the Web of Objects or Linked Open Data
can use the Web as a platform to exchange and reason over semantically rich data covering any topic. Yet two-thirds of the world
population is deprived of Web access and are thus deprived from applications that could have a critical impact on their life. There
is a need to adapt Semantic Web technologies to put them to work for all in challenging contexts. This special issue describes
progress made towards reaching that goal.

Keywords: ICT4D, Semantic Web, Knowledge Representation, Ontology, Crisis response

1. Editorial

Over the past few years Semantic Web technologies have brought significant changes in the way structured data is published, shared and consumed on the
Web. Emerging online applications based on the Web
of Objects or Linked Open Data can use the Web as
a platform to exchange and reason over semantically
rich data covering any topic. This jump into what is
often referred to as the Web 3.0 holds the promises
of an increased support from computers which will be
able to understand and reason over our world with outcomes ranging from more timely, accurate and efficient information to computer supported scientific dis-
coveries. The latent pitfall of this technical and societal

advances is that these emerging technologies typically
assume that connectivity to data repositories and entity
resolution services are always available. This may not
be a valid assumption in many cases. Indeed, there are
about 4.5 billion people in the world who have no or
limited Internet access. Many data-driven applications
may have a critical impact on the life of those people,
but are inaccessible to those populations due to the architecture of todays Web based data platforms and the
computing resources required to process them.

One example of this specific context is disaster
response. Because of the chaotic nature of the environment most of the data exchange in this field
still happens mostly manually but the emergency of

1570-0844/0-1900/$27.50 c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

C. Gueret et al. / The Semantic Web for all

the situation calls for more optimised data flows. In
their paper entitled The Humanitarian eXchange Lan-
guage: Coordinating Disaster Response with Semantic Web Technologies, Carsten Keler and Chad Hendrix highlight how Semantic Web technologies can be
leveraged to improve information flow in the humanitarian domain and help decision makers better allocate resources and activities. A formal ontology is proposed as well as an matching infrastructure taking into
account the commonly observed lack of Internet con-
nectivity.

Being able to better express and share data is not
the only hurdle to overcome. When considering target
users that have limited education and/or can only speak
in their own dialect literacy and semantics become
an issue. The design of a voice-based interface between a user speaking his own language and a knowledge base containing multilingual factual information
is a challenge Victor de Boer, Nana Baah Gyan, Anna
Bon, Wendelien Tuyp, Chris van Aart, Hans Akkermans took up. Their paper A Dialogue with Linked
Data: Voice-based Access to Market Data in the Sahel
contains a description of a system that let users enter
and query for market data by talking to their basic mobile phones. The bridge they propose between Linked
Open Data and Voice is a step towards a more inclusive
Web of Data that goes beyond text centric, and often
English focused, interfaces.

As hinted earlier reasoning can play an important role in helping individuals making more out of
data. Centralized computing is still the most common
paradigm for this data processing where all the data
is gathered into one system having enough comput-

ing power to make all the deductions. This paradigm
is however challenged by hostile environments where
such a large system is not available or when the
centralization of data is not possible for privacy or
technical reasons. Wei Tai, John Keeney and Declan
OSullivan propose to push the intelligence back to the
device layer to reason closer to the data. They describe
in their paper Resource-Constrained Reasoning Using a Reasoner Composition Approach how a composition approach to reasoning can taken to fit the different resources and datasets at hand. By select rules to be
applied to a dataset a more resource-efficient amount
of reasoning can be performed.

The three papers of this special issue are all steps
towards The Semantic Web for all. They highlight
the concrete role Semantic Web technologies can play
in constrained scenarios and what is needed to adapt
main-stream approaches to fit these specific contexts.
It is however too soon to claim victory and move onto
something else. The many specific challenges of these
specific contexts (limited infrastructure, different societal situations, high illiteracy, multilinguality, . . .) call
for having more Semantic Web researchers integrate
these into their own respective research. This will be
the key to drive Semantic Web research into producing
more inclusive output that will be then more likely to
be usable and used world wide. This shared objective is
what brings together the growing World Wide Semantic Web community 1 of Semantic Web researchers,
humanitarian, development experts and social scien-
tists.

