Semantic Web 6 (2015) 12
IOS Press

Special Issue on Semantic Web Interfaces

Roberto Garcia a, Heiko Paulheim b and Paola Di Maio c
a Computer Science and Engineering Department, Universitat de Lleida, C / Jaume II, 69, 25001 Lleida, Spain
E-mail: roberto.garcia@udl.cat
b Data and Web Science Group, University of Mannheim, B6 26, 68159 Mannheim, Germany
E-mail: heiko@informatik.uni-mannheim.de
c Universal Interfaces Research Lab, ISTCS, 1 Summerhall, Edinburgh EH9 1PL, UK
E-mail: paola.dimaio@gmail.com

With a growing number of Semantic Web data
sources, spanning from small documents to large-scale
knowledge bases, the question of how to reasonably interact with those sources becomes important. Interactive tools should span the whole lifecycle of Semantic
Web sources, starting from end-user friendly authoring
tools to applications consuming Semantic Web data
and supporting users in making sense of such data. So
far, only few high level interfaces exist that are available capable of supporting user navigation, manipulation and interaction with semantic technologies and
datasets.

Although the major portion of Semantic Web research to date has been focused on the consumption
of that data by machine agents, workshop series like
Human-Semantic Web Interaction1 or Visualizations
and User Interfaces for Knowledge Engineering and
Linked Data Analytics2, large-scale projects like Visual
Data Web3, and activities the Semantic Web Interfaces
W3C Community4, as well as older efforts such as the
Semantic Web Applications and Human Aspects work-
shop5, which dates back to 2008, indicate that interest
in human aspects of Semantic Web research has existed for quite some time and even grown in the recent
past.

This special issue called to harvest the latest work
in this research area and received a number of high
quality submissions. The four papers accepted and col-

1http://hswi.referata.com/
2http://linkedscience.org/events/

visual2014/

3http://www.visualdataweb.org/
4http://www.w3.org/community/swisig/
5http://tinyurl.com/o3cg6vu

lected in this special issue explore and evaluate both
established and novel ideas in designing interaction
methods, targeting single users as well as collaborating
groups, for the Semantic Web:

 OntoWiki  An Authoring, Publication and Visualization Interface for the Data Web (Philipp
Frischmuth, Michael Martin, Sebastian Tramp,
Thomas Riechert, Soren Auer) revisits an established collaborative authoring toolkit for creating,
editing and browsing Semantic Web data. They
discuss different use cases from enterprise data
integration to open data visualization, and show
how scalability, functionality and usability are
balanced to create a powerful, end-user friendly
tool.

 Collaborative multilingual knowledge management based on controlled natural language (Kaarel
Kaljurand, Tobias Kuhn, Laura Canedo) shows
how Wiki documents can be mapped to ACE
(Attempto Controlled English), allowing both for
question answering over the contents captured in
the Wiki, as well as for automatic translation into
other languages. Ultimately, users speaking different natural languages are enabled to collaboratively edit a shared knowledge base.

 WYSIWYM  Integrated Visualization, Exploration and Authoring of Semantically Enriched
Un-structured Content (Ali Khalili, Soren Auer)
compares three systems which can be used for annotating textual context, using, e.g., NLP meth-
ods, and visualizing the data created with such an-
notations, showing that the browsing experience
of textual documents can be enhanced by enriching them with Semantic Web data.

1570-0844/15/$27.50 c 2015  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

R. Garcia et al. / Special Issue on Semantic Web Interfaces

 Affective Graphs: The Visual Appeal of Linked
Data (Suvodeep Mazumdar, Daniela Petrelli,
Khadija Elbedweihy, Vitaveska Lanfranchi, Fabio
Ciravegna) discusses a number of design metrics
used for visual knowledge representations. They
evaluate existing Linked Data browsers according to those metrics, and develop a graph-based
interface which can be used for exploring Linked
Data.

Generally, this special issue collects some insights
into this emerging and relevant area within the Semantic Web research community, and we hope that it will

inspire further research activity on those topics, ultimately bringing the Semantic Web and its end users
closer together. We would like to express our thanks
to all people who contributed to compiling this issue,
from all authors who submitted papers, whether ultimately accepted or not, through all reviewers, to the
SWJ editorial staff.

Roberto Garcia
Heiko Paulheim
