Semantic Web 6(5) (2015) 0
IOS Press

Editorial

Domenico Lembo a and Wolfgang Faber b
a Department of Computer, Control, and Management Engineering, Sapienza University of Rome
Via Ariosto 25, I-00185, Roma, Italy
Email: lembo@dis.uniroma1.it
b School of Computing and Engineering, University of Huddersfield
Queensgate, Huddersfield HD1 3DH, United Kingdom
Email: w.faber@hud.ac.uk

This special issue of the Semantic Web journal
is a collection of contributions on the major topics discussed at the Seventh International Conference on Web Reasoning and Rule Systems (RR
2013). These topics include original research from
all areas of Web Reasoning, with an emphasis on
combinations with Rule Systems.

Combining Web Reasoning and Rule Systems
embodies the main challenges to be faced by largescale information systems that deal with hetero-
geneous, distributed, uncertain, changing, incom-
plete, and possibly contradictory information. The
formalisms and systems need to provide expres-
siveness, yet be scalable; they need to be aware
of context, yet be general; they need to cope with
noise, yet provide crisp conclusions. These are just
a few examples of the tensions that have to be re-
solved, and the International Conference on Web
Reasoning and Rule Systems (RR) provides a major annual forum for discussions in these areas.

The seventh RR conference was held in Mannheim,

Germany, during July 26-28, 2013 . The conference program included presentations of 23 (full
and short) papers that were selected out of 34
submissions. Each submission received at least 3
reviews.

The present special issue has been targeted to
authors of papers presented at RR 2013 for preparing revised and extended versions of their conference contributions to be considered for publication
in the Semantic Web Journal, but it was open to
all submissions of papers addressing the conference
topics.

We received seven submissions, two of which
were extended versions of RR 2013 papers. Apart

from one submission, which was rejected in pre-
screening, each submission underwent a rigorous
review process, involving at least three reviews
per paper and two review rounds. Four submissions were eventually selected for this special is-
sue, whereas one paper was rejected and another
one was withdrawn.

 In Forest Logging: A Trace-Based Analysis
of Large Rule-Based Computations, Terrance
Swift presents a new way of profiling tabled
computations involving rule bases interpreted
using the well-founded semantics, which form
the underpinnings of a number of rule-based
Web Reasoning systems. The results obtained
in this paper will allow for better performance
analyses of Web Reasoning applications.

 In Sound, Complete and Minimal UCQRewriting for Existential Rules, M elanie K o-
nig, Michel Lecl`ere, Marie-Laure Mugnier,
and Micha el Thomazo study query rewriting
in the setting of existential rules, providing
also a promising implementation that allows
for more efficient ontology-based data access.
 In Probabilistic Description Logics under the
Distribution Semantics, Fabrizio Riguzzi, Elena Bellodi, Evelina Lamma, and Riccardo
Zese present a new way of integrating probabilities in ontologies. They also present a
promising algorithmic approach for computing probabilities of queries on this kind of on-
tologies. This paper is an extended version of
an RR 2013 contribution that was awarded
the best paper prize.

 In Coupling conceptual modeling and rules
for the annotation of dramatic media, Vin-

1570-0844/15/$27.50 c 2015  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

cenzo Lombardo, Cristina Battaglino, Antonio Pizzo, Rossana Damiano, and Antonio Lieto use ontologies and rules to model drama
and characters therein, and they successfully
use it for annotation purposes by means of
reasoning.

We would like to thank all the authors for
their contributions to this special issue and all reviewers (Leopoldo Bertossi, Fran cois Bry, Mau-

rice Bruynooghe, Claudia dAmato, Pablo Gerv as,
Stijn Heymans, Erwan Jahier, Michael Kifer,
Raghava Mutharaju, Alessandro Oltramari, Giorgio Orsi, Frantisek Simanc k, Giorgos Stoilos, Umberto Straccia, and five others who opted to stay
anonymous) for their valuable and careful review
work that made the publication of this special is