Semantic Web 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

OLiA  Ontologies of Linguistic Annotation

Editor(s): Sebastian Hellmann, AKSW, University of Leipzig, Germany; Steven Moran, LMU Munich, Germany; Martin Brummer, AKSW,
University of Leipzig, Germany; John P. McCrae, CITEC, Bielefeld University, Germany
Solicited review(s): Menzo Windhouwer, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Steve Cassidy, Macquarie
University, Sydney, Australia; one anonymous reviewer

Christian Chiarcos  and Maria Sukhareva
Applied Computational Linguistics (ACoLi), Department of Computer Science and Mathematics,
Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main, Germany, http://acoli.cs.uni-frankfurt.de

Abstract. This paper describes the Ontologies of Linguistic Annotation (OLiA) as one of the data sets currently available as
part of Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) cloud. Within the LLOD cloud, the OLiA ontologies serve as a reference hub
for annotation terminology for linguistic phenomena on a great band-width of languages, they have been used to facilitate
interoperability and information integration of linguistic annotations in corpora, NLP pipelines, and lexical-semantic resources
and mediate their linking with multiple community-maintained terminology repositories.

Keywords: linguistic terminology, grammatical categories, annotation schemes, corpora, NLP, tag sets, interoperability

1. Background

The heterogeneity of linguistic annotations has been
recognized as a key problem limiting the interoperability and reusability of NLP tools and linguistic data
collections. Several repositories of linguistic annotation terminology have been developed to facilitate annotation interoperability by means of a joint level of
representation, or an interlingua, the most prominent
probably being the General Ontology of Linguistic Description [12, GOLD] and the ISO TC37/SC4 Data
Category Registry [21, ISOcat].

Still, these repositories are developed by different
communities, and are thus not always compatible with
each other, neither with respect to definitions nor technologies (e.g., there is no commonly agreed formalism
to link linguistic annotations to terminology reposito-
ries).

The Ontologies of Linguistic Annotation (OLiA)
have been developed to facilitate the development of
applications that take benefit of a well-defined terminological backbone even before the GOLD and ISOcat

*Corresponding author. E-mail:

chiarcos@informatik.uni-

frankfurt.de

repositories have converged into a generally accepted
repository of reference terminology: They introduce
an intermediate level of representation between ISO-
cat, GOLD and other repositories of linguistic reference terminology and are interconnected with these re-
sources, and they provide not only means to formalize
reference categories, but also annotation schemes, and
the way that these are linked with reference categories.

2. Architecture

The Ontologies of Linguistic Annotations [3] represent a modular architecture of OWL2/DL ontologies that formalize the mapping between annotations,
a Reference Model and existing terminology repositories (External Reference Models).

The OLiA ontologies were developed as part of an
infrastructure for the sustainable maintenance of linguistic resources [28], and their primary fields of application include the formalization of annotation schemes
and concept-based querying over heterogeneously annotated corpora [16,10].

In the OLiA architecture, four different types of ontologies are distinguished (cf. Fig. 1 for an example):

1570-0844/0-1900/$27.50 c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

Chiarcos and Sukhareva / OLiA  Ontologies of Linguistic Annotation

 The OLIA REFERENCE MODEL specifies the
common terminology that different annotation
schemes can refer to. It is derived from existing
repositories of annotation terminology and extended in accordance with the annotation schemes
that it was applied to.

 Multiple OLIA ANNOTATION MODELs formalize annotation schemes and tagsets. Annotation
Models are based on the original documentation,
so that they provide an interpretation-independent
representation of the annotation scheme.
 For every Annotation Model, a LINKING MODEL
defines (cid:118) relationships between concepts/proper-
ties in the respective Annotation Model and the
Reference Model. Linking Models are interpretations of Annotation Model concepts and properties in terms of the Reference Model.

 Existing terminology repositories can be integrated as EXTERNAL REFERENCE MODELs, if
they are represented in OWL2/DL. Then, Linking Models specify (cid:118) relationships between Reference Model concepts and External Reference
Model concepts.

The OLiA Reference Model specifies classes for linguistic categories (e.g., olia:Determiner) and
grammatical features (e.g., olia:Accusative), as
well as properties that define relations between these
(e.g., olia:hasCase).

Conceptually, Annotation Models differ from the
Reference Model in that they include not only concepts
and properties, but also individuals: Individuals represent concrete tags, while classes represent abstract
concepts similar to those of the Reference Model. Figure 1 gives an example for the individual PDAT from
the STTS Annotation Model, the corresponding STTS
concepts, and their linking with Reference Model con-
cepts. Taken together, these allow to interpret the individual (and the part-of-speech tag it represents) as an
olia:Determiner, etc.

3. Data Set Description

The OLiA ontologies are available from http://
purl.org/olia under a Creative Commons Attribution license (CC-BY).

The OLiA ontologies cover different grammatical
phenomena, including inflectional morphology, word
classes, phrase and edge labels of different syntax an-
notations, as well as prototypes for discourse annota-

tions (coreference, discourse relations, discourse structure and information structure). Annotations for lexical semantics are only covered to the extent that they
are found in syntactic and morphosyntactic annotation
schemes. Other aspects of lexical semantics are beyond the scope of OLiA: Existing reference resources
for lexical semantics available in RDF include Word-
Net, VerbNet and FrameNet, their linking with OLiA is
recommended as part of the lexicon model lemon [22],
and has been implemented, for example, in lemonUby
[11].

Since their first presentation [3], the OLiA ontologies have been continuously extended. At the time of
writing, the OLiA Reference Model distinguishes 280
MorphosyntacticCategorys (word classes), 68
SyntacticCategorys (phrase labels), 18 MorphologicalCategorys (morphemes), 7 Mor-
phologicalProcesses, and 405 different values
for 18 MorphosyntacticFeatures, 5 SyntacticFeatures and 6 SemanticFeatures (for
glosses, part-of-speech annotation and for edge labels
in syntax annotation).

As for morphological, morphosyntactic and syntactic annotations, the OLiA ontologies include 32 Annotation Models for about 70 different languages, including several multi-lingual annotation schemes, e.g.,
EAGLES [3] for 11 Western European languages,
and MULTEXT/East [8] for 15 (mostly) Eastern European languages. As for non-(Indo-)European lan-
guages, the OLiA ontologies include morphosyntactic annotation schemes for languages of the Indian
subcontinent, for Arabic, Basque, Chinese, Estonian,
Finnish, Hausa, Hungarian and Turkish, as well as
multi-lingual schemes applied to languages of Africa,
the Americas, the Pacific and Australia. The OLiA ontologies also cover historical varieties, including Old
High German, Old Norse and Old Tibetan. Addition-
ally, 7 Annotation Models for different resources with
discourse annotations have been developed.

External reference models currently linked to the
OLiA Reference Model include GOLD [3], the OntoTag ontologies [1], an ontological remodeling of ISOcat [4], and the Typological Database System (TDS)
ontologies [26]. From these, only the TDS ontologies are currently available under an open (CC-BY)
license,1 but these take a focus on typological data
bases rather than NLP and annotation interoperability.

1http://languagelink.let.uu.nl/tds/

ontology/LinguisticOntology.owl

GOLD and ISOcat should be available under an open
license,2 but can currently not be redistributed because
of an uncertain licensing situation (no explicit license
information). The OntoTag ontologies are available to
the author but have not been publicly released.

In this context, the function of the OLiA Reference
Model is not to provide a novel and independent view
on linguistic terminology, but rather to serve as a stable intermediate representation between (ontological
models of) annotation schemes and these terminology
repositories. This allows any concept that can be expressed in terms of the OLiA Reference Model also
to be interpreted in the context of ISOcat, GOLD, OntoTag or TDS. OLiA serves to aggregate annotation
terminology as found in linguistic resources and provides a middle ground between these and the External Reference Models linked to it. We would like to
emphasize that OLiA is not meant as a substitute for
any of these repositories, but rather, that it serves to facilitate their further harmonization and interoperabil-
ity, as they are maintained by different communities
and remain for the foreseeable future in a continuous
state of enrichment and specialization. Initial efforts
towards their gradual convergence include the support
of linking mechanisms to external knowledge bases in
GOLD and ISOcat. Within a GOLD context, for ex-
ample, OLiA may be referred to as a Community-of-
Practice Extension for the NLP community. From the
perspective of ISOcat, it may be seen as an ontological view on annotation terminology among the otherwise unstructured data categories. Along with ontologies for other ISOcat profiles, e.g., metadata [35],
OLiA may provide a seed for populating RELcat [29],
an ongoing effort to provide structured views on ISOcat data.

As compared to a direct linking between annotation
models and these terminology repositories, the modular structure limits the number of linkings that need
to be defined (if a new Annotation Model is linked to
the Reference Model, it inherits its linking with ISO-
cat, GOLD, OntoTag and TDS), and also, it provides
stability (GOLD and ISOcat are developed in community processes with occasional revisions), a clear
and non-redundant taxonomical organization (similar
to GOLD, TDS and OntoTag, but very different from
the semi-structured ISOcat) and establishes interoper-

ability between GOLD and ISOcat (that  despite ongoing harmonization efforts [20]  are maintained by
different communities and developed independently).
Using the OLiA Reference Model, it is thus possible to
develop applications that are interoperable in terms of
GOLD and ISOcat even though both are still under development and both differ in their conceptualizations.
Such applications are briefly described in the following section.

4. Application

Initially, the OLiA ontologies have been intended to
serve a documentation function, i.e., as a formal
means to specify the semantics of annotation schemes
[28]. From the ontologies, dynamic HTML can be gen-
erated,3 and tags in the annotation can be represented
as hyperlinks pointing to the corresponding definition
[10].

In earlier corpus query systems, e.g., ANNIS
[9], OLiA was used to formulate interoperable corpus queries: Assume we wanted to retrieve noun
phrases from German newspaper corpora;
instead
of querying for cat="NX" on TuBa-D/Z [33] or
cat="NP" on NEGRA [30], a query for cat in
{olia:NounPhrase} was expanded into a disjunction of possible tags and formatted according to
the query language under consideration. Only if corpora are represented as Linked Data (which is exceptional at the moment), they can be directly linked with
OLiA Annotation Models, and queried without a query
preprocessor [6]. When dealing with non-RDF cor-
pora, ontology-based query rewriting using OLiA can
be applied as sketched above, it was implemented, for
example, in a generic query framework for linguistic
corpora in heterogeneous XML-formats [16].

In a similar vein, OLiA can be employed in NLP
pipeline systems for tagset-independent, interoperable
information processing [1]. In this function, OLiA is
part of the NLP Interchange Format (NIF) specification4 to formalize linguistic annotations in a conceptually interoperable way. Using OLiA, the NLP2RDF
platform developed on this basis unifies various NLP
result outputs and maps them into RDF, as currently
implemented for English [18] and Korean [17].

2Actually, the developers are sympathetic to the idea of releasing this data under an open license, Helen Aristar-Dry (for GOLD)
and Menzo Windhouwer (for ISOcat), pers. communication, June
2012.

3http://code.google.com/p/

co-ode-owl-plugins/wiki/OWLDoc

4http://persistence.uni-leipzig.org/

nlp2rdf/

Chiarcos and Sukhareva / OLiA  Ontologies of Linguistic Annotation

chitectures, where different NLP modules (say, part-
of-speech taggers) are applied in parallel, so that they
produce annotations for one particular phenomenon,
and that these annotations are then integrated. Using OLiA Reference Model specifications to integrate
the analyses of multiple NLP tools for German, [5]
showed that a simple majority-based combination increased both the robustness and the level of detail of
morphosyntactic and morphological analyses: Despite
imposing rigid ontological consistency constraints, abstraction from tool-specific representations and integration of different annotations on this basis resulted
in an increase of recall. Similar results have been obtained with the OntoTag ontologies for Spanish [24].

We see possible applications of this technology in
situations where multiple, domain-specific NLP tools
are available. In a monolingual setting, this may be the
case where rule-based morphologies [34] or parsers
[32] are to be combined with robust statistical part-of-
speech taggers, whose coarse-grained tagsets cannot
be trivially mapped onto the detailed annotations provided by deep, rule-based systems. Here, OLiA representations leverage tools with different granularity.
Currently, we experiment with multilingual annotation
projection, where annotations are projected from multiple source languages onto parallel (translated) text in
a less-resourced language. Using conceptual representations instead of complex strings as the basis of pro-
jection, different types of information can be drawn
from different sources, e.g., aspect from Russian verbal morphology, and definiteness from English mor-
phosyntax. For a (hypothetical) language that exhibits
both features, information present in both sets of projected annotations may be adopted, merged and, most
importantly, pruned using OLiA specifications.

5. Discussion

This paper summarized the development of the OLiA
ontologies since 2006, their current status, and a number of applications that have been developed on this
basis.

The fundamental idea of the OLiA architecture is
that annotation schemes are linked to communitymaintained terminology repositories through an intermediate Reference Model, thereby minimizing the
number of mappings necessary to establish interoperability of one annotation scheme with multiple terminology repositories. Further, annotation schemes and
their linking to the Reference Model are formalized as

Fig. 1. Interpreting annotations in terms of the OLiA Reference
Model

Figure 1 illustrates how annotations can be mapped
onto Reference Model concepts for the German phrase
Diese nicht neue Erkenntnis this well-known (lit. not
new) insight from the Potsdam Commentary Corpus
[31, file 4794]: Given the information that its part-of-
speech annotations follow the STTS scheme [27], we
may consult the corresponding Annotation Model,5
and find that the tag PDAT matches the string value of
the property hasTag of the individual stts:PDAT.
The associated class stts:AttributiveDemon-
strativePronoun is a subconcept of olia:De-
monstrativeDeterminer.6 The word diese this
from the example can thus be described in terms of
the OLiA Reference Model as olia:Demonstra-
tiveDeterminer, etc.

These ontology-based descriptions are comparable
across different corpora and/or NLP tools, across different languages, and even across different types of
language resources: Recently, the OLiA ontologies
have also been applied to represent grammatical specifications of machine-readable dictionaries, that are
thus interoperable with OLiA-linked corpora [22,11].
Moreover, through the linking with External Reference
Models, OLiA-linked resources are also interoperable
with resources directly grounded in GOLD, ISOcat,
etc.

Using Semantic Web formalisms to represent corpora and annotations also provides us with the possibility to develop novel, ontology-based NLP algo-
rithms. One application are ensemble combination ar-

5http://purl.org/olia/stts.owl
6http://purl.org/olia/stts-link.rdf

separate OWL2/DL ontologies, so that interpretationindependent conceptualization (annotation documen-
tation) and its interpretation in terms of the Reference
Model (linking) are properly distinguished.

The OLiA ontologies differ from related approaches
in that they take a focus on modeling annotation
schemes and their linking with reference categories
rather than merely providing reference categories.
The differentiation of Annotation Models, the OLiA
Reference Model and External Reference Models
(community-maintained terminology repositories) represents increasing levels of abstraction, and, possibly,
loss of information. However, no information about the
original annotation is lost, and tools may chose the appropriate level of abstraction. Unlike a direct mapping
approach as apparently favored by GOLD and ISOcat,
OLiA allows to recover information about sources of
mismatches between Reference Model concepts and
Annotation Model concepts, and its declarative linking supports inspection and refinement using standard
RDF/OWL tools.

The relationship between annotations and reference
concept is not only represented in a transparent way,
but also, conceptual mismatches can be represented.
When confronted with conceptual overlap/fusion or
ambiguity, many tagsets for, say, part-of-speech annotation introduce hybrid categories (e.g., IN for preposition or subordinating conjunction, or TO for all functions of English to [25]) or introduce tagset-specific
notations, e.g., | for ambiguities [25], or + for cliti-
cization/fusion [14]. As opposed to such ad-hoc solutions that may or may not be transparent to tagset
users, OWL2/DL provides a W3C-standardized vocabulary to formalize these relationships, that also extends
beyond individual tagsets: Ambiguity can be modeled
as disjunction ((cid:116)), conceptual overlap/fusion as conjunction ((cid:117)).
Moreover, negation () is available in OWL2/DL.
This is of particular importance for the linking between
External Reference Models and the OLiA Reference
Model. For example, an olia:ProQuantifier
(pronominal quantifier, can substitute for an independent noun phrase, e.g., someone) can be defined as
subclass of gold:Quantifier. According to its
definition, however, gold:Quantifier pertains to
determiners only, so, a more appropriate superclass
would be gold:Quantifier(cid:117)gold:Determiner.

The physical separation of Linking Models from
Annotation Models and Reference Model introduces
a clear distinction between externally provided information and the ontology engineers interpretation. An-

notation Models formalize annotation documentation,
and the Reference Model is based on a generalization
of a broad band-width of resources. However, there
may be different terminological traditions involved,
so that apparently similar concepts found in Reference Model and Annotation Model are in fact unre-
lated. If nevertheless an incorrect identification takes
place, the linking can be inspected by existing ontology browsers, and corrected independently from the
interpretation-invariant Annotation Model and Reference Model. Furthermore, multiple alternative linkings between an Annotation Model and the Reference
Model can be implemented, e.g., to accommodate for
systematic tagger errors (i.e., more extensive usage of
(cid:116)), or for multiple dialects of the same tagset (e.g., the
STTS tagset distinguishes indefinite attributive pronouns in indefinite noun phrases [PIAT] and in definite noun phrases [PIDAT], but in the TuBa-D/Z cor-
pus, PIAT covers both uses).

In ISOcat, the problem of conflicting interpretations
of data categories is currently not addressed, and the
definitions provided are not always sufficient to distinguish classes, e.g., the category definite/DC-2004
is defined as value referring to the capacity of identification of an entity. The concept is (at least partially)
grounded in MULTEXT/East [15], which, however,
conflates different uses of definite: (1) postfixed Determiner in Romanian, Bulgarian and Persian nouns or
adjectives, (2) difference between full and reduced
adjectives in Slavic (diachronically, full forms reflect
a clitic pronominal), (3) a pattern of quantifier agreement in Slavic, and (4) the so-called definite conjunction of Hungarian verbs. Even though the generic definition captures most of these different meanings, they
remain incompatible with each other. However, without modeling relations between different languagespecific annotation schemes and a data category registry from a global perspective, it is possible that such
ill-defined data categories and/or links remain unde-
tected.7 Within MULTEXT/East, for example, only the
ontological modeling of language-specific annotation
schemes and the common morphosyntactic specifications led to the proper differentiation between these
different conceptions of definite [8]. The OLiA Reference Model provides such a fully developed taxonomy of linguistic categories. Recent activities to aug-

7Providing a top-down perspective does not automatically disclose such inconsistencies, but the resulting dialog between tagset
provider and ontology developer may facilitate their detection, as in
the example given above.

Chiarcos and Sukhareva / OLiA  Ontologies of Linguistic Annotation

ment ISOcat with a relation category registry [29] may
eventually lead to a comparable global perspective, so
that the problem of conflicting interpretations of data
categories may become more obvious to the ISOcat
community, but these are still on-going developments.
In comparison to GOLD, OLiA is more focused
on NLP and corpus interoperability, whereas GOLD
originates from the language documentation commu-
nity. Therefore, a number of data categories commonly assumed in NLP were not originally represented in GOLD. For example, gold:CommonNoun
was added only following a request by the first author.
While the GOLD community process will eventually
lead to a compensation of such coverage issues, a more
fundamental problem is that the views of academic linguists and NLP engineers may deviate with respect to
the overarching taxonomy of concepts. GOLD, for ex-
ample, seems to conflate both semantic roles (case in
the sense of [13], e.g., gold:BenefactiveCase)
and syntactic roles under gold:CaseProperty.
Therefore, OLiA adopts a relatively agnostic view on
the taxonomical order of concepts. While the taxonomy is modeled in a specific way (mostly following
established annotation schemes), it is not assumed that
this way of modeling is the only possibility. In fact,
alternative taxonomies can be formulated as External
Reference Models, and OWL2/DL allows one to formulate specific conditions for the linking, including
the use of negation and disjunction. This complements
the concept of Community-of-Practice Extensions in
GOLD, that presuppose GOLD as an upper model providing the top-level categorizations for dependent on-
tologies, whereas OLiA remains agnostic about which
External Reference Model to be adopted.

Conceptually, the OLiA ontologies are closer related to the OntoTag ontologies [2], that were also applied to develop NLP applications on the basis of ontological representations of linguistic annotations [24].
One important difference is that the OntoTag ontologies are considering only Iberian Romance languages
(in particular Spanish), that they are partially designed
with a top-down perspective (whereas the development
of the OLiA Reference Model is guided by the annotation schemes it is applied to) and are thus richer in consistency constraints (that are, however, often language-
specific), and that the OntoTag ontologies are not publicly available at the moment. Within the OLiA archi-
tecture, the morphosyntactic layer of the OntoTag ontologies is integrated as an External Reference Model
[1].

The OLiA ontologies may play an important role
in NLP, corpus and annotation interoperability in that
they relate these activities to initiatives in different linguistic communities to establish reference repositories
for linguistic annotation terminology, e.g., recent developments towards the creation of a Linguistic Linked
Open Data (LLOD) cloud.8 In this context, the OLiA
ontologies are used to provide linguistic reference terminology for lexical-semantic resources such as lemon
[23] and Uby [11] as well as for linguistic corpora such
as the Manually Annotated Sub-Corpus of the Open
American National Corpus [19].9

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Menzo Windhouwer, Steve
Cassidy and four anonymous reviewers for valuable
feedback and comments to this paper and its immediate predecessor [7]; beyond this, we thank OLiA users,
contributors and funders. OLiA has originally been developed at the Collaborative Research Center (SFB)
441 Linguistic Data Structures (University of Tubin-
gen, Germany) in the context of the project Sustainability of Linguistic Resources in cooperation with
SFB 632 Information Structure (University of Pots-
dam, Humboldt-University Berlin, Germany) and SFB
538 Multilingualism (University of Hamburg, Ger-
many) from 2006 to 2008. From 2007 to 2011, is has
been maintained and further developed at SFB 632 in
the context of the project Linguistic Data Base. In
2012, the first author continued his research on OLiA
in the context of PostDoc fellowship at the Information Sciences Institute of the University of Southern
California funded by the German Academic Exchange
Service (DAAD). The work of the second author was
conducted in the context of the LOEWE cluster Digital Humanities at the Goethe-University Frankfurt
(2011-2014).

In parts, this data set description is based on [7],

shortened, updated and thoroughly revised.
