PAROLE/SIMPLE lemon ontology and 
lexicons 

Editors: Sebastian Hellmann, AKSW, University of Leipzig, Germany; Steven Moran, LMU Munich, Germany; Martin Brummer, AKSW, 
University of Leipzig, Germany; John McCrae, University of Bielefeld, Germany. 
Open reviews: Judith Eckle-Kohler, TU Darmstadt, Germany; Philipp Cimiano, University of Bielefeld, Germany; one anonymous reviewer. 

Marta Villegas and Nuria Bel  
Universitat Pompeu Fabra 

Abstract. The PAROLE/SIMPLE 'lemon Ontology and Lexicon are the OWL/RDF version of the PAROLE/SIMPLE lexicons (defined during the PAROLE (LE2-4017) and SIMPLE (LE4-8346) IV FP EU projects) once mapped onto lemon model 
and LexInfo ontology. Original PAROLE/SIMPLE lexicons contain morphological, syntactic and semantic information, organized according to a common model and to common linguistic specifications for 12 European languages. The data set  we 
describe includes the PAROLE/SIMPLE model mapped to lemon and LexInfo ontology and the Spanish & Catalan lexicons. 
All data are published in the Data Hub and are distributed under CC Attribution 3.0 Unported license. The Spanish lexicon 
contains 199466 triples and 7572 lexical entries fully annotated with syntactic and semantic information. The Catalan lexicon 
contains 343714 triples and 20545 lexical entries annotated with syntactic information half of which are also annotated with 
semantic information. In this paper we describe the resulting data, the mapping process and the benefits obtained. We demonstrate that the Linked Open Data principles prove essential for datasets such as original PAROLE/SIMPLE lexicons where 
harmonization and interoperability were crucial. The resulting data is lighter and better suited for exploitation. In addition, it 
facilitates further extensions and linking to external resources such as WordNet, lemonUby, DBpedia etc. 

Keywords:  lexicon, ontology, open linked data, RDF, OWL, LE-PAROLE, SIMPLE, LexInfo, lemon 

1. Introduction 

The  PAROLE/SIMPLE  'lemon'  Ontology  is  the 
OWL/RDF version of the PAROLE & SIMPLE lexicon models (defined during the PAROLE LE2-4017 
and  SIMPLE  LE4-8346  projects)  once  mapped  to 
lemon1 and LexInfo2 models. 

1.1. PAROLE/SIMPLE lexicons 

The original PAROLE/SIMPLE3 lexicons contain 
morphological,  syntactic  and  semantic  information 
organized  according  to  a  common  model  and  to 
common  linguistic  specifications.  PAROLE  was  the 
first  project  producing  corpora  and  lexicons  in  so 
many  languages 4  and  built  according  to  the  same 
design principles, linguistic specifications and repre-

1 http://lemon-model.net/ 
2 http://lexinfo.net/ 
3 http://www.ub.edu/gilcub/SIMPLE/simple.html 
4 Catalan,  Danish,  Dutch,  English,  Finnish,  French,  German, 

Greek, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish and Swedish 

sentation format. The model was based on EAGLES 
recommendations  for  morphosyntactic  information 
and verb syntax [7] and on the extended GENELEX 
model [1]. 

The goal of SIMPLE project was to add semantic 
information to the set of harmonized multifunctional 
lexicons built for 12 European languages by the PAROLE  consortium.  All  PAROLE/SIMPLE  lexicons 
were defined against a common model defined in the 
DTD. Thus all PAROLE/SIMPLE lexicons are XML 
files  valid  against  the  same  DTD 5.  In  addition,  a 
good  number  of  'descriptive'  elements  were  defined 
and  shared  by  all  SIMPLE  lexicons.  Essentially, 
these  in-clude:  (i)  Template  assignment:  meant  to 
guarantee  coherent  encoding,  across  sites  and  lan-
guages, (ii) Domain information, (iii) Semantic class 
informa-tion,  (iv)  Semantic  features:  distinctive  features  used  to  better  specify  the  semantic  class  of  a 
sense, and for the definition of selectional restrictions 

5 Original  PAROLE/SIMPLE  lexicons  were  in  SGML  so  we 

previously converted them into XML. 

tic Rela-tions. 

1.2. LMF, lemon and LexInfo  

LMF [5] (Lexical Markup Framework) is an ISO 
standard  (ISO-24613:2008)  for  computational  lexi-
cons.  LMF  combines  the  best  designs  and  methods 
from many existing NLP lexicons6. LMF models are 
represented by UML classes, associations among the 
classes,  and  a  set  of  ISO-12620  data  categories  that 
function as UML attribute-value pairs. LMF includes 
an XML DTD where XML elements in the DTD are 
transcoded from the UML class diagrams. The class 
adornment is implemented as a set of feat elements. 
Lemon[3][6]  (lexicon  model  for  ontologies  developed  by  the  Monnet  project  http://www.monnet-
project.eu/)  is  a  model  for  modeling  lexica  in  RDF. 
The lemon model consists of a core path defined as: 
OntologyEntity  LexicalSense  LexicalEntry  
LexicalForm    WrittenRepresentation.  Lemon  is 
highly compliant with LMF. 

LexInfo [2][4] is a model for the linguistic grounding of ontologies and as such allows for the association of linguistic information (such as part-of-speech, 
subcategorization  frames  etc.)  with  ontology  elements (such as concepts, relations, individuals, etc.). 
LexInfo it is also highly compliant with LMF and the 
lemon model.  

1.3. The mapping 

Mapping  PAROLE/SIMPLE  lexicons  onto  lem-
on/LexInfo involves three tasks. Firstly, the original 
PAROLE/SIMPLE  model  expressed  in  the  DTD 
needs to be mapped onto the lemon model. This can 
be seen as the lexicon format mapping.  Secondly, all 
descriptive  elements  defined  by  PAROLE/SIMPLE 
lexicons are mapped onto the LexInfo ontology. This 
includes  language  dependent  descriptive  elements 
and common elements7. This broadly corresponds to 
the ontology mapping part. Finally, lexical entries are 
mapped.  

The resulting dataset is organized into three files. 
One contains the PAROLE/SIMPLE Ontology which 
essentially  imports  lemon  and  LexInfo  ontologies 

6 Especially GENELEX, PAROLE and SIMPLE. 
7 Note that, whereas PAROLE lexicons are structurally compat-
ible, in certain aspects they are semantically idiosyncratic as each 
lexicon defines its own descriptive elements. Thus for example, 
subcategorization frames are defined in each lexicon without any 
reference  or  relation to  the  others.  In  contrast,  SIMPLE  lexicons 
go one step further and define a set of shared descriptive elements. 

and adds 'PAROLE elements' (classes and/or proper-
ties) whenever these could not be mapped. The other 
two files collect the Spanish and Catalan lexical en-
tries. 

In the following sections we describe the clues of 
the mapping process and highlight some of the benefits obtained. 

2. From PAROLE/SIMPLE model to lemon 

The  strategy 

followed  when  mapping  PA-
ROLE/SIMPLE  model  onto  lemon  can  be  summarized as follows: 

lemon:Frames. 

Elements from the DTD were mapped onto classes. 
Whenever  possible,  lemon  (and  LexInfo)  classes 
were used. Otherwise, new classes were created. For 
example:  PAROLE  Description  elements  become 
contrast, 
the  parole:Connotation  class  was  created  as  a  subclass of parole:Element and lemon:PropertyValue as 
shown 
that  many  PA-
ROLE/SIMPLE elements are not mapped and simply 
disappear in the target model. This is partially due to 
the fact that RDF allows a better modeling and they 
are no longer needed. 

in  Figure  1.  Note 

In 

Figure 1 Adding classes 

Attributes from the DTD were mapped onto Prop-
erties.  Again,  whenever  possible,  lemon  or  LexInfo 
properties  were  used.  For  example:  PAROLE 
MuS/@gramcat8 becomes lexinfo:partOfSpeech. 

Values. When the PAROLE/SIMPLE DTD establishes  the  set  of  values  for  a  given  attribute,  these 
values  are  mapped  onto  the  corresponding  LexInfo 
values. For example: the PAROLE pair: NOUN + 
COMMON 
translates 
as lexinfo:commonNoun as shown in Figure 2. 

Parent/child  relations  between  elements  in  the 
DTD were mapped onto relevant Properties. For ex-
ample: the parent/child relation between a PAROLE 

simply 

8 We use XPath expressions when referring to source data. 

tionC element becomes lexinfo:subject property. 

Figure 2 Attribute mapping 

IDREFs  pointing  mechanisms  between  elements 
in the DTD became properties. For example: the relation  between  PAROLE  morphological  and  syntactic 
units  (MuS  &  SynUs)  is  expressed  by  means  of 
the lemon:synBehaviour property as shown in Figure 
3. 

Figure 3 Mapping the IDREF pointing mechanism 

Though the mapping process implied a considerable effort we think the task was worth it. The source 
model (DTD) and common descriptive elements are 
already  mapped  and  can  be  reused  by  other  lan-
guages.  This  process  involved  two  main  aspects:  a 
change  of  model  (both  conceptually9  and  formally) 
and a change of vocabulary which was a rather painful  task 10.  Lexical  entries  and  language  dependent 
data  in  source  lexicons  will  require  additional  mapping  processes.  Once  the  mapping  between  the  two 
models is defined, rewriting the original entries is not 

9 Notice that we moved from a layered model onto an 'integrat-
ed' one and from an ER model formalized as a DTD into an ontol-
ogy. 

10 Finding the right correspondences between PAROLE/LexInfo 
'vacabularies' was rather tough and not always easy due to the lack 
of  documentation  in  the  original  lexicons.  Note  for  instance  that 
the LexInfo model includes up to 319 morphosyntactic features. 

difficult  and  conversion  rules  can  be  easily  applied. 
The biggest problem here is the difficulty to get relevant  PAROLE  data.  Whether  the  data  are  in  XML 
files or in a data base, the fact is that gathering data 
for a particular lexical entry is quite a complex task. 
In  PAROLE,  a  lexical  entry  is  split  into  different 
elements  across  different  layers  which  makes  this 
task rather complex. Our strategy was to follow PAROLE layered structure; thus, for each layer we generated  the  relevant  triples.  Using  source  IDs  (and 
IDREFs) to create the target URIs allows for such a 
strategy and guarantees consistency of data. The migration  of  subcategorization  frames  deserves  special 
attention:  in  the  PAROLE  model,  syntactic  frames 
are  defined  locally  in  each  language  lexicon.  This 
means that the conversion to the lemon model needs 
to  be  addressed  for  each  particular  lexicon  and  its 
difficulty depends on the nature of the source data11. 
In any case, for each input frame we need to find the 
corresponding LexInfo frame. Whenever this matching is not possible we need to place the input frame 
in  the  LexInfo  ontology 12.  In  our  case,  moving  to 
LexInfo frames allowed us to improve certain aspects 
such as bounded prepositions and, more important, to 
get a better organization of the frame system which is 
eventually organized as an ontology13. 

In any case, conversion tasks can benefit from already  defined  conversion  templates  which  can  be 
reused  when  mapping  lexical  entries  from  different 
languages  and  sources.  Figure  4  shows  part  of  the 
XSL template used to map PAROLE features to LexInfo ontology. 

11 Notice that PAROLE model allowed for both coarse-grained 

and fine-grained descriptions. 

12 Our lexicons include lots of pronominal and sentential frames 
(used  to  distinguish  between  indicative  and  subjunctive  comple-
ments) that were not listed in the LexInfo ontology. 

13 Note for instance that getting all transitive verbs in the original PAROLE lexicons meant searching for each and every transitive frame.  

3. Some benefits: syntax/semantic linking 

The  Lemon  model  simplifies  the  original  PA-
ROLE/SIMPLE model in a good number of aspects. 
This is partly due to the use of RDF which allows for 
a  more  compact  and  efficient  representation.  The 
case  of  syntax/semantic  mappings  is  particularly  in-
teresting.  The  original  PAROLE/SIMPLE  data  include  a  complex  machinery  to  define  syntactic  subcategorization  frames  and  semantic  argument  struc-
tures. In the former case, we have to deal with a large 
set of related elements: SynU, Description, Construc-
tion,  Self,  InstantiatedPositionC,  PositionC,  Syntag-
maNT, etc. The relation among these elements is established  by  means  of  the  parent/child  relation  mechanism or ID/IDREF pointing mechanism as exemplified in Figure 5. 

Figure 5 Subcategorization information 

Similarly, argument structure representation is also 
complex  and,  again,  we  find  a  good  number  of  elements  involved:  PredicativeRepresentation,  Predi-
cate, Argument, InfArg, SemanticRole, etc. 

Syntax semantic linking in the PAROLE/SIMPLE 
model is even more complex and, in most cases, use-
less. Syntactic frame descriptions and semantic predicate descriptions are completely separated. The former  involve  syntactic  arguments  whereas  the  latter 
involve  semantic  arguments  with  no  relation  at  all 
between  them.  Syntax/semantic  relations  are  expressed by means of additional elements: the Correspondence  element  and  its  descendants.  Correspondence  are  global  elements  that  point  to  SimpleCorrespArgPos  elements  which  are  the  eventual 

holders of the syn/sem argument linking. Since SimpleCorrespArgPos elements are global, the linking is 
defined not in terms of arguments IDs but in terms of 
the  position  they  occupy  in  the  syntactic  frame  and 
the  semantic  predicate.  Note in  addition  (see  Figure 
6)  that  neither  the  syntactic  frame  nor  the  predicate 
involved are at hand.  

Figure 6 Syn / sem linking in PAROLE/SIMPLE 

The lemon model allows defining all these things 

in a much easier way, essentially: 

Description,  Construction  &  Self  elements  are 
mapped  to  lemon:Frame  class  and  related  onto  the 
relevant  entry  by  means  of  the  lemon:synBehaviour 
property. 

InstantiatedPositionC,  Position  &  Syntagmas  are 
mapped onto lemon:Argument class and related to the 
relevant  lemon:Frame  via  some  lemon:synArg  rela-
tion. 

PredicativeRepresentation  &  Predicate  are  also 

mapped onto lemon:Frame 

and 

link 

Argument, 

lemon:Argument 

SemanticRole 
class 

InfArg 
come 
to 
vant lemon:Frame via some lemon:semArg relation. 
A simplified entry for the English verb 'write' can 
be found in Figure 7. Figure 8 gives a partial graphical  representation.  There  we  can  see  that  both  the 
syntactic frame and the lexical sense point to ARG0 
and  ARG1  instances.  In  the  former  case,  the  frame 
links to its arguments by means of subject and object 
properties. In the latter case, the lexical sense links to 
its arguments by means of agent and patient proper-
ties.  Finally,  arguments  are  also  specified  for  a  semantic template (Human & SemioticArtifact respec-
tively) and syntactic realization (NP in both cases). 

welcome  but  proves  problematic  when  addressing 
interoperability  among  resources  and  prevented  us 
from  providing  a  general  frame  ontology14  that  fulfills the requirements of the different PAROLE lexicons 15.  Instead,  we  included  frame  descriptions  as 
part  of  each  language  lexicon.  Note,  however,  that 
the  fact  that  these  language  dependant  frames  are 
eventually integrated into the LexInfo ontology guarantees some interoperability  as they all share a core 
model. 

LexInfo defines the subcategorization ontology as 
the instantiation the lemon classes. As we saw, lemon 
includes  the  notion  of  Frame.  Frames  are  indicated 
with the synBehaviour property and their arguments 
with the property synArg. LexInfo defines subproperties of synArg to represent the syntactic functions of 
arguments and organizes frames into subclasses. Our 
mapping to LexInfo implied mapping PAROLE subcategorization  frames  onto  this  model  (Description 
elements and their descendants). The mapping process was done in two steps. First, we defined a style 
sheet  converter  that  reads  our  PAROLE  XML  lexicon  and  for  each  Description  element  generates  a 
new Frame. Consequently, all newly created frames 
were 
the 
lemon:Frame.  Second,  we  collapsed  some 
eral 
frames  into  one  single  class 16,  thus  simplifying  the 
model, and organized them in the LexInfo ontology. 
As  a  result,  the  PAROLE  lexicons  become  lighter 
than  the  original  ones;  are  better  organized;  share  a 
wide  core  frame  ontology  and  allow  queries  that 
were  otherwise  impossible  in  the  original  PAROLE 
lexicons; for instance  we can easily get all control 
verbs;  verbs  with  a  sentential  complement;  verbs 
with an indirect object, etc17.  

subclasses 

treated 

as 

of 

14 as an extension of the LexInfo one 
15 Differences between lexicons are important. For example, in 
the Spanish lexicon optionality of arguments is dealt at the argument level (optional complements are marked as optional) whereas 
in  the  Catalan  lexicon  optionality  of  an  argument  generates  two 
distinct  frames;  Spanish  frames  include  passive  constructions 
whereas Catalan frames do not; etc. 

16 For example, the original Spanish lexicon includes 12 intransitive prepositional Descriptions, one for each bounded preposition. 
All these frames are mapped to IntransitivePP Frame as the information  about the  preposition  is  encoded  by  means  of  a  property 
attached to the PP argument. 

17 SPARQL  query  to  retrieve  verbs  with  a  sentential  argument 

(with inference): SELECT  DISTINCT ?label 

WHERE { ?entry lemon:synBehavior ?frame ; rdfs:label ?label. 
?frame lemon:synArg ?arg . 
?arg lemon:constituent parole:Clause.} 

Figure 7 A simplified entry for the English verb write 

Figure 8 Simplified Syn/Sem linking 

4. Some benefits: subcategorization frames 

Each original PAROLE lexicon defines the set of 
subcategorization  frames  for  a  particular  language. 
Contrary to semantic descriptions, syntactic descriptions  are  essentially 
language  dependent.  Thus 
whereas  all  lexicons  share  the  same  set  of  semantic 
de-scriptive  elements  (domain,  semantic  class,  semantic relations, etc) such homogeneity was not defined in the syntactic layer. This means that subcategorization 
information  cannot  be  easily  shared 
among the lex-icons. Basically, this is due to the fact 
that  PAROLE  aimed  at  being  a  flexible  model  to 

6. The sources 

The  most  difficult  problem  of  the  original  PA-
ROLE/SIMPLE  lexicons  is  exploitation  and  man-
agement.  When  moving  from  the  original  PA-
ROLE/SIMPLE  model  to  a  relational  database,  we 
end up with a complex database with a huge number 
of  related  tables 18.  Having  PAROLE/SIMPLE  lexicons  in  a  database  means  managing  lots  of  tables 
and very often we need to split complex queries into 
several sub queries [7]. Note, for example, that  getting the senses of a given lemma is not easy and we 
need a complex  SQL query involving up to  six different  tables.  Similarly,  a  query  such  as  find  the 
lemma  and  template  of  all  senses  with  a  negative 
connotation  is  a  real  challenge  in  the  original  PA-
ROLE/SIMPLE lexica. Such a query is quite simple 
in RDF as shown in Figure 9. The results are given in 
Figure 10. 

Figure 9 SPARQL sample query 

The  Ontology  and  both  the  Spanish  and  Catalan 
lexicons  are  distributed  under  CC  Attribution  3.0 
Unported license. These datasets are published in the 
Data  Hub 
(http://datahub.io/dataset/parole-simple-
ont) and can be downloaded in both XML RDF format and RDF Turtle format. 

The Spanish lexicon contains 199,466 triples with 
7,572  lexical  entries  fully  annotated  with  syntactic 
and  semantic  information  distributed  as  follows: 
5,659 common nouns, 729 proper nouns, 859 adjectives  and  325  verbs.  The  lexicon  contains  11,430 
LexicalSenses. 

The  Catalan  lexicon  contains  343,714  triples  and 
20,545 lexical entries annotated with syntactic information half of which are also annotated with semantic  information.  Lexical  entries  include  3,064  verbs, 
13,206 common nous, 247 proper nous, 3,101 adjectives and 511 adverbs. The rest belong to closed cat-
egories. The lexicon contains 11,813 LexicalSenses. 
Table  1  lists  the  properties  assigned  to  Lexi-

calSenses19 in both lexicons. 

Property 
id 
template 
example 
semanticClass 
semanticRelation 
countability 
semanticFeature 
semanticRole 
copulaType 
connotation 
adjType 
comment 
domain 
gradable 
definition 

Spanish  Catalan 

102363 

Table 1 Triples assigned to LexicalSense 

7. Summary and Conclusions 

The dataset described here is the result of mapping 
PAROLE/SIMPLE  Spanish  and  Catalan  lexicons 
onto the lemon model following the LexInfo ontolo-
gy. The mapping implied three main tasks: the lexicon format mapping (from DTD to lemon model), the 

Figure 10 Query results 

18 Our PAROLE/SIMPLE database included 223 tables. 

19 Semantic relations and semantic roles are grouped. The object 

of semantic relation triples is always another LexicalSense. 

[1]  Antoni-Lay, M.-H., Francopoulo, G., & Zayssr, L. (1994). A 
generic  model  for  reusable  lexicons:  the  GENELEX  project. 
Literary and linguistic computing, 9(1), 47-54. 

[2]  Buitelaar, P., Cimiano, P., Haase, P., & Sintek, M. (2009). In 
Proceedings  of  the  6th  European  Semantic  Web  Conference 
on  The Semantic Web: Research and Applications (pp. 111
125). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/978-3-
642-02121-3_12 

[3]  Chiarcos,  Ch.,  McCrae,  J.,  Cimiano,  P.,  &  Fellbaum,  Ch. 
(2013). Towards open data for linguistics: Lexical Linked Da-
ta. In A. Oltramari, P. Vossen, L. Qin, & E. Hovy (Eds.), New 
Trends  of  Research  in  Ontologies  and  Lexical  Resources:  
Ideas,  Projects,  Systems  (pp.  725).  Berlin,  Heildelberg: 
Springer-Verlag. 

9(1), 

Web, 

Wide 

[4]  Cimiano, P., Buitelaar, P., McCrae, J., & Sintek,  M. (2011). 
LexInfo:  A  declarative  model  for  the  lexicon-ontology  inter-
face.  Web  Semantics:  Science,  Services  and  Agents  On  The 
World 
29-51. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2010.11.001 

[5]  Francopoulo,  G.,  Bel,  N.,  George,  M.,  Calzolari,  N.,  Mona-
chini,  M.,  Pet,  M.,  &  Soria,  C.  (2007).  Lexical  Markup 
Framework:  ISO  standard  for  semantic  information  in  NLP 
lexicons.  In  Lexical  semantic  and  ontological  resources: 
Workshop  of  the  GLDV  Working  Group  on  Lexicography  at 
the  Biennial  Spring  Conference  of  the  GLDV;  April  13-14, 

2007,  Tubingen,  Germany;  workshop  proceedings.  Hagen: 

FernUniv. 
from 
http://tagmatica.fr//publications/LMFPaperForTubingen17Feb
urary2007.pdf 

Retrieved 

[6]  McCrae, J., Spohr, D., & Cimiano, P. (2011). Linking Lexical 
Resources and Ontologies on the Semantic Web with Lemon.  
In Proceedings of the 8th Extended Semantic Web Conference 
on  The  Semantic  Web:  Research  and  Applications  -  Volume 
Part  I  (pp.  245259).  Berlin,  Heidelberg:  Springer-Verlag. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2008892.2008914 

Eagles. 

[7]  Barnett, R., Calzolari, N., Flores, S.,  Hellwig, P., Kahrel, P., 
Leech, G., Melera, M., Montemagni, S., Odijk, J., Pirrelli, V., 
Sanfilippo, A.,  Teufel, S., Villegas, M., & Zaysser, L. (1996). 
EAGLES:  Preliminary  Recommendations  on  Subcategorisa-
tion:  EAG---CLWG---SYNLEX/P,  version  of  Aug,  1996.  [Pi-
sa]: 
from 
http://www.ilc.cnr.it/EAGLES96/synlex/synlex.html 

Retrieved 

[8]  Villegas, M., & Bel, N. (2002). From DTD to relational dB. 
An  automatic  generation  of  a  lexicographical  station  out  off 
ISLE  guidelines.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Third  International 
Conference  on  Language  Resources  and  Evaluation,  LREC 
2002 (pp. 694-700). Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain: European  Language  Resources  Association.  Retrieved  from 
http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2002/pdf/48.pdf 

ontology  mapping  (from  descriptive  elements  to 
LexInfo ontology) and the mapping of lexical entries.  
This  work  may  help  and  encourage  other  PA-
ROLE/SIMPLE lexicons to take the same way20. The 
lemon version of PAROLE  model (DTD) is already 
mapped and all shared descriptive elements are integrated with the LexInfo ontology. Everything can be 
reused by other languages. In addition, new lexicons 
can benefit from conversion templates and only need 
to  address  language  particular  descriptions.  Linked 
Open Data is the  natural scenario for a  multilingual 
resource such as the PAROLE/SIMPLE lexicons. 

The resulting lexicons benefit from standardization 
and  Linked  Open  Data  principles.  The  fact  that 
source data categories are  mapped onto the LexInfo 
ontology which in turn is linked to ISOcat21 is a step 
forward in standardization and interoperability. 

From  our  experience  we  conclude  that  XML  (es-
sentially DTDs) is not well suited for modeling purposes as it allows for a number of syntactic alternatives  and  conveys  semantic  ambiguity.  In  addition, 
XML proves inefficient when relating resources. This 
is  crucial  in  a  scenario  where  references  to  external 
resources  are  essential  to  guarantee  interoperability. 
RDF  overcomes  some  of  the  problems  met  with 
XML. The use of RDF (especially URIs) proves essential 
as  original  PA-
ROLE/SIMPLE  lexicons  where  interoperability  was 
crucial. The resulting data is lighter and better suited 
for  exploitation.  In  addition,  it  easies  further  extensions  and  links  with  external  resources  such  as 
WordNet, lemonUby, DBpedia etc. 

for  datasets 

such 

8. Acknowledgements 

The  resources  reported  in  this  paper  were  developed with the support of METANET4U: Enhancing 
the European Linguistic Infrastructure, (2011-2013), 
funded  by  UNER  -  Competitiveness  and  Innovation 
Framework Program, (CIP-PSP-270893). 

We  thank  the  Institut  dEstudis  Catalans  and  the 
GilcUB from the University of Barcelona as the creators of the original Catalan and Spanish lexicons. 

Finally, we also want to thank the reviewers of this 

paper for their valuable comments and suggestions. 

20 Most PAROLE/SIMPLE  lexicons have been maintained and 
enlarged  since  their  creation  and  are  available  at  the  METASHARE  nodes  (ie  http://metashare.elda.org/).  These  include  the 
Catalan,  Danish,  Dutch,  English,  Greek,  Italian,  Portuguese  and 
Spanish.  The  Swedish 
at 
http://spraakdata.gu.se/parole/lexikon/swedish.parole.lexikon.html. 

accessed 

lexicon 

can 

be 

