Migrating Bibliographic Datasets to the 
Semantic Web: the AGRIS case 

Editor(s): Jens Lehmann, University of Leipzig, Germany; Oscar Corcho, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Spain 
Solicited review(s): Christophe Gueret, VU Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Daniel Vila-Suero, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Spain; 
Hugh Glaser, University of Southampton, UK   

Stefano Anibaldia, Yves Jaquesa, Fabrizio Cellia, Armando Stellatoab and Johannes Keizera* 
a Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO of the UN), v.le Terme di Caracalla 1, 00154, 
Rome, Italy 
b Department of Enterprise Engineering, University of Tor Vergata, Via del Politecnico 1, 00133, Italy 

Abstract. AGRIS is among the most comprehensive online collections of agricultural and related sciences information. It is a 
growing global catalog of 5 million high-quality structured bibliographic records indexed from a worldwide group of provid-
ers.  AGRIS  relies  heavily  on  the  AGROVOC  thesaurus  for  its  indexing.  Following  the  conversion  of  that  thesaurus  into  a 
SKOS concept-scheme and its publication as Linked Open Data (LOD), the entire set of AGRIS records was also triplified and 
released as LOD. As part of this exercise, OpenAGRIS, a semantic mashup application, was developed to dynamically combine  AGRIS  data  with  external  data  sources,  using  a  mixture  of  SPARQL  queries  and  web  services.  The  re-engineering  of 
AGRIS for the Semantic Web raised numerous issues regarding the relative lack of administrative metadata required to compellingly address the proof and trust layers of the Semantic Web stack, both within the AGRIS repository and in the external 
data pulled into OpenAGRIS. The AGRIS team began a process of disambiguation and enrichment to continue moving toward 
an entity-based view of its resources, beginning with the tens of thousands of journals attached to its records. The evolution of 
the system, the issues raised during the triplification process and the steps necessary for publishing the result as LOD content 
are hereby discussed and evaluated. 

Keywords: Linked Datasets, Agriculture, Journal Archives, Digital Libraries 

1.  Introduction 

The  International  Information  System  for  the  Agricultural  Sciences  and  Technology  (AGRIS)  is  an 
initiative set up by the Food and Agriculture Organization  of  the  United  Nations  (FAO  of  the  UN)  in 
1974,  to  make  information  on  agricultural  research 
globally available. One of the main objectives of the 
AGRIS  initiative  is  to  improve  access  and  exchange 
of information serving the information needs of developed  and  developing  countries  on  a  partnership 
basis  [1].  Since  1975,  AGRIS  has  been  collecting 
and  disseminating  bibliographic  information  on  scientific  and  socio-economic  publications,  scholarly 
papers  and  grey1 literature,  issued  on  a  wide  variety 

of food and agricultural  subjects  from over 150 data 
providers  located  in  more  than  100  different  coun-
tries. 

With  the  growth  of  open  access  Institutional  Repositories  (IRs),  AGRIS  has  considerably  improved 
its  methods  for  harvesting  and  indexing  metadata 
from  content  providers.  Initiatives  such  as  the  Open 
Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting 
(OAI-PMH)  have  greatly  facilitated  interoperability 
with our data providers. 

Today  AGRIS  disseminates  a  collection  of  more 
than  5  million  bibliographic  references  modeled  using  a  qualified  Dublin  Core  metadata  format  that 
facilitate  sharing  of  information  across  information 
systems. 

1 Unpublished scientific and technical reports 

*Corresponding author 

Fig. 1. Derivation history of an AGRIS artifact 

Dissemination  is  handled  by  the  AGRIS  portal2, 
one of the  most trafficked  FAO  web sites,  with  over 
200,000 unique visitors per month, augmented by the 
OpenAGRIS [2] semantic mashup that combines and 
merges 
information  from  different  online  data 
sources.  The  entire  XML  and  RDF  repository  is 
freely  downloadable 3  and  can  be  reused  and  pub-
lished, after a specific request to the AGRIS Secretar-
iat,  under  the  terms  and  conditions  as  stated  in 
http://agris.fao.org/terms. 

The  AGRIS  data  is  heavily  indexed  with  the 
AGROVOC  thesaurus.  In  order  to  take  better  advantage of its move to LOD, the entire set of AGRIS 
records  was  remodeled  using  Resource  Description 
Framework (RDF) and deployed in an Allegrograph4 
triple  store.  Well-known  standard  RDF  vocabularies 
such  as  BIBO  [3]  FOAF  [4]  and  Dublin  Core 
Metadata  terms    [5]  were  reused  to  facilitate  interlinking  with  other  existing  datasets.  However,  the 
triplification  of  the  AGRIS  content  brought  to  light 
deficiencies in data production, in particular the han-

2 http://agris.fao.org 
3 ftp://ext-ftp.fao.org/GI/Reserved/Agris/AgrisData/ 
4 http://www.franz.com/agraph/allegrograph/ 

dling  of  proof  and  trust  in  a  world  of  machinereadable  linked  data.  The  paper  covers  a  number  of 
initial issues that  were resolved and finishes  with an 
overview  of  proposals  aimed  at  partially  or  wholly 
remedying the remaining proof and trust deficiencies 
in the AGRIS dataset. 

2. Why RDF 

Bibliographic resources are static and often do not 
contain  the  information  needed  to  answer  a  users 
query, in particular  when the  record does not  link to 
the  full  text  of  the  described  publication.  A  recent 
AGRIS site analysis shows that when end users reach 
an AGRIS result page (a reference) where no full text 
information  is  available,  they  typically  exit  the  site 
and  presumably  search  again    using  other  search 
engines or databases  for other online resources. The 
...digital  environment  has  increased  the  range  of 
user needs and expectations beyond the scope of the 
collections  of  most  consortia.  End-user  services  are 
now required to operate at Web-scale and incorporate 
metadata  from  sources  well  beyond  the  traditional 
bibliographic  record.  [6].  As  of  August  2013,  the 

Fig. 2: The RDF/XML serialization of an AGRIS record 

datahub5 portal included 34 open bibliographic linked 
open  datasets,  such  as  Europeana6 and  the  move  to 
RDF  has  enabled  AGRIS  to  align  with  such  important hubs of information science. This is achieved 
by  providing  disambiguated,  entity-based  access  to 
bibliographic  and  citation  data  and  by  mashing  up 
this  information  with  related  data  sources.  The  ambition  is  not  to  collect  comprehensively  all  bibliographic  references  in  the  subject  area, but  to  use  the 
latent knowledge in the AGRIS data to find, link and 
interpret relevant sources on the internet. [7]. 

3. The Road to Linked Data 

With  the  growth  of  open  access  repositories  and 
web  resources,  the  AGRIS  objectives  required  a 
thorough  revision  in  the  strategies  and  methods  to 
use for such a large dataset. 

Following  the  innovation  begun  by  the  porting  of 
its  indexing  thesaurus  AGROVOC  to  a  Simple 
Knowledge  Organization  System  (SKOS)  conceptscheme published as LOD [8], the decision was made 
to  connect  the  AGRIS  content  to  the  LOD  cloud  as 
well, and to fully exploit the potentialities of the Semantic Web. 

When the AGRIS team decided to publish its records  as  linked  data  in  RDF,  it  quickly  became  clear 
that  crucial  metadata  necessary  in  addressing  issues 
of proof and trust were missing. It goes without saying  that  as  the  number  of  repositories  and  aggrega-

5 http://datahub.io/ 
6 www.europeana.eu/ 

tors  increase,  so  too  does  the  number  of  potential 
formal  or  informal  metadata  sources  [9].  Figure  1 
shows the long flow of an AGRIS artifact, from genesis to dissemination. Every phase generates administrative  metadata,  and  for  each  record,  AGRIS  has 
always  registered  authors,  titles,  dates  and  the  cataloguing institute. 

3.1. AGRIS RDF datasets 

Becoming part of the LOD cloud meant translating 
the  repository  of  over  5  million  XML  bibliographic 
records  to  RDF,  and  publishing  it  on  the  Web.  The 
translation  process  required  a  design  step  to  define 
vocabularies and properties needed in order to model 
data  as  statements  (triples),  and  the  creation  of  a 
translation mapping between the AGRIS XML bibliographic  repository  and  the  AGRIS  RDF.  The 
AGRIS  XML  bibliographic  repository  is  encoded  in 
an  XML  qualified  Dublin  Core  metadata  format,  so 
each XML element has a specific meaning. To move 
to  RDF,  it  was  important  to  map  XML  elements  to 
RDF  properties  with  the  same  meaning.  Keeping  in 
the  spirit  of  reusability,  the  team  avoided  almost 
completely  minting  any  new  properties  and  to  reuse 
as  much  as  possible  available  standard  vocabularies, 
such as BIBO, FOAF and Dublin Core.  Reusing existing and widespread vocabularies helps applications 
to  better  know  the  meaning  of  a  property,  so  to  dis-
play, interlink, or use the content in the best way and 
with the correct meaning. We defined new properties 
only  when  there  was  nothing  in  the  world  that  can 
express a desired relationship. 

tasets, AGRIS data comprises information from three 
different RDF data sources maintained in FAO: 

  The  AGRIS  Records  dataset:  the  direct  translation  of  AGRIS  XML  records  to  RDF.  This  dataset  consists  of  more  than  130  million  triples 
resulting from the conversion of the above mentioned XML repository. The relevancy of the dataset  derives  not  only  from  the  long  process  of 
disambiguation  and  data  cleaning,  but  also  on 
the  multilingual  assets  obtained  by  crossing  its 
data  records  with  the  multiple  editions  of  records  available  in  the  diverse  countries  which 
provide it with data. Figure 2 shows an example 
of an RDF/XML AGRIS record. 

  The  AGRIS  Serials  dataset:  since  over  80%  of 
AGRIS  records  are  journal  articles,  it  was 
thought  to  generate  an  appropriate  authoritative 
dataset of agricultural journals, with comprehensive information about each entry such as ISSN, 
subjects,  dates, 
frequency,  publisher.  The 
metadata  information  from  the  AGRIS  scientific journals, together with other important data sources such as the journals of the FAO cata-
logue,  the  Directory  of  Open  Access  Journals 
(DOAJ7), Centre for Agricultural Bioscience International 8  (CABI)  and  the  National  Agricultural  Library  Catalog 9  (AGRICOLA)  was  expanded  by  retrieving  authoritative  information 
from  the  ISSN  Centre  database10.  Currently  the 
team  has  disambiguated  nearly  20,000  agricultural journals and rendered them unique entities, 
stored  in  a  triple  store,  for  a  total  of  almost 
320,000 triples. 

  The  Agrovoc  dataset11:  Agrovoc  is  the  worlds 
most  comprehensive  multilingual  agricultural 
vocabulary. Agrovoc contains more than 32,000 
concepts in over 20 languages, covering subject 
fields  in  agriculture,  forestry  and  fisheries  together  with  cross-cutting  themes  such  as  land 
use, rural livelihoods and food security.  A great 
part  of  the  AGRIS  records  are  indexed  with 
Agrovoc  concepts,  and  interlinks  to  other  the-
sauri, such as Eurovoc12, NAL13 and DBpedia14.  

7 http://www.doaj.org/ 
8 http://www.cabi.org/ 
9 http://agricola.nal.usda.gov/ 
10 http://www.issn.org/ 
11 http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/system/files/swj274_1.pdf 
12 http://eurovoc.europa.eu/ 
13 http://agclass.nal.usda.gov/ 
14 http://dbpedia.org 

3.2. The RDF-ization process 

Both  the  AGRIS  XML  core  dataset  and  the  RDF 
dump  are  periodically  updated  and  disseminated  as 
Open Data at an FTP site. The extremely performing 
and  flexible  Apache  Solr  technology  behind  the  index allows easy updates, specifically when there is a 
requirement to change parts or entire records. For 35 
years  or  so,  the  AGRIS  network  always  provided  a 
stable  environment,  officialized  by  an  agreement 
signed  by  all  the  United  Nations  Member  Countries 
in  1974.  In  addition,  in  the  last  few  years,  journal 
publishers,  Open  Repositories  and  Service  Providers 
adhered  to  AGRIS,  and  this  increased  enormously 
the AGRIS core data, which is continuously growing 
at a rate of 150,000 records each year. 

The  repository  is  accessed  by  many  applications 

that pre-date the RDF porting of its content. 

For  this  reason,  the  translation  to  RDF  requires 
continuous automatic updates. Moreover, the process 
is  based  on  operations  of  data  transformation  and 
enrichment, so it requires well defined and structured 
steps  with  a  precise  flow  of  information  (again  see 
Figure 1). 

To begin with, a unique URI is generated for each 
AGRIS  resource:  each  of  the  published  URIs  represents  a  unique  means  to  identify  a  specific  resource 
and  provides  researchers  with  a  partial  map  of  the 
global  research  community,  linking  formal  outputs 
(papers,  conference  proceedings,  etc.)  with  other  information available in other datasets. 

The URI is generated deterministically from available  identifiers  (see  Figure  2,  where  the  identifier 
associated to dct:identifier has been used to also generate  the  local  name  of  the  URI),  thus  there  is  no 
need of a component for managing the consistency of 
URIs along different translations. Then various steps 
cover  the  process  of  translation  of  the  XML  documents to RDF. Figure 1 shows these conversion steps. 
The process takes as input a set of AGRIS XML records  and  loads  them  into  the  database  in  an  objectrelational data model. This step is part of a data validation  process  necessary  to  ensure  that  no  duplicate 
records will be added to the repository and to modify 
data  using  the  common  query  language  SQL.  These 
data  are  consumed  by  a  filter  that  transforms  them 
(data type conversion, data cleaning, data validation) 
and  enriches  them  with  information  taken  from  different  controlled  and  authoritative  sources,  like  the 
ISSN Centre database and the FAO Open  Archive15. 

15 http://www4.fao.org/faobib/ 

loaded into a triple store and disseminated to the Web.  

This  process  of  RDF-ization  is  completely  auto-
matic:  data  come  directly  from  structured  AGRIS 
records,  so  mapping  can  be  between  the  AGRIS 
XML  and  the  AGRIS  RDF,  with  a  few  filters  to 
check  the  correctness  of  some  information  (e.g.  date 
formats,  ISSNs,  etc.)  and  to  add  more  data  by  using 
predefined  data  sources  that  have  been  previously 
mapped  to  AGRIS  records. Thus,  when  new  records 
are added to the AGRIS repository, they are automatically translated to RDF  without any loss of  reliability  as  no  new  uncertainty  is  added  to  the  dataset. 
Where  critical  operations,  such  as  mappings  from 
AGROVOC  to  other  datasets  and  interactions  with 
data owners, such as the ISSN International Centre16, 
require human intervention, the rest of the translation 
process  is  controlled  by  filters  that  check  data  consistency  and  correctness  in  the  metadata  ingested  by 
AGRIS data providers.  

Maintaining a wealth of curated knowledge - such 
as the OpenAGRIS Semantic application - entails the 
implementation of a mechanism for keeping track of 
provenance  information  of  the  data  sources,  as  will 
be discussed in Section 4.  

3.3. AGRIS Dataset Links 

Information  about  AGRIS  is  available  from  the 
FAO  web  site 17 ,  while  more  specific  information 
about the AGRIS Dataset is available on AIMS18. 

A description file following the VoID (Vocabulary 
of Interlinked Datasets) specification [10] is available 
alongside  the  AGRIS  Linked  Open  Dataset 19.  The 
VoID  file  contains  statistical  information  about  the 
linked  dataset  (partitioned  into  two  subsets:  AGRIS 
records and AGRIS journals), as  well as coordinates 
(such  as  the  http  address  of  its  SPARQL  endpoint) 
for automatically accessing and properly querying it. 
More information on the VoID data about AGRIS is 
reported in section 4. 

4. AGRIS Provenance and trust 

The  issues  discussed  in  the  previous  section  refer 
to  the  world  of  Linked  Open  Data  (LOD)  and  are 

16 http://www.issn.org/ 
17 http://agris.fao.org/knowledge-and-information-sharing-

through-agris-network 

18 http://aims.fao.org/aos/agrovoc/ 
19 http://agris.fao.org/void.ttl 

typically  partially  or  wholly  ignored  in  closed  world 
systems.  In  open  world  systems,  data  is  designed  to 
be  accessed  by  potentially  any  person  or  machine, 
and  it  is  then  that  problems  of  proof  and  trust  move 
to  the  forefront.  OpenAGRIS,  as  a  system  designed 
to access such data, has to cope with these issues and 
has been an ideal vehicle to get to the top proof/trust 
layers  of  the  LOD  stack  to  experience  the  issues 
firsthand. 

Provenance  in  particular  is  a  broad  term  that  may 
refer  to  various  levels  of  granularity.  Data  provenance was not a historical concern as AGRIS always 
took  for  granted  that  the  agreements  in  place  with 
national  governments  (and  the  national  libraries) 
provided AGRIS with a license allowing its secretariat  to  ingest  and  disseminate  data  without  specific 
rights  or  provenance  statements.  With  the  shift  to 
digital  publishing  and  machine-readable  records 
however,  tracing  the  provenance  chain  gained  new 
importance.  In  AGRIS,  each  record  has  an  identifier 
known as ARN (AGRIS Record Number), which has 
a  predefined  structure  and  contains  information  on 
the  data  source  together  with  the  year  of  creation  of 
the  artifact.  With  this  unique  identifier,  AGRIS  provides precise and updated statements of the origins of 
the 
the  ARN 
ES2011001090  refers  to  a  record  created  in  2011 
from a specific AGRIS data provider located in Spain, 
whose  progressive  number  is  1090.  Especially  for 
legacy data, ARNs are very important pieces of meta-
information, since it is very difficult to retrieve provenance information for decades-old records with poor 
metadata  [11].  Thus,  the  team  triplified  information 
about  the  AGRIS  data  providers,  providing  unique 
URIs for each and adding triples (using the property 
dct:source)  to  identify  this  aspect  of  provenance, 
which previously was only implicit in the ARN. 

itself.  For 

artifact 

instance, 

In  such  a  way,  using  the  ARN  of  a  record,  it  is 
possible  to  assign  provenance  information  to  an  entire  record,  which  is  a  set  of  triples.  But  the  AGRIS 
triplestore  currently  contains  more  than  130  million 
triples  and,  ideally,  each  triple  should  be  linked  to 
administrative  metadata. In  fact, information about a 
specific  AGRIS  record  could  come  from  different 
entities,  each  of  whom  would  provide  part  of  the 
metadata  during  the  record  lifecycle.  It  should  be 
possible to know  where the information  was extracted  from,  who  submitted  it  and  the  primary  data 
source.  Although  this  primary  source    trustworthy 
or not  creates the information, it is often only possible to determine the last provider in the chain.  

Questions remain on the appropriate set of properties  with  which  to  encode  such  metadata.  The  Vo-

likely  candidate.  Intended  as  a  bridge  between  publishers  and  consumers  of  RDF  data,  it  is  organized 
around  four  metadata  areas:  descriptive  metadata, 
access  metadata,  structural  metadata  and  linking 
metadata that is helpful for understanding how multiple  datasets  are  related  and  can  be  used  together 
[10].  For  descriptive  metadata,  VoiD  recommends 
Dublin  Core  (DC)  and  Friend  of  a  Friend  (FOAF) 
properties  which  together  cover  basic  provenance 
issues.  However  to  more  fully  cover  provenance, 
extensions  such  as  the  EnAKTing  Groups  voidp 
Vocabulary for Data and Dataset Provenance [12] are 
desirable  while  earlier  initiatives  such  as  the  Open 
Provenance  Model  [13]  suffer  from  complex  serializations and no reuse of existing properties. 

Looking  at  metadata  domains  other  than  prove-
nance,  VoiD  also  covers  license  issues  by  using  DC 
extensions  and  contains  some  recommendations  regarding  common  license  types.  Where  VoiD  and  its 
extensions are silent is in the trust layer area of quality  which  will  become  an  important  issue  as  more 
competing  Linked  Data  comes  online  and  machines 
need  to  make  dynamic  value  judgments  on  which 
sources  to  prefer.  Though  beyond  the  scope  of  the 
proposed  work  in  AGRIS,  an  interesting  initiative 
which  bears  future  examination  is  Olaf  Hartigs 
tRDF,  which  proposes a set of criteria to assess the 
quality of Linked Data sources" [14]. 

5. The OpenAGRIS Semantic Mashup 

In  the  last  two  years  the  AGRIS  project  has  focused  its  attention  on  the  metadata  which  end  users 
are  mostly  interested  in  and  on  the  many  ways  to 
enrich these metadata. AGRIS references often suffer 
from a lack of complete information and in particular 
of full text links. Only 4% of the entire collection has 
a working full text link. Accordingly, if a user wants 
to get more information on a specific topic they must 
use  Google  or  other  search  engines  to  retrieve  the 
publication. 

The  AGRIS  team  thought  then  to  treat  AGRIS 
records abstractly as metadata sets that could be leveraged  to  automatically  access  and  display  related 
data. This approach led to the development of Open-
AGRIS,  a  semantic  mashup  portal  that  aggregates 
information  from  different  Web  sources  using 
AGRIS records exposed as sets of triples in a Linked 
Open  Data  environment.  An  AGRIS  record  represented  in  RDF  (see  Figures  2,  3)  thus  becomes  the 

entry  point  for  a  mechanism  that  discovers  related 
web  resources  primarily  via  AGROVOC  keywords. 
AGROVOC  contains  many  alignments  to  other  vocabularies  (e.g.  DBpedia,  FAO  Geopolitical  Ontolo-
gy,  etc.)  that  allow  querying  triple  stores  to  retrieve 
external resources. Moreover, AGROVOC keywords 
can  also  be  used  to  query  traditional  Web  Services 
(e.g.  World  Bank,  FAO  fisheries  dataset,  etc.)  to  retrieve  non-RDF  data.  The  system  currently  displays 
production  statistics  of  aquatic  species,  species  occurrence  maps,  World Bank  indicators  and  more,  all 
dynamically queried through a constellation of related keywords and vocabulary alignments. 

OpenAGRIS  is  an  environment  that  allows  the 
team to test and raise issues related to the implementation  of  end  user  systems  based  on  the  Semantic 
Web, and helps in spotting problems in the proof and 
trust  layers  of  the  AGRIS  system  as  well  as  in  most 
of the systems from which it retrieves data. As previously noted, the first  major issue to arise was that of 
provenance.  AGRIS  records  contained  only  partial 
provenance  metadata, and  most external sources that 
were accessed contained even less. DBpedia is a typical  example  in  that  by  its  very  nature,  wiki  data  is 
highly  collaborative  and  almost  immune  to  strong 
provenance tracking. 

Licensing is another aspect which is often underestimated and/or kept off the explicit data level. Quality 
indicators  are  also  typically  non-existent.  Finally, 
there  are  semantic  issues  related  to  vocabulary 
alignment that can impact the correctness of dynamically  retrieved  data.  A  common  situation  is  that  two 
vocabularies  representing  the  same  concept  with  the 
same  name  are  attached  to  data  that  is  contextually 
very different and even wrong from the users point-
of-view.  For  instance,  one  vocabulary  may  have  a 
commercial  view  of  a  concept  while  another  has  a 
scientific  view.  SKOS  deliberately  fuzzy  definition 
of  exactMatch  and  closeMatch  properties,  while 
avoiding ontological over-commitment, does little  to 
assist in this regard. 

5.1. Details of the OpenAGRIS platform 

The  core  of  the  OpenAGRIS  web  application20 is 
the AGRIS RDF dataset, stored in an Allegrograph21 
RDF store, which is the same source exposed on the 
LOD as a SPARQL endpoint. 

By starting from the resource requested by the user 
and  identified  by  the  already  mentioned  ARN  code 

20 http://agris.fao.org/openagris/ 
21 http://www.franz.com/agraph/allegrograph/ 

extract  keywords  for  the  specific  resource  and  relationships  to  other  datasets,  such  as  DBpedia.  If  the 
resource  is  a  journal  article,  the  engine  also  queries 
the  AGRIS  Serials  dataset,  obtaining  complete  information about the journals and related articles from 
the  same  journal  covering  similar  topics.  This  process  can  be  extended  to  all  areas  of  interest  in  the 
linked  open  data  cloud,  obtaining  all  possible  information about the specific resource and its main topics.  

From an architectural point of  view, since  filtered 
SPARQL  queries  on  a  triple  store  are  not  very  effi-
cient,  OpenAGRIS  uses  an  Apache  Solr  index  to 
immediately  display  information  about  the  record. 
These  indexes,  instead  of  merely  providing  indexed 
search  over  RDF  literals,  enable  semantic  shortcuts 
between elements bound by arbitrary RDF paths, in a 
way which is specialized for AGRIS constructs. Then, 
various threads are responsible for querying the other 
linked  triple  stores  by  means  of  their  SPARQL  end-
points, when available, or other APIs.  

6. Conclusions 

The  process  of  moving  the  5  million  AGRIS  data 
over  to  RDF  and  along  the  way  disambiguating  and 
enriching the  records  was one of the necessary  steps 
in  the  process  of  rethinking  bibliographic  databases 
for  the  semantic  web.  Along  the  way  the  AGRIS 
team discovered a number of related benefits, in that 
the  radical  openness  of  the  LOD  paradigm  put  into 
discussion curation practices and shed light on historic  weaknesses  in  the  collection  of  administrative 
metadata. 

The  ways  in  which  users  search  and  discover  information  has  changed  enormously  with  the  rise  of 
the  Internet.  It  is  becoming  less  and  less  likely  that 
users are browsing bibliographic data in order to find 
a  print  publication  that  they  will  then  order  from  a 
publisher  or  research  library.  Users  are  more  and 
more expecting to simply search subject categories in 
a  generic  search  engine  and  click  on  the  results  to 
open full text journal articles, conference proceedings 
and  book  excerpts  and  whatever  else  will  enable 
them to answer their queries. This implies that traditional bibliographic databases need to find new ways 
in  which  to offer  value to end users. They  must leverage their often rich set of authoritative, disambiguated  and  interrelated  metadata  to  take  advantage  of 
the new sea of external data that is increasingly being 
exposed  via  web  services  and  exploited  using  tech-

nologies such as Asynchronous JavaScript and XML 
(AJAX). 

The  OpenAGRIS  pilot  does  just  that.  By  combining  disambiguated,  authoritative  records  for  journals 
together  with  a  rich  set  of  multi-lingual  thesaurus 
concepts that are in turn broadly linked to other subject  thesauri,  OpenAGRIS  is  able  to  maximize  a 
powerful  set  of  related  metadata  by  using  it  first 
against  an  ever  increasing  set  of  Semantic  Web  services  and  then  pragmatically  against  other,  useful 
web services whether semantic or not. 

In its original conception OpenAGRIS was to be a 
purely  RDF-based  application.  Experience  showed 
that only a few domains intersecting with the agricultural  domain  offered  RDF  web  services.  Pragmatic 
considerations of basic data availability thus necessitated the use of non-RDF APIs. 

Despite  the  relative  lack  of  RDF-based  APIs  for 
agricultural  use,  the  field  is  growing.  As  new,  relevant  RDF  APIs  become  available,  OpenAGRIS  will 
continue to exploit them,  while at the same time doing  its  part  by  producing  AgriBase,  a  Freebase-like 
aggregation  API for agricultural data. This challenging  endeavor  will  necessitate  wrapping  and  reinterpreting  non-RDF  APIs.  It  will  be  available  via 
SPARQL endpoint as well as via RDF and non-RDF 
web services. 

Along  with  a  recent  rise  in  the  number  of  RDFbased  services,  data  providers  are 
increasingly 
providing  web-service  widgets  returning  complex 
functionality such as static and dynamic tables, maps, 
charts  and  graphs.  OpenAGRIS  will  also  begin  to 
exploit such rich services, relying on its unique set of 
citation-based  metadata  relationships  to  deliver  relevant information in graphical form to end users. 

Finally,  behind  the  scenes,  the  group  responsible 
for  the  publication  of  AGRIS  has  been  quietly  publishing and linking an ever increasing set of authoritative  RDF  vocabularies,  from  thesauri,  to  journals, 
to  corporate  authors.  This  growing  web  of  formally 
linked  metadata  will  continue  to  improve  the  relevance  of  AGRIS  records  as  they  reach  ever  further 
into the linked data cloud.  
