Knowledge Pattern Extraction and Their Usage

in Exploratory Search

Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese1,2

1 STLab-ISTC Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Rome, Italy

2 Dipartimento di Scienze dellInformazione, Universit`a di Bologna, Italy

Abstract. Knowledge interaction in Web context is a challenging
problem. For instance, it requires to deal with complex structures able
to filter knowledge by drawing a meaningful context boundary around
data. We assume that these complex structures can be formalized as
Knowledge Patterns (KPs), aka frames. This Ph.D. work is aimed at
developing methods for extracting KPs from the Web and at applying
KPs to exploratory search tasks. We want to extract KPs by analyzing
the structure of Web links from rich resources, such as Wikipedia.

1 Problem Statement and Related Work

In the vision of the Semantic Web agents are supposed to interact with Web
knowledge in order to help humans in solving knowledge-intensive tasks. Though
Linked Data is a breakthrough in Semantic Web it is still hard to build contextualized views over data, which would allow to select relevant knowledge for
a specific purpose, i.e., to draw relevant boundaries around data. Let us suppose we are interested in events involving Arnold Schwarzenegger in the artistic
context. For example, the movies that Arnold Schwarzenegger starred before
starting his political career. We need to recognize starring situations over the
knowledge about Arnold Schwarzenegger available on the Web. Such situations
are represented as complex structures that relate entities and concepts according
to a unifying view, e.g., Arnold Schwarzenegger having role of actor in movies
during a time period. Such complex structures can be exploited for supporting a variety of knowledge interaction tasks, such as decision support, content
recommendation, exploratory search, content summarization, question answer-
ing, information visualization, interface design, etc. These complex knowledge
structures have been identified and described by Minsky [5], who proposed to
conceptualize them as frames. Frames, known as Knowledge Patterns (KPs),
have been reproposed in Semantic Web [3]. A KP can be briefly defined as a
formalized schema representing a structure that is used to organize our knowl-
edge, as well as for interpreting, processing or anticipating information. This
Ph.D. work aims at developing methods for discovering and extracting KPs on
the Web and exploit them for supporting exploratory search. Exploratory search
is well known in literature. [9] is a survey that presents examples of exploratory

 Advisors: Paolo Ciancarini, Valentina Presutti, and Aldo Gangemi.

P. Cudr e-Mauroux et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2012, Part II, LNCS 7650, pp. 449452, 2012.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012

A.G. Nuzzolese

search on the Semantic Web. Existing approaches perform exploratory search
by organizing knowledge according to scatterd elements like classes or relations.
Differently from them, we want to experiment with exploratory search based on
KPs as a solution for providing summarizations and navigating knowledge.

We focus on analyzing and studying KPs in Wikipedia and some Linked Data
data sets. Our aim is: (i) to develop methods for KP discovering and extraction
on the Web, and (ii) to apply KP-based strategies to exploratory search and
prove that the user experience improves as compared to state of the art tools.

We hypothesize that: (i) KPs can be discovered by analyzing the linking structure of Web resources. 1 In fact, linking things to other things is a typical cognitive metaphor used by humans on the Web for organizing knowledge. Hence,
Web links (either hypertextual links or RDF triples) convey rich knowledge that
can be used for extracting KPs. (ii) Exploratory search would benefit from using
KPs. In our vision KPs can be applied to exploratory search in order to filter
knowledge and guide a user to explore contextual relevant knowledge.

2 KP Extraction and Usage in Exploratory Search

We want to develop methods for discovering and extracting KPs by analyzing the
linking structure of Web resources and exploit them for supporting exploratory
search.

KPs sources. We identify at least two different kind of sources from which
to extract KPs:

 already existing KP or frame sources. Examples are the FrameNet
project [1] or the Ontology Design Pattern project 2. These resources are
modelled with a top-down approach and they are typically designed by domain experts, that firstly formalize the domain semantics and then move
to data. We are aimed at transforming these resources in order to represent them homogeneously as they are expressed with different formats and
semantics. Possible solutions are reengineering, refactoring based on transformation rules, key concept identification, ontology mapping, etc. Initial
results have been obtained and in [6] we present a solution for reengineering
FrameNet in order to produce (i) a LOD data set 3 and (ii) a collection of
reusable KPs available as OWL2 ontologies; (ii)

 the Web. The Web provides a lot of heterogeneous sources from which KPs
can be extracted. In order to narrow them we need to make some assumption.
We want to take into account only text resources including links that (i) are
associated with structured data, e.g., Linked Data, and (ii) can be formally
interpreted. Wikipedia fits perfectly these assumptions. In fact, it provides
rich content deriving from a collaboratively crowd sourcing performing an

1 Under a number of assumptions (see Section 2).

http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org
http://stlab.istc.cnr.it/stlab/FrameNetKCAP2011
?

?

?
encyclopedic task. Furthermore, it has a RDF dump in Linked Data, i.e.,
DBpedia [4], and ontologies, e.g., YAGO and the DBpedia Ontology, that
allow to give formal interpretation to data. For these reasons we want to
focus on the extraction of KPs from Wikipedia.

For this purpose some work has been done. In [7] we present a method
that we have defined for extracting KPs from Wikipedia by analysing links
and their interpretation through the DPpedia Ontology. 4 The analysis of
results shows a bias due to a large number of untyped entities in DBpedia.
For that reason we have investigated inductive as well abductive approaches
for automatically typing DBpedia entities [8]. Experiments show that NLP
is needed in order to address this task. Hence, we have investigated a NLPbased approach showing good resutls [2] 5. With this approach we plan
to type all DBpedia entities and then re-run the extraction of KP from
Wikipedia.

KPs in Exploratory Search. In Exploratory Search tasks users want to discover what they are looking for by exploring knowledge. In some case, they have
only a vague idea about what the nature of their search is. In these cases it is
important to select relevant data in order to help users to filter and to summarize knowledge during their search. KPs can be used in exploratory search
tasks for drawing boundaries around data in order to provide contextual relevant
knowledge. This means that, depending on the context, different KPs could be
automatically selected on the same data in order to make emerge the knowledge
that is relevant to a users search. We have started to experiment KPs in Exploratory Search with Aemoo 6. Aemoo selects and organize the core knowledge
about a DBpedia entity by applying KPs extracted from Wikipedia as lenses
over data.

3 Evaluation

We want to evaluate both the performance of our extraction method and the
quality of extracted KPs. On one hand, the evaluation of the methods performance can be easily analyzed by taking into account the execution time of the
extraction algorithm. On the other, it is less clear how to evaluate extracted KPs.
We think that a solution for evaluating the quality of extracted KPs derives from
the combination of the following methods:

Gold standard based evaluation. We want to ask to a group of at least 3
expert users in knowledge representation to build a sample of KPs on some subset of some specific domain. Each expert has to formalize KPs with respect to
the tasks proposed, e.g. to provide the core concepts that summarize what an

4 We have extracted 231 KPs representing the core knowledge used for describing a

specific type of entity.

5 Typing precision is around 86%.

http://aemoo.org. Aemoo partecipated to the last Semantic Web Challenge reaching the final round.

A.G. Nuzzolese

airplane is. The set of KPs proposed will be the same for each expert in order
to evaluate the inter-rater agreement among experts. KPs over a certain threshold of agreement will be the gold standard. Hence, by applying our extraction
method on the same set will be possible to compare the results to the gold
standard for evaluating precision and recall of our method;

User based evaluation. After the extraction of KPs we want to ask to a
group of heterogeneous users in terms of education and expertise in knowledge
representation to evaluate them. The evaluation will be conducted by asking
users to fill a survey about the capacity of assigned KPs to be relevant to some
context, exhaustive in summarizing knowledge, appropriate, etc. This will give
an idea of soundness and accuracy of extracted KPs;

Task based evaluation. A comparison between an exploratory search application based on KPs and other existing exploratory search applications will be
used for evaluating the effectiveness of KPs in exploratory search tasks. In this
case will be asked to a group of users to solve tasks of knowledge exploration,
learning, summarization, relation finding, definition extraction, etc.
