Linking Smart Cities Datasets with Human

Computation  The Case of UrbanMatch

Irene Celino1, Simone Contessa1, Marta Corubolo2, Daniele DellAglio1,

Emanuele Della Valle2,1, Stefano Fumeo1, and Thorsten Kr uger3

1 CEFRIEL  Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy

2 Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy

{name.surname}@cefriel.it
{name.surname}@polimi.it

3 Siemens, Corporate Technology, Munich, Germany

thorsten.krueger@siemens.com

Abstract. To realize the Smart Cities vision, applications can leverage
the large availability of open datasets related to urban environments.
Those datasets need to be integrated, but it is often hard to automatically
achieve a high-quality interlinkage. Human Computation approaches can
be employed to solve such a task where machines are ineffective. We argue that in this case not only peoples background knowledge is useful to
solve the task, but also peoples physical presence and direct experience
can be successfully exploited. In this paper we present UrbanMatch, a
Game with a Purpose for players in mobility aimed at validating links
between points of interest and their photos; we discuss the design choices
and we show the high throughput and accuracy achieved in the interlinking task.

Introduction

Cities are defined smart when their investments in the human and social capital,
as well as in the communication infrastructures are aimed at fuelling a sustainable economic growth and a high quality of life [6]. Specifically, current research
investigates the impact of ICT on the development and improvement of smart
cities with respect to several dimensions, from people to government, from mobility to environment, etc. In this context, a key to realize smart cities is to
involve smart citizens by raising their awareness, participation and contribution.
Big industrial players are focusing their research and innovation around smart
cities; some examples are the initiatives carried out by Siemens1, IBM2 and
CISCO3. Public authorities are also becoming more and more attentive to adapt
their political agenda to fulfil this smart cities vision, in particular through an
open data strategy.

Geo-spatial data and information related to entities located in the physical
world are among the first sources that are published openly  and often also

http://www.usa.siemens.com/sustainable-cities/
http://www.ibm.com/uk/smarterplanet
http://www.cisco.com/web/strategy/smart_connected_communities.html

P. Cudr e-Mauroux et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2012, Part II, LNCS 7650, pp. 3449, 2012.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012
?

?

?
freely  on the Web; valuable examples are Ordnance Survey location data in
the UK4, GeoLinkedData.es in Spain5, GeoNames geographical database6 and
the community-driven OpenStreetMap7. The Semantic Web community also has
showed interest in geo-spatial data: OpenStreetMap was turned into Linked Data
by the LinkedGeoData project [26] and the Open Geospatial Consortium is standardizing GeoSPARQL8, a spatial extension of the SPARQL language.

For the last years, we have been experimenting with geo-spatial data  especially with those related to urban environments  in order to build Linked
Data-enhanced applications and services. The used datasets and the applications
objectives were diverse: points of interest and event data to plan journeys [9];
traffic sensors data and road topography to predict the most suitable path [10];
urban regulations to update road sign information [17]; social media to provide
location-based recommendations of restaurants [3].

While the large availability of urban data is an advantage in realizing such
kind of services, the poor quality or the doubtful trustworthiness of the information source strongly hamper a large-scale adoption of those data. Imprecise
or outdated information, sparse or heterogeneous distribution of data are just
some examples of the obstacles to a proper reuse of geo-spatial (linked) data. Our
experience tells that inconsistencies and imprecise data can be detected  and
their quality improved  by a small amount of manual work that does not require
specific skills, but often the physical presence in the urban environment [17].

Human Computation [29] is the paradigm to leverage human capabilities to
solve tasks that computers are not yet able to properly undertake. A Human
Computation approach is often employed to solve data quality tasks.

Our research question can be formulated as follows: is it possible to exploit
peoples physical presence in the environment to improve geo-spatial data qual-
ity? Can we build a new generation of Human Computation techniques based
on the contributors direct experience (instead of a specific domain expertise)?
To check our hypothesis, we built UrbanMatch [7], a location-based Game
with a Purpose [28] in the form of a mobile application9. Specifically, UrbanMatch is aimed at exploiting players experience of the urban environment to
correctly link points of interests in the city with their most representative photos
retrieved from Web sources. The papers contribution lies in the modelling of the
POI-photo linking as a record linkage problem and the realization of the game
using this formalization; we also experimentally determined the best combination of the models parameters, in order to optimize the trade-off between the
number of links created per playing hour (system throughput) and the accuracy
of those links.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces
the related work; Section 3 defines the problem statement, while the process to

http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/
http://geo.linkeddata.es/
http://geonames.org/
http://www.openstreetmap.org/
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/requests/80

9 UrbanMatch is available on iTunes app store at http://bit.ly/um-itunes.

I. Celino et al.

achieve the game purpose is detailed in Section 4. Section 5 explains the mechanics of the UrbanMatch game, while the evaluation is illustrated in Section 6;
finally Section 7 draws some conclusions and future work.

2 Background and Related Work

Our work focuses on user interaction for link elicitation and validation for Linked
Data in urban scenarios. It is centred on Linked Data and it is based on the results of three research areas: data linking, data quality, and human computation.

2.1 Data Linking and Linked Data

Data Linking is the problem of deciding whether resources belonging to different
data sources are referring to the same entity. It is rooted in the record linkage
problem studied in the databases community since the 1960s [13,20,32].

Record linkage is a challenging task, as deciding if records match is often
computationally expensive and application specific [5]. The former is because a
combination of string similarity algorithms have to be used, the latter because
it is difficult to provide a general solution which works well with heterogeneous
datasets. For instance, the techniques used in linking scientific datasets will be
different from the ones used for linking CRM datasets.

In this paper, we are particularly interested in referring to the formal definition
of record linkage introduced by Felligi and Sunter in [13], which we use in the
rest of the paper. When linking the records in two databases A and B, the idea
is a) to classify links in the comparison space  = A  B into M  the set of
matches , and U  the set of non-matches ; b) to compute for each link  a
score s as ratio of probabilities P (  |M )/P (  |U ); and c) to use the
score s to divide the comparison space in three disjoint sets using an U P P ER
thresholds, a LOW ER threshold and a decision rule. If s > U P P ER, then the
link is correct; if LOW ER  s  U P P ER, then the link needs to be assessed
by an expert; if s < LOW ER, then the link is incorrect.

Establishing links between datasets published as linked data [27] is a problem rooted in record linkage, but can benefit from the availability of ontologies
describing the datasets to be linked, and, thus, from existing ontology matching solutions [22,12]. At the time of writing, SERIMI [2], Zhishi.links [21] and
AgreementMaker [8] are the best data linking solutions emerged from the Data
Interlinking track of the OAEI 2011 challenge [11].

2.2 Data Quality and Linked Data

Data Quality [23,4] is the discipline that studies the most appropriate and relevant features to describe the value of data.

A key point of Data Quality is the context-dependency: given a dataset, its
quality can be very high w.r.t. the fulfilment of some tasks but very bad w.r.t.
other ones. As pointed out in [16], the perception of information quality (on the
WWW) is highly dependent on the fitness for use being relative to the specific
?

?

?
task that users have at their hands. In other words, it is not relevant (and
not always possible) to define absolute quality factors [19]. More specifically,
[23] enumerates the following factors contributing to fitness-for-use: accuracy,
completeness, consistency with other sources, timeliness, accessibility, relevance,
comprehensiveness, easy to read and easy to interpret. In this work, we evaluate
our solution using accuracy and throughput (see Section 2.3) as a proxy for
completeness.

It is worth noting that the Linked Data best practices alone [15] assure more
quality than raw data in closed databases because: a) data becomes accessible over the Web rather than being closed up in silos; b) the use of shared
vocabularies makes the data both easier to read (i.e. user information needs
can be satisfied by a single SPARQL query instead of requiring many datasetspecific queries) and easier to interpret (i.e. shared vocabulary semantics can
be used to verify data integrity and/or infer implied data); c) the presence of
links makes it also possible to verify consistency across different sources.

However, the assessment of data quality factors like accuracy, completeness,
timeliness, relevance and comprehensiveness of data is intrinsically a hard task
that Linked Data best practices do not make any easier. As one can expect, the
quality of published Linked Data is variable and the community has started to
follow data quality with growing interest. Flemming worked on the definition of
quality criteria for linked data sources [14]. She grouped the criteria to describe
data sources in four categories: content (the quality of the data as available in
the dataset), representation (an evaluation of the data serialization), usage (the
measurement of the data fitness for use) and system (indicators about the
publishing system).

2.3 Human Computation and Linked Data

As we showed in the two previous sections, data linking and data quality are hard
problem for computers and subjective in nature. We, as humans, are perfectly
capable of both tasks, but we are not necessarily willing to. Human Computation [29], however, demonstrated that computations of this kind can be carried
out by groups of people if motivated by the right incentives.

The incentives to make people contribute can be of different kinds: they can
give the participant an explicit and concrete reward (like in the popular Amazon
Mechanical Turk10 in which people are paid to perform small and simple tasks)
or they provide a different kind of implicit or more abstract return, for example
by means of entertainment like in Games with a Purpose [28] (GWAP).

In this paper, we are specifically interested in the design and evaluation of
GWAPs as UrbanMatch is a GWAP. Having created many GWAPs (e.g., ESP
Game, Peekaboom, Phetch, and Verbosity), Luis Von Ahn and Laura Dabbish
reports in [31] on three game-structure templates that generalize successful instances of Human Computation games: input-agreement games, inversion-problem
games, and output-agreement games. In input-agreement games, players must determine whether they have been given the same input; in inversion-problem games,

http://mturk.com/

I. Celino et al.

given an input, a player produces an output, and another player guesses the input;
in output-agreement games, players are given the same input and must agree on
an appropriate output. UrbanMatch is an output-agreement game.

UrbanMatch is not the first GWAP proposed by the Semantic Web com-
munity. GWAPs have been already used to cover the complete Semantic Web
life-cycle [25]. A dedicated community portal was recently set up11 to collect
those games. A good showcase is the Linked Data Movie Quiz [1], that builds a
cinematographic game based on the available movie-related Linked Data showing
that the answers are out there; and so are the questions.

The metrics [31] proposed to evaluate GWAPS include throughput and average lifetime play (ALP). The throughput of a GWAP is defined as the average
number of problem instances solved per human hour. The higher the throughput
the more effective the GWAP. However, a GWAP with a high throughput that
fails to attract and keep players is useless. The ALP is a proxy for the intangible
enjoyability of the GWAP. It is defined as the overall amount of time the game is
played by each player, averaged across all people who have played it. A successful
GWAP like the ESP game [30] has a throughput of 233 problem instances solved
per human-hour and an ALP of 91 minutes. We use those metrics to evaluate
Urban Match in Section 6.

3 Problem Statement

UrbanMatch aims at linking urban related data sets. More specifically, the purpose of UrbanMatch is to derive meaningful links between a datasets containing
the points of interest (POIs) in a urban environment and a dataset with the
images depicting those POIs and retrieved from Web social media; among all
photos taken in the proximity of a POI, UrbanMatch is designed for linking the
most representative ones to that POI.

We selected the first dataset A of POIs from OpenStreetMap/LinkedGeoData
and we retrieved the second dataset B collecting photos from social media
sharing sources, namely Flickr and Wikimedia Commons. The first edition of
the UrbanMatch game is released for the city of Milano in Italy, thus the
POIs in dataset A are tourist attractions in Milano, i.e. entities in LinkedGeoData [26] that are instances of classes like lgdo:Monument, lgdo:Historic or
lgdo:Landmark.

Dataset A contains the POIs aggregated by playable place. A playable place is
an open area (like a square or a park) that is physically adjacent to at least two
tourist attractions. Playable places are retrieved via a spatial-enhanced query on
OpenStreetMap. Given the list of playable places with the corresponding POIs,
we appealed to an expert judgement (a person, among the authors, familiar with
the city and its notable locations) to filter out the irrelevant elements and to
complete a list of alternative names/labels to indicate the selected POIs. The
result was a set of 14 playable places with 34 POIs in Milano.

To retrieve the dataset B of the photos, we used the POIs geographic coordinates to perform a spatial query on the image sources  Flickr and Wikimedia

http://www.semanticgames.org/
?

?

?
Commons  by invoking the respective API. This location-based query was enhanced with other information about the POIs: on Flickr API, geographic coordinates were used together with a keyword search by using the alternative POIs
names/labels. On the other hand, Wikimedia Commons  the media database
related to Wikipedia  puts in relation its photos with the Wikipedia page that
describes the depicted POI; thus, the retrieval requests mix the geographic coordinates with a conceptual search, comparing a Wikipedia page with the
concept of the respective POI. The result of the photo selection was a set of
11,287 photos of Milano POIs.

We can formulate the data interlinking problem that UrbanMatch aims to
solve as a record linkage problem using the formal definition of record linkage
introduced by Felligi and Sunter in [13] (already cited in Section 2.1). Thus, we
define the set  of all possible links between POIs and photos as the comparison

space12 between the two datasets, i.e.  = A  B. Each link p,n   can be

seen as an RDF triple of the form:

<POI-n> foaf:depiction <photo-p> .

in which <POI-n> is the URI of the POI n in dataset A and <photo-p> is the
URI of the photo p in dataset B.

Data interlinking is achieved when all the links  in the comparison space are
classified in two sets: the set M of matches, i.e. of correct links, and the set
U of non-matches, i.e. of incorrect links. Each link p,n is associated with a
score sp,n  [0..1] that represents the probability of the link to be correct; two

thresholds are usually defined  U P P ER and LOW ER  so that:

if sp,n > UPPER then p,n  M
if sp,n < LOWER then p,n  U

The comparison space  between two datasets A and B can be seen as divided
into three disjoint sets: M , U and the set C of unclassified links, for which:

LOWER  sp,n  UPPER

Solving the data interlinking problem, therefore, requires the ability to alter the

score of the links p,n  C. Those links represent our candidate links that need

to be assessed to be classified either in M or in U .

In the case of UrbanMatch, the candidate links in C are those links whose
quality is not appropriate according to the fitness-for-use principle [23]. For
example, a candidate link could connect a POI with a photo that frames the
inside of that POI, or a non-evocative detail of the POI, or people in front of
the POI. The central idea of UrbanMatch is to use a GWAP to ask players to
assess the candidate links in C and to alter the score of each link until it falls
either in M or in U .

Each link  between a POI in the dataset A and a photo in the dataset
B is given an initial score s between LOW ER and U P P ER, so that all links

12 A reduction of the comparison space  by partitioning is explained in Section 4.

I. Celino et al.

initially belong to the subset C of candidate links. To bootstrap the UrbanMatch
approach, we manually modified the score of some candidate links in C to a value
either greater than U P P ER or lower than LOW ER. To this end, we appealed
to an expert judgement to select some photos depicting the POIs: on the basis
of this selection, some links moved from C to M (because the photos depicts for
sure the POIs) while some other links moved from C to U (because they do not
depict the POIs). The result of this preparation phase was a comparison space
 with 196 links in M , 382 links in U and 37,413 link in C. Table 1 recaps the
initial dataset with the detail for each playable place in Milano.

Table 1. The initial dataset of UrbanMatch Milano (created in spring 2012)

Playable Place Name

Piazza dei mercanti
Piazza SantAmbrogio
Piazza del Duomo
Piazza Duca dAosta
Via Legnano
Via Conservatorio
Viale Alemagna
Largo Marco Biagi
Corso di Porta Ticinese (1)
Corso di Porta Ticinese (2)
Via Gioia
Corso Venezia
Piazza della Scala
Piazza Cairoli & Viale Petofi
Total

bootstrapped total POIs links links

photos

photos
?

?

?
3,884
1,032
?

?

?
1,269
11,089
?

?

?
links
in M in U in C
?

?

?
128 19,580
?

?

?
2,086
?

?

?
1,964
?

?

?
1,978
?

?

?
3,620
?

?

?
3,852

196 382 37,413

4 Achieving the UrbanMatch Purpose

The UrbanMatch game was designed to let the players rate the candidate links.
However, presenting players directly with the RDF links is not a user-friendly
way to let them solve the task. Moreover, if the players are not in the urban
space or if they do not have enough background knowledge about the POIs, it
could also be difficult for them to say, for example, if a photo actually depicts
Palazzo della Ragione. For those reasons, UrbanMatch is designed as a singleplayer mobile game to be played on the go, in which the players are presented
only with the photos and are asked to pair those that represent the same POI
around them. The players may not know the name of the depicted POI, but if
the photo is representative, they can recognize it.

The photo pairs selected by the player are used by UrbanMatch to alter the
scores of the candidate links between those photos and the POIs around the
player. Let us assume that UrbanMatch shows the player two photos a and b
and it wants to assess if the two photos are both linked to the same POI 1. Let
?

?

?
us also assume that the link a,1  M , i.e. the link between a and POI 1 is
correct, and that b,1  C, i.e. the link between b and POI 1 is candidate. The
player can decide whether to pair the two photos or not. If the player pairs the

two photos, the score of the link b,1 is modified; the new value of the score s
b,1
of the link b,1 between the photo b and the POI 1 is increased using the formula
in Equation 1
?

?

?
b,1 = sb,1 + Kpos

s

(1)

where Kpos is a positive constant that counts for the positive evidence provided
by the player.

Otherwise, if the player does not pair the two photos, the new value of the

b,1 of the link b,1 between the photo b and the POI 1 is decreased using

score s
the formula in Equation 2

b,1 = sb,1  Kneg
?

?

?
s

(2)

where Kneg is a positive constant that counts for the negative evidence provided
by the player. Collecting positive and negative evidences for each link in C,
UrbanMatch alters the score of each candidate link until it is categorized as
belonging either to M or to U .

An important issue arises when modifying the links scores: are players reli-
able? We can certainly trust a large majority of the players to play earnestly, but
we need to consider that some players can cheat or misunderstand the task, thus
giving wrong answers. As proposed in [31], we can mitigate the risk of trusting
erroneous inputs with two strategies: i) repeating the same task multiple times
to randomly picked users, and ii) testing the player reliability.

The approach described in Equations 1 and 2 is ready to support the first
strategy, by opportunely tuning the values of Kpos and Kneg. As noted in [31],
this strategy can guarantee the correct assessment of link quality with arbitrarily
high probability.

The second strategy can be embedded in Equations 1 and 2 by testing players multiple times per game and evaluating their reliability on the basis of the
number of errors they make. As a result of the bootstrapping, a number of incorrect links exist; UrbanMatch puts them in the game as verification cases. For
example, let us assume that we have only two POIs (1 and 2), and UrbanMatch
shows the player two photos (a and b) each depicting only one of the two POIs:

a depicts 1 (i.e., a,1  M , a,2  U ) and b depicts 2 (i.e., b,1  U , b,2  M ).

If the player pairs a and b he/she makes a mistake, because the two photos certainly depicts different POIs. If 	p is the number of errors done by a player p in
a game, the players reliability can be computed as:

 	p

rp = e

Note that rp is a float in [0..1]: it is equal to 1 when the player makes no error,
decreases to e
2 = 0.6 when the player makes 1 error, and drops almost to zero
if the player makes 6 errors (e

6 = 0.04).

 1

 1

I. Celino et al.

Considering also the players reliability, Equations 1 and 2 respectively take

the form of Equations 3 and 4:

b,1 = sb,1 + Kpos  rp

s
b,1 = sb,1  Kneg  rp
?

?

?
s

(3)

(4)

Table 2 wraps up the decision rules that allow to increase/decrease the score of
a link and to detect errors. More information about the initial value of s, and
the values of Kpos, Kneg, U P P ER and LOW ER is given in Section 6.

Table 2. The two tables above show the decision rules used by UrbanMatch when the
player pairs, or does not pair, two photos a and b on the basis of the scores of the links
a,1 and b,1 between those two photos and a POI 1. The table on the left shows the
case when the player pairs a with b, while the table on the right shows the case when
the player does not pair a with b. The symbol n.a. means no action, si,j ++ means
that UrbanMatch increments the value of the score of the link i,j by using Equation
3, si,j - - means that UrbanMatch decrements the value of the score of the link i,j by
using Equation 4, and 	p++ means that UrbanMatch increases the error counter for
the player p.
paired with a,1  M a,1  U a,1  C
b,1  M
	p++ sa,1++
n.a.
b,1  U
	p++
n.a.
b,1  C sb,1++
n.a.

not paired with a,1  M a,1  U a,1  C
sa,1- -
n.a.
n.a.

b,1  M
b,1  U
b,1  C

n.a.
n.a.

	p++
n.a.
sb,1- -

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Functionally, the proposed solution solves the UrbanMatch problem, but an
efficient solution should also consider the need for a high throughput (defined in
Section 2.3). This result can be obtained by combining two approaches.

On the one hand, we can reduce the problem space by partitioning13 the
comparison space  . The partition is based on the concept of playable places:
the comparison space  is built by considering only the links between each
photo, retrieved in correspondence to a playable place, and all POIs visible
from the same playable place. In other words, UrbanMatch discards from the
comparison space  all the links between the photos, which were retrieved using
geo-coordinates and labels of a given playable place, and the POIs in the other
playable places.

On the other hand, UrbanMatch splits the set of candidates links C into two
subsets: Cengaged, the set of links currently evaluated by the UrbanMatch game,
whose score can be altered by players actions, and Cretained, the set of links
not yet evaluated by the game. In this way, positive and negative evidences are
gathered only for links in Cengaged whose score reaches the U P P ER or LOW ER
threshold at the maximum speed. As soon as a link moves from Cengaged to M
or U , a new link is fetched from Cretained and added to Cengaged for evaluation.

13 The comparison space partitioning is a well-known technique in record linkage [18].
?

?

?
5 The UrbanMatch Gameplay

In this section we illustrate how UrbanMatch works internally. We explain the
game levels construction and the feedbacks to the players pairing actions.

5.1 Game Level Definition

When the player starts the UrbanMatch app on her device, her location is detected to make her play with what surrounds her. In case of doubt (e.g. the user
is close to more than one playable place), a map with the close-by locations is
displayed.

a

b

c

d

g

f

e

h

POI 1
(Duomo)

POI 2
(statue)

Fig. 1. Explanation of the photos presented in a game level

Once the playable place is selected, the game starts and the players are presented with the first game level; a maximum of six levels are created and given
as input to the players in each match. In each level, two POIs (1 and 2) of the
playable place are considered and eight different photos (from a to h) are selected
and displayed (cf. Figure 1). The photos are selected according to the following
policy:

 for each of the two POIs, two relevant photos are definitely linked to them (d
and g to POI 1, c and h to POI 2), thus representing four links belonging to
the M set of correct links and four links belonging to the U set of incorrect
links;

 two irrelevant photos are definitely linked to other POIs (b and f ), not visible
from this playable place; those photos are certainly not linked to the current
POIs 1 and 2, thus representing four links belonging to the U set of incorrect
links;

 the remaining two doubtful photos are not certainly linked to the current
POIs 1 and 2 (a and e), thus they are representative of four candidate links
from the C set of links to be validated.

The players are then asked to pair the photos depicting the same POI, but they
must be careful not to select those photos referring to POIs in a different playable
place, i.e. those POIs they cannot see around them.

I. Celino et al.

5.2 Feedbacks to Players

Whenever a player pairs two photos, this action is taken as an evidence of the
correspondence between the respective links represented by those photos; each
evidence is weighted according to Equations 3 and 4 and taken into consideration
according to the policy defined in Table 2. Besides the application of the decision
rules  which is important for the hidden purpose of data linking  the coupling
action is also used to give an immediate feedback to the user within the gameplay.
We decided to always give a positive or negative feedback to the player, even
when UrbanMatch is in doubt; moreover, we chose to prefer a positive reward
to a negative reward in case of doubt, to motivate the user to continue playing.
Whenever a user pairs two photos between the relevant and irrelevant ones,
UrbanMatch always knows if the coupling action is right or wrong: either the
two photos are certainly linked to the same POI  and thus the player gets a
positive feedback and gains points  or they are definitely linked to different
POIs  and thus the player gets a negative feedback and loses points.

d

e

b

f

Fig. 2. Positive and negative feedbacks w.r.t. the photo pairs chosen by the player

Every time a user pairs a doubtful photo with another one, UrbanMatch does
not know if the coupling action is right or wrong, but it gives the best possible
feedback: pairing a doubtful photo with a relevant one or pairing two doubtful
photos gives the player a positive feedback; pairing a doubtful photo with an
irrelevant one gives a negative feedback.

Figure 2 on the left shows the positive feedback given to a coupling action
in a level played in Piazza del Duomo playable place in Milano: UrbanMatch
displays a green frame around the two selected photos (d and e that both depict
the Duomo cathedral of Milano) and plays a success sound. On the contrary,
the right part of Figure 2 shows the negative feedback given to another pairing
action during the same game level: UrbanMatch displays a red frame around the
two selected photos (b and f , depicting Castello Sforzesco, are clearly irrelevant
for this playable place since the castle is not in the playable place) together with
the textual banner and plays a failure sound.

Each successful or failure pairing action is associated in the gameplay
with a positive or negative score respectively: the sum of the scores in one level
determines if the player can continue to the next level and the total score in all
the levels of the match determines the position in the leaderboard.
?

?

?
6 Experimental Deployment and Evaluation

As reported in Section 3, in spring 2012 we experimentally deployed UrbanMatch
in Milano using OpenStreetMap as POI dataset, and Flickr together with Wikimedia Commons as photo data sources. For each photo a retrieved by a query
related to a POI 1, the initial score sa,1 was set to 0.4 if the source was Flickr
and 0.6 if the source was Wikimedia Commons; this was because we considered
Wikimedia Commons search precision to be higher than Flickrs. For each POI
i in the same playable place of POI 1, the score sa,i was set to 0.2, because a
photo depicting a POI in a playable place may also partially show other POIs in
the same playable place (e.g., see photo a in Figure 1, taken in Duomo square,
that depicts both Vittorio Emanueles statue and the Duomo cathedral). For
each POI j in a different playable place, no link of the form a,j was inserted in
the comparison space, according to the comparison space partitioning technique
discussed in Section 4.

Between March and May 2012, as consequence of an email advertising cam-
paign, seventy people downloaded UrbanMatch from iTunes and 54 of them
played the game at least once, for a total of 781 played levels. The total time all
players spent playing UrbanMatch is about 3 hours.

As evaluation metrics for UrbanMatch, we chose throughput and ALP (as
defined in [31]), and accuracy. The latter plays an important role in deciding the
values of U P P ER and LOW ER. The ALP definition is equivalent to the one
in [31], but the notion of throughput and accuracy need to be redefined as:

T hroughput =

CM + CU
P layedT ime

Accuracy =

(CM  F P ) + (CU  F N )

CM + CU

(5)

(6)

in which the symbols have the following meaning:

 CM is the number of candidate links that UrbanMatch was able to move

from C to M , i.e., emerged as correct;

 CU is the number of candidate links that UrbanMatch was able to move

from C to U , i.e., emerged as incorrect;

 F P is the number of links moved from C to M that should have been

classified as incorrect, i.e., the false positive links;

 F N is the number of links moved from C to U that should have been clas-

sified as correct, i.e., the false negative links; and

 P layedT ime is the total time spent by the players in playing UrbanMatch.

Note that CM and CU are a direct result of UrbanMatch, while F P and F N
were manually assessed by one of the authors that lives in Milano and is thus
knowledgeable about the city.

As the reader can expect, the throughput and accuracy of UrbanMatch depend on the value of U P P ER, LOW ER, Kpos and Kneg. Therefore we need to
determine the best combination of these values to maximize both throughput
and accuracy.

I. Celino et al.

We arbitrarily decided that a positive evidence of a reliable player counts as

+0.3 (i.e., Kpos = 0.3) and a negative evidence counts as 0.1 (i.e., Kneg = 0.1).
We chose Kpos = 3  Kneg because players pair photos in which they recognize

the same POI, but they may not pair photos for several reasons, e.g., for the little
knowledge about the POI, for inexperience, for lack of time and for mistake.

To determine the best values of U P P ER and LOW ER, we analysed the
throughput and the accuracy of UrbanMatch as a function of U P P ER and
LOW ER. The values in Table 3 are obtained setting U P P ER = 1 and assigning
LOW ER the values 0.05, 0.10, 0.15 and 0.2014. Both throughput and accuracy
increase when increasing the threshold, so LOW ER was set to 0.20.

Table 3. Throughput and Accuracy as a function of LOW ER threshold

LOW ER

F N
Throughput
Accuracy

0.05

0.10
?

?

?
0.15

0.20

409.42
108.08
98.75% 98.56% 99.39% 99.34%

117.17

387.87

The values in Table 4 are obtained setting LOW ER = 0 and assigning
U P P ER values between 0.6 and 0.95 using a 0.05 step15. Throughput decreases
while increasing U P P ER, but accuracy increases, therefore we need to find a
trade-off between the two performance indicators. Noticing that accuracy increase steeply for U P P ER  0.7 and slightly for U P P ER > 0.7, we decided to
set U P P ER = 0.7.

Table 4. Throughput and Accuracy as a function of U P P ER threshold

U P P ER

F P
Throughput
Accuracy

0.60
?

?

?
0.65
?

?

?
0.70
?

?

?
0.75
?

?

?
0.80
?

?

?
0.85
?

?

?
0.90
?

?

?
76.43
16.49
78.85% 79.11% 94.11% 95.38% 95.08% 95.00% 97.95%

22.89

75.75

21.88

20.53

20.20

The final results are wrapped up in Table 5. The throughput of UrbanMatch
is 485 links per played hour; this is twice as much as the throughput of the ESP
game [30]. The ALP of UrbanMatch is a bit more than 3 minutes per player;
this is a not an outstanding result (the ALP of the ESP game is 91 minutes
per player), but this value could be increased by improving the gaming and
entertaining features of UrbanMatch. The accuracy of UrbanMatch is 99.06%,
which is a significant result. This allow us to assert that UrbanMatch provides
an effective solution for link quality assessment.
14 0.2 is the greatest value we can assign to LOW ER because it is the minimum value

we decided to use when initializing scores to links in C.

15 0.6 is the smallest value we can assign to U P P ER because it is the maximum value

we decided to use when initializing scores to links in C.
?

?

?
Table 5. Final evaluation results

CM F P CU F N Players PlayedTime Throughput ALP Accuracy

2h 58m 12s

99.06%

485 links/h

3m 17s

7 Conclusions

The problems of interlinking and assessing the quality of information published
as Linked Data have been recognized of paramount importance by researchers
and practitioners, who are investigating the adoption of different approaches.
Most research is focused on automated solutions, but crowdsourcing the interlinking or quality assessment tasks is also possible. Actually, if we consider the
fitness-for-use principle of data quality [16], involving human processors may
be the only practical way to obtain high quality links.

UrbanMatch, presented in this paper, adopts the approach of Games with
a Purpose to assess the quality of automatically created links between POIs
and photos that depict them. However, UrbanMatch is not simply a GWAP for
Linked Data: it considers the characteristics of urban-related  or, more broadly,
geo-spatially related  Linked Data and the possibility to rely on the on-site
experience of the players in addition to their knowledge.

Our analysis of the links assessed by UrbanMatch in few month of availability
on the iTunes store seems to confirm our research hypothesis. Our work and
evaluation is currently oriented to gather further evidence in two directions:
repeating the UrbanMatch experience in Munich16 and exploring a different
gaming approach with a new app named Urbanopoly17.

So far, the development and deployment of UrbanMatch in the German city
of Munich allowed us to verify the data preparation step, i.e. obtaining POIs
from OpenStreetMap with the help of LinkedGeoData, automatically fetching
photos from Flickr and Wikimedia Commons and creating the candidate links
to be assessed. A preliminary analysis of the matches played in Munich confirms
the results obtained in Milano.

On the other hand, a new game named Urbanopoly was designed to get a
higher value of ALP w.r.t. UrbanMatch, while keeping the same level of through-
put. In analysing the results of UrbanMatch, we noticed that the players were
motivated to continue playing by the presence of the leaderboard and the possibility to beat other players. Thus, in designing Urbanopoly, we put more
emphasis on those gaming features that require a long-term engagement of the
player.

The main lesson learned from UrbanMatch is that Human Computation approaches can be successfully employed to interlink urban-related datasets: the
on-site experience of the players helps in gathering links with a clear business
value. For example, UrbanMatch allows to learn the locations from which a POI
is visible and recognizable. This information can be valuable for a wide range

16 Cf. http://bit.ly/um-munchen
17 Cf. http://bit.ly/urbanopoly

I. Celino et al.

of city stakeholders, like municipalities (for placing information totems) or mobile operators (to deliver effective location-aware mobile advertisement). Games
like UrbanMatch may serve to a wide range of Smart Cities services like traffic
optimization, environmental sustainability or city planning.

Acknowledgements. This work was partially supported by Siemens Corporate
Research and Technologies and by the PlanetData project, co-funded by the
European Commission (FP7-257641).
