An Overview of the Tourpedia Linked Dataset with a Focus

on Relations Discovery among Places

Davide Gazze, Angelica Lo Duca, Andrea Marchetti, Maurizio Tesconi

Institute of Informatics and Telematics

National Research Council
via Moruzzi 1, 56124 Italy

[name].[surname]@iit.cnr.it

ABSTRACT
Tourpedia (http://tour-pedia.org) is an open initiative which
contains a linked dataset of tourism places, i.e. accommo-
dations, attractions, points of interest (POIs) and restau-
rants. Tourpedia extracts and integrates information about
places from four different social social media: Facebook,
Foursquare, Google Places and Booking.com. The resulting
knowledge base currently consists of more than 6M RDF
triples and describes almost 500.000 places, each of which
is identified by a globally unique identifier, which can be
dereferenced over the Web into a RDF description. This paper gives an overview of the Tourpedia knowledge base and
illustrates how new relations are discovered among places
through Named Entity Recognition (NER) tools.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Over the last years the Web has seen the growth of two big
initiatives: linked data and social media. On the one hand,
the linked data initiative [3] allows the creation of a globalscale interlinked data space, known as the Web of Data,
by exposing datasets previously isolated as data graphs,
which can be interlinked and integrated with other datasets.
Thanks to this, an unprecedented amount of linked data
sources were recently produced and continues growing fast.
On the other hand, social media and mobile technologies [8]
have been fostering crowdsourced databases, such as places,
events, reviews, etc. that have huge potential of enrichment
in mashup applications. Recently researches have used social media data for enrichment of spatial and spatiotemporal
data. If combined, these two kinds of data sources can be
very useful for creating mashup applications and resources.
This paper describes the Tourpedia1 [6] initiative, a linked
dataset, which combines and aggregates data extracted from

1http://tour-pedia.org

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SEMANTiCS 15, September 15-17, 2015, Vienna, Austria

c 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3462-4/15/09. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2814864.2814876

four social media: Facebook2, Foursquare3, Google Places4
and Booking.com5 (extracted from 2014 May to 2015 May).
Tourpedia contains almost half a million places, divided in
four categories: accommodations, restaurants, points of interests (POIs) and attractions. With respect to our previous work [6], we focus more on the Linked Data aspect, by
underlining how we enriched the Tourpedia linked dataset
through new relations among resources. With respect to
the state-of-the-art tourism datasets, Tourpedia provides the
following features. Firstly, Tourpedia elaborates reviews of
places extracted from social media to calculate their overall
sentiment. This constitutes a novelty compared to existing datasets, because it provides the access to customersatisfaction derived from social media. The availability of
the sentiment about a place has been playing an important
role over the last years.
In fact, a recent study [1] shows
that the percentage of consumers consulting reviews at social media prior to booking a hotel room has steadily increased over time, as well as the number of reviews they
are reading prior to making their hotel reservation. There-
fore, there is a clear need to manage and understand the
knowledge conveyed by opinions and customer-generated online content [17]. Tourpedia satisfies this need by providing
an easy way to access the sentiment about tourism places.
Secondly, Tourpedia consolidates features of accommoda-
tions, by providing additional details. This aspect could
strengthen research in the tourism industry. In fact, there
are studies discussing which hotel characteristics travellers
interests require [11] or which kind of accommodations some
categories of travellers prefer [13]. A resource like Tourpedia could encourage and facilitate these kinds of studies,
by providing specific information about each accommoda-
tion. Finally, for each accommodation, Tourpedia provides
also links to related attractions. By related attraction of an
accommodation we mean an attraction that in some way
is connected to that accommodation. For example, if the
Hotel Bologna in Pisa is located near the Leaning Tower
of Pisa, a possible relation can be established between the
two places. Relations among accommodations and attractions could foster and promote new research in the services
industry. In fact, many studies exist in the literature, showing how hotels choose their location in a city [18] and how
tourists attractions change according to the position of the
hotel [12, 14]. A resource like Tourpedia could foster and fa-

2http://www.facebook.com
3http://www.foursquare.com
4http://www.google.com/business/
5http://www.booking.com


between accommodations and attractions.

This paper gives an overview of the Tourpedia knowledge
base and then describes how the links between accommodations and attractions are built. The other aspects of Tourpe-
dia, i.e. reviews analysis and features descriptions, will be
described in a future work. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work; Section 3
gives an overview of Tourpedia and Section 4 explains how
new relations are discovered among accommodations and
attractions. Section 5 describes the evaluation process for
relations discovery. Finally, Section 6 contains the conclusions and future work.

2. RELATED WORK

Over the last years, many initiatives have been proposed
in the field of tourism datasets. A complete list can be found
in the DataHub.io Web site6. Here we give an overview only
of the most important datasets related to the tourism do-
main. GeoNames7 is a very popular geographical dataset
with over 10 million geographical names.
It contains also
tourism places, such as hotels and restaurants. However, it
does not provide any SPARQL endpoint to query data and,
for each node, it gives only little information. For example,
for the Hotel Bologna in Pisa, it provides only its geographical coordinates8. LinkedGeoData9 [15] is an open initiative
that exports information extracted from OpenStreetMap10
as a RDF knowledge base. LinkedGeoData contains more
than 1 billion nodes. Since it is derived from a collaborative platform, it is continuously updated. With respect
to LinkedGeoData, we propose a smaller knowledge base,
which contains more detailed information for each node.
For example, the Hotel Bologna in Pisa contains more information in Tourpedia11 than in LinkedGeoData12. In any
case, it would be very interesting to map the two knowledge
bases through sameAs links. We are planning to do it as
future work, by adopting a flexible Linked Data Mashup
view [16]. Other initiatives with minor impact are The
Santillana Guide dataset13, the Salzburgerland Tourismus
dataset14 and the Accommodations in Tuscany and Piedmont datasets, whose links are no longer available. To the
best of our knowledge, Tourpedia is the only tourism dataset
which provides sentiments about places and relations between accommodations and attractions.

3. TOURPEDIA

The Tourpedia knowledge base currently consists of 6.037.889

RDF triples and describes 492.888 entities, divided in four
classes, as shown in Table 1. Tourpedia contains almost
500.000 links to DBpedia15. This is defined through the
property dbpedia-owl:location, associated to every place.

Class
Accommodation
Restaurant
Attraction

Instances


Table 1: Tourpedia classes with the number of their
instances.
Other useful statistics about external links are contained in
the Tourpedia VOID description16. The Tourpedia knowledge base is accessible over the Web through different mech-
anisms: a) SPARQL endpoint17, b) direct access through the
resource identifier (e.g. Hotel Annalena 18), c) RDF dump19,
d) Web API20, e) Web interface21 [5]. Tourpedia is also registered to the DataHub.io platform22 and provides a place
for community discussion23.

3.1 Ontology

The Tourpedia knowledge base is represented by a unique
ontology24 (Table 2), which contains classes and properties
derived information extracted from each social media. The
prefix marl: refers to the MARL ontology25, while the prefix
acco: refers to the Acco ontology [9] and h: to the Hontology ontology [4], both related to the tourism domain.
We defined some equivalences of classes with the Schema
ontology26. We did not use schema.org directly as ontol-
ogy, because our data model is conceptually different from
that defined in schema.org, where the levels of hierarchy
are more complicated.
In Tourpedia concepts are simpler
and subclasses are at the same level of hierarchy. Currently,
Tourpedia contains only generic classes. However we extracted also subcategories from social media, e.g. type of
accommodation. We are planning to integrate this aspect,
although the mapping is not simple, because of the different
classification mechanisms employed by different social me-
dia. More details about accommodation data modeling can
be found in [2]. It is interesting to note how the Tourpedia ontology describes the sentiment about a place: each
place has a property marl:hasOpinion, which is connected
to a resource of class marl:AggregatedOpinion. The polarity value associated to each aggregated opinion ranges from
0 to 10.

3.2 License and Maintenance

Tourpedia is served on the Web under the terms of the
Creative and Commons CC0 1.0 License. We investigated
carefully the issues related to the publication of data extracted from social media and we published only objective
properties associated to each place (such as name, address,
latitude, longitude and so on). Instead, sensible data produced by the social media (such as the content of a review)
cannot be published by Tourpedia. In this case we provide

6http://datahub.io/dataset?q=tourism
7http://www.geonames.org
8http://www.geonames.org/6501002/hotel-bologna.html
9http://linkedgeodata.org/About
10https://www.openstreetmap.org/
11http://tour-pedia.org/page/acco-204042
12http://linkedgeodata.org/page/triplify/node2617740233
13http://webenemasuno.linkeddata.es
14http://data.salzburgerland.com/organization/salzburgerland-
tourismus
15http://dbpedia.org

16http://tour-pedia.org/download/void.ttl
17http://tour-pedia.org/sparql
18http://tour-pedia.org/resource/acco-207756
19http://tour-pedia.org/download/tourpedia.rdf
20http://tour-pedia.org/api
21http://tour-pedia.org/gui/demo/
22http://datahub.io/dataset/tourpedia
23https://groups.google.com/forum/?tourpedia#!forum/tourpedia
24http://tour-pedia.org/download/tp.owl
25http://www.gsi.dit.upm.es/ontologies/marl/
26http://schema.org


+ vcard:fn
+ dbpedia-owl:address
+ vcard:hasTelephone
+ vcard:hasPhoto
+ wgs84 pos:lat
+ wgs84 pos:long
+ dbpedia-owl:location
+ dbpedia-owl:wikiPageExternalLink
+ marl:hasOpinion

tp:Accommodation extends tp:Place

+ acco:feature
+ h:InternalFeature
+ skos:related

tp:Restaurant extends tp:Place
tp:POI extends tp:Place
tp:Attraction extends tp:Place

+ owl:sameAs

marl:AggregatedOpinion

+ marl:polarityValue

Table 2: Tourpedia ontology.

the link to original resource on the social media. Beside
this, in Tourpedia we publish only integrated data and not
original data, as they were extracted from the social media.
For this reason, in Tourpedia data provenance of each attribute is not associated to a specific social media source.
Tourpedia maintains data provenance through the property
wikiPageExternalLink accessible via SPARQL and through
direct access to each resource27. In the Web search interface
data provenance is preserved through a marker on the map
associated to each place. A click on the marker opens an
infobox, containing the direct links to social media.

The maintenance of Tourpedia is under deployment.

It
implements the incremental maintenance of Linked Data
Mashup views described in [16]. Periodically, for each social media Tourpedia computes the incremental changes in
terms of:
INSERT, DELETE and UPDATE records and
propagates them to the final mashup view, by considering
also the preservation/change of same as links.

4. RELATIONS DISCOVERY AND LINKING

In this paper we describe how we discovered relations
among accommodations and attractions, represented through
the property skos:related. Besides this, we illustrate how
we built the owl:sameAs links between attractions and other
linked data sources. The description of how we extracted the
sentiment will be further illustrated in a future work.

4.1 Relations discovery

In order to discover new relations, we implemented the
Entity Discovery System (EDS), a tool which extracts all the
Named Entities (NEs) from accommodationsdescriptions
(extracted from Booking.com). This is motivated by the
fact that almost all descriptions contain a great number of
NEs, i.e. attractions, located near the accommodation which
the description refers to. Therefore, EDS builds a relation
between each extracted NE and the accommodation. In de-
tails, EDS exploits the DBpedia Spotlight (configured to

27http://tour-pedia.org/page/acco-204042

Figure 1: The architecture of EDS.

return generic entities) Service28, a Named Entity Recognition and Disambiguation (NERD) tool, which provides also
the links of disambiguated NEs to DBpedia. Other NERD
services exist, both commercial and open source, such as
OpenCalais29, TagMe30 and OpenNLP31. We chose DBpedia Spotlight for EDS because of the highest quality of extracted NEs. Due to space limitation, we do not illustrate
the results of comparison among the different NERD tools.
Figure 1 shows the architecture of the EDS: it is composed
of three main modules: the NE Extractor, the NE Filtering
and the NE Linking. The NE Extractor takes accommodations as well as their descriptions from the Places Database
(DB) of Tourpedia and extracts NEs and their associated
URIs from the DBpedia Spotlight service. In order to validate the results, a manual check is done. This phase consists
in correcting wrong links to DBpedia manually and performing manual coreference, such as disambiguating Central Station in Pisa Central Station. Obviously, for a large amount
of data this is not feasible. However, a manual check can
be always done on a subset of data in order to verify the
quality of extracted NEs. This process is very awkward
because it is strongly related to the quality of established
relations. We are aware that this process should be done
automatically or semi-automatically. We are planning to
move to this direction as future work, by also taking into
account the difficulties related to it. The NE Filtering module deletes all the non-geographical NEs by applying a filter
based on geographical coordinates. This module asks DBpedia for geographical coordinates. If they do not exist, the
NE is not considered a place thus it is discarded. Other-
wise, it is added to the list of discovered NEs. Once all the
NEs have been extracted and corrected, a new relation is
built between each pair (accommodation, discovered NE).
The relation between the two records is defined through the
property skos:related. We chose this property to represent
this relation because it represents a general relation. In fact,
the NER is not able to discover the specific type of relation
between two entities.

4.2 Linking

The NE Linking module links the discovered NEs to the
places contained in the Places DB through the owl:sameAs
property. This is done through a matching algorithm, which
was implemented as follows. Let (i) p a place in the Places

28https://github.com/dbpedia-spotlight/dbpedia-
spotlight/wiki
29http://new.opencalais.com
30http://tagme.di.unipi.it
31https://opennlp.apache.org


Entities Extracted
Entities Filtered
Entities Linked
Entities Added

Nr. of entities


10,8 %
76,03 %
23,97 %

Table 3: The output of EDS.

DB and q a discovered NE; (ii) Tp = {tp1 , ..., tpm } and
Tq = {tq1 , ..., tqn } the set of tokens in the names of p and
q, respectively; (iii) Gp = (xp, yp) and Gq = (xq, yq) the geographical coordinates of p and q, respectively. Intuitively,
p and q are matching candidates if they are geographically
close and their names are quite similar. The matching function computes the following steps: (i) calculate distance(Gp,
Gq), as the great circle distance [7] between Gp and Gq (ii)
iff distance(Gp, Gq)  , calculate

sim(Tp, Tq) = 2

Pmin (m,n)

i=1

Pt1Tp

Pt2Tq

wi(t1, t2)

m + n

(1)

We used  = 200m. The function wi(.) represents the Levenshtein distance [10] between two tokens in Tp and Tq. (iii)
p and q are considered matching candidates iff sim(Tp, Tq)
 . We set  = 0.8.
If sim(Tp, Tq)   holds, then a
new owl:sameAs link is built between p and q, otherwise
q is added to the Places DB as a new place with category
attraction (e.g. Pitti Palace in Florence32).

5. EVALUATION OF EDS

EDS was applied on 10.338 descriptions, associated to just
as many accommodations, derived from Booking.com. Table 3 illustrates the output of EDS. The NE Extractor module extracted 9.814 NEs, of which only 1.064 corresponded to
geographical NEs (10,8%). The 76,03 % of filtered NEs were
already available in the Tourpedia knowledge base, and the
remaining 23,97% were added to Tourpedia as attractions.
Besides this, EDS discovered 13.294 relations among accommodations and places, thus adding the same number of RDF
triples to the Tourpedia knowledge base. EDS added 1,29
relations per accommodation on average.

6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper we have given an overview of the Tourpedia knowledge base, which contains tourism places extracted
from social media. Besides this, we have illustrated how new
relations among accommodations and attractions were built
in Tourpedia. The described procedures could be generalized and adopted also by other knowledge bases. For example the abstracts of places contained in DBpedia could be
processed through EDS in order to discover new relations
among entities. As future work, we are planning to improve
EDS by studying and implementing a strategy to reduce the
human participation during the NE extraction phase and to
release EDS as a public framework.
