Data Licensing on the Cloud - Empirical Insights and

Implications for Linked Data

Ivan Ermilov

Tassilo Pellegrini

University of Leipzig, Institute of Computer

UAS St. Polten, Department of Media

Science, AKSW Group

Economics, Matthias Corvinus Str. 15, 3100 St.

Augustusplatz 10, D-04109 Leipzig, Germany

iermilov@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

Polten, Austria

tassilo.pellegrini@fhstp.ac.at

ABSTRACT
This paper investigates necessities and pitfalls in existing
data licensing practices on the World Wide Web. The authors analyzed four open data portals with respect to the
available licenses and drew conclusions about the quantity
and quality of available licensing information. Additionally
the authors address reasoning issues with respect to the automatic detection and potential clearance of licensing conflicts
when creating derivative works from multiple data sources.
The issues raised in this paper should be taken into account
when designing and implementing a Linked Data licensing
policy.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
Computing / technology policy [Intellectual property]: Li-
censing; Computing / technology policy [Intellectual prop-
erty]: Digital rights management

Keywords
Data Portals, RDF Datasets, Licensing

1.

INTRODUCTION

Data-driven innovations are governed by technological (i.e.
standards) and non-technological (i.e. norms) influences [14].
The first define the good characteristics of a digital artefact,
while the latter set the boundaries in which technology can
unfold. One of these non-technological components of innovation are licensing policies. They provide information on
ownership, provenance and utilization of intangible artefacts
that can be protected by intellectual property rights. Licenses are enablers and barriers for economic transactions.
They define the legitimate or illegitimate usage of data for
commercial and non-commercial purposes.

This is especially relevant for Linked Data, which alters
the asset specificities of data into a network good. Network
goods are characterized by specific externalities like positive
feedbacks and economies of scale stimulating network effects

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. Copyright is held by
the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
SEMANTiCS 15, September 15-17, 2015, Vienna, Austria
c 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3462-4/15/09 ...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2814864.2814878.

around the production, provision and distribution of datadriven goods and services [14, 17].

Under such circumstances licensing information - ideally in
machine-readable form - is a critical factor in the efficient and
legally secure handling of data, especially when it comes to
derivative works compiled from various datasets. The utilization of datasets licensed according to open licenses allows for
greater freedom in the reuse of data. However, the users still
have to take into consideration prohibitions, requirements
and permissions when consuming these datasets. This can be
a time- and cost-intensive undertaking if sufficient licensing
information is missing, resulting in increasing transaction
costs and decreasing the incentives to reuse existing data.

But data licensing is not a trivial issue given the fact
that data as an economic asset is difficult to define and to
protect. Various kinds of data assets can be subject to different legal protection instruments like copyright, database
right, competition law and patent law [16, 11]. Alternative
licensing instruments like Creative Commons, Data Commons as well as open source licenses and derivatives thereof
complicate the matter further, bringing about new challenges
like appropriate licensing policies, license compatibility and
machine-processability of licensing information - especially
under conditions of dual licensing.

The article addresses these and other issues as follows.
Section 2 gives a brief overview over related work on the
topic of data licensing and reasoning over licenses. Section 3
gives empirical insights into licensing practices on four opendata portals under special consideration of machine-readable
licenses. Section 4 addresses the reutilization of data under
special consideration of compatibility issues. The authors outline a reasoning framework that helps to detect compatibility
conflicts. Section 5 closes the paper with a recapitulation
and perspectives on future work.

2.

(LINKED) DATA LICENSING - RELATED

With the increasing proliferation of open data, i.e. as
part of public sector information initiatives or open innovation policies, the issue of data licensing gained attention
among governments, companies and non-governmental organisations [10, 9, 7, 3]. As a consequence a wide array of
data publishing guidelines were established [8, 19, 4], giving
expression to the fact that licensing of (semantic) data is a
fairly new kind of economic practice and still subject to debate concerning the adequate design of licensing policies [16,
11].

Most of work in the area of automatic processing of licens-


management systems. But so far little attention has been
paid to the issue of license compatibility [12] and associated
reasoning over machine-readable licensing information [5].
A logic for reasoning over the licenses was introduced by
Pucella and Weissman [13], but their approach has not been
implemented with semantic web standards. Therefore it is
hard to operate on in the context of RDF licenses. Garcia
and Gil [5] propose an OWL ontology to describe copyrights
issues in closed datasets for rights clearance purposes. Their
approach does not deal with alternative license models like
Creative Commons or Open Source licenses. Thus it is not a
viable solutions for problems arising from open data licens-
ing. Villata and Gandon [18] describe the formalisation of a
license composition tool for derivative works. They extend
their research in [15, 6] by introducing deontic logic and
heuristics for license composition. They use a subsumption
approach for the comparison of the requirements, permissions
and prohibitions of given licenses and derive new licenses
out of them. Their work is an interesting approach to detect
and potentially solve licensing conflicts by composing a new
license. The pitfall of their approach lies in the circumstance,
that an automatically composed license might result in logically correct but practically useless license. New licenses
are created using machine-readable metadata, which are not
necessarily in line with human-readable deeds and, what
is more important, with lawyer-readable legal text. Additionally the new license might violate the intent of another
rights holder who deliberatelly chose a more liberal license
under the Share-Alike constraint. Thus, simply providing a
deductive mechanism that chooses the most strict license for
derivative works might not be sufficient.

Although progress has been made in the definition of
machine-readable vocabularies for licensing like ccREL (Cre-
ative Commons Rights Expression Language) [2] or ODRL
(Open Digital Rights Language) [1] empirical evidence presented in this paper reveals that the adoption rate of these
standards is still very low.

3.

ISSUES IN DATA LICENSING

3.1 Methodology

The authors chose three open government data portals and
one open science data portal and aggregated the available
licensing information of 441 315 individual datasets. Essen-
tially, we selected the most popular data portals in the open
data domain with respect to the available datasets.1 For
the government data portals we chose Publicdata.eu (EU),
Data.gov (USA) and Open Data Canada (CAN). This allowed us to gain insight into regional differences in licensing
practices. We additionally analyzed the portal Datahub.io,
an open data repository provided by the Open Knowledge
Foundation.

To collect the licensing information the authors developed
an application2 for crawling and aggregating data utilizing
the CKAN API3, caching the data in the local store for
further processing by the application.

1The most up to date list of data portals can be found
following the link: http://dataportals.org/
2Source code for the application is available on Github:
https://github.com/AKSW/ckan-aggregator-py
3The description for CKAN API is available at: http://
docs.ckan.org/en/latest/api/index.html

3.2 Results

In the following sections we will discuss major findings of
our investigation. All in all the situation should be described
as problematic with respect to the quality of licensing information and the quantity of individual licenses. It raises
questions about the institutional viability of giant interlinked
data clouds, given the fact, that a high degree of license heterogeneity requires technical means to effectively detect and
resolve licensing conflicts. But for the time-being hardly any
dataset provides licensing information in machine-readable
form. Table 1 provides a brief overview of our findings.

Data Licenses on the Cloud

Datagov Open

Public
Data
55 481

24.3 %
35.3 %
0.5 %

Canada
244 257

0.0 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
100.0 % 39.9 %
100.0 % 43.2 %
0.0 %

2.6 %

Datasets
License Types
Not Specified


Other
Deref. Link
Mach. Read.

132 206

99.6 %
0.4 %
0.0 %
0.0 %
0.4 %
0.0 %

Datahub


59.1 %
17.1 %
4.8 %
19.0 %
23.1 %
2.2 %

Table 1: Data Licenses on the Cloud (as of May
2015)

3.2.1 Insufficient License Documentation

The first major finding was that a majority of the provided
datasets lacks a sufficient amount of information about their
licensing terms and conditions.

On Data.gov 99.6 % of all datasets lack explicit licensing
information. Data from federal bodies are formally classified
as public according to the US Open Data Policy4 but this
information is not explicated or referenced at the dataset
level. Additionally this data policy is not binding for nonfederal data providers, i.e. the City of New York or Cornell
University. Approximately 25 % of all datasets on Data.gov
are provided by non-federal organisations, who can define
individual terms of use. Just 0.4 % of all datasets provide a
de-referenceable link to their license.

Open Canada should be considered as a good practice with
respect to governmental data licensing. They provide solely
Canadian governmental data under three licensing types to
choose from. 100 % of all datasets provide a de-referenceable
link to their license.

On the contrary the European open government data
platform Publicdata.eu 35.3 % of all datasets come along
with Creative Commons and 40 % provide an individual
license. Open Data Commons are associated to 0.5 % of all
datasets. 24.3 % provide no licensing information at all. The
documentations of the individual licenses vary considerably
in depth and ease of accessibility. Nevertheless 43.2 % of all
datasets provide a de-referenceable link to their license.

In the case of Datahub.io 59.1 % of all datasets lack any
kind of licensing information. 17.1 % are provided under
Creative Commons, 4.8 % under Open Data Commons and
19 % make use of an individual license. 23.1 % of all datasets
provide a de-referenceable link to their license.

4http://www.data.gov/data-policy


We can observe a high heterogeneity of licenses, but with
strong regional differences. Publicdata.eu, which provides
55k datasets, utilizes 50 license types. On Datahub, with 9k
the smallest of the analyzed data repositories, we found 33
different license types. Data.gov, which lists 55k datasets,
makes use of 10 different licenses. Canada, which provides
more than 240k datasets, makes use of just three license
types.

The degree of heterogeneity varies in accordance to the
type of repository and the region it is located in. In Europe
(39.9 %) and in Datahub.io (19 %) we can observe a high
degree of individual licenses especially for governmental data.
This draws from the fact that a lot of countries have created
a standard license of their own. For the time being it is not
possible to determine the degree of heterogeneity in the US
portal Data.gov. This would require a separate analysis of
all datasets that are provided by non-federal organisations.

3.2.3 Compatibility Issues

License heterogeneity raises the question about license
compatibility. Terms and conditions of two or more different
licenses might contradict each other. So a coupling of these
datasets for the purpose to create derivative works might be
prohibited.

Within the analyzed datasets, where licensing information
was specified, we found various conflicting licenses. In Pub-
licdata.eu at least 2 % of all datasets are not compatible with
the open definition. In Datahub.io it is 7 % of all datasets
and on Data.gov it is 3 %. This might not seem overwhelm-
ing, but given the high amount of unspecified datasets it is
easy to conclude that the degree of potential conflicts might
be significantly higher. The situation is further complicated
by the fact that especially in Europe most countries have
created a standard license of their own introducing slight
semantic differences in the definition of licensing terms thus
adding to the complexity of the subject matter and the correct fulfillment of licensing terms and conditions. Due to the
lack of machine-readability these licenses need to be checked
manually for compatibility thus adding significantly to the
transaction costs associated with the re-purposing of existing
datasets.

3.2.4 Machine-readable Licenses

The analysis of the four data portals revealed that for the
time being hardly no machine-readable licensing information is being provided. The only exceptions can be found
where links to CC licenses are being provided, which allows
to automatically retrieve the licenses terms and conditions
explicated in ccREL [2]. This applies to 2.6 % of the datasets
on Publicdata.eu and 2.2 % of datasets on Datahub.io. The
other portals did not provide a machine-readable licensing
information at all.

4. OPEN DATA LICENSES COMPOSITOR

AND RECOMMENDER

As a first step in mitigation of the problems outlined
above, we propose an approach which combines the licensing information and provides recommendations on the data
usage. The main difference from previously proposed approaches is that we do not provide a combined license, but
a recommendation and, possibly, a reference to an existing

Figure 1: Composition problem on example of CCBY and MIT licenses.

license compatible with all of the input licenses.
In this
section we describe an application for license composition
and recommendation. The application processes the RDF
representations of licenses as input data. To show case our
application we utilize Creative Commons (CC) licenses.

CC licenses consist of three components: human-readable
deeds, machine-readable metadata, and lawyer-readable li-
censes. Although, the license composition problem was previously addressed in [18, 15, 6], the combined licenses were created using machine-readable metadata, which leads to a new
license that do not necessarily comply with human-readable
deeds and, what is more important, with lawyer-readable
legal text. This occurs when combining, for example, CCBY (Creative Commons) and MIT (Open Source) licenses
(see fig. 1)5. The combination in our example is achieved by
a simple combination of all the features of each licence (i.e.
permissions, prohibitions and requirements). The output
license contains a set of permissions and prohibitions, which
does not match CC-BY or MIT. Therefore the combined
license does not match any existing legal text and can not
be utilized as is.

The Licenses Compositor and Recommender 6 application
combines open data licenses, inspects their compatibility and
gives a single existing license with requirements (e.g. attri-
bution) as a recommendation to the user. In fig. 2 we show a
scenario, where a user chooses three datasets that come along
with three different licenses. The chosen CC-BY, CC-BY-
NC-SA and CC-BY-SA licenses are queried for requirements,
permissions and prohibitions using SPARQL. After this step
license features are combined and a recommendation is dis-
played: These three licenses are not compatible. However,
you can use the first two licenses together and license your
data with CC-BY-NC-SA. Attribution for both licensors are
required, notices should be kept.

The main purpose of the License Compositor is to provide a user with information, explaining the conditions for
using licenses in combination. To accomplish this task, the
License Compositor analyzes the features of input licenses
such as permissions, requirements and prohibitions. After
the analysis a decision is made on the licenses compatibility,

5The data about licenses is taken from https://tldrlegal.
com/
6The
https://github.com/AKSW/LicenseCompositor

application

is

available

at:

DistributeSublicensePlace WarrantyHold LiableInclude CopyrightCC-BYDistributeHold LiableInclude CopyrightMITModifyCommercial UseSublicensePrivate UseInclude LicenseDistributeInclude CopyrightCombined LicenseModifyCommercial UseSublicensePrivate UseInclude LicenseModifyCommercial UseSublicensePlace WarrantyHold Liable[2] H. Abelson, B. Adida, M. Linksvayer, and N. Yergler.

ccREL: The Creative Commons Rights Expression
Language. W3C Member Submission, 2008.

[3] P. Archer et al. Study on business models for Linked

Open Government Data. ISA programme by PwC EU
Services. European Union, 2013.

[4] M. Frosterus, E. Hyv onen, and J. Laitio. Creating and

publishing semantic metadata about linked and open
datasets. In Linking Government Data, pages 95112.
Springer, 2011.

[5] R. Garc a and R. Gil. Copyright licenses reasoning
using an owl-dl ontology. Law, Ontologies and the
Semantic Web: Channelling the Legal Information
Flood, 188:145162, 2009.

[6] G. Governatori, H.-P. Lam, A. Rotolo, S. Villata, and

F. Gandon. Heuristics for licenses composition. In
JURIX, pages 7786, 2013.

[7] L. Guibault and C. Angelopoulos. Open Content

Licensing: From Theory to Practice. G -
Reference,Information and Interdisciplinary Subjects
Series. Amsterdam University Press, 2011.

[8] B. Hyland and D. Wood. The joy of data-a cookbook
for publishing linked government data on the web. In
Linking government data, pages 326. Springer, 2011.
[9] E. Hyvonen. Publishing and Using Cultural Heritage

Linked Data on the Semantic Web. Synthesis Lectures
on the Semantic Web. Morgan & Claypool Publishers,
2012.

[10] P. Jain, P. Hitzler, K. Janowicz, and C. Venkatramani.

Theres no money in linked data. 2013.

[11] T. Pellegrini. Linked data licensing  datenlizenzierung
unter netz okonomischen bedingungen. In Transparenz.
Tagungsband des 17. Internationalen Rechtsinformatik
Symposium IRIS 2014, pages 159168. Verlag der
 Osterreichischen Computergesellschaft, 2014.

[12] J. Prenafeta. Protecting copyright through semantic

technology. Publishing research quarterly,
26(4):249254, 2010.

[13] R. Pucella and V. Weissman. A logic for reasoning

about digital rights. In Computer Security Foundations
Workshop, 2002. Proceedings. 15th IEEE, pages
282294. IEEE, 2002.

[14] E. Rogers. Diffusion of Innovations, 5th Edition. Free

Press, 2003.

[15] A. Rotolo, S. Villata, and F. Gandon. A deontic logic
semantics for licenses composition in the web of data.
In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages
111120. ACM, 2013.

[16] M. Sonntag. Rechtsschutz f ur ontologien. In e-Staat

und e-Wirtschaft aus rechtlicher Sicht, pages 418425.
Stuttgart: Richard Boorberg Verlag, 2006.

[17] H. Varian, J. Farrell, J. Farrell, and C. Shapiro. The

Economics of Information Technology: An Introduction.
Raffaele Mattioli Lectures. Cambridge University Press,
2004.

[18] S. Villata and F. Gandon. Licenses compatibility and

composition in the web of data. COLD, 905, 2012.

[19] D. Wood. Linking government data. Springer Science &

Business Media, 2011.

Figure 2: License Compositor and Recommender.

which clusters the licenses into sets, presenting to the user
which licenses can be utilized in combination and on which
conditions. Each set corresponds to a single existing license,
we therefore avoid the problem of combining license features
into a non-existing or non-appropriate license.

We foresee two usage scenarios for the License Compositor:
i) a data consumer wants to exploit existing datasets from the
Web to use inside her application, in this scenario user utilizes
the License Compositor to check the datasets compatibility
from the licensing perspective; and ii) a data provider chooses
a dataset license in accordance with other existing datasets, in
this scenario the License Compositor enables flexible license
choice for a use case at hand.

5. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

This paper presented empirical insight into the licensing
practices on four data clouds. The findings reveal characteristic patterns and pitfalls of licensing practices with respect
to region and domain specificity of the data portal. Further
research is necessary to investigate compatibility issues under special consideration of the large amount of individual
licenses. This raises the question how machine-readability of
licensing information can be improved to enable automatic
detection of conflicts and - in the long run - provide a infrastructure for automatic negotiation and clearance. At
the time of writing the License Compositor exists only as a
proof of concept with the interface limited to three licenses.
Extending the License Compositor to represent sets of compatible licenses as well as implementing features such as
automatic retrieval of licenses from the datasets is a subject
of future work. To evaluate License Compositor we plan
to use licenses from the Creative Commons and tldrlegal
portals.

6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work has been carried out within the project NoLDE
(Network of Linked Data Excellence) funded by the Austrian
Promotion Research Agency under grant number 3592880.
We acknowledge support from GeoKnow project, GA number
no. 318159, as well as BMWi project SAKE.
