Procurement Notice Enrichment using Product Ontologies

Vojt ech Svatek

Univ. of Economics, Prague

Nam. W. Churchilla 4, Praha 3

Czech Republic
svatek@vse.cz

Patrik Kompus

CTU, Prague

Thakurova 9, Praha 6

Czech Republic

Marek Dudas

Univ. of Economics, Prague

Nam. W. Churchilla 4, Praha 3

Czech Republic

patrik.kompus@gmail.com

marek.dudas@vse.cz

Martin Necasky

Charles University in Prague
Malostranske n. 25, Praha 1

Czech Republic

Jakub Klimek

CTU, Prague

Thakurova 9, Praha 6

Czech Republic

necasky@ksi.mff.cuni.cz

jakub.klimek@fit.cvut.cz

ABSTRACT
Linked data resources supporting matchmaking supply and
demand on the procurement market are so far limited. Precise match could be obtained by enriching the procurement
notices with detailed types and parameters of the prod-
uct/service that are explicitly modeled in vertical ontologies for the e-commerce field, in particular in the OPDM
project associated with the GoodRelations initiative. We
showcase a web-based prototype that allows the contracting
authority to (1) fetch a product ontology from the OPDM
repository, (2) create forms using relevant concepts from the
ontology, and (3) annotate a procurement notice via the
form corresponding to the demanded product.

1.

INTRODUCTION

Semantic publishing of government data has recently become a prominent stream in the world-wide effort to weave
a semantic web. Among the various types of information
produced by governmental institutions as open data are descriptions of public contracts, both at the level of procurement notice (call for tenders) and at the level of awarded
contract. An interesting aspect of public contracts from the
point of view of the Semantic Web initiative is the fact that
they unify two different spheres: public needs and commercial offers. They thus represent a meeting place for data
models, methodologies and information sources that have
been (often) independently designed within the two sectors.
The presented research is a part of a larger effort originally carried out within the procurement linked data use
case of the EU FP7 LOD2 project1 and carried on as part
of the informal OpenData.cz initiative (as joint venture of
collaborating research teams at three Prague-based univer-

1http://lod2.eu/WorkPackage/wp9a.html

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

SEMANTiCS 15, September 15 - 17, 2015, Vienna, Austria

c 2015 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-3462-4/15/09. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2814864.2814891

sities). The first phase of this effort involved extensive procurement data extraction, transformation, and publishing
according to the Public Contracts Ontology.2
(PCO) The
second phase exploited the linked procurement datasets for
matchmaking and analytic tasks. One of the outcomes of
this effort is a web-based prototype called Public Contract
Filing Application. It offers interfaces addressing the needs
of both the buyer side (contracting authorities preparing
the procurement notices) and the supplier side (potential
bidders seeking relevant published notices) The purpose of
the application is however not to mimic the behavior of deployed procurement portals but to experimentally integrate
diverse advanced functionality into a basic version of the
working environment of both sides (but predominantly the
buyer side). The development of the prototype evolved into
two branches managed separately, to avoid integration overhead as well as overcharging the GUI. Both branches contain the same basic public contract filing (i.e. procurement
notice design, storage and semantic publishing) function-
ality; however, one further focuses on enriching the notice
with ontologically grounded product information while the
other addresses the matchmaking and analytical function-
ality. The latter branch is described in two LOD2 project
deliverables, [6] and [7] (Ch. 23) and in a forthcoming pa-
per. The current demo paper is thus mainly devoted to the
former.

The second input to the presented research is the family of
ontologies3 developed within the EU FP7 OPDM (Ontology-
based Product Data Management) project to be used as
part of an ontology-based product data management system.
Each ontology defines a particular type of product (e.g.,
washing machines or bicycles), both in terms of product
sub-types and its parameters, which are explicitly classified
under quantitative and qualitative ones. The ontologies are
designed to be simple enough for inexperienced users but sufficiently expressive to cover all common features. Their common core is the GoodRelations4 (GR) [3] ontology, which is
a respected core ontology for e-commerce (among other, integrated into the Google-supported Schema.org vocabulary)
and one of the most widespread linked data vocabularies
overall. While GR models the process of offering and selling

2http://lov.okfn.org/dataset/lov/vocabs/pc
3http://www.ebusiness-unibw.org/ontologies/opdm/
4http://www.heppnetz.de/projects/goodrelations/


ery and warranty conditions, etc.), the vertical product ontologies mainly specialize its concepts of product or service
and quantitative/qualitative property with respect to the
particular commodity, e.g., for a washing mashine, quantitative properties include the drum capacity while qualitative
properties include the drying efficiency rating (A to G).

2. TOOL DESCRIPTION

In describing the prototype, we start from the basic functionality for specifying the procurement notice, through enriching the notice by information from already fetched and
pre-process product ontology content, to the ontology fetching and form building functionality. Finally, a few implementation details are mentioned.

2.1 Basic public contract filing

Upon logging into the buyer-side interface5, the procurement authority views all their open calls (published or inprogress procurement notices) and can edit them or start a
new one. The basic description to be provided for a notice
contains, besides textual information, structured data conforming to the PCO, such as type of contract, procurement
method (open, restricted, negotiated, etc.), tender submission deadline, contract fulfillment date and location (using
NUTS, Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics), or
estimated price. Furthermore, a crucial element of the form
are the CPV (Common Procurement Vocabulary) codes,6
defining the categories of procured products and services;
the application offers the codes in autocompletion mode
(upon typing the first characters of a token from the code
description). While the CPV codes are themselves an important input to supplier matchmaking, they also serve for coupling the notices with product-ontology-based forms. When
the mandatory fields of the basic form have been filled, the
notice can be stored in either a private or public workspace
quad store, in a format conforming to the PCO.

2.2 Ontology-based annotation

Provided the given notice has already been coupled with
an ontology-based form, a detailed specification can be entered upon clicking on the respective button. The additional
form generated from a bicycle product ontology is in Fig. 1.
Quantitative data can be specified either as specific values
or as interval range (using the S/R switch on the left). The
rdfs:comment for the given property in the original ontology
is available as contextual help (here for the Size of frame
property). All this additional data is stored according to
GR and the specific product ontology.

2.3 Ontology/form management

For a new type of commodity for which a product ontology compliant with GR7 has been identified, this ontology
can be uploaded in the advanced user interface (accessible
through an Admin login button, from the login page). Let

5The supplier-side interface is similar, except that the supplier specifies its long-term competence profile instead of
one-time procurement notice, however via similar means.
6http://simap.europa.eu/codes-and-nomenclatures/
codes-cpv/codes-cpv en.htm
7Note that even ontologies designed independently of GR
can be canonicalized, using semi-automated pattern-based
transformation, as shown for a subset of Freebase in [2].

Figure 1: Specification of ontology-based details on
the procured product

Figure 2: List of uploaded product ontologies

us consider the domain of coffee machines (e.g., for an office building). For this domain, an ontology is available at
http://purl.org/opdm/coffeemachine. Its upload starts by a
basic dialog specifying the name, description and URI of the
ontology, after which the ontology is included in the ontology list, see Fig. 2. Subsequently, a class from the ontology,
which corresponds to the commodity in question, is chosen,
and one or more CPV codes are specified for it (so as to
connect it with relevant contracts), as in Fig. 3. Then the
user selects the properties of this class to be covered in the
detailed form, as in Fig. 4; separately for main properties
(modeled as qualitative properties or quantitative properties in terms of GR) and additional properties (plain data
properties of the given product ontology). This mechanism
allows to only cover, from the whole ontology, the classes and
properties relevant for matchmaking in public procurement.
In this step the user can also choose whether the values of
quantitative properties are to be entered as range or exact
value. Finally, the generated form is displayed for approval.

2.4 Implementation

The web application is implemented in Java EE. Its architecture is modular; the modules consist of both the client
and the server side, and are based on a module template,
which contains the code for user and context management
as well as for quad store access. The public procurement
data itself is stored in two instances of a quad store. The
public quad store contains published data accessible to everyone (part of the LOD cloud). The private quad store
contains unpublished data for each user and data required
for application management.


tions was collected. When the utility was not obvious
from the use case currently examined, the user was
asked if she could identify a different case for which
the relevance of the PCFA support would be higher.

5. Analogously, the user was enquired about a desirable
functionality that is not present in the current version
of the PCFA (nor in mainstream procurement portals).

We only present the observations related to the version
of the application that is subject of the current demo; the
enrichment functionality is commented in the last bullet.
All observations, separately for the two users and including those related to the version with advanced data mining
and matchmaking functionality are in the respective LOD2
project deliverable [7, p. 3336].

 The basic form for PC filing was found intuitive and
covering the most important features. User 1 noted
that compliance with law would require, among other,
specifying not only date but also time of the tender
submission deadline. The publication model should
also be careful with respect to the Czech law disallowing to disclose a call earlier than 1 month after the
official publication in the Procurement Bulletin, except
for a certain kind of low-price contract notice.User 2
was surprised why the kind of contract (such as Supplies or Services) is not to be filled in it, especially
that the scope of documents to be appended (also part
of the form) depends on it in reality.

 The possibility to play with a call under preparation in a private space, while already having access to
matchmaking and analytics, was considered as highly
advantageous. As possible enhancement, User 1 suggested to allow for multiple users to share a common
private space within the contract authority institution,
since people from various departments may be entitled
to prepare the draft of the notice, which is then finalized by a legal expert with no F2F interaction.

 User 2 mentioned that for larger-size contracts (to which
the user was accustomed) the workflow also contains
publication of a preliminary contract notice, already
including a price estimate, i.e.
it is not possible to
freely tune the parameters of the call in a private space
and then publish it in full.

 The codelist-based autocompletion (CPV, NUTS) was
welcomed well. User 1 was not aware of similar functionality within the mainstream portals; she always
had to select the values from a codelist open sideways.
User 2 however pointed out that the use of text autocompletion for CPV codes might lower the precision in
situations when the user does know which code s/he
seeks, as s/he might encounter a code with similar text
that however belongs to a different branch than de-
sired.
In such situations, the possibility to navigate
within a tree should be offered as alternative.

 Forms based on product ontologies were considered as
major enhancement by User 1; they would most likely
be used for procurement of devices such as computers
and beamers (yet by the entitled members of the computing center rather than by the legal department).

Figure 3: Specification of class and CPV codes

Figure 4: Specification of properties

3. USER ASSESSMENT

The application has been assessed by two contract author-

ities from the Czech Republic:

 User 1 : University of Economics, Prague (UEP), as
a large educational and research body, represented by
the Head of its legal department, as official responsible
for publication of most public contract notices.

 User 2 : Czech Hydrometeorogical Institute (CHMI),
as a central government institution chartered by the
Ministry of Environment. The contacted user is a
member of the Department of Hydrology and is regularly involved in the procurement process.

Each session about one hour and was arranged as follows:

1. The user was briefly informed about the context of the
work (LOD2 project goals, procurement use case etc.)
and motivations for the development of the PCFA.

2. The user presented her view of the procurement pro-

cess within her institute/department.

3. The application functionality was demonstrated, taking into account the key points identified in the previous phase, and considering one or more hypothetical
contracts of the typical kind for the authority.


useful for the kind of contracts considered by her (which
is Services). It was mentioned that services in hydrology are so variable that is probably not realistic to
devise a service ontology for each of them.

4. RELATED RESEARCH

To the best of our knowledge, the reuse of e-commerce
product ontologies (containing product taxonomies as well
as product features) for public procurement is a topic untouched by previous efforts. Several ontology-based solutions for public procurement have however been proposed
in the last ten years, in general. The Linked Open Tenders
Electronic Daily (LOTED) project [8] ontologically modeled
the procurement process itself, analogously to our PCO (but
with more focus on reasoning and less on vocabulary interop-
erability). The Spanish MOLDEAS/EuroAlert project [1, 5]
combined the CPV classification with the (featureless) Product Types Ontology8 derived from Wikipedia. The Korean
KOCIS project [4] built its own relatively heavy-weighted
ontologies that defined various categories and parameters of
products that can be offered within tenders. It is not clear,
however, how the ontology system has been integrated with
the actual procurement processes.

5. DEMO ACCESS

The demo of the prototype is installed at http://lod2-dev.
vse.cz:8080/PCFA. The annotation interface uses the credentials username: demo, password: demo. The ontology fetching and form creation interface (expert interface)
will only be demonstrated on site because of the shared
workspace effect: forms tentatively constructed by one demo
user in the expert interface might otherwise be reused by
another demo user in the annotation interface. However,
the use of the expert interface is included in the short uncommented video available from http://screencast.com/t/
mTfo2BUFFh.

6. CONCLUSIONS

The demo showcases a novel combination of models and
tools from two different subfields of the Semantic Web: linked
government data (public contracts ontology and datasets,
CPV codes) and semantically enabled e-commerce (OPDM
ontologies and GoodRelations as their core model). Although the prototype is only meant as a proof of concept, it
helped identify unforeseen opportunities and obstacles, especially thanks to the accomplished sessions with real contracting authorities. Most important, the product ontologies seem to be sufficiently expressive to cover the crucial
features required by matchmakers, and building forms out
of ontological entities is likely to save significant effort compared to ad hoc design of such formsnever mind long-term
interoperability assured by persistent web-based ontologies
and GoodRelations as widely accepted standard. Thorough
evaluation of the approach will however only be possible in
direct collaboration with organizations maintaining largescale procurement portals, since RDF data on the supply
side of the procurement market is not publicly available.

A certain limitation of course is that only a subset of
procured commodities is at the same time subject of e-

8http://www.productontology.org/

commerce transactions;
in particular, specialized services
are unlikely to be covered by sufficiently descriptive ontologies in the foreseeable future. The ontology-based approach
will thus necessarily have to be combined with keywordbased and collaborative filtering approaches so as to cover
all use cases. On the other hand, the use of an e-commerce-
based ontological model may be beneficial for the suppliers,
since they could then apply the same model both in seeking
procurement opportunities and in advertizing their products
via (semantic) e-commerce channels.

Acknowledgments
The work on this paper was partially supported by the VSE
IGA project F4/90/2015, by the ICT FP7 project no. 257943
(LOD2), and by the H2020 project no.645833 (OpenBud-
gets.eu). Vojtech Sv atek and Marek Dud as also benefit
from the long-term institutional support of research activities by Faculty of Informatics and Statistics, University of
Economics, Prague.
