Guiding the Evolution of a Multilingual Ontology

in a Concrete Setting

Mauro Dragoni1, Chiara Di Francescomarino1, Chiara Ghidini1, Julia Clemente2,

and Salvador S anchez Alonso2

1 FBKIRST, Trento, Italy

{dragoni,dfmchiara,ghidini}@fbk.eu, julia@aut.uah.es,

2 Universidad de Alcal a, Alcal a de Henares, Spain

salvador.sanchez@uah.es

Abstract. Evolving complex artifacts as multilingual ontologies is a difficult activity demanding for the involvement of different roles and for guidelines to drive
and coordinate them. We present the methodology and the underlying tool that
have been used in the context of the Organic.Lingua project for the collaborative
evolution of the multilingual Organic Agriculture ontology. Findings gathered
from a quantitative and a qualitative evaluation of the experience are reported,
revealing the usefulness of the methodology used in synergy with the tool.

1 Introduction

Ontologies are dynamic entities that evolve over time because they need to reflect
changes in the domain they describe, in their conceptualization, or in their specifica-
tion. As stated in [1], ontology evolution can be defined as the timely adaptation of
an ontology to the arisen changes and the consistent propagation of these changes to
dependent artifacts..

Managing the evolution of ontologies is a complex problem, well known to the Semantic Web community, and a number of efforts are devoted to tackle different aspects
of the problem, as described in [2]. The problem becomes even more complex when,
besides the evolution of the ontology entities, the changes are related also to the multilingual aspects of the ontology itself. Indeed, in the last years, the construction of
multilingual ontologies has become an important objective for organizations working
in multilingual environments. Examples are companies which need to apply ontologies
to information retrieval on a mass of resources written in different languages, or international bodies using ontologies as a way of describing terminological standards in a
particular field (e.g., food, diseases, agriculture, and so on). As described in [3], obtaining multilingual ontologies is a complex activity which requires to tackle a number of
problems spanning from the translation of labels and description associated to a given
ontology entity to the adaptation of the ontology to a concrete language and cultural
community.

These requirements lead to the necessity of guiding the evolution of an ontology
according to its final use; moreover, this necessity become stronger when ontologies are
used not only for modeling a domain, but also for describing and accessing resources
in knowledge repositories or web portals.

P. Cimiano et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2013, LNCS 7882, pp. 608622, 2013.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
?

?

?
In this paper we present the methodological and technical solution used for facing
the problem of the multilingual evolution of an ontology for the organic agriculture (the
OrganicAgriculture ontology) in the context of the Organic.Lingua project.

The main contributions of the paper are: (i) the definition of a methodology for guiding the evolution in a collaborative environment and its usage in a real setting; and (ii) a
quantitative and a qualitative evaluation about the synergistic usage of a semantic web
tool and the defined methodology.

2 The Organic.Lingua Project

Organic.Lingua (http://www.organic-lingua.eu) is an EU-funded project that aims at
providing automated multilingual services and tools facilitating the discovery, retrieval,
exploitation and extension of digital educational content related to Organic Agriculture
and AgroEcology. More in concrete, the project aims at providing, on top of a web
portal, cross-lingual facility services enabling users to (i) find resources in languages
different from the ones in which the query has been formulated and/or the resource
described (e.g., providing services for the cross-lingual retrieval); (ii) manage meta-data
information for resources in different languages (e.g., offering automated meta-data
translation services); and (iii) contribute to evolve the content (e.g., providing services
supporting the users in the content generation).

The accomplishment of these objectives is reached in the Organic.Lingua project by
means of two components: on the one hand, a web portal offering software components
and linguistic resources able to provide multilingual services and, on the other hand, a
conceptual model (formalized in the OrganicAgriculture ontology) used for managing
information associated with the resources provided to the final users and shared with
other components deployed on the Organic.Lingua platform. In a nutshell, the usage of
the OrganicAgriculture ontology is twofold:

 Resource annotation: each time a content provider inserts a resource in the
repository, the resource is annotated with one or more concepts extracted from the
ontology. The list of available concepts is retrieved by using an ontology service
deployed in the ontology management component (shown in Section 4). Then, this
list is exploited for annotating the learning resources published on the Web portal.
 Resource retrieval: when web users perform queries on the system, the ontology is
used, by the back-end information retrieval system, to perform advanced searches
based on semantic techniques. Moreover, the ontology is used also by the CrossLanguage Information Retrieval component for query expansion purposes.

Due to this intensive use of the ontology in the entire Organic.Lingua portal, evolving
both the knowledge represented by the artifact, as well as, the linguistic layer, requires
a precise methodology, and dedicated tools, for avoiding the loss of effectiveness of
the components deployed on the platform. In the next two sections we describe the
methodology that we have defined in the context of the Organic.Lingua project and that
we propose as a general best practice for the evolution of complex artifacts as the ones
used in this project (Section 3) as well as the dedicated collaborative tool that supports
the proposed methodology (Section 4).

M. Dragoni et al.

3 Guiding Evolution with a Scenario-Based Methodology

Collaboratively building, maintaining and evolving multilingual ontologies is not a trivial task: multilinguality, in fact, adds the linguistic problem to classical problems of
collaborative modeling such as the background, skills and role differences that may
exist between e.g., domain and knowledge experts that collaboratively model the ontol-
ogy. Facing all these issues together requires appropriate methodologies (and tools) to
support the work of the involved experts.

In the Organic.Lingua project, a multi-role scenario-based methodology (MRSB)
was proposed and adopted for the OrganicAgricultureontology evolution. The methodology relies on involving experts playing different roles and guiding them, step-by-step
through tasks and critical scenarios, towards the collaborative evolution of the multilingual ontology.

3.1 MRSB: A Multi-Role Methodology

Three different types of experts are involved in the ontology evolution process: domain
experts, language experts and knowledge engineers. Domain experts play a key role as
they are in charge of driving the core changes in the ontology; language experts have to
revise existing translations and to provide new translations for the newly added terms;
finally, knowledge engineers provide a general support for the evolution process and
ensure correctness from a formal point of view.

To coordinate all these different experts, the MRSB methodology proposes to guide

them step-by-step through tasks and guidelines. In detail:

 domain experts are asked to create or contribute to discussions, suggesting actions
to be taken on the ontology and/or commenting on existing issues: they are recommended to clearly state whether all the suggestions should be implemented, if only
some and why;

 once reached an agreement, knowledge engineers can be notified and take the final
decision: either approve or discard the suggestion and proceed with the update on
the English version of the ontology;

 finally, the language experts are asked to provide, check and revise the translations

of labels and definitions, often produced by translation services.

3.2 MRSB: A Scenario-Based Methodology

The MRSB methodology proposes to guide domain experts in the ontology evolution
through critical scenarios which represent the major types of changes that have arisen
from the analysis carried out for the OrganicAgriculture ontology. Such scenarios address three main categories of activities: the general revision of the ontology (from
scenario 1 to 3), the revision of the ontology by taking into account environments in
which ontologies are exploited by external tools (scenarios 4 and 5), and, finally, the
revision of the linguistic layer. To further guide the experts in the evolution process, the
scenarios have been complemented with the results of a rigorous analysis carried out by
knowledge engineers on the use of the entities in the existing version of the ontology
?

?

?
(e.g., which terms are less frequently used for searches, how many resources are retrieved by different terms). This choice is motivated by the fact that often ontologies are
not used only for representing the knowledge of a particular domain, but they are also
exploited for other tasks like the annotation and the retrieval of resources with/through
semantic information.

The devised scenarios are the following:

1. Entity Deprecation Scenario. A complete analysis of the active version of an on-
tology, generally performed jointly by the domain experts and the knowledge en-
gineers, may lead to a report containing a set of instances considered unnecessary
for the representation of the target domain. Therefore, domain experts are asked to
identify all candidate entities for removal and start the relative discussions, with the
support of the knowledge engineers, for reaching an agreement about the status of
each identified concept.

2. Ontology Mapping Scenario. A linguistic analysis of the terms used for defining
entities in an ontology, may lead to the consideration that some of the terms used
for defining the entities generate ambiguities when a user needs to understand the
meaning of the label. This scenario is designed for finding a solution to this problem
by asking domain experts to find concepts, in external domain-related knowledge
bases (KBs), that may be linked with the ones defined in the ontology that they are
revising. Moreover, it is also desirable that, the terminology used for revising the
ontology, is the same used in the external knowledge base.

3. Ontology Enrichment Scenario. In this scenario, domain experts are asked to
complete the ontology by including concepts in those areas that were more poorly
covered. For accomplishing this task, domain experts are invited to consult domainrelated resources (concept lists, knowledge bases, etc.) for finding new concepts and
relationship not previously described in the ontology.

4. Entity Specialization Scenario. This scenario addresses the necessity of increasing
the granularity of some branches of the ontology. Such an increase is required, not
only for the completeness of the ontology, but also when there are concepts used for
annotating a huge number of resources, e.g., terms qualifying up to 500 resources
or more. Indeed, a huge set of results is not useful in searches, because it does not
really help users to find effective results.

5. Entity Generalization Scenario. The opposite of what has been described in the
previous scenario happens when some concepts have been used for annotating a
very small number of resources or are not used at all. In this case, domain experts
are appointed to study each particular case in detail and to suggest, eventually, the
deprecation for those concepts that lead to the retrieval of few resources. As for
the previous scenario, the number of retrieved resources is used as a distinguishing
parameter for evaluating which kind of action the domain experts should propose
for evolving the ontology.

6. Entity Translation Scenario. Considering the usage of multilingual ontologies, the
revision of the linguistic layer is important for having a high quality artifact. For
instance, when a term is translated by non-language experts, a common error is
that the translated term is correct from a language point of view (dictionary-based
translation), but it is not the optimum one for the domain described by the ontology.

M. Dragoni et al.

Fig. 1. A page and the access modes in MoKi

Therefore, in this scenario, domain experts and language experts are asked to complete and revise the translations of each entity defined in the ontology by carefully
considering the domain described by the ontology.

4 Supporting the Evolution: The MoKi Tool

MoKi1 is a collaborative MediaWiki-based [4] tool for modeling ontological and procedural knowledge in an integrated manner2. MoKi is grounded on three main pillars,
which we briefly illustrate with the help of Figure 1:

 each basic entity of the ontology (i.e., concepts, object and datatype properties, and
individuals) is associated to a wiki page. For instance, the concept Mountain in
Figure 1 is associated to a wiki page which contains its description;

 each wiki page describes an entity by means of both unstructured (e.g., free text,

images) and structured (e.g. OWL axioms) content;

 a multi-mode access to the page content is provided to support easy usage by users
with different skills and competencies. Figure 1 shows three different access modes,
for accessing the unstructured and structured content of the wiki page.

A comprehensive description of MoKi is presented in [5].

In order to meet the specific needs of the Organic.Lingua project, MoKi has been
customized with the addition of: (i) multilingual services for the automatic translation of

1 http://moki.fbk.eu
2 Though MoKi allows to model both ontological and procedural knowledge, here we will limit

our description only to the features for building ontologies.
?

?

?
Fig. 2. Multilingual box for facilitating the entity translation

labels and descriptions associated to the ontology entities; and (ii) collaborative features
specifically targeting linguistic issues. Translating domain-specific ontologies, in fact,
demands that experts discuss and reach an agreement not only with respect to modeling
choices, but also to (automated) term translations.

In the context of the Organic.Lingua project, MoKi has been customized with facilities that enable a new type of profile, the Language Expert, to manage the translations
carried out on the ontology entities. Such a profile has the role of coordinating the translation activities by approving the terms translation that the other actors involved into the
ontology revision process suggest.

The MoKi collaborative nature together with these customizations make it a good

technological layer for the application of the multi-role scenario-based methodology.

4.1 Supporting the Different Scenarios with MoKi

In this subsection, we briefly describe the main customizations implemented in MoKi
with a particular emphasis on how these customizations specifically address the different scenarios described in Section 3.

Domain and Language Experts View The semi-structured access mode, dedicated to
the Domain and Language Experts, has been equipped with functionalities that permit
to accomplish the revisions of the linguistic layer. This set of functionalities permits to
revise the translations of names and descriptions of each entity (concepts, individuals,
and properties).

For facilitating the browsing and the editing of the translations, a quick view box has
been inserted into the mask (as it is shown in Figure 2); this way, language experts are
able to navigate through the available translations and, eventually, invoke the third-party
translation services for retrieving a suggestion or, alternatively, to edit the translation by
themselves (Figure 3).

This customization aims to address all scenarios described in Section 3.

Approval and Discussion Facilities. Given the complexity of translating domain specific ontologies, translations often need to be checked and agreed upon by a community
of experts. This is especially true when ontologies are used to represent terminological
standards which need to be carefully discussed and evaluated. To support this collaborative activity we foresee the usage of the wiki-style features of MoKi, expanded with

M. Dragoni et al.

Fig. 3. Quick translation box for editing entities translations

the possibility of assigning specific translations of ontology entities to specific experts
who need to monitor, check, and approve the suggested translations. This customization
permits to promote the management of the changes carried out on the ontology (in both
layers) by providing the facilities necessary to manage the life-cycle of each change.

These facilities may be split in two different sets of features. The first group may be
considered as a monitor of the activities performed on each entity page. When changes
are committed, approval requests are created. They contain the identification of the
expert in charge of approving the change, the date in which the change has been per-
formed, and a natural language description of the change. Moreover, a mechanism for
managing the approvals and for maintaining the history of all approval requests for each
entity is provided. Instead, the second set contains the facilities for managing the discussions associated with each entity page. A user interface for creating the discussions
has been implemented together with a notification procedure that alerts users when new
topics/replies, related to the discussions that they are following, have been posted.

This customization aims to address all scenarios described in Section 3.

Quick Translation Feature. For facilitating the work of language experts, we have implemented the possibility of comparing side-by-side two lists of translations. This way,
the language expert in charge of revising the translations, avoiding to navigate among
the entity pages, is able to speed-up the revision process.

Figure 4 shows such a view, by presenting the list of concepts in the English and
Italian translations. At the right of each element of the table, it is placed a link allowing
to invoke a quick translation box (as shown in Figure 3) that gives the opportunity to
quickly modify information without opening the entity page. Finally, in the last column,
it is placed a flag indicating that changes have been performed on that concept, and a
revision/approval is requested.

This customization aims to address the Entity Translation Scenario described in

Section 3.

Ontology Translator Component. This component manages the translation operations
required by MoKi. When a translation, for an entity name or description, is requested,
the Ontology Translator invokes the external translation services for performing the
?

?

?
Fig. 4. View for comparing entities translations

translation. The component sends the request to the interface exposed by the third-party
translation services and, after the retrieval of the result, the representation of the entity
is updated with the information coming from the translation services. Further details,
about the translation services used by MoKi can be find in [6].

This customization aims also to address the Entity Translation Scenario.

Interface and Ontology Multilingual Facilities. In order to complete the set of features
available for managing the multilingual aspects of the Organic.Lingua project, MoKi
has been equipped with two further components that permit to switch between the languages available for the tool interface, to add a new language to the ontology, and to
select the language used for showing the ontology in the different views.

Through these facilities, it is also possible to add a new language to the MoKi interface and to manage the translation of its labels. This module has been implemented on
top of the multilingual features of MediaWiki.

Instead, concerning the ontology, when a new language is added to the ontology,
the Ontology Translator component described above, is invoked for retrieving, for each
entity described in the ontology, the translations related to its labels and descriptions.

Finally, the Ontology Export functionality has been revisited by adding the possibil-

ity to choose the export languages, among the available ones.

This customization has not been implemented for addressing a particular scenario,

but for improving the usability of the tool in a multilingual context.

Linked Open Data Service. In order to permit the exposure of the ontology artifact to the
other components deployed on the Organic.Lingua platform, MoKi has been equipped
with a service that exposes entity information by using the Linked Open Data format.
Such a service permits to perform operations on the ontology remotely; examples of
available remote operations are the retrieval of the entire ontology, or of part of it, or
the possibility to edit the ontology e.g., by adding a new translated label. The service

M. Dragoni et al.

provides a RESTful interface for receiving the requests, while the results are exposed
by using the SKOS language 3.

This customization has not been implemented for addressing a particular scenario,
but for linking the tool with the other components deployed on the Organic.Lingua
platform.

5 The Evaluation

Our goal is evaluating the usage and the usefulness of the MRSB methodology (guiding
step by step users through tasks and scenarios) and of the underlying tool, i.e. MoKi,
to support different experts in the collaborative evolution of a multilingual ontology.
Evolving a multilingual ontology, indeed, adds to the traditional difficulties characterizing the evolution of an ontology, such as the involvement of domain experts (DEs)
and their collaboration with knowledge engineers (KEs), also the issues related to the
multilinguality, including the need of a third role, the language experts (LEs), and their
collaboration with DEs and KEs. In detail, we are interested in answering two main
research questions:

RQ1. Is it useful guiding step by step through tasks and scenarios the different experts

involved in the collaborative evolution of a multilingual ontology?

RQ2. Do the MoKi functionalities provide an effective support to the the collaborative

evolution of a multilingual ontology?

In order to answer these questions we performed two types of analysis: a quantitative
and a qualitative one. In the former, data about the activities carried out by the three categories of experts in the context of the evolution of the OrganicAgriculture ontology
have been analyzed; in the latter, instead, experts have been asked to answer questions
aiming at investigating their perception about the usefulness of the MRSB methodology as well as of the MoKi tool in supporting the realization of the different tasks and
scenarios foreseen by the MRSB methodology.

Design, Material and Procedure Eleven experts with average experience in their field
ranging from 5 to 10 years, were overall involved in the ontology evolution: 3 ontology
experts, 4 domain experts and 4 language experts, although one ontology expert and
one domain expert also played the role of language experts. The first languages of the 6
LEs were different one from another, thus allowing us to translate the evolved ontology
into 6 different languages: Estonian, Spanish, French, Greek, Turkish and Italian.

Most of the experts had no previous knowledge of the tool, hence an initial phase of

training was necessary. The training was organized according to the following steps:

 A one-day overall introduction to the tool.
 A few short, on-line, training sessions with the MoKi tool guided by ontology and
tool experts, targeted to help domain experts to better understand the capabilities of
the tool.

3 http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/
?

?

?
Table 1. Usage of MoKi by the team of experts for accomplishing the multilingual evolution task

Entity Entity Entity

Expert
Category Creation Update Deletion Translation Creation
DEs
KEs
LEs
total
?

?

?
Entity

Discussion Discussion

Update
?

?

?
 Hands-on usage of the tool: domain experts were left to play with MoKi in order
to become familiar with the functionalities that they would use during the revision process. This exercise also had the secondary objective to collect doubts and
problems encountered by experts.

After the initial training, according to the MRSB methodology, the experts were provided with detailed guidelines (including the description of tasks and scenarios) for the
multilingual evolution of the OrganicAgriculture ontology. At the end of their ontology evolution activity, experts were asked to fill a questionnaire aiming at investigating
their perception about the methodology and the MoKi tool (ease of use, usefulness and
capability to support the different scenarios and tasks required by MRSB). Questions
were organized in four main parts: (i) one collecting information on the experts back-
ground; (ii) one about the support provided by the methodology used for guiding them
in the ontology evolution; (iii) a third one on the subjects evaluation about MoKi and
the role of its different functionalities for accomplishing the MRSB tasks; and (iv) a last
one for retrieving information, impressions and questions related to the work performed
for the ontology evolution. Some of the questions were provided in the form of open
questions, while most of them were closed questions. The latter type mainly concern
the experts evaluation of the tool usefulness on a scale from 1 to 5, varying according
to the target of the evaluation (e.g., 1 = extremely ease/useful/effective, ... , 5 = extremely
useless/difficult/ineffective).

5.1 Quantitative Evaluation Results

We analyzed the data on the usage of MoKi during the phases of the project devoted
to the evolution of the OrganicAgriculture ontology (June - November 2012). Overall
each expert spent on average between 8 and 15 hours for accomplishing her work, with
peaks of more than 15 hours for DEs. The data are obtained by combining the information stored in the MoKi database and the tool logs. Table 1, reporting the number of the
main operations carried out by the team of experts during the ontology evolution phase,
shows that the tool has actually been used by all the experts categories. As reason-
able, DEs and KEs have been more involved in the entity editing (creation, update and
deletion) and in the discussions (both creation and update), while the LEs have actively
participated in the translation activity.

Looking more in detail at the MoKi functionalities exercised by KEs, DEs and LEs,
such a trend is overall confirmed (Table 2a). The highest percentage of operations related to the editing and the discussion functionalities has been carried out by DEs,

M. Dragoni et al.

while LEs actively exercised the multilingual ones. Surprisingly, the browsing and visualization functionalities have been mainly used by LEs, probably feeling the need to
translate labels and descriptions after getting a better understanding of their semantics
(through browsing and view functionalities). This result confirms our intuition about
the importance of allowing all the different categories of experts involved in the collaborative evolution to easily access to and work on the ontology.

Table 2. Usage of the MoKi functionalities per category of experts and topics of discussions

(a)

(b)

MoKi Functionality Group DEs KEs LEs
46.4% 21.6% 31.4%
Discussion and Approval
39.2% 15.3% 45.5%
Browsing
33.7% 3.4% 64.2%
Multilingual
Editing
61.4% 7.8% 30.8%
42.7% 29.7% 45.8%
Visualization

Topic
Specialization
Mapping to external KBs
Entity Deprecation
Ontology Enrichment
Entity Moving
Definition Rephrasing

Percentage

35.5 %
22.6%
19.4%
16.1%
3.2 %
3.2 %

Furthermore, inspecting the topics of the discussions allowed us to get a coarse idea
of the methodology usage and effectiveness. Table 2b reports the percentage of discussions carried out by experts, classified according to the topic. The table suggests that
the highest percentage relates to scenarios proposed in the methodology. In detail, most
of the discussions had as topic the need to specialize existing entities (Entity Specialization Scenario), followed by those related to the mapping of the OrganicAgriculture
ontology to external knowledge bases ((Ontology Mapping Scenario) and finally by the
deletion of (deprecated) entities and addition of (new relevant) entities. The analysis of
the discussions also revealed the effectiveness of the MRSB methodology: only 15%
of the discussions (5 out of 32) is still open, i.e., no decision has been made yet.

5.2 Qualitative Evaluation Results

To investigate the subjective perception of the 11 experts about the support provided
by the methodology and the tool to the multilingual ontology evolution activity, we
analyzed the subjective data collected through the questionnaire.

In order to evaluate the statistical significance of the positivity/negativity of the collected results we applied the (one-tailed) Mann-Whitney test [7] verifying the hypothesis that  F  3, where  F represents the median of the evaluations for the factor F
and 3 is the intermediate value in the 1 to 5 Likert scale. Moreover, to evaluate whether
the results are strongly positive, we also applied the same test for the hypothesis that
 F  2, where 2 is the lower level of positive answer in the 1-5 Likert scale. In this case,
a significant outcome would mean that, overall, the obtained results are strongly posi-
tive. All the analyses are performed with a level of confidence of 95% (p-value < 0.05),
i.e., there is only 5% of probability that the results are obtained by chance.

Figure 5 (left) reports the distribution of the experts evaluations about the usefulness
of scenarios and tasks used in the MRSB methodology for guiding the experts in their
work: scenarios have been mostly judged as absolutely useful, while 10% of the experts
?

?

?
revealed minor doubts about the task-based approach. By applying the Mann-Whitney
test we found that the usage of scenarios has, also at statistical level, been judged as
absolutely useful, while the usage of tasks has been evaluated as useful (with statistical
significance of 95%). The fact that the usage of tasks was less appreciated by LEs and
KEs can partially justify the result: their work indeed, that is mainly driven by DEs
actions, demands for a less intensive task guidance.

Fig. 5. Experts evaluation about methodology and MoKi

Figure 5 (right) shows the distribution of the experts evaluations (on the 5 point
scale) of MoKis ease of use and usefulness for the accomplishment of the ontology
evolution activity. Although 10% of the experts showed doubts about the ease of use of
the tool, the evaluations are overall positive (easy) also at statistical level. Moreover, all
the experts recognized the usefulness of the tool, resulting in an overall evaluation of
MoKi as absolutely useful (also at statistical level). The difficulty in the ease of understanding can be partially explained complementing these results with experts answers
in the open questions: some of the experts asked for a MoKi tutorial. Indeed, while most
of the experts have been using MoKi starting from the training phase, a few of them did
not immediately practice it, thus finding its usage more difficult later on.

To better understand the relationship between the role of the tool in supporting the
methodology used for guiding the experts, we asked the experts to express their evaluation about the effectiveness of the support provided by each typology of functionality
to each scenario of the methodology. Table 3 reports the corresponding evaluations according to a 95% statistical significance, e.g., effective means that there is only a 5%
of possibility that the subjects evaluations are overall equal or higher than effective by
chance. Except for the non-convincing support of the browsing functionalities to the
Ontology Mapping Scenario, all the MoKi functionalities have been evaluated as overall at least effective in supporting the MRSB methodology for the multilingual ontology
evolution. In detail, the table shows that the discussion functionalities have been considered as absolutely effective in supporting the highest number of scenarios. Indeed, many
of the evolution scenarios demand for experts discussions to reach an agreement. The
overall absolute effectiveness of the browsing functionalities has also been assessed in 2

M. Dragoni et al.

Table 3. MoKi functionality effectiveness in supporting the MRSB methodology

Functionality Ontology

Entity

Entity

Entity

typology
Discussion

and Awareness

Browsing

enrichment deprecation Specializ Generaliz
Absolutely Absolutely
effective
effective
Absolutely Absolutely
effective
effective

Effective Effective

Effective Effective

Multilingual

Effective

Effective

Effective Effective

Editing

Visualization

Effective

Effective

Effective Effective

Ontology
Mapping

Effective

Neither effective
nor ineffective

Effective

Effective

Entity

Translation
Absolutely
effective

Effective

Absolutely
effective

Effective

out of the 7 scenarios, despite the moderate support for the Ontology Mapping Scenario.
Finally, as expected, the multilingual functionalities have been evaluated as absolutely
effective for the Entity Translation Scenario.

5.3 Findings and Lesson Learned

The quantitative results reported in Subsection 5.1 show that the MRSB methodology
has been actually applied for evolving the OrganicAgriculture ontology: the experts
discussions, indeed, were mainly guided by scenario-related topics. Combining these
results with the preferences expressed by the experts, we can positively answer RQ1:
the MRSB methodology, guiding users step-by-step via scenarios and tasks, provides
a concrete help to experts in the evolution of a multilingual ontology, although experts
prefer scenarios to tasks.

Together with the application of the MRSB methodology, the quantitative results
also show the actual usage of the tool and of its functionalities by the three categories
of experts. Moreover, their positive evaluation about ease of use and usefulness of the
tool, as well as about effectiveness of the different functionalities in supporting the
methodology suggest a positive answer also for RQ2: the MoKi functionalities support
the experts in the application of the MRSB methodology for the collaborative evolution
of multilingual ontologies.

By further inspecting evaluations and subjects expertise we found that some relations4 exist between the evaluations provided by subjects on the effectiveness of the
MoKi functionalities with respect to specific scenarios and the typology of expertise of
the subject. In particular we found that DEs, differently from the other two categories of
experts, perceived the browsing functionalities as more effective in supporting the Entity Deprecation Scenario than the other experts. On the contrary, the KEs found more
effective the discussion functionalities for the Entity Specialization Scenario. These results are inline with the overall evaluations of the experts on the effectiveness of the
functionalities in supporting the MRSB methodology, i.e., across all the scenarios. Indeed each group of functionalities got an effective average evaluation by all the three
categories of experts, except for a higher score by DEs for the browsing functionalities
and by KEs for the discussion functionalities.

4 We applied the Anova statistical test to investigate whether the provided evaluations are influ-

enced by the role of the subject.
?

?

?
Finally, the answers to the open questions provided us with suggestions about possible improvements of MoKi. In particular, besides the need to improve the quality of the
translation suggestions, features for enhancing the formatting of content and discussion
pages, for better supporting concept mappings to external ontologies and for helping
experts in the decision making process have been suggested by experts.

Hence, we can conclude that combining a tool easy to use and provided with useful
functionalities as MoKi, with a methodology guiding experts step-by-step through concrete scenarios seem to be a winning strategy to overcome the complexity of a problem
mixing the two dimensions: the one related to the multilinguality and the one related to
the collaboration of different experts.

6 Related Works

In this Section, we present a brief review of the main ontology management tools applied to support collaborative creation and sharing of ontological knowledge.

Knoodl 5 facilitates community-oriented development of OWL based ontologies and
RDF knowledge bases. It also serves as a semantic technology platform, offering a Java
service-based interface or a SPARQL-based interface so that communities can build
their own semantic applications using their ontologies and knowledge bases.

Prot eg e [8] is an open source visual ontology editor and knowledge-base frame-
work. Recently, Collaborative Prot eg e has been released as an extension of the existing Prot eg e system. It supports collaborative ontology editing as well as annotation
of both ontology components and ontology changes. In addition to the common ontology editing operations, it enables annotation of both ontology components and ontology
changes. It supports the searching and filtering of user annotations, also known as notes,
based on different criteria.

Semantic MediaWiki+ [9], which includes the Halo Extension, is a further extension
on Semantic MediaWiki with a focus on enhanced usability for semantic features. Es-
pecially, it supports the annotation of whole pages and parts of text, and offers knowl-
edge gardening functionalities, that is maintenance scripts at the semantic level, with
the aim to detect inconsistent annotations, near-duplicate entries etc.

The tools above support the collaboration between users for the creation and the evolution of ontologies but do not deal with multilingual issues, which have significantly
grown in importance during the last years [10]. To testify the importance of multilinguality in the field of ontology engineering a recent example is provided by the Monnet
Project 6 that targets the problem of multilingual information access at the semantic
level [11]. Its aim, is to define novel models for cross-lingual information access by
using semantic web approaches. Concerning tools, the only instrument supporting the
management of multilinguality in ontologies is NeOn [3]. It is a state-of-the-art, open
source multi-platform ontology engineering environment, which provides comprehensive support for the ontology engineering life-cycle. The last version of the toolkit is
based on the Eclipse platform and provides an extensive set of plug-ins covering a variety of ontology engineering activities. However, this tool does not provide facilities

5 http://www.knoodl.com
6 http://www.monnet-project.eu

M. Dragoni et al.

for supporting the multi-role collaboration. Thus, as far as we know, MoKi provides the
first significant effort to produce a tool that supports the collaborative evolution of multilingual ontologies, by combining features for the support of collaboration and features
for the support of multilinguality and translation.

7 Conclusions

In this paper we have presented our experience in applying a scenario-based methodology for modeling complex ontological artifacts composed of a knowledge layer representing the domain, and a linguistic layer making the knowledge available from a
multilingual point of view. Such a methodology has been concretely used in the context of the Organic.Lingua EU project with the support of a customized version of the
MoKi tool. Three different profiles (domain experts, language experts, and knowledge
engineers) evolved the ontology in a collaborative way. Their work together with their
subjective evaluation revealed that the synergistic use of the tool and of the methodology permits to evolve the ontology effectively.
