Semantic Web for the Humanities

Albert Merono-Penuela

Department of Computer Science, VU University Amsterdam, NL

albert.merono@vu.nl

Abstract. Researchers have been interested recently in publishing and
linking Humanities datasets following Linked Data principles. This has
given rise to some issues that complicate the semantic modelling, com-
parison, combination and longitudinal analysis of these datasets. In this
research proposal we discuss three of these issues: representation round-
tripping, concept drift, and contextual knowledge. We advocate an integrated approach to solve them, and present some preliminary results.

Keywords: Semantic Web, Formats, Concept Drift, Contexts.

1 Motivation and Research Questions

Humanities researchers have been interested recently in publishing and linking
their datasets following Linked Data principles, in order to enhance their decen-
tralization, openness, changeability and integration. Traditionally, the unique
demands of the Humanities, their limited technical and modelling interests, and
the highly contextualized nature of their source materials have kept this field
distant from the Semantic Web.

We make efforts to bridge the gap. As case studies, we convert Dutch historical
censuses (1795-1971) and the catalogue of publications in the Netherlands during
the Golden Age (STCN, 16th century onwards) to RDF [10], we model them
using standard vocabularies, and we publish them on the Web.

These datasets are messy and heterogeneous. Different dataset versions contain inconsistent structuring rules, concepts with a changing meaning over time,
and multiple representation formats. Comparison, combination and longitudinal
queries (e.g. evolution on the number of shoemakers in Amsterdam from 1795 to
1971 ) are notoriously difficult. Researchers are forced to manually rewrite data
and queries, incurring in high labour costs and non repeatable practices.

Figure 1 shows data heterogeneity interacting with other indicators. Since
our goal is to increase data integration, data heterogeneity has to lower, as
shown by arrows and signs. Lowering data heterogeneity is no trivial task, and
we identify format round-tripping, concept drift and contextual knowledge as
influencing indicators that can indirectly improve data integration.
Format Round-Tripping. Lots of data formats are used to encode semistructured datasets. Tools for legacy conversion between these formats are required:
Humanities researchers use non RDF compatible tools, and providing data in
 Advisors: Stefan Schlobach and Frank van Harmelen

P. Cimiano et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2013, LNCS 7882, pp. 645649, 2013.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

A. Merono-Penuela

Fig. 1. Indicators influence each other as indicated by arrows. The increase of any
given indicator increases/decreases, respectively, the one influenced by it as indicated
by the +/- signs. E.g., increasing format round-tripping decreases data heterogeneity.

various formats on demand is a requirement. Under this topic we will investigate,
first, how to perform any plain, tabular, tree-based, graph-based or relationalbased format conversion from a holistic point of view and, second, whether the
original data can be retrieved after arbitrary conversions.
Concept Drift. Different versions of the same dataset show that concepts
change their meaning over time, especially if the time gap is wide. Although
not meaning exactly the same, two time gapped instances of the same concept
may preserve some degree of sameness. For example, the concept shoemaker
in the 17th century (someone who makes shoes with leather) has drifted until
nowadays (someone who owns a company). Mapping drifted concepts correctly
is necessary to solve longitudinal queries in Humanities data.
Contextual Knowledge. Humanities ontologies require dynamic concept formalizations instead of static ones, especially for contested, open-textured or ambiguous concepts. The definition of such concepts needs to be dynamically built
depending on their contexts. Examples of contextual knowledge are the time
when and the space where the concept occurs, subjective opinions on the con-
cept, or domain expert statements about the concept. Multiple contradictory
definitions may need to coexist in one ontology.

Concept drift and knowledge from contexts are closely related. Since the context of a concept often changes over time, a definition of concept drift based on
the varying properties in contexts can be established. Despite less connected,
formats often define metadata describing dataset contextual information, which
needs to be appropriately modelled. We realize these phenomena are not exclusive to the Humanities, and this proposal looks further on solving longitudinal
analyses in dynamic domains of any kind.

We define a general goal of providing algorithms, formalisms and tools to
disambiguate, clean, prepare, normalize, transform, link and query Humanities
datasets, conforming a framework for effective Humanities data publishing in the
Semantic Web. Under this umbrella, our research questions are:
?

?

?
Semantic Web for the Humanities

RDF-based format round-tripping framework possible?

2. How can we model concept drift? Can drifted concepts be aligned?
3. Can we infer dynamic concept definitions from explicitly formalized con-

texts? Can these contexts help solving concept drift?

2 State of the Art

Work has been developed on translating RDF, spreadsheet formats and relational databases. Conversion from relational databases to RDF is covered by
[7,13], and the W3C has developed a standard (R2RML) for this purpose. Some
tools like D2RQ allow accessing relational databases as virtual RDF graphs.
Translating RDF backwards to the relational model is developed in [12] under
some assumptions. Conversion between spreadsheet formats and RDF is also
possible [6,10]. Google Refine is a power tool for working with messy data and
generic format translations, with plugins supporting RDF.

Concept drift in the Semantic Web has been studied in [14], where the authors
establish a theory for concept drift defining the meaning of a concept in terms
of its intension, extension and labeling. Other Semantic Web approaches have
used conceptual clustering [2] or concept signatures [5] to detect concept drift.
In Description Logics, ontology diff [3] can be used to determine meaning differ-
ences. The question has been discussed in Philosphy around the confrontation
of history of unit-ideas versus a pure linguistic intellectual history [9].

Some work has been done recently with respect to contexts in the Semantic
Web, although they emphasize the specific goals of improving data integration
[4] or speeding up reasoning [11]. Rule interchange languages for the Semantic
Web like RIF are also related to dynamic concept construction [8].

3 Proposed Approach

Format Round-Tripping. Existing approaches on format conversion pair any
data format with RDF and perform a forward or backward transformation between the two. Our proposal is to take an holistic approach, studying the expressivity of these languages and checking whether arbitrary translation workflows
are possible. We are interested in round-tripping translation paths to check if
original representations can be regenerated without data loss. We aim at canonical RDF graph forms [1] and centric RDF data representations.
Concept Drift. We will study what precise relationship holds between two
different versions of a changing concept, identifying the presence of a drift and
its nature. Using Description Logics work on ontology diff [3], we will define a
minimum meaning concept core, which keeps stable over time despite other non
essential transformations. A data model to represent drifted concepts will be
needed. A systematic comparison between unstable concept properties will tell
whether a drift occurred, and its type. We consider discussions on history of unitideas [9] and theories of concept drift for the Semantic Web [14] as inspiration.

A. Merono-Penuela

Contextual Knowledge. We will study how concepts can be dynamically defined depending on their graph contexts. To solve contextual knowledge questions
we aim at a two step process. First, we target an explicit semantic representation of the context of a concept, and we will use various data models and vocabularies to define contexts. Second, we consider inference for deriving logical
consequences from previously selected contextual graphs. This process can be
further integrated with our concept drift framework.

4 Research Methodology

We establish an iterative workflow that runs the proposed topics in parallel,
first developing theories and then proposals. Proposals will be evaluated with
at least the two Humanities case-studies referred in Section 1. All models and
automated methods will be validated by domain experts. At the end of each
iteration, resulting design methods will be scaled up and refined.

5 Results and Future Work

Regarding format round-tripping, we implemented some preliminary tools1,2.
TabLinker is a MS Excel to RDF converter supporting translation of annotations
and interactive user defined mappings. We also developed scripts generating RDF
from various semistructured data formats. We plan to evaluate round-tripping by
comparing an original file with its circularly translated homologue. With respect
to concept drift, a first set of mappings between possibly label-drifted concepts
have been defined using label similarity functions. We run simple longitudinal
queries with MP2Demo, relying on an hybrid top-down/bottom-up approach that
combines upper ontologies (e.g. Historical International Standard Classification
of Occupations, HISCO) with automatically extracted local ontologies.

Three more yearly iterations will be carried out. Format round-tripping will
be generalized from current scripts, defining transformation entities that will
abstract specific format dependencies to modelling artifacts. We will create a
data model for concept drift and an RDF/OWL simulation framework to test
it with ontology diff and intension, extension and labeling functions. We will
extend this framework to integrate reasoning with contexts.

6 Conclusion

In this research proposal we motivate the problems of format round-tripping,
concept drift, and contextual knowledge in the context of a Humanities enabled
Semantic Web. We propose an approach with novel perspectives extending the
state of the art, and we describe an iterative research method to sort these issues
out. Finally, we show work that has been done during the first year iteration,
and we establish a plan for the remainder.
1 http://github.com/Data2Semantics/
2 http://github.com/CEDAR-project/
?

?

?
Acknowledgements. The work on which this paper is based has been partly
supported by the Computational Humanities Programme of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, under the auspices of the CEDAR project.
For further information, see http://ehumanities.nl.
