Semantically Assisted Workflow Patterns

for the Social Web

Ioannis Stavrakantonakis

Semantic Technology Institute (STI) Innsbruck, University of Innsbruck,

Technikerstr. 21a, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria

ioannis.stavrakantonakis@sti2.at

Abstract. The abundance of discussions in the Social Web has altered
the way that people consume products and services. This PhD topic aims
to materialise a novel approach to assist online communication in the
Social Web by combining workflow patterns and behaviour modelling.
Semantic Web technologies are considered beneficial in various aspects
of this approach, like in the behaviour modelling, personalisation and
context-aware workflows.

Keywords: Social Web,
Ontologies, Workflow Patterns.

Semantic Web, Behaviour modelling,

1 Motivation

The character of online communication has radically changed upon the introduction of Social Web in the daily life of people. This vast expose of users to
information and opinions from colleagues, friends or acquaintances in their online social circle has definitely affected enterprises that rely on the traditional
word-of-mouth regarding the quality of the offered services to the end-user by
introducing both challenges and new opportunities in the Social Web [1]. The
speed of message distribution and the number of people that a message reaches
comprise the major aspects of word-of-mouth. Both dimensions have been drastically changed in the last few years; sharing an opinion requires only some
internet connection (on a mobile or desktop device) and a few seconds to compile a message and share it; and the number of people that a message can reach
has exponentially been increased as we can push a message simultaneously to the
various ever-expanding social network graphs. Enterprises, in order to address
the above-mentioned challenges and turn them into opportunities, should be able
to understand the dynamics of communication and the behaviour of users in the
Social Web. In this respect, behaviour modelling and workflow patterns could
assist enterprises handling the online communication with end-users by applying
them in a context-aware manner. The initial idea is to map behaviour patterns
with actions in a workflow to assist the offering of services; these workflow patterns are refered as communication patterns in the proposed approach.

Therefore, the aim of this PhD research is the specification of the infrastructure
and the communication patterns that could assist the offering of services based on

P. Cimiano et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2013, LNCS 7882, pp. 692696, 2013.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
?

?

?
the user behaviour in the Social Web. In the scope of my thesis, I consider various
dimensions that should be combined for the realisation of the aforementioned
conceptual idea as the following section presents.

2 State of the Art

Inspired by the work of Mika [2] regarding the tripartite model of ontologies for
social networks (i.e. Actor-Concept-Instance), this thesis aims to define workflow patterns that are usable and adaptable to the needs of the Social Web.
Moreover, there has already been considerable interest in the social network in-
teractions, like the work in [3] which coined the social property as a network of
activity theory concepts with a given meaning. Social properties are considered
as patterns that represent knowledge grounded in the social sciences about mo-
tivation, behavior, organization, interaction... [3]. The results of this research
direction combined with the generic workflow patterns described in [4] are highly
relevant with the objectives of the proposed approach and the materialisation of
the communication patterns. Furthermore, the design of the patterns is related
to the collaboration among the various agents as described in [5], in the scope
of the social workflows. Besides the social properties, the work described in [6]
introduces the usage of ontologies in the modelling of the users activities in conjunction with content and sentiment. In the context of our approach, modelling
behaviours will enable us to identify patterns in communication problems and
understand the dynamics in discussions in order to discover ways of engaging
more efficiently with the public in the Social Web. Extending the state of the
art work in the existing behaviour modelling methods, the contribution will be
the specialisation of the ontology towards specific domains, in respect to the
datasets of the use cases.

Several researchers have proposed the realisation of context-aware workflows
[7] and social collaboration processes [8], which are related to our initial idea
of modelling the related actors and artifacts in order to enable adaptiveness
and personalization in the communication patterns infrastructure. Moreover, research in the area of semantics regarding the retrieval of workflows [9] as well as
the semantic annotation paradigms like described in [10],[11] is considered relevant to our planned contribution. The contribution could be considered as three-
fold: application of user and behaviour modelling methods on certain domains,
design and implementation of workflow patterns specific for the communication
in the Social Web, and context-aware adaptation and evolution of the patterns.

3 Approach

The proposed approach is closely related with the objectives and contributions as
described in section 2. Figure 1 demonstrates the approach that will be followed
to materialise the concept of the communication patterns. The design and implementation of the workflow patterns will be based on the open communication
issues of the use cases that have been extracted from the datasets. According

I. Stavrakantonakis

to Figure 1, the first steps include the modelling of the user behaviour in order
to understand it and retrieve her/his activities A that are related to a specific
context. The next step is to match A with existing patterns (we assume that
some basic patterns will have already been defined) by exploiting the benefits of
inference as some semantic meta-data will be stored in conjunction with every
pattern definition. These patterns while being predefined and seemingly static,
will also be able to adapt in the context of specific cases by employing contextaware paradigms like those represented by the papers mentioned in the state of
the art, in section 2.

Fig. 1. General flow in the communication patterns infrastructure

The research will be based on datasets from various domains, e.g. tourism
including hotel reviews and points-of-interest reviews. Employing the Behaviour
Ontology described in [6], an extented model (specific to the domains) will be
applied on the datasets in order to understand the dynamics in the discussions of
the users. Thus, helping to address possible issues and preventing the churning
[12] of the users from the provided services. For example, a typical user activity
could be the post of a bad review for a service (e.g. accommodation), which the
affected enterprise should be able to handle in an appropriate way. The reaction
from the side of the enterprise could be assisted by a communication pattern
specific for this context.

Various technologies are available for modelling workflows like YAWL and
BPEL. The YAWL ecosystem [13] (i.e. language, workflow engine, etc.) has
been designed in an Open Source manner [14], which perfectly fits the proposed approach as it enables the extension of the workflow engine due to its
high modularity. However, the contributions of the proposed approach will remain independent of platform in order to be easily adoptable on other research
initiatives in the future.

The effectiveness of the designed patterns can be measured by employing and
extending the findings of the work presented in [15] regarding metrics of the
user engagement in terms of popularity, activity and loyalty. Moreover, research
in the area of Quality of Service (QoS), e.g. [16], is considered to be important
for our approach in the scope of evaluating the impact of the communication
pattern infrastructure.
?

?

?
4 Methodology

The planned methodology of the proposed approach includes various steps that
are interconnected, albeit they could run in parallel in order to enhance the
overall research process.

1. Idea Initialization

In the first phase of the research work, the usage scenarios will be defined
as well as the pilots that will be used from various domains in order to
evaluate the research results. Moreover, existing approaches regarding the
various dimensions of the research plan will be evaluated in order to find
gaps and specify our contribution.

2. Specification of Communication Patterns Infrastructure

The state of the art analysis and the requirements analysis will qualify in
this phase to the specification of the infrastructure that will support the
concept of communication patterns.

3. Implementation

The next step is to apply the design of step 2 and the theoretical background
that has been acquired from the aforementioned steps in the development of
the algorithms that will be used by the various components and the ontology
for the behaviour modelling. The implementation phase will be assisted by
experiments that will run in an iterative way in small-scale and per component in order to recognize problems and bottlenecks at an early-stage in the
approach.

4. Final Evaluation

The final validation of the results will consist of various indicators and measurements that will be gathered from user studies related to the domains of
the use cases (e.g. tourism, social networking, product quality management
or brand management).

The aforementioned methodology layers are reflected in the research working
plan which is presented in section 5.

5 Schedule

The schedule of my thesis is based on the realization of the steps mentioned in
section 4. The first phase of studying the state of the art in the research fields
of my contribution has already started. In addition, the study of the state of the
art runs in parallel with the specification of the usage scenarios, the retrieval
of the datasets and the requirements analysis in order to specify the needs and
the expectations in this early-stage. The next step is the theoretical design of
the communication patterns infrastructure, which will have finished until the
end of the second quarter of 2013 and the first research results should have
come out of this process. The next two quarters of 2013 will be exploited in
refining the theoretical part, the algorithms and the ontology for the behaviour
modelling. In case that all the above-mentioned goals are achieved till the end of
2013, the refineminent of the running prototype will take place in the following

I. Stavrakantonakis

year (i.e. 2014) as well as the final validation in conjunction with the writing of
the dissertation document. Throughout this research initiative several high-level
conferences, workshops and journals have been considered for submissions.
