 

Maintaining Mappings Valid between Dynamic KOS 

Julio Cesar Dos Reis 

CR SANTEC, CRP Henri Tudor and LRI, University of Paris-Sud XI 
6, Av. des Hauts-Fourneaux, L-4362 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg 

julio.dosreis@tudor.lu 

Abstract. Knowledge Organization Systems (KOS) and the existing mappings 
between  them  have  become  extremely  relevant  in  semantic-enabled  systems 
especially for interoperability reasons. KOS may have a dynamic nature since 
knowledge  in  a  lot  of  domains  evolves  fast,  and  thus  KOS  evolution  can 
potentially  impact  mappings,  turning  them  unreliable.  A  still  open  research 
problem is how to adapt mappings in the course of KOS evolution without recomputing  semantic  correspondences  between  elements  of  the  involved  KOS. 
This PhD study tackles this issue proposing an approach for adapting mappings 
according to KOS changes. A framework is conceptualized with a mechanism 
to  support  the  maintenance  of  mappings  over  time,  keeping  them  valid.  This 
proposal will decrease the efforts to maintain mappings up-to-date.  

Keywords: mapping evolution, mapping adaptation, mapping maintenance. 

Introduction 

Knowledge  Organization  Systems  (KOS)  aim  at  encompassing  all  types  of 
conceptual models for organizing knowledge [1] as, for example, semantic networks, 
ontologies,  taxonomies  and  thesauri.  In  various  contexts  and  domains,  such  as  the 
Semantic Web (SemWeb) and Bioinformatics, it is necessary to have a combined use 
of different KOS, since a unique KOS is not able to cover the totality of a domain due 
to its size and complexity. Mappings representing semantic correspondences between 
elements belonging to different KOS therefore need to be established.  

The highly dynamic aspect of the knowledge leads to frequent KOS changes. Klein 
[3] proposed a first categorization of changes, which can affect ontologies, dividing 
them  into  atomic  and  complex  operations.  The  first  refers  to  the  change  of  only  a 
single specific element (e.g., concepts, attributes and relationships) while the second 
denotes  operations  that  are  composed  of  multiple  atomic  ones.  The  impact  of  these 
changes on mappings associated to KOS has not been deeply studied. Actually, KOS 
evolution  challenges  the  reliability  of  dependent  artifacts  such  as  mappings,  in  the 
sense  that  changes  affecting  KOS  elements  may  invalidate  existing  mappings.  This 
requires mappings to be adequately maintained over time. Nevertheless, how to adapt 
mappings impacted by KOS evolution as automatic as possible, without re-computing 
the whole set of mappings each time a KOS evolves, is still an open research problem. 
Many  research  questions  arise  in  the  context  of  this  problem:  (1)  How  to  perform 

P. Cimiano et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2013, LNCS 7882, pp. 650655, 2013. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
?

?

?
mapping adaptation taking the way KOS evolve into account? (2) What information 
regarding  mappings  and  KOS  evolution  is  necessary  to  support  the  mapping 
adaptation? (3) How to correlate different types of KOS changes with actions suited 
to  adapt  mappings?  (4)  How  might  the  different  types  of  semantic  relations  of 
mappings be taken into consideration? 

Maintaining  mappings  valid  over  time  is  crucial  since  various  applications  may 
rely  on  them  [2].  In  the  SemWeb  context,  for  instance,  up-to-date  mappings  could 
allow more trustable semantic searches over integrated ontologies in the Web [4]. In 
other domains, such as the biomedicine, mappings are very important to support data 
integration  among  different  applications  [5].  Usually,  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
mappings are explored by applications such as the Unified Medical Language System 
(UMLS). Therefore, after releasing new KOS versions, re-computing the whole set of 
mappings is a time-consuming task demanding huge efforts of validation.  

The aim through this PhD study is to define a framework coping with the mapping 
maintenance  problem  between  dynamic  KOS.  The  proposed  approach  developed  in 
the framework is to adapt mappings relying on the exploitation of information derived 
from KOS evolution, combined with information coming from existing mappings. We 
aim at considering different types of semantic relations (=, , , ) in mappings.  

The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the state-
of-the-art.  Section  3  describes  the  proposed  approach  including  the  research 
methodology and the evaluation method. Section 4 presents the results achieved so far 
and the future work envisaged. 

The State of the Art 

Although significant research efforts in the past years have coped with issues related 
to  ontology  evolution  [6],  the  understanding  of  the  impact  of  this  evolution  in 
dependent artifacts such as mappings has received very little attention. We organize 
the  different  approaches  coping  with  the  maintenance  of  mappings  in  two  main 
categories.  The  first  category  tackles  the  problem  by  re-calculating  mappings.  The 
most naive approach is the full re-calculation of the set of mappings, which does not 
consider any information from KOS changes or mappings. Nowadays, there is a high 
frequency  of  new  KOS  versions,  and  usually  the  rate  of  KOS  evolution  does  not 
justify  a  full  re-calculation  [7].  A  partial  re-calculation  approach  was  proposed  by 
Khattak  et  al.  [8]  re-creating  only  those  mappings  associated  to  ontology  elements 
which  had  changed.  Matching  algorithms  are  used  to  perform  a  new  alignment 
between those changed elements and the whole target ontology. However, the size of 
KOS  still  challenges  the  compromise  between  precision  and  recall  of  available 
techniques  for  mapping  calculation  [2].  Partial  re-calculation  slightly  minimizes  the 
efforts of validation.  

The second category concerns approaches attempting to adapt mappings after KOS 
evolution. KOS changes are usually used to support adaptation of mappings without 
performing re-calculation. The first propositions appeared in the context of database 
schema mappings [9]. For ontologies, Martins & Silva [10] propose that evolution of 

J.C. Dos Reis 

mappings should behave similarly with the strategies applied for ontology evolution. 
More  recently,  aiming  at  better  understanding  mapping  evolution,  Gro  et  al.  [11] 
empirically investigated the evolution of life sciences ontology mappings. In fact, it is 
still  unknown  how  to  fully  perform  mapping  adaptation  as  automatic  as  possible 
according to KOS evolution. The influence of KOS changes on how mappings should 
change  deserves  deeper  investigations  and  various  research  problems  remain  open. 
For instance, considering the change in the semantic relation type of a mapping as a 
possible mapping adaptation action is still an issue. It is also crucial to conduct further 
investigations  to  better  understand  the  impact  of  complex  changes  operations  (e.g., 
split and merge of concepts) on mappings for their adequate adaptation.  

Approach and Methodology 

This  research  relies  on  the  hypothesis  that  there  is  a  correlation  between  changes 
affecting  KOS  elements  and  the  evolution  of  their  associated  mappings,  which  has 
been  observed  in  experimental  studies.  In  this  sense  KOS  evolution  shall  be  well 
described for supporting the adaptation of mappings. This is the characterization of a 
refined  categorization  of  underlined  KOS  (complex)  change  operations  (the  most 
fine-grained types of KOS changes) containing information judged important for the 
adaptation  of  mappings.  We  determine  that  as  Change  Patterns  (CPs)  in  a  way  to 
recognize different behaviours of changes between KOS versions and a richer context 
to adapt mappings. Different types of split complex operations are examples of CPs. 
These are expressed as distinct types of atomic change operations (i.e., addition and 
removal  of  KOS  elements)  as  well  as  KOS  complex  change,  including  whenever 
possible, information regarding the semantic and structural impact of these changes.  

We  have  identified  different  behaviours  of  complex  changes  such  as  split  and 
merge of concepts. These behaviours are recognized according to a categorization of 
semantic similarity shared between concepts in a change operation. We also consider 
how involved concepts in the change are structurally organized. For instance, whether 
merged  concepts  were  related  through  an  is_a  relationship  or  whether  they  were 
sibling concepts. These aspects are further explored for the mapping adaptation. 

The  proposition  is  to  adapt  mapping  elements  such  as  the  source  element  of  the 
mapping, and/or the type of its semantic relation supported by information from the 
CPs that have affected the mapping combined to information coming from mappings. 
Mapping  Adaptation  Actions  are  proposed  representing  different  strategies  of 
mapping adaptation to change the adequate mapping elements, for instance, to adapt 
mappings  associated  to  a  removed  concept  transferring  them  to  parent  or  sibling 
concepts (two different actions). In order to know the most appropriate action to be 
taken for each mapping independently, CPs information and identified elements used 
to establish the  mapping including its semantic  status are  taken into account. These 
must  represent  the  necessary  conditions  to  model  in  which  situation  an  adaptation 
action shall be applied. Heuristics in the proposal accounts for the modeling and the 
formalization  of 
the  correlations  between 
information from mappings and CPs with the adaptation actions.  

these  conditions, 

thus  expressing 

 
?

?

?
As an example, if a deletion of an attribute affects a concept and this attribute was 
identified as crucial for establishing an associated mapping of the concept concerned, 
then such mapping is removed. Also, if a complex change like a split of concept was 
identified resulting in  new  sub concepts (an example of  CP), and an early  mapping 
with  the  relation  of  less  general  type  ()  was  associated  to  the  old  unsplit  concept, 
then  the  sub-concepts  may  inherit  this  mapping,  keeping  the  same  semantic  type. 
Note that how the mapping is adapted is dependent on the structural organization of 
the concepts in the change combined with information from the mapping. 

The  research  methodology  conducted  firstly  observe  empirically  the  evolution  of 
various KOS from the biomedical domain, and the way different types of KOS (complex) 
change have impacted the behavior of existing official mappings. The proposed approach 
in the framework is grounded on the results of these experiments. A further and deeper 
analysis  on  them  serves  also  for  the  definition  and  refinement  of  CPs  and  Heuristics. 
Finally,  the  framework  for  mapping  evolution  is  formally  defined  and  a  software  tool 
implemented for evaluation purposes. In the evaluation method we aim at comparing the 
adapted  mappings,  as  outcome  of  applying  the  proposed  framework,  with  mappings 
generated by approaches totally based on matching techniques. Different measures will be 
observed  regarding,  for  instance,  the  adaptation  actions  used,  the  quantity  of  mapping 
candidates  involved  and  their  semantic  correctness.  A  qualitative  evaluation  of  adapted 
mappings will also be conducted with experts of the domain.  

Preliminary Results and Future Work 

Empirical  Basis.  We  have  empirically  studied  the  impact  of  KOS  evolution  on 
mappings by observing the evolution of official mappings between biomedical KOS. 
We investigate different aspects of changes in KOS elements aiming at understanding 
the  correlations  between  KOS  (complex)  changes  and  how  mappings  are  adapted. 
Different cases of mapping evolution are considered in the context of KOS complex 
changes, observing their influence on the changes applied in mappings. Initial results 
highlight that mappings cannot be adapted according to high level or general types of 
changes only, but that it  is rather necessary to consider fine-grained information on 
the  affecting  KOS  changes  and  mappings.  Results  have  also  pointed  out  that  it  is 
feasible to have correlations between KOS changes with actions adapting mappings. 

The DyKOSMap Framework. We have organized the proposed components of the 
approach into an initial version of the DyKOSMap framework [7]. Figure 1 presents 
the components and how they are related one to another. The identification of CPs (1) 
uses two different versions of a same KOS as input, and a set of aspects is designed to 
describe and recognize CPs. We aim to determine the instances of CPs that took place 
between  two  KOS  versions.  The  mapping  evolution  mechanism  must  select  (2)  the 
appropriate Mapping Adaptation Action having as input the current mappings and the 
set  of  identified  instances  of  CPs.  We  perform  that  supported  by  the  Heuristics  to 
know the most adequate actions to apply on impacted mappings. In the last step up-to-
date mappings and their history are generated (3) as outcome. 

J.C. Dos Reis 

Future  Work.  It  involves  the  refinement  of  CPs  and  their  identification  between 
KOS  versions  reusing  software  tools  already  available  for  this  purpose.  We  aim  at 
defining,  formalizing  and  implementing  the  Mapping  Adaptation  Action  and 
Heuristics computationally. The prototype for mapping evolution shall be developed. 
Finally, the evaluation will be conducted assessing the results provided by testing the 
prototype. 

 
Fig. 1. The DyKOSMap framework for supporting mapping evolution 

Acknowledgments. FNR of Luxembourg (grant C10/IS/786147 - DynaMO project). 
