Search Result Ontologies for Digital Libraries

Emanuel Reiterer

School of Information Systems, Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia

emanuel.reiterer@postgrad.curtin.edu.au

Abstract. This PhD investigates a novel architecture for digital li-
braries. This architecture should enable search processes to return instances of result core ontologies further on called result ontologies linked
to documents found within a digital library. Such result ontologies would
describe a search result more comprehensively, concisely and coherently.
Other applications can then access these result ontologies via the web.
This outcome should be achieved by introducing a modular ontology
repository and an automatic ontology learning methodology for documents stored in a digital library. Current limitations in terms of automatic extraction of ontologies should be overcome with the help of seed
ontologies, deep natural language processing techniques and weights applied to newly added concepts. The modular ontology repository will
be comprised of a top-level ontology layer, a core ontology layer and a
document and result ontology layer.

Keywords: ontology, ontology learning, ontology modularisation, digital library, semantic digital library, semantic data management, search
result ontology.

1 Motivation and Research Questions

The following motivators led to this research: Firstly, the semantic accessibility
of documents within a digital library could contribute to the semantic web.
This could be achieved by ontologies created automatically and triggered by
a conceptual search. Secondly, an ontology repository within a digital library
could enhance the search process within a digital library by enabling ontological
search that includes more than a meta-data search and does not necessarily
have to incorporate a full-text search. Thirdly, result ontologies, if rendered
properly, could provide a concise, coherent, yet comprehensive search result to
the user. This result will be concise because it will consist of a conceptualisation
about a query and not only a set of documents, coherent because these concepts
will be related meaningfully, and comprehensive because the whole result set of
documents will be represented through one ontology.

These motivations lead to the following research question: Can a digital library
be improved to enable more coherent, concise, yet comprehensive query result
presentations by using ontologies?

P. Cimiano et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2013, LNCS 7882, pp. 687691, 2013.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

E. Reiterer

2 State of the Art

This research covers two different research areas: digital libraries and ontolo-
gies. In computer science, the term ontology is used to mean a formal, explicit
specification of a shared conceptualisation [1].

Cimiano [2] describes ontology learning as a reverse engineering process where
an ontology reflects the authors point of view. Ontology learning includes several tasks: the extraction of terms, definition and hierarchical organisation of
concepts, extraction of relations and attributes as well as the definition of axioms [2]. Deep natural language processing techniques, such as the use of lexicosyntactic patterns, are promising but not thoroughly investigated in current
ontology learning processes [3]. This research proposes that patterns, which include the extraction of implicit information such as the train of reasoning, could
improve the learning of expressive ontologies. Additionally, a standardised document core ontology could help to create consistent and reusable results.

There are an increasing number of ontology repositories available but current digital libraries could provide a wealth of new ontologies, although these
ontologies have to be extracted first, which is part of this work.

A digital library is defined as a focused collection of digital objects, including text, video, and audio, along with methods for access and retrieval, and
for selection, organization, and maintenance [4]. The goals of semantic digital
libraries are to enhance information extraction, to connect information within
a digital library, for query refinement, and also for recommendation services.
Ontologies are used as bibliographic ontologies and community-aware ontologies
[5]. Ontology repositories, built upon an ontology hierarchy, as well as implicit
information, such as the extraction of the thesis statements could improve the
search processes but also digital libraries in general. Additionally, a result ontology repository could combine information within a digital library, mentioned in
a multitude of books or documents, by incorporating or referencing the actual
document.

Open problems addressed in this research are (1) the learning of more expressive ontologies [6] by the use of deep natural language processing techniques, (2)
the linkage between ontologies and unstructured documents, (3) the provision
of standards for ontology repositories by strictly following a top-level ontology
and the use of modularised ontologies within an ontology repository, and an (4)
automatic ontology creation methodology.

3 Approach

This research proposes and will develop and evaluate five main new artefacts
including (1) a generalised digital library architecture, which introduces (2) a
modular ontology repository, (3) a search process, (4) an indexing process, and
(5) an automatic ontology creation methodology. This work will extend a commonly used document repository system, a full-text search engine, as well as a
natural language processing library. It also incorporates state-of-the-art ontology
learning algorithms.
?

?

?
Figure 1 shows the initial architecture where a digital library is divided into
a document repository, a document ontology repository, and a result ontology
repository. The document ontology repository stores document ontologies about
each document in the system. The result ontology repository consists of ontologies created on the fly if a search is not already represented by an ontology.
This figure also depicts processes for search and indexing. The indexing process
creates a document ontology out of an inserted document and updates affected
result ontologies. The search process searches for existing result ontologies and
combines document ontologies if no result ontologies are found. If no document
ontology exists a full-text search will be initiated.

Result Ontology Repository

Incorporates links to document ontologies

Updated if relevant

Update result 

ontologies

Extracting and 

Searches for existing result sets

merging document 

ontologies

Created on insertion

Indexing Process

Document Ontology Repository

Each ontology is related to a specific 

document

Falls back if no existing ontologies are 

available

Search Process

Added on insertion

Learn Ontologies

Fallback to full text 

search

Search can also be executed 

with standard search 

algorithms

Document Repository

Fig. 1. Digital Library Processes and Repository Architecture

Figure 2 shows the ontology hierarchy used to integrate document ontologies
and result ontologies. Although the main outcomes of this research are result
ontologies, this hierarchy is essential to provide a consistent basis and is utilised
to create such result ontologies. All ontologies are based on a common top-level
ontology. The document core ontology describes four aspects: the structural as-
pect, the technical aspect, the syntactical aspect, and content. The result core
ontology contains result based information. The reference ontology is comprised
of contextual information. Each document is expressed by a document ontology.
A result ontology is an instantiation of the result core ontology and incorporates

E. Reiterer

subsets of a set of document ontologies. With this hierarchy it will be possible to
search for predefined concepts and relations in the document core ontology and
the result core ontology but also more generally by using the reference ontology.

Top-Level Ontology

basedOn

basedOn

basedOn

Document Core Ontology /
Document based information

referencesTo

Reference ontology / 
Contextual Information /

Contains different domains

referencesTo

Result Core Ontology /
Result based information

extends

referencesTo

referencesTo

extends

Document ontology /

Contains a subset of different 
domains limited by the scope 

of a document

defined by a subset of multiple

Result ontology /

Contains a subset of different 
document ontologies limited 

by the scope of a query

Fig. 2. Ontology Hierarchy

One difficulty of this approach is how to learn ontologies automatically. Well
established seed ontologies, which are incorporated in a reference ontology, such
as UMBEL (http://umbel.org), should mitigate this problem. Additionally, the
use of lexico-syntactic patterns should make it possible to extract more valid and
expressive ontologies. Also, weights for newly added concepts will be calculated,
as proposed in Boese et al. [7], to minimise the influence of unimportant or false
concepts. A limitation of this research is that it will not address the presentation
of search result ontologies to the user.

4 Research Methodology

Because this research is about the design and evaluation of the artefacts mentioned in section 3, design science research [8] has been chosen. The artefacts will
be evaluated ex-ante and ex-post [9]. Ex-ante evaluations should demonstrate the
feasibility of the generalised architecture and algorithms. The implemented artefacts will then be evaluated ex-post. Artificial methods [9] will be used to analyse
the artefact in terms of functionality and efficacy and naturalistic methods will
be applied by asking ontology experts to evaluate the created ontologies.

5 Current Status and Future Work

This research started with the creation of an initial version of a document core
ontology design and a result core ontology design. Afterwards, a proposal for an
initial automatic ontology creation methodology has been defined, which meets
the needs for use in a digital library. This methodology relies on seed ontologies
that are already available and heavily utilised. Such ontologies are either hand
selected or well established ones that are selected automatically. To support
?

?

?
automatic selection of such ontologies, it is planned to utilise the ontology usage
analysis framework by Ashraf [10].

To evaluate the intended benefits of the result ontologies a result ontology will
be created manually and presented to a small group of study participants. These
participants will then be interviewed about the completeness of this ontology
concerning the searched topic in terms of concepts, relations, and linkage to
the actual documents and the improvement of such a result in contrast to a
normal result list. The next step includes the automatic creation of document
and result ontologies. Deep natural language processing for ontology learning
by defining lexico-syntactic patterns will build the basis for learning ontologies.
After that, a generalised architecture for digital libraries as well as indexing and
search processes will be defined and evaluated ex-ante. Then the artefacts will
be implemented and finally evaluated ex-post.
