Linked Data Interfaces for Non-expert Users

Patrick Hoefler

Know-Center, Graz, Austria
phoefler@know-center.at

Abstract. Linked Data has become an essential part of the Semantic
Web. A lot of Linked Data is already available in the Linked Open Data
cloud, which keeps growing due to an influx of new data from research
and open government activities. However, it is still quite difficult to access
this wealth of semantically enriched data directly without having indepth knowledge about SPARQL and related semantic technologies. The
presented dissertation explores Linked Data interfaces for non-expert
users, especially keyword search as an entry point and tabular interfaces
for filtering and exploration. It also looks at the value chain surrounding
Linked Data and the possibilities that open up when people without a
background in computer science can easily access Linked Data.

Keywords: linked data, interfaces, semantic web, sparql, rdf.

1 Motivation

The Linked Open Data cloud provides an impressive wealth of semantically
enriched, openly available Linked Data. However, this Linked Data is basically
only accessible for experts in semantic technologies who know how to write
SPARQL queries. And even for those who know how to use SPARQL, it can be
quite laborious at times, especially while trying to explore an unknown SPARQL
endpoint.

Therefore, the goal of this dissertation is to research easy-to-use interfaces
for accessing Linked Data. These interfaces should be usable without any prior
knowledge of SPARQL or other semantic technologies.

2 Research Questions

The central research question is:

 How can Linked Data interfaces for non-expert users look like?

Subsequent research questions are:

 How can current search engine paradigms be used for Linked Data?
 How can Linked Data be displayed, filtered, and explored in tabular form?
 How can value be created when non-expert users can access Linked Data?

P. Cimiano et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2013, LNCS 7882, pp. 702706, 2013.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
?

?

?
3 Approach and Research Methodology

The first phase of this dissertation dealt with some of the fundamental problems
related to the question of easy access. In [1], we looked into ways to turn search
keywords into URIs and applied the technique in a simplified end-user interface
for accessing Linked Data. This approach was extended into CAF-SIAL, a proof-
of-concept application described in [2] and [3]. CAF-SIAL helped users to search
information about concepts in the Linked Open Data cloud without having to
know any of the mechanics of the Semantic Web.

We also created a Linked Data value chain model [4] that conceptualized the
actors and processes in the Linked Data ecosystem. Though we did not pursue
that strand of research further at the time, it turned out to become much more
relevant to this dissertation later on.

The second phase of this dissertation is closely related to the CODE project
[5], a research project funded by the European Union. As described in [6], the
vision of CODE is to establish a sophisticated ecosystem for Linked Data. The
current focus of this dissertation is the Linked Data Query Wizard1 as part of
CODEs Visual Analytics work package [7]. The goal of the work package is to
develop a web-based visual analytics platform that enables non-expert users to
engage in a visually supported, collaborative analysis of Linked Data, and the
Linked Data Query Wizard will play a crucial role in this undertaking.

The current research methodology follows the principles of agile development
and rapid prototyping: Small implementation cycles, resulting in new versions
of the prototype on a weekly, sometimes daily basis.

4 The Linked Data Query Wizard

The working hypothesis for the Linked Data Query Wizard is: Theres not a
lot of people who speak SPARQL and are familiar with graph structures. On
the other hand, many people know spreadsheet applications like Microsoft Excel.
Therefore, the idea is to develop a web-based tool that brings the graph structure
of Linked Data into tabular form (see figure 1) and provides easy-to-use interaction possibilities for filtering and exploring Linked Data by using metaphors
and techniques the users already know.

4.1 Related Work

Although the Semantic Web has matured in recent years, and semantic technologies have become quite powerful, the Linked Open Data cloud is still only
accessible for semantic technology experts and programmers. The problem of
easy-to-use interfaces for accessing Linked Data is still largely unsolved. The
majority of current tools are not aimed at non-expert users. As an example,
the popular Semantic Web search engine Sindice [8] is practically unusable for
people without a deep understanding of semantic technologies.

http://code.know-center.tugraz.at/search

P. Hoefler

Fig. 1. Early beta version of the Linked Data Query Wizard

Currently, only very few web-based tools use tables for representing Linked
Data. One such example would be Freebase Parallax [9]. Although its main
feature is the ability to browse sets of related things, it also provides a table
view for these result sets. Another online tool that shares similarities with our
prototype is the Falcons Explorer [10]. Both tools feature a search box as the
main entry point  an idea that is also central to our prototype. However, in
both tools, the table view is not the central focus.

Another tool that shares a few similarities with our prototype is OpenRefine
[11] (formerly known as Google Refine and Freebase Gridworks). It supports
RDF, and there are also extensions such as LODRefine [12] that focus on Linked
Data  however, OpenRefines main focus is cleaning up tabular data, and its
also not available as a web service, even though its main interface is browser-
based.

Our prototype also supports the current working draft of W3Cs RDF Data
Cube Vocabulary [13] which provides a semantic framework for expressing statistical data sets as Linked Data. Data sets that comply with the RDF Data
Cube standard can easily be displayed, filtered, and explored using the Linked
Data Query Wizard. To the best of our knowledge, there are currently no other
tools with a feature set similar to our prototype that support RDF Data Cubes.

4.2 Limitations

Currently, the biggest limitation of the prototype is the rather demanding set
of requirements it imposes on the SPARQL endpoints that serve as its back
end. One critical feature that is needed for our current approach is support
for full-text search. Sadly, full-text search is sorely lacking from the current
SPARQL specification, which is why certain SPARQL endpoints have come up
with workaround solutions. Therefore, only Virtuoso and bigdata are currently
supported as SPARQL endpoints by the Linked Data Query Wizard.
?

?

?
The Linked Data Query Wizard also makes use of certain SPARQL 1.1 fea-
tures, especially the aggregation functions. The COUNT() function is critical and
already in use by the current prototype for displaying the number of results for
a given query.

4.3 Evaluation

For evaluating the prototype, both formative as well as summative evaluations
are planned:

The formative evaluations have already started informally, mostly with project
team members, and with increasing feature completeness will also include friendly
users outside of the team with a decreasing degree of expertise. The last formative evaluations will include non-expert users.

There are also summative evaluations planned. Some of them will be part of
challenges and the planned use of the prototype in university courses, but additional quantitative and qualitative user studies might be conducted as needed.

4.4 Initial Results

The Linked Data Query Wizard is currently available online as an early beta
version. In its current form, it offers two entry points: Users can either initiate a
keyword search, or they can select any available dataset, represented as an RDF
Data Cube. In both cases, the users get presented with the results in tabular
form, similar to what they are used from spreadsheet applications. They can
choose which columns (i.e. RDF predicates) they are interested in, and they can
set filters to narrow down the displayed data.

Though the current functionality of the prototype is still rather limited, first
usage experiments have shown that the tool can be helpful in exploring the data
and respective data structures of unknown SPARQL endpoints.

5 Conclusions and Future Work

The creation process of this dissertation can be divided into two phases: The
early first phase, focusing on keyword search for Linked Data and the value
chain of the Linked Data ecosystem, and the current second phase, focusing on
the Linked Data Query Wizard, a novel approach for filtering and exploring
Linked Data.

The next steps regarding the prototype will be to expand its functionality, focusing on better filter mechanisms as well as more advanced exploration features
that incorporate the underlying semantic structure. Additionally, the Linked
Data Query Wizard will be integrated with a tool for visualizing Linked Data as
well as a semantic enrichment service for turning generic RDF into RDF Data
Cubes.

The development of the prototype will continue throughout the rest of the

year, leading to a final evaluation at the beginning of 2014.

P. Hoefler

The writing process of the dissertation has already begun and will intensify
as the year progresses. The majority of the dissertation should be finished by
the end of 2013, leaving only the final evaluation results as well as the finishing
touches for the beginning of 2014.

The dissertation should be finished in the first half of 2014.

Acknowledgments. Parts of this PhD thesis are being developed within the
CODE project at the Know-Center, Graz, Austria. The CODE project is funded
by the EU Seventh Framework Programme, grant agreement number 296150.
The Know-Center is funded within the Austrian COMET Program  Competence Centers for Excellent Technologies  under the auspices of the Austrian
Federal Ministry of Transport, Innovation and Technology, the Austrian Federal
Ministry of Economy, Family and Youth, and by the State of Styria. COMET
is managed by the Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG).
