 

Augmented Reality Supported  
by Semantic Web Technologies 

Tamas Matuszka 

Eotvos Lorand University, Budapest, Hungary 

tomintt@inf.elte.hu 

Abstract.  Augmented  Reality  applications  are  more  and  more  widely  used  
nowadays. With help of it the real physical environment could be extended by 
computer generated virtual elements. These virtual elements can be for example 
important context-aware information. With Semantic Web it is possible among 
others to handle data which come from heterogeneous sources. As a result we 
have the opportunity to combine Semantic Web and Augmented Reality utilizing the benefits of combination of these technologies. The obtained system may 
be suitable for daily use with wide range of applications in field of tourism, en-
tertainment,  navigation,  ambient  assisted  living,  etc.  The  purpose  of  my  research is to develop a prototype of general framework which satisfies the above 
criteria. 

Keywords: Semantic Web, Augmented Reality, Ontology, Mobile Application. 

1  Motivation and Research Questions 

Before my doctoral research I dealt in detail with Augmented Reality and Semantic 
Web, but I worked in two areas independently. Thanks to my acquired experiences I 
recognized the opportunities which follow from the combination of these two different technologies. It is these facilities what I try to exploit during my research (e.g. to 
link physical places, objects and people to digital content). Both areas are dynamically  growing  fields  thus  there  are  several  papers  in  field  of  Semantic  Web  and  Augmented Reality. The experiments of combining these two technologies mostly come 
from the last few years therefore the common literature is not sophisticated. According to the statement of Gartners 2012 Hype Cycles Special Report [1] both technologies are in the peak and have at least five years to the mainstream adaptation. It is also 
a motivating factor to research in this field. 

Augmented Reality is such technology which is able to combine the physical environment  with  virtual  elements  generated  by  computer  in  real  time.  These  elements 
could  be,  for  example,  3D  models,  videos,  images,  music,  animations,  information, 
etc.  The  system  created  this  way  is  located  between  the  real  and  the  virtual  world. 
There  are  two  kinds  of  Augmented  Reality:  one  called  marker  based  and  another 
called location-based. The first one uses so-called  marker,  which  usually is an arbitrary  photo.  With  help  of  the  marker  the  system  is  capable  to  compute  the  position 

P. Cimiano et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2013, LNCS 7882, pp. 682686, 2013. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
?

?

?
and orientation of the  virtual  elements in the physical environment. The virtual element will appear on the marker. A good example for this is to display the 3D model 
of  a  molecule  structure  in  chemistry  textbook  because  it  could  be  hard  to  imagine 
using  only  the  two-dimensional  representation.  The  second  one  is  related  with  the 
physical  position  of  the  user.  Computing  of  this  position  is  usually  based  on  GPS 
coordinates.  The  system  shows  the  virtual  elements  depending  on  the  location.  For 
example, one could view the restaurants located in a given range, represented by virtual icons on the display of mobile device. 

Today there are several location based Augmented Reality applications (e.g. Wiki-
tude1, Layar2) but they extract the needed data typically from one given data source. 
Nowadays with using of Semantic Web we can access a lot of public datasets, see the 
LOD cloud [2]. With the help of the LOD cloud the visualization capability of Augmented  Reality  could  be  extended.  It  would  be  useful  to  extract  the  displayable  information  from  the  public  datasets  located  on  internet  instead  of  one  given  data 
source. 

Currently accessible applications are typically made for a specific area, about this 
we could read in Section 2. I did not find any framework which was sufficiently gen-
eral,  or  which  was  appropriate  to  develop  arbitrary  Augmented  Reality  application. 
To reach the general purposes we have to separate the data model from specific application area, because this is not a typical property of the accessible applications. For 
the  above  reasons  I  feel  necessary  to  develop  a  general  Augmented  Reality  frame-
work, which is able to separate the data model and the logic of the application using 
Semantic Web and to provide the showable information from continuously expanding 
public datasets. To achieve this aim I have to examine semantic mobile applications 
and semantic database management system solutions, work out architectures and ap-
proaches, develop a prototype and test the efficiency of this system. 

Based  on  the  aforementioned  facts  the  following  questions  are  arising:  How  can 
static  databases  used  by  AR  applications  be  connected  and  extended  with  semantic 
datasets? What kind of architecture and information model is necessary for the effective implementation and for ensuring the generality? What are the needed functions of 
the system? In which application fields could the system be used? 

State of the Art 

The literature has several application areas which use both Semantic Web and Augmented  Reality  (e.g.  navigation,  ambient  assisted  living,  manufacturing,  etc.).  This 
section shows some of them. 

In a previous paper [3] we describe an indoor navigation system which uses Augmented Reality to visualization. Storing of the maps data was based on an ontology 
and to generate the possible paths we ran rule-based inferences.  

                                                           
1   http://www.wikitude.com/ 
2   http://www.layar.com/ 

T. Matuszka 

Hervas, Garcia-Lillo and Bravo present in [4] a mobile application for supporting 
daily  life  of  elderly-people.  They  propose  an  adaptive  model  to  transform  physical 
information  into  virtual  representation.  To  do  this  they  use  the  accelerometers  and 
digital  compass  of  device.  Users  and  their  environment  are  represented  in  a  formal 
context  model. Based on this  model and  using semantic axioms and inference rules 
they can determine what the users want to do. 

Schmalstieg,  Langlotz  and  Billinghurst  [5]  intended  to  combine  Web  2.0  and 
Augmented  Reality.  For this  they implemented a location-based  mobile  Augmented 
Reality application, which enhances creativity, collaboration, communication and the 
reliable information sharing. Based on their system, they developed an indoor navigation system called Signpost [6] which is used for location-based conference guide. 

According to Schmalstieg and Reitmayr [7] the data model has to be independent 
from specific application and their implicit assumptions. The georeferenced Semantic 
Web provides such a data model. In the paper they investigate how this model fits the 
requirements  of  Augmented  Reality  applications  and  how  such  a  system  can  be  
developed. 

Nixon et al. [8] suggest a possible solution for the cooperation of Semantic Web 
and Augmented Reality. They present how things of internet are described semantically and how can link into the LOD cloud. They implemented an application which 
is capable of manual annotation of concert posters (i.e. posters in the street advertise 
concerts and clubs.). The application can recognize these posters and then displays the 
extracted information.  

There exist some touristic applications in [9] and [10], applications which support 

manufacturing processes in [11] and which use of robotics in [12]. 

We can see there are many solutions in different fields but it is conspicuous, that 
there is not any tool which is capable to make arbitrary Augmented Reality applica-
tions.  The  investigated  programs  are  typically  only  marker  based  or  only  location-
based. The system what I will to develop has to answer several open questions. One 
of the important factors is to specify the information model. To efficient operation of 
framework I should design the needed architecture. It is a problem, that there is not 
standardized evaluation method for location based applications 

Proposed Approach 

The aim of my research is to create a general Augmented Reality framework which 
exploits the advantages of Semantic Web. The framework could be divided into two 
parts. Arbitrary marker based application can be created with the first part. The idea is 
similar  to  the  approach  in  [8],  but  the  application  area  of  that  solution  is  limited  to 
using  concert  posters.  In  my  case  it  would  be  possible  to  create  any  marker  based 
Augmented Reality applications with my framework. The second part of the system 
will be a location-based Augmented Reality application  which combines the advantages of existing solutions and complements their incompleteness. 

To create such kind of model is mandatory to separate the data model from specific 
application areas. In order to achieve this goal it is needed to design the information 

 
?

?

?
model. This model requires various new ontologies and linking existing ontologies to 
each other. These ontologies (which are made in OWL language) describe the conceptual hierarchy of the members which are located in different levels in the system. 

One of my main objectives is the richer description of the existing georeferenced 
POIs  (Point  of  interest)  based  on  the  LOD  cloud.  Information  could  also  be  taken 
from the LOD cloud in the case when some POIs do not have enough description (e.g. 
a POI has latitude and longitude but has not altitude). With help of Semantic Web and 
the  LOD cloud I  will dynamically  link context-aware physical objects to virtual in-
formation, content and services. For this purpose different SPARQL queries and RDF 
datasets are needed. Let us consider an example. Suppose that we get the information 
about a building based on existing POIs. Afterward we can complete the given information from the LOD cloud (e.g. who was the architect of the building and what did 
he designed nearby.) 

Social networks and Web 2.0 solutions are very popular. Therefore I feel important 
that  my  framework could share content in the  various popular social networks (e.g. 
Facebook,  Twitter).  Using  the  location-based  module  of  the  framework  the  users 
would be able to share their current activities, to rate the viewed places, etc. To reach 
this aim, it is necessary to develop a user system. Handling of the profiles would happen with ontology. This ontology also provides the personalization. 

After my framework is done, users could create applications which are capable to 
use arbitrary markers navigate through any area, finding different places, create and 
share content with the location-based module. The system could even serve as a base 
for smart city applications. My system will be built using client-server architecture or 
maybe on cloud architecture and it will be able to use the available services provided 
by  Internet.  The  clients  could  be  various  devices,  etc.  smartphones,  tablets,  even 
Google Glass too. 

Planned Research Methodology 

In the first steps of the research I plan to explore and analyze the related work. Also 
an important objective is studying the basic ontology methods in this phase. With the 
possession of obtained knowledge the next steps are searching semantic mobile appli-
cations, examining semantic database management system solutions and finding new 
areas where the Semantic Augmented Reality is applicable. 

After the preliminary study and determining the application the next step is to de-

sign the detailed specification of the prototype. 

The implementation of the prototype follows the specification. This part can be divided  into  multiple  parts  because  of  modularization.  The  first  part  is  specifying  the 
information model which is the base of the system. For this purpose various ontologies are needed to describe the elements and their relations and the rules of the sys-
tem. When the information model is done, I will implement the marker based and the 
location based  modules. For this it is  necessary to observe the existing open source 
solutions. If there are not such solutions, I have to develop it. Integration of the developed modules is also needed. 

T. Matuszka 

It is a problem, that there is not standardized evaluation so I will overview the frequently applied evaluation methods. On one hand I will test my framework with heterogeneous group and surveying, and on the other hand I will compare my system with 
the existing similar applications. 

Schedule 

This is the first year of my doctoral studies. I will specify the information model and 
extend the existing mathematical model by the end of the first year. I plan the beginning of implementation of the prototype and the server and the location-based module 
in the second year. Furthermore I hope that I also finish the marker based module in 
that  year.  At  the  end  of  my  studies  I  will  finish  and  evaluate  my  prototype  of  the 
framework, will make the connection to the social networks and write the dissertation. 
