 

Knowledge Point-Based Approach to Interlink Open 

Education Resources   

Xinglong Ma 

Design, Engineering & Computing, Bournemouth University, Poole, UK 

xma@bournemouth.ac.uk 

Abstract. With more and more Open Education Resources (OER) courses being recognised and acknowledged by global learners, an emerging issue is that 
learners self-efficacy is often affected by the lack of interaction between peers 
and instructors in their continuous self-learning process. This paper proposes a 
low-level  Knowledge  Point-based  approach  to  serve  application  layers  to   
enhance the interaction during the self-learning. This is achieved through taking 
advantage  of  Semantic  Web  and  Linked  Data  techniques  to  annotate  and   
interlink  OER  fragments  which  can  later  be  reused  and  interoperated  more   
conveniently. 

Keywords:  Linked  Data,  Open Education  Resources,  Annotation,  Knowledge 
Point, Media Fragment, Self-Learning. 

Introduction 

An increasing number of universities and organisations are now participating in carrying  forward  the  development  of  OER  since  MIT  launched  the  OpenCourseWare 
(OCW1) initiative in 2001. With the multimedia based OER information (video, au-
dio, digitalised textbooks and documents, etc.), global learner can freely access and 
schedule  their  self-learning.  However,  the  process  becomes  more  monotonous  and 
unexciting  by  missing  traditional  interactive  classroom.  This  often  results  that  most 
learners  are  struggling  to  catch  up  with  the  whole  curriculum  and  complete  the 
course. To address this issue, a Knowledge Point-based approach is proposed to semantically  annotate  and  interlink  OER  fragments  rather  than  a  collection  of  OER 
material,  which provides the  support of flexible reuse and interoperation of OER to 
serve learning applications. 

This  paper  is  organised  as  follows.  First,  the  research  problem  is  described. 
Second,  current  Linked  Data  and  annotation  technologies  for  OER  are  discussed. 
Third, the proposed Knowledge Point approach is introduced. Last, the schedule and 
related methodologies are briefed. 
                                                           
1    http://ocw.mit.edu/index.htm 

P. Cimiano et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2013, LNCS 7882, pp. 717721, 2013. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 

X. Ma 

2  Motivation and Research Questions 

Without giving timely feedback and assessment, online learners often feel less motivated  compared  to  learners  in  the  traditional  classroom  learning  [1,  2].  In  terms  of 
OER, massive open online courses (MOOCs), such as Khan Academy2and Coursera3, 
are trying to improve this situation by providing  more interactive environment  with 
quizzes  during  or  after  class.  However,  these  quizzes,  which  are  usually  predefined 
and  arbitrary,  cannot  be  easily  reused  and  interoperated  with  open  access.  In  most 
situations,  once  an  OER  material  is  published,  no  on-going  supplements  are  maintained and served although it is essential for self-learning.   

To  date,  most  OER  data  are  collected  in  distributed  repositories,  such  as  OCW, 
OER Commons4, Merlot5,    where data are annotated by different metadata mechanisms  (e.g.  IEEE  LOM 6 ,  ADL  SCORM 7 )  and  retrieved  by  individual  web 
APIs/services [3].   

This PhD project will research on how to reuse and interoperate isolated OER and 
in which way these OER can be more openly and flexibly accessed to promote interaction in self-learning. 

State of the Art 

Semantic web and Linked Data technologies have recently been exploited and applied 
into the field of the technology enhanced learning (TEL) to improve the learning performance and enable the reuse and interoperation of OER data. Following the Linked 
Data principles [4], URIs are used to name the OER data, which can be unambiguously identified. With the aid of URIs, the corresponding OER data and relevant interlinked data can be dereferenced, which are machine-readable and repurposed to serve 
the dynamic assessment system to enhance interaction with reused and interoperated 
OER data. 

In [5-7], researchers presented Linked Data based approaches to automatically and 
dynamically  generate  learning  assessments  via  DBpedia8,  publishing  Wikipedia  information  on  the  web.  However,  these  approaches  do  not  reuse  existing  huge  and 
diverse OER data. Instead, they highly rely on the knowledge from Wikipedia. 

On the other hand, OER provided with Linked data facilitates the process of reuse 
and interoperation, which has been implemented by a few universities, such as Open   
 

                                                           
2  https://www.khanacademy.org/ 
3  https://www.coursera.org/ 
4  http://www.oercommons.org/ 
5    http://www.merlot.org/merlot/index.htm 

7  Advanced  Distributed  Learning  (ADL)  Sharable  Content  Object  Reference  Model 

IEEE Learning Object Metadata (LOM) http://ltsc.ieee.org/wg12/ 

(SCORM) http://www.adlnet.gov/capabilities/scorm 

8  http://dbpedia.org/About 

 
?

?

?
University9, University of Southampton10  and University of Oxford11. However, most 
OER data are still distributed in different OER repositories. Then a lot of researches 
have been done to integrate and generalise the metadata, such as OAI-PMH12, which 
are registered by 1888 repositories [8], and ontology-based approaches[9-11]. How-
ever,  these  technologies  are  limited  because  the  annotated  data  cannot  be  dereferenced [12] and these annotations are for a block or collection of OER rather than a 
single  or  certain  part  of  OER  material.  Therefore  more  advanced  technologies  are 
required to enrich the OER data with Linked Data, such as textual analysis, text min-
ing, information extraction and natural languages processing (NLP). 

In another way, the annotation can be clinged to the certain section of an individual 
OER material to avert NLP kind of complex approaches, which can be implemented 
for  videos  and  audios  by  using  Media  Fragments13.  In  [13],  it  applies  the  Media 
Fragments and NERD14  to annotate the YouTube video fragments with Linked Data. 
Yet, for OER, there are more types of open data. 

Proposed Approach 

In this section, it proposes the concept of Knowledge Point (KP) and an annotation 
approach that refines annotation granularity and is based on the LOD Cloud to semantically annotate variety of OER materials. 

In Fig. 1, the left-side shows the distributed and heterogeneous OER Repositories, 
which  store  multifarious  of  OER  data,  such  as  videos,  documents,  etc.  After 
processing Knowledge Point Annotation, the single material wrapped in a block or 
collection can be virtually cut into multiple fragments. And a single fragment can 
be  annotated  by  more  than  one  KP  which  are  acquired  or  extracted  from  manifold 
datasets  of  LOD  Cloud15.  Based  on  the  KP  Annotation  mechanism,  the  RDF  with 
Linked Data can be used in conjunction with higher-level educational applications. 

Characteristics of KP include: 

  Fully Compliant to best practice: As a member of web of data, KP complies with 

the Linked Data principles. 

  Independent  and  atomy:    KP  can  be  operated  independently  and  will  not  be  af-

fected by other KP. 

  On-demand  Fragmentation:  An  individual  OER  material  can  be  fragmentised  on 

the basis of KP and an OER fragment can be attributed by manifold KPs. 

  KP  and  OER  fragments  intersupplement:  KP  annotates  the  OER  fragment  while 

the OER fragment explains the KP. 

                                                           
  9  http://data.open.ac.uk 
10  http://data.soton.ac.uk 
11  http://data.ox.ac.uk 
12  Open Archives Initiative  Protocol for Metadata Harvesting 
  http://www.openarchives.org/pmh/ 
13   Media Fragments URI 1.0 http://www.w3.org/TR/media-frags/ 
14   Named Entity Recognition and Disambiguation http://nerd.eurecom.fr/ 
15  Linked Open Data Cloud http://linkeddata.org/ 

X. Ma 

Fig.  1.  Knowledge  Point-Base
into multiple fragments. Left 
yellow knowledge points distri

 
y  cut 
ed  Approach  to  Interlink  OER  (Left-side  OER  are  virtually
side 
certain fragment with yellow can be annotated by the rightibuted over LOD Cloud.) 

There are a few challeng
need to be address in the d
distributed OER repositorie
mats; extracting suitable K
tomatically and precisely. 

ges that could be seen in this proposed approach which a
development. For example, accessing a single file over 
es and blocked file conveniently; compating all OER  f
KPs from LOD Cloud and fragmentising the OER data 

also 
the 
for-
au-

Scheduled Meth

hodology 

  January 2013 - January
annotate the heterogeneo

y 2014:Propose a lightweight mechanism to describe an
ous OER in fragment level 

nd 

  January    April:  Review
Media Fragment URI16, 
tories tools and technolo
  April - June: Find a pos
rials distributed in differe
  June - October: Prototyp
  September  January 201

w  the  currently  lightweight  annotation  technologies  (
Tagging, Folksonomy, etc.) and mainstream OER repo
gies (e.g. DSpace17, Eprints18, OAI-PMH, etc.). 
ate-
sible approach on how to annotate the diverse OER ma
. 
ent repositories which provide different access methods
pe this approach and test its efficiency and performance. 
14: Evaluate this approach and improve it. 

e.g. 
osi-

                                            
16  http://www.w3.org/T
17  http://www.dspace.o
18  http://www.eprints

               
TR/media-frags/ 
org/ 
.org/ 

 
?

?

?
  February 2014  July 2014: Research on how to extract KPs from general lexical 

resources (e.g. DBpedia) and domain-specific ones (e.g. GeoNames19). 

  July 2014 - November 2014: Using the proposed KPs extraction mechanism to 

extend the above prototype. 

  October 2014 - May2015: Repeat testing, evaluating and improving to enhance 

this KP-based approach. 

  September 2015: Finish and submit the PhD dissertation.   
