Ontology-Supported Document Ranking

for Novelty Search

Michael F arber

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany

michael.faerber@kit.edu

Abstract. Within specific domains, users generally face the challenge
to populate an ontology according to their needs. Especially in case
of novelty detection and forecast, the user wants to integrate novel
information contained in natural text documents into his/her own
ontology in order to utilise the knowledge base in a further step. In
this paper, a semantic document ranking approach is proposed which
serves as a prerequisite for ontology population. By using the underlying
ontology for both query generation and document ranking, query and
ranking are structured and, therefore, promise to provide a better ranking
in terms of relevance and novelty than without using semantics.

Keywords: Document ranking, Ontology-based information extraction,
Novelty detection, Semantic similarity.

1 Motivation

The existence and steady growth of the Web has granted us vast amounts of
web documents in which contained information can be discovered and utilised
for certain information needs. Some of the existing information extraction (IE)
techniques make use of background information provided by Semantic Web
ontologies. In the past, various ontology-based information extraction (OBIE)
systems have been proposed, where ontologies are used within the IE process.
Although there exist quite a lot of notable ontologies, in many application
areas appropriate ontologies are, due to domain-specificity, too small and, hence,
need to be populated in terms of adding instances and properties. For ontology
population, it is a crucial task to find new textual information which is relevant
to the domain expert, but has not been stored in the knowledge base (KB)
and, therefore, has been made usable. In this work, we focus on the worthwhile
interplay between an existing KB and a text document corpus, which  in case
of the use case of trend detection  is created on demand.

Within the area of ontology population, we propose a novel approach for
document ranking in the context of structural search for novel items in text
documents. We claim that semantics can be used to rank documents according
to their expected novel items contained therein.

 Work leading to this paper has been partially supported by the German Ministry of

Education and Research (BMBF) under grant no. 02PJ1000.

P. Cimiano et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2013, LNCS 7882, pp. 639644, 2013.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

M. F arber

2 Related Work

Our approach is part of an ontology population system with the task of
finding relevant and novel information and integrating it into a  e.g., company
wide  KB. There are already many OBIE systems [1]. However, concerning
novelty search on documents, current approaches show only little [2] or no
semantic components [3, 4], although semantics can resolve inconsistencies and
ambiguities. Existing approaches are subject to different definitions of novelty
and different application areas and granularities. Within the TREC novelty
track in 20022004 [5], systems for detecting novelty were designed. However,
the task took place on sentence level, was limited to event and opinion detection,
and was aligned for non-domain-specific texts such as news. A similar case is
the novelty detection task of the Text Analysis Conference (TAC) Knowledge
Base Population (KBP) track [6]. Li and Croft [2] address the field of novelty
formalisation in depth. Under the semantic point of view, they merely make
use of a low-key named entity recognition and classification (NERC) component
and primarily rely on statistical patterns. Zhang et al. [4] regard the challenge of
novelty and redundancy detection as a filtering process. Documents are filtered
at first according to relevance to the topic, and in a second step according to
novelty defined as non-redundancy with respect to previously seen documents.
Contrary to systems like Newsjunkie [3], we face domain-specific documents
like technical reports and patents, and therefore do not have to deal with the
problem of analysis of huge amounts of articles in a very short time period,
known as burst of novelty.

Besides the novelty aspect, our work touches upon the research area of query
generation as well as graph comparison techniques and similarity metrics. Work
here [710] might show good results for query suggestion or expansion techniques.
Our novel approach, however, uses an underlying ontology as a bridge for both
query generation and document ranking.

Last but not least, Aleman-Meza et al. [11] and several researchers at the
TAC KBP track [6] whose task it was to find property values in documents
(called slot filling) provide a document ranking approach which also exploits
named entities (NEs) found in documents. In the first case, a weighting schema
is proposed, where domain experts need to assign weights to the edges between
classes of the KB schema in order to model the relatedness. The existence of huge
ontologies like DBLP and many different data sources is assumed here. Contrary
to this assumption, we want to populate our own, rather small, domain-specific
ontology with instances and properties and need to take novelty detection into
consideration.

3 Proposed Approach

Given our own KB with instances and schema, our goal is to search for documents
and to rank them, so that the documents most novel to the KB and relevant to
the query and to the KB have the highest ranking. In the overall OBIE system
?

?

?
	


	

	




	




?

?

?





Fig. 1. According to a users context a structured query is generated with the help of
an underlying ontology. After the creation of a document corpus (using the query in
an unstructured fashion), annotation and ranking of documents are performed. In a
further step, on which we do not focus on, the annotations are verified by the user and
used for populating the ontology. In succeeding search rounds search is based on the
enriched ontology.

in which our approach is embedded, a second step follows in which the user is
able to import phrases marked in the document into his/her KB as property
values. Figure 1 gives an overview of the interplay between an ontology and
document texts with potentially novel information. In the following, we describe
our ranking approach.

Assuming that we have a pre-defined KB schema with assigned weights on
the edges expressing the strengh of relatedness and some instances, we start
our search by defining the search query  and, hence, the query graph  by the
user and his/her context. Besides instances and property values from the KB,
additional search keywords can be defined by the user. After expanding the query
graph with neighbouring entities of the KB (or neighbouring instances of merely
the targeted entity type), we can transform the query graph plus additional
keywords into a keyword phrase for simple document search, getting a crawled
set of web documents. Of course, we can also operate on a fixed document
collection, although this would hamper the overall goal of getting external novel
information like in the use case of trend detection and forecast.

As the extended query graph is a subgraph of the KB instance graph and each
instance has a fixed set of possible properties, we can find out which relationships
(i) between instances and property values and (ii) between instances and other
instances of the KB exist and which are still missing. To include the real
filling degree in terms of personalised importance or novelty degree, we use the
weights of the edges in the KB schema graph. By means of the KB, we construct
for each document a graph containing all instances found as NEs in the focused
document and their relationships among these instances read from the KB.
According to further features such as the frequency of the found NEs, additional
weights can be assigned to the nodes in the document graphs. For each document,

M. F arber

we can compute a final score compliant with the local severity of found instances
in the document, with their novelty degree (inverse filling degree), and with the
actual weighting of edges in the KB schema graph. New detected NEs and string
matches are also included.

The documents are ranked according to the document scores they obtained.
Furthermore, we can use implicit user feedback in the following way: If the
user determines which properties or instances are important and novel in the
focused document, the weights in the KB schema graph between the classes of
the instances (or properties) which were found in the document are adapted.
By this means, we can defer to the personal views what relationships between
certain classes and properties (or other classes) are of great significance.

The proposed ranking approach is geared to the need of having an approach
for ranking documents as a prerequisite for the ontology population task. This
involves the inclusion of the novelty aspect into ranking and the adaptation of
context and user-dependent association weights between classes.

Implementation and Research Methodology

The proposed framework of ontology supported novelty search is currently
under development, so that experiments and evaluation could not be performed
yet. As use case we chose technology companies, since they are interested in
technology forecasts and novelty detection. The lightweight use case ontology
consists of classes like technology, company, product, and person. For a valid and
comparable evaluation, we plan to evaluate our approach also on a non-specific
domain, using the AQUAINT collection, which consists of newswire articles, as
used in the TREC 2005 HARD track. Here, DBpedia will be used as underlying
KB.

Annotation is done by the wikify service of the Wikipedia Miner [12]. We
adopt ideas from wikifier, but adapt it to specific domains, by using the content
of our domain-specific semantic-based wiki. In order to detect also new entities,
property values, and relationships, we use GATE1, a well-established rule-based
framework.

Our research focuses on semantic document ranking. We implement and
plan to evaluate a ranking score function as proposed above. Concerning our
domain-specific use case, the final evaluation will be done by students and experts
in companies. During the evaluation, we compare the approach of manually
assigning weights to the edges in the schema graph with the approach of learning
weights. Possible evaluation scenarios entail: 1. We measure whether the users
need less time to find a specific amount of relevant and novel documents in
comparison to the time they needed in case of using generic search engines like
Google. 2. We can also determine whether more relevant and novel documents
were found in a specific time interval. This is the main aim of innovation partners
in companies and serves as practical motivation.

http://gate.ac.uk
?

?

?
5 Conclusion and Prospects

Semantic-based solutions for document ranking do not regard novelty as a
criterium so far. In this work, a new ranking approach is proposed. It is designed
to improve document retrieval, since users generally face the problem of being
commited to review too many text documents containing irrelevant or already
known information. With the help of the proposed ranking schema, the more
relevant and potentially novel information a document contains, the higher it
is ranked and, hence, more likely to be worth reading and the more useful
for ontology population. The next steps will involve the implementation and
valid evaluation of the semantic ranking approach. In the medium term, we
plan to integrate our work into a theoretical foundation like Markov random
models.
