Building an effective Semantic Web for 
Health Care and the Life Sciences 

Editor(s): Krzysztof Janowicz, Pennsylvania State University, USA; Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA 
Solicited review(s): Rinke Hoekstra, Universiteit van Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Kunal Verma, Accenture, USA 

Michel Dumontier*
Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, School of Computer Science, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel 
By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1S5B6 

Abstract. Health Care and the Life  Sciences (HCLS) are  at the leading edge of  applying advanced  information technologies 
for the purpose of knowledge management and knowledge discovery. To realize the promise of the Semantic Web as a framework for large-scale, distributed knowledge management for biomedical informatics, substantial investments must be made in 
technological innovation and social agreement. Building an  effective Biomedical Semantic  Web will be  a long, hard and tedious process. First, domain requirements are still driving new technology development, particularly to address issues of scalability in light of demands for increased expressive capability in increasingly massive and distributed knowledge bases. Second, 
significant challenges remain in the development and adoption of a well founded, intuitive and coherent knowledge representation for general use. Support for semantic interoperability across a large number of sub-domains (from molecular to medical) 
requires  that  rich,  machine-understandable  descriptions  are  consistently  represented  by well  formulated  vocabularies  drawn 
from formal ontology, and that they can be easily composed and published by domain experts. While current focus has been on 
data, the provisioning of semantic web services, such that they may be automatically discovered to answer a question, will be 
an essential component of deploying Semantic Web technologies as part of academic or commercial cyberinfrastructure.  

Keywords: semantic web, health care, life sciences, digital libraries, cyberinfrastructure, ontology 

1.  Introduction 

The vision of the Semantic Web (SW) outlines that 
common standards for all aspects of knowledge management will facilitate the development of an interoperable ecosystem of data and services so that it becomes easier to publish, find, and re-use information 
in ways that go beyond their original design (Berners-
Lee, Hendler, & Lassila, 2001). As a major consumer 
of information technologies, the Health Care and Life 
Sciences (HCLS) has traditionally placed demanding 
requirements  to  support  activities  related  to  knowledge  management  and  knowledge  discovery. While 
HCLS  data is  highly  heterogeneous and  growing  at 
an  unprecedented  rate, SW  technologies  offer  a  salient solution to accurately publish this diverse knowledge  in  so  that  it  becomes  a  major  resource  for  research  and  development. In  fact,  the  W3C  Semantic 

*Corresponding author. E-mail: michel_dumontier@carleton.ca  

Web HCLS Interest Group is specifically chartered to 
develop,  advocate  and  support  SW  technologies  for 
HCLS  communities  (HCLS,  2005).  Our  experience 
maintains that in order to build an effective Semantic 
Web for the HCLS, significant efforts still have to be 
made  towards  the  coordinated  development  of  high 
quality  vocabularies,  well  thought  out  protocols  for 
data  sharing  and  publication,  and  scalable, cohesive 
cyberinfrastructure. 

Coordinated efforts by a wide  range of communities to promote a coherent representation of data will 
foster  commoditization  of  information  and  create 
entirely  new  commercial  opportunities  and  publicgood  efforts  devoted  to  provisioning  data,  in-depth 
analysis  and  effective  visualization.  There  is  little 
doubt  that  by  making  biomedical  data  available 
through the Semantic Web, we will dramatically  improve  overall  productivity,  increase  investment  re-

nomic  activity  and  augment  the  outcomes  of  basic 
and applied research. The challenge then is to assess 
the  vision  for  the  Semantic  Web  with  respect to the 
state-of-the art in knowledge representation and tech-
nology. 

2. State of the Art  

The SW positions itself as a platform for information exchange between intelligent agents. Interoperability is achieved by ensuring that the information is 
consistently  encoded  (syntax)  and  uses symbols  that 
have  a  formally  defined meaning  such  that  they  can 
be  consistently  interpreted  (semantics).  An  effective 
Semantic  Web  will  ensure  interoperability  between 
cyberinfrastructure  components including  i)  capacity 
to capture knowledge, ii) infrastructure to publish and 
share information,  iii) efficient  middleware  for question answering  and knowledge discovery.  

2.1. RDF and Linked Data 

The  Resource  Description  Framework  (RDF)  is  a 
core SW  language that offers a  lightweight  mechanism  to  describe  entities  in  term  of  their  types, 
attributes  and  relations  to  other  entities. Entities  are 
identified by International Resource Identifiers (IRIs) 
which  includes  web  based  identifiers  (HTTP  URIs) 
that  can  be  resolved  on  the  Web.  Statements  about 
these  entities  captured  as  subject-predicate-object 
triples,  and  are  described  using  vocabularies  from 
domain-specific  ontologies.  RDF  Schema  (RDFS) 
makes it possible to specify simple type and relation 
hierarchies using the is a relation. RDF can be queried using the SPARQL query language. 

A number of life science projects are using RDF as 
their  core  language  of  representation  and  publishing 
the information so that information about the entities 
can  be  queried  and  visualized.  Bio2RDF 1
 is  at  the 
forefront  of  generating  and provisioning  ~40  billion 
triples  of  linked  life  science  data  from over  40  high 
profile databases. Bio2RDF normalizes the data IRIs 
so as to facilitate linking of datasets (Belleau, Nolin, 
Tourigny, Rigault, & Morissette, 2008).  Each dataset 
is  deployed  as  its  own  SPARQL  endpoint,  which 
allows original data provider to actively participate in 
the network  while decentralization of  resource offerings  provides  web-scalability.  Bio2RDF  offers  spe-

http://bio2rdf.org 

cialized  federated  query  services  across  its  global 
mirrors (Ottawa, Quebec City, Guelph and Brisbane). 
(LODD) 2  and 
The  Linking  Open  Drug  Data 
Chem2Bio2RDF 3 projects are generating linked data 
to  support  chemical-based  investigations  including 
drug  discovery.  These  projects provision  RDF  data 
from relational databases using D2R.  LinkedLifeDa-
ta4
 consists of a diverse array of  life science datasets 
provisioned  through  cluster-based  data  warehouse 
solution  using  the  commercial  BigOW LIM  engine. 
Yet  all  of  these  projects  largely  involve  information 
retrieval  in the  most basic sense, without making full 
use of the background knowledge provided by ontol-
ogies. 

2.2. Ontologies 

Initially driven by the need to query gene and gene 
product annotation across a number of  model organ-
isms,  the  Gene  Ontology  (GO)  has  emerged  as  an 
vast  controlled  vocabulary  of  biological  processes, 
molecular  functions  and  cellular  components  (GO 
Consortium,  2008). Since its inception,  GO strives to 
more accurately describe their 20,000+ terms principally organized via an is a axis, but also augmented 
with  other  relations  (e.g.  parthood).  Following  GO, 
there are now over 150  Open Biomedical Ontologies 
(OBO) listed at the National Center for Bio-Ontology 
(NCBO)  BioPortal,  which now spans molecular, ana-
tomical,  physiological,  organis mal,  health,  experimental  information.  Yet  significant  overlap  exists 
between ontologies, as a search yielding 20 different 
terms for protein will attest. Towards developing a 
set  of  orthogonal  ontologies,  the  OBO  Foundry 
(Smith et al., 2007) promotes development over basic 
categories  drawn  from  the  Basic  Formal  Ontology 
(BFO)  and  encourages  the  use  of  reuse  basic,  do-
main-independent  relations  from  the  Relational  Ontology  (RO). Well  defined  relations  should  make  it 
clear when the relations are to be used, and what infe-
rences, if any, may be drawn from them. 

2.3. OWL and Linked Knowledge 

Drawing from the well understood area of Description  Logics,  the  Web  Ontology  Language  (OW L) 
provides  a substantially  more  expressive  vocabulary 
to  axiomatically  describe  entities  for  enhanced  rea-
soning.  Building  these  kinds  of  ontologies not  only 

2 http://esw.w3.org/HCLSIG/LODD 
3 http://chem2bio2rdf.org 
4 http://linkedlifedata.org 

the entities, but also requires a keen understanding of 
formal  knowledge  representation  so  that  knowledge 
is  properly  captured  and  becomes  intuitive  to  query 
using an information system.    

Several projects have now demonstrated the use of 
OWL-based  information  systems. The  HCLS  knowledge base contains a collection of instantiated ontologies used to identify interesting molecular agents in 
the treatment of Alzheimers (Ruttenberg et al., 2007). 
With  consideration  of  how  genetics  plays  a  role  in 
effective  drug  treatment,  the  Pharmacogenomics 
Knowledge  Base  (PGKB)  offers  depression-related 
pharmacogenomic  information  that  facilitates  additional  knowledge  curation  beyond  the  PharmGKB 
database  (Dumontier  &  Villanueva-Rosales,  2009). 
Thus,  ontologies  can  play  an  important  role  both  in 
semantic  data  integration  as  well  as  guide  curation 
activities  with  well  established  use  cases  towards 
populating a specialized knowledge base. 

2.4. Semantic Web Services 

Web  services define  application  programming  interfaces by structuring messages and content with the 
Web Services Description Language (WSDL). HCLS 
web  services  may  be  registered  and  annotated  using 
the Web 2.0  inspired  BioCatalogue (Goble, Stevens, 
Hull,  Wolstencroft,  &  Lopez,  2008).  Workflow  application tools like Taverna facilitate chaining of ser-
vices, to obtain and logically consume content (Oinn 
et al., 2004).  Yet, the pairing of services still  remains 
rather difficult because the inputs are generally datatypes  as  opposed  to semantic  types  that  can be  reasoned  about.  SADI,  a  new  semantic  web  services 
framework project, uses OWL ontologies to formally 
describe services, in which the Semantic Health And 
Research  Environment  (SHARE)  query  system  undertakes 
invocation 
through a SPARQL query (Vandervalk, McCarthy, & 
Wilkinson, 2009). This has been put to use in Cardi-
oSHARE,  a  system  that  integrates  patient  data  with 
analytical  services  so  as  to  identify bone  fide  cardiovascular health indicators. 

service  matchmaking  and 

3. Challenges 

3.1. Scalable Semantic Web Technologies 

Requirements  of  Semantic  Web  technologies  have 
been  drawn  from  extensive  analysis  of  domain  re-

quirements, technical feasibility and vendor capabili-
ties.  While  these  including  HCLS  centric  concerns, 
they  do  not  reflect  the  enormous  amounts  of  data 
(trillions  of  facts),  nor  the widespread and decentralized  nature  of  databases  (thousands  of  indirectly 
connected  databases)  that  would  have  to  be  accom-
modated.  Current  stand-alone  solutions  appear  to 
scale  up  into hundreds  of  millions  of  triples,  while 
cluster-based  solutions  (Virtuoso  Cluster  Edition; 
BigOW LIM; BigData) appear to scale into the tens or 
hundreds  of  billions  of  statements,  but  with  highly 
restricted capability to reason about OWL data.  New 
and  sustained efforts  into  large-scale  reasoning  and 
possibly  incomplete  reasoning  may  be  required,  as 
recently  demonstrated  (Urbani,  Kotoulas,  Maaseen, 
van Harmelen, & Bal, 2010). 

3.2. From Linked Data to Linked Knowledge 

RDF  linked data efforts currently employ a simple 
model for representing knowledge: entities are either 
related to other entities or related to valued attributes 
through a single relation. Model 1 (Figure 1) exemplifies a typical  linked data  model  for representing the 
volume of a protein using a decimal datatype. Such a 
model  does  not  express  the  unit  of  measure,  and  no 
statements can be made as to how or under what conditions the value  was obtained. In contrast, Model 2 
overcomes 
explicitly 
representing  the  entity,  quality,  measurement  value, 
and  the  unit  as  distinct  entities.  However,  moving 
from  2 triples in Model  1 to the 8 triples  required  in 
Model 2 translates to a 4x  increase in the storage requirements  and  requires  more  sophisticated query  to 
retrieve  all  the  relevant  information. The  benefit increasing our capacity to make  meaningful statements 
about any one of these entities, which cannot (easily) 
be done in Model 1, is nevertheless substantial. 

limitations 

these 

by 

Figure 1 Two models for representing a physical attribute. 

If Model 2  is deemed desirable, then the challenge 
lies not only in getting scalable systems to accommodate  this  influx  of  triples  (possibly  by devising  customizable  indexes), but also in getting users to learn 
about  and  deploy  standard  patterns  which  they  can 
apply to their own data. The patterns should be cohe-
rent,  intuitive  and  well  specified  such  that  nonexperts can read, understand and apply the guidelines 
found therein. Importantly, these patterns should specify the relations that hold between instances, and for 
this  reason  having  a  coherent,  well  founded  set  of 
types and basic relations supported by formal ontology is of critical value.  While BFO+RO combination 
provides  guidance  for  instantiable  types,  it  lacks  the 
capacity to handle all elements of scientific discourse 
(Dumontier  &  Hoehndorf,  2010),  specifically  with 
types  that  may  be  hypothesized  (putative  agents  of 
disease), predicted (genes and proteins from genomic 
sequences),  or  simply  do  not  occur  (perpetual  mo-
tion).  This  necessitates  significantly  more  effort  in 
developing  a  foundational  ontology  (types  +  rela-
tions) to represent a more diverse array of knowledge, 
including that which is already found in linked data.  
Recent  work    by  the  W3C  HCLS  subgroup  on 
translational  medicine  has  produced  a  knowledge 
base composed of the Translational Medicine Ontol-
ogy,  which  provides  75  core  classes  mapped  to  223 
classes  from  40  ontologies,  and  acts  as  a  global 
schema  over  a  set  of  fake  patient  data  and  linking 
open data (LOD) resources (Dumontier et al.,  2010). 
They featured queries that span bedside to bench by 
not only  matching patients to clinical trials, but also 
in  finding  trials  for  which  their  drugs  had  different 
mechanis ms  of  action  so  as  to  potentially  avoid 
common  side  effects.  Here,  the  integration  of  electronic  health  records  with  public  data  provides  new 
avenues  for  clinical  research  and  improved  health 
care.  With  increased  interest  in  building  s marter 
health  care  systems  using  electronic  health  records, 
Semantic Web technologies can play a pivotal role in 
incentivizing  interoperability  between  health  care 
providers by linking valuable to public data.  

3.4. The need for axiomatic description of classes 

Until  recently,  OBO  ontologies have  been  largely 
crafted using the OBO  language, an ad-hoc language 
with  its  own  (non-XML)  syntax  and  lacking formal 
semantics.  OBO  ontologies  differ  enormously  in 
terms  of  their  development  status,  expressivity,  and 

overall quality. While  the standard transformation to 
OWL  involves  fixed  semantics,  more  recent  work 
demonstrates  how  more  flexible  semantics  can  be 
assigned as patterns associated with  well defined relations  such  as  the  RO  (Hoehndorf  et  al.,  2010).  
Axiomatic description of classes should improve ontology  quality  by  forcing  ontology  designers  to  be 
explicit  about  the  necessary  conditions  for  class 
membership,  as  opposed  to  relying  on  potentially 
vague descriptions using natural  language. Such formalization  can  make  use  of  automated  reasoners  to 
find  errors  and  provide  explanations  for  unexpected 
inferences.  

3.5. Provenance and Attribution 

Provenance  and  the  corresponding  attribution  of 
knowledge  is normal practice  in science. Several approaches  (Research  Objects,  Provenance  Ontology, 
Provenir  Ontology,  SWAN-SIOC  provenance)  have 
now  been  articulated, and  must now  be  unified.  Im-
portantly,  contributions  to  community-based  ontologies need to be acknowledged. Further, the wholesale 
provenance  of  data  need  to  be specified,  and  while 
RDF  reification or  OWL axiom annotations supports 
this,  they  generate  significantly  higher  overhead  (4 
triples  per  statement).  In  contrast,  TriX/TRiG/RDF 
Named  Graphs  may  be  more  effective  and  needs  to 
go down the path of standardization. 

3.6. User Interfaces 

Despite  a  decade  of  research  and  development 
around  Semantic  Web  technologies, significant  gaps 
still  remain  in  tools  that  facilitate  data  management 
and  knowledge  discovery.  User  interfaces  are  still 
developed close to the metal, forcing a  model that 
is not meant for human consumption. New innovative 
approaches  need  to  consider  FreeBases  Parallax 5, 
but for the Semantic Web.  Impressively, the sig.ma 6

Mashup  tool  uses  the  Sindice  Semantic  Web  Search 
engine to provide an enhanced view of  indexed RDF 
triples,  including  those  provided  by  Bio2RDF  and 
DBpedia. For  OW L  knowledge bases, SMART (Bat-
tista,  Villanueva-Rosales, Palenychka,  &  Dumontier, 
2007)  offers  a  way  to  craft  queries  as  class  expressions  using  the  Manchester  OWL  syntax.    Significantly  more  research  in  human-computer  interaction 
is  required  to  identify  effective  ways  to  work  with 

http://www.freebase.com/labs/parallax/ 
6 http://sig.ma/  

er,  O.,  Chen,  H.,  et al.  (2007).  Advancing translational  research with the Semantic Web. BMC bioinformatics, 8 Suppl 
3, S2. 

[13]  Smith,  B.,  Ashburner,  M.,  Rosse,  C.,  Bard,  J.,  Bug,  W., 
Ceusters, W.,  et  al.  (2007). The  OBO  Foundry: coordinated 
evolution of ontologies to support biomedical data integration. 
Nature Biotechnology, 25(11), 1251-1255. 

[14]  Urbani,  J., Kotoulas,  S.,  Maaseen,  J., van Harmelen,  F., & 
Bal, H. (2010). OWL reasoning with WebPIE: calculating the 
closure of 100  billion triples.  Proceedings  of  the 2010  Extended Semantic Web Conference. 

[15]  Vandervalk,  B.  P.,  McCarthy,  E.  L.,  &  Wilkinson,  M.  D. 
(2009). Moby and Moby 2: creatures of the deep (web). Briefings in bioinformatics, 10(2), 114-28. 

with hyper-dimensional data from  multiple  (and possibly untrustworthy) sources.  

4. Conclusion 

Building  an  effective  Semantic  Web  for  HCLS  is 
clearly  a  long  term  effort  that  needs coherent  representations along with simple tools to create, publish, 
query and visualize generic semantic  web data. With 
hundreds  of bioinformatics  web  services,  thousands 
of  biological  databases  and  millions  of  unrecorded 
facts in waiting, significant effort will also have to be 
placed  in  training  the  next  generation  of  application 
developers to  correctly  use  Semantic  Web  technolo-
gies. HCLS communities can then be served by custom portals, and ultimately act as a key component of 
cyberinfrastructure  for  both textual  and  semantically 
annotated data and services.  
