Five challenges for the Semantic Sensor Web 

Editor(s): 'Krzysztof Janowicz, Pennsylvania State University, USA; Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA 
Solicited review(s): Christoph Schlieder, Bamberg University, Germany; Werner Kuhn, University of Munster, Germany 
Open review(s): Roberto Garcia, Universitat de Lleida, Spain 

Oscar Corcho and Raul Garcia-Castro 
Ontology Engineering Group, Departamento de Inteligencia Artificial, Facultad de Informatica,  
Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Campus de Montegancedo, Boadilla del Monte, 28660, Madrid, Spain 

Abstract. The combination of sensor networks with the Web, web services and database technologies, was named some years 
ago as the Sensor Web or the Sensor Internet. Most efforts in this area focused on the provision of platforms that could be 
used to build sensor-based applications more efficiently, considering some of the most important challenges in sensor-based 
data management and sensor network configuration. The introduction of semantics into these platforms provides the opportunity of going a step forward into the understanding, management and use of sensor-based data sources, and this is a topic being explored by ongoing initiatives. In this paper we go through some of the most relevant challenges of the current Sensor 
Web, and describe some ongoing work and open opportunities for the introduction of semantics in this context. 

Keywords: sensor, ontology, query language  

1. Introduction 

The combination of sensor networks with the Web, 
web services and database technologies,  was  named 
some years ago as the Sensor Web or the Sensor Internet [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Most of the work done on this 
topic, performed in some cases under the umbrella of 
the OGC Sensor Web Enablement Working Group1, 
focused on the creation of specifications for different 
functionalities  related  to  the management  of  sensorbased  data  (observations,  measurements,  sensor  network descriptions, transducers, data streaming, etc.), 
and for the different types of services that may handle  these  data  sources  (planning,  alert,  observation 
and measurement collection and management, etc.).  
Some  additional  work  has  focused  on  the  provision of platforms that provide the services needed to 
develop  sensor-based  applications.  These  platforms 
include  libraries  for  common  domain-independent 
data  management  tasks,  such  as  data  cleaning,  sto-
rage,  aggregation,  query  processing,  etc.,  and  they 
are  used  to  provide  domain-specific  aggregated  services (e.g., coastal imaging [1], patient care [2]).  

1 http://www.opengeospatial.org/projects/groups/sensorweb 

Finally, centralized registries for sensor-based data 
have appeared (e.g., Pachube2, SensorMap3), focused 
on the registration of sensor-based data sources, and 
on the provision of access to them in multiple ways, 
by means of REST-based interfaces, web services, or 
ad-hoc query languages, to name a few. 

Figure 1 presents a general architecture of Sensor 

Web applications; which can be characterised by:  

variability and heterogeneity of data, devices and 
networks  (including  unreliable  nodes  and  links, 
noise, uncertainty, etc.);  
use  of  rich  data  sources  (sensors,  images,  GIS, 
etc.) in different settings (live, streaming, histor-
ical, and processed);  
existence  of  multiple  administrative  domains; 
and  
need  for  managing  multiple,  concurrent,  and 
uncoordinated queries to sensors. 

We  will  now  review  some  of  the  most  relevant 
challenges  in  this  area,  for  which  we  will  later  propose descriptions of how semantic-based approaches 
could be applied. 

2 http://www.pachube.com/ 
3 http://atom.research.microsoft.com/sensewebv3/sensormap/ 

external  conditions  to  the  sensor  network.  In  sum-
mary,  there  are  a  number  of  quality  characteristics 
that  are  relevant  to  the  quality  of  service  and  that 
may affect the results obtained from a data observation  process,  normally  with  important  trade-offs 
among each other (e.g., longevity vs. latency or completeness vs. throughput). 

Another challenge has to do with the integration 
and  fusion  of  data  coming  from  autonomouslydeployed  sensor  networks,  with  varying  qualities  of 
service  and  different  throughput  rates,  geographical 
scales, etc. This is related not only with the integration  of  data  coming  from  different  sensor  networks, 
but also with the combination of such data with data 
persisted in other sources, such as static data or archived sensor data. 

Another challenge of utmost importance, related to 
the previous one, is the identification  and  location 
of  relevant  sensor-based  data  sources  with  which 
data  integration  and  fusion  tasks  can  be  performed. 
The  number  of  sensor  networks  being  deployed  in 
the real world is growing continuously, given the fact 
that the prices of hardware are decreasing. As a result, 
more  experiments  and  initiatives  deploy  sensor  networks  in  different  (sometimes  overlapping)  areas, 
and finding the right information to be used in integration and fusion tasks is highly relevant. 

Finally, another important challenge has to do with 
the need to enable the rapid development of applications  that  are  able  to  handle  sensor  data,  taking 
into  account  the  aforementioned  characteristics  and 
challenges. This includes dealing  with data integrity 
and validation issues as well as the need for common 
interfaces and formats between applications, databas-
es,  sensor  networks,  etc.  This  challenge  requires 
enabling the development of applications with different  resource  models  and  qualities  of  service  (e.g., 
energy, bandwidth, processing, storage) and facilitating  the  interaction  with  sensor  data  from  the  developer and user points of view. 

3. Applying Semantic-Based Approaches to 
Sensor Web Challenges 

In  this  section  we  provide  brief  descriptions  of 
how  the  aforementioned  challenges  are  being  addressed in existing initiatives and projects, by means 
of  semantic-based  methods,  techniques  and  technol-
ogies.  

Figure 1. Architecture of a Sensor Web application 

2. Five Challenges for Sensor Web Applications 

This  section  starts  presenting  those  challenges  in 
the area of the Sensor Web that have to do with the 
characteristics of the data sources that are handled in 
typical Sensor Web applications, and then moves into 
those challenges that have to do with the creation of 
applications based on these data sources. We do not 
aim at being exhaustive on the identification of chal-
lenges, but we hope that this categorization is useful 
to understand some of the open problems in this area.  
One  of  the  first  challenges  is  related  to  the  abstraction level in which sensor data can be obtained, 
processed  and  managed  in  general.  Sensor  data  can 
be  managed  at  a  very  low  level,  at  the  device-  and 
network-centric  levels,  generally  by  means  of  using 
low-level programming languages and operating sys-
tems.  But  it  can  be  also  managed  through  higherlevel  formalisms  (e.g.,  via  declarative  continuous 
queries over  streams), thereby insulating clients and 
users from the infrastructural and syntactic heterogeneities of autonomously-deployed sensor networks. 

Another  challenge  is  related  to  the  adequate  characterisation  and  management  of  the  quality  (and 
quality  of  service)  of  sensor  data.  Issues  like  the 
unavailability of a piece of data over a period of time 
may have different meanings when seen from an application  perspective:  the  sensor  was  not  available, 
there was no event to trigger the data generation during that time, the communication with the sensor was 
broken,  etc.  Other  issues  like  the  accuracy  of  the 

tion  level  at  which  sensor  data  can  be  obtained, 
processed  and  managed.  A  number  of  sensor  network  ontologies  have  been defined  in  the  literature 
[6], which aim at describing different aspects of sen-
sor-based data, from the device point of view (focus-
ing  on  the  hardware  that  is  being  used  in  order  to 
generate the data) to the domain point of view (focus-
ing  on  the  types  of  data  that  can  be  generated  from 
sensors and sensor networks in the context of specific 
domains  such  as  Health  or  Environment).  Several 
aspects  are  relevant  in  the  development  of  most  of 
these ontologies, such as the distinction between raw 
observed data and derived data, the representation of 
aspects like accuracy, or the consideration of observations  and  measurements  according  to  the  relevant 
OGC  models;  the  ontological  representation  of  this 
last  aspect  has  received  attention  on  its  own  [7,  8]. 
The development of an ontology in this area is one of 
the main tasks being performed in the W3C Incubator Group on Semantic Sensor Networks4.  

The  aforementioned  work  on  sensor  network  ontologies  also  takes  into  account  the  quality  of  the 
data  sources,  although  it  is  not  central  to  the  work 
being  performed  in  the  context  of  the  Incubator 
Group. Data quality is a large research area that is not 
only applicable to sensor-based data, but to any type 
of  data  that  can  be  managed  in  an  application.  It  is 
common to talk about data quality in relational data-
bases, in semi-structured data sources, in user generated  content,  etc.  Therefore,  it  is  a  property  of  data 
sources  in  general,  and  not  of  sensor-based  data  in 
particular.  However,  sensor-based  data  depends 
largely on the context of the sensor network, such as 
the  network  physical 
infrastructure,  deployment 
strategy,  or  surrounding  environmental  conditions. 
This context may influence the quality of data (e.g., 
the  accuracy  of  measurements)  and  has  to  be  taken 
into  account  to  correctly  interpret  them  (e.g.,  to  interpret the meaning of data gaps). Early work is being done on the definition of data quality models for 
this type of data, by categorising existing approaches 
for other types of sources and selecting and adapting 
them  to  the  context  of  sensor  networks.  The  same 
applies  to  the  quality  of  service  of  sensor  network 
sources, in terms of parameters that are also applied 
to  other  types  of  sources  (e.g.,  reliability)  and  are 
specialized  for  sensor  networks  (e.g.,  reading  rate, 
battery levels). 

4 http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/ssn/ 

With respect to the integration and fusion of data, 
work has been done in the context of integrating and 
fusing  heterogeneous  data  streams.  Some  of  this 
work uses semantic techniques, and some does not. A 
recent research trend is focused on the generation of 
Linked Data from sensor network data streams [9, 
10] by means of transforming sensor-based data into 
RDF and making it available using HTTP by means 
of sensor-related URIs. This will allow the seamless 
navigation  across  sensor-based  (and  other  types  of) 
data.  Other  work  is  being  done  on  the  provision  of 
semantic  queries  that  are  adapted  to  sensor-based 
data.  They  leverage  declarative  querying  infrastructure to define logical views over sensor network data 
and open the way for view- and ontology-based techniques  to  be  used.  These  approaches  extend  query 
languages  like  SPARQL  with  constructors  normally 
applied to stream-based sources (e.g., time and tuplebased windows). Examples of such extensions are the 
C-SPARQL  [11]  or  the  Streaming  SPARQL  [12] 
languages,  and  an  example  of  approaches  that  provide transformations between sensor data sources and 
these languages is the work described in [13]. 

In the context of identifying and locating relevant 
sensor-based  data  in  the  real  world,  work  is  being 
done  on  the  definition  of  sensor  data  registry 
interfaces, and in the development of the appropriate 
infrastructure that can cope with the types of queries 
that are usually handled in sensor-based applications. 
These  registries  should  provide  support  for  spatiotemporal  queries  (e.g.,  get  sensor  data  sources  that 
contain  information  about  the  temperature  in  this 
region  for  the  last  two  days)  and  for  metadata 
queries related to existing sensor network ontologies. 
Some work in this context can be found at [14]. 

development 

of  high-level 

Finally,  another  identified  challenge  is  related  to 
application 
the 
programming interfaces (APIs) that ease the rapid 
development  of  thin  applications  (e.g.,  mashups) 
that  use  data  from  sensor  networks  and  legacy 
databases.  These  programming  interfaces  should 
cope in a homogeneous way with the different types 
of  data  (persisted  and  streamed),  support  the  use  of 
the  semantic  extensions  already  identified  (e.g., 
semantic-based  descriptions  of  data,  linked  sensor 
data,  semantic-based  registries),  and  help  users 
interact  with  and  make  sense  of  the  potentially 
enormous  and  heterogeneous  amounts  of  data 
coming  from  the  Sensor  Web.  Examples  of  these 
interfaces  are  already  available,  although  without 
much  semantic  support  (e.g.,  SensorMap  [15])  and 

support systems for environmental management. 

4. Conclusions and Future Work 

working  group  on  Real  World  Internet10 and  in  the 
W3C incubator group on Semantic Sensor Networks.  
Finally,  we  would  like  to  thank  all  the  SSG4Env 
project partners for their contributions to the identification and work on these challenges. 

In this paper we have described some challenges in 
the area of the Sensor Web and how these challenges 
are being addressed using semantic-based approaches.  
We have covered issues that arise from the need to 
interpret, manage and integrate in a meaningful way 
data  that  is  coming  from  heterogeneous  sensor  net-
works,  with  different  levels  of  abstraction,  different 
application  areas,  and  different  quality  conditions. 
We  have  also  described  how  applications  that  rely 
heavily  on  sensor-based  data  can  be  more  flexibly 
created,  and  how  they  can  make  use  of  services  to 
locate data sources that may not have been originally 
deployed for the specific purpose of the application. 

Much  work  still  remains  to  be  done  in  all  these 
areas, and also in others that have not been covered 
exhaustively  in  this  position  paper,  such  as  event 
identification  and  management  with  sensor  data  or 
improved sensor network management using semantic techniques, to name a few. 

Furthermore, the achievement of a Semantic Sensor  Web  is  not  a  task  to  be  made  in  isolation.  We 
have shown how introducing semantics into the Sensor Web scenario presents new requirements over the 
Semantic Web specifications and technologies. Even 
if such requirements are currently being satisfied by 
extending these specifications and technologies, they 
can  be  a  valuable  input  for  advancement  in  the  Semantic Web area that will, in turn, benefit the Semantic Sensor Web.  

Acknowledgements 

Some  of  these  challenges  are  being  addressed  in 
the  SemsorGrid4Env  project5,  funded  by  the  European  Commission  under  grant  FP7-223913.  Other 
ongoing  projects  related  to  these  challenges  are: 
SENSEI6, CONET7, PECES8, and ASPIRE9. 

A research agenda for the Semantic Sensor Web is 
also being discussed by the Future Internet Assembly 

5 http://www.semsorgrid4env.eu/ 
6 http://www.ict-sensei.org/ 
7 http://www.cooperating-objects.eu/ 
8 http://www.ict-peces.eu/ 
9 http://www.fp7-aspire.eu/ 
