Semantic Web Journal 0 (2010) 17
IOS Press

Towards a Pattern Science for the Semantic
Web

Editor(s): Krzysztof Janowicz, Pennsylvania State University, USA and Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA
Solicited review(s): Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA; Benjamin Adams, University of California, Santa Barbara, USA
Open review(s):

Aldo Gangemi and Valentina Presutti
Semantic Technology Lab, Institute for Cognitive Sciences and Technology, CNR, Via Nomentana 56, 00161,
Rome, Italy
E-mail: {aldo.gangemi,valentina.presutti}@cnr.it

Abstract. With the web of data, the semantic web can be an empirical science. Two problems have to be dealt with. The knowledge soup problem is about semantic heterogeneity, and can be considered a difficult technical issue, which needs appropriate
transformation and inferential pipelines that can help making sense of the different knowledge contexts. The knowledge boundary
problem is at the core of empirical investigation over the semantic web: what are the meaningful units that constitute the research
objects for the semantic web? This question touches many aspects of semantic web studies: data, schemata, representation and
reasoning, interaction, linguistic grounding, etc.

Keywords: Knowledge patterns, Cognitive science, Frames, Contexts, Linked data,

1. Introduction

Linked data [BHBL09] are creating the web of data,
which on its turn can be considered the bootstrapping
of the semantic web. For the first time in the history of
knowledge engineering, we have a large set of realistic data, created by large communities of practice, on
which experiments can be performed, so that the semantic web can be founded as an empirical science, as
a branch of web science [BHH+06].

An empirical science needs clear research objects,
e.g. cells, proteins, or membranes are types of research
objects in different branches of biology. Such research
objects, which can typically change and evolve (within
different time scales), need to be shared by a community working on them. The community should also develop a language that is at least partly shared by its
members and that is appropriate to describe those research objects. Based on these basic resources, a science develops procedures for making patterns emerge
out of the research objects.

Until few years ago, the research objects of the semantic web used to be extracted from mostly small or
toy examples, which had not the coverage and form
that one can expect from data emerging from the use
of the web by people and organizations. That coverage
and form now exist, and are sometimes wild, but this is
probably what an empirical science should deal with.
Currently the web of data, including datasets such as
DBpedia, geographical and biological data, social network data, bibliographical, musical, and multimedia
data, etc., as well as the data emerging from the use of
RDFa, Microformats, etc., has eventually provided an
empirical basis to the semantic web, and indirectly to
knowledge engineering.
There are two main problems (presented in sections 1.1
and 1.2) for the identification, selection and construction of patterns from the empirical research objects of
the semantic web. In section 2 we provide some scenarios that exemplify the knowledge boundary prob-
lem, and in section 3 we suggest a practical approach
for making an empirical pattern science over the semantic web. Finally, we come back to the relation be-

0000-0000/10/$00.00 c 2010  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

Aldo Gangemi and Valentina Presutti / Towards a Pattern Science for the Semantic Web

tween the soup and the boundary problems, and discuss conclusion.

1.1. The knowledge soup problem

Several authors (e.g. [JHY+10]) have pointed out
that the research objects in the web of data are just
data, and one should ask what is really semantic in
them, besides the usage of certain knowledge-oriented
syntaxes like RDF. This is a variation of a problem spotted by AI scientists years ago (e.g. [Sow06]),
called the knowledge soup problem (section 1.1): since
people maintain and encode heterogeneous knowl-
edge, how can formal knowledge be derived from
the soup of triplified data (this is also related to the
reengineering bottleneck, see Hoekstra in this special issue)?
The web of data is a knowledge soup because of the
heterogeneous semantics of its datasets: real world
facts (e.g. geo data), conceptual structures (e.g. the-
sauri, schemes), lexical and linguistic data (e.g. word-
nets, triples inferred from NLP algorithms), social
data about data (e.g. provenance and trust data), etc.
The authors of [JHY+10] envisages a situation where
those datasets are formally represented, e.g. through
the semantics that would derive from an alignment
to DOLCE1. In that way (by means of appropriate
reengineering practices) we can imagine that conceptual structures are represented as classes or properties,
real world facts as individuals or assertional axioms,
lexical data into annotations, etc. They also propose
to remove the inconsistencies that can derive from the
alignment.

1.2. The knowledge boundary problem

The second problem we have singled out is the
knowledge boundary problem (section 1.2): how to establish the boundary of a set of triples that makes them
meaningful, i.e. relevant in context, so that they constitute a knowledge pattern? and how the very different
types of data (e.g. natural language processing data,
RDFa, database tables, etc.) that are used by semantic
web techniques contribute to carve out that boundary?
Patterns in general can be defined as invariances
across observed data or objects. The patterns in the
semantic web emerge from data, but we need to distinguish the symbolic patterns of mathematical pattern science [Gre96], as studied in data mining, com-

plex systems, etc., from the knowledge patterns of a
semantic web pattern science. Knowledge patterns are
not only symbolic patterns: they also have an interpre-
tation, be it formal, or cognitive. Such interpretation
consists in the meaning of the pattern, e.g. a fact reported in news, a soccer event in a picture, an aggressive attitude in a sentence, a subtle plan revealed by
the analysis of a set of documents. In practice, a meaningful pattern to be discovered in the web of data has
to be relevant in a certain context; we need a notion
of boundary for sets of triples that matter. How many
semantic applications address relevance in context ex-
plicitly? How many of them succeed in achieving it,
solving problems that matter to anyone?

2. Some Scenarios and their Requirements

Being meaningful is usually associated with relevance in context, i.e. having a clear boundary in order
to matter to someone.
In this section, we exemplify this concept and highlight
the importance to have a semantic web able to recog-
nize, handle, and exploit such boundaries.
For example, consider an application that leverages
the web of data to provide information on some topic.
Tools of this sort, like Sig.ma2 already exist. The information that Sig.ma or similar tools can collect, mesh
up, and serve is much easier to consume than the typical results of a traditional search engine like Google.
This is due to the form of information handled: data
as opposed to documents.Nevertheless, to establish
which of the retrieved data are relevant in the context
that matters to the user is still an issue. For example,
consider the situation of searching information about
a person e.g. Aldo Gangemi, who teaches as tutor in a
school for researchers. Figure 1 shows the difference
between all data that are collected from the web of
data, and those that are relevant for the specific pur-
pose. Figure 1(a) shows the data collected about Aldo
Gangemi: it can be noticed that such data contain information about Aldos favorite music, civil status, political views, hobbies, etc., which are not relevant for
his role of tutor at the school. Among all such information only those depicted in Figure 1(b) would solicit some interest in this context. Notice that the selection of relevant information impacts at both the level
of properties and the level of property values e.g. in

1http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/ont/dul/DUL.owl

2http://sig.ma/

this context it could be relevant to provide the information that Enrico Motta, who is a researcher, is in
Aldos contact network, while it is less important to
mention that the network includes Aldos mother. How
could relevance boundaries for this context be identi-
fied? Another clarifying example is the situation of a

evant to most people. For example, it emerges that the
two men have been both Prime Minister of Italy but
the relevant knowledge that would matter to the user
in this context would be the possible similarity of approaches that they followed, and the attitude that they
have shown during their respective careers. Hence, the
issue is still how to establish what are the boundaries
that identify the relevant knowledge for a specific con-
text. It is even clearer to understand the issue, and its

(a) Data about Aldo Gangemi collected and meshed
up from the web of data.

(b) Relevant data about Aldo Gangemi as tutor, collected and meshed up from the web of data.

Fig. 1. The difference between data about Aldo Gangemi collected
and meshed up from the web of data, and the selection on such data
of what is relevant for a specific context i.e. looking for information
about the tutor of a school for researchers.

query aimed at identifying a more complex entity than
a person. Consider the situation of a talk involving a
discussion about two politicians belonging to different
periods. In this case the application should be able to
extract and interpret relevan knowledge by exploring
the relationships that hold between the two politicians.
One such application is RelFinder3, a tool based on
the web of data that extracts and visualizes relationships between objects in datasets, and to make these
relationships interactively explorable. Figure 2 depicts
a fragment of the result produced by RelFinder for
Benito Mussolini and Silvio Berlusconi. Despite
the extent of the data about the two politicians available on the web of data, the similarity between them
that RelFinder discovers is shallow and somehow irrel-

3http://relfinder.semanticweb.org/

Fig. 2. Relations between Benito Mussolini and Silvio Berlusconi
extracted from the web of data by the RelFinder application.

importance for the semantic web, if we consider that a
key goal of the semantic web is to drastically decrease
the cognitive load of humans when performing some
task by delegating it to smart software agents. Consider
the situation of a user that plans to arrange a holiday
trip to San Francisco. In order to solve this task the user
considers personal preferences e.g. on hotels, personal
past traveling experiences, working calendar, available
budget, etc., and compares them to what can be extracted from the information gathered from the web. A
common task like this requires a significant amount of
time, and cognitive effort. Additionally, the capability
of identifying relevant contextual information in order
to produce e.g. trip arrangement proposals, is key for
enabling automatic support that goes beyond information or data retrieval.
The current semantic web and its frontline web of data
branch are far from enabling support for tasks like this,
although it enables the interpretation and consumption of data in the form of knowledge. We need a new
paradigm, which enables a move from representing
knowledge in general to shaping knowledge to be represented for a certain task, i.e. meaningfully.

Aldo Gangemi and Valentina Presutti / Towards a Pattern Science for the Semantic Web

3. Frames and Knowledge Patterns

A research paradigm for the semantic web should
include at least two key foundational, interleaving as-
pects: (i) a unit of meaning for the semantic web, more
complex and effective than scattered classes or properties (binary relations), and (ii) a multidimensional context model.
We believe that the unit of meaning of the semantic
web should be the knowledge pattern, a special name
for frames [Min75,BFL98] in the semantic web, and
that a formal context model should address the distinction between four dimensions i.e. descriptive, in-
formational, situational, and social, besides the formal
dimension.

3.1. Frames

A frame is a pattern whose intuition goes back to
the notion of schema by [Bar32]4. Many-flavoured
varieties of schemata or frames have been proposed
later by [Pia67], [Fil68], [Min75], [Bar99], [GM03a],
[CTP00], etc. The intended meaning of a frame across
the different theories can be summarized as a structure that is used to organize our knowledge, as well
as for interpreting, processing or anticipating informa-
tion.
Different theories highlight the static vs. dynamic behavior of frames, their adaptability, or even peoples
ability to create them on the fly. Some older studies cast doubts on their role in e.g. scene recognition
[BMR82], but besides the huge positive literature in
linguistics and cognitive science, recent biological evidence seems to be quite convincing for considering
them more than a philosophically-fascinating hypoth-
esis. For example, [AZWRI06] found a clear congruence between activations of visually presented actions
and of actions described by literal phrases. These results suggest a key role of mirror neuron areas in the
re-enactment of sensory-motor representations during
conceptual processing of actions invoked by linguistic stimuli. These findings support embodied semantics hypotheses, in which frames are the core unit of
meaning, as event-oriented, embodied structures that
abstract basic sensory-motor competences acquired by
cognitive agents (see [Gan10] for an overview of em-

bodied semantics applied to ontologies).
Marvin Minsky [Min75] introduced frames into computer science, claiming that there would be large advantages in having mechanisms that could use these
same structures both for thinking and for communi-
cating. This means that the cognitive notion of a
frame should have counterparts into the computational
world. [Min75] exemplified counterparts in the form
of modeling, programming, and interaction schemata.
That was very successful, since the frame metaphor
has been used as a formal schema in frame logics
(frames involving closed world assumption) and description logics (concepts); as a design structure in object oriented design (classes); as an interaction design
pattern in human-computer interaction (templates),
etc. Therefore, a cognitive frame is an embodied structure that can be partly represented with constructs
from languages with different formal semantics: as a
polymorphic intensional relation, as a F-Logic frame,
as an OWL class, etc.
However, the cognitive origin and motivation of Minskys proposal were abandoned during the evolution
of knowledge representation and engineering, because
other scientific problems, such as complexity and
formal semantic foundations, overruled the original
agenda, which demanded a lot on the design side rather
than on representation and reasoning. We believe it is
time to resurrect that agenda.
Based on the above considerations, we suggest the usage of frames as the primary research objects over the
semantic web, as opposed to simple concepts or binary
relations, and we call them knowledge patterns. Such
notion must be pragmatic and provide a meaning unit
that acts as a hub between requirements for semantic
applications, reusable ontologies, data to be queried,
patterns in indexed texts, interaction patterns for semantic data, etc. The benefits of knowledge patterns
can be several: easier ontology design, advanced ex-
ploration, extraction, and lenses over data, query pat-
terns, rich linguistic grounding of ontologies for hybrid applications, etc.5 In the next section, we briefly
present a model of the different aspects (data, linguis-
tic, interaction, etc.) of a knowledge pattern as revealed
in the complex semiotic activity of cognitive agents,
which can be addressed by semantic web research.

4The genealogy of Bartletts schemata goes back to Kants distinction between objects of perception and their interpretation by an
agent, and the need to postulate background schemata that enable
interpretation over pure perception.

5Some of

[BPGD10].

them have been experimentally demonstrated

Fig. 3. An OWL content pattern learnt from a text corpus, based on
a FrameNet frame and machine learning techniques. It models the
relevant entities participating in an accuse of violation, a special case
of the judgement communication frame in FrameNet [BFL98], learnt
as described in [CGG+09].

3.2. A research framework for knowledge patterns

Over the semantic web, agents and reasoners should
be able to discover and/or recognize knowledge patterns (KP), and reason on them. Examples of KP representations that are already reused within the semantic
web are mentioned in Section 3.3. A KP derived from
a FrameNet [BFL98] frame is depicted in Figure 36,
while a native semantic web KP (a content pattern7)
is depicted in Figure 4. Currently, technology and languages allow us to find occurrences of KPs that we
already know. For example, we can use SPARQL for
querying the linked data cloud in order to find occurrences of the KP depicted in Figure 4. However, how
to discover new meaningful KPs is still an open issue.
How to decide a boundary within the giant graph of
LOD? What topology should be adopted? How to hybridize different data? While some of these questions
are left to more extensive work, and for the joy of the
semantic web community, the following proposal provides a unified model for describing the different aspects of an empirical research for KPs over the semantic web. A KP can be modeled as a polymorphic relation that takes arguments from a number of facades,
as depicted in Figure 5. A facade represents a type of
knowledge that can be associated with a frame, and can
be used to motivate, test, discover, and use it. We use
an elementary KP that models persons with a role in a
research group for exemplifying some typical facades
of a KP.

 Vocabulary: a set of terms that can be structured with informal relations, for example, for a

6A comprehensive discussion on how to transform linguistic
frames to knowledge patterns, and how to enrich them is [CGG+09]
7See http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org and [PG08] for more

details on content and other ontology patterns.

4.

An

Fig.
from
http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org (ODP), manually defined. It
models places, their characteristics, and the relationships between
them e.g. the transitive property hasLocation.

content

pattern

KP about researchers, the following set of terms
could be activated: {Person, Role, ResearchInter-
est, ResearchGroup, Name}

 Formal representation: axioms that provide a formal semantics to the vocabulary. For example (in
OWL):
Person (cid:118) hasRole.Role 
hasTopic.ResearchInterest 
memberOf.ResearchGroup 
=1hasName.Name

 Inferential structure: rules that can be applied to
infer new knowledge from the formal representation of the KP, e.g.:
similarInterest(?p1 ?p2) 
hasTopic(?p1 ?i), hasTopic(?p2 ?i)

 Use case: requirements addressed by the KP.
They can be expressed in various forms e.g.
including one or more competency questions
[GF94]; in our lead example a competency question could be: What phd students from a research
group have a certain research interest?

 Data that can be used to populate an ontology
whose schema is a formal representation for the

 Linguistic grounding: textual data that express the
meaning of the KP, e.g.: The AST group has developed significantly in the last year. Professor Joao
spawned AST interests from theoretical work on
strong AI to applications by making an agreement
with the WQP software engineering lab

 Interaction structure: mappings between elements in the formal representation of a KP, and in-

Aldo Gangemi and Valentina Presutti / Towards a Pattern Science for the Semantic Web

terface or interaction primitives, e.g.: Person 
Static container, Role  Container
features (color, size), Research
group  Drop down list, Research
interest  Static container,
Relation  Link | Containment

 Relations to other KPs, e.g.: hasComponent

{personrole, collection, topic}

 Annotations: provenance data, comments, tags,
and other informal descriptions not yet covered
by any existing facade.

In an empirical research perspective, the different
facades provide research objects, which can be RDF
triples in the formal and data facades, texts to be indexed or parsed, data in different formats that can be
reengineered according to specific needs, etc. Each of
them is the result of a particular approach for representing our knowledge. For example, evidence of
an known KP, or the discovery of a new one can be
the result of machine learning techniques applied to
large corpora (cf. [CGG+09]), of defining RDF named
graphs, of reengineering existing data models or struc-
tures, or of the harvesting of formalized ontologies.
The KP framework presented here is an invitation to
start empirical work for a knowledge pattern science
that has cognitive objects as primary research objects
(see also Raubal and Adams in this special issue),
and that provides a unifying framework to all diverse
approach for representing knowledge. Although it is
reasonable to envision an implementation of the KP
framework, semantic web research can take advantage

Fig. 5. The facades of a knowledge pattern.

from it as a research model, and individual KPs can be
used for annotating results of data integration, pattern
discovery or detection, etc., and eventually to make
them converge for specific projects or applications.

3.3. Partial realizations of knowledge patterns

Existing projects that (partially) realize the KP research model include: the Component Library [CP97]
encoded in the KM language, which realizes the vocabulary and formal facades; the FrameNet project
[BFL98], which realizes the vocabulary and linguistic grounding facades; Microformats, which realize the
data and vocabulary facades; the Ontology Design Patterns project, which includes several types of design
patterns: content patterns (realizing the use case, vocabulary and formal facades) [PG08], logical patterns
(realizing types of formal facades), reengineering patterns (targeting good practices in mapping vocabulary
to formal facades, or formal to formal), etc. Ontology design patterns also highlight some similarities between frames and design patterns as employed in
software engineering [GHJV95].
Besides projects that explicitly address frames or pat-
terns, we remark that a lot of semantic web research
and applications already implicitly address the typical data involved in some KP facades. The difference
is that they lack of explicit use of KPs as research
objects, therefore the patterns that eventually emerge
in e.g. representation and reasoning, data reengineer-
ing, linked data, etc. do not necessarily address cognitively meaningful structures. Moreover, those heterogeneous patterns are usually disconnected from each
other. In such situations, KPs can play the role of attractors for the diverse patterns: linguistic, data, axiom schemata, reasoning-oriented, etc. by providing
a unified research model that support integration between those diverse, although complimentary results.

3.4. Knowledge patterns and multidimensional

contexts in the soup

As mentioned in section 1.1, data on the web is
affected by the knowledge soup problem, and needs
to be cleaned up when making advanced reasoning
on it. The solution proposed by [JHY+10] is to align
it to foundational ontologies, and perform inconsistency debugging. While data cleaning through alignment to foundational ontologies can be feasible and
desirable to some extent, the removal of inconsistencies can be hardly sustainable. It would require the re-

moval of triples that express possible relevant knowl-
edge, hence distorting the original intentions of data
curators. Rather than removing them, we might want
to live with inconsistencies by isolating them when a
consistent reasoning pipeline is needed.

text; the formal and inferential facades exemplify the
formal context.

A foundational ontology that formally represents
such different contexts is the Constructive Description and Situation (c.DnS) [GM03b,Gan08]. It leaves
it open the choice about controversial distinctions such
as objects and events vs. three-dimensional entities,
qualities vs. values, etc., which are typically fixed by
most upper-level and foundational ontologies. The basic machinery of c.DnS involves a strict separation of
the domains for the different context types, and includes appropriate relations between contexts of the
same or different type. Several content ontology design patterns encode parts of c.DnS for its use within
the KP paradigm. For space reasons, we redirect the
reader to the cited literature for further details.

4. Conclusion

In this paper we argue that the semantic web can be
an empirical science based on a new paradigm built
upon two foundational aspects: (i) the knowledge pattern as a unit of meaning for the semantic web, and (ii)
a multidimensional context model able to capture its
descriptive, informational, situational, social, and formal characters. The current situation is that only triples
and named graphs on one side, and large or complicated ontology schemata on the other side, are de facto
research objects: in neither case they are close to the
way knowledge is contextually relevant for people. We
have suggested knowledge patterns (KPs) as a primary
research object to focus on. KPs both reflect the intuition of frames on the semantic web and provide the
structure needed for representing the different context
dimensions.

Acknowledgements

This work has been part-funded by the EC under grant
agreement FP7-ICT-2007-3/ No. 231527 (IKS - Interactive
Knowledge Stack). We would like to thank Giovanni Pez-
zulo, Eva Blomqvist, Alfio Gliozzo and the STLab8 for the
nice and useful discussions on knowledge patterns.

8http://stlab.istc.cnr.it

The choice of a foundational ontology is key in this
process as it heavily impacts on the effects of reason-
ing. In order to make such choice effective two key aspects have to be addressed.
Task. The coverage and axiomatic complexity of
the foundational ontology should be tailored to the
task at hand, and alternative solutions may co-exist.
E.g. reasoning on sequence-related axioms (tempo-
ral, spatial, scheduling) is different from reasoning on
participation-related axioms (events, situations). Using
all of them at the same time is not mandatory. Using a
unique ontology for all of them is not mandatory either.
Knowledge patterns such as ontology design patterns
[PG08] are a blessing for this criterion, since they can
be used to plug and play with manageable subsets of
axioms and aligned data, which are related to relevant
use cases.
Context. The data in the soup implicitly assume different domains of interpretation, or contexts: e.g.
WordNet datasets live in an informational (linguistic)
domain of discourse, FOAF profiles live in a social
context, most DBpedia and geographic datasets come
from a situational domain (they are bare facts), a
lot of DBpedia and biological data are about conceptual entities, etc. To make sense of these data, formal
semantics alone is not enough. We need something
that supports multidimensional interpretations of data
linked across different, sometimes logically incompatible contexts: descriptive (or conceptual) context, informational context, situational context, social context,
and formal context.

Based on the above reasons, some of the types and
axioms of the foundational ontology should cover the
knowledge contexts that make up the soup, typically
individuals, facts, concepts, information objects, and
social metadata.

The research on KPs exemplifies the typical contexts that are mixed up in the soup. The vocabu-
lary, linguistic grounding, formal representation, and
definition-oriented annotation facades of a KP contain data that exemplify the descriptive context of
knowledge; the linguistic grounding facade exemplifies the informational context; the interaction facade
and provenance annotations exemplify the social con-
text; the data facade exemplifies the situational con-

Aldo Gangemi and Valentina Presutti / Towards a Pattern Science for the Semantic Web
