Digital Heritage: Semantic Challenges of 
Long-term Preservation 

Editor(s): Krzysztof Janowicz, Pennsylvania State University, USA; Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA 
Solicited review(s): Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA 
Open review(s): Krzysztof Janowicz, Pennsylvania State University, USA 

Christoph Schlieder 
University of Bamberg 

Abstract. The major digital preservation initiatives are about as old as the idea of the Semantic Web but the research areas 
only had little effect upon each other. This article identifies connections between the two research agendas. Three types of 
ageing processes are distinguished which affect digital records: media ageing, semantic ageing, and cultural ageing. It is argued that a period of 100 years constitutes an appropriate temporal frame of reference for addressing the problem of semantic 
ageing. Ongoing format migration constitutes currently the best option for temporal scaling at the semantic level. It can be 
formulated as an ontology matching problem. Research issues arising from this perspective are formulated that relate to the 
identification of long-term change patterns of ontologies and the long-term monitoring of ontology usage. Finally, challenges 
of cultural ageing are discussed. 

Keywords:  digital preservation, format migration, ontology matching, ontology change, 

Introduction 

Scalability  is  widely  considered  a  core  objective  of 
the Semantic Web, but it is mainly looked at from a 
quantitative  data  perspective,  considering,  for  in-
stance,  the  number  of  RDF  triples  that  can  be  han-
dled. In digital preservation, the focus lies on finding 
solutions  that  scale  well  along  the  temporal  dimension [1]. Memory institutions such as museums care 
very  much  whether  the  documents  and/or  the  data 
they publish will be accessible in 50 years from now. 
Considerable  effort  was  invested,  for  instance,  at 
Emory  University,  Atlanta,  to  make  the 20-year old 
digital material of the writer Salman Rushdie accessible by recreating the software environment he used 
via emulation [3]. Increasingly, less famous individuals ask what sort of digital legacy they will be able 
to  leave  with  todays  technologies.  The  problem  of 
digital  preservation  has  moved  from  a  concern  of 
specialists to mainstream awareness [15]. In the fol-
lowing,  we  will  explore  the  challenges  of  temporal 
scalability.  

In the pre-digital world, the preservation of written 
records over long periods of time depended on sever-

al  prerequisites  which  are  rarely  made  explicit. 
Firstly,  the  record needs  to  be  preserved physically. 
Secondly,  the  semantic  capabilities  to  read  and  interpret the records have to persist. A reader of a clay 
tablet, for instance, has to master a particular form of 
cuneiform writing and the Acadian language. Thirdly, 
there must be a community that (still) shows interest 
in the record. Only an interested community will mobilize  the  resources  required  to  teach  its  members 
complex semantic skills or to even engage in the deciphering of extinct languages. In many respects, the 
preservation of digital records faces similar problems. 

The ageing of digital records 

One reason for which digital preservation can fail is 
media ageing. Any medium that carries a digital encoding will physically deteriorate until it is no longer 
possible  to  recover  the  original  bit  stream.  This 
process of media ageing has received much attention 
from memory institutions but it seems less critical for 
the Web with its capacity to easily replicate data. 

content  is  affected  by  semantic  ageing,  that  is,  the 
evolution of data formats and the fact that knowledge 
about data semantics quickly disappears if not specified explicitly. Finally, there is a process which may 
be called cultural ageing. This process is rarely discussed in connection with digital preservation. Grad-
ually, the community loses interest in some particular 
content. The corresponding documents are no longer 
retrieved,  the  data  is  no  longer  used  in  inferences. 
Knowledge  about  the  semantics  of  digital  records 
may  persist  for  a  while  after  the  community  loses 
interest  in  their  content.  However,  as  the  semantic 
knowledge  is  not  maintained  and  transmitted  any 
more, its loss is almost unavoidable. 

Choosing a temporal frame of reference 

Before identifying the semantic challenges of digital preservation it is important to determine at which 
temporal scale to address the issue. At the short-term 
end  there  is  the  time  frame  which  the  legal  regulations of many countries provide for the preservation 
of business documents, namely 10 years. The market 
offers a number of archiving solutions which handle 
digital  preservation  at  this  scale  by  using  archiving 
formats with are maintained for at least a decade. The 
preservation  problem  may  be  considered  solved  at 
this scale.  

Probably,  the  most  ambitious  temporal  frame  of 
reference  considered  for  digital  preservation  is  the 
formidable  period  of  10.000  years  promoted  by  the 
Long Now Foundation [2]. Without doubt, it is intellectually  challenging  to  look  at  ten  millennia,  the 
relevant unit of analysis for a number of global problems such as climate change. It is less clear, however, 
in  what way  such  a very  long-term  perspective  fosters  the  emergence  of  technological  solutions  (e.g. 
format  repositories)  radically  different  from  those 
currently discussed in digital preservation.   

For the purpose of this article a much more modest 
frame of reference is chosen, a period of 100 years, 
which  is  more  accessible  to  empirical  evaluation  as 
well as closer to personal experience. Centering this 
frame  of  reference  upon  the  present  sets  a  double 
agenda:  (1)  finding  strategies  to  access  digital  contents from the past 50 years in spite of media ageing 
and semantic ageing, (2) planning the preservation of 
currently  accessible  digital  content  for  future  use 
during the 50 years to come.  

A major consequence of this specific planning horizon consists in the fact that the problem of semantic 
ageing cannot be solved anymore by simply agreeing 
on a standard format for digital archiving. Half a century is just plenty of time for requirements to evolve 
beyond any standard. This holds even for plain text 
as  the  chronology  of  character  formats  illustrates. 
The year 1963 witnessed the first edition of the ASCII standard which ceased to evolve with a last update in 1986. In the same year, the Latin-1 character 
set was published which became part of the ISO 8859 
series of standards. ISO ceased maintenance of these 
standards in 2004 to concentrate its resources on Un-
icode. The example shows that even for data of little 
semantic  complexity  only  a  sequence  of  standards 
was able to bridge a period of almost 50 years. Note 
also  that  the  end  of  a  standard s  evolution  does  not 
imply the end of its usage. 

Digital preservation and the Semantic Web 

Digital preservation has been a very real concern of 
memory institutions who addressed the problem long 
before  the  problem  of  an  impending  digital  dark 
age [10] became known to a wider audience. Public 
funding  of  the  major  research  initiatives  started 
around  the  turn  of  the  millennium,  notably  the  National  Digital  Information  Infrastructure  and  Preservation Program (NDIIPP) established in 2000 by the 
US  congress  and  comparable  European  research  in-
itiatives.  In  other  words,  the  mainstream  of  digital 
preservation research is about as old as the Semantic 
Web.  Unfortunately,  both  strands  of  research  have 
only interacted in rather limited ways so far. 

The  digital  preservation  initiatives  basically  explored two families of approaches for the problem of 
semantic  ageing:  migration  and  emulation   as well 
as combinations of both. Migration is especially interesting  for  document-centered  workflows,  including  those  used  in  the  humanities  and  in  culturalhistoric  research.  The  ideal  target  format  for  migration is published under an open source license, comes 
with  an  explicit  account  of  its  semantics,  and  possesses a large community of users. 

Emulation  constitutes  the  best  solution  for  archives of highly interactive media, e.g. interactive art 
or  video  games.  Emulation  strives  for  authenticity, 
for a reenactment of a user experience from the past. 
However,  being  able  to  run  the  software  which 
created the data does not per se make it interoperable 
with present day technology. Migration, on the other 

ture  knowledge-based  workflows.  Because  of  the 
focus  on  data  and  interoperability,  migration  seems 
to blend more easily with the different flavors of the 
Semantic Web  definitely with the idea of a Web of 
semantically interoperable knowledge bases but to a 
certain  extent  also  with  the  more  recent  idea  of  a 
Web of Linked Data. 

At least two levels can be distinguished at which 
migration  strategies  are  currently  supported  by  Semantic  Web  technologies:  the  preservation  planning 
level and the semantic transformation level. A major 
result  of  the  digital  preservation  initiatives  was  to 
conceive  preservation  as  an  ongoing  process  based 
on an appropriate digital curation lifecyle model (e.g.  
[4],[16]).  Preservation  planning  is  a  central  element 
of such a life cycle model. At the preservation planning  level,  migration  strategies  are  implemented  by 
services  that  monitor  data  formats  and  data  access 
mechanisms on the one hand and available migration 
tools on the other hand. Emerging risks are assessed 
(obsolescence  detection)  and  recommendations  for 
migration  pathways  are  generated.  A  first  link  between the world of digital preservation and the world 
of  the  Semantic  Web  exists  at  this  planning  level. 
Preservation services have been described as Semantic Web services, for instance, in the PANIC system 
[9] which uses an extension of the OWL-S ontology 
to  describe  preservation-specific  services  and  computes semantic matches to support service discovery.  
Services such as format transformations are based 
on  the  preservation  metadata  that  comes  with  the 
digital  records.  This  works  best  for  atomic  single 
media records but becomes more difficult for composite  multimedia  records.  For  highly  complex  data 
objects  such  as  those  produced  in  the  architecture, 
engineering,  and  construction  (AEC)  industry  by 
special-purpose CAD systems ready-to-use migration 
services simply do not exist [5]. In such cases, before 
addressing  migration  at  the  preservation  planning 
level, it has to be implemented at the semantic transformation level. For specialized domains such as architectural drawings, archival formats start to emerge 
although  they  have  some  limitations  from  the  point 
of view of digital preservation [14].  

However, many projects in the AEC industry have 
documentation needs that require some sort of application specific semantic modeling. It is near at hand 
to use ontological modeling languages such as OWL 
for  describing  those  application  ontologies  and  for 
relating  them  to  the  domain  ontology  [8].  This  is  a 
second  link  that  has  been  established  between  the 

world  of  digital  preservation  and  the  world  of  the 
Semantic Web. 

Once that data semantics is captured by ontological modeling, the problem of migrating from one data 
format  to  another  can  be  described  as  an  ontology 
matching problem which transforms a source ontology  into  a  target  ontology  [6].  Format  migration  is 
thus closely related to ontology change as defined in 
[7]. In adopting such an approach, we must, however, 
be  aware  of  the  general  limitations  of  ontological 
modeling. While many aspects of data semantics are 
easily captured by modeling formalisms such as description  logics,  some  aspects  of  the  semantics  of 
natural  languages  are  difficult  to  render.  The  same 
holds for epistemic drifts that are not reflected by a 
change of the logical modeling of data. 

The challenges of semantic ageing 

Within this setting  digital preservation based on 
ongoing format migration modeled as a sequence of 
ontology changes  a number of challenges arise. In 
one way or the other, they are all related to the issue 
of how well solutions scale over the chosen temporal 
frame of reference of 100 years, or rather 50 years, if 
only forward preservation is considered.  

Identifying long-term patterns of ontology change 

Only  by  looking  at  periods  that  are  significantly 
longer than the 10 years handled by current technol-
ogy,  it  can  be  determined  how  the  changes  in  the 
ontologies  which  cause  semantic  ageing  distribute 
over  time.  There  seem  to  be  change  processes  with 
an almost constant rate of change. However, in many 
cases,  changes  occur  in  bulk.  Open  research  questions relating to ontology change include: 

 What  different  change  patterns  are  there?  Do 
they depend on the type of ontology (top-level, 
domain, task, application)? 

 Is it possible to predict impending bulk changes 
by analyzing the time series of changes and the 
structural complexity of the ontology? 

 Media  ageing  is  studied  by  artificial  ageing 
processes. Can similar simulation approaches be 
designed for semantic ageing? 

Monitoring long-term usage of ontologies  

Software  tools  with  rich  functionality  (e.g.  specialpurpose  CAD  systems),  tend  to  generate  data  with 

only a fraction of the functionality is used to actually 
create  a  digital  record  (e.g.  a  CAD  document  with 
only 2D geometries). Migration at the semantic transformation  level  would  be  greatly  simplified  if  for  a 
collection of digital records it is known whether there 
are parts of the source ontology that are not used by 
any  of  the  records,  or  only  used  by  very  few.  The 
long-term  evolution of ontology  usage has  not been 
studied so far. Issues to be addressed in this context 
include:  

 How  does  the  population  of  classes  with  in-

stances change over long time intervals?   

 Which instances are actually used in queries and 
inferences? Do usage patterns change over time?  
 How can information about ontology usage pat-

terns help to improve ontology matching?  

 How  is  ontology  usage  monitoring  best  integrated into preservation life-cycle management? 

The challenges of cultural ageing 

The creation of meaning by communities is an ongoing  process  which  is  inevitably  accompanied  by  an 
antagonistic  process  in  which  meaning  is  lost.  Precomputer history is full of examples for this process 
of  cultural  ageing  which  affects  natural  languages 
and  their  writing  systems  as  well  as  complex  belief 
systems such as religions. Cultural ageing has at least 
a technical benefit. Only the records that a community  still  shows interest  in  will  be  migrated which reduces the semantic translation workload by orders of 
magnitude.  The  downside  is  also  evident.  Processes 
of  cultural  renewal  (renaissances)  which  generate 
interest in content that was considered uninteresting 
for generations are not possible. 

At  present,  cultural  ageing  does  not  constitute  a 
focus  of  research  on  digital  preservation.  Probably, 
this is due to the fact that there are sufficiently many 
other problems that seem more pressing. On the other 
hand, it is difficult to imagine a satisfactory solution 
to  digital  preservation  which  does  not  take  the  mechanisms of cultural ageing into account. This is not 
so much a matter of trying to prevent cultural ageing 
 a hopeless task  rather than to monitor the communitys access to the digital records and to identify 
content that will become vulnerable to semantic ageing because of the communitys loss of interest. 

Web  archiving  provides  a  good  example  of  how 
the digital version of cultural ageing operates. Defining a selection policy for the Web sites that are going 

to be preserved constitutes the crucial first step in the 
design of any Web archive [13]. Different computational methods have been proposed to determine the 
relevance of a web page such as Google's PageRank 
or the HITS algorithm [11]. The underlying problem 
 measuring visibility in a large-scale communicative 
processes  has been studied from many disciplinary 
perspectives  including  social  network  analysis  and 
bibliometrics. Simulation studies can show how visibility evolves over time [12].     

Monitoring cultural ageing 

A similar type of selection has been effective in the 
pre-computer era archives. What is new, is the quantitative scale, that is, the number of records for which 
choices need to be made. The choice is not necessarily one of inclusion or exclusion but rather a decision 
about  the  quality  level  at  which  semantic  ageing  is 
dealt with. An online journal with a high impact factor will probably enjoy a premium migration process 
involving human intervention which even preserves, 
for  instance,  interactive  3D-models  and  HD  videos 
while  the  automatic  standard  migration  process  for 
less  visible  journals  is  going  to  concentrate  on  preserving  just  text,  tables,  and  images.  A  number  of 
research  problems  are  connected  to  the  selection 
process triggered by cultural ageing.  
  Which is the appropriate way to quantify the 

visibilty of documents and/or data in the relevant 
communicative processes, e.g. in scientific 
communication in the humanities? 

  What is an adequate formal model of the loss of 

semantics triggered by cultural ageing? 

  How can digital preservation reflect the plurality 

of interests that different communities show?  
  What type of preservation planning will permit 
or even encourage the rediscovery of documents 
or data? 

Conclusions 

Although  the  digital  dark  age  is  a  menace  of  the 
present, the processes of media ageing, semantic age-
ing,  and  cultural  ageing  have  been  effective  since 
pre-computer times. In a world of distributed digital 
data,  however,  semantic  ageing  constitutes  a  bigger 
problem  than  media  ageing.  The  best  way  to  overcome the effects of semantic ageing is by migrating 
digital records into new formats. We have seen how 
Semantic Web technologies support migration at the 

transformation level. Research challenges have been 
formulated for semantic ageing and for cultural age-
ing. 

Long-term  preservation  constitutes  an  application 
field that forces the Semantic Web research community to adopt a much longer temporal frame of refer-
ence.  By  doing  so  it  places  the  study  of  ontology 
change  under  a  new  perspective  which  focuses, 
among others, on the changes of ontology use and on 
the  changing  population  of  classes  with  instances 
(categorization patterns of instance data). 

Taking cultural ageing seriously means to abandon 
the idea that digital preservation operates like a time 
capsule. The picture of content that is enclosed in a 
digital capsule to be opened at some moment in the 
future  is  misleading  because  it  is  not  the  past  that 
sends messages to the future. Rather, it is the present 
that  makes  choices,  selecting  content  from  the  past 
and  linking  to  it.  This  ongoing  process  of  linking 
from the present into the past makes up digital herit-
age.  
