Semantic Web  Interoperability, Usability, Applicability 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

Semantic Web  Interoperability, Usability,
Applicability

Editorial

Pascal Hitzler a, Krzysztof Janowicz b
a Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, USA
b GeoVISTA Center, Pennsylvania State University,

The Semantic Web is here to stay.

While this statement seems obvious, this has not been
so a few years ago, when basic research funding
seemed to be running out, and industrial uptake was
hardly happening. In the meantime, we do not only see
sustained funding for Semantic Web related research
(in particular by the European Commission), but also
significant investment by industry, including major IT
and venture capital companies. The Semantic Web is
here to stay  and to grow.

The Semantic Web is multidisciplinary and hetero-
geneous. Many Semantic Web researchers maintain
close ties to neighboring disciplines which provide
methods or application areas for their work. However,
the Semantic Web has now established itself as a research field in its own rights. Consequently, a growing
number of researchers, in particular those of the second or third generation, seem to identify themselves
with the Semantic Web as their primary field of work.
The growing number of top quality events dedicated
to Semantic Web topics is also a clear indication of
this trend. Another indicator is the increasing interweavement of Semantic Web methods into related disciplines leading to research topics such as geospatial-
semantics, the Semantic Sensor Web, semantic desk-
top, or work on cultural heritage.

The Semantic Web journal is set up to be a forum for highest-quality research contributions on all
aspects of the Semantic Web. Its scope encompasses
work in neighboring disciplines which is motivated by
the Semantic Web vision. Besides the publishing of research contributions, it is also an outlet for reports on

/0-1900/$ c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

tools, systems, applications, and ontologies which enable research, rather than being direct research con-
tributions.1 The journal also publishes top-quality surveys which serve as introductions to core topics of Semantic Web research.

The journals subtitle  Interoperability, Usability,
Applicability  reflects the wide scope of the jour-
nal, by putting an emphasis on enabling new technologies and methods. Interoperability refers to aspects
such as the seamless integration of data from heterogeneous sources, on-the-fly composition and interoperation of Web services, and next-generation search
engines. Usability encompasses new information retrieval paradigms, user interfaces and interaction, and
visualization techniques, which in turn require methods for dealing with context dependency, personaliza-
tion, trust, and provenance, amongst others, while hiding the underlying computational issues from the user.
Applicability refers to the rapidly growing application
areas of Semantic Web technologies and methods, to
the issue of bringing state-of-the-art research results
to bear on real-world applications, and to the development of new methods and foundations driven by real
application needs from various domains.

The primary modern purpose of a scientific journal
is quality control and visibility. Fair quality control in
scientific publishing directly depends on the quality
of the underlying review process and further editorial
choices. Today, however, reviewing and publishing is
inflationary, which increases potential conflicts of interest and substantially reduces the quality of the typical paper  and of the typical review. While we cannot simply reverse this trend, we can take advantage of
the World Wide Web to counteract these developments

1See http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/authors/ for informa-

tion on different types of papers accepted for publication.

Hitzler and Janowicz / Semantic Web  Interoperability, Usability, Applicability

in any way, you can find us at http://www.semantic-
web-journal.net/.

Acknowledgements This journal wouldnt be here
without Arnoud de Kemp. We thank him for taking the
initiative. This journal wouldnt be sustainable without all the hard work put into it by the editorial board
members, and by the responsible staff at IOS Press.
Thank you for your support.

and improve quality and transparency by bringing the
review process out into the public space.

The Semantic Web journal thus relies on an open
and transparent review process.2 All submitted papers as well as the corresponding solicited reviews are
made publicly available. All researchers can additionally contribute public reviews and submit comments.
Reviewers and editors are publicly known by name.
Discussions between reviewers and authors can (and
should) happen in public. Reviewers and editors are
acknowledged by name in the published versions of
the papers.

Reviewers put more effort into providing constructive reviews if their work and contribution to the final manuscript becomes visible. Editors can document
their choice of reviewers. Authors can receive additional feedback to ensure that their submission is of
sufficient maturity for an archival journal. Public discussions on controversial submissions minimize errors
in the decision making and thus result in a fairer pro-
cedure.

The success which ensues the setup of the journal
is highly encouraging. Until September 2010, we received more than 50 paper submissions; thisdoes not
include the vision statement papers contained in this
issue. We have several special issues from various domains lined up, some of which have not been publicly
announced yet. Researchers have contributed open reviews without us asking them to. So far, there have
only been very few occasions where a solicited reviewer has asked to remain anonymous.

This very first issue of the Semantic Web journal
contains vision statements by the members of the Editorial Board. While these contributions were essentially invited, they nevertheless underwent the full,
open, and transparent review process of the journal in
order to improve quality and clarity. Their publication
on the journals webpage already led to comments and
open reviews from external researchers. The resulting
collection is an impressive compilation of topics of
core concern to the Semantic Web community. While
it cannot possibly be exhaustive in terms of the many
aspects of Semantic Web research, its breadth of coverage is indicative of the breadth of scope of the jour-
nal.

We thank all contributors, authors and reviewers
alike. If you would also like to contribute to the journal

