Semantic Web  Interoperability, Usability, Applicability 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

The Role of Space and Time For Knowledge
Organization on the Semantic Web

Editor(s): Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA
Solicited review(s): Christoph Schlieder, University of Bamberg, Germany
Open review(s): Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA

Krzysztof Janowicz
jano@psu.edu
GeoVISTA Center, Department of Geography,
The Pennsylvania State University, USA

Abstract. Space and time have not received much attention
on the Semantic Web so far. While their importance has been
recognized recently, existing work reduces them to simple
latitude-longitude pairs and time stamps. In contrast, we argue that space and time are fundamental ordering relations
for knowledge organization, representation, and reasoning.
While most research on Semantic Web reasoning has focused
on thematic aspects, this paper argues for a unified view combining a spatial, temporal, and thematic component. Besides
their impact on the representation of and reasoning about individuals and classes, we outline the role of space and time
for ontology modularization, evolution, and the handling of
vague and contradictory knowledge. Instead of proposing yet
another specific methodology, the presented work illustrates
the relevance of space and time using various examples from
the geo-sciences.

Keywords: Semantic Heterogeneity, Ontologies, Context,
Space and Time, Sensors and Observations, Geospatial Se-
mantics.

1. The Beauty of Semantic Heterogeneity

Overcoming semantic heterogeneity is a core topic
of many contributions to such diverse research fields
as semantic interoperability, semantics-based information retrieval, service composition, the Sensor Web,
and ontology engineering. But do we really want to
overcome or resolve semantic heterogeneity and what
would this mean for the Semantic Web?

In contrast to syntactic heterogeneities caused by
differences in data types, signatures, and protocols, semantic heterogeneity refers to differences in the intended interpretation, i.e., meaning, of information.
While homonyms or polysemes are classical linguistic
examples, semantic heterogeneities in information science tend to be more subtle. Web service interfaces to
weather stations offer an impressive example. Two services can return a string called wind direction as output and even specify that the results are numerical values ranging from 0 - 360 but still have a contradicting interpretation of wind direction. For instance, one
service refers to wind blows to while the other adapts
a wind blows from semantics. Combining the results
to compute the dispersion of a toxic gas plume would
lead to meaningless and potentially dangerous results
[1]. It seems obvious that such incompatibilities need
to be resolved by overcoming semantic heterogeneity.
While this is true in many cases and at the core of classical data integration, it may not be the most appropriate solution for a Web following the AAA slogan1.

Consider the following simple, yet entertaining example of potholes in the UK [3]. Due to a severe winter millions of potholes need to be repaired by the local councils that are legally responsible for the maintenance of roads within their administrative bound-
aries. While potholes are defined as cracks of more
than 30mm depth in North East Somerset, they must
be of the width of a large dinner plate (300mm) and
the depth of a golf ball (40mm) in Gloucestershire.
Worcestershire, in contrast, defines potholes by the
width of a smaller dinner plate (200mm) with a minimum depth of a fist (40mm). In Coventry, a pothole
can be reported by citizens if its depth is a pound coin
and a 1p coin side by side. These, and many other,

1Anyone can say Anything about Any topic [2].

1570-0844/0-1900/$00.00 c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

K. Janowicz / The Role of Space and Time For Knowledge Organization on the Semantic Web

councils have different conceptualizations of the term
pothole for good reasons - probably because of the
budget they would need to invest in fixing them. Con-
sequently, it is unlikely that they want to resolve semantic heterogeneity in the first place.

Assuming one knows all local definitions of pothole
and all potential cracks in roads, answering the question how many potholes are there in Britain becomes a
complex, yet feasible task. In contrast, the question of
how many lakes are there in Minnesota, USA cannot
be answered this way. While the Department of Natural Resources lists 11,842 lakes over 10 acres, lake is a
vague concept by nature. Its intended interpretation is
not restricted to a degree which would allow to decide
whether a water body is a single lake or two lakes connected by a watercourse, or how to distinguish them
from ponds [4]. In fact, many size-based definitions
take 5 acres as criterion [5]. One could argue that the
size of a lake is all it needs for its definitions, but a
flooded grassland is not a lake while a temporarily dry
basin may still count as lake.

What appears to be an academic exercise only is, in
fact, a common problem in cross-border Spatial Data
Infrastructures (SDI). To query and exchange data between administrative units or states requires to take local conceptualizations into account. Similarly, in most
cases the reuse of sensor data fails due to different
measuring practices and requirements and, hence, data
is collected again and again. One approach to ensure
that, e.g., a forest does not stop at a states border
and continues as (wood) pasture on the other side just
because of varying definitions of forest2 is top-down
standardization. The Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the European Community INSPIRE is such
a large scale standardization endeavor aiming at cross-
scale, cross-language, and cross-border interoperability and access to geo-data.

However, creating top-down definitions of geographic feature types bears the danger of excluding local definitions [7]. To take yet another example from
geography, the European Water Framework Directive
defines river as [a] body of inland water flowing for
the most part on the surface of the land but which may
flow underground for part of its course. Simplifying,
European member states have to encode their data according to such global schemata. Nevertheless, rivers
in Southern Europe may lack any flowing water for

2and there are, for various reasons, several hundred local defini-

tions of forest [6].

long parts of the year. Therefore, the local definitions
may contradict with the global schemata.

While the previous examples involved space as a criterion for their variety, the following example also involves time as driving force. One key concept in ecology is succession. It describes the ordered, sometimes
cyclic sequence of changes resulting in transitions between ecological communities within the same geographic location. An often cited, cyclic example are
beaver dams. By changing the water flow of streams
they create ponds in forested areas. These ponds repress the trees, hence, change the composition of the
habitat and, therefore, may not offer the right food
sources for beavers anymore. Such ponds will then be
abandoned by the beavers and dry out again. The resulting meadows form yet another habitat with optimal conditions for plants requiring more direct light.
However, they will turn back into forested areas on the
long term and serve as beaver habitats again. From an
ontological point of view, this raises several questions
about how to define identity criteria for such places
and how to model them. We can define the state before
the stream is dammed and after the pond is replaced
by a meadow; the question from which point in time a
stream segment becomes a pond and how much water
is required to distinguish the pond from a meadow is
more difficult. Finally, if the cyclic succession at the
same location creates ponds again and again, are these
ponds the same entity3?

Summing up, one reason for the success of Semantic Web technologies in life sciences such as medicine
is based on canonical definitions. While we can define a human hand as having five distinguishable fingers in a specific order4, the above examples illustrate that there is no context free definitions of lakes,
forests, and many other geographic feature types. Context however, as will be discussed in the following,
is largely determined by space and time. With respect
to the question of overcoming semantic heterogene-
ity, the introduced examples illustrate the need for a
change in perspective. Namely, shifting from resolving heterogeneity to accounting for it and acknowledging the importance of local conceptualizations by focusing on negotiation and semantic translation. In previous work, we have discussed how semantic similar-

3This argument should also be kept in mind when arguing for Web
of Things related approaches to grounding, e.g., by assigning URIs
to real world entities.

4and we consider deviations such as caused by Polydaktylie, i.e.,

having supernumerary fingers, as deformities.

ity can be used to estimate how accurately an ontology
captures the users initial conceptualization [8]. Such
work could also be used for the negotiation of semantics on the Web.

2. Contexts and Concepts

Categorization is an essential prerequisite for interacting with and reasoning about our environment. Nev-
ertheless, there is no a priori conceptualization of the
world and the creation of entities and types is an act of
cognition and social convention [9,10]. The decision
of how to carve out fields of sensory input depends on
context, i.e., factors such as cultural background, previous knowledge, language, personal goals, the current
situation, and especially also on space and time. What
is a deep lake for recreation may be a shallow pond for
navigation purposes; see also [11]. In fact, conceptualization is the act of introducing distinctions for certain needs  making these decisions explicit in a formal way, i.e., constraining their interpretation, is what
ontology engineering should be about. Concepts and
relations between them are not fixed but emerge from
the context [12].

The importance of contextual information has been
widely recognized in information retrieval; which role
does it play for the Semantic Web? Today, the Web
is essentially still about documents and fixed links between them. These documents encapsulate information
by providing structure and context for the inherent data
and, hence, support their interpretation. The forthcoming Data Web, however, is about linking data, not doc-
uments. Data sets are not bound to a particular document but can be freely combined outside of their original creation context. In theory, users can query the
Linked Data cloud to answer complex queries spanning multiple sources and establish new links between
data on-the-fly. However, retrieving meaningful results
is more difficult than one may expect. While uncoupling data from documents eases their accessibility it
puts the burden on their interpretation.

Data is always created for a particular purpose, even
if it may be as broad as the creation of a free and collaborative encyclopedia such as the Wikipedia. Consider the following gedankenexperiment as illustra-
tion: do all appearances of a particular term in the
Wikipedia conform with its definition in the according
Wikipedia main article? For instance, the article about
time is based on modern physics, while the term is
used in a colloquial way throughout hundreds of thou-

sands of Wikipedia articles. If a future DBpedia version would capture more data from Wikipedia then it
does so far, would it assign the same ontological concept time to all of them? To a certain degree DBpedia
already faces such problems. For instance, searching
for actors may be done using rdf:type Actor or by
the relation occupation with the filler actor  both
SPARQL queries produce overlapping but different result sets.

Revisiting the examples in the previous section also
illustrates that similar difficulties arise for the creation
of meaningful URIs for Linked Data. Entities are often constructed based on social convention and differ
between information communities or even individuals.
Downtown or other vague regions may act as examples
[13]. If we do not want to end up in assigning URIs to
single pixels of raster data or the whole swath width of
sensors, we need to make some choices about how to
extract entities, e.g., points of interest, from datasets.
These choices are arbitrary to a certain degree and
should therefore be encoded in the URI. As recently
discussed by Halpin and Hayes, using owl:sameAs for
identity links is not sufficient and may be even misleading [14].

How do humans establish communication if the
meaning of terms is influenced or even determined by
local contexts? Leaving the physical layer, e.g., the
cortex and the role of mirror neurons aside, substantial work from cognitive science argues for a situated
nature of categorization [15]; see also [16]. Instead
of rigid and pre-defined conceptualizations with clear
boundaries, many concepts arise by simulating situ-
ations. A classical example are so-called ad-hoc categories such as things-to-extinguish-a-fire which include such diverse entities as bed sheets and water. The
function of artifacts, for instance, may be best understood in terms of the HIPE theory, i.e., by their History,
Intentional perspective, the Physical environment, and
Event sequences [17].

Humans can interact not because they share the
same conceptualizations but because they can make
sense of each others statements by putting them into
context. Meaningful communication, i.e., semantic interoperability in terms of the Web, can be established
as long as the consequences, e.g., actions, of our
counterpart are consistent and meet our expectations
[18,19]. For instance, while hill and mountain may
have clearly defined distinctions of social importance5,

5Cineastes are referred to the movie The Englishman Who Went

Up a Hill But Came Down a Mountain for an example.

K. Janowicz / The Role of Space and Time For Knowledge Organization on the Semantic Web

they are irrelevant for many everyday situations such
as agreeing to climb its peak. The reason why we
are not confused when our counterpart uses the term
mountain for what we would call a hill is that the potential interpretations of the terms are sufficiently restricted by the sentence or the context, e.g., the surrounding landscape. Where and when we use a term
restricts its interpretation towards the intended model.
Consequently when describing the nature of the Web,
the AAA slogan may be more appropriately described
as AAAAA slogan  Anyone can say Anything about
Any topic at Any time and Anywhere.

Acknowledging the role of context for conceptualization and the importance of the resulting heterogeneities sheds new light on the vision of establishing
ontologies for the Web. Learning from the success of
user generated content on the social Web, a promising
approach would be to support users in becoming active knowledge engineers instead of trying to develop
de-contextualized ontologies top-down. A set of building blocks and tools could support information communities in specifying their local conceptualizations.
Semantic annotations should connect local ontologies
with Linked Data on-the-fly.

How to define such building blocks without falling
into the symbol grounding trap, i.e., how to avoid an
endless regress? While this topic is too complex to be
discussed here, embodiment seems to be a crucial part
of potential solutions [20]. Humans do not share the
same conceptualization of the world but commonalities can be established by fundamental properties of
our bodies and sensor systems. Experiences of sur-
faces, containment, paths, center-periphery, blockage,
and many more are shared as they are directly observable based on our bodily interaction with the environment [21,22]. It is interesting to note how many
of these so called image schema have spatial roots. A
prominent linguistic examples illustrating the same argumentation are spatial and temporal metaphors [23].
Gibsons notion of Affordances [24], i.e., action possibilities arising from the combination of the actors
physical properties and those of the environment is another approach, and has been recently used to demonstrate how to ground geographic categories in observations [25] as well as for robot control. Strictly speak-
ing, one may object that the argumentation provided
above requires an inter-subjective stimulus meaning
and a similar sensory reception. However, as argued
by Quine, we can stay with private stimulus meanings
as the inter-subjectivity is provided by the use of language [19].

The ontological question of what is there bears the
danger of introducing entities and fixed types in an
early stage instead of focusing on observation categoricals [19]; see also [26] for the construction of bodies from observations. Ontologies should act as bridges
between the continuous fields of sensor-based observa-
tions, numerical models, and the rather entity-centric
use of language. Highlighting the importance of observations does not exclude social aspect of semantics.
With respect to the pothole example, all local definitions share an observable component - a depression in
the road - while the required size is a matter of social
convention and negotiation.

Space and time are two of the most fundamental ordering relations used in human cognition, language,
and even on the physical level in the formation of
patterns inside the human cortex. While we may not
agree on the definition of chair by referring to shape,
size, the number of legs, or the existence of a backrest - we can reach agreement in stating that their surfaces offer support and hence sitability. To demonstrate the impact of space on categorization6, another
approach to understand whether a visually perceived
object is a chair is via its position relative to a table,
bin, or other objects. Context and categorization influence each other mutually. While entering an unfamiliar building we constantly make predictions on what
we expect to encounter [27]. Once we have identified
a room as office by recognizing tables though stacks
of paper placed on them, a partially visible gray box
positioned under a table (that could not be categorized
before) is likely to be a computer. In other words, unfamiliar objects can be categorized based on their place
and at the same time give feedback about whether our
assumptions about the current context were appropri-
ate. If we cannot identify chairs in the room, the office
hypothesis may need to be revised. This could also affect the interpretation of other objects categorized be-
fore. Personal information managers (PIMs) use this
fact to split to-do lists based on contexts such things to
do at the office, home, or during travel.

Summing up, to ensure the meaningful usage of
(linked) data requires to restrict their potential inter-
pretations. Ontologies are one method to make the
underlying distinctions explicit but depend on context themselves. The attempt to develop stable and
global ontologies contradicts with the nature of the
Web. While this section illustrates the role of context

6Marked italic in the following sentences.

and situated concepts, various approaches have been
proposed in the knowledge representation and reasoning literature within the last decades  recent examples include C-OWL [28] or Bennetts notion of standpoint semantics [29]. Embodiment, sensors, and observations are crucial elements for establishing common building blocks to align or translate between usercontributed ontologies. To combine two buzzwords: a
promising approach for the future may be to ground
the Semantic Web in the Sensor Web.

3. Giving Order by Space and Time

While the previous section focused on knowledge
representation, this section describes how to structure
and organize concepts and ontologies. Since the impact of context is not random, reasoning about and
building bridges between local ontologies requires a
meta-theory explaining which kind of contextual information matters, which refines, and how context causes
diversification. In contrast to Semantic Web research,
understanding the users context and trying to infer implicit information out of it is a central task in information retrieval and related areas.

The challenge of handling local conceptualizations
at a global level is a prominent topic in artificial intelligence research since decades. One core idea is to
be consistent at the local level but allow contradicting
conceptualizations within the global knowledge base.
One approach is to organize knowledge in domain specific microtheories (also called contexts) and has been
used in OpenCyC. Each microtheory is developed as
a coherent set of statements and can be thought of as
a single ontology; see also work on ontology modularization [30]. Separate microtheories may hold information about the same concept but contain incompatible facts. Using the time example introduced above,
one microtheory may be more precise and rigid with
respect to physical properties and laws of nature, while
another microtheory may be based on weaker constraints to support naive physics [31]

Microtheories are organized in subsumption hier-
archies, i.e., facts specified in the super-microtheory
must also hold in each of its sub-theories. In contrast,
sibling-theories can store contradicting facts. More
formally, the hierarchy of microtheories is established
through the generalization relationship genlMt [32].
Given ist(mt, p) is the is true in relation between a
microtheory mt and a predicate p, then genlM t is the
anti-symmetric, reflexive, and transitive binary predi-

cate by which the theory hierarchy is constructed by
adding axioms of the form
mt0 : p ist(mtg, p)genlM t(mtg, mts)  ist(mts, p)

to the topmost theory mt0; where mtg is the more
general and mts the more specific theory; see also [33]
for details.

Surprisingly, alternative ordering principles based
on space, time, or cultural background have not been
discussed so far. While the previous sections illustrate
the impact of climatic, geological, ecological, adminis-
trative, and further factors on the categorization of geographic feature into types, this impact does not occur
randomly but follows gradually changing patterns7. In
other terms, using Toblers famous First Law of Ge-
ography: Everything is related to everything else, but
near things are more related than distant things [34].
For instance, the definition of river changes gradually
from northern to southern European countries. Simi-
larly, temporal examples can be found in the domain
of cultural heritage research which has to deal with in-
complete, biased, and contradicting information. For
instance, beliefs about the solar system from the Middle Ages may be organized in a different branch of
a knowledge base than microtheories describing beliefs from the age of industrialization. To structure microtheories by spatial (or administrative) containment
genlM t can be enriched.

mt0 : p ist(mtg, p)  genlM tC(mtg, mts)
 genlM t(mtg, mts)  (cid:125)(mtg, mts)

Hence, genlM tC(mtg, mts) holds if mts is a subtheory of mtg and all footprints of individuals of geographic feature types specified in mts are (spatially
or administratively) contained in mtg; see [7] for more
details. This containment predicate ((cid:125)) requires a spatial footprint for the individuals as well as for the spatial scope of the theory; a formal semantics including
the Region Connection Calculus (RCC) is left for further work.

The usefulness of this approach can be demonstrated by the INSPIRE example. Adding genlM tC
to the meta-theory structuring local ontologies ensures that geographic feature types defined by states
that are administratively contained by the European
Union must be sub-types of the EU wide definition.
Based on this requirement, instead of developing common schemata for all European member states top-

7Which does not exclude crisp borders between them as in case

of some administrative factors.

K. Janowicz / The Role of Space and Time For Knowledge Organization on the Semantic Web

down, local conceptualizations and non-standard inference such as computing the Least Common Subsumer
(LCS) [35] and similarity reasoning [36] can be employed to automatically infer an appropriate top-level
which does not violate local definitions. Consequently,
if Spanish rivers do not necessarily contain flowing
water but rivers in Germany do, the computed top-level
for the EU should not define rivers based on the feature
of flowing water; see [7] for details.

Summing up, besides subsumption hierarchies ontologies can be organized using space and time. Understanding and modeling the relation and interaction between ontologies will support the development of and
reasoning about user-centric ontologies for the Web.

4. Towards an Ecology of Concepts

The previous sections argue that conceptualization
is influenced by spatial and temporal factors, and that
these factors can be used on a higher abstraction level
to establish structure between different conceptualiza-
tions. Consequently, if concepts are not static, how to
study their evolution [37] and diversification in space
and time? Since shifts in conceptualization are difficult to detect and quantify, one may search for an analogy to a well known process. An interesting approach
would be to study how species evolve and what factors drive their diversification. One promising candidate may be the process of adaptive radiation. In short,
it described the evolutionary diversification of a single
ancestor into several species each adapted to a particular ecological niche; Darwins finches are a classical
example. Simplifying, the process is caused by some
(sudden) change in the environment, e.g., the volcanic
creation of an isolated island. To construct a meaningful analogy requires to establish partial mappings between the evolution of concepts and biological evolu-
tion. While concepts and emerging new sub-concepts
can be mapped to the radiation of species, the changing environmental, e.g., spatial, aspects can be mapped
to a semantic space [38], distance to semantic distance,
i.e., similarity, and so forth. The sudden diversification
of pothole definitions caused by climatic and economic
conditions may serve as a first example. An alternative approach based on time-geography was recently
presented by Raubal [38] arguing for a time-indexed
representation of concepts in GIScience. Schlieder discusses the related notion of semantic ageing for the
long-term preservation of digital data [39].

For an impressive example on how theories from
ecology and evolutionary biology can explain human
strategies in gathering information, see Pirollis Information Foraging Theory [40].

5. Conclusions

In this work we discussed the role of space and
time for knowledge engineering and organization from
three distinct perspectives: (1) their role for the definition of individual concepts, (2) their role for the organization of these concepts, and (3) their role for understanding their mutual interaction. We illustrated the
need for semantic heterogeneity and the situated nature of conceptualization using various examples from
the geo-sciences, outlined how space and time can act
as structuring principles between local ontologies, and
sketched an approach to model how concepts evolve in
space and time. To create and maintain such local on-
tologies, we have to raise the user from a content creator to an active knowledge engineer. Citizens as sensors [41] and the Sensor Web may serve as a foundation for Semantic Web ontologies based on observation
categoricals.

6. Acknowledgments

The comments from the reviewers and discussions
with Werner Kuhn, Martin Raubal, and Simon Scheider provided useful suggestions to improve the content
and clarity of this paper.
