Undefined 1 (2009) 15
IOS Press

Accessing the Web of Data through
Embodied Virtual Characters

Editor(s): Krzysztof Janowicz, Pennsylvania State University, USA and Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA
Solicited review(s): Kunal Verma, Accenture, USA; Tom Heath, Talis, UK
Open review(s):

Philipp Cimiano a Stefan Kopp b
a Semantic Computing Group, Cognitive Interaction Technology Excellence Center (CITEC), Bielefeld University
E-mail: cimiano@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de
b Sociable Agents Group, Cognitive Interaction Technology Excellence Center (CITEC), Bielefeld University
E-mail: kopp@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de

Abstract. The amount of data published on the Semantic Web has witnessed a tremendous growth in the last years to which
the Linked Open Data (LOD) project has contributed significantly. While the Semantic Web was originally conceived of as an
extension to the Web by addition of machine-readable data allowing automatic processing by machines, the question how humans
can benefit from all the data published on the Web is becoming an important one. In the light of this question it seems crucial
to make accessing the data on the Web as easy and intuitive as possible by adapting to the cognitive and information processing
capabilities of humans. In this short position paper, we argue that one interesting and promising approach in this direction is to
allow people to access semantic data on the Web through multimodal interaction with embodied virtual characters.

Keywords: semantic web, interaction, multimodal access, virtual characters

1. Introduction

The amount of data published on the Web of Data
(a.k.a. The Semantic Web) has witnessed a tremendous
growth in recent years. The Linked Open Data (LOD)
project1 has contributed significantly to this growth.
People are in fact massively following Tim BernersLees advice to publish data on the Web following
the linked data principles [3,5]. Linked Data is a
term referring to the recommended best practices for
exposing, sharing, and connecting RDF data via dereferenceable URIs on the Semantic Web. While the
Semantic Web was originally conceived as an extension to the Web by the addition of machine-readable
data allowing automatic processing by machines, the
question how humans can benefit from all the data published on the Web is certainly becoming a more and
more important one.

1http://linkeddata.org/

In the light of this question it seems crucial to make
accessing the data on the Web as easy and intuitive as
possible. One central concern is to adapt to the cognitive and information processing capabilities of humans
by making interaction on the Semantic Web meaningful for the user. Clearly, this is not only a user interface question. While suitable user interfaces are definitely yet to be seen, appropriate interaction paradigms
for the Web of Data need to provide answers to the
following questions:

 How much of the RDF graph should remain visible to end users? Should we fully abstract from
the RDF data model / graph? It has been argued
that the graph is actually not particularly useful as
a way to present semantic data [28]. While some
tools for accessing the Web of Data stick quite
closely to the (linked) data graph (see Tabulator
[4]), it seems important to abstract from the data
graph when interacting with end users. After all,

0000-0000/09/$00.00 c 2009  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

Cimiano and Kopp / Accessing the Web of Data through Embodied Virtual Characters

why should users care about the data model if all
they want is relevant information?

 How should information be packaged? That means,
which are the information units that users can
handle optimally? At one end of the spectrum, we
have a single triple (arguably the smallest information unit on the Web of Data), at the opposite
end we can come up with complete (multimodal)
presentations generated by integrating various re-
sources, aggregating data, computing diagrams,
etc.

 What is the ideal interaction paradigm to access
the Web of Data? Keyword querying [33], browsing [4], query-by-example, natural language [26]
or even by way of reciprocal conversation between the user and the interface [14]?

 How can users understand non-trivial concepts
such as trust, provenance, confidence etc? What
are appropriate metaphors to convey such meta-
information?

Providing answers to the above questions does
clearly not only pertain to research on mere user interface design, but rather constitutes a non-trivial and
long-term endeavor for the Semantic Web and related fields of research. Developing new and effective
paradigms for interacting with the Semantic Web has
indeed been recognized as a key challenge in the field
(see [18,16,17]).

2. Motivation

We argue that one interesting and promising approach is to allow people to access semantic data on
the Web through multimodal communication with embodied virtual characters. Consider that you would like
to get information about the relation between the two
French painters Claude Monet and Edouard Manet.
Suppose also that you would like to get an overview
about all painters considered as impressionists or that
you would like to receive information about US presidents in chronological order. A natural way to pose
such queries to a system is by way of natural language.
And, as the Web of Data is structured, in contrast to
the traditional Web, we can indeed provide answers to
such information needs by fetching and re-composing
different pieces of data available. Such a composition
of available information into new informational structures that meet a current information need would be
much more difficult on the traditional Web as it requires to understand the textual content first.

The even more important question for our purposes
here is: which kind of structure would we like to get
back as answer to such a request? An unordered and
unstructured set of triples crawled from the Web of
Data? Certainly not. Rather it seems crucial to find
approaches that allow to assemble the relevant triples
into a logical and coherent structure that can be conveyed to users. Imagine that you have a virtual character as assistant that you have posed the above query to
compare Monet and Manet. The character would provide the following spoken answer along with different
non-verbal modalities (we highlight the ouput in nontextual modalities in bold font):

[Agent displays three photos of Claude Monet,
Edouard Monet and one of Paris in the 19th
century, respectively] Both Claude Monet [points
to the photo of Claude Monet] and Edouard
Manet [points to photo of Manet] were French
painters born in Paris in the 19th century [points
to photo of Paris]. Monet was born on the 14th of
November 1840, whereas Manet was born earlier
on the 23rd of January of 1832. While both are associated with the Impressionism movement, Monet
is also considered to belong to the realism move-
ment. The most important works of Monet include
Impression Sunrise, Rouen cathedral, London Par-
liament, Water Lilies and Poplar Series [agent sequentially blends in pictures of all these works,
synchronized with its speech]. The most important works of Manet include The Lunch on the
grass".

The strengths of such an approach to accessing the
Web of Data by virtual embodied characters can be
clearly appreciated: by packaging information into different modalities and units (e.g. sentences in speech)
that people are used to from everyday conversation,
we can generate a structured, yet compact, concise and
amenable presentation. There are a number of further
benefits, which we discuss with respect to the issues
raised in the introduction:

 Abstracting from the RDF data model: It has
been argued that the RDF graph is actually not
particularly useful as a way to present semantic
data [28]. Virtual characters are a promising way
to realize a human-tailored access that abstracts
from the RDF data model in order to transform
the information into units that can be presented
via different natural modalities (speech, text, gestures etc.).

 Multimodal communication as interaction paradigm

Conveying multimodal output (using speech, in-
tonation, gestures or facial expressions) allows to
package information more effectively and compactly as different types of information can be
conveyed across different suitable channels in
parallel. As a corollary, this will lead to information packages that are closer to the information
units that people are used to process and assimilate in daily interaction with human partners.

 Tangible notion of a mediator: Virtual characters are known to be entertaining and to increase
the motivation to interact with a system [24]. In
the difficult situation of wanting (or having) to access the abstract body of knowledge contained in
the Semantic Web, we hypothesize that the presence of a virtual character can be beneficial because it makes tangible the notion of an assistant who is there to help users in finding the relevant information. Also, being able to formulate
an information need in natural language is a custom and natural way for humans (and is increasingly supported by search engines, e.g. Wolfram-
Alpha2, or by natural language interfaces to the
Semantic Web, see [27],[20]). Virtual characters
are known to be social actors in the sense that they
elicit the willingness to apply natural interaction
patterns [24,23,10].

 Expressing meta-information: An embodied
virtual character can use gestures, appropriate facial expressions, prosody and intonation, or linguistic modifiers such as possibly or probably to
make clear that trust in a certain bit of information
is low. As trust is an important building block of
the Semantic Web (see [30,12,13,9,32,1]), conveying trust levels to human users becomes a crucial issue. Using gestures along with appropriate linguistic modifiers enables natural communication of such qualifiers together with the actual content, in a way that is more intuitive than
presenting lists of items ranked by confidence or
other symbolic or numerical representations of
confidence values or trust levels.

2.1. Related Work

Developing new and effective paradigms for user
interaction with the Semantic Web has been recog-

2http://www.wolframalpha.com/

nized as a key challenge in the field. Heath et al. [18]
have identified the following challenges that must be
addressed if Semantic Web technologies are to enter
into widespread usage: i) increasing awareness, ii)
providing clear benefits and iii) delivering appropriate functionality, iv) giving guidance for users, v) improving usability, vi) ensuring coherence of Semantic Web applications and vii) creating a critical mass
of participation. In fact, there have been several workshops on this topic since 2004, e.g. IDWS3, EUSW4,
SWUI075, SWUI086, SWUI097. Some authors of
papers at these workshops have already proposed that
conversational interaction with the Web of Data is an
important interaction paradigm to explore (see [14]
and [11]). However, there have only been quite preliminary approaches [7,21], which allow such an access and even extend it to the use of embodied virtual
characters. For example, Kimura and Kitamura [21]
directly embed RDF queries into utterance rules specified in the chatterbot markup language AIML. This
simple approach allows for responding to a certain input phrase with a fixed utterance in which predetermined parts are replaced with retrieved fragments, but
it represents by no means a flexible and comprehensive
method to collect semantic data and to turn this into
coherent multimodal presentations to satisfy the users
information need.

It is important to emphasize that we are not stating
that an approach to access the Semantic Web / Web of
Data by way of embodied virtual characters will solve
all of the challenges raised by Heath et al. [18]. How-
ever, as argued above, an approach based on embodied
virtual characters has the potential to provide access to
the Web of Data in an intuitive and natural manner and
thus to improve usability. Given the massive amount of
data available, techniques that gather this data and generate intuitive and appealing summaries are addressing
a clearly defined user need and deliver a clear benefit
and appropriate functionality. Heath et al. claim that in
order for semantic technologies to increase in awareness and receive widespread adoption we would need
to hide the label Semantic Web and convey the fact
to users that technology is doing useful things. The interaction with embodied virtual characters as we propose here would indeed contribute to making the tech-

3http://interaction.ecs.soton.ac.uk/idsw04/
4http://www.ifi.uzh.ch/ddis/iswc2005ws.html
5http://swui.semanticweb.org/swui2007/
6http://swui.webscience.org/SWUI2008CHI/
7http://swui.webscience.org/SWUI2009/

Cimiano and Kopp / Accessing the Web of Data through Embodied Virtual Characters

nology and data models used behind the scenes transparent to the user while focusing on the systems presence as a helpful and useful assistant. This capitalizes
on the fact that an agent can naturally provide assistance and guidance to the user in case he/she is experiencing problems, and can provide an enjoyable interaction which has the potential to increase the participation toward a critical mass.

As argued for by Dickinson [11], many problems
for which the Semantic Web or Linked Open Data is
useful are inherently exploratory in nature, where the
users start out with a vague idea of what to look for
and develop further insights into the nature of the enquiry during the interaction. This is exactly the type
of incremental interaction that we aim to support and
elicit with an embodied conversational character. It
has been further argued for by Dickinson that turntaking dialogues are a natural fit for the iterative exploration moves in exploratory search [11]. We agree
with Dickinson that access though conversation is the
most natural interaction type possible for humans engaging in exploration tasks. The fact that conversationbased access to the Semantic Web is an alternative with
high potential is also argued for by Golbeck and Mut-
ton, who allow users to access services from Internet
Relay Chat (IRC) [14].

3. Challenges and Roadmap

We have highlighted the benefits of accessing the
Web of Data by way of embodied virtual characters.
However, this is a daunting endeavor requiring remarkable progress in a number of areas. We can, however,
point out some of the challenges that need to be ad-
dressed:

 Selecting and packaging information intro
narratives: An important challenge is to develop
approaches that i) select the right information
from the Web of Data to satisfy a users information need, ii) construct plans how to convey
this information in different modalities and iii)
generate coherent narrative structures as output.
The latter requires the generation of discourses
beyond single sentences, which has been partially
addressed in the language generation community
(see [34], [29] [19]). The biggest challenge is to
accomplish this robustly without requiring a fixed
data schema to allow for scaling up to the size and
heterogeneity of the Web of data.

 Verbalization of Information: Conversational
access to the Semantic Web requires that we are
able to verbalize RDF data, possibly in different
languages. We hence need generation algorithms
that can exploit linguistic knowledge captured in
models such as LexInfo [8] about how data elements are to be realized linguistically in order
generate language output. First approaches to verbalize semantic data have been presented [6] but
are restricted to very rigid schemas and require
manual effort by the user to adapt the system.

 Generation of appropriate non-verbal behav-
ior: Flexibly producing gestures, facial expres-
sions, or head movements that can accompany
other modalities (speech, audio, video, text) is a
non-trivial problem and subject of ongoing research [2]. In our context, one key challenge is to
extract the information from a semantic resource
that allows for generating behaviors that communicate differently from speech, e.g. gestures modulating or complementing it with imagistic or indexical information.

 Robust Dialog Management in large domains:
An important challenge for providing conversational access to the Semantic Web is to be able to
implement robust dialog management strategies
that do not follow a fixed schema but allow, e.g.,
for clarification requests or repairments of mis-
understanding. Thus, slot-filling techniques that
have been developed in the dialog system community [25] are less suited in this context. Dialog
management systems that can flexibly cope with
arbitrary domain data are needed here. A first approach in this direction proposing to use a multimodal dialog system to access semantic data can
be found in [15].

 Language-based interfaces: We need to support
language-based interaction between the user and
the conversational agent that goes beyond mere
question-answering functionality (see [26]). One
key issue is to be able to interpret language input
for the users information need, which is most often only possible by embedding it in the context
of previous requests and presentations.

 Synchronizing different modalities: While expressing information through different channels
(modalities) allows to compactly and efficiently
apportion and encode information, synchronizing
the different channels becomes crucial and is a
big challenge (see [22]).

 User acceptance: One challenge is that embodied characters bear the risk of raising expectations
with the users that the systems cannot live up to
and that creates annoyance or frustration of the
user. We argue that by smart design of the character and its interaction capabilities, and by a usercentered approach to developing character-based
interfaces to the Web of Data, it may be possible
to find the balance between what users demand
from the system (e.g. full natural language con-
versation), what the character evokes by its appearance and behavior, and what it actually deliv-
ers.

While all of these issues are open research ques-
tions, we think that they are worthwhile to explore. We
can conceive of a step-wise development towards the
ultimate vision of an embodied virtual character that
takes a query and answers it like a human expert in the
respective field. At first, we will see agents that understand relatively simple requests and can automatically
generate a simple discourse (possibly applying a limited set of templates). This first generation of agents
might be already able to generate simple non-verbal
output, synchronizing it with the speech modality and
have basic mechanisms for conveying trust levels. The
interaction with the user will be most likely text-based
rather than via speech and there will be no mixedinitiative interaction, i.e, the agents will merely react
to the input of a user. The technology for such characters is already available and building them is mainly
a matter of system construction and attunement to the
Semantic Web domain. Then, we will see agents that
implement simple patterns of interaction and are able
to engage in clarification dialogues. Simple mixedinitiative dialogs in selected domains have been realized already (see for example the project Gossip Galore which aims at developing conversational agents
providing users access to pop trivia [35]). Finally, we
might have reached a state that allows us to engage in
conversation in selected domains and to receive multimodal information presentations from the character
that are informative and tailored to the context. Robustness might be achieved by data-driven techniques
which acquire script knowledge via games with a purpose [31], by observation, or via trial-and-error.

4. Conclusion

Providing meaningful interaction paradigms to access the Web of Data is an important topic for the Se-

mantic Web community. We have suggested that providing access to the Semantic Web through multimodal
interaction with embodied virtual characters is an interesting avenue to explore. Besides preliminary case
studies, there has not been extensive research on this
topic so far. As is clear from the challenges mentioned
in this article, developing systems that provide conversational access to the Web of Data requires techniques
and knowledge from a number of disciplines (dialog
management, natural language processing, information retrieval, multimedia processing, virtual agents,
etc.). Thus, we see it as a vision to which different research fields could (and should) contribute to and can
cross-fertilize each other by doing so.

Certainly, the one interaction paradigm which fits
all purposes and users does not exist. We thus think
that it is only through appropriate user studies that we
will be able to find out which (combination of) interaction paradigms are suited for which purpose. Conversational access to the Semantic Web might be one of
them, possibly most suitable for casual users wanting
to explore the Web of Data.
