Undefined 0 (2010) 10
IOS Press

Towards the Ubiquitous Web

Editor(s): Krzysztof Janowicz, Pennsylvania State University, USA and Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA
Solicited review(s): Marta Sabou, MODUL University Vienna, Austria and Boyan Brodaric, Geological Survey of Canada, Canada
Open review(s): none

Andreas Hotho a,b and Gerd Stumme a,c
a Knowledge & Data Engineering Group,
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science,
University of Kassel, Wilhelmsh oher Allee 73,
34121 Kassel, Germany
http: // www. kde. cs. uni-kassel. de/

b Data Mining and Information Retrieval Group,
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science,
University of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland
97074 Wuerzburg, Germany
http: // www. is. informatik. uni-wuerzburg. de/

c Research Center
L3S, Appelstr. 9a,
30167 Hannover, Germany
http: // www. l3s. de/

Abstract. Today, we observe the amalgamation of the Social Web and the Mobile Web, which will ultimately lead
to a Ubiquitous Web. The integration and aggregation of the different kinds of available data, and the extraction
of useful knowledge and its representation has become an important challenge for researchers from the Semantic
Web, Web 2.0, social network analysis and machine learning communities. We discuss the Ubiquitous Web vision,
by addressing the challenge of bridging the gap between Web 2.0 and the Semantic Web, before widening the scope
to mobile applications.

Keywords: Ubiquitous Web, Semantic Web, Web 2.0, Data Mining, Machine Learning, Social Network Analysis

1. Introduction

Highly popular user-centered applications such
as blogs, social tagging systems, and wikis have
come to be known as Web 2.0 or the Social
Web [6]. At the same time, mobile phones became more and more powerful and are equipped
with more and more sensors, giving rise to Mobile
Web applications. Today, we observe the amalgamation of these two trends, leading to a Ubiqui-

tous Web, whose applications will support us in
many aspects of the daily life at any time and
any place. The integration of the different kinds
of available data, their integration and aggrega-
tion, and finally the extraction of useful knowledge
and its representation has become an important
challenge for different research communities, since
it requires the confluence of previously separated
lines of research. Consequently, the last years have
seen increasing collaboration of researchers from

0000-0000/10/$00.00 c 2010  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

ysis and machine learning communities. Applications that use these research results are achieving
economic success. Data now become available that
allow researchers to analyze the use, acceptance
and evolution of their ideas.

In this position paper, we will discuss the Ubiquitous Web vision in two steps. First, we will address the challenge of bridging the gap between
Web 2.0 and the Semantic Web, before widening
the scope to mobile applications.

2. Bridging the Gap Between Web 2.0
and the Semantic Web

A major reason for the immediate success of
Web 2.0 systems is their high ease of use. The result is that the wisdom of the crowd and the
wisdom of the experts are converging. The online
encyclopedia Wikipedia, for instance, reaches (and
in some areas even surpasses) the quality of traditional dictionaries [3]. We anticipate that wikis,
resource sharing systems, and blogs are only the
first appearances of an emerging family of web cooperation tools. These sites do not only provide
content but also generate an abundance of weakly
structured metadata. A good example is tagging.
Here, users add keywords from an uncontrolled vo-
cabulary, called tags, to a resource. Such metadata
are easy to produce, but lack any kind of formal
grounding, as used in the Semantic Web.

The Semantic Web complements the bottom-up
effort of the Web 2.0 community in a top-down
manner. Its central point is a stronger knowledge
representation, based on some kind of ontology
with a fixed vocabulary and typed relations [5].
Such a structure is typically something users implicitly have in mind when they provide their content in Web 2.0 systems. However, for further use,
this structure is hidden in the content and needs
to be extracted. In the Semantic Web community,
such approaches are known as Ontology Learning [1]. Techniques to analyze network structures
or weak knowledge representations, such as those
found in the Web 2.0, have also a long tradition
in different other disciplines, like social network
analysis, machine learning and data mining. These
kinds of automatic mechanisms are necessary to
extract the hidden information and to reveal the
structure in a way that the end user can benefit

from it. Using established methods to represent
knowledge gained from unstructured content will
also be beneficial for the Web 2.0 in that it provides Web 2.0 users with enhanced Semantic Web
features to structure their content.

Besides the application of Semantic Web tech-
nology, it may also be beneficial to consider more
light weight knowledge representations, since not
always approaches with strong formal semantics
are needed. One example are statistical represen-
tations, such as association rules, tag similarity
measures, and similarity measures in search engines or recommender systems. A careful analysis
of the intended application will decide the way to
be followed.

The main research question can be summarized
as follows: How will current and emerging Web 2.0
systems support untrained users in sharing knowledge on the Web within the next years? The scientific challenge is to develop minimal-invasive
and scalable techniques for large, web-wide spread
user communities for knowledge sharing. While
knowledge acquisition and management has a long
research history, the new aspect of the Web 2.0 is
a) the real large number of users who are willing to
share their knowledge but b) who are very selective in participating and will stop their cooperation soon if the barriers are set too high. An import
requirement is thus how to build, from the uncoordinated input of many people, where each individual is providing very little and/or unstructured
input only, a shared knowledge space which allows
for similar benefits as those usually promised for
approaches with one central, well-designed, heavyweight ontology. This representation will probably
not be presented to the users, as the interaction
has to be kept as simple as possible, but will be the
basis for the systems enhanced functionalities.

3. The Ubiquitous Web

The emergence of ubiquitous computing [7] has
started to create new environments consisting of
small, heterogeneous, and distributed devices that
foster the social interaction of users in several di-
mensions. Similarly, the upcoming Social Semantic
Web also integrates the user interactions in social
networking environments. For instance, nowadays
modern smartphones allow everyone to have access
to the WWW at every place and at every time.

with more and more sensors. Typical sensors in todays smartphones are measuring proximity, ambient light, acceleration, loudness, moisture, geographic north. Furthermore, access to the most
prominent Web 2.0 platforms  in particular Face-
book, Flickr, Youtube  is frequently pre-installed
by the vendor. This example shows that the worlds
of WWW, Web 2.0, the Mobile Web, and sensor
technology are rapidly amalgamating. Going even
one step further, we assume the rapid convergence
of the Ubiquitous Web with the Internet of Things
(cf. [2])  more and more, the real world that is
surrounding us will have its digital counterpart.

Applications in the Ubiquitous Web will thus
rely on a mix of data from sensors, social networks and mobile devices. These data need to be
integrated, aggregated, and analyzed by means of
Data, Text, and Web Mining techniques to all
for semantic and/or statistical representations of
knowledge, which will then fuel the ubiquitous ap-
plications.

Mining in ubiquitous and social environments is
thus an emerging area of research focusing on advanced systems for data mining in such distributed
and network-organized environments. It also integrates some related technologies such as activity
recognition, Web 2.0 mining, privacy issues and
privacy-preserving mining, predicting user behav-
ior, etc. (cf. [4])

In typical ubiquitous settings, the mining system can be implemented inside the small devices
and sometimes on central servers, for real-time ap-
plications, similar to common mining approaches.
However, the characteristics of ubiquitous and social mining are in general quite different from current mainstream data mining and machine learn-
ing. Unlike in traditional data mining scenarios,
data does not emerge from a small number of
(heterogeneous) data sources, but potentially from
hundreds to millions of different sources. As there
is only minimal coordination, these sources can
overlap or diverge in any possible way.

Semantic Web technology can bridge the gap between all kinds of information independent of its
source and its origin and can be used as a starting
point to put everything together. The real world
information gathered by sensors will be used by
applications running on mobile devices and will be
connected with the information of their users from

the social web. Semantic Web technology may become the right knowledge representation for connecting these worlds.

4. Conclusion

Today, we see the first steps towards an integration of the Social, Mobile and Semantic Webs. This
path allows for exciting challenges for researchers
of different communities. New insights provided
by machine learning and social network analysis
techniques will lead to a new type of knowledge.
We envision that research in this area will be of
growing interest, as the automatic extraction of
knowledge from weakly structured sources contributed by a huge mass of users and the combination with structured knowledge will be an important basis for the Semantic Web. It will lead to a
broad range of new applications, which allow for
combining knowledge of different types, levels and
from different sources to reach their goals. The upcoming Ubiquitous Web is one target application
area which will benefit from the newly integrated
knowledge.
