Undefined 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

A Taskonomy for the Semantic Web

Editor(s): Krzysztof Janowicz, Pennsylvania State University, USA and Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA
Solicited review(s): Manfred Hauswirth, DERI, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland and Mark Gahegan, University of Auckland, New Zealand
Open review(s): Frank van Harmelen, Donovan Artz, Pascal Hitzler, Osma Suominen

Tom Heath
Talis Systems Ltd.
Knights Court, Solihull Parkway,
Birmingham Business Park, B37 7YB,
United Kingdom
Email: tom.heath@talis.com

Abstract. The modalities of search and browse dominate
current thinking about interaction with the Web. Given the
Webs origins as a global hypertext system, it is understandable that these document-centric interaction patterns prevail.
However, these modalities alone are inadequate as a conceptual model of interaction with the global Linked Data
space that is the Semantic Web. Realising the full potential of
the Semantic Web requires a fundamental reconsideration of
Web interaction patterns in the light of Linked Data, and this
renewed conceptualisation must drive the research agenda
related to user interaction and the Semantic Web. This paper
argues that a fundamental understanding of user goals and
tasks is the appropriate perspective from which to approach
the research and development of Semantic Web applications.
However, the Web in Semantic Web should not detract from
the potential for cross-platform data interoperability enabled
by the Semantic Web technology stack. In this context we
propose a taskonomy of data- and object-centric user tasks
derived from an analytical abstraction of existing research,
not simply in the fields of Web search and browse but also
email and Instant Messaging, that can help shape the direction of research and application development in the Semantic
Web field.

Keywords: Semantic Web, Linked Data, Email, Instant Mes-
saging, User Interaction, Taskonomy, Activity-Centred De-
sign.

1. The Ubiquitous Document Metaphor

"The correct approach to the support of behavior is

activity-based classification." [15]

Look closely enough and it becomes apparent that
document-centric metaphors are fundamental to the
concept, design and realisation of our most widely
used computing systems. Computers have desktops,
files live in folders, we add pages to our Web sites. The
terminology of email (mailbox, postmaster, blind carbon copy, attachments) reflects a communication platform conceived in the era of memos and postal sys-
tems. The Web emerged from a desire to share information between scientists [2], and owes much to the
influence of the document-centric fields of hypertext
and information retrieval:

"Computers give us two practical techniques for the
man-knowledge interface. One is hypertext, in which
links between pieces of text (or other media) mimic human association of ideas. The other is text retrieval,
which allows associations to be deduced from the content of text. In the first case, the readers operation
is typically to click with a mouse (or type a reference
number)  in the second case, it is to supply some
words representing that which he desires. The W3 ideal
world allows both operations, and provides access for
any browsing platform." [1]

1.1. Classifying Web Search

This original model of the Web has defined our view
of how it is used ever since, with searching and browsing remaining the prevalent lens through which we
view human interaction with the Web [16], even occurring in more data-centric analyses such as [19].

The dominance of the document-metaphor manifests itself not only in the computing applications we
develop, but in the research conducted to try and understand how people use the Web in practice. While
work such as [6] has attempted to understand the range
of activities conducted on the Web, e.g. banking, job-
hunting, or finding travel information, numerous others have attempted to identify and classify various
forms of Web search:

0000-0000/0-1900/$00.00 c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

 Guha, McCool and Miller [7] distinguish between
navigational searches, where "the user is using
the search engine as a navigation tool to navigate to a particular intended document" and research searches, where the user is "trying to locate a number of documents which together will
give him/her the information s/he is trying to find"
(pp. 702).

 Broder [4] identifies three types of Web search:
navigational and informational searches,
that
map closely onto the navigational and research
searches of Guha et al. [7], and transactional
searches where the user intends "to reach a site
where further interaction will happen" (pp. 6),
such as a shopping site or a site where images or
music can be downloaded.

 Related work by Rose and Levinson [17] yielded
top-level categories with many similarities to
those of Broder [4], in addition to a number of
more specific sub-categories (e.g. download, en-
tertainment, interact, and obtain).

 Morrison, Pirolli, and Card [13] describe a taxonomy of Web activities with three variables: the
purpose of a search, the method used, and the
content of the information being searched for.

1.2. Distortions in the Search-centric Lens

As comprehensive models of Web search, these
classifications have a number of limitations. For exam-
ple, in the work of Broder [4], the range of possible
transactions a user may wish to perform, and the underlying reasons for wishing to perform them, are not
explored. Similarly, consideration is not given to why
a user may wish to navigate to a particular Web site or
document. Presumably this destination does not represent an end in itself, but part of the strategy for performing another task, such as finding a phone number
or arranging car rental.

In addition, while Rose and Levinson [17] give a
number of examples to illustrate their sub-categories,
the distinctions between them are often based on technical aspects of how the target object will be used,
rather than the fundamental nature of the task the user
is performing. For example, the target of the download goal is "a resource that must be on my computer or other device to be useful" (pp. 15), and the
authors cite the example of a piece of software. How-
ever, the same definition could equally apply to the
adult movie example used to illustrate the entertainment sub-category. In both cases the key feature is the

attempt to locate something specific; drawing arbitrary
category distinctions between these serves only to obscure the commonality in the underlying goal of the
user.

At first glance the variables proposed by Morrison,
Pirolli and Card [13] appear neatly defined. However,
the classification of some activities suggests the variables may not be mutually exclusive in the form presented by the authors. For example, some methods are
seen to be triggered by a particular goal (find, collect)
whereas others (explore, monitor) are not. On the con-
trary, there is a strong argument that explore and monitor represent goals in their own right, and should be
classed under purpose.

The focus of these studies on classifying search behaviors may be valuable in informing the ongoing development of Web search engines. However, by taking a search-centric perspective on Web usage these
classifications may often obscure the true goal of the
user in being online and perpetuate the ubiquity of the
document metaphor in attempts to understand how the
Web can support people in achieving their goals. The
search-specific focus of these studies means none can
account for more complex tasks performed on the Web.
While the resource-interact goal of Rose and Levinson [17] and the transactional queries of Broder [4]
suggest an intention to carry out further interaction beyond the search (perhaps indicating a greater overall
goal), the search itself is still seen as the users primary
task. No mention is given of, for example, arranging
a holiday as an overarching reason for being online,
or even for carrying out a search. While analysis of
search query logs is unlikely to show many queries
such as "arrange holiday", this likely reflects an awareness among users of the narrow scope of search engines rather than a lack of desire the use the Web for
this purpose.

2. That Which Is Not Search

A number of studies have investigated a broader

range of tasks beyond simply Web search:

 Sellen, Murphy, and Shaw [18] describe six types
of activity carried out on the Web, based on
a study of Web use by twenty-four knowledge
workers: finding, information gathering, brows-
ing, transacting, communicating, housekeeping).
 Kellar, Watters, and Shepherd [11] report a study
into how people use "web browser navigation

to classify their Web usage according to the following tasks: fact finding, information gathering,
just browsing, transactions, and other. This classification was informed by previous studies, such
as [18], but refined based on the findings of pilot
studies with users.

 Kellar [10] refines the top level classification of
Kellar et al. [11], grouping fact finding, information gathering, and browsing under an information seeking goal; transactions are joined by communications under information exchange; lastly a
new top-level goal of information maintenance is
added, containing a single maintenance task.

The classifications of [18,11,10] are not limited to
describing variations of Web search and do attempt to
capture the users needs or goals in using the Web, with
some success. For example, the concept of transacting is a first-class citizen of all three classifications,
without the degree of indirection present in the notion
of a transactional search. In contrast, it is not clear
whether the notion of browsing represents a goal in its
own right, or simply an activity in support of some further (unspecified) goal. As already noted, this confusion of purpose and method is a consistent theme in attempts to understand how people use the Web and how
the Web supports individuals in meeting their goals.

2.1. Fragmented Platforms for Communication

Perhaps the most significant limitation in all the
work reviewed to this point is the focus purely on Webbased tasks. Sellen, Murphy and Shaw [18] define their
communicating task as "Using the Web in order to participate in chatrooms or discussion groups" (pp. 229),
but exclude email activities from the data. Similarly,
Kellar [10] introduces a communications task, but uses
email as an illustrative example.

As intuition would suggest, and these findings cor-
roborate, the Web is regularly used for two-way communication of the sort conducted through email, chatrooms and discussion groups. Communicating accounted for just four percent of observed activities by
Sellen et al.[18], however it is likely that the inclusion of email in the analysis, in addition to increased
use of Webmail services in recent years and the advent
of Web-based microblogging services, would result in
a significantly higher percentage if the study was re-
peated.

An examination of analogous research into how
people use email reveals, unsurprisingly, significant

usage of this platform to conduct asynchronous com-
munication. For example, in a study of 20 office work-
ers, of varying roles, Whittaker and Sidner [20] focus
on three main email functions: task management, personal archiving, and asynchronous communication. Of
particular note in this case is that Whittaker and Sidner found evidence of email being used for a significantly wider range of tasks than purely asynchronous
communication, for which is was originally conceived.
They refer to this process as email overload.

Additional evidence for the overloading of email as
a platform comes from an investigation of members of
a large research laboratory [12], in which email was
identified as supporting the following work functions:
information management, time management, and task
management. It was noted that those participants for
whom email served an information management function may have job roles that involve staying abreast
of developments by tracking information, a task that
bears a noteworthy similarity to the monitoring activities identified in the work of Kellar [10] and Morrison,
Pirolli and Card [13].

Ducheneaut and Belotti [5] identify additional ways
in which people use email to perform tasks. For exam-
ple:

 All but one participant reported regularly using

email to exchange files with others

 Eighty percent of respondents reported using

email to arrange meetings

 Seventy-two percent of participants used email to

make decisions.

In the case of the latter point, how this decisionmaking is achieved in practice is not discussed by
Ducheneaut and Belotti. Presumably email is used as
a medium for discussion from which a decision can be
reached.

While mainstream use of Instant Messaging (IM)
is a more recent phenomenon than adoption of email
and the Web, research in this area reveals noteworthy
overlap with the tasks identified in the literature discussed above related to email and the Web. While use
of IM for communicating is to be expected, the literature demonstrates that this platform also plays a role in
tasks such as finding and arranging.

Following a study of how IM is used in the work-
place, Nardi, Whittaker and Bradner [14] describe a
number of informal communication tasks supported by
this technology:

 quick questions and clarifications

 coordination and scheduling
 organising impromptu social meetings
 keeping in touch with friends and family
Whilst the latter three tasks seem rather distinct,
further examination shows that they share a common
theme of the participants making arrangements. Such
arranging may vary from purely work-related, such
as scheduling a meeting, to workplace social arrangements such as meeting colleagues for lunch, to coordinating social activities with friends and family outside
of work.

Isaacs, Walendowski, Whittaker, Schiano and Kamm
[9] refine the work of Nardi et al. [14] by showing how
the prevalence of particular tasks in IM usage varies
across different types of users. Frequent IM partners,
or those seen as heavy users, used the medium predominantly for working together. Lighter users or infrequent partners generally used IM to carry out scheduling tasks.

At a general level, the findings of Isaacs et al. [9] are
supportive of Nardi et al. [14]. Evidence was found for
a number of similar functions:

 simple questions and information bears a strong
likeness to Nardi et al.s quick questions and clar-
ifications, whilst placing more emphasis on the
simplicity of the exchange rather than the duration over which it occurred.

 directly equivalent scheduling and coordination

tasks are present in both classifications.

 the social talk task of Isaacs et al. is comparable
to aspects of the keeping in touch with friends and
family task

The evolution of email into a platform for a wider
range of tasks than those for which it was originally intended is consistent with the development of the Web
into a general purpose platform for a variety of tasks
that go beyond its original role as an information distribution platform. While evident in literature and prac-
tice, it should be noted that the function creep affecting
email and the Web does not imply that these platforms
are well adapted to the tasks for which they are being
used. On the contrary, they may represent the best of
several poor options.

With the literature also indicating that Instant Messaging supports a broad range of heterogeneous tasks,
any comprehensive attempt to understand the tasks and
goals of Web users must not examine this platform in
isolation, but instead take a holistic view of how all
Internet platforms (e.g. Web, email, IM) are used. If

the goal of understanding user tasks and goals is to
drive improvements in available applications and ser-
vices, this understanding must be shaped not by existing applications and services that embody potentially
counterproductive assumptions and metaphors, but by
the notion of activity-centred design [15] and a fundamental examination of the underlying goals of Internet
users. To do otherwise would be to confuse purpose
with the method employed.

3. A Web of Actions

To summarise the arguments so far, it is apparent from the literature that Internet platforms such as
email, IM and the Web are widely used to support tasks
for which they were not originally intended. While this
is acceptable (of course), and perhaps an inevitable
indicator and consequence of their success, it is not
necessarily optimal from a user perspective, as applications developed for one purpose may not be well
adapted to others. Is your email client optimised for
task and project management? In addition, many of
the applications we use to interact with email and the
Web, and their underlying conceptual models, reflect a
document-centric perspective that is not adequate for a
world of Linked Data [3].

Linked Data, and the Semantic Web that has arisen
from the large-scale publication of Linked Data, is
things and the connections between things.
about
Linked Data is about the ability to publish descriptions
of any aspect of any thing. Its about giving identifiers
to those things, and maybe even interacting directly
with those things, rather than just with documents that
describe them.

A Web that is document-centric only enables users
to interact directly with documents; it does not allow users to interact with or perform actions on the
things described by those documents. The Linked Data
paradigm changes that, by encouraging data publishers to assign HTTP URIs to any object or concept they
wish to refer to. The existence of these identifiers paves
the way for applications that support direct interaction
with things identified by URIs, or at least interaction
that is less incumbered by the layer of indirection inherent in document-centricity.

If Linked Data is about things rather than just doc-
uments, what happens to the old metaphors that underpin so many of our computing systems? Are desktops and filing systems appropriate metaphors for organising and accessing things that are not documents,

tion not of what can be done with documents, but what
can be done with things in general provide a different
perspective  a set of thing-centric and action-centric
metaphors to shape and inspire the Linked Data applications we build? What Linked Data brings to the table are the means to identify the things we want to act
upon, and also to describe the kinds of actions that it is
possible to perform on things of certain types.

In a world where people are identified by URIs,
should a person A who wants to share a photo with person B have to choose between multiple platforms (e.g.
email, IM, photo-sharing Web site, social networking
Web site) in order to share the photo? Does it make
conceptual sense to create a new email message and
then attach the photo to that document, or simply to
post the photo to the URI of the recipient and allow
her to decide how it is handled on arrival? In the latter
case, the recipient benefits because she gets to choose
how and where the photo is received and stored, while
the sender benefits precisely because he does not have
to.

Similarly, is the fragmented nature of current communication channels optimal, whereby a person C
wanting to notify person D of something must choose
between multiple channels through which to achieve
this goal, many of which may be suboptimal for the recipient at a particular time? Should it not be up to the
recipient to choose the notification method, with the
sender simply posting notifications to a canonical identifier for that recipient, perhaps accompanied by some
indicator of the perceived urgency of the notification?

4. A Taskonomy for the Semantic Web

With these questions in mind, the following list
presents a taskonomy of user activities and goals on-
line. This taskonomy was developed by distilling the
tasks and activities identified in previous literature,
and removing those that represented means or methods
rather than ends or purposes, or only reflected artefacts
of existing Internet platforms.

 Locating: Looking for an object or chunk of in-

formation which is known or expected to exist.
Example: Locating an article from a journal, an
image for a school project, a colleagues phone
number, or information about a book a friend rec-
ommended.

 Exploring: Gathering information about a specific concept or entity to gain understanding or
background knowledge of that concept or entity.
Example: Exploring a philosophical theory to understand its central tenets; getting background information about an organization before a job in-
terview.

 Grazing: Moving speculatively between sources
with no specific goal in mind, but an expectation
that items of interest may be encountered.
Example: Following links that spark your interest
on someones blog.

 Monitoring: Regularly or repetitively checking
known sources that are expected to change, with
the express intention of detecting the occurrence
and nature of changes.
Example: Monitoring news Web sites during an
election; checking email accounts for new mes-
sages; watching discussion fora for new ideas or
information.

 Sharing: Making an object or chunk of informa-

tion available to others.
Example: Sharing holiday photos with a col-
league; uploading a journal article to your personal Web site.

 Notifying: Informing others of an event in time

or a change of state.
Example: Emailing a group of friends to tell them
you will be going to a concert at the weekend.

 Asserting: Making statements of fact or opinion

available, with no discursive expectation.
Example: Writing a review of a film, or stating on
your Web site that you own a certain book.

 Discussing: Exchanging knowledge and opinions

with others, on a specific topic.
Example: Posting a comment on a discussion
forum stating that you disagree with a previous post, explaining why, and then receiving responses from others.

 Evaluating: Determining whether a particular
piece of information is true, or assessing a number of alternative options in order to choose between them.
Example: Choosing which film to see at the week-
end, based on whats showing, where, and at what
time.

 Arranging: Coordinating with third parties to ensure that something will take place or will be possible at a certain time.
Example: Arranging travel and accommodation
for an international conference.

 Transacting: Transferring money or credit be-

tween two parties.
Example: Paying a bill.

With this taskonomy as a reference point, what
forms of applications should we develop to exploit the
unique capabilities of the Semantic Web?

Starting with the classic modalities of search and
browse, we should not be developing Semantic Web
search engines and browsers that crudely apply existing (document-centric) interaction styles to Linked
Data [8]. Instead we should build services that allow
us to locate specific information as efficiently as possible by incrementally supplying as much concrete information as we can and as is needed in order to narrow the search space sufficiently. This does not mean
simply tweaking Query by Example interfaces to work
over RDF data, but enabling query terms to be combined with background contextual information about
the user in order to refine the result set.

Interfaces for exploring should not just be document browsers, but applications that integrate and summarise information about a specific thing of interest,
based on its type, and adapt the interface accordingly.
Monitoring applications need to be able to adapt
their interfaces based on the rate of change of different information sources, and the relative significance
of these changes. Some information sources (e.g. Twit-
ter) will change frequently with little consequence,
while others (e.g. natural disaster warning systems)
will change rarely but carry great significance. Effective monitoring applications that do not fragment user
attention across multiple channels will need to account
for each combination of information significance and
rate of change, and adjust their behaviour accordingly.
Sharing, notifying, asserting, and discussing are
currently supported by applications that frequently tie
data to the application or system in or through which
it was created. For example, notification emails stay
in email systems, discussion forum posts stay unconnect to related posts made in different fora, files are uploaded to specific systems and then shared with others,
rather than vice versa. A shift is needed such that applications emphasise the posting of notifications, discussion points, assertions, files, etc. into the Web at large,
from where they can be retrieved as required by authorised parties, rather than simply into an applicationspecific silo.

Applications wishing to support evaluating and arranging may stand to gain the most in the near term
from Linked Data and the Semantic Web. It is not hard

to envisage how price comparison Web sites could be
enhanced through Linked Data, such that products can
be evaluated not simply based on price, but on local
availability, delivery times, product reliability, guarantee terms, and environmental impact. This capability is
feasible at present, but very costly due to the complexity of integrating data from numerous sources, each
with proprietary interfaces.

Similarly, many domain specific arranging applications exist, such as flight comparison and booking Web
sites. Where these applications fall short is in their
rigidity; integration of arbitrary data relevant to a trip,
but not specifically flight related, comes at a significant cost and not all types of information will warrant
the investment despite potential value to a long-tail of
users.

How transacting applications will truly benefit from
the Semantic Web is not immediately clear. In one respect transacting, sharing, and notifying have much in
common: in all cases the Semantic Web infrastructure
allows a recipient to be uniquely identified, independently of any specific application or service. The result
of this could be a democratisation of online payment
services for end users, supported by common protocols
and standards for payment interoperability.

Grazing, as defined above, is an activity with no
specific, explicit user goal. In contrast it is likely to
serve as a displacement activity that allows the user to
defer performance of another (likely more important)
task. Key factors in grazing would appear to be nov-
elty, serendipity, and human interest. With much of the
promise of the Semantic Web centred on increased pre-
cision, it is unclear what form a grazing application for
Linked Data may take. Further research may increase
our understanding of grazing and reveal whether this
is a meaningful match for Semantic Web technologies.

5. Conclusions

As the adoption of Linked Data and Semantic Web
principles and technologies continues, informal questions are increasingly being asked about the kinds of
applications that could and should be developed to
make best use of these technologies. Meaningful answers to these questions can only be achieved through
principled analysis that attempts to understand the areas in which Linked Data and the Semantic Web can
make a unique contribution relative to conventional
technologies.

thing-centricity brought about by the Linked Data
paradigm creates opportunities for new forms of
activity-centred applications and also challenges the
research and development community to reassess the
established metaphors that underpin computing applications and services. The ubiquity of documents in human culture suggests that alternative metaphors may
not be easily identified, however the taskonomy presented in this paper can form the basis for discussion
and innovation in the research community that can begin to address these challenges.
