User Modeling and Adaptive Semantic Web 

Editor(s): Krzysztof Janowicz, Pennsylvania State University, USA and Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA 
Solicited review(s): Michel Dumontier, Carleton University, Canada and Jie Tang, Tsinghua University Beijing, China  
Open review(s):  

Lora Aroyo a, and Geert-Jan Houben b 
a Computer Science, VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV Amsterdam, the Netherlands 
b Web Information Systems, TU Delft, P.O. Box 5031, 2600 GA Delft, the Netherlands 

Abstract. Historically, personalization and adaptation have been important factors for the success of the Web and therefore 
they have been important topics in Web research. Many research efforts in the field of adaptive hypermedia and adaptive Webbased systems have resulted in solutions for user-adapted access to Web content, often in terms of systems that provide an 
adaptive hypermedia structure of content pages and hyperlinks. With pages and links that depend on the user, it is feasible to 
offer a high degree of personalization. Next to research into engineering and realizing adaptation, research into user modeling 
has been crucial for the success of adaptation. To apply the right adaptation it is necessary to know the user and her relevant 
properties and the research field of user modeling has focused on theories and techniques for eliciting knowledge about the 
user. Naturally, the research fields of adaptive web-based systems and user modeling have always lived in close harmony. In 
order to create a similar success with personalization and adaptation in relation to the Semantic Web, adaptation and user modeling  have  to  be  redefined,  with  consequences  for  the  research  into  these  topics.  In  particular,  the  nature  of  user  modeling 
changes significantly with the extended distribution and openness that we encounter on the Web of Data, with implications 
from problems studied in Web science. Promising research shows how Semantic Web-based solutions can aid in the representation of user properties for sharing and linking of user models. In this vision paper we outline the evolution of user modeling 
and adaptation in connection to the Semantic Web and list research questions and challenges for the relevant research fields.  

Keywords: User modeling, adaptation, personalization, linked open data, web science 

1.  Introduction 

In this paper we outline the evolution we see and 
anticipate  for  the  research  fields  of  adaptation  and 
user modeling in connection with the Semantic Web. 
Adaptation of content access to the user is by definition a process in which a description of the content 
and a description of the user are combined to decide 
whether  and  how  to  present  the  content  to  the  user. 
On  the  Web  this  adaptation  has  typically  been  designed and realized in closed and scoped applications. 
The user modeling to represent relevant user descriptions has been characterized by the same assumptions. 
When we relate this to the Web of Data, new conditions and assumptions come into play. At the Semantic Web we have witnessed already the use of seman-

tics  in  the  integration  of  content,  for  the  purpose  of 
integrating and linking content between applications, 
but  similarly,  and  perhaps  more  importantly,  user 
modeling  can  and  should  also  be  aligned  with  the 
conditions and requirements of the new Web. Where 
the  distributed  and  open  nature  of  data  has  brought 
major advances for linking content, the same characteristics  of  distribution  and  openness  find  their  way 
into user modeling.  

In this vision we reflect on what is happening and 
sketch  challenges  and  questions  for  the  relevant  research fields. In Section 2 we consider the concepts 
of adaptation and user modeling in their original context  of  the  classical  Web,  before  we  turn  to  user 
modeling in relation to the Semantic Web in Section 
3 and the corresponding challenges in Section 4.  

to 

i.e.  how 

the  user, 

From  the  conception  of  the  Web  its  hypertextbased  nature  triggered  researchers  to  find  ways  to 
improve  the  nodes-and-links  structure  that  gave  the 
Web  its  success.  With  the  observation  that  a  single 
fixed hyperlink structure would not fit all users, the 
research  field  of  adaptive  hypermedia  [5]  investigated  how  the  hyperlink  structure  could  be  made 
adaptive 
the  pages  and 
hyperlinks could be made fitting for each single user. 
This  adaptation  aims  to  present  the  best  possible 
hyperlink  structure  to  a  user  depending  on  relevant 
properties  of  the  user,  e.g.,  background,  context,  or 
goal.  Educational  applications  have  always  been  a 
good example for researchers to showcase adaptation 
solutions  [3].  In  educational  applications  often  the 
users are students or learners for whom the acquired 
knowledge  is  a  basis  for  adaptation.  Imagine  a 
teacher  wants  to  present  the  student  with  relevant 
material  to  study  a  certain  subject,  then  the  teacher 
will  create  a  structure  of  pages  and  hyperlinks  that 
will  make  the  student  go  through  the  material  in  a 
manner  that  satisfies  the  teachers  intentions  and 
pedagogic principles. That structure will present the 
student  with  pages  and  links  depending  on  the 
knowledge  the  student  acquired  before  and  during 
her study of the material. For this purpose, the hyperlink structure will include with pages and links preconditions  that  reflect  the  teachers  assumptions 
about the students knowledge at that moment in the 
browsing.  

 In  the  research  field  of  adaptive  hypermedia  [5] 
this  approach  has  been  studied  in  several  other  domains as well, e.g. e-commerce and tourism, and this 
has  led  to  the  development  of  systems  that  support 
the  design  and  execution  of  adaptation  in  hyperme-
dia-based information delivery. Due to the nature of 
the first trials and the technological hurdles that had 
to  be  taken,  most  research  concentrated  on  systems 
with  a  well-defined  and  limited  scope,  to  make  it 
feasible for the system to know the user and how to 
respond to that. Obviously, the design of adaptation 
asks  for  a  detailed  understanding  of  the  users 
knowledge  at  the  time  and  of  the  influence  that  the 
knowledge  should  have  on  the  content  to  be  pre-
sented. In closed applications and systems the design  and  execution  of  the  adaptation  proved  to  be 
already challenging enough for researchers to extensively  investigate  design  and  usage  [21].  Later,  the 
scoping was relaxed when the same approaches were 
being used at the Web [7,8].  

Approaches for adaptation cannot be meaningfully 
applied without a thorough understanding of the user. 
That is why the field of user modeling [11] has concentrated on theory and techniques for the elicitation 
of user knowledge into user models that could serve 
as  the  basis  for  effective  user-adaptation.  Applying 
intelligent techniques to calculate relevant properties 
of the user for adaptation, for example in recommendation  or  teaching  scenarios,  researchers  established 
theories and tooling for an accurate and relevant description of the user on the basis of the users actions 
in the application. 

In linking these two research fields [18], the use of 
an  explicit  user  model  is  the  classical  approach  for 
adaptive  systems.  Following  the  reference  model 
from [13], a general view on adaptive systems is that 
a system contains a description of the domain content, 
i.e. a domain model, a description of the user, i.e. a 
user model, and a way to combine those two to adapt 
the content for a presentation fitting the user, i.e. an 
adaptation model and engine. 

In many cases the user model overlays the domain 
model, meaning that the user knowledge is expressed 
as  an  overlay  over  the  domain  content.  A  good  example  from  the  educational  scenario  would  be  that 
the  students  knowledge  is  expressed  as  a  value  attached  to  each  domain  subject  reflecting  the  degree 
to which the student has learned the topic. The specific  elements  in  a  user  model  depend  of  course  on 
the application, but aspects that we often see are his-
tory,  background,  preferences,  knowledge 
level, 
goals  and  tasks,  context  of  work,  meta-cognitive 
skills, personality traits, affective states, and attitudes. 

3.  User Modeling in a Web of Linked Data 

With  the  content  moving  towards  the  Semantic 
Web, it is now interesting to see how the advances in 
the  Semantic  Web  and  the  cloud  of  Linked  Open 
Data  [20]  impact  adaptation  and  in  particular  user 
modeling. 

Where in the traditional adaptation approaches the 
adaptation was often confined to a single closed ap-
plication,  it  is  natural  to  try  to  share  and  integrate 
content data to profit from the investment in content 
made in multiple applications. In the evolution from 
adaptive hypermedia to adaptive Web-based systems 
this trend was already visible. Also, open hypermedia 
systems [4] show a similar approach where the linking is separated from the content data. Similarly, the 
open  corpus  adaptive  hypermedia  systems  [6]  show 

tent reuse and integration, with obvious connections 
to  semantic  techniques  and  languages.  So,  when  it 
comes to integrating and linking data, adaptive applications do not differ from other applications and can 
equally well benefit from results obtained in Semantic  Web  research.  Therefore,  we  concentrate  in  this 
vision paper further on the user modeling aspect. 

3.1.  Linking User Knowledge 

Semantic  integration  can  of  course  also  create 
benefits  for  the  user  knowledge.  When  adaptive  applications have the opportunity to share user knowl-
edge,  for  example  in  an  educational  setting  the  students knowledge in a particular subject domain, then 
with  richer  and  more  relevant  user  knowledge  from 
across  application  boundaries  the  applications  can 
provide better adaptation. 

This  trend  in  semantic  integration  of  user  knowledge aligns with the trend in Web 2.0 and social networking where people share personal information. 

Both trends show two aspects that are relevant for 
linking  user  model  knowledge:  the  identification  of 
the users and the representation of their properties. 

3.2. User Identification 

When  applications  want  to  share  information  for 
and  about  users,  they  require  mechanisms  for  the 
identification of users.  

Identity-based  protocols  as  OpenID1 can  be  used 
for users to link their different identities on the Web. 
Systems  can  use  authentication  mechanisms,  from 
basic http authentication to open protocols for secure 
API  authorization  like  OAuth2.  The  Google  Friend 
Connect3 API  exemplifies  the  use  of  OpenID  (e.g. 
Yahoo)  and  OAuth  to  integrate  existing  login  sys-
tems,  registered  users,  and  existing  data  with  new 
social  data  and  activities.  It  is  based  on  open  standards and allows users to control and share their data 
with  different  sites.  The  integration  of  social  flows 
and  data  is  realized  via  the  OpenSocial4 standard 
specification. The Facebook Platform uses the OAuth 
2.05 protocol  for  authentication  and  authorization  in 
web  applications  (both  desktop  and  mobile).  The 

1 http://openid.net 
2 http://oauth.net 
3 http://code.google.com/apis/friendconnect/ 
4 http://www.opensocial.org/ 
5 http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-oauth-v2-10 

Facebook  Connect  extension  makes  it  possible  for 
users to "connect" their Facebook identity to any site 
by  using  trusted  authentication  and  to  also  reuse, 
among  others,  their  basic  profile  information  and 
friends list around the Web.  

Research like [10] presents an approach to enable 
interoperability of user-adaptive systems in a ubiquitous environment. It is centered around a semanticsbased  dialogue  for  exchanging  user  model  and  context data with focus on the user data clarification and 
negotiation  tasks.  Further,  [9]  looks  at  a  framework 
for  user  identification  for  cross-system  personaliza-
tion. It exploits a set of identification properties that 
are combined using an identification algorithm. 

3.3. User Property Representation 

Contrary to the identification of users, for the representation  of  user  properties  there  are  hardly  any 
standardized and generic solutions available. This is 
not a surprise of course, given the traditionally closed 
environment in which user model knowledge is created and used. 

This  representation  issue  can  best  be  explained 
with  an  example.  If  for  example  in  an  educational 
setting a students knowledge needs to be represented, 
then  one  often  sees  something  like  a  value  such  as 
well-learned  that  is  associated  as  the  degree  of 
learning  with  a  subject  like  Programming  or  a 
value of 80% for the knowledge level of a subject Java. From these examples it is easy to see that 
for  interoperability  we  need  to  align  (a)  the  knowledge  about  the  domain,  e.g.  about  the  domain  concepts such as Programming or Java, and (b) the 
knowledge  about  the  knowledge  about  the  domain, 
e.g.  the  degree  of  learning  or  knowledge  level 
and their corresponding values.. 

Important  aspects  of  the  representation  of  user 

properties are  

(1) to represent uniquely the object of the interest 
or  preferences,  e.g.  interested  in  Java  or  likes 
Brad Pitt,  

(2) to provide a shared vocabulary to express different user activities which translate into user proper-
ties, e.g. like, read, view, favor,  

(3)  to  have  a shared scale(s)  to  interpret  the  user 
property, e.g. rate this video with 5 stars and rate 
this book with 2 stars  it is handy to know that the 
first value was in a 10 point scale and the second in a 
5 point scale, which makes them almost identical in 
terms of their value for the aggregated user interest, 

racy of the collected and aggregated user properties, 
e.g.  indicating  the  source  or  the  context  of  the  collected information and specifying how trustworthy or 
reliable the source is  if the user had bought a book 
on  Amazon  about  Java  programming  or  watched  a 
video on TED about it, these could be pretty reliable 
sources for her interest in this topic, while if she just 
browsed through several web pages it might be questionable whether she actually read anything.  

A good example for most of those aspects can be 
found  in  current  extensions  of  FOAF 6 ,  e.g.  the 
Weighted  Interest  Vocabulary7 for  identifying  context  and  source  of  the  collected  information,  or  e-
FOAF8 for defining temporal properties for the interest  value.  Additionally,  a  format 
like  Activity 
Streams9 is  used  for  syndicating  social  activities  on 
the  Web  and  providing  a  shared  vocabulary  to  express user activities across applications. This format 
has  already  been  adopted  by  Facebook,  MySpace, 
Windows Live, Google Buzz, BBC, Opera, Gowalla, 
among  others.  The  base  schema  defines  a  set  of 
Verbs, e.g. mark as Favorite, post, tag, a set of 
Object Types, e.g. article, bookmark, comment, 
a set of Activity Context Elements, e.g. for location 
and mood, and Event Verbs, e.g. positive RSVP.  

as 

e-FOAF allows for temporal reasoning in the user 
interest value calculation over time. Knowing when a 
specific  piece  of  evidence  for  the  user  interest  has 
(e-foaf:interest_appear_time)  or 
occurred 
when  the  interest  value  was  updated  (e.g.  e-
foaf:interest_value_updatetime)  helps 
to 
increase  the  accuracy  in  the  calculation  of  the  user 
interest 
aggregation 
(foaf:cumulative_interest_value) of multiple 
pieces  of  evidence  around  the  Web.  Additionally, 
properties as e-foaf:retained_interest_value, 
help  express  decay  or  other  time-related  aspects  of 
like  e-
the 
foaf:interest_longest_duration  and  e-
foaf:interest_cumulative_duration 
the 
strength of the interest can be varied in order to reflect the intensity of the evidence in terms of calculating the cumulative user interest value.  

interest  values.  With  properties 

an 

6 http://www.foaf-project.org/ 
7 http://xmlns.notu.be/wi/#spec/20091224.html 
8 http://wiki.larkc.eu/e-foaf:interest 
9 http://activitystrea.ms/ 

Semantic Web-based user model standards that are 
used  widely  in  educational  settings  are  IMS  LIP10 
and IEEE PAPI11. 

3.4. Sharing Adaptation Functionality 

For the sake of completeness we mention that following  [13]s  reference  model,  after  domain knowledge and user knowledge linking and integration, the 
integration  of  adaptation  functionality  can  also  be 
improved but this is an extremely challenging problem given the proprietary nature of many of the currently  available  solutions  and  systems.  Projects  like 
[16] show first steps in the integration of adaptation 
functionality,  where  also  semantic  technologies  are 
used albeit mainly for domain and user knowledge. 

With the advances in the Web of Data for linking 
domain  and  content  knowledge  and  for  linking  user 
model  knowledge  as  we  have  just  described  in  this 
section,  we  see  however  the  emergence  of  a  new 
paradigm for adaptation, where adaptive applications 
are connected to a cloud of Linked (content) Data as 
well  as  a  cloud  of  Linked  User  Data.  While  this 
Linked User Data is technically part of the new Web 
of Data as well, the distributed and open nature puts 
a  whole  new  perspective  on  user  modeling,  and 
opens a whole new array of innovations.   

4. Distributed and Open User Modeling 

For  sharing  user  model  knowledge,  experience 
from  the  Semantic  Web  can  provide  concrete  solu-
tions,  as  for  example  the  research  from  [2,3,10,19] 
shows. The main benefit is that each application does 
not have to build up its user model knowledge alone, 
which  specially  in  the  beginning  can  be  a  problem 
when little knowledge is available: the so-called cold 
start.  Also,  with  more  knowledge  available  to  construct a model the chance that the model accurately 
describes the user increases naturally. 

This sharing of user knowledge is not just a matter 
for applications that like to adapt (as we discussed in 
the previous section), but practically the same ambition and techniques show in the Social Web when a 
user  wants  to  share  her  own  personal  profiles  between social networking systems, as for example [13] 
shows. In [15] it is shown how FOAF can be used to 
link social networks. Where existing social network-

10 http://www.imsglobal.org/profiles/ 
11 http://www.ieee.org 

personalized  services,  the  trend  towards  distribution 
is clearly visible and helps also to increase the control users have over their own data. 

Another example is provided by the NoTube project12 where a strategy for aggregating user data from 
various  Social  Web  applications  is  provided.  This 
work is based on a concrete use case of reusing activity  streams  to  determine  a  user's  interests,  and  then 
generating  television  programme  recommendations 
from these interests. A key component to realize this 
is  the  NoTube  BeanCounter  [1].  The  main  design 
rationale is to provide a flexible and extensible architecture  that  exposes  robust,  scalable  and  reliable 
services  to  handle  different  kinds  of  responses  of 
different social application platforms. A set of APIs 
allows  for  modeling  the  targeted  responses  in  order 
to gather them, represent them with a set of suitable 
RDF  vocabularies,  and  integrate  them  with  other 
pulled information in a fully transparent way  with 
the  help  of  service-specific  adaptor  tubelets  (e.g.  a 
twitter activity stream tubelet) and application server 
modelets (e.g. for movies or songs) which allow for 
the selection of data source and RDF vocabulary and 
the generation of RDF-ized user data, integrated with 
data coming from other adaptors.  

Observing the promising results in user modeling 
for  adaptive  and  social  applications  with  the  aid  of 
Semantic  Web-based  solutions,  we  now  outline  research  questions  and  challenges  for  the  new  paradigm  of  Distributed  and  Open  User  Modeling  as  a 
main ingredient for the Adaptive Semantic Web. 

4.1. User Identification 

The major question in user identification is: How 
do we identify a person (or a persons appearance)? 
In the conventional adaptive solutions, closed and 
with  restricted  scope,  identification  mechanisms  are 
often proprietary or pragmatic, and usually these are 
also  not  fit  for  application  at  Web-scale.  The  new 
assumptions  and  requirements  imply  a  number  of 
research questions: 
  How can a person identify herself to an applica-

tion? 

  How can a person manage her identities (across 

multiple applications)? 

  How  can  applications  find  a  user  (identity)  in 

other applications? 

12 http://notube.tv 

  How  are  trust  and  privacy  provided  in  mecha-

nisms for user identification? 

  How  do  users  behave  in  systems  with  shared 
user  identification  and  what  are  the  social  and 
legal consequences? 

The  above  questions  do  include  technical  chal-
lenges,  but  also  constitute  interesting  problems  in 
Web  Science.  Considering  the  specific  Semantic 
Web  angle  we  see 
identification 
mechanisms  and  efficient  corresponding  indexing 
mechanisms need to be proposed. 

that  standard 

4.2. User Knowledge Alignment 

After  users  being  identified,  the  main  question 
with  respect  to  user  knowledge  is:  How  can  user 
model knowledge be shared?  

Answering his question on the Web of Data brings 
up several research questions related to the representation of user properties: 
  How can the objects of user properties uniquely 

be represented? 

  How can a shared vocabulary be constructed for 

expressing user properties? 

  How  can  shared  scales  be  constructed  to  inter-

pret values for user properties? 

  How  can  notions  of  certainty  and  accuracy  be 

attached to user properties?  

The main challenge here for the user modeling research field is to derive from the vast amount of user 
modeling theories and experience [18], those properties  that  are  typically  and  effectively  used  to  model 
user  properties  and  then  turn  to  the  area  of  the  Semantic Web to create a standard vocabulary for those 
properties.  Such  a  vocabulary  could  borrow  from 
SKOS, RDF/OWL etc., as we see in some of the examples we mentioned before.  

Besides its role for sharing user model knowledge, 
such a vocabulary-based approach would also be the 
ideal stepping-stone for Web Scientists to study user 
modeling  on  the  Web  of  Data,  and  thus  to  analyze 
how  user  modeling  performs  under  the  new  conditions of distribution and linking. As part of this study, 
openness  and  scrutability  need  to  be  investigated  as 
well: 
  How  is  an  open  approach  to  user  knowledge 

perceived by the users? 

  How  can  users  be  given  the  opportunity  to  inspect and correct the user knowledge an application maintains about them? 

tion of user knowledge can also be extended, with the 
aid of semantic techniques, following [12].  

Thus,  we  see  the  first  examples  of  investigations 

into the new paradigm for user model knowledge. 

5. Conclusion 

In this paper we have considered how user modeling evolves from its original environment in connection to a closed and scoped adaptive system to a distributed and open existence in the Semantic Web. We 
have identified some promising research approaches 
that show how the Semantic Web can contribute with 
solutions  for  user  identification  and  user  knowledge 
representation.  On  the  basis  of  that  experience,  we 
have  formulated  for  the  new  paradigm  a  number  of 
relevant  engineering  and  scientific  questions  for  inclusion in the research agenda.  
