Semantic Web - Interoperability, Usability, Applicability 1 (2010) 15
IOS Press

Smart Objects: Challenges for Semantic Web
Research

Editor(s): Krzysztof Janowicz, Pennsylvania State University, USA; Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA
Solicited review(s): Lora Aroyo, Free University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Boyan Brodaric, Geological Survey of Canada, Canada
Open review(s):

Marta Sabou a,,
a MODUL University Vienna, Austria

Abstract. The increased availability and robustness of sensors, the wide-spread use of the internet as a communication environment and the intensified adoption of semantic technologies foster the vision of embedding intelligence in physical objects.
The race of realizing this vision is pervasive to a variety of research fields, most notably ambient intelligence and semantic web,
and leads to the proliferation of several overlapping definitions and terminologies: smart products, semantic devices, semantic
gadgets - to which we collectively refer to as smart objects. What exactly are smart objects? And what are the research challenges
in realizing them? We hereby explore the answers to these questions.

Keywords: smart objects, semantic web, ambient intelligence, challenges

1. Introduction

While the Semantic Web (SW) started out as an initiative for enhancing a Web of primarily textual doc-
uments, the technologies developed by this community have evolved and have been applied to major Web
innovations such as the Web of services or the Social Web. With the advent of sensors, computationally
enhanced physical devices, ubiquitous connectivity of
objects (e.g., Internet of Things), the SW community
naturally follows suit and an increased interest is now
shown in extending the use of semantic technologies
beyond the digital world into the realm of physical
things and devices.

This novel orientation of the SW field complements
longstanding efforts in AI to embed intelligence in the
surrounding environments and physical objects in the
context of research areas such as robotics and, more re-

*Corresponding author. E-mail: marta.sabou@modul.ac.at. Part
of the work reported in this paper has been performed by the author in the context of the FP7 SmartProducts project (231204) while
working at the Knowledge Media Institute(KMi), The Open Univer-
sity, UK.

cently, ambient intelligence [21], [15],[14]. Obviously,
the intention is not to compete against that large body
of work but rather to complement it towards the realisation of a vision that, over the last two decades [21],
has become a "melting pot" for various scientific disci-
plines. In particular, we note those differentiating characteristics of SW techniques which make them well
suited in scenarios which involve a high number of
heterogeneous devices: (i) they have been designed to
work at Web scale; (ii) they foster interoperability between heterogeneous data sources; (iii) they rely on
a stack of Web technology standards which allow for
easy and large scale adoption.

While the quest for using SW technologies in pervasive computing application is currently intensifying,
we can actually trace it back to almost a decade ago, in
the area of Task Computing [11] where users can easily compose services based on semantic descriptions
of devices. Then, ontology-based smart environments
and devices were investigated by initiatives such as
SOCAM [6] and CoBra [3]. However, an overall characteristic of these approaches was their centralised na-
ture, where the intelligence of the individual devices
depended on the processes handled by a central com-

0000-0000/10/$00.00 c 2010  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

M. Sabou / Smart Objects

puter. The recent proliferation of intelligent devices,
advances in sensor and communication technologies,
all support a trend towards making devices more autonomous by embedding intelligence into them [19].
For example, the SoaM architecture relies on SW technologies to realise semantic gadgets [20]. The architecture allows both distributed and centralised topologies
thus providing a smooth transition from centralised solutions towards autonomous smart objects. Indeed, the
authors experiments show that distributed topologies
often rival centralised ones in terms of performance,
thus providing an early proof for the feasibility of the
distributed approaches.

In the next section we describe smart objects by
summarising various, complementary definitions from
fields as diverse as business studies, ambient intelligence and Semantic Web. Based on these definitions and on our experiences within the SmartProducts
project1, we discuss a set of research challenges in realising smart objects as well as current efforts towards
solving those challenges. Our analysis complements a
similar study in the area of the semantic sensor web
published in this issue [4]: although smart objects rely
on sensors and sensor networks, they provide a more
focused application domain with its own challenges.

2. Defining Smart Objects

The notion of objects (products, devices, gadgets)
that display some level of intelligence has been proposed in various research fields. Allmendinger and
Lombreglia investigate the notion of smartness in a
product from a business perspective [2]. They regard
smartness as the products capability to be preemp-
tive, i.e., to be able to predict errors and faults thus removing unpleasant surprises from [the users] lives.
A recent notion introduced in the area of ambient intelligence is that of smart products. In 2008, Maas et al
[10] define smart products as adaptive to situations and
users. This adaptivity is enabled by three main tech-
nologies: (i) sensing technologies which identify the
global and the local context of a product (using global
or local sensors respectively); (ii) communication infrastructures and (iii) IT services, in particular, rich
context representations, representations about product capabilities and domain knowledge used to infer how to learn from and adapt to users and situa-

1http://www.smartproducts-project.eu/

tions. For Muhlhauser [12], smart products are ob-
jects, software or services that have improved simplicity (in terms of user interaction) and openness (in
terms of connecting to and communicating with other
devices). These characteristics are achieved through
context-awareness, semantic self-description, proactive behaviour, multimodal natural interfaces [12].

In the Semantic Web area, Lassila and Adler proposed the notion of semantic gadget, a device capable of performing discovery and utilisation of services without human guidance or intervention, thus
enabling formation of device coalitions [8]. Vaquez
et al [19] extend this definition to that of a semantic device, a system that is spontaneously aware of
surrounding context information, capable of reasoning and interpreting this information at a semantic
level, and finally able to develop a reactive behaviour
accordingly. Additionally, a semantic device is able
to spontaneously discover, exchange and share context information with other fellow semantic devices.
Some prototype semantic devices include SmartPlants
(house plants paired with an intelligent artefact which
sense lighting and temperature conditions and ask to
be moved to the most suitable position) or the AwareUmbrella (umbrella which obtains weather information from local sensors and the Internet and alerts the
owner to take it along when it is likely to rain).

The SmartProducts project combines research from
the ambient intelligence and SW fields to provide
an industry-applicable, lifecycle-spanning methodology with tools and platforms to support the construction of smart products. While using Muhlhausers definition [12] as a starting point, the project focuses on
tangible objects (i.e., physical products) as smart products and not virtual products like software or services.
Proactivity is a core characteristic of these products
and is ensured by them being self-, situational-, and
context-aware. Finally, the knowledge and functionalities of smart products can be shared with other products and evolve over time as a side effect of their interactions with users and other products.

While originating from diverse fields, the above definitions converge towards a set of core characteristics
that a smart object (product, gadget, device):

 context-awareness - the ability to sense context;
 proactivity - the ability to reason upon and make
use of this context and other information in order
to proactively approach users and peers;

 self-organization - the ability to form and join

networks with other products.

In addition to these characteristics, smart products
should support their entire life-cycle and should offer
multimodal interaction with the users, in order to increase product simplicity [12]. Maas and colleagues
highlight the need for using context information in order to support personalisation and adaptiveness [10].
They also see products as being aware of concrete business and legal constraints. The SmartProducts consortium identified some additional characteristics to those
provided by Maas and colleagues in [10]. Most im-
portantly, products are seen as capable of acting autonomously (by themselves) without the need of central control. The rest of the characteristics refer to aspects of the knowledge component that enables the
smartness of the products. This knowledge has an important procedural component, it should evolve during
the life-cycle of the product as a side effect of its interaction with users and products and, finally, it might
need to be stored in a distributed fashion in order to
overcome the resource limitations of some objects.

3. Challenges for Semantic Technologies

Knowledge technologies play a crucial role in embedding intelligence into physical objects, in partic-
ular, for semantically representing context information and providing reasoning mechanisms that underpin proactivity and product-to-product interactions.
We hereby discuss some of the challenges that such
technologies are likely to face:

Hardware resource limitations. In the process of
moving from intelligent, centralised architectures towards autonomous objects with on-board intelligence,
the hardware limitations of these objects present an important challenge. Although physical objects are heterogeneous in terms of their hardware resources for information storage and processing, even the most powerful objects will lag behind the resources characteristic of the computer machinery for which semantic
technologies are currently built.

An important objective for the Semantic Web community is to adapt its technologies for use on objects
with limited computational resources. Strategies in this
area include reducing the storage space needed for
semantic data [13] and optimising semantic tools in
terms of resource consumption. For example, Ali and
Kiefer [1] describe the OR query answering and reasoning system for resource-constrained (mobile) devices which improves on the performance of two ear-

lier reasoners specifically built for mobile devices, i.e.,
Bossam and Pocket KRHyper [7]. Alternatively, W.
Tai et. al propose an automatically composable OWL
reasoner which is customised automatically depending
on the semantics of the ontology to be reasoned upon
by selecting the required reasoning modules only [17].
They show that the approach reduces memory requirements while maintaining reasoning ability thus being
well suited fore resource constrained devices.

Complex reasoning algorithms. Smart objects use
reasoning mechanisms on their rich knowledge bases
in order to adapt to user needs, to perform personalisation and to proactively interact with users and other
objects. This complex expected behaviour requires sophisticated reasoning mechanisms such as diagnosis
or planning. Such reasoning is much more ambitious
than current work in the area of sensor networks which
primarily relies on subsumption matching (e.g., for
matching between available resources and tasks [5]).

We expect that, given the proactive nature of smart
objects, they will mostly rely on production ruleengines rather than DL reasoners. As a response
to the increased interest in rule engines, the OpenRuleBench2 benchmark has been established for analysing the performance and scalability of different rule
engines and already used for comparing 11 systems [9]. While a good step towards understanding the
capabilities of various rule-engines, this benchmark is
not suited towards evaluating rule-engine performance
on resource-constrained devices.

Tokmakoff et al. [18] argue that, in order to deal
with ambiguities and uncertainties inherent in environments involving human beings, the reasoning mechanisms of smart products should not rely on two-valued
logics but rather combine fuzzy, rough or probabilistic
deduction methods. However, combing these methods
is not trivial and still requires extensive research.

Suboptimal data quality. A fundamental characteristic of smart objects is that they rely on context information obtained from associated sensors which is
then translated into higher level semantic information.
However, as pointed out by Corcho and Garcia-Castro,
ensuring sensor data quality is an important challenge
and has to account for issues such as data unavailability or lack of accuracy [4]. Although they also describe a set of research efforts towards improving sensor data quality, it is reasonable to assume that sensor

2http://rulebench.projects.semwebcentral.

org/

M. Sabou / Smart Objects

data will have a lower quality than manually authored
and checked semantic information. For example, the
derived data could be incomplete or, on the contrary,
contain redundant elements. Therefore it is important
a) to further develop fusion techniques that combine
data from multiple sensors into meaningful semantic
data and b) to build semantic techniques that are robust
enough to be able to process such data.

Representing a variety of information. Researchers
investigating semantic sensor webs generally agree
that semantic models are needed for representing information about time, space and the domain relevant
for the sensors [16]. From our analysis of smart objects and their characteristics, we can conclude that
their representation needs are much richer and more
diverse. Indeed, at a minimum, knowledge associated
with smart objects should contain user models, task
models (procedural knowledge), models to represent
life-cycle stages and the main users (or communities
of practice) involved in each stage, interaction models.
Therefore, the employed semantic technologies should
be able to cover all these representation needs.

Earlier studies from using semantic techniques in
pervasive computing applications suggest new representational requirements for ontologies. For example,
in [11], the authors report on using ontologies to enable task computing, i.e., easy composition of services
provided by various devices in a room. The authors acknowledge that ontologies were not so much used for
formal reasoning, but rather for making service composition easier for users. As such, ontology comments
and labels played an important role.

Further challenges. It is envisioned that smart objects will continuously update their knowledge bases
by deriving knowledge as a side effect of their interaction with users and other objects. Therefore, mechanisms for supporting the derivation and evolution of
emergent knowledge need to be built. Further, given
their close interaction with users, smart objects need to
maintain a considerable amount of information about
users including their likes, dislikes, their usage pat-
terns, their personal information etc. It is therefore crucial to implement access rights mechanisms that can
ensure the desired level of trust and privacy for user
