Ontology Use for Semantic e-Science 

Editors: Krzysztof Janowicz, Pennsylvania State University, USA, and Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA. 
Solicited Reviews: Michel Dumontier, Carleton University, Canada, and Manfred Hauswirth, DERI, National University of Ireland, Ireland. 

Boyan Brodarica,* and Mark Gaheganb  
aGeological Survey of Canada, 234B  615 Booth St., Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1A 0E9 
bCentre for eResearch and School of Environment,University of Auckland, Human Sciences Building, 10 
Symonds St., Auckland, New Zealand 

Abstract.  Ontologies are being widely used in online science activities, or e-Science, most notably in roles related to managing and integrating data resources and workflows. We suggest this use has focused on enabling e-science infrastructures to 
operate more efficiently, but has had less emphasis on scientific knowledge innovation. A greater focus on online innovation 
can be achieved through more explicit representation of scientific artifacts such as theories and models, and more online tools 
to enable scientists to directly generate and test such representations. This should lead to routine use of ontologies by scientists, 
and foster new and potentially different scientific results to help usher in next generation e-Science. 

Keywords: ontology use, e-Science, semantic web 

1.  Introduction 

Before the onset of scientific computing, the data, 
methods and theory used for science were often kept 
close  together,  in  the  head  and  notebook  of  the  re-
searcher.  Development of computational infrastructure over the last 50 years has allowed first data and 
next methods to move far from their scientific crea-
tors. Many research communities are now congregating around online infrastructures that contain shared 
repositories of primarily data and methods. Such infrastructures  are  being  used  for  the  discovery,  re-
trieval, and integration of online scientific resources, 
mainly  scientific databases, and increasingly also to 
capture and describe scientific instruments, software, 
workflows,  and  experiments.  These  infrastructures 
and  associated  activities  collectively  comprise  e-
Science  [6].  The  number  of  e-Science  initiatives  is 
vast. Some examples are:  
  The 
Geosciences 

Network: 

(www.geongrid.org) [10] 

  Cancer  Biomedical  Informatics  Grid:  caBIG 

(https://cabig.nci.nih.gov/) [13] 

*Corresponding author. E-mail: brodaric@nrcan.gc.ca. 

  Global  Ocean  Observing 

Initiative:  GOOS 

(http://www.ioc-goos.org/) [2] 

These  and  similar  efforts  are  realizing  important 
scientific  benefits,  which  we  claim  can  be  largely 
attributed to three factors: improvements in resource 
quantity,  improvements  in  representation,  and  improvements in communication: 

(1) Improvements  in  resource quantity are realized by leveraging and integrating greater numbers of 
relevant  online  resources.  New  results  ensue  when 
more and bigger online assets are brought to bear on 
a  problem,  for  example,  such  as  when  distributed 
computing  is  running  remote  applications,  often 
automated and in parallel, over networks of massive 
databases or sensors.  Data that is often expensive to 
capture or create is then more likely to see secondary 
use.    The  same  goes  for  methods  and  other  e-
resources. 

(2)  Improvements  in  representation  are  realized 
by  recording  more  complete  and  complex  expressions  of  scientific  knowledge  as  well  as  related  research  activities.    More  reliable  results  then  accrue 
from far better levels of repeatability and explanation, 

environments 

because 
host  machineprocessable representations of many (ideally all) aspects  of  scientific  investigation,  and  these  can  be 
accessed by greater numbers of scientists.  

(3) Improvements in communication are realized 
by facilitating deeper and more frequent online collaboration between scientists. The enhanced connectivity  of  online  science  environments  then  increases 
the exchange of ideas. 

Ontologies  are  already  playing  a  pivotal  role  in 
these areas. For example, in virtual observatories [8] 
ontologies are: (1) being used to annotate the structure  and  content  of  scientific  databases  and  workflows to make them interoperable, (2) helping guide 
the  structure  and  content  of  scientific  workflow 
provenance  to  illuminate  scientific  reasoning  [14], 
and more generally they are (3) facilitating scientific 
discourse by providing content and context for online 
dialog in virtual communities.  

However, these improvements are mainly impacting  the  online  use  of  scientific  data  and  methods, 
while  the  surrounding  knowledge,  the  theory,  as-
sumptions, reasoning and other context, have largely 
been left behind. This is highlighted by the position 
of  ontologies  in  the  infrastructures  where  they  are 
frequently  shuffled  to  the  background.  Indeed,  ontologies are rarely used directly by scientists, despite 
the  potential  for  them  to  help  represent  knowledge 
that might otherwise seem to be absent. Instead, they 
are more often directly used by computers to enable 
automated components of the infrastructure to work 
properly.  This  raises  outstanding  questions  about 
how effectively ontologies are being used to innovate 
knowledge  from  their  background  position  in  the 
infrastructure.  

We suggest that ontologies are underutilized in the 
development of new scientific knowledge in each of 
the three aspects above. This is largely due to the fact 
thatfor the most partontologies are being treated 
as  engineering  artifacts  required  to  execute  tasks 
more efficiently, rather than knowledge artifacts that, 
for example, help to describe some gap in scientific 
theory or flaw in the reasoning.  Indeed, we claim e-
Science ontology use is at present largely motivated 
by  operational  efficiency,  with  downstream  impacts 
on  scientific  knowledge  development  minimized  at 
present,  and  significantly  below  their  potential.  A 
contrasting  vision  prioritizes  knowledge  innovation 
in  which  scientists  use  ontologies  both  to  express 
hypotheses, theories and models, and also to generate 
and test them [4, 18]. In this aspirational vision, sci-

entists use ontologies directly as part of routine scientific  investigation  because  the  e-Science  environments are designed to facilitate this. Such direct scientist  interaction  with  the  ontology-enabled  knowl-
edge,  i.e.  in-silico  semantic  science,  should  then 
help revitalize online scientific methodology by helping generate richer insights, and improving our ability to repeat, report, and validate scientific findings. 

2. Resource Quantity  

The focus on operational efficiency is best exemplified by the quantity aspect (described in 1 above), 
in which significantly more online  resources can be 
marshaled and then applied  to some  task.  This usually  involves  ontology-enabled  semantic  interoperability  to  connect  greater  volumes  of  data,  software, 
instruments,  and  computing  resources.  The  associated  ontologies  typically  consist  of  application  ontologies  that  describe  particular  resources,  or  a 
slightly more general domain ontology that spans the 
application ontologies and serves as a unifying conceptualization  for  the  system  [16,  21].    However, 
neither of these ontology types typically encapsulates 
broad  domain  knowledge,  as  each  tends  to  include 
only those concepts needed to enable the interoperability of specific resources. These ontologies are seldom even seen by scientists and they mainly remain 
part of black-box components that allow the system 
to automatically handle greater volumes of resources 
than could perhaps be handled manually. Even when 
the ontologies are seen by scientists, for example in 
query interfaces used to search distributed databases, 
the  focus  is  on  efficient  retrieval  of  resources. 
Knowledge innovation is thus tied to insights gleaned 
by scientists from greater and faster resource retrieval 
and integration,  rather than deeper understanding of 
the  resources. Arguably, this often does not  involve 
the application of new online scientific methods, but 
rather  the  mirroring  of  manual  methods  within  the 
online  environment,  such  that  conventional  lines  of 
reasoning are carried out online by scientists. While 
this is certainly leading to new scientific results, there 
remains  the  real  possibility  that  dramatic  new  insights  might  be  achieved  with  complementary  lines 
of  investigation  that  involve  increased  use  of  machine  techniques  related  to  learning,  analogical  and 
abductive reasoning, data mining, and so on, that are 
starting to be applied to scientific discovery [5, 13]. 
The  contrasting  vision  would  thus  leverage  ontologies and more automated methods to facilitate the 

nisms to test their validity. The role of the scientist is 
not  diminished  but  the  system  plays  a  greater  and 
more  direct  role  in  knowledge  innovation  as  some 
tasks  are  automated,  like  resource  comparison  and 
evaluation,  and  as  new  avenues  of  investigation  are 
recommended to the scientist. Ontologies also play a 
greater role, because as authoritative representations 
of  domain  knowledge  they  become  key  expressions 
of  the  inputs  and  outputs  of  the  research,  which 
causes  them  to  be  consulted  and  updated  regularly. 
The ontologies then constitute a far richer knowledge 
repository  for  a  domain,  and  consist  of  theories, 
models,  methods,  and  other  artifacts  of  scientific 
work. This is a significant advance on present ontology contents, which primarily contain scientific categories  such  as  granite,  mass,  temperature,  and 
melanoma. It is also a significant shift in ontology 
use as ontologies would be deployed directly by sci-
entists,  as  well as  machines, in all stages of knowledge discovery. 

3. Representation 

 The representation aspect is probably best exemplified  by  the  role  of  ontologies  in  online  scientific 
provenance  [11,  19],  where  ontologies  are  used  to 
represent  many  aspects  of  scientific  investigation. 
Scientific provenance refers to the historical context 
surrounding  some  scientific  activity  or  result,  and 
typically  involves  a  description  of  the  methods  and 
applications used, the processes and reasoning steps 
carried out by a  scientist for some purpose,  and the 
old as well as new states of knowledge and data [20]. 
It is most widely encountered in established scientific 
workflow  environments,  such  as  myExperiment  [7], 
which  orchestrate  scientific  processing  and  from 
which  the  provenance  elements  can  be  readily  ob-
tained. While traditional best practices would necessarily have such process information recorded manu-
ally, online environments allow this to happen transparently by recording each operation as it occurs, and 
also recording it more finely so that each step can be 
captured, repeated and questioned.  

Ontologies are widely used in provenance systems. 
They  serve  as  common  conceptualizations  in  the 
query interface for viewing and querying provenance, 
and for semantic interoperability across various data 
and  provenance  stores  [11].  They  are  also  used  to 
annotate  metadata  associated  with  components  in  a 
scientific workflow [10, 11], and underpin trust sys-

tems that evaluate the quality and reliability of a scientific  resource  [2].  However,  as  with  the  quantity 
factor, such ontology use primarily has an efficiency 
imperative:  more  often  than  not  the  ontologies  are 
used to describe low-level system resources such as a 
web  service  interface  or  a  specific  data  product, 
rather than scientific objectives such as the hypothesis being tested or the reasoning used. The ontologies 
are thus primarily used to make the provenance system work, but how this affects knowledge generation 
is  left  to  the  scientist  to  determine.  Our  vision  of 
provenance extends these notions to include ontologies  of  scientific  method  and  reasoning,  such  that 
online processing steps can be understood in terms of 
scientific objectives, for instance to verify a result or 
evaluate  a  hypothesis.  A  particular  workflow  could 
thus  be  described  in  terms  of  system  operations  as 
well  as  scientific  reasoning  steps,  so  that  scientists 
could  interact  with  the  workflow  in  terms  of  scientific goals as well as system mechanics. This necessarily  involves  a  conceptualization  of  the  general 
science  knowledge  cycle  as  well  as  effective  interfaces and functions to operate over it.  

4. Communication 

The  communication  factor  is  best  exemplified  by 
online  scientific  collaboratories  in  which  scientists 
utilize  multi-media  and  social  networking  resources 
to work together on common tasks [17]. The general 
intent is scientific progress through increased scientific interaction, with a particular focus on augmented 
and clearer online discourse. Tools  to represent and 
search  scientific  discourses  are  usually  coupled  to 
literature repositories or other resources, which provide subject matter for the discourse. Ontologies are 
used to represent concepts inherent in the discourse, 
including  discourse  concepts  and  scientific  domain 
concepts, and these are often realized as annotations 
to papers in the literature repositories. The emphasis, 
though,  is  on  the  nature  of  the  rhetoric  surrounding 
some  knowledge  [3,  14]  and  on  the  validity  of  a 
given line of reasoning typically within a descriptive 
logic,  with  far  less  focus  on  the  representation  and 
evolution of higher-order scientific concepts such as 
theories  and  models.  Again,  this  can  be  largely 
viewed as a gain in efficiency in that scientific statements  indexed  against  rhetorical  or  basic  domain 
concepts can be more readily found, likely in semantically  annotated  repositories  [15],  and  more  scientists are able to collaborate more often. It can also be 

tion as the knowledge is parsed into relatively simple 
structures, which nevertheless are critically evaluated 
such that inconsistencies in the reasoning are identified  and  conceptual  gaps  are  highlighted.  Critical 
evaluation  might  include  the  proposal  of  new  hy-
potheses, but discourse systems on their own do not 
enable  those  hypotheses  to  be  tested  in  a  scientific 
sense, against data using established methods; at least 
not  without  being  coupled  to  additional  resources 
such  as  workflows,  databases,  instruments,  and  so 
forth. Our vision would see that coupling take place, 
such that dynamic hypothesis generation and testing 
could  occur  on  deeper  knowledge  structures  during 
online scientific discourse, where it could be tracked 
as well as evaluated for trust and eventual re-use. 

5. Challenges 

The vision of a scientific semantic web, in which 
ontologies drive science knowledge discovery, comes 
with many significant challenges related to capturing, 
designing, and using ontologies: 

(1)  Ontology  capture:  although  some  domains 
such as biomedical are routinely evolving ontologies, 
the vast bulk of science knowledge exists in growing 
literature repositories from which ontologies are absent and must be captured. At present, existing automated  and  semi-automated  techniques  for  ontology 
extraction  are  limited  to  the  capture  of  relatively 
simple  science  concepts  and  shallow  structures  explicit in the text, such as domain terms and large rhetorical blocks.  A serious challenge  is the  capture  of 
complex concepts and deep structures often implicit 
in  the  text,  such  as  theories  and  lines  of  reasoning, 
and automation of this capture to deal with the large 
volume of source material. However, it is likely that 
techniques  to  capture  knowledge  as  it  develops 
within  workflows  will  be  more  effective  than  those 
geared  towards  extraction  form  texts  produced  after 
some  experiment  has  been  completed,  because  the 
former  contains  more  sources  of  context  and  more 
opportunities for direct interaction with the research-
ers.  The design, management, and interoperability of 
related  science  knowledge  repositories  is  a  related 
concern.  

(2)  Ontology design: challenges for ontology design  include  the  development  of  guidelines,  design 
patterns, and formal methods for the construction and 
evaluation  of  ontologies  within  and  across  science 

domains.  At  present,  general  ontology  engineering 
approaches  are  being  successfully  adapted  to  help 
domain  ontology  construction,  but  largely  without 
recourse to general knowledge elements common to 
science. The main hurdle to overcome involves tuning  these  established  techniques  specifically  to  science domains, taking into account commonalities and 
differences.  This  further  requires  careful  work  to 
build  general  ontologies  of  science,  which  should 
lead  to  more  consistent  and  coherent  ontologies 
within  domains,  and  facilitate  connectivity  across 
domains  by  providing  a  unifying  upper-level  of  generic concepts such as theory, data, model, induction, 
method,  experiment,  and  so  on.  Significant  challenges also abound concerning how scientists might 
collaborate  on  the  development  of  these  elements, 
such  as  theories  that  are  shared,  overlapping,  or  in 
conflict,  and  how  online  resources  can  aid  in  the 
resolution of knowledge disputes.    

(3)  Ontology  use:  perhaps  the  holy  grail  of  semantic  e-Science  is  the  quest  for  online  (semi-)  
automated  knowledge  discovery.  This  requires  a 
combination of human and computer methods to analyze  and  compare  ontology-driven  knowledge  ele-
ments,  such  as  theories  and  models,  and  to  propose 
and  test  knowledge  gaps.  Coordinating  deductive, 
inductive, and abductive reasoning in workflows operating over distributed online resources is an important part of this challenge. The development of userfriendly  query  and  browsing  interfaces  attuned  to  a 
large-scale science knowledge framework is another 
significant challenge that must be overcome to ensure 
the framework will be usable.  

6. Conclusions 

Our  conception  of  semantic  e-Science  amalgamates  the  enhanced  visions  discussed  above.  It  includes  semantic  repositories  of  knowledge  in  which 
ontologies  are  a  base  representation  for  scientific 
concepts,  theories,  models,  methods,  and  other  science  knowledge  elements.  These  are  coupled  to 
workflow  operations  driven  by  scientific  objectives 
and methods, and to scientific provenance described 
in terms of scientific reasoning steps. Finally, scientific  collaboratories  enable  community  discourse  to 
occur over any of the previously mentioned compo-
nents, to evaluate them for quality, trust, veracity and 
re-usability. In such an online environment scientists 
would  focus  on  knowledge  innovation,  in  as  trans-

and innovation objectives for next generation science. 

Acknowledgements 

We  gratefully  acknowledge  of  the  support  of  the 
Geological  Survey  of  Canada  and  the  Ministry  of 
Research,  Science  and  Technology,  New  Zealand, 
and kindly thank the editors and reviewers  for their 
suggestions which led to improvements in the manu-
script:  Krzyszof  Janowicz,  Pascal  Hitzler,  Michel 
Dumontier, Manfred Hauswirth. 
