Preventing Ontology Interoperability 
Problems Instead of Solving Them

Editors: Krzysztof Janowicz, Pennsylvania State University, USA and Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University, USA'
Solicited reviews: Giancarlo Guizzardi, Federal University of Espirito Santo (UFES), Brasil and Martin Raubal, University of California, 
Santa Barbara, USA.

Eero Hyvonen
Semantic Computing Research Group (SeCo), Aalto University and University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 15500, FI00076 Aalto, Finland

Abstract. A major source of interoperability problems on the Semantic Web are the different vocabularies used in metadata 
descriptions. This paper argues that instead of solving interoperability problems we should focus more effort on avoiding the 
problems in the first place, in the spirit of Albert Einstein's quote "Intellectuals solve problems, geniuses prevent them". For 
this purpose, coordinated collaborative development of open source vocabularies and centralized publication of them as public 
vocabulary services are proposed. Methods, guidelines, and tools to facilitate this have been developed on a national level in  
the Finnish FinnONTO initiative, and are now in pilot use with applications and promising first results

Keywords: interoperability, vocabularies, ontology libraries, ontology services

1.  Interoperability of Vocabularies

Much of the power of the Web comes from the 
freedom for anybody to publish and link his/her own 
content as the Web of Pages. When moving into the 
era of the Semantic Web, the Web of (Linked) Data, 
content is being linked on the level of ontological 
concepts   and   metadata   underlying   the   pages1  [3]. 
This   leads   to   interoperability   problems,   especially 
interoperability   regarding   metadata   schemas   and 
vocabularies used for filling element values in the 
schemas.   Approaches   to   schema   interoperability 
include the dumb-down principle, as suggested in the 
Dublin Core (DC) community2, and using a shared 
schema   ontology   onto   which   other   metadata 
representations can be transformed, as suggested by 
the CIDOC CRM and FRBR communities3. In con-
trast, this paper focuses on interoperability problems 

due to domain vocabularies (ontologies of hierarchically   organized   domain-specific   concepts)   used   in 
annotations, not to schema models such as DC of 
CIDOC   CRM   that   are   also   sometimes   called 
"vocabularies" or "ontologies".

Content aggregated in semantic portals, or on the 
web scale in the Linked Data initiative, comes from 
actors   and   organizations   that   produce   content   for 
their   own   purposes   and   come   from   different   dis-
ciplines, cultures, and countries. As a result, lots of 
different, partly overlapping vocabularies are used in 
metadata descriptions. To approach the interoperability problems, various techniques of ontology matching (mapping) [5] are used. For example, lots of mappings based on the  owl:sameAs  relation have been 
created for the resources in the Linked Data cloud. 
There are, for example, mappings between the place 
resources   of   DBPedia4  and   GeoNames5.   A   key 
problem here is how to deal with situations, where 

1 http://linkeddata.org/
2 http://dublincore.org/
3 http://cidoc.ics.forth.gr/

4 http://dbpedia.org/
5 http://geonames.org/

single   real   world   object   [4],   and   where   different 
objects have the same name or identifier. The same 
problem   is   encountered   in   Web   2.0   sites,   where 
tagging using literals without identified meaning is 
causing more and more semantic confusion as more 
and more tags are being created (e.g. "jaguar" as an 
animal, or a car or an airplane model).

2. Coordinated Collaboration for Vocabulary 

Creation

The mess of meaning references on the metadata 
level on the Semantic Web creates lots of interesting 
research   problems   to   study.   Most   research   on 
interoperability   issues   seems   to   be   focusing   on 
developing   methods   and   tools   for   obtaining 
interoperability   between   heterogeneous   annotations 
(e.g. the datasets of the Linked Data initiative). How-
ever, from a non-academic practical viewpoint, this is 
a problem that should be avoided in the first place as 
far   as   possible.   Obviously,   more   research   effort 
should be focused on developing methods, tools, and 
practices by which metadata could be produced on a 
larger scale in an interoperable way at the time of 
creating it. Instead of solving interoperability problems we should rather try to prevent them by better 
ontology services, coordination, and collaboration in 
ontology development and content creation.

FinnONTO6 20032012 is a research project and a 
Living Laboratory experiment [6, 7], where the idea 
is   to   establish   a   collaboration   framework   for 
vocabulary development and services on a national 
level   for   the   Semantic   Web.   The   main   goal   of 
FinnONTO is to create an open source, national level 
cross-domain   "content   infrastructure"   for   the 
international 
Semantic   Web,
vocabularies,
  This 
infrastructure   and   network   of   concepts   can   be 
paralleled,   on   a   conceptual   level,   with   the 
construction   of   railroad,   electrical,   or   telephone 
networks in the past.

  aligned   with  

  and   practices.

  standards,

The work is based on the domain independent Semantic Web standards7  of the W3C, such as RDF, 
SKOS, OWL, and SPARQL, but the heart of the system  
  While 
standardization   work   at   W3C   focuses   on   defining 
general   principles   of   ontological   structuring   and 
reasoning, such as subsumption and inheritance, the 

is   domain-specific   ontologies.

6 http://www.seco.tkk.fi/projects/finnonto/
7 http://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/

general goal of FinnONTO is to facilitate cross-do-
main interoperability of metadata descriptions on a 
domain-specific  vocabulary level. The  idea is that 
when content is published on the web, it should be 
possible to connect it semantically with other related 
(cross-domain) contents based on a system of mutually aligned domain ontologies.

The vocabulary infrastructure  has been  built by 
transforming   nationally   used   traditional   keyword 
thesauri [1] into lightweight ontologies, which makes 
the   ontologies   interoperable   with   already   indexed 
content in databases. A key goal in the work is to encourage collaboration between ontology developers 
of different domains by proving a general FinnONTO 
ontology framework in which new vocabularies can 
be   aligned   with   existing   ones   already   during   the 
ontologization   process,   instead   of   afterwards.   The 
kernel of the FinnONTO system [7] is the General 
Finnish Ontology YSO developed from the widely 
used General Finnish Thesaurus YSA that consists of 
some 25,000 general concepts and that is maintained 
by the National Library of Finland. The corresponding ontology YSO has been extended by various do-
main-specific   daughter   ontologies,   based   on   other 
national thesauri used in domains such cultural heri-
tage,   agriculture   and   forestry,   applied   arts, 
geography,
  These 
ontologies create together virtually one ontology, the 
Collaborative   Holistic   Ontology   KOKO,   that   now 
has   over   70,000   general   concepts,   not   including 
ontology-like   datasets,   such   as   places,   persons, 
mammal and bird species of the world, and historical 
events.8 

  and   others.

  photography,

Figure 1 illustrates the structure of KOKO, with 
the   top   ontology   YSO   on   top,   and   overlapping 
domain  ontologies   AFO  (agriculture  and  forestry), 
MAO   (cultural   heritage),   TAO   (applied   art),   and 
VALO   (photography)   extending   its   concept 
hierarchies.

KOKO Ontology
KOKO Ontology

...
...

...
...

Fig. 1. KOKO system of overlapping aligned ontologies [6].

8 http://www.seco.tkk.fi/ontologies/

Development

if   the   project   is   successful,   by   another 
coordinating organization.

The key idea in the ontologization process is to 
aim   at   a   system   of   vocabularies   that   are  born 
interoperable  with each other. To facilitate this, a 
new thesaurus is first matched with the general YSO 
top ontology in order to identify potential overlaps. 
The result is a Protege editor9  project that includes 
YSO and the new thesaurus concepts. This structure 
is then corrected and maintained manually. (Align-
ment with other overlapping ontologies is also possible in a similar way.) In this way, the work already 
done in YSO can be reused in daughter ontologies 
and, at the same time, interoperability is enhanced by 
collaboration.

Vocabulary work in our view is as much a social 
process as it is a technical challenge. The work is 
guided by the following principles or "ten command-
ments": 

to  

1. Add   machine   semantics  

legacy 
vocabularies. Start transforming thesauri [1] 
into   machine   interpretable   lightweight 
ontologies in order to boost their usage on 
the Semantic Web. 

2. Think cross-domain. Consider not only your 
own micro world, but also cross-domain usage  of concepts  when  making ontological 
decisions. 

3. Establish collaboration networks of domain 
expert  groups.  Nobody masters the whole 
universe. 

4. Reuse others work. 
5. Maintain interoperability with the past and 
other   ontologies.   Otherwise   benefits   of 
collaboration are lost. 

6. Proceed in small steps. Adding even little 
semantics can be very useful (and keeps e.g. 
the funding agencies happy). 

7. Respect different ontological views. It is not 
possible to come up with only one ontological view of the world. 

8. Accept imperfect models. The ontology will 

never be fully perfect. 

9. Minimal ontological commitment. Keep ontological structures simple and generic in order to facilitate cross-domain reuse. 

10. Coordinate   the   work   and   add   new 
commandments if needed. This is done now 
by the FinnONTO research project but later, 

9 http://protege.stanford.edu/

4. Vocabulary Services for Legacy Systems

Another key component of the FinnONTO infrastructure is the National Ontology Service ONKI10 
[15]   hosting   currently   over   80   ontologies   and 
vocabularies. The idea is provide the vocabularies as 
a free open source service for both human  and machine users to utilize. ONKI ontology services such 
as   concept   finding,   browsing,   fetching,   and   query 
expansion [13, 14] can be integrated with legacy systems through REST, Web Service, or AJAX APIs in 
a way that is analogous to using Google Maps as an 
external   service   in   applications.   We   hope   that   by 
making vocabulary services available and usable in 
an economically motivating way, organizations and 
people   start   using   shared   ONKI   vocabularies   and 
URIs,   preventing   interoperability   problems   rising 
form   using   local   or   depreciated   vocabularies,   and 
ambiguous literal terms in annotations. Other ontology servers on the web with the goal of publishing 
and sharing ontologies in public include Cupboard 
[2] and BioPortal [11].

5.  Evaluation

The   feasibility   of   the   FinnONTO   approach   is 
tested and demonstrated in practice by applications, 
such as the collaborative semantic portals Museum-
Finland11, HealthFinland12  [12], and CultureSampo13 
[8]   that   makes   use   of   the   whole   KOKO   system 
aligned with some international vocabularies, such as 
the Getty vocabularies14 AAT, TGN, and ULAN. In 
summer   2009,   150   organizations   in   Finland   and 
abroad had been registered to use ONKI services, and 
new   ontologized   vocabularies   in   the   system   have 
been   developed   by   external   organizations,   e.g.   an 
ontology   for   maritime   terms   (MERO)   and   for 
literature content (KAUNO). The latter one that has 
been   used,   based   on   the   ONKI   services,   for 
annotating over 50,000 pieces of Finnish novels and 
short   stories   in   a   Web   2.0   fashion   by   Finnish 

10 http://www.onki.fi/
11 http://www.museosuomi.fi/
12 http://www.tervesuomi.fi/
13 http://www.kulttuurisampo.fi/
14 http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/

          vocabularies/

Kirjasampo15.   In   HealthFinland   metadata   is   being 
created using the ONKI ontologies and services by a 
variety of national health organizations, and the system is in use16 and maintained by the National Institute for Health and Welfare since 2009 [12]. 

Our own experience suggests that gaining semantic interoperability in terms of vocabularies is a very 
tedious task and hinders fast publication cycle form 
legacy databases to the Web. In CultureSampo, for 
example, the content is harvested from tens of mu-
seums, libraries, archives, media companies, and web 
sources   producing   heterogeneous   content.   The 
vocabulary   interoperability   problem   should   in   our 
mind definitely be addressed seriously at the time 
and   place   of   content   creation,   rather   than   after 
harvesting   the   content,   and   we   hope   that   the 
FinnONTO infrastructure is a step towards facilitating this in practice.

6. Discussion

Changing the established practices of vocabulary 
development,   and   adapting   software   in   legacy 
systems to use ontologies cannot happen instantly but 
only over time. However, we believe there is now a 
promising   road   ahead   to   go   based   on   the 
collaborative   FinnONTO   approach,   although  many 
problems   of   interoperable   ontology   development 
need to be addressed in the future.

A concern is the management of changes in the 
evolving ontologies and their alignments. Ontology 
versioning is needed because 1) the underlying real 
world   or   2)   our   conceptualization   about   it   may 
change [10], or 3) the underlying vocabulary standards evolve. Here one faces the problem that old 
content has been annotated using an old vocabulary 
while the end-user or applications may use a modern 
vocabulary or different old vocabularies. To address 
the   problem,   alignments   between   vocabulary   versions along the temporal dimension are needed. An 
approach   to   modeling   temporal   ontology   changes 
was developed in the Finnish Spatio-temporal Ontology   SAPO17  modeling   over   1000   geographical 
changes   of   Finnish   counties   (e.g.   boundaries   and 
names) since 1865 [9].

An   important   question   in   sharing   ontologies   is 
application specificity or point of view dependency. 

15 http://www.kirjasampo.fi/
16 http://www.tervesuomi.fi/
17 http://www.seco.tkk.fi/ontologies/sapo/

An ontology developed from one point of view may 
not be usable from another perspective. To pursue 
application independence, the FinnONTO vocabularies   are   kept   lightweight   with   as   little   ontological 
commitment   to   applications   as   possible.   The 
vocabularies provide only little more than the skeletal 
RDFS subsumption hierarchy of concepts, and it is 
left up to the applications to build more domain specific semantics based on that.

End-users, domain experts, and ontology engineers 
may have different views to a domain. In such cases, 
different   separate   ontologies   for   the   same   domain 
may   be   needed,   aligned   with   each   other.   For 
example, in the HealthFinland portal, the content is 
annotated using domain expert vocabularies, such as 
Medical   Subject   Headings   (MeSH)18,   but   the 
vocabularies provided for the citizen end-users in the 
faceted search engine are based on layman's concepts 
extracted using a card-sorting technique [12].

Still another concern is whether two vocabularies 
sharing   the   same   concepts   should   share   the   same 
ontological structure, too. Since there can be different 
views and opinions to modeling the real world, the 
modeling choices in a vocabulary in FinnONTO can 
be   made   independently   from   those   in   other 
overlapping   vocabularies.
  The   FinnONTO 
framework only makes the different vocabularies and 
views   visible   to   all   parties,   encouraging   but   not 
forcing to sharing structures. 

It   is   our   hope   that   supporting   collaboration   in 
distributed   ontology   development   facilitates   costefficient creation of large cross-domain vocabularies 
with better interoperability than using a centralized 
approach   or   distributed   development   without 
coordination.   It   is   also   our   hope   that   supporting 
social collaboration will lead to ontologies of better 
quality.   By   using   the   ONKI   service   for   ontology 
publishing,   the   results   of   the   joint   efforts   can   be 
utilized in practical applications easily as ready-to-
use servicesboth by human and machine end-users.

Acknowledgements

Thanks   to   Martin   Raubal,   Giancarlo   Guizzardi, 
and   Krzysztof   Janowicz   for   fruitful   comments 
concerning an earlier version of this article. Tens of 
researchers have been working in the various parts of 
the FinnONTO 20032012 project. The research has 
been   funded   by   the   Finnish   Funding   Agency   for 

18 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/

tium of over 40 companies and public organizations.
