Semantic Web  Interoperability, Usability, Applicability 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

Semantic Web Tools and Systems

Editorial

Pascal Hitzler a, Krzysztof Janowicz b
a Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, USA
b GeoVISTA Center, Pennsylvania State University,

Semantic Web research relies on a number of key
methodologies such as knowledge representation languages or reasoning algorithms. As a research commu-
nity, however, we could not progress based on these
methodologies exclusively, but require tools and systems that realize our research results as key technologies for the Semantic Web. There would be no Linked
Data without repositories to store them, no Semantic
Web applications without application programming interfaces to load and edit ontologies, and no semanticsbased user interfaces without reasoners. Consequently,
some of these technologies are research enablers in
their own rights.

Unfortunately, the developers of such software
often researchers themselvesrarely get appropriate
credit for their work. Attempts to publish papers describing their software systems frequently provoke reviews and decision letters questioning their conceptual contribution. This criticism may be correct, be it
because the conceptual underpinnings have been published previously, or because there may in fact be little conceptual underpinnings apart from excellent software engineering. As a result, developers of key research enabling software often have considerable difficulties publishing their work in high-quality journals.
In turn, paradoxically, researchers using these systems within their own work lack a primary citation
source for the used software, and may have to settle for
a URL, a short demo paper, or for a workshop contribution as citation. These outlets, however, can not provide the rigid quality criteria and visibility compared
to journal publications.

There is a need for publishing Tools and Systems papers in primary journals. The criteria applied to evaluate such papers have to differ from those applied to

/0-1900/$ c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

classical research articles. Unfortunately, these alternative evaluation criteria are often not spelled out in
detail and therefore not consistently taken into account
by reviewers and editors. As a consequence, the Semantic Web journal has adopted the Tools and Systems
article as one of its regular paper types and provides
crisp criteria for their evaluation:

Reports on tools and systemsshort papers describing mature Semantic Web related tools and systems.
These reports should be brief and pointed, indicating
clearly the capabilities of the described tool or system.
It is strongly encouraged, that the described tools or
systems are free, open, and accessible on the Web. If
this is not possible, then they have to be made available to the reviewers. For commercial tools and sys-
tems, exceptions can be arranged through the editors.
These submissions will be reviewed along the following dimensions: (1) Quality, importance, and impact
of the described tool or system (convincing evidence
must be provided). (2) Clarity, illustration, and readability of the describing paper, which shall convey to
the reader both the capabilities and the limitations of
the tool.

The impact of the described tool or system is indeed
decisive. Authors are asked to provide evidence for a
substantial number of researchers using their software
for research and applications. In exceptional cases, authors may also argue about the potential future impact of their software given that they can provide clear
evidence for this. Clearly, software prototypes which
were only implemented as proof-of-concepts, or software which is closely tied to a particular (externally
funded) project, are out of scope. Originality or noveltywhich are decisive dimensions for high-quality
research articlesare not mentioned among the evaluation criteria. Tools and Systems Papers in the Semantic Web journal are reviewed based on whether they are
or will be research enablers as described above.

In this issue, we present a first collection of articles
that address this Tools and Systems call  and what a
