Semantic Web  Interoperability, Usability, Applicability 0 (0) 1
IOS Press

Semantic Web Surveys and Applications

Editorial

Pascal Hitzler a, Krzysztof Janowicz b
a Kno.e.sis Center, Wright State University, USA
b University of California, Santa Barbara, USA

The primary purpose of a scientific journal is to be
a service to the research community. It is up to the
editors-in-chief and the editorial board to assess the
needs of the community, and to tailor the journal in
such a way that it addresses these needs as closely as
possible.

It is for this reason that the Semantic Web journal
publishes more than original research papers. In the
last editorial [2], we discussed why it is fruitful for the
Semantic Web community to have a forum for publications on tools and systems with high impact, and the
last issue of the journal contained a collection of reports on some of the finest and most well-known Semantic Web tools currently available.

The present issue contains three surveys and one application paper. The surveys are responses to a special
call which we issued in fall 2010, asking for abstracts
first. Out of 37 submitted abstracts, we selected those
which were most promising in addressing current and
future needs of the Semantic Web community. It was
only 6 for which we strongly encouraged the authors
to write a full survey. Three of the resulting surveys are
presented in this issue.

The quality we expect from survey articles is indeed very high,1 We expect them to be well-written
and structured, comprehensive, and with a balanced
presentation and coverage. They must be accessible to
readers who are not dedicated specialists on the surveys topic. The covered material must be of timely
importance to the broader Semantic Web community.
Finally, a survey must provide a classification of the
presented work that supports the reader in understanding the commonalities and differences between the reviewed approaches. In other words, surveys for the Se-

mantic Web journal must have the potential to become
well-known introductory and overview articles. Given
these selection criteria, it is no surprise that one of the
surveys in this issue is the currently most accessed paper on the Semantic Web journal website.

We consider high-quality surveys to be of major importance to the Semantic Web in its current state of
development. The community is growing, there is significant uptake in the industry, but accessing the state
of the art and staying up-to-date in the different subcommunities is a difficult and time-consuming pro-
cess. While introductory textbooks can now be found
on the market,2 these can only cover the basics and
capture the knowledge and methods which are already
stable over a certain period of time. The state of the
art of many relevant current topics, however, is a constantly moving target, and books are not the right tool
to quickly capture and deliver a snapshot of ongoing research. High-quality survey articles address this
gap and thereby offer added value for the community.
Thus, besides other paper types, the Semantic Web
journal provides a forum for survey articles as well.

The last article in this issue is an application report 
yet another type of submission supported by the jour-
nal. Application reports in the Semantic Web journal
describe deployed applications. The impact of these
applications is a key review criterion, i.e., project use
case applications or studies introduced in Ph.D. theses
or technical reports usually do not qualify due to lack
of archival value and long-term impact. With the Semantic Web gaining momentum beyond research, reports on real applications with lasting impact are of
major importance as bridgeheads for further application developments. At the same time, it appears to be
rather difficult to convince industrial application devel-

1See the explicit review criteria listed on the Semantic Web jour-

nal website, http://www.semantic-web-journal.net/.

2See, e.g., [1,3].

/0-1900/$ c 0  IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

Hitzler and Janowicz / Semantic Web Surveys and Applications

opers to invest the time to write a report on their find-
ings. By providing a prominent forum for such papers,
however, the Semantic Web journals makes an attempt
to stimulate such contributions. And indeed we would
like to thank the authors of the paper, of Ontotext AD,
for their contribution.
