Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 25 (2014) 915

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

ArguBlogging: An application for the Argument Web
Floris Bex a,b,, Mark Snaith c, John Lawrence c, Chris Reed c,1

a University of Groningen, The Netherlands
b Utrecht University, The Netherlands
c University of Dundee, UK

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

In this paper, we present a software tool for ArguBlogging, which allows users to construct debate and
discussions across blogs, linking existing and new online resources to form distributed, structured con-
versations. Arguments and counterarguments can be posed by giving opinions on ones own blog and
replying to other bloggers posts. The resulting argument structure is connected to the Argument Web,
in which argumentative structures are made semantically explicit and machine-processable. We discuss
the ArguBlogging tool and the underlying infrastructure and ontology of the Argument Web.

 2014 Elsevier B.V.

Open access under CC BY license.

Article history:
Received 27 July 2012
Received in revised form
10 January 2014
Accepted 18 February 2014
Available online 5 March 2014

Keywords:
Argumentation
Opinions
Blogging
Web Apps

1. Introduction

Blogging has become commonplace in the online community
as an open platform to share and discuss information and opin-
ions. There are currently almost 60 million blogs on Tumblr alone2
and Blogspot/Blogger3 consistently ranks as one of the most visited
sites on the Web.4 Bloggers comment on and argue about a huge
variety of topics, from the newest video game to who should be the
next president of the United States, and popular blogs often have
large numbers of vocal followers who comment on the opinions
both expressed in the blog and also by other commenters.

As such, the blogging phenomenon (and the Web as a whole)
acts as an enabler of large-scale argumentation, where different views are constantly presented, challenged, and evaluated by
a large and diverse user group. However, what is currently not
captured is the explicit structure of argumentative viewpoints:
opinions and discussions may be identified (or tagged) by their
topics, time, or participants but not the different facts, opinions,

 Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: florisbex@gmail.com, f.j.bex@rug.nl (F. Bex),

marksnaith@computing.dundee.ac.uk (M. Snaith),
johnlawrence@computing.dundee.ac.uk (J. Lawrence),
chris@computing.dundee.ac.uk (C. Reed).
1 School of Computing, University of Dundee, DD1 4HN, UK.
2 www.tumblr.com/about, 5-6-2012.
3 www.blogger.com.
4 www.google.com/adplanner/static/top1000/, 5-6-2012.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2014.02.002
1570-8268  2014 Elsevier B.V.

Open access under CC BY license.

and arguments and how they relate to one another and, as such,
contribute to the overall picture. Having such structure has the potential to enable far better visualisation, navigation and analysis of
a debate, and makes it easier to automate support for the argumentation process, for example, by discovering inconsistencies among
arguments or by discovering synergies among disputants.

In this paper, we present5 and evaluate a software tool for
ArguBlogging,6 which allows users to blog with linked, semantically rich argument data. Arguments and counterarguments can be
posed by giving opinions on ones own blog and replying to other
bloggers posts. The resulting argument structure is connected to
the Argument Web, which is part of the Semantic Web [2]. Thus,
these argument structures can be further viewed and manipulated
using the different tools that work with the Argument Web [3]. Fur-
thermore, by supporting explicit debate-like moves, ArguBlogging
users are gently encouraged to better structure and organise their
positions, thereby potentially raising the overall quality of argumentation online.

Below, we first introduce the ArguBlogging tool and the underlying Argument Web in an informal way, through some examples.
In Section 4 we then look at the tools architecture, underlying infrastructure and ontology in more detail, and we briefly discuss a
user evaluation of the tool.

5 The system presented here is a newly implemented system loosely based on
the earlier version presented in [1].
6 argublogging.com.

F. Bex et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 25 (2014) 915

2. Introducing the Argument Web

The Web is an ideal platform for enhancing critical debate, due
to its ubiquity and openness. One of the drawbacks of existing tech-
nologies, such as forums, blogs, Twitter and so on is that these
methods do not capture the structure of argumentative viewpoints
explicitly. This makes the task of identifying, searching and evaluating the relationships among arguments difficult. Recently, a
number of tools have begun to offer support for explicit argument
and debate on the Web. [4] discuss a wide variety of tools for visu-
alising,7 editing,8 annotating9 and searching10 arguments on the
Web. However, these tools are all self-contained, and the arguments represented in them cannot be interchanged. For example,
if one edits an argument in Debatepedia it is not possible to subsequently visualise it in ArguNet.

The approach proposed by the Argument Web [2,5,3] aims to
provide infrastructure that supports argumentation in many different contexts and use cases by providing practical bridges between individual applications and application domains, and by
offering a coherent ontology supported by a variety of search
and display tools. Thus, with the Argument Web, the structure of
arguments and debate is not captured on a separate, specifically
designed website. Rather, this structure is URI-addressable: the
Argument Web as a part of the Semantic Web, is offering a platform that combines linked argument data with software tools that
make online debate intuitive for various audiences, including me-
diators, students, academics, broadcasters and bloggers. With the
Argument Web we aim to build an open, extensible and re-useable
infrastructure for large-scale argument representation, manipula-
tion, and evaluation, allowing for structured argument and debate
whilst at the same time tapping into the enormous user base of the
World Wide Web.

One particularly topical issue in mid 2012 was the issue of Assads Syria and the morality of potential Western intervention.11
We can use this topic in creating an example to illustrate the Argument Web. Say you search the Web for arguments by asking the
question Should we invade Syria?. You find a number of arguments with links to their sources: a video of a press conference in
which the UK prime minister says that Assad should be held accountable for war crimes, a newspaper column claiming that Syria
is different from Iraq, an article that explores the military feasibility of attacking Syria, and so on. You focus on the newspaper
column, and this page links to other arguments posted on the Web
that agree or disagree with the fact that Syria is different from Iraq.
One of the counterarguments, posted on a forum, states that the
writer of the column is a leftie who has no idea what the difference between Syria and Iraq is, or what real war is like for that
matter. In the same forum, another user disagrees with this ar-
gument, stating that McCain is for intervention and he is not a
leftie.

In this way, the Argument Web makes it possible to follow a line
of argument across disparate fora, user comments, professionally
prepared editorials, multimedia resources and so on. Furthermore,
at any time you can express your agreement or disagreement with
one of the points made and post your own linked reply on your
blog. Fig. 1 visualises the small web of arguments from our exam-
ple. Here, links tagged pro indicate that one statement agrees with
another statement, that is, that one statement provides a reason

Fig. 1. Linked Argument Data across different online sources.

for the other statement; con links indicate that a counterargument
is provided, that is, that one statement is a reason against another
statement. Note that statements and arguments can be on different web pages but that, for example, a counterargument can also
be given on the same web page (as is the case for the forum).

There are various tools for the Argument Web that all offer different interaction styles for engaging in online argument.12 For ex-
ample, OVA13 can be used to annotate arguments on websites, the
AIFdb14 interface can be used to search and visualise arguments,
and TOAST15 [3] can be used to evaluate arguments in the Argument Web according to a logical calculus [6]. It is further possible
to upload and download argument graphs in formats associated
with third-party argument visualisation and critical thinking tools
such as Rationale16 and Carneades.17

3. ArguBlogging

Many of the existing tools for interfacing with the Argument
Web are geared towards specialist audiences (e.g. academic users
interested in discourse and argument analysis). The same is true
for a lot of the tools discussed in [4]. With ArguBlogging the aim
is to open up the Argument Web to regular internet users with
a critical view: bloggers. The ArguBlogging tool is built so as to
post arguments and link them to the Argument Web with minimal
effort on the part of the user. The variety of Argument Web tools
can then be used to further explore the more complex webs of
opinions built using ArguBlogging and other tools.

The ArguBlogging tool requires no local installation, as it exists
as a bookmarklet18 in the users browser. Once the bookmarklet is
installed from the ArguBlogging home page (argublogging.com), a
user can respond to an opinion on a web page by highlighting the
relevant piece of text and clicking the bookmarklet. The ArguBlogging widget is then rendered on the page, providing options with
which to respond. In Fig. 2, the widget is rendered on top of an
opinion column on a possible invasion of Syria.

7 e.g. www.argunet.org.
8 e.g. www.debatepedia.com.
9 e.g. ova.computing.dundee.ac.uk.
10 e.g. www.discoursedb.org.
11 en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syrian_civil_war.

12 www.argumentinterchange.org/library.
13 ova.computing.dundee.ac.uk/.
14 www.aifdb.org/.
15 www.arg.dundee.ac.uk/toast/.
16 rationale.austhink.com/.
17 carneades.github.com.
18 www.bookmarklets.com/about/.

Fig. 2. ArguBlogging widget rendered on a web page.

Fig. 3. A blog post automatically constructed by ArguBlogging.

At the moment, the user can agree or disagree, causing the selected text to be highlighted in green or red, respectively. A large
text field is available to give ones reasons for the agreement or dis-
agreement; the smaller text field allows for the input of a title for
the blog post. At the moment, the widget contains the ability to
connect to two blogging platforms, Blogger and Tumblr.

Note that at the moment, the ArguBlogging tool uses a simple
dialogue model. Currently, only agreement and disagreement can
be expressed and it is not possible, for example, to challenge the
other party to give a reason for her claim. The modular approach
of the Argument Web means that other, more complex models of
dialogue (see [7]) are easily integrated in the tools based on the Argument Web, including ArguBlogging. This future work is further
discussed in Section 5.

Once the opinion is sent, the widget gives the user the links to
the blog post and the conversation view. A typical blog post made
using ArguBlogging is shown in Fig. 3.

Just below the title is the text that was replied to (in this case
the text selected in the opinion column) and the link to the source.
Below that is shown the bloggers conversational move (i.e. agree
or disagree) together with the bloggers reasons for their opinion.
There is also a link to the full conversation. At the bottom of the

blog post an argue button is created. This button is similar to the
buttons which are often found on websites (e.g. share on Blogger,
share on Facebook, share on Twitter), as it allows one to respond
to the blog post as a whole without having to select or copy the text
in the blog. Clicking the button will bring up the ArguBlogging wid-
get, and the text that is replied to is then the opinion of the blogger
(in this case The situation is different, the Americans openly lied
about WMD in Iraq.).

The ArguBlogging widget and blog posts created using ArguBlogging also provide a link to the conversation. This conversation includes all claims, opinions and arguments that are somehow
relevant to (i.e. linked to) the opinion expressed in the blog post.
Conversations can be viewed in the conversation view provided by
the Argument Web search engine,19 which shows a sequence of
replies as well as the argument that has been built in the conversation as a diagram. In Fig. 4, the conversation about whether Syria
and Iraq are different is shown.20 On the left, opinions are rendered

19 www.AIFdb.org.
20 www.arg.dundee.ac.uk/AIFdb/argview/750.

F. Bex et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 25 (2014) 915

Fig. 4. The Argument Web search engine, showing the conversation on the left and the argument map on the right.

as a sequential dialogue between the participants in the conversa-
tion; below each speech bubble a link to the original source (opin-
ion column, blog) is provided. On the right the argument based
on this dialogue is rendered as a diagram. Here, green links represent pro links (reason for) and red links represent con links (rea-
son against). The first reply discussed in our example  the blog
post that America lied about WMD  is shown as a reason for the
original text from the newspaper column. Other bloggers have also
engaged in the debate, arguing against the statement that America
lied and for the statement that Iraq is not Syria.

4. Ontology, infrastructure and architecture

Now that we have informally discussed ArguBlogging on the Argument Web, we offer a bit more detail with regards to the current underlying ontology and infrastructure of the Argument Web
(Section 4.1) and the architecture of the ArguBlogging tool
(Section 4.3).

4.1. The AIF ontology

The Argument Web is based on a common ontology for argument that supports web-based interchange of data, called the
Argument Interchange Format (AIF) [5,6], which is available in a
number of machine-readable formats (RDFs, OWL/XML, RDF/XML
and SQL database schemas).21 The AIF ontology places at its core
a distinction between information, such as propositions and sentences and schemes, general patterns of reasoning which, when ap-
plied, provide the specific argumentative relations. These schemes
allow us to model and incorporate typical patterns of human argumentation [8], such as for example ad hominem argument, an
argument against the person. Another important distinction in the
ontology is that between argument structure, i.e. a static structure

21 www.arg.dundee.ac.uk/aif.

of statements that are reasons for or against conclusions (as in, he
prepared an argument), and argument dialogue, a debate or discussion (as in, they had an argument).

Fig. 5 shows an example of the linked data that corresponds to
the discussion in our example. The locutions on the right are part
of the dialogue in which one locution replies to another (shown in
Fig. 4 as speech bubbles). The information on the left side of the picture (which was shown as a graph in Fig. 4) is the argument that follows from the dialogue. The dialogue and the argument are linked
via nodes denoting the illocutionary force of the speech act in the
locution, such as asserting or arguing. The illocutionary relation between the Reply node and the support node in the argument is more
complex, as it represents the fact that it is in virtue of the fact that
The situation is different is responding to Syria is not Iraq that
there is an inferential support link here.

The detailed structure of linked data allows for the assessment
of certain properties of argumentation that are not captured by
other, simpler models (such as [9]). For example, in our model the
felicity conditions of a speech act can be made explicit as conditions on the illocutionary force, and these conditions can then be
subject to critical questioning and counterarguments. Thus, complex argumentative phenomena such as ad hominem argumentation or misquotation are easily captured and analysed.

4.2. Argument Web infrastructure and architecture

The Argument Web is a large-scale deployment of Semantic
Web technology, which at the time of writing contained 1250 different argument maps (see Fig. 4) and more than 23,000 linked
propositions (nodes). The Argument Web adopts a pragmatic
approach to issues of infrastructure by specifying the ontology
not only in OWL and RDF, but also as an instance of a relational database schema which can be implemented in a range
of databases such as MySQL. Thus, the Argument Web approach
builds on highly scalable, mature, robust and commercially accepted database systems, whilst still conforming to the main principles and demands of Linked Data: each piece of an argument

Fig. 5. Example of linked data on the Argument Web.

is addressable by a unique URI which stands in relationships to
other URI-addressable information [10]. So an entity in the Argument Web can be accessed both by state-of-the-art Semantic Web
technology (because it is expressed in RDF) and by a range of web
services written in PHP which allow for the addition and retrieval
of AIF components from the database to, for example, import and
export argument data in a range of widely used formats including Araucaria (AML), DOT, Carneades (LKIF), JSON, Rationale (RTNL)
and SVG files. Furthermore, a middle layer exists which groups simple web service queries, combining information about the structure and rules of argumentative dialogues with participant data so
that more complex queries  for example, a query to determine
what reasons a dialogue participant has for a particular point  can
be performed.

4.3. ArguBlogging architecture

The ArguBlogging architecture (Fig. 6) consists of two main
components: the user interface and the Argument Web Social
Layer. The user interface (the widget) is a lightweight JavaScript ap-
plication, accessed by a user from their web browsers bookmarks
bar. Data from the bookmarklet is formatted as a JSON string and
posted to the web service interface of the Argument Web Social
Layer.

The Social Layer [11] provides an interface for applications to
interact with both the Argument Web and social media sites. Data
is received from applications via a web service, and is processed
into both AIF and formats suitable for publishing to different social
media platforms. The social layer also provides for user manage-
ment, storing details of each registered user of the relevant tool (in
this case ArguBlogging). Connections to the social media platforms
are handled using the OAuth 2.0 protocol, allowing secure access
to user blogs without the need for users to constantly provide their
usernames and passwords.

4.4. ArguBlogging user evaluation

Because ArguBlogging is specifically targeted at non-academic
end users we performed a relatively modest evaluation (15 users),
asking respondents to rate and comment on the usability of
the tool. For this evaluation, the users were asked to go to
argublogging.com and install the bookmarklet. The users were
then asked to respond to some opinion online using the ArguBlogging tool. Finally, the users could express their findings in a brief
survey.22

22 www.surveymonkey.com/s/VLBWNW5.

Fig. 6. The ArguBlogging architecture.

The survey starts by asking about the users backgrounds. The
users have quite a lot of experience with IT, with an average rating
of 4.2 out of 5. Experience with argument and debate is less (aver-
age rating 2.8 out of 4), with half of the respondents only having
argued in an informal setting and the other half having experience
with debate in a formal setting (e.g. courtroom, academic). The experience with blogs is also average (rating 3 out of 5): about half of
the users are bloggers or have blogged before and the other half has
only read blogs; 1 user has never read or written for a blog. Most
users have expressed opinions online before: stand-alone web-
sites, forums, blogs and Twitter were all used in equal measure by
various users. Two users indicated that they had never expressed
an opinion online.

There are three questions in the survey which ask users to rate
the difficulty of performing various actions with the ArguBlogging
tool on a scale of 15: (Q1) Was it easy or difficult to configure Argublogging and get started?, (Q2) Were the Argublogging bookmarklet
and window easy or difficult to use? and (Q3) Did you find it easy or
difficult to view and respond to opinions after they had been posted?.
Table 1 shows the respondents answers and the average scores.
Respondents can further comment on the strength and weaknesses
of ArguBlogging in open questions.

F. Bex et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 25 (2014) 915

Table 1
User scores for the usability of the ArguBlogging tool.

Very difficult
0(0%)
1 (7%)
0(0%)

Somewhat difficult
5 (33%)
3(20%)
2(13%)

Neither difficult nor easy
2(13%)
1(7%)
4(27%)

Somewhat easy
2(13%)
4 (27%)
6 (40%)

Very easy
6 (40%)
6 (40%)
3 (20%)

Avg. score (05)

Q1
Q2
Q3

On average, the respondents found the tool relatively easy to
use. The users almost consistently mentioned the simplicity and
ease of use as one of the strengths of ArguBlogging. The difficulty
of configuring ArguBlogging (Q1) was caused by four users not
knowing what was meant by the bookmarks toolbar (the bar of
favourite bookmarks under the browsers address bar). Other users
commented that bookmarklets might not work well on smartphones and tablets; this can be remedied by developing an ArguBlogging app, which we leave for the future. The respondent who
indicated very difficult for Q2 did not use bookmarks and would
have liked to be able to use ArguBlogging by copying text and a
URL to the tool. Two respondents who indicated somewhat difficult on Q1 and Q2 ran into technical problems which were related
to the server, not the tool itself. This has probably influenced their
ratings. Finally, with respect to Q3, users remarked that while the
diagram (i.e. the conversation view, Fig. 4) is a nice feature, it is not
very clear exactly what is represented.

When asked about the strengths and weaknesses of ArguBlog-
ging, users were generally positive about ArguBloggings simplicity and ability to react to any text online with a single click.
Furthermore, they lauded the ability to link arguments across blogs
and other media (news sites, forums), and the option to view connected arguments as a diagram was generally well-received. Not
all users knew about or considered the wider implications of ArguBloggings connection to the Argument Web. One user indicated
that it would be interesting to connect opinions across different
blogs, and another user indicated that it would be useful to have
discussions about one topic on a single page instead of scattered
across different blogs; the Argument Web makes this possible, but
one has to use the AIFdb search tool instead of ArguBlogging.

When asked about features they would like to see, the respondents indicated that the option to vote for or rate opinions
(e.g. with a thumbs up or thumbs down button) would be nice.
A few users would have liked to see Facebook and Twitter inte-
gration. This points to what about half of the users indicated as
the major weakness of ArguBlogging, namely that it only posts to
blogs. The reach of the tool and the wider Argument Web could
be increased if similar tools are available to post to Twitter or social networking sites. A few users argued that such outlets would
perhaps be more suited to the relatively short arguments posted
with the simple ArguBlogging tool, as arguments on blogs tend to
be more expansive and go on for several paragraphs.

5. Conclusion and future work

In this paper we have presented a Semantic Web approach to
blogging that focuses on critical argument and debate, combining
a rich ontology for describing argumentative and rhetorical
structures with a flexible and extensible infrastructure for linked
argument data.

By providing a simple bookmarklet and easy-to-use interface,
structured and semantically rich data can be collected from users
in an unobtrusive way. In this way, we aim to encourage the direct
growth of the Argument and Semantic Web, as opposed to the common method of extracting structured semantic information from
existing Web resources (DBpedia,23 for example, extracts its information from Wikipedia). Preliminary evaluation suggests that this

approach to metadata collection is appealing, and user feedback
suggests that it would be particularly appropriate to extend it to
Argument Web applications for Twitter and Facebook.

ArguBlogging builds on a foundation for semantic blogging [12].
Hence, the connection argumentation and ontologies for social me-
dia, which was already explored in [9], can be easily made. The connection between blogs and semantically rich linked data opens up
new research possibilities in, for example, areas like opinion mining and sentiment analysis. For example, if we combine the information on the Argument Web with information about social links
(e.g. FOAF24), we can determine whether groups of people have the
same opinions or agree with the same claims.

Currently, the ArguBlogging tool only allows for very simple argumentative discourse: given a claim, one can agree or disagree.
Current research is working on generalised processing of formal dialogue systems [7], which provide rules for coherent dialogue that
determine, for example, when each party takes its turn or which
types of responses can be given to a claim or a question. In [13],
we propose a generic framework for capturing these dialogue sys-
tems, which is explicitly compatible with the AIF ontology. Hence,
dialogue systems expressed in the framework can be directly engineered into the tools that connect to the Argument Web, including ArguBlogging. On the one hand, this allows for a wider variety
of argumentative moves (e.g. instead of disagreeing one can challenge the other blogger to give further reasons for his claim). On
the other hand, this makes ArguBlogging not just a system for describing or capturing online argumentative discourse, but also for
improving such discourse. The rules of a dialogue system, for ex-
ample, might explicitly forbid attacks against the person such as
the one in Section 4.1, allowing the debate to focus on what is really at stake. Thus, ArguBlogging will help to further the normative
goal of the Argument Web, which is to bring a new kind of critical
rationality to the Web.

Acknowledgements

This work has been supported in part by the EPSRC under grant
EP/G060347/1. The authors would also like to acknowledge the
input and contributions from Simon Wells to earlier versions of the
ArguBlogging system.
