Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 2728 (2014) 3441

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Big linked cancer data: Integrating linked TCGA and PubMed
Muhammad Saleem a,, Maulik R. Kamdar b, Aftab Iqbal b, Shanmukha Sampath b,
Helena F. Deus c, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo a
a Universitat Leipzig, IFI/AKSW, PO 100920, D-04009 Leipzig, Germany
b Insight Centre for Data Analytics, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland
c Foundation Medicine Inc. One Kendal Square Cambridge, MA, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 15 March 2014
Received in revised form
13 June 2014
Accepted 7 July 2014
Available online 16 July 2014

Keywords:

PubMed

Linked data
Visualization

The amount of bio-medical data available on the Web grows exponentially with time. The resulting large
volume of data makes manual exploration very tedious. Moreover, the velocity at which this data changes
and the variety of formats in which bio-medical data is published makes it difficult to access them in an
integrated form. Finally, the lack of an integrated vocabulary makes querying this data more difficult. In
this paper, we advocate the use of Linked Data to integrate, query and visualize bio-medical data. The
resulting Big Linked Data allows discovering knowledge distributed across manifold sources, making it
viable for the serendipitous discovery of novel knowledge. We present the concept of Big Linked Data
by showing how the constant stream of new bio-medical publications can be integrated with the Linked
Cancer Genome Atlas dataset (TCGA) within a virtual integration scenario. We ensure the scalability of our
approach through the novel TopFed federated query engine, which we evaluate by comparing the query
execution time of our system with that of FedX on Linked TCGA. Then, we show how we can harness
the value hidden in the underlying integrated data by making it easier to explore through a user-friendly
interface. We evaluate the usability of the interface by using the standard system usability questionnaire
as well as a customized questionnaire designed for the users of our system. Our overall result of 77
suggests that our interface is easy to use and can thus lead to novel insights.

 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Over the last years, the number of Linked Data sources published has grown to comprise more than 60 billion triples.1 The
portion of these data sources that pertain to bio-medicine is distributed across partly very large datasets. One of the newest addition to the bio-medical datasets is the Linked TCGA [1], a 20
billion-triple dataset which represents the Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) database in RDF. Making bio-medical datasets available as
Linked Data presents the obvious advantage of easing their integration and fusion. These integrated datasets can then be used to
support bio-medical experts during the analysis and exploration

 Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 17666169917.

E-mail addresses: saleem.muhammd@gmail.com,

saleem@informatik.uni-leipzig.de (M. Saleem), maulik.kamdar@insight-centre.org
(M.R. Kamdar), aftab.iqbal@deri.org (A. Iqbal), shanmukha.sampath@deri.org
(S. Sampath), hdeus@foundationmedicine.com (H.F. Deus),
ngonga@informatik.uni-leipzig.de (A.-C. Ngonga Ngomo).
1 http://stats.lod2.eu/.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2014.07.004
1570-8268/ 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

of bio-medical knowledge as well as for the extraction of novel
knowledge from this data. Moreover, the provision of bio-medical
data in RDF allows the use of the powerful query language SPARQL,
which eases the selection of relevant portions of the data.

In this paper, we present a scalable framework that aims to
support the serendipitous discovery of bio-medical hypotheses
from Big Linked bio-medical data by providing an interface for
the analysis and exploration of Big Linked Data, i.e., large volumes
of Linked Data that were extracted from different sources and
are updated frequently. The back-end of our application supports
the management and querying of high volumes of Linked Data as
well as the continuous integration of this data with other novel
bio-medical data from external data streams. In this paper, we
consider a subset of the Linked TCGA dataset (i.e., 10 tumors) that
pertains to various cancer types and its continuous integration
with the RDF data extracted from the semi-structured content
of PubMed. We chose PubMed because it contains more than
23 million publications and provides an interface that allows
discovering novel publications as soon as they are made available.
The user interface developed on top of the resulting datasets
presents an easily understandable, integrated, up-to-date view of

the information available in the back-end. The intuition behind our
work is that when presented with such an interface, experts can
detect unexpected correlations amongst known resources. These
unexpected correlations can then form the basis for a serendipitous
discovery. For example, bio-medical experts that specialize on
rare cancer types are empowered to easily detect the interactions
between these rare cancer types and other diseases. For example,
they could discover that certain cancer tends to metastasize
into cancers of particular types, leading to the question of why
this particular cell migration occurs. This question could then
lead to the serendipitous formulation of new research questions,
e.g., pertaining to the rheology of certain cancer types.

The rest of this paper is structured as follows: we first give
an overview of the architecture of our approach and show how
it supports volume, velocity and variability to generate novel
value from large Linked Data datasets. We then present the user
interface built on top of integrated datasets as well as outline
various features of our interface. The evaluation section shows
that our data infrastructure outperforms the state of the art in the
management of large amounts of data. Moreover, it shows that our
interface can be used easily. The conclusion of the paper presents
future research avenues pertaining to Big Linked Data. Note that
this paper is based on the work presented in [2].

2. Architecture

The architecture of our system is shown in Fig. 1 and is

explained in the following subsections.

2.1. Datasets

Our framework relies on three types of datasets that are loaded
into various SPARQL endpoints (explained in Section 2.2): Linked
data version of TCGA, PubMed metadata in RDF and a set of
mappings between these datasets. In the following, we describe
each of these datasets in detail.

2.1.1. Linked TCGA

The Cancer Genome Atlas is a pilot project started in 2005
by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the National Human
Genome Research Institute (NHGRI). The goal of this project is to
catalog the genomic alternations found in all cancers. The TCGA
public data portal2 gives open access to the cancer patient data
and enables researcher to perform and validate their analysis on
real data. Currently, TCGA data portal contains 27 635 text archives
for 30 different cancer diseases and 9000 patients, leading up to a
total of 32.3 TB3 of data. Each disease data is categorized into three
levels: level 1 is raw data, level 2 is normalized data, and level 3 is
processed data. Most of the analysis is performed on level 3 data,4
therefore we selected level 3 data in this paper.

Exploiting such large amount of data in bio-informatics
applications is a major challenge. One has to download large
archives and process the relevant text files in order to collect the
actual data necessary for analysis. Further, data in the archives are
not biologically linked and thus require lookups on various files. To
overcome these issues, a Linked Data version of the Cancer Genome
Atlas is developed [1]. The main aim of this work is to publish TCGA
data as Linked Data and further made it publicly available through
several SPARQL endpoints. This would enable researchers to issue
a query against a SPARQL endpoint and get the required chunk of

2 https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/tcgaDownload.jsp.
3 https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/datareports/statsDashboard.htm.
4 https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/datareports/statsDashboard.htm.

data necessary for analysis. Such query processing capability saves
a lot of time and encourage cancer researchers to develop real time
applications on top of TCGA data. Currently, Linked TCGA contains
20.4 billion triples for 27 cancer diseases.5 However, in this paper
we have used data from 10 different cancer diseases (7.36 billion
triples) of Linked TCGA. The details about data is given in Table 1.

2.1.2. TCGA disease and genes mappings

The aim of the second dataset is to establish a bridge between
the structured data contained in TCGA and the constant flow of
RDF data generated by analyzing PubMed (see next subsection).
In order to integrate these two datasets, diseases and genes
(including their synonyms) found in Linked TCGA are required to
be identified in PubMed articles metadata. To achieve this goal, we
extracted a list of diseases and genes from Linked TCGA. Then, we
made use of the BioPortal search API6 to obtain a list of synonyms
and their corresponding URIs for every disease and gene found in
Linked TCGA.

The synonyms are later used for matching against any key
term identified in PubMed articles abstract by using a biomedical
named entity recognition tool known as BANNER [3]. URIs
corresponding to the matched keywords are then used to actually
establish links between PubMed articles and corresponding
diseases and gene URIs. The parsed results are stored as RDF
statements dubbed TCGA disease and genes mappings. A sample
TCGA disease mapping7 for the Bladder cancer using the Bioportal
search API is shown in Listing 1.

2.1.3. Integrating PubMed articles

Our third dataset consists of PubMed articles meta data. The
purpose of this dataset is to keep our system up-to-date w.r.t. the
current knowledge on the cancer types contained in the underlying
Linked TCGA dataset. However, given that PubMed articles are not
in RDF, we wrote our script which takes into a list of cancer-related
keywords8 which are used to search for PubMed articles tagged
with those keywords. All articles returned as a result based on set
of keywords are transformed into RDF.

For searching purposes, we use the Entrez Programming
Utilities (E-utilities)9 which acts as an API to the Entrez system
of databases at the National Centre for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI). The E-Utilities provides access to all major functions of
Entrez, such as, text searching in databases (e.g., PubMed), and
downloading records in various formats. We use the E-Utilities
API in our script to search for PubMed article IDs associated with
a particular keyword. We retrieve the full metadata record of
article in the list of articles retrieved through the list of keywords.
The resulting PubMed article information in XML format is then
transformed into RDF. Moreover, we analyze the abstract of each
PubMed article retrieved previously to identify any disease or gene
name using BANNER [3]. If a disease or a gene name is identified,
we execute a SPARQL query on our TCGA disease and gene mapping
dataset (see Section 2.1.2) to find matching resources. If the match
is found, then we add a triple stating the relevance of a PubMed
article to a particular disease or gene term using skos:related
predicate. An excerpt of a PubMed article related to bladder
cancer is shown in Listing 2.

5 http://tcga.deri.ie.
6 http://data.bioontology.org/documentation.
7 http://data.bioontology.org/search?q=Bladdercancer&exactmatch=true&
apikey=eb54ca23-d4a4-4b36-8652-909538a5aedd.
8 List of keywords obtained from https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/.
9 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK25501/.

M. Saleem et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 2728 (2014) 3441

Table 1
Overview of the TCGA data used.

Tumor type
Cervical (CESC)
Rectal adenocarcinoma (READ)
Papillary Kidney (KIRP)
Bladder cancer (BLCA)
Acute Myeloid Leukemia (LAML)
Lower Grade Glioma (LGG)
Prostate adenocarcinoma (PRAD)
Lung squamous carcinoma (LUSC)
Cutaneous melanoma (SKCM)
Head and neck squamous cell (HNSC)

Fig. 1. Architecture of the proposed system.

Original size (GB)

Refined size (GB)

RDFized size (GB)

Triples (Million)

Listing 1: An Exemplary RDF representation of TCGA disease mappings

<http : / / tcga . deri . ie / schema / >.

@prefix rdfs : <http : / /www.w3. org /2000/01/ rdfschema#>.
@prefix tcga :
<http : / / tcga . aksw . org / disease /BLCA>
tcga : ref
rdfs : label
tcga : acronym "BLCA" ;
tcga :synonyms " Bladder cancer " , " carcinoma of
tcga : uri <http : / / purl . bioontology . org / ontology /MEDDRA/10005003> .

<http : / / tcga . deri . ie / graph /BLCA> ;

" Bladder cancer " ;

tcga : disease ;

the bladder " , " cancer of

the bladder " ;

2.2. TopFed

After creating the datasets for our framework, we had to ensure
that the user interface is responsive enough to be used in real
use cases. Addressing this scalability problem is one of the major
challenges when developing this platform as it relies on a very
large data basis. In particular, the Linked TCGA dataset contains
over 20 billion triples and is expected to reach around 30 billion
triples as new data is being submitted frequently [1]. This is, to
the best of our knowledge, the largest dataset of the Linked Open
Data (LOD) Cloud. Hosting such large amount of data using a
centralized server is simply not scalable. We thus opted for using a
total of 17 SPARQL endpoints to host the 30+ billion triples which
resulted from our continuous integration of PudMed articles and
LinkedTCGA. Each of the endpoint contains around 2 billion of
triples10 (load balancing). Still, querying this large amount of data
is a tedious problem. Therefore, we addressed this problem by
developing TopFed.

TopFed is a Linked TCGA-tailored federated query engine for
efficient on-the-fly data integration from multiple TCGA SPARQL
endpoints.
Input SPARQL query is first processed to get the
individual triple patterns. For each triple pattern, the set of relevant
sources are obtained using the TopFed index which contains the
data distribution information among TCGA SPARQL endpoints.
The annotated query is then forwarded to the federator which
generates multiple sub-queries. The output of the federator is
forwarded to the optimizer, which generates an optimized query
execution plan for the Linked TCGA data. Each optimized subquery is forwarded to the corresponding SPARQL endpoints and the
results are integrated using the integrator. Finally, the integrated
results are forwarded to the user. Complete details about TopFed
can be found at the project home page.11

Current source selection [46] and SPARQL query federation
[79] approaches are more general and do not leverage data
distribution. Thus, they overestimate the set of capable sources
that actually contribute to the final result set of SPARQL queries [6].

10 See Section 2 for details: http://goo.gl/0oTAKV.

11 https://code.google.com/p/topfed/.

Listing 2: An Exemplary RDF representation of meta data of a PubMed Article

<http : / / tcga . deri . ie /pubmed/22998857>
"[ Urinary BLCA4 level

rdfs : label
<http : / / bio2rdf . org / pubmed_vocabulary : author >

<http : / / bio2rdf . org / pubmed_vocabulary : PubMedRecord> ;

i s useful

to detect upper urinary t r a c t urothelial c e l l carcinoma ] . "

<http : / / tcga . deri . ie /pubmed/22998857/author /4> , <http : / / tcga . deri . ie /pubmed/22998857/author /1> ;

<http : / / tcga . deri . ie /pubmed/22998857/chemical /4> , <http : / / tcga . deri . ie /pubmed/22998857/chemical /1> ;

<http : / / bio2rdf . org / pubmed_vocabulary : chemical >

<http : / / bio2rdf . org / pubmed_vocabulary : journal >

<http : / / tcga . deri . ie /pubmed/22998857/ Journal > ;

<http : / / bio2rdf . org / pubmed_vocabulary : mesh_heading>

<http : / / bio2rdf . org / pubmed_vocabulary :owner>

<http : / / bio2rdf . org / pubmed_vocabulary : publication_model >

"NLM" ;
" PrintElectronic " ;

<http : / / tcga . deri . ie /pubmed/22998857/mesh_heading/6> , <http : / / tcga . deri . ie /pubmed/22998857/mesh_heading/5> ;

<http : / / bio2rdf . org / pubmed_vocabulary : publication_type >

, " Research Support , NonU. S . Gov  t "

" Journal A r t i c l e "

<http : / / bio2rdf . org / pubmed_vocabulary : status >

, " English Abstract " ;

"MEDLINE" ;

dcterms : abstract <http : / / tcga . deri . ie /pubmed/22998857/ abstract > ;
dcterms : i d e n t i f i e r "pubmed:22998857" ;
dcterms : language " spa " ;
dcterms : t i t l e "[ Urinary BLCA4 level
i s useful
skos : related <http : / / tcga . deri . ie / graph /BLCA> .

to detect upper urinary t r a c t urothelial c e l l carcinoma ] . "

An over-estimation of sources can be very expensive while dealing
with Big Linked Data sources such as the integrated Linked TCGA
and PubMed datasets. In contrast, TopFed is an index-assisted
approach particularly designed for Linked TCGA and makes use of
the intelligent data distribution provided as input.12 Using a lightweight index, TopFed is able to detect the contributing sources for
each SPARQL query and can thus reduce the number of sources
selected (without losing any recall) during the query federation.
By selecting fewer sources than state-of-the-art approaches, our
approach can compute the answer to queries significantly faster,
leading to acceptable response times for the queries required to
use our framework.

3. Visualization

One of the most important challenges when delivering and
using data-driven solutions for any type of human process is
the provision of data visualization/summarization tools that are
intuitive and easy to use for the experts [10]. Searching across
integrated linked data sources, aggregating and displaying the
evidence required to make informed decisions, and reusing the
retrieved results to address challenges in different contexts are
the main tasks of such visual analytics platforms. The current
method by which physicians look for information on the Web is
through peer-reviewed publications. However, with the indexing
of over 10,000 papers in PubMed every year, keeping up-to-
date with the literature and using this knowledge to derive new
research questions has become a herculean task. To facilitate the
intuitive exploration of the information available in TCGA datasets
and tumor-related publications, we coupled the integrated Linked
TCGA and PubMed data with an interactive visual analytics
platform called the Linked TCGA Dashboard. A prototype of the
interface is available at http://srvgal78.deri.ie/tcga-pubmed/.

3.1. Network explorer

The Linked TCGA Dashboard comprises different perspectives
through which the underlying integrated data sources can be

explored. The Network Explorer perspective features a highly
dense, force-directed network graph linking the different tumor
typologies analyzed in TCGA to the publication resources where
more information about these tumors can be discovered. The
linking/display method retrieves tumor-associated publications
and presents them as a bipartite network graph initially (Fig. 3),
with the nodes colored according to the tumor mappings. On
the selection of a publication node, the graph gets constrained to
display the Mesh Terms associated with the selected publication
resource. The relevant terms are displayed as distinct nodes along
with other publication nodes which reference common Mesh
terms (Fig. 2(B)). The metadata of the publication (author, abstract,
mesh terms, chemicals cited, etc.) is retrieved using a SPARQL
query and presented in the adjoining panel (Fig. 2(C)) along with a
link to the original PubMed article.

3.2. Genome Browser

The phenomena of DNA Methylation is relevant for cancer
progression detection. Methylation patterns in cancer cells are
known to reflect the silencing or turning-off of cancer protecting
genes (i.e. tumor suppressor genes), thus allowing the cancer to
progress. On the other hand, differential expression of exons are
used to build functional profiles, which provide insights into the
underlying cellular mechanisms in specific conditions. In addition
to the Network Explorer perspective, the Linked TCGA Dashboard
also enables cancer researchers to visualize the genomic datasets
(DNA Methylation and Exon Expression) of the cancer patients
against the human genome through the provision of a Genome
Browser perspective.

Each researcher can select the chromosome for which he/she
wishes to visualize the genomic datasets and the ideogrammatic
representation of the selected chromosome is displayed in the
first track (Fig. 4(A)). Ideograms are a schematic representation
to depict staining patterns on a tightly-coiled chromosome. These
Chromosome Bands (Ideograms) were downloaded from the
Mapping and Sequencing Tracks Table in the Human Genome
Assembly (GRCh37/hg19, Feb 2009), available at the UCSC Genome
Browser13 [11]. The coordinates and descriptions of the Proteincoding genes contained within this chromosome are retrieved

12 TopFed Index: http://goo.gl/X6yz09.

13 http://genome.ucsc.edu/.

M. Saleem et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 2728 (2014) 3441

Fig. 2. Linked Cancer Genome Atlas Dashboard for the integrated visual exploration of the Linked TCGA datasets with tumor-related publications retrieved from PubMed.

from CellBase [12]. These genes are annotated using the HGNC
Nomenclature [13] and the positions are indicated by start/stop
attributes, and are shown in the subsequent track (Fig. 4(B)).
Hovering the mouse pointer above any gene provides additional
information on this gene (Fig. 4(F)).

The cancer researcher has the option to select any tumor
category and load the genomic datasets of the patients diagnosed
with that tumor using the interface controls (Fig. 4(E)). Selection
of the patient executes SPARQL queries against the corresponding
Linked TCGA endpoints and retrieves his sequencing results in
real-time. These datasets (DNA Methylation and Exon Expression)
are represented using bar charts (red and green respectively),
whose X-coordinates are mapped to the genomic coordinates of
the chromosome and the Y-coordinates indicate the normalized
beta value or the RKPM value at that chromosomal position. The
Genome Browser perspective allows the simultaneous comparison
of these results between different patients, and the corresponding
genomic datasets are stacked vertically (Fig. 4(C), (D)). The
perspective also supports zooming and automatic scrolling across
the length of the clicked chromosome.

3.3. Technologies

The Linked TCGA Dashboard is a Web-based client application
developed using native Web technologies like HTML5 Canvas,
JavaScript and JSON. The spike in the usage of HTML5 Canvas
for data visualization in the recent years and its interoperability
across traditional browsers, allows the application to remove
the dependence on proprietary frameworks like Adobe Flash and
Silverlight for interactivity.

The Linked TCGA Dashboard uses the SigmaJS14 and the ForceAtlas graph layout algorithm [14] for the Network Explorer
perspective and KineticJS15 library, an HTML5 Canvas JavaScript
framework enabling node nesting, layering, caching and event
handling, for the Genome Browser perspective. The Linked TCGA
Dashboard is available to download from https://github.com/
maulikkamdar/tcga-pubmed/ and can be deployed using any
Apache Server with PHP5 and PHP-CURL support enabled. The
platform communicates with the Linked TCGA endpoints using the
SPARQL 1.1 protocol and retrieves the results in JSON format.

14 http://sigmajs.org/.
15 http://kineticjs.com/.

Fig. 3. Force-directed network graph linking the different TCGA tumor typologies
to the publication resources. (For interpretation of the references to color in this
figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

4. Use cases

Our framework enables a variety of use cases, of which two are

explained below.

4.1. Enabling Evidence-based genomic medicine

Data from TCGA is of high value for oncologists as it enables
matching the evidence that they find for their own patients with
those enrolled in the TCGA project, including both clinical and
genomic sets. It is well known that specific genomic alterations
in each individuals cancer affect response to treatment and
sensitivity to drugs. As such, a physician could, for example,
use our visualization to compare their own patients methylation
patterns against that for other patients enrolled in TCGA. Since
genomic information in TCGA is linked with each patients clinical
prognostic and follow-up, the physician could assert, based on the
similarity of genomic results, whether a patient would respond
well to a given drug by observing the other patients reaction. What
this also enables is medical decisions that are highly informed
by the evidence. Cancer, we now know, is a genetic disease. This
means that the location where the tumor occurs (e.g. brain, liver,
etc.) is less relevant for its treatment than the genetic signature
that the cancer cells express (i.e. whether genes are silenced,

Fig. 4. Embedded Genome Browser for intuitive exploration of the Linked TCGA genomic datasets. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the
reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

amplified, etc.). However, drugs that are approved by regulatory
agencies, and many publication resources, are still approved in
the context of a single tumor typology. By making use of crossresource linking, we enable the discovery on whether a drug could
be applied to more than on tumor typology, by linking the two
typologies through their genomic signature. As an example, a
publication resource that is linked to two or more tumor typologies
may mean that a discovery has been made that affects both cancer
typologies and therefore the same drug or set of drugs may be
applied.

4.2. Generation of new hypotheses

In addition to aiding evidence based genomic medicine, the
availability of this type of linked information can also facilitate
inter-disciplinary research. Some types of cancer (e.g. breast
cancer) are more common than others and therefore the intricacies
of their genomic signatures and genetic events tend to be more
well known. However, for many rare cancers (e.g. pancreatic
cancer), knowledge is more scattered and harder to find. The
resource that we make available will enable researchers in the
less common tumor typologies to discover association between
their cancer of interest, and those that are more well studied. By
finding papers where two tumor typologies co-occur, a researcher
can hypothesize that the treatments and genomic events that are
valid and have been proved to be relevant in the most common
type of cancer, may also be relevant in the less common tumor
typology. They can then exploit the genomic data in both cases to
support or reject this hypothesis.

Another possible arena for hypothesis generation is that of
tumor cell migration. Cancer experts have shown in the past
that, for some tumor typologies, metastasis occurs preferentially
in a specific tissue type. This is known as the seed-and-soil
hypothesis, meaning that cancer cell seeds travelling in the blood
vessels prefer some specific tissues to metastasize as they are
optimal soil for their growth. For example, skin tumor cells
preferentially metastasize in the brain. As such, co-occurrence
of tumor typologies in publications may mean that cells of a
particular tumor typology that is the main subject of a publication,
preferentially migrate to the tissue of the second tumor typology,
co-occurring in the publication but not necessarily the main
subject of the paper.

Fig. 5. Comparison of query runtimes.

5. Evaluation

The goal of our evaluation is (1) to evaluate the accuracy of
Linked TCGA integration with PubMed articles, (2) to measure the
performance of TopFed engine in terms of smart source selection
and query execution time, and (3) to quantify the usability and
usefulness of our visualization. In the following, we explain our
experimental setup and the evaluation results.

5.1. Experimental setup

The aim of the TopFed evaluation is to show that it is well
suited for the management of large volumes of Linked Data and can
consequently support the extension of this data by novel RDF data
extracted from other data streams. We thus compared TopFed with
FedX [7] on 25 patients genomic results (clinical, methylation, SNP,
exon-expression, gene-expression, miRNA, RNAseq2) extracted
from 10 tumors. All of the data was distributed across 10 local
SPARQL endpoints sharing a dedicated network. We considered
10 queries of which 4 were star-shaped [6] and the remaining
queries were path-shaped or hybrid (path+star) and contained
between 3 and 7 triple patterns. We ran each of the queries 10
times and present the average runtime for each of the queries. The
query evaluation experiments were carried out on a 2.53 GHz i5
processor with 4 GB RAM. All of the data along with queries used
for our evaluation can be found at TopFed home page.16

16 https://code.google.com/p/topfed/.

M. Saleem et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 2728 (2014) 3441

Fig. 6. Result of usability evaluation using SUS questionnaire.

Fig. 7. Result of usefulness evaluation using our custom questionnaire.

5.2. Results

5.2.1. Data integration

In order to compute the precision of PubMed articles integration
with Linked TCGA, we randomly selected 50 publications related to
genes and cancer tumors from PubMed. Using our custom written
scripts, we converted these articles to RDF and further evaluated
the links generated using BANNER between genes and cancer
diseases within those articles. For the evaluation, 3 biologists
reviewed each link manually. After the manual inspection, the
results of the evaluators showed that using BANNER, we have
achieved a precision of 63% for TCGA cancer disease and 84%
for TCGA genes while integrating PubMed articles metadata with
Linked TCGA.

5.2.2. Query runtime performance

Fig. 5 shows the query runtime of TopFed and FedX. As an
overall performance evaluation, TopFed is able to select half of
the source to FedX without losing the recall. Consequently, the
query run time of TopFed is about one third to that of FedX. We
outperform FedX significantly on 90% of the queries. In the base
case (query 2, query 3), TopFed is more than 75 times faster than
FedX. We only have the same runtime for query 5. This is simply
due to the number of sources selected by FedX being already
optimal. Thus, our source selection approach selects exactly the
same data sources. Due to smart source selection, we believe that
our approach scales well on a large datasets.

5.2.3. Usability and usefulness

To assess the usability of our visualization, we used the
standardized, ten-item Likert scale-based System Usability Scale
(SUS) [15] questionnaire.17 In addition, we conducted a custom

survey18 to asses the usefulness of our system in terms of various
functionalities provided in the visualization. Both of these survey
were filled by the same 3 biologists who evaluated the accuracy
of PubMed articles integration with Linked TCGA. The results of
SUS usability survey is shown in Fig. 6. We achieved a mean
usability score of 77 indicating a high level of usability according
to the SUS score. The responses to question 10 suggest that our
system is adequate for frequent use (average score to question
10 = 4.33  0.57) by users all of type (4.33  0.57 average score
for question 4). The results of the usefulness of our visualization is
shown in Fig. 7. As an overall usefulness evaluation, we achieved
an average score of 3.52/5 indicating a usefulness of 70.37%. In
particular, we achieved an average score of 3.83/5 (76.66%) for the
use cases discussed in Section 4.

6. Conclusion and future work

In this paper, we presented a scalable Linked Data-driven
solution for the continuous integration of bio-medical data
sources i.e., LinkedTCGA and PubMed. We also propose a visual
environment that enables researchers to easily understand the
data and support the serendipitous discovery of bio-medical
hypotheses. The evaluation of our system leads us to believe
that it is usable and useful for bio-medical experts. In future
work, we aim to integrate the complete Linked TCGA data (20
billions triples) with other digital libraries. Moreover, we wish
to integrate the GenomeSnip platform [16], which embodies the
novel Genomic Wheel visualization for the human genome within
the Linked TCGA Dashboard. By these means, we will enable cancer
researchers to easily isolate genomic segments of interest and
analyze the genomic datasets of the Linked TCGA patients in their
context.

17 SUS survey can be found at: http://goo.gl/kKZimO.

