Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 5366

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Identifying relevant concept attributes to support mapping
maintenance under ontology evolution
Duy Dinh a,, Julio Cesar Dos Reis a,b, Cedric Pruski a, Marcos Da Silveira a,
Chantal Reynaud-Delaitre b
a Public Research Centre Henri Tudor, 6 avenue des Hauts-fourneaux, L-4362 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
b LRI, University of Paris-Sud XI, Bat 650, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 1 August 2013
Received in revised form
3 April 2014
Accepted 27 May 2014
Available online 9 June 2014

Keywords:
Ontology mappings
Mapping adaptation
Ontology evolution
Semantic similarity
Biomedical ontologies

1. Introduction

The evolution of semantic technologies has led to the development and publication of a huge amount of ontologies, allowing information systems to better describe data and search for relevant
information on the Web. Ontologies offer means to make the semantics of data explicit which, in turn, facilitates its exploitation
and management. However, mainly for semantic interoperability
issues, we need to establish semantic correspondences between
ontologies, named mappings, to allow software applications to explore data annotated using various ontologies. The ever increasing number of large ontologies underlines the major role played
by mappings [1].

The dynamic nature of domain knowledge induces continuous
changes in existing ontologies like adding, removing or modifying
ontology elements (e.g., classes, properties, etc.) [2]. These changes
impact dependent artefacts such as mappings, making them in-
valid. In consequence, domain experts must repair affected mappings taking ontology changes into account. This laborious task

 Corresponding author. Tel.: +352 425991.

E-mail addresses: dinhbaduy@gmail.com, duy.dinh@tudor.lu (D. Dinh),

julio.dosreis@tudor.lu (J.C. Dos Reis), cedric.pruski@tudor.lu (C. Pruski),
marcos.dasilveira@tudor.lu (M. Da Silveira), chantal.reynaud@lri.fr
(C. Reynaud-Delaitre).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2014.05.002
1570-8268/ 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

The success of distributed and semantic-enabled systems relies on the use of up-to-date ontologies and
mappings between them. However, the size, quantity and dynamics of existing ontologies demand a huge
maintenance effort pushing towards the development of automatic tools supporting this laborious task.
This article proposes a novel method, investigating different types of similarity measures, to identify
concepts attributes that served to define existing mappings. The obtained experimental results reveal
that our proposed method allows to identify the relevant attributes for supporting mapping maintenance,
since we found correlations between ontology changes affecting the identified attributes and mapping
changes.

 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

consists in identifying changes affecting elements of ontologies,
and to adapt mappings impacted by these changes accordingly.
This process can be performed manually on small ontologies with
a restricted number of mappings, but large and highly dynamic on-
tologies, like those of the life sciences, require appropriate methods
and automatic tools.

Existing tools compute mappings between concepts in an
(semi-)automatic way to create semantic correspondences between them [3]. Although concepts are considered in their entirety,
a closer empirical analysis of mappings reveals that only partial
textual statements characterizing concepts are used to define the
semantic correspondences [4,5].

When analysing two consecutive versions of the same ontology,
we found cases, for instance, where concepts attribute values are
completely transferred from one concept to its siblings. This had
affected the associated mappings since their definition relies on
such textual statement. For example, we observed this case with
the concept 560.39 of the ICD-9-CM1 (ICD) biomedical ontology.
Such concept contains three attributes and one of them has as
value Fecal impaction (release 2009). Five mappings are defined
with this concept as domain, and one of these mappings has a
range called Fecal impaction (disorder), from SNOMED CT2 (SCT).

1 http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd/icd9~cm.htm.
2 http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct.

D. Dinh et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 5366

After evolution (i.e., ICD release 2010), the attribute value Fecal
impaction is no longer associated with the ICD concept and the
previously mentioned mapping has been removed. Moreover, the
concept Fecal impaction has been newly created in ICD (release
2010) and is remapped to Fecal impaction (disorder) of SCT.
This illustrates the major role played by concepts attributes in
the definition of mappings [5]. However, when matching systems
create a mapping, they fail to keep the ontological entities used to
justify such mapping in its definition, preventing thus any future
use for maintenance purpose.

In this article, we address this issue by investigating techniques
suited to identify textual statements in concepts that might represent the most meaningful attributes for a given correspondence,
but lack in its original description. We hypothesize that adequately
supporting the mapping adaptation task requires the correct identification of these statements [5,6]. Our identification method
relies on the adaptation of various semantic similarity measures
targeting: the lexical level [7], the syntactic level [8] and the semantic [9] level. These measures might support our method to
identify a sufficient Subset of Concept Attributes (SCA) relevant for
interpreting mappings. We conduct a set of experiments to assess
the quality of the results yielded by the identification method using two life science ontologies (SCT and ICD) and their associated
mappings. In particular, we measure correlations between ontology changes affecting the identified attributes and adaptation of
associated mappings. We further study the stability of the underlying similarity measures analysed.

We structure the remainder of this article as follows: Section 2
presents the related work. Section 3 introduces the preliminaries.
Section 4 presents our approach to identifying the relevant
attributes. Section 5 presents the experimental evaluation while
Section 6 discusses the obtained results. Section 7 wraps up with
concluding remarks.

2. Related work

Semantic interoperability among heterogeneous systems has
increasingly pushed the efforts on semi-automatic matching approaches to aligning ontologies, by finding correspondences between concepts [10]. Ontology mappings play a key role in the
biomedical domain [11] where various efforts such as Bioportal [12] and UMLS [13] aim at supporting interoperability.

The Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) [13], developed
by the U.S. National Library of Medicine,3 aims at facilitating the
exchange of clinical data and improve retrieval of health infor-
mation. UMLS includes over than one hundred of ontologies and
mappings between them. For example, UMLS also integrates the
mappings between SNOMED-CT and ICD9-CM which are created
and maintained in collaboration with the IHTSDO organisation.4
These mappings support a transition from the use of legacy ICD9CM procedure codes to SNOMED-CT.5

A large number of works have investigated approaches to
ontology matching and alignment [1417]. Various approaches
focus on string-based similarity metrics to establish mappings between ontologies. Some surveys have reported on the performance
of these metrics in the course of developing ontology alignment
systems [1820].

Indeed, despite advancements over the last years on ontology
alignment, many issues remain open and represent a real challenge
for the Semantic Web community [1]. Unaddressed aspects such

3 http://www.nlm.nih.gov.
4 http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct.

snomedct.html.

http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/mapping_projects/icd9cmv3_to_

as users interaction [21] and crowdsourcing [22] have recently
gained interest and the mapping maintenance under evolving
ontologies remains an open research problem [23]. To the best of
our knowledge, only few studies have investigated fully automatic
methods to keep ontology mappings semantically valid over time.
We distinguish three main categories of approaches for mapping maintenance. The first one relies on the revision of mappings
by identifying and repairing invalid mappings. For example, Meilicke et al. [24] propose an automatic debugging of mappings between expressive ontologies eliminating inconsistencies, caused
by erroneous mappings, by means of logical diagnostic reason-
ing. Similarly, Castano et al. [25] suggest a probabilistic reasoning
approach to performing the validation of mappings. These techniques can be applied after ontology evolution to detect invalid
mappings. However, they require logically expressive ontologies at
a high level of formalization, making this approach unavailable for
information systems that rely on semantic resources of low level
of formalization such as nomenclatures, thesauri, etc.

The second category performs a full or a partial re-calculation
of mappings. While the former fails to consider any information
from ontology evolution nor existing mappings, the latter aims
at exploiting those information for recreating only mappings that
are associated with changed concepts in ontologies. In addition,
if large ontologies are frequently released, fully re-calculating
mappings becomes less flexible than a partial re-calculation
approach because the cost in terms of processing time for realigning ontologies still remains too expensive. Khattak et al.
[26] propose a partial re-calculation approach, which re-creates
only those mappings associated with concepts whose elements
have changed. They use matching algorithms to perform a new
alignment between changed concepts issued from source ontology
and the whole target ontology. However, large ontologies, as in the
biomedical domain, so far represent a big challenge for methods
relying on mapping calculation [1].

The third category concerns approaches that attempt to adapt
semantic mappings in response to ontology evolution. These approaches usually use ontology changes to support mapping adap-
tation, avoiding to perform calculations for re-aligning ontologies.
The first propositions appeared in the context of database schema
mappings [27] based on primitive schema changes. Composition
of mappings [28] explores mappings between different schema
versions for adapting mappings. Concerning ontologies, Tang &
Tang [29] propose a method for ontology evolution to find the minimal impact of ontology change propagation. Nevertheless, they assume that only removal of axioms can impact mappings. Martins
& Silva [30] propose that the evolution of mappings should behave
similarly with the strategies applied for ontology evolution, but
their method only adapts mappings when concepts are removed
from the ontology. More recently, researches have empirically investigated the evolution of life science ontology mappings to understand the mapping evolution phenomenon [31,5]. On this basis,
preliminary investigations have proposed ontology changes-based
techniques to adapt mappings [32].

it still

Despite these recent investigations,

lacks adequate
methods to fully perform mapping adaptation in an automatic
way according to ontology evolution. Mapping adaptation under
evolving ontologies should consider the whole set of possible
types of ontology changes rather than only concept removal. We
have defined the DyKOSMap framework [33,6] for handling the
adaptation of mappings based on ontology changes and mapping
interpretation. We believe that the similarity between concepts
attributes that have been changed constitutes a key factor that
we might take into account in automatic mapping adaptation.
Beyond the literature, this article proposes a novel technique for
identifying relevant attributes that we could exploit for adapting
mappings under evolving ontologies.

(a) Medical Subject Headings (MeSH). Each concept in MeSH is denoted by an attribute (preferred term), which can
have one or more synonyms (non-preferred terms). Concepts are linked together by is-a relationship.

(b) International Classification of Diseases - Clinical Modification
(ICD9-CM). One concept has only one or more direct children concepts.

Fig. 1. Examples of life science ontologies.

3. Preliminaries

We first introduce the notions of ontology and mapping and
then we define the problem of mapping adaptation. Afterwards,
we define the specific problem of identifying relevant concepts
attributes defining mappings, which we deem necessary to
interpret the established mapping for maintenance purpose.

Definition 1. An ontology O specifies a conceptualization of a
domain in terms of concepts, attributes and relationships [34]. In
other words, an ontology O consists of a set of concepts interrelated
by directed relationships. We define a set of all concepts of an
ontology O at time h (denoted as Oh) as Concepts(Oh) = {ch
i |i  N}.
Each concept ch
i (i.e., concept ci at time h) has a unique identifier
i |i  [1..p]}
and is associated with a set of attributes A(ch
(e.g., label, synonym, definition, etc.), where ah
is attribute ai at

time h and p is the number of attributes denoting concept ch
i .
Furthermore, each attribute is defined for a particular objective,
e.g., label for denoting concept names or definition for giving the
meaning in the context where the concept is used. A relationship
between two concepts c1 and c2, denoted as r(c1, c2), is defined
for interrelating a particular concept and another one in the
same ontology, e.g., r(cancer, brain cancer) = is-a. Our
adopted definition of ontology is motivated by current life science
ontologies which are less logically rigorous ones and instances
are usually not available. Fig. 1 depicts the structure of two large

i ) = {ah

life science ontologies namely Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
and International Classification of Diseases - Clinical Modification
(ICD9CM). Note that in the biomedical domain, ontologies are
defined and maintained by different organizations. For this reason,
life sciences ontologies vary in terms of formats and structures.
Definition 2. We define the context of a particular concept ci 
Concepts(O), denoted as CT (ci), as the union of the sets of sup(ci)
(direct super concepts), sub(ci) (direct children concepts) and
sib(ci) (sibling concepts) of ci as following:
CT (ci) = sup(ci)  sub(ci)  sib(ci)
wheresup(ci) = {cj|cj  C, ci = cj  ci  cj}
sub(ci) = {cj|cj  C, ci = cj  cj  ci}
sib(ci) = {cj|cj  C, ci = cj  sup(cj)  sup(ci) = }.
In Formula (2), the notation ci  cj stands for ci is narrower
or more specific than concept of cj, e.g., hypotension is more
specific than vascular disease. These definitions rely on the is-a
relationship that forms the hierarchical structure of the ontology.
Moreover, this structure consists in a directed acyclic graph, which
prevents circular definition of concepts.

(2)

(1)

The context CT (ci) includes concepts in the neighbourhood of
ci, i.e., direct parents, direct children and sibling concepts. This

D. Dinh et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 5366

Table 1
Atomic ontology change operations related to ontology OX [2].

Change operation

Atomic

addC(c)
delC(c)
addA(a, c)
delA(a, c)
addR(r, c1, c2)
delR(r, c1, c2)

Description
Addition of a new concept c  Concepts(O1
X )
Deletion of an existing concept c  Concepts(O0
X )
Addition of a new attribute a to a concept c  Concepts(O0
X )
Deletion of an attribute a from a concept c  Concepts(O0
X )
Addition of a new relationship r between two concepts c1, c2  Concepts(O0
X )
Deletion of an existing relationship r between two concepts c1, c2  Concepts(O0
X )

Table 2
Complex ontology change operations related to ontology OX [2].

Change operation

Complex

chgA(ck, ai, vh)
moveC(ck, p1, p2)
substitute(ck, cj)
merge(u, ck)
split(ck, u)
toObsolete(ck)
delInnerC(ck, pl)
delLeafC(ck, pl)
addInnerC(ck, pl)
addLeafC(ck, pl)
revokeObsolete(ck)

X ) with the new value vh
X ) by concept cj  Concepts(O1
X )

Description
Change of attribute ai in concept ck  Concepts(O0
Moving of concept ck (and its subtree) from concept parent p1  Concepts(O0
Replacement of concept ck  Concepts(O0
Fusion of a set of multiple concepts u  Concepts(O0
Split of concept ck  Concepts(O0
Sets status of concept ck to obsolete (ck is no longer active)
Deletion of concept ck where pl  sup(ck) and sub(ck) =  from ontology O0
Deletion of leaf concept ck where pl  sup(ck) and sub(ck) =  from ontology O0
Addition of a sub concept ck under the concept pl  sup(ck) to the ontology O1
Addition of leaf concept ck where pl  sup(ck) and sub(ck) =  to the ontology O1
Revokes obsolete status of concept ck (i.e., ck becomes active)

X ) into concept ck  Concepts(O1
X )
X ) into a set of resulting concepts u  Concepts(O1
X )

X ) to concept parent p2  Concepts(O1
X )

excludes concepts linked to ci by other relationships than is-
a relationship. Indeed, in our previous investigation on mapping
evolution [4], we pointed out that concepts outside its context have
a very low impact on mapping evolution and thus are less relevant
for this study.

Definition 3. We define the set of attributes in the context of
concept ci as A(CT (ci)). Formally:

A(CT (ci)) = 

j=1..n

A(cj),

cj  CT (ci).

(3)

Fig. 2. Mapping adaptation based on ontology changes.

We denote the set of all attributes of concept ci and the ones in

its context, denoted as Aall(ci), as follows:
Aall(ci) = A(ci)  A(CT (ci))
(4)
where A(ci) is the set of attributes of concept ci and A(CT (ci)) refers
to the set of attributes from each concept in the context of the
concept ci.

T ) is given by:

Definition 4. We denote Oh
X as an ontology OX (if we do not
consider its version) at time h, where X is the name of the ontology.
We consider only the two successive versions of the same ontology,
i.e., h = 0 or h = 1. Given two ontologies namely Oh
S and Oh
T , a
ST , established at time h, between two concepts cS 
mapping mh
S ) and cT  Concepts(Oh
Concepts(Oh
ST = (ch
mh
T , semTypeh
S , ch
(5)
where semTypeST refers to the semantic relation between cS and cT .
The confidence value represents the semantic similarity between
cS and cT (indicating the confidence of their relation [10]). The
higher the value is, the more the concepts are related. We consider
the following semantic relations: unmappable [], equivalent [],
narrow-to-broad [], broad-to-narrow [] and overlapped []. We
|i  N} as the set of mappings at time h between
ST = {mh
define Mh
STi
S and Oh
two ontologies Oh
T .

ST , confidenceh)

Definition 5. An ontology change operation (OCO) characterizes
the evolution of an ontology in terms of operations applied to
concepts, relationships and attributes [32,2]. They are classified
into two main categories: atomic and complex changes. Each

operation in the former category cannot be divided into smaller
operations while each one of the latter category is composed
of more than one atomic operations. For instance, the complex
operation change in attribute value is composed of two atomic
operations delete attribute value and add attribute value [2].
Tables 1 and 2 present the possible atomic and complex ontology
change operations, respectively.

Definition 6. Mapping adaptation problem: Fig. 2 depicts the
general scenario investigated in this article. We denote OS as
the source ontology and OT is the target ontology in mappings.
Since we focus in the evolution of ontologies and mappings,
we examine different versions of each ontology. To better study
correlations between ontology evolution and mapping evolution,
we hypothesize that the target ontology remains unchanged (i.e.,
T  OT ) while the source evolves (or vice-versa). If the
T  O1
O0
source ontology evolves, we might adapt the mappings in M0

accordingly using mapping adaptation actions (MAA) [6], for each
source concept impacted by a change. The results of mapping
adaptation consist of a set of up-to-date mappings in M1
ST .

Given two versions of the same source ontology, namely O0

S at
time h0 and O1
S at time h1, we always have at least one target ontology OT and an initial set of valid mappings M0
S and
O0
T at time h0. Since this evolution probably impacts the mappings
ST , the necessary mapping adaptation actions are applied to M0
M0

generating M1
ST . For instance, we need to assure that mappings are
not established with removed concepts. The mapping adaptation
problem, therefore, refers to the process that existing mappings are
modified according to changes affecting ontology entities to keep
mappings valid and complete over time [6].

ST between O0

To adequately address this open research challenge, we first
focus on determining attributes belonging to a source concept
that could be used as relevant concepts attributes for interpreting
mappings associated with this concept. This objective requires
to investigate the similarity between attributes in the context of
the source concept and the ones belonging to the target concept.
We consider the similarity as a criteria for ranking candidates of
relevant attributes.
Given a mapping mST between two concepts cS  Concepts(OS )
and cT  Concepts(OT ), we investigate the task of determining a
set of meta-data containing a sufficient number of attributes of
cS or those from its context CT (cS ). In Section 4, we describe our
algorithm for identifying this set of meta-data relying on different
similarity measures.

4. Identifying relevant attributes for interpreting mappings

We assume that mappings are established according to the
degree of similarity between a subset of attributes, belonging to
the interrelated concepts or their context. Mappings are defined
based on a set of most similar ontology concepts attributes, more
precisely, relying on the attributes values of concepts involved
in mappings. Despite the observed importance of explicitly
considering this subset of textual statements in the mapping
adaptation process (cf. Section 1), mappings are released along
with the source and target ontologies without these meta-data
defining mappings (i.e., most similar attributes).
Given a mapping, this requires to (re-)identify the most relevant
attributes of cS  Concepts(OS ) and/or cT  Concepts(OT ) that optimize its semantic confidence. For this purpose, we use similarity
measures to quantify the semantic relatedness between concepts
attributes. On this ground, we aim to empirically observe whether
an ontology change, affecting any of those identified attributes related to a mapping, leads to the adaptation of such mappings. To
examine the correlation between ontology changes and mapping
adaptation in this study, we suppose that cT remains unchanged
while cS evolves.

We define topA(cS , cT , n) as the method to detect the set of top
n attributes that may come from concept cS or its context. Thus, its
outcome corresponds to the subset of concepts attributes (SCA)
defining a mapping. Each attribute ap  A(cS ) can have a particular
similarity with each attribute aq  A(cT ). When the target concept
cT (all its attributes) remains unchanged while the source concept
cS (at least one attribute) changes, we denote (sap
) as the couple of parameters related to attribute ap  A(cS ) or ap  A(CT (cS )).
The similarity values sap refers to best similarity of attribute ap
with the most similar attribute in concept cT . The argument ctap accounts for the context where we find the attribute ap. We set ctp to
NOCT (not in the context) if ap  A(cS ), i.e., attribute ap belongs to
concept cS, but not to its context. We compute the similarity value
between each attribute ap  Aall(cS ) and aq  A(cT ). Fig. 3 illustrates a scenario of identifying the concepts attributes where we
highlight a few relevant attributes.

, ctap

Algorithm 1 presents the designed procedure for selecting the
top attributes of the source concept cS or its context CT (cS ). After
calculating the similarity between each attribute of cS and the ones
in cT (lines 312), the algorithm tries to find the best candidate
attribute in cS. If there is an exact match between any couple of
attributes ap and aq, i.e., the similarity sap between them is equal to
1 (line 14), then the algorithm does not identify more attributes
in the context CT (cS ). Otherwise, the algorithm calculates the
similarity between each attribute in the context of cS and each
attribute of cT (lines 1521) to retrieve more attributes from the
context CT (cS ). Finally, the algorithm sorts and returns the top n
attributes.

Fig. 3.
Identification of relevant concept attributes defining the mapping between
concept cS and cT . Candidate attributes may come from concept cS or its context. The
most similar candidate attributes constitute SCA, e.g., topA(cS , cT , 2) = {acsup2, acs2}
because sima and simb are the best similarity values reflecting the similarity
between cS and cT .

To examine the most adequate similarity measure to use in
the proposed algorithm, we selected and evaluated different wellknown measures. We discuss the motivations leading to the
chosen measures. Note that, the possible similarity measures to
use is customizable in our algorithm. We consider three different
similarity measures: character-based, word-based and semanticbased similarity.

)}

, ctan

, cta1

), (sa2

Concepts(O0

, NOCT)};

Input: mST = (cS , cT , semTypeST )  M0
ST; cS 
S ); cT  Concepts(O0
T ), n  N
Output: SCA = {(sa1
), . . . , (san
, cta2
1: SCA  ; {Initialize the final result set}
2: {Compute similarity between attributes in ci and cj}
3: for all ap  A(cS ) do
4: maxSim  0;
for all aq  A(cT ) do
sp  sim(ap, aq);
SCA  SCA  {(sap
if maxSim < sp then
maxSim  sp;
end if
end for

5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12: end for
13: {Select attributes in context if exact matches are not found}
14: if maxSim < 1.0 then
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21: end if
22: SCA  sort(SCA, n); {Select top n attributes}
Algorithm 1: Select top n attributes defining a mapping

for all ak  A(CT (cS )) do
for all aq  A(cT ) do
sk  sim(ak, aq);
SCA  SCA  {(sak
end for

end for

)};

, ctak

X = value(ap), ap  A(cS )  ap  A(CT (cS ))

First, we measure the edit-distance between the value of pth
attribute ap in concept cS or its context (denoted by string X) and
the value of qth attribute aq issued from concept cT (denoted by
string Y ). Formally:
Y = value(aq), aq  A(cT )
where value(ap) (resp. value(aq)) is the value of attribute ap
(resp. aq). For example, given two attributes values X = tracheal
stenosis following tracheostomy and Y = tracheal stenosis due
to tracheostomy, the similarity function must express to which
extent these values are similar or different in terms of lexical
similarity. The more similar they are, the more they are considered
as related in the sense that we can account a semantic relation

(6)

D. Dinh et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 5366

between the two underlying concepts. For this purpose, we use
the well-known string edit-distance measure, but at the level of
characters [7] (Section 4.1).

Second, the similarity function must also take into account
the level of words in addition to the differences at the level of
characters. For example, we must consider the following attributes
values skin cancer and cancer of the skin as equivalent ones.
Indeed, the edit distance at the level of characters fails to allow
coping with the word order issue in those terms. Therefore, we
should consider the distance at the level of words in order to
provide a summarizing figure for the lexical level [8] (Section 4.2).
Third, we also evaluate the impact of using semantic similarity for identifying relevant attributes (i.e., SCA) related to each
mapping, by considering the semantic information in common between the attributes value. This refers to the conceptual similarity
between strings, to which Resnik [35] proposed to determine by
using the information content approach. For example, the two following attributes values bone of the extremity and limb bone
semantically refer to the same concept and shall be considered as
equivalent because extremity and limb are semantically related.
To compute this semantic distance, we further need an external
lexical knowledge resource, e.g., WordNet [36] and an annotated
corpus such as SemCor [37] (Section 4.3).

4.1. Character-based edit-distance similarity

Many related applications require to determine the similarity
between two strings, such as pattern recognition, information
retrieval, ontology alignment, etc. A widely-used notion of string
similarity stands for the edit distance or the Levenshtein [7]. It
corresponds to the minimum number of edit operations (insertion,
deletion, and substitution of individual symbols) required to
transform one string into the other. Mathematically, the stringbased or character-based edit distance between two strings X and
Y , denoted as ED(X , Y ), can be defined as the minimum weight of
transformation through a sequence of weighted edit operations.
A normalized ED(X , Y ) aims at ensuring that it provides values
in the interval [0..1]. We adopt the normalization of the characterbased edit distance similarity measure between two strings X and
Y , denoted as simCED(X , Y ), defined as follows:
simCED(X , Y ) =

2  ED(X , Y )

(X + Y) + ED(X , Y )

(7)

The advantage of such normalization relies on the fact that it
allows to measure the similarity between strings using a genuine
metric [38] with a degree of similarity between 0 and 1, where
1 stands for a perfect/exact match. We formally define the edit
distance between two strings X and Y as follows:
ED(X , Y ) = min{ (TX ,Y )}
where
 TX ,Y = T1T2...Tn is an edit path, i.e. the sequence of atomic edit
operations transforming X into Y ;
i=1  (Ti) corresponds to the cost function of an
edit transformation TX ,Y from X to Y , which is the sum of the
individual cost of each edit operation  (Ti). More details about
the estimation of this cost function can be found in [38].

  (TX ,Y ) = n

(8)

An atomic edit operation Ti can be among the three following ones:
insertion, deletion and substitution. Formally:
(a  ) :

a   (a  ) :
a  b
(a, b  ) :

insertion
deletion
substitution

(9)

where
  is a finite set of characters or symbols, e.g.  = {a, b,
c, . . . , 1, 2, 3, . . .}.
 a, b are symbols or characters belonging to .
  is the null symbol or character.
ED(X , Y ) becomes a metric if the following conditions are

satisfied:
a, b  ,
 (a  b) > 0 if ((a = b)  ( (a  b) =  (b  a))).(10)

 (a  a) = 0

4.2. Word-based edit-distance similarity

The character-based edit distance (cf. Section 4.1) provides
an effective way to compute the semantic relatedness between
similar strings, especially for single-word strings. However, it fails
to take into account the syntactic information in compound terms.
For example, it results in a very low degree of similarity between
two synonymous terms, but with a different word order, e.g.,
cancer of the skin in the face vs. face skin cancer. To cope with
this issue, we examine another similarity function that determines
the extent to which the symbols in each substring Wi (separated
by a set of delimiters, e.g., a white space) in the first string X are
similar to the symbols in each substring Wj of the second string Y .
The underlying assumption states that: if the first string contains
all substrings of the other, it is likely that they are semantically
related [8]. Originally proposed in [8], we adapt the word-based
edit-distance similarity measure, by extending the characterbased similarity. This enables us to evaluate the performance
of our Algorithm 1, by comparing these similarity measures
that underlying the algorithm. We define the word-based editdistance similarity measure (namely syntactic measure) between
two strings X and Y , denoted simWED(X , Y ), as follows:
simWED(X , Y ) = 1

simCED(Wi, Wj)


max
WjLY

(11)

WiLX

where
 simCED(Wi, Wj) refers to the normalized character-based editdistance similarity between single words (substrings or tokens)
in Wi and Wj in strings X and Y respectively (cf. Formula (10));
 LX and LY are the sets of words in X and Y , respectively;
 LX is the length of string X in terms of tokens.
Note that in Formula (10), the normalization by Lx aims to ensure that simWED(X , Y ) provides values in the interval [0..1]. The
max function ensures that Wi and Wj constitute the couple of most
similar strings in X and Y .

4.3. Knowledge-based similarity

Using lexical knowledge resources to compute the similarity
can help to determine the semantic relatedness in a semantic net-
work, constructed by a taxonomy of concepts or classes. Combining
corpus statistical information can enhance the resources, because
the computational evidence derived from a distributional analysis
of corpus data can better quantify the semantic distance between
nodes in the semantic network. We propose to adapt the original
JiangConrath similarity [9] measure, by normalizing the similarity with the length of the source string, so that the similarity values
stay between 0 and 1. We define the semantic similarity measure
between two strings X and Y , denoted as simSEM (X , Y ), as follows:
simSEM (X , Y ) = 1

simJCN (Wi, Wj)


max
WjLY

(12)

WiLX

(13)

where simJCN (Wi, Wj) stands for the Jiang & Conraths knowledge
based similarity between two words Wi and Wj referring to two
concepts in the same ontology. Formally:
simJCN (Wi, Wj)
= max{[IC(Wi) + IC(Wj)  2  IC(lcs(Wi, Wj))]1}
where
 IC(Wk) refers to the information content of word Wk denoting
a particular concept in the semantic network, computed as
follows:
IC(Wk) = log P(Wk)
(14)
where P(Wk) calculates the probability of encountering an
instance of a concept denoted by the single-word term Wk in
a corpus [9].
 lcs(Wi, Wj) stands for the lowest common subsumer, i.e., the
lowest node or concept in the hierarchy subsuming6 both
concepts denoted by Wi and Wj.
The calculation of the information content in Formula (14)
requires a large corpus [39]. In the biomedical domain, there
exists an annotated corpus namely GENIA corpus [40]. However,
the semantic annotation is only limited to entities of interest in
molecular biology such as proteins, genes and cells constituting
the GENIA ontology. In our experiments, we accept SemCor as the
underlying corpus because it has been widely used for computing
the similarity measures based on external resources [41,42].
SemCor consists of a text corpus which has been semantically
annotated with information about Part-Of-Speech (i.e., noun, verb,
adjective and adverb), lemma and WordNet synset [37]. This is
composed of 352 texts and includes more than 200,000 sensetagged words.

5. Experimental evaluation

This section presents the set of experiments conducted to empirically evaluate the proposed approach to identifying concepts
attributes defining mappings. We compare the performance of
similarity measures by exploiting the contextual information of
interrelated concepts, i.e., attributes denoting concepts in the
neighbourhood of a concept involved in mapping. We believe that
studying the evolution at the level of attributes provides an evidence for better supporting the mapping adaptation. Therefore,
we study the impact of the different similarity measures (cf. Sections 4.14.3) considered through the correlation between changes
in mappings (MAAs [6]) and modifications in candidate attributes
(OCOs [2]).

We performed a series of experiments to achieve these
objectives. First, we describe the used dataset and the methodology
(Section 5.1). Then, we evaluate to which extent changes affecting
relevant attributes, susceptible for defining mappings, influence
their adaptation (Section 5.2). Furthermore, we analyse the
stability of the examined similarity measures (Section 5.3).

5.1. Experimental dataset and methodology

The conducted evaluation consider two ontologies of the
biomedical domain namely SNOMED-CT (SCT)7 and ICD-9-CM

6 Subsume means contain, comprise or include, e.g., lcs (car, bicycle) = ve-
hicle.
7 http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct.

Table 3
Statistics about the dataset including ontologies and associated mappings.

Characteristics

Nr. of concepts
Nr. of  relationships
Nr. of attributes
Nr. of mappings

Mappings
M0

SCT10

1,547,855

ICD09

M1

SCT12

1,570,504

ICD11

Table 4
Ontology change operations (OCOs) identified between the two versions of the
studied ontologies. Tables 1 and 2 provide more details about the description of
each OCO. We consider delA and chgA as the most relevant OCOs for identifying
changes in concepts attributes values.
Nr. of changes

Nr. of changes

merge
split
substitute
toObsolete
revokeObsolete
delInner
delLeaf
delSubGraph
addInner

addLeaf
addSubGraph
addR
delR
move
addA
delA
chgA

(ICD)8 and the official mappings between them.9 Indeed, mappings
between SCT and ICD are provided for each release of SCT by
the IHTSDO organisation. We use the following versions of those
ontologies: SCT released in January 2010 and in January 2012,
and ICD released in 2009 and in 2011. Therefore, our experiments
are based on the two sets of mappings between SCT and ICD,
ST =
which have been established by experts at IHTSDO: M0
ST = (SCT Jan. 2012, ICD 2011).
(SCT Jan. 2010, ICD 2009) and M1
Table 3 presents some statistics about the dataset.
In the conducted experiments, we focus on studying the
evolution of both ontologies; in particular on source concepts
involved in mappings. We conducted the following experimental
procedure to select the adequate set of mappings:
1. based on the two releases of the same ontology, we identify the
set of concepts that have changed from one version to another.
We name this subset of concepts as Cdiff (O0, O1) that is obtained
using the Conto-Diff tool [2] (cf. Table 4). We are particularly
interested in exploiting the two OCOs namely delA and chgA
because they directly impact on the values of attributes that can
serve for defining mappings. Therefore, although Table 4 shows
an overview about ontology changes, in our experiments, we
only consider delA and chgA as relevant for detecting changes in
concepts attribute values;

2. from the Cdiff (O0, O1), we remove all unassociated concepts
with a mapping, since we consider that only concepts associated with mappings can impact on the validity of mappings;

3. we further remove from the Cdiff (O0, O1) added and removed
concepts. The correlations between these two change operations and mapping adaptation were already studied in our
previous work [4]. We focus on analysing mapping adaptation particularly on those mappings associated only with concepts that had their contents somehow modified, i.e., affected
by the change operations concerning addition and removal of
attributes;

8 http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd/icd9~cm.htm.

http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/mapping_projects/icd9cm_to_

snomedct.html.

D. Dinh et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 5366

(ak  topA(m0

#total-correlation = #change-correlation

S ))} /M0

STi

), ak  Aall(c1
+ #unchange-correlation.

(16)

(17)

4. finally, to avoid misunderstandings on the results, we consider
only those mappings where the target concepts remained unchanged from one version to another. Therefore, we removed
from the analysis mappings where source and target concepts
simultaneously change. This results in a final subset of modified concepts from Cdiff (O0, O1) containing mappings associated
with them. These mappings are represented by the set Mdiff .
We conduct this experimental procedure with both ontologies
in an isolated way. We present the achieved results in Sections 5.2
and 5.3. In the following of this article, we only refer to the set of
mappings Mdiff associated with the concepts of the calculated and
filtered Cdiff (O0, O1) for both ontologies. We analyse a total number
of 6672 mappings in the resulted set of mappings regarding SCT
and 3788 for ICD, respectively. Note that, no intersection exists
between these sets of mappings.

5.2. Evaluating the correlation between changes in SCA identified and
changes in mappings

We aim to examine the way that we can adapt mappings under
evolving ontologies, by considering changes in the sufficient Subset
of Concept Attributes (SCA). For this purpose, we measure the
correlation between changes detected in identified attributes (i.e.,
delA, chgA) and the adaptation of the associated mapping. We also
assume as a correlation when both the identified attributes and
the associated mapping remain unchanged. The objectives of our
experiments are three-fold:
1. we evaluate the utility of using different similarity measures
to identify relevant attributes (SCA) for supporting mapping
adaptation;

2. we evaluate the impact of using the ontology context (cf.

Formula (2)) of source concepts on the yielded correlations;

3. we compare, with respect to the studied task, the quality and
the stability of each similarity measure (Character-based ED,
Word-based ED and Knowledge-based Similarity).
The experiments may allow us to empirically observe various
aspects: (1) the quality of the identified SCA by the proposed technique (cf. Algorithm 1); (2) a comparison among the three types
of similarity measures and the two ontologies of the experimental dataset; and most importantly (3) to which extent mapping
adaptation should rely on the identification of relevant attributes
(SCA).

Evaluation method: we calculate the different types of correlations between changes affecting the attributes in SCA and mapping adaptation. To this end, we count the number of mappings
that changed when at least one attribute of SCA has changed (i.e.,
its value has been modified or deleted), in addition to the number
of mappings that remained unchanged when particularly any attribute of SCA changed. Note that the source concept of all the analysed mappings belongs to the subset Cdiff (O0, O1), which means
that at least one attribute of such concept has been changed. How-
ever, this attribute may belong to SCA or not, which justifies the
different types of correlations we propose. We characterize a mapping change when a mapping is removed from one release to an-
other, or when the source concept is replaced by another one, or
either the semantic relation in the mapping is modified. Formally,
we define the different types of correlations as follows:

 M0
), ak  Aall(c1

ST|(m1

S ))} /M0

j  M1

STi

ST , m1

= m0

STi

(15)

#change-correlation ={m0
={m0

(ak  topA(m0
#unchange-correlation
ST|(m1

 M0

STj

STi

STi

 M1

ST , m1
STj

= m0

STi

The change-correlation in Formula (15) corresponds to the
percentage of adapted mappings that have at least one modified
attribute in SCA. Similarly, the unchange-correlation in Formula
(16) corresponds to the percentage of unchanged mappings
because no changes occurred in attributes identified in SCA. Finally,
the total-correlation in Formula (17) calculates the sum of the two
previous types of correlation.
For each one of the considered ontologies, we first compute the
total-correlation values for mappings of mST  Mdiff without using
the context of source concepts (denoted as NOCT ). Afterwards, we
measure the correlations obtained by using solely the different
concepts from the context (denoted as SUP for super concepts, SUB
for sub concepts, and SIB for sibling concepts). For the unchange-
correlation, we measure the context influence considering the
retrieved attribute with the highest similarity value. For instance,
if our Algorithm 1 finds such attribute in a super concept, then
we compute the correlation for this type of concept. We compare
the contributions of the different types of context (SUP, SUB, SIB)
separately, and with the obtained results without using the context
(NOCT ). Finally, we combine all conceptual information together to
build the SCA as a whole (denoted as ALL). This allows to evaluate
the influence of the context for supporting mapping adaptation.

To have an overview, we first present the results concerning the
analysis of total-correlation (Figs. 4 and 5). Afterwards, we present
the results with respect to a more detailed analysis on the changecorrelation (Figs. 6 and 7). The size of the set of relevant attributes
in SCA examined (denoted as #topA) refers to a parameter taking
integer values ranging from 1 to 10.

Results. Fig. 4 depicts the results obtained by computing the
total-correlation (cf. Formula (17)) with respect to SCT and Fig. 5
presents the results for ICD. More specifically, Fig. 4.1 and Fig. 5.1
present the results without considering the context (NOCT) by
comparing the different similarity measures. It allows to point out
three main aspects:
 first, the similarity measures perform differently for SCT and
ICD. If we do not consider the information about the context
of mapped concepts (without CT, cf. Fig. 4.1), we observe
that the Character-based ED outperforms the Word-based ED
and Knowledge-based similarity for SCT while we observe the
inverse findings for ICD (cf. Fig. 5.1);
 second, if we consider the parents of mapped concepts (SUP),
the Knowledge-based similarity significantly outperforms the
two other similarity measures with an improvement rate of
9% for SCT while no improvement is observed for ICD. In
addition, children (SUB) and sibling (SIB) concepts are not useful
for identifying SCA. This indicates the usefulness of considering
the context, more precisely the super concepts of mapped
concepts in the mapping adaptation process;
 third, the percentage of found correlations with respect to the
number of analysed mappings differs comparing SCT (25%
without context and 90% with context in addition) and ICD
(3% without context and 5% with context in addition).
This observation is coherent with the statistics about SCT and
ICD. Indeed, SCT stands for a much larger ontology than ICD9
in terms of number of attributes and concepts, number of
associated mappings (cf. Table 3) as well as in numbers of
ontology change operations (cf. Table 4).

Fig. 4. Performance of our Algorithm 1 using three different similarity measures and the impact of using context (CT) for understanding the correlation of mapping
evolution with the evolution of SCT ontology. The #topA corresponds to the number candidate relevant attributes observed. The #total-correlation refers to the percentage
of correlations between the number of changed and unchanged mappings and the number of changed and unchanged candidate attributes in mapped concepts and/or their
context (cf. Formula (17)). The plot on the top left (1) compares the performance of the three similarity measures, while the remainder plots (2, 3, 4) show the performance
of each similarity measure individually by comparing the different types of context where the candidate attribute is found (SUP, SUB, SIB concept or from the source concept
without using its context (NOCT) or they can come from both (ALL)).

Fig. 5. Performance of our Algorithm 1 using three different similarity measures and the impact of using context (CT) for understanding the correlation of mapping
evolution with the evolution of ICD9-CM ontology. The #topA corresponds to the number candidate relevant attributes observed. The #total-correlation refers to the
percentage of correlations between the number of changed and unchanged mappings and the number of changed and unchanged candidate attributes in mapped concepts
and/or their context (cf. Formula (17)). The plot on the top left (1) compares the performance of the three similarity measures, while the remainder plots (2, 3, 4) show the
performance of each similarity measure individually by comparing the different type of context where the candidate attribute is found (SUP, SUB, SIB concept or from the
source concept without using its context (NOCT) or they can come from both (ALL)).

D. Dinh et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 5366

Fig. 6. Analysis of change-correlation (cf. Formula (15)) w.r.t. SCT. These plots are similar to the ones in Fig. 4 with the exception that we only plot the percentage of
change-correlation.

Fig. 7. Analysis of change-correlation (cf. Formula (15)) with respect to ICD. These plots are similar to the ones in Fig. 5 with the exception that we only plot the percentage
of change-correlation.

The results also indicate several interesting facts by analysing
the performance of the similarity measures, considering the different concepts retrieved from the context for the source concepts
in mappings. Fig. 4.2 and Fig. 5.2 show that by considering ALL attributes in mapped concepts and their context, we obtain the best
correlation counts both for SCT and ICD. These results also show
that while the super concepts play a major role in SCT (cf. Fig. 4.2),

in ICD the correlations regarding the sibling concepts dominated,
but they still remain less expressive than correlations found only
considering the source concept (NOCT) for ICD (cf. Fig. 5.2).

At this level, we aim to observe the results only for the changecorrelation in SCT (cf. Fig. 6) and ICD (cf. Fig. 7), respectively.
We skip the unchange-correlation analysis because this seems a
more trivial scenario for us that, whether attributes denoting

Fig. 8. Analysing similarity values found by the studied similarity metrics by using aggregate functions (ANZ, AVG, MAX and MEDIAN) in total-correlation w.r.t. SCT.

a mapped concept remain unchanged, the associated mappings
might also remain unchanged. Results illustrate that the Wordbased ED similarity performs better than the Character-based
ED and the Knowledge-based similarity measure for SCT, while
the Character-based ED similarity performs better than the other
similarity measures for ICD. Both lexical and syntactic measures
outperform the Knowledge-based similarity. The latter is mainly
based on the similarity between senses of concepts in WordNet, and
the exploitation of the term co-occurrence in the SemCor corpus.
The low performance of the Knowledge-based similarity measure
quality is probably because of the lack of domain information, i.e.,
the biomedical knowledge available in the training data as well as
in the underlying knowledge source.

Analysing the influence of context for identifying relevant
attributes, we observe that attributes in the source concepts yield
the best correlations rather than the ones in their context. This
observation is coherent for the three similarity measures used
as depicted in Fig. 6.24 for SCT. Indeed, the NOCT curve, which
corresponds to the scenario where no context is used, remains
always above other curves corresponding to each type of context
(i.e., SUP, SUB, SIB). We observe the same results on ICD with the
Character-based ED similarity (cf. Fig. 7.2) with the exception that
NOCT and SUP tend to perform similarly both for Knowledge-based
and Word-based ED similarity measures (cf. Fig. 7.3 and 4).

5.3. Analysing the stability of similarity measures

We aim to study the stability of the similarity measures because
an important issue of mapping adaptation concerns determining
in which situation a mapping should be adapted. In some cases,
the decision could easily be made, e.g., when a source concept is
removed, the mapping is removed. However, other cases represent
much more difficulties to determine the impact of change on
the associated mappings, e.g., where concepts are only affected
by a change in attributes. In such situations, the SCA relevant
attributes identified could help, since we can exploit changes in
attributes values as well as their similarity with attributes in the
corresponding target concept. We consider unaffected mappings

those with attributes that remain unchanged from one ontology
version to another. On the other hand, it is more likely to adapt
a mapping when a change affects an identified attribute for
such mapping. Even in this situation, the decision on adaptation
still appears complex. Therefore, we aim to observe whether
found correlations relate to the similarity values described in the
identified SCA. For this purpose, we study the stability of the
similarity measures used for identifying the relevant attributes
based on different aggregation functions in statistics.

Evaluation method: we conduct a more fine-grained analysis
of correlations based on different intervals of similarity values
between attributes of each source concept (including its context)
and the corresponding target concept from each mapping. More
specifically, for each interval of similarity values ranging from 0 to
1, we compute the frequency of the correlations obtained using the
ALL attributes configuration, i.e., either from the source concepts of
mappings as well as the ones issued from their context (SUP, SUB
and SIB). We use four aggregate functions (MAX, MEDIAN, ANZ and
AVG) for selecting the appropriate candidate attribute in SCA to
study its similarity value. We chose these functions because they
have been widely used for selecting best candidates from a list of
items in related research areas, e.g., information retrieval [4345].
The MAX function corresponds to the maximum similarity value
from topA. The MEDIAN and AVG functions compute the median
and average of similarity values obtained in topA. The ANZ function
is similar to the AVG function with the exception that attributes
in topA with similarity values of zero are ignored. We divide the
similarity values into 10 groups from 0.0 to 1.0, each of which
contains a set of attributes whose similarity value ranges from x
to y with a step of 0.1 (y  x = 0.1).
Results. We plot the percentage of the total-correlation observed
using each similarity measure over the similarity threshold from
0.1 to 1.0 with the step of 0.1. We examine the similarity
values from the list of candidate attributes in SCA by using each
aggregate function ANZ, AVG, MAX and MEDIAN, respectively.
Fig. 8 compares the frequency of correlations obtained for each
type of aggregate functions observing the similarity measures

D. Dinh et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 5366

Fig. 9. Analysing similarity values found by the studied similarity metrics by using aggregate functions (ANZ, AVG, MAX and MEDIAN) in total-correlation w.r.t. ICD.

when studying SCT. Similarly, Fig. 9 presents the results analysing
the frequency of correlations obtained when studying ICD.

The results indicate that the Word-based ED is the most appropriate similarity measure for identifying the correlations between
attribute changes and mapping changes. Indeed, for most of the
aggregate functions, the Word-based ED performs better than the
two other similarity measures, considering higher values of similarity ([0.51.0]) (cf. Fig. 8). We notice that the higher number of
correlations occur in groups of high similarity values. It reinforces
the proposed suggestion that semantic mappings are established
mainly based on the similarity between attributes. Therefore, the
higher the similarity value of the changed attribute is identified,
the greater is the probability of adapting the associated mapping.
Hence, if a change occurs in an attribute identified in a source concept cS or in its context CT (cS ), we should adapt such mapping in an
appropriate way (e.g., replacement of source concept, modification
of mapping semantic relation or removal). This suggests that correlations found in groups of high values of similarity are important
evidences for triggering an adaptation of mapping.

6. Discussion

The continuous evolution of ontologies requires adapting
mappings over time. Coping with this issue remains so far
an open research problem demanding serious investigations to
guarantee the interoperability in the Semantic Web. To investigate
the impact of ontology changes affecting concepts attributes on
mapping adaptation, this article proposed a novel approach to
exploring similarity between concepts attributes of source and
target concepts in established mappings. Our investigation relies
on previous results of our empirical study on the analysis of
mapping evolution [4].

Through the experiments reported in this article, we hypothesized that identifying a minimal set of relevant candidate attributes
(in the mappings source concept or its context), namely SCA, might
play a central role for automatically adapting mappings. Indeed, according to the obtained results, the SCA identified for each mapping

provides an evidence for better interpreting mappings. To this end,
we investigated the influence of different similarity measures, at
three different linguistic levels, on our proposed method for identifying SCA (cf. Algorithm 1).

The achieved empirical results underscored the quality of the
yielded relevant attributes identified by our algorithm and the relevance of exploiting them for supporting mapping adaptation. We
found correlations between changes affecting identified attributes
and modifications in the corresponding mapping interconnecting
source and target concepts. This allowed understanding the influence of ontology changes specifically affecting concepts attributes
on mapping adaptation.

According to our obtained experimental results, we found
relevant to combine the attributes from the concepts of the context
with the source concepts attributes for boosting the identification
of SCA. Using the context revealed more relevant to find unchangecorrelation than change-correlation. Our method performed well
without using the context relying either on Character-based ED or
Word-based ED. Indeed, in some cases, the Word-based ED allows
to efficiently cope with the problem of word order in biomedical
terms such as skin cancer and cancer in the skin in comparison
to the Character-based ED.

When considering the context of interrelated concepts for
studying the mapping adaptation, results demonstrated the
convenience of exploiting the similarity based on the background
knowledge such as WordNet, even that this consists of a general
resource lacking domain information. To improve these results,
we plan to use additional background knowledge as soon as the
required resources like annotated corpora to compute similarity
will be exploitable. Moreover, we observed that results vary
according to the studied ontologies. We should particularly choose
the adequate similarity measure according to characteristics of the
involved ontologies, but this requires further research. Therefore,
we judge more appropriated to have the similarity metric as a
parameter in the proposed method.

Overall, the extensive experiments conducted in this study
with large and real biomedical ontologies allow to validate our
claimed objectives and hypothesis. We can easily generalize our

designed research methodology and experimental findings to
other contexts and ontologies, since the used datasets do not
require particular characteristics to run the study, which promotes
its reproducibility.

7. Conclusion

Mappings interconnecting ontologies play a key role for
software applications dealing with tasks related to information
integration and sharing on the Web. Nevertheless, ontology
evolution potentially makes existing mappings semantically
invalid or outdated. In this article, we proposed an original method
for identifying the most relevant subset of concepts attributes,
namely SCA, which is useful
for interpreting the evolution
of mappings under evolving ontologies. Our research aims to
facilitate the maintenance of mappings based on the detected
attributes. We conducted a series of experiments investigating the
influence of similarity measures underlying our method at three
different linguistic levels: lexical, syntactic and semantic level. Our
achieved results provided empirical evidences of the relevance
of identifying the relevant attributes for supporting mapping
adaptation. The conducted evaluation shows to which extent the
similarity is valuable between source and target concepts involved
in mappings, especially at the level of attributes in concepts, to
support the decisions on mapping adaptation.

For future work, we aim to study additional factors that might
influence the adaptation of mappings due to ontology evolution.
For instance, when a concept is removed (or is set to obsolete), we
plan to investigate the similarity between the source concept and
the ones in its context in a new ontology version to decide whether
mappings should be removed or moved to a most related concept
in the context. In addition, we aim to examine the influence of
other types of ontology change operations, such as those affecting
relationships (e.g., delR, addR) to determine precise decisions on
mapping adaptation actions based on ontology changes.

Acknowledgement

The National Research Fund (FNR) of Luxembourg entirely
(grant

the DynaMO project

supports this research under
#C10/IS/786147).
