Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 24 (2014) 2732

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

On the design of a self-medication web application built on linked
open data
Olivier Cure

Universite Paris-Est Marne la Vallee, LIGM, CNRS UMR 8049, France

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Open Self-Medication1 is a Web application that better informs people when treating undiagnosed
medical ailments with unprescribed, over the counter drugs, i.e., self-medicating. The application achieves
this goal by providing a set of functionalities that ensure safety and efficiency of this practice. The
systems most critical operations are processed using a self-medication knowledge base, expressed in
OWL, which has been inductively built on medical information obtained from a similar French project. A
main characteristic of this application is that almost all the data processed by the system and presented
to the end-user comes from a subset of the LOD data sets, namely DrugBank, DailyMed, Sider and DBPedia.
This paper motivates the design of such an application, provides the design choices, describes some
implementation details and presents lessons learned and future work.

 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Article history:
Received 20 May 2013
Received in revised form
8 November 2013
Accepted 16 December 2013
Available online 21 January 2014

Keywords:
Linked open data
Knowledge base

Self-medication
Web application

1. Introduction

In OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Devel-
opment) countries, due to the emergence and wide distribution of
the new drugs as well as the aging of populations, the consumption of pharmaceuticals keeps increasing every year. In 2009, the
associated bill has been estimated to USD 700 billion, i.e., 19% of
the total health spending [1]. On the one hand, this practice comes
at an increasing financial cost for the patient and the health system and may also imply some health risks, e.g., contraindications
between molecules taken during a given period of time, overdosing a molecule present in different drugs. On the other hand, this
rising consumption of drug products is not necessarily correlated
with the general publics access to medical information that helps
them make more informed decisions. A common practice nowadays is that the general public totally relies on the skills of health
care professionals when it comes to the consuming drugs.

Meanwhile, in the same OECD document, it is reported that selfmedication (i.e., the act of treating undiagnosed medical ailments
with unprescribed drugs) with over-the-counter (OTC) pharmaceutical products typically accounts for approximately 15% of drug
spending. This has been exacerbated since 2008, coinciding with
the beginning of the financial crisis, with people trying to reduce
their health-related spending, e.g., avoiding visits to general prac-

 Tel.: +33 10160957721.
1 http://srvisis01.univ-mlv.fr/selfMed/.

E-mail address: ocure@univ-mlv.fr.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2013.12.001

titioners whenever possible. This has contributed to the fact that
self-medication is one of the most dynamic drug markets for pharmaceutical companies. Most experts of the domain consider that
this practice will accentuate in the coming years. Industrialized
countries like France are pushing in this direction by transitioning molecule sets from originally prescribed to OTC, i.e., opening
them to self-medication. This political approach can have a disastrous impact on the health of the general public if not guided properly [2].

Due to the increasing practice of self-medication, many government agencies are calling for the development of educational
tools targeting the general public on health and medical issues.
At the same time, other government agencies, usually in the same
countries, are requesting to implement computerized applications
based on open data. The Open Self-Medication project aims to satisfy both calls by developing a self-medication Web application fueled on Linked Open Data (henceforth LOD) data sets dedicated to
drugs and medicine.

The application presented in this paper achieves this goal by
providing a set of functionalities that ensure safety and efficiency
of the self-medication practice. With safety, we mean that the
system guides the end-user from a set of common mild medical
signs to adapted molecules and drug products, but also highlights
the risks, e.g., drug interactions, adverse events, of self-prescribing
a drug in a given situation. The efficiency argument corresponds to
providing a rating, based on a tolerance/efficiency ratio designed
by a team of health care professionals, to some identified selfmedication molecules. This project leans on the experience of
implementing a similar system for the French market. Together

O. Cure / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 24 (2014) 2732

with Pr. Jean-Paul Giroud (Ph.D., M.D., former pharmacology WHO
expert), we have contributed to the practice of a safe and efficient
self-medication by releasing several books, recently [3], and Web
applications, one of which has been accessible for the last 6 years
to over 6 million clients of three major insurance companies in
France. This application, named Les conseils de lautomedication,
is owned by the Santeclair service company and is only granting
access to its clients. Recently, an iOS application, namely Top des
medocs, has been released and is accessible to a larger audience,
i.e., those purchasing the application.

Intuitively, the French application, influenced by [4], aims to
provide adapted to the general public, objective (i.e., not influenced
by pharmaceutical companies), information on drug products sold
in France. In just a few interactions, one can select a symptom and
obtain information on associated therapeutic classes and drugs. A
main feature of this application is the rating of drugs, i.e., a typical
French score between 0 and 20, based on an efficiency/tolerance
ratio. This ratio depends on the drugs composition, i.e., its set
of molecules, as well as its indication. The cornerstone of the
system is a drug database which is the result of years of medical
and pharmacological research, e.g., translating drug characteristics
into chunks of text that are easily understandable by the general
public. The back end of the Web application is based on the use
of a knowledge base which has been designed and enriched using
inductive reasoning over the drug database [5]. The ontology that
underpins this knowledge base also serves to ensure the quality
of the drug data by performing molecule-oriented inferences [6].
That is reasoning over the properties, e.g., contraindications, of
molecules contained in a drug rather than on the properties of a
drug. This approach enables us to identify drugs in the scope of
self-medication by reasoning over the molecule it is composed of.
Unlike the system we developed previously for the French
market, the Open Self-Medication application more heavily uses
data originating from the open data initiative. Hence, we believe it
will be of practical value to a more general audience of Web users
since it enables us to retrieve information from different health
systems. To achieve this goal, we had to define correspondences
between the molecule identifiers found in our select LOD sets
and the ones already present in our Knowledge Base. Our main
motivation is to leverage open data, as represented in Semantic
Web technologies, and to apply our experience with the French
system toward a self-medication application that will better serve
an international audience, i.e., support for drug products sold in
different countries and providing their description in different
languages. Moreover, the goal of using open data amounts to
accessing large volumes of data which are hard to obtain in the
proprietary pharmacological domain.

2. Related work

The design of a self-medication application is relatively novel
and does not currently correspond to any existing work. Never-
theless, related work exists on the topic of exploiting LOD in domain such as life sciences and medicine. As a motivation for our
approach, [7] considers that using open data is one of the most efficient ways to collect data and knowledge on the medical domain
at large scale. Moreover, as explained in [8], semantic technologies
will prove to be amongst the most reliable methods to search into
these data sets. In [9], the authors motivate the technical aspects
selected during the creation of the Open Pharmacological Space
(OPS), a drug discovery platform part of the Open PHACTS project.
Although the principal goal of this application differs from ours,
i.e., helping in drug discovery versus providing accurate drug information on known products, the approaches share some common aspects such as exploiting data sets of the LOD cloud. We also
share opinions on the data quality issue of some of these data sets.

[10] presents the Linking Open Drug Data (LODD) W3Cs task force
and its project of linking drug related data, some of which have
been used in this project. It also proposes best practices for exposing data that could fit efficiently into LOD. Finally, [11] describes an
experience in developing a food ontology in the context of the FP6
PIPS (Personalized Information Platform for Health and Life Ser-
vices) project. The ontology development process did not rely on
an inductive approach like Open Self-medication and did not use
external knowledge repositories as most recent approaches do.

3. LOD data sets

Some design choices concerning this application were mainly
motivated by the results of investigating the LOD data sets relevant
to the domain of self-medication. The data sets we formally
considered were DrugBank [12], DailyMed,2 Sider,3 DBPedia [13],
LinkedCT,4 Diseasome5 and FreeBase [14]. We finally retained only
the first four since we considered that the others were not adapted
to self-medication, e.g., diseasome and LinkedCT, or were less
precise than some selected data sets, e.g., FreeBase vs DBPedia.

An in-depth study of our selected data sets rapidly emphasized
that the central concept of this applications first version would
not be the same as in our French system. The central concept in
the French application corresponds to a Drug product for the following reasons: (i) a unique identifier, namely the CIP (Club Inter Pharmaceutique) code, is provided to each drug product being
sold in France, (ii) information sources are available, although distributed over the several providers, e.g., ANSM (Agence Nationale
de Securite du Medicament et des produits de sante), on these products and (iii) market evolution on these products are also available,
i.e., modification, emergence and withdrawal of products. Thus it
is possible to maintain an almost exhaustive, up-to-date and accurate drug database for these drugs. Note that (i) and (ii) are
characteristics of different national health systems and are not consequences of LOD per se. These three properties also enable us to
rate drugs and molecules in a consistent manner. The ability of
rating molecules is quite useful in cases of compound drugs containing several molecules with different dosages. For instance, our
health experts can use the rating of some molecules to help in
defining the rating of a drug composed of several molecules. In
the case of drugs found on LOD, we have not found an accurate
and consistent list of identified drugs available on the market at a
given time. For instance, at the time of developing this application,
data sets such as RXNorm are not present on the LOD cloud. For
this reason, we have currently decided to only rate molecules and
to consider non-compound drugs. Moreover, drug products containing a single molecule generally have better properties, i.e., less
drug interactions, contraindications, side-effects, and hence have
higher rates and provide a better service to the patient. Neverthe-
less, we are already working on compound drugs since informing
the general public about inefficient or/and dangerous drug products should also be an important feature of our system.

4. Self-medication knowledge base

The issue of selecting the molecules fitting in the field of selfmedication is non-trivial. This is partly due to the absence of an
explicit self-medication indication in most drug data and knowledge bases. In fact, we consider that being an OTC drug is not a

2 http://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed.
3 http://sideeffects.embl.de/.
4 http://linkedct.org/.
5 http://diseasome.eu/.

sufficient condition to belong to our self-medication category. For
instance, in France, some drugs belong to the family of OTC products but we do not recommend them for self-medication due to
some of their properties, e.g., contraindications or unadapted therapeutic classes.

The identification of molecules in the scope of self-medication
is performed with the assistance of a knowledge repository. This
knowledge base, developed in the context of our French applica-
tion, has been designed semi-automatically using induction over
our French drug database. This knowledge repository regroups
valuable information on molecules which are used by our team
of health experts to qualify if they belong or not to the selfmedication domain. We now present the main steps involved in
developing this knowledge base and invite interested readers to
obtain more details in [5]. The method is able to generate an OWL
ontology from any drug-related classification present in our drug
database. In a nutshell, our self-medication database stores, for
all drugs sold in the French market, all the information available
on the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC). In addition, it
also contains our efficiency/tolerance ratio and a comment from
a team of health care professionals. This database takes the form
of a star-shaped schema where the central table stores information on general drug information, e.g., name, price, as well as CIP
drug identifiers which serve as primary keys. This table is also
related, using one-to-many or many-to-many associations of the
EntityRelationship logical model, to all kinds of medical informa-
tion, e.g., side-effects, therapeutic classes, contraindications, and
warnings. Drugs are also related to some of the most frequently
used, at least in Europe, drug classifications, e.g., ATC (Anatom-
ical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System)6 and EphMRA
(European Pharmaceutical Market Research Association).7 Lets concentrate on ATC; it is organized in a five-level hierarchy ranging
from anatomical groups to molecules that corresponds to a gen-
eralization/specialization classification. It uses an encoding system that can easily be transformed into an explicit OWL concept
subsumption hierarchy, e.g., an R5D concept, with an Antitussives
label, is created and has the R5 concept, with label Respiratory System as a super concept. This approach, when performed over ATC,
yields a concept hierarchy of depth 5 containing over 5000 con-
cepts. Starting from this concept hierarchy, our method associates
properties, corresponding to some medical information, to each
concept corresponding to a molecule. This is performed using the
star-shaped schema to cluster relevant groups of products, generated using one of the previously cited classifications. Intuitively,
we navigate in the hierarchy of concepts and create groups of products for each level, using the classification to drug relation in our
database. Then, for each group we study some specific properties
which correspond to fields in SPCs (Summary of Product Character-
istics), e.g. contraindications, and for each possible value in these
domains we calculate the ratio of this values number of occurrences on the total number of elements of the group. We attribute
the property, i.e., via a previously defined OWL property, to a concept when that ratio is above a predefined threshold. This step
is semi-automatic, meaning that a health care professional supervises the results inferred and has the ability to overrule them. This
is performed with the help of a graphical user interface and hence
is processed efficiently by our health experts by usually requiring
only a small number of mouse clicks. Finally, we refine the ontology
by moving property assertions along a subsumption branch. This is
performed automatically to remove redundancy among siblings by
moving properties up in the hierarchy when they are shared among

6 http://www.whocc.no/atcddd/.
7 http://www.ephmra.org/.

all children of a given concept. Thus this ontology refinement approach is deterministic and based on its topology.

In order to select self-medication relevant molecules from
our LOD data sets, our first approach was based on identifying
molecules with the ATC or EphMRA classifications. We rapidly
found out that these identifiers are sparsely used in DrugBank and
DBPedia, the central data sets of our application. So we complemented our ontology with a new identifier solution based on DrugBank keys. This processing step was performed semi-automatically
using different sources such as DBPedia and other classifications,
e.g., EphMRA. At this stage, we also found out that some molecules
could not be matched because they could not be found due to their
non-commercialization in North America, e.g., absence of the Ambroxol molecule. We found out that most missing drugs were badly
rated and considered useless in our French system.

5. System description

Fig. 1 provides an overview of the main components of the
system, i.e., LOD data sets, database instance and knowledge base.
It highlights that the communication between the different data
repositories is performed using a set of APIs and interfaces. Next we
consider the graphical user interface which provides the medical
information to the end-user.

In Fig. 2, we present a screenshot of the application that displays
information on the Dextromethorphan molecule. The navigation
bar (upper part of the screen) proposes several functionalities,
i.e., home, symptoms, molecules, drugs, contact us and find a
pharmacy. The symptom feature enables the end-user to access
molecules and drugs from mild clinical signs. Given our approach
within the design of the French system, we consider that this
is the most intuitive way for the patient to find some valuable
information. This feature enables us to design a classical selfmedication scenario: the end-user selects an entry among the most
frequent self-medication-related symptoms, e.g., coughing, a list
of adapted molecules is then displayed with short indication and
its rating (from A to E). More information, e.g., contraindications,
side-effects, food interactions, and drugs, can be obtained from
selecting a molecule. Finally, among the list of drugs, some of
them, i.e., those that provide useful and relevant information in a
self-medical context, can be selected to get more information, i.e.,
adverse events, precautions, and warnings. The list of molecules
displayed in the Interactions section is linked, thanks to URIs and
the linking of data sets, to drug products stored in DBPedia and
Drugbank. Hence, clicking on a molecule name opens up a box
that contains all drugs containing it. This is quite useful for most
end-users who generally know some product names but do not
know the molecules they are composed of. Because we were not
satisfied with the amount of drug information one can retrieve
from LOD data sets, the molecule information page provides a
link to DrugBank pages which contain more information, e.g., drug
prices.

The navigation bar also proposes a more direct access, i.e.,
not implying the selection of symptom, to molecule and drug
information. This approach enables us to inform the general public
on non-self-medication molecules and drugs by proposing to
access information on all drugs and molecules obtained on our
selected LOD data sets. Up to now, we do not provide ratings for
these molecules. This is mainly motivated by the fact that they are
generally out of the scope of self-medication.

Finally, to provide useful services in the context of self-
medication, we propose the end-user to locate the pharmacies surrounding her current or a defined location (Fig. 3). Given a position,
this tool suggests the ten closest pharmacies and provides driv-
ing/walking directives. We have not found on LOD a repository of
addresses for health actors, e.g., hospitals, doctors, and pharmacies.

O. Cure / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 24 (2014) 2732

Fig. 1. Architecture overview.

Fig. 2. Screenshot of the Dextromethorphan molecule.

Hence, we harvested the Web for pharmacy coordinates in France
and the US. Currently, we have gathered more than 18,000 of them.
At the moment, this information is stored in a relational database,

i.e., MySQL, since it does not follow a graph representation and enables fast data retrieval due to indexes created on the geolocation
coordinates.

Fig. 3. Screenshot of the geolocation page.

6. Implementation details

The Web application uses HTML5 and CSS3 for the user interface
and programs are written using PHP, Javascript and its JQuery
library. The geolocation page uses the Google Map API version 3
and the navigator HTML5 extension.

Concerning the LOD data sets, we are not using SPARQL endpoints due their relative unreliability.8 Instead, we downloaded
some dumps and put them on our own OpenRDF Sesame triple
store. We are using the phpSesame PHP Client library which enables us to access OpenRDFs Sesame Framework via HTTP re-
quests. All non-RDF data, i.e., list of mild clinical signs, molecules
and their ratings as well as pharmacy coordinates, are stored in
a MySQL database instance to support a faster and easier integration with our French system. A stored procedure enables us to compute the distance between a given two pairs of latitude/longitude
coordinates, i.e., the user-end and pharmacy locations. Retrieving
data from these data stores is performed using REST services which
are using SPARQL and SQL queries. We are aiming to propose some
public APIs for these services in order to enable interested developers to access them directly.

7. Lessons learned

The main challenge addressed by this work is to evaluate the
feasibility of designing a self-medication application relying on the
LOD. Open Self-Medication is a proof of concept that such an application can be implemented and, considering positive feedbacks
from end-users, can provide a useful service to the general public.
The main contributions consist in the identification of a subset of

8 http://labs.mondeca.com/sparqlEndpointsStatus/index.html.

the LOD to self-medication and the selection relevant molecules.
The latter leverages on research previously conducted over several years on a similar French system, i.e., the design of a selfmedication knowledge base and its use in enhancing data quality,
[6] form more details.

Considering the application and domain point of views, we
consider that the use of the LOD provides many benefits. First, it
enables us to address a large audience with the description, in different languages, of drugs sold in different countries. Characteristics of LOD also support the discovery of new data sets and valuable
information by following dereferenceable URIs. For instance, it enables us to integrate data in an efficient and fluid way that could
not be supported with non-RDF formats. In terms of other usage of
semantic technologies, reasoning over our knowledge repository is
quite useful but is mainly supporting back end operations, e.g., data
quality enhancement. Finally, we appreciate the ability to query in
a federation kind of way over several LOD data sets, i.e., executing
a SPARQL query over several RDF graphs.

The development of this application also emphasizes the heterogeneity and data quality issues of the data contained in some
LOD data sets. In terms of heterogeneity, some molecules are lacking some important properties, e.g., ATC or DrugBank molecule
identifiers, and are not properly linked to other data sets. Although
some drug products are well documented, others are totally ab-
sent. At the same time, some important properties are missing for
some popular drugs. The solution we have implemented to discover and filter unsufficiently described molecules is supported by
the manual design of a set of SPARQL queries that were executed
over the selected LOD data sets. These queries were mainly checking the presence of fundamental information, which are selected
by health experts from our ontology, the molecule must provide.
We consider that 25% of the self-medication molecules present in
our knowledge base were rejected following that approach.

O. Cure / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 24 (2014) 2732

It was not a surprise to discover that the contents on diseases,
molecules, and drugs on data sets such as LOD are mainly targeting
the community of health care professionals. Studying them, we
found out that some information is still comprehensible for the
general public but several processing steps are needed to adapt the
content to certain categories of end-users. Finally, to the best of
our knowledge, there does not exist a free, open source repository
of addresses for health care actors and care facilities. Such data
sets are highly desirable for developers aiming to implement
applications providing directions to hospitals, clinics, pharmacies,
and so on.

8. Conclusion and future works

The Open Self-Medication application is built using Semantic
Web technologies, i.e. RDF (through LOD data sets), OWL and
SPARQL. Its goal is to provide useful information to the general
public on mild clinical signs and self-medication molecules. We
consider that this application already provides useful information
to the general public on mild clinical signs and self-medication
molecules. The use of technologies available in the Web of Data
has proved to be quite useful and presents a lot of potential.
Nevertheless, we were disappointed with the correctness and
completeness of drug information available on the LOD cloud,
which limits the breadth of our application. In order to deal with
these issues, we have decided to show only those drugs that satisfy
a certain quality, i.e., given in terms of correspondences with our
own ontology.

Right now, updating the data repository requires significant
effort and we aim to automate this process. We also hope to obtain
more user feedback to improve the system and to develop new
features. In terms of future work, one project could be to adapt
a similar tool for the health care professionals as primary users,
since most of the LOD content seems oriented toward this audience
already. This application would of course tackle all kinds of drugs
and would not be limited to self-medication and OTC drugs. We
already know from our previous French system that many general
practitioners are using either text books or applications that we
have produced on self-medication. Thus, the goal remains to
engage the patients more directly as consumers. The most obvious
strategy would be to extend our existing French system into a

multilingual version, but language is not the only issue to consider
that drugs are approved by different national organizations, bought
and used differently across countries and a useful system as to
address all these aspects.
