Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 311

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Querying neXtProt nanopublications and their value for insights on
sequence variants and tissue expression
Christine Chichester a,,1, Pascale Gaudet a,1, Oliver Karch b, Paul Groth c, Lydie Lane a,d,
Amos Bairoch a,d, Barend Mons e, Antonis Loizou c
a Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, CALIPHO group, CMU - Rue Michel-Servet 1, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
b Biomarker Technologies, Discovery Bioinformatics, Merck Serono, Frankfurter Str. 250, 64271 Darmstadt, Germany
c VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
d Department of Human Protein Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, CMU - Rue Michel-Servet 1, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
e Netherlands Bioinformatics Centre, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 9 August 2013
Received in revised form
12 April 2014
Accepted 8 May 2014
Available online 12 June 2014

Keywords:
Nanopublication
Post-translation modification
Polymorphism
Tissue expression

Understanding how genetic differences between individuals impact the regulation, expression, and
ultimately function of proteins is an important step toward realizing the promise of personal medicine.
There are several technical barriers hindering the transition of biological knowledge into the applications
relevant to precision medicine. One important challenge for data integration is that new biological
sequences (proteins, DNA) have multiple issues related to interoperability potentially creating a quagmire
in the published data, especially when different data sources do not appear to be in agreement. Thus,
there is an urgent need for systems and methodologies to facilitate the integration of information
in a uniform manner to allow seamless querying of multiple data types which can illuminate, for
example, the relationships between protein modifications and causative genomic variants. Our work
demonstrates for the first time how semantic technologies can be used to address these challenges using
the nanopublication model applied to the neXtProt data set, a curated knowledgebase of information
about human proteins. We have applied the nanopublication model to demonstrate querying over several
named graphs, including the provenance information associated with the curated scientific assertions
from neXtProt. We show by way of use cases using sequence variations, post-translational modifications
(PTMs) and tissue expression, that querying the neXtProt nanopublication implementation is a credible
approach for expanding biological insight.

 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

The Semantic Web is gaining momentum as a framework for
the development of next-generation bioinformatics and pharmacology data integration tools [1]. With the availability of increasingly powerful Resource Description Framework (RDF) stores [2,3]
it is now possible to integrate and query data from many disparate
databases, existing as large linked data networks [4,5] and there-
fore, considered as a viable solution for data integration challenges.

 Corresponding author. Tel.: +41 795968830.

E-mail addresses: christine.chichester@isb-sib.ch, christine_chi@sunrise.ch

(C. Chichester).
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2014.05.001
1570-8268/ 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Integrating data on the Semantic Web is mainly a matter of shared
and reusable properties definitions and unique data identifiers.
However, to fully leverage such integrated semantic data sets for
precision science, the provenance remains essential. Fine-grained
provenance including attribution has been identified as critical to
omics information as it inspires trust in the data [6]. Several approaches have now been proposed to associate statements with
provenance, attribution, and argumentation [79]. These efforts
aim to expose the computer-elusive research articles and database
entries as single scientific assertions that can be encoded in a
limited number of RDF graphs including specific provenance and
evidence. Here, we apply the nanopublication model [7], a representation for data publishing which emphasizes the attribution
and provenance information about who created and published the
data, and how it was produced, and provides a means for quality
assessment to the neXtProt data set.

C. Chichester et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 311

neXtProt [10] is a web-based knowledge platform developed
within the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics2 (SIB) centered around
human proteins. neXtProt contains information describing many
important aspects of human proteins: their function, their physical features (domains, binding sites, PTMs, etc.), detection in
proteomics experiments, interactions, subcellular localization and
tissue expression, as well as their associations with diseases.
neXtProt aims to be a central resource to support research on human proteins. Whenever possible, and in particular for sequence
features, data are attributed to each curated isoform in neXtProt,
which provides a very granular level of annotation. One important
user group of neXtProt is the c-HPP initiative of the Human Proteome Organization3 (HUPO) [11]. The data set in neXtProt is complemented by the whole corpus of manually curated annotations
extracted from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot [12] and in an effort to increase interoperability with other data sets within the Linked Data
cloud [13], an RDF version of the neXtProt data set has been produced and is available for download [14].4

Data integration across multiple data sources has been identified as a major challenge [15], therefore interoperable resources,
such as neXtProt, and frameworks, such as the Semantic Web are
essential. Still, serious obstacles impede progress towards complete data integration including inconsistent nomenclature, the
use of multiple incompatible ontologies, unambiguous mappings
of biological objects across resources, and issues related to the
stability and tracking of unique identifiers. A well-known example of those issues is illustrated by DNA and protein sequence
data. Since the technologies to obtain DNA and protein sequences
from biological samples are now well established, the rate-limiting
step is currently data analysis [16] and integration. For variant sequence data, one major hurdle is the heterogeneous nomenclature used to describe the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
among the various public databases (dbSNP [17], UCSC genome
browser [18], HapMap [19], PharmGKB [20]). The Human Genome
Variation Society (HGVS) has proposed a comprehensive and
systematic nomenclature for the description of genetic variants
[21,22], but in addition to compliance issues, changes in the guidelines and the coordinates of the underlying sequences complicate
the interoperability between the different resources. Thus, when
data sources are compared, variant identification and correspondence between several diverse sources often fail [23].

For the present work, we have converted data from neXtProt
into nanopublications to demonstrate how they can be used to
seamlessly query the data and gain biological insight. We have
converted three types of annotations of interest for the biomedical
community: variation data, posttranslational modification (PTM),
and tissue expression. The biological importance of each of these
features is highlighted subsequently.

Genetic differences between individuals constitute a major susceptibility factor to disease, and contribute to varying response to
environmental challenges and drugs. Understanding the genetic
contribution to both rare single-gene Mendelian disorders and
more complex common diseases will require integration of research efforts among many fields. The ease at which these data are
generated via high-throughput sequencing and mass spectrometry technologies raise high hopes for applications in the field of
personalized medicine. Among the large number of individual variations dispersed throughout the genome (more than 10 million
displaying a frequency higher than 1% in studied populations),
most are SNPs [24] Some of these SNPs are non-synonymous and

2 http://www.isb-sib.ch.
3 http://www.hupo.org/.
4 http://downloads.nbiceng.net/nextprot/currentrelease.

will result in single amino acid polymorphisms (SAPs), which can
have a major impact at the protein level and thus on the susceptibility to disease, as well as the response to environmental
challenges, and drugs. In the field of pharmacogenomics, SAPs are
typically evaluated for their impact on individual drug responses,
whereas in disease diagnostics and prognostic biomarkers, SAPs,
for instance, can help predict tumor development [25].

A fundamental mechanism for regulating protein activity [26]
is by various posttranslational modifications (PTM). A main PTM
system involves the covalent reversible phosphorylation of serine,
threonine, and tyrosine residues by phosphate. Protein phosphorylation is often employed for temporary modulation of protein
function, serving to induce or abolish enzyme activity, facilitate or
disrupt protein interactions, alter protein conformations, or target
proteins for destruction. Changes in the phosphorylation profile
due to sequence variants can cause major deleterious biochemical
idiosyncrasies in cells, and is often one of the contributing factors
in the pathogenesis of cancer.

Tissue- and developmental-stage specific gene expression underlies the development, function, and maintenance of the diverse
cell types within an organism. Accounting for tissue- specific expression provides useful information for system-level understanding of function and diseases processes. Similar to genomics data
expansion, large-scale studies of spatio-temporal gene expression
both at the single-gene and whole-genome level [27] have been
performed to investigate the relationship between normal, devel-
oping, and disease tissues, notably using microarrays, expressed
sequence tags, immunohistochemistry, and more recently, deep
sequencing.

Integration of SAPs with PTMs and tissue expression information is expected to contribute to the understanding of global
correlations between gene expression, gene regulation, protein
function, and cellular and organism phenotype [28]. The marriage
of the un-biased genomic approach with semi-quantitative histological methods promises to open many new research avenues.

The central contribution of this paper is the demonstration that,
through the use of fine-grained biological annotations in the form of
nanopublications, complex knowledge discovery queries dealing with
protein sequences and tissue expression can be answered. In addition
to this core contribution, we also provide templates, in the form of
examples, for querying tissue expression, PTMs and SAPs using the
nanopublication model.

A secondary aim of this paper is to provide a discussion
point between the bioinformatics and Semantic Web community.
For the bioinformatics community, this paper shows how the
nanopublication and semantic integration approach is critical
for answering state-of-the art questions. For the Semantic Web
community, this paper encourages continued investigation into
managing biologically relevant annotations in a high-speed and
usable way. In particular, we show how named graphs are central
to answering questions in this domain.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows; we begin by
discussing related work with a focus on models that allow for
the publication of fine-grained scientific statements and their
provenance, we then describe how to represent tissue expression
and sequence variants using the nanopublication model. This is
followed by a description of three use cases and the SPARQL queries
that make use of named graphs. Finally, we discuss these results
and put them in a larger biological context.

2. Publishing models

As there has been extensive work on data provenance, [29]
instead we will
in particular as it applies to e-science [30],
focus on models for exchanging fine-grained information about
predominately scientific statements. But, it is worth mentioning

that the recent standard for the interchange of provenance (PROV)
from the W3C [31] is a valuable resource that can be leveraged by
all of the models discussed below to describe the provenance of the
scientific statements.

Nanopublications are an approach that enables scientists to
represent knowledge in a format that can be easily mined, queried,
and retrieved through the Internet and be subject to computer rea-
soning, something that is not feasible for regular articles and many
annotations from databases. To accomplish this objective, nanopublications subdivide results into minimal but meaningful scientific assertions, represent these assertions in an RDF-based formal
notation, attach provenance information to the assertion, and treat
each assertion as a separate publication. Nanopublications in their
original formulation consisted of two RDF named graphs: one containing an assertion and another containing the provenance about
the assertion [7]. Since its conception, the schema has been extended to three named graphs: assertion, provenance, and publication information.5 The assertion graph is composed of one or
several triples that state the core scientific assertion of the nanop-
ublication. The provenance graph contains statements supporting
the assertion, such as the methods used to create the assertion, as
well as attribution for the assertion. The publication information
(publicationInfo) graph contains provenance statements referring
to the creation of the nanopublication itself.

Building on the basic concept of nanopublications, several other
approaches have been proposed to associate statements with
provenance, attribution, and argumentation. These approaches
are disposed to modeling and supplying provenance information,
as it is critical to providing reliable and trustworthy services to
scientists.

Micropublications [8] aim to incentivize data contribution by
recognizing the source of statements included in data resources.
Micropublications preserve a brief narrative of the argumentation
to enhance the transition of scientific publications to a machine
consumable format and for eventual use on the Web for quick human confirmation. A set of design patterns is available to demonstrate the application of the model to a publication, the structure of
its argument, the literature references, and concrete scientific evi-
dence. In the simplest form, a micropublication represents a statement with its supporting reference provenance. As this is quite
similar to nanopublication, it has been demonstrated that the micropublication and nanopublication models can be readily integrated [8].

Ovopubs [9] are an alternative model to encode scientific
assertions along with their provenance. Two types of ovopub
objects are proposed: assertion ovopubs and collection ovopubs,
which contain one or more assertion or collection ovopubs. While
the model benefits from having a more precise semantics, it implies
that complex assertions are composed through constructing
a modular network of assertions. Provenance is captured by
using the reified RDF model in assertions. Ovopubs are seen
as complimentary to nanopublications: their stricter formalism
provides more uniform semantics; while nanopublications afford
greater flexibility that is useful to describe certain types of data.

Finally, AIDA nanopublications [32] have expanded the notation of nanopublication from an RDF notation format to incorporation of full text controlled natural language statements. In
particular, their work defines a continuum from informal to formal
statements for representing scientific assertions as a way for the
scientific community to derive substantial benefits from nanopublications with informal claims not expressed as RDF.

Each of these models strives towards describing fine-grained information as computer understandable scientific statements. Each

5 http://www.nanopub.org/nschema.

recognizes the need for provenance and attribution information.
The different models are for the most part convertible and there
are active efforts to align these models. The research community
is still trying to find the best representation for this sort of finegrained information on the statement level. In this work, we selected nanopublications as a representation due to our familiarity
with it and its specific support for attribution at both the provenance and publication levels, which is critical for the neXtProt use
case of highly curated data.

3. Methods

3.1. Modeling neXtProt nanopublications

All nanopublications were modeled as 3 named graphs; an
assertion graph, a graph for the provenance of the assertion, and
a graph for provenance of the nanopublication (publicationInfo).
The assertion graph was initially created by stating the scientific
assertion in natural language to identify all the entities required to
convey a specific and distinct scientific fact. There is quite a bit of
freedom for authors in the nanopublication guidelines6 concerning
which triples belong in the different named graphs. Therefore,
the choices made in the modeling reflect what was determined
as biologically important information and the minimum essential
information necessary to draw biological conclusions. Ontologies
on Bioportal [61] and the OBO foundry [62] were then consulted
to find the appropriate predicates and the assertion graph
was constructed. Attempts were made to keep the number of
triples to a minimum but some assertion modeling required
several triples. All information that were considered important for
understanding the background of the assertion (the method for
generating the assertion and the data used) were added into the
provenance graph. No restrictions were placed on the number of
provenance statements. While fully reifying the assertion triples
and subsequently annotating the resulting statements could also
preserve provenance, such an approach can quickly yield complex
RDF structures that are restrictive and unnatural to domain
scientists. Moreover, reification increases data size by a factor of
3, and increases the complexity of SPARQL queries. Lastly, the
publicationInfo graph was constructed to include the information
necessary to cite the nanopublication.

Three types of nanopublications were modeled from the
neXtProt data set [11]: tissue expression (Fig. 1), PTM, and SAP
(Fig. 2). The assertion and the provenance graphs differ for
each type of nanopublication while the publicationInfo graph is
essentially the same. The publicationInfo graph documents, using
the Provenance Authoring and Versioning [33] (PAV7), Dublin Core
(dcterms8), and PROV9 [34,35] ontologies, several features about
the nanopublication as a whole including: the data used to create
the nanopublication and the authors of the data, the creators of
the nanopublication, the nanopublication version and when it was
generated, and the licensing of the nanopublication.

In the neXtProt data set particular attention is given to indicate
the level of data confidence in a clear way to help users rapidly
assess the most reliable data. neXtProt provides quality rankings:
neXtProt gold data are of highest quality, with error rates
estimated to be less than 1%; neXtProt silver data have an
estimated error rate of less than 5%; all other data are assigned the
neXtProt bronze quality rating, and are not incorporated into the

6 http://www.nanopub.org/2013/WD-guidelines-20131215/.
7 http://code.google.com/p/pav-ontology/wiki/Homepage.
8 http://dublincore.org.
9 http://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/.

C. Chichester et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 311

Fig. 1. Tissue Expression Nanopublication. The schematic representation of the tissue expression nanopublication shows the modeling of the 3 different named graphs
(assertion, provenance, and publicationInfo) and the relationships present in each named graph. The circles signify nodes and the connecting lines are the predicates labeled
with human readable text. The expression nanopublication describes the detection result of a protein in a tissue by different specialized methods and includes other triples
referencing the data used (provenance graph) and triples referring to the creation of the nanopublication itself (publicationInfo graph).

Fig. 2. SAP Nanopublication. This example shows the modeling of the scientific assertion that describes the position and the amino acid substitution in a specific isoform.
The circles indicate nodes, blank nodes are open circles, and the connecting lines indicate predicates labeled with human readable text (has value, has proper part, has
attribute, is realized in) as well as with the corresponding URI (SIO:000300, SIO:000053, SIO:000008, SIO:000356). The provenance and publicationInfo graphs are similar
to those shown in Fig. 1, therefore the labels for the relationships are not included.

neXtProt data set [10]. Thus, the conclusion of the curator, in regard
to the data certainty, exists in the 3 types of nanopublications and
was included in the provenance graph via the Weighted Interests
Vocabulary.10 The provenance graph includes the attribution
information pertaining to the assertion, such as the journal article
as the primary source and the database from which the data were
derived e.g. UniProtKB, Bgee, Human Protein Atlas (HPA), etc.

10 http://smiy.sourceforge.net/wi/spec/weightedinterests.html.

3.2. Tissue expression nanopublication

Tissue expression data contribute significant insights into
protein function, especially when it is highly restricted to certain
tissues or developmental stages. Expressed sequence tags (ESTs)
together with microarray and immunohistochemistry information
provide a broad and rich view of the transcriptome expression.
However, it is difficult to perform large-scale expression mining of
the data generated by these diverse experimental approaches. Not
only are the data stored in disparate locations, but often the data

Fig. 3. Nanopublication Production. Flow-chart depicting data sets (input/output in parallelograms), decision points (diamond), the alternative and merge (triangle) steps
used to produce the RDF and nanopublications. The two stage process allows data consistency checks to be applied. Furthermore, it decouples access to the neXtProt data
model from content generation of different RDF formats (trig and rdf/xml).

about the tissue source are ambiguous and inconsistent, describing
different levels of granularity, ranging from cell types to organs,
and different developmental stages. In addition, the different
resources may use synonyms to describe the same concept. Thus,
a consistent tissue classification is needed to enable detection of
tissue specificity. To address this issue, neXtProt has developed the
CALIPHO Ontology for Human Anatomy (CALOHA), data version
1.12 [36]. CALOHA11 contains all terms provided by the expression
resources, HPA [37] and BGee [38].

Data provided by the integrated expression resources are generated from experiments performed using different methodolo-
gies, in partially overlapping anatomical structures ranging from
cell types to organs, and at different developmental stages. The
resulting ranges of granularity are not easy to reconcile. How-
ever, to avoid information loss, neXtProt strives to keep the original granularity of the data. Evaluation of the existing ontologies
confirmed it was not possible to represent the precise hierarchical descriptions needed to represent these data sources therefore CALOHA was created. To improve interoperability with other
ontologies and controlled vocabularies, CALOHA is fully mapped
to UBERON [39], Foundational Model of Anatomy [40], BRENDA
Tissue Ontology [41], Medical Subject Headings, and Cell Ontology [42]. Reciprocally, CALOHA is cross-referenced in UBERON.

The nanopublications for the expression data (Fig. 1, an example
of the RDF is available as Supplementary Data) for specific
proteins convey the method of detection (EST, microarray, or
immunohistochemistry), the tissue where expression has been
assessed, and the quality and curation assessment of the result.
The assertion graph includes the protein, tissue, and the quality of
the expression result (positive, negative), whereas the provenance
graph includes the method of detection, the curation assessment,
and the data used to make the assertion. In neXtProt, expression
data are associated with qualitative quality of expression (weak,
moderate, strong, etc.), as well as not detected when a tissue or
cell type had been tested and gave negative results. We simplified
this in the nanopublication and expression was reported as solely
as a positive or negative result. A template was created that
captures the assertion data plus the method of detection as human
text, for example, Based on microarray data, Apoptosis regulator
Bcl-2 is expressed in Hypothalamus.

3.3. PTM nanopublication

The PTM nanopublication was included in the first version of
the neXtProt Linked data [14]. The PTM nanopublication assertion
is the minimal unit of information to describe the PTM for a specific

protein isoform. It states that there is a modification on one specific
amino acid in a specific protein isoform with a specific type of
PTM.

3.4. SAP nanopublication

The SAP nanopublication (Fig. 2) assertion describes the fact
that there is a sequence variant of a codon or codons that results in
single amino acid substitution, multiple amino acid substitutions,
small deletions or small insertions in the isoform at a specific
position(s). The provenance captures the reference to the data sets
employed by the annotator to make the assertion. These data sets
include: COSMIC [43], dbSNP [44], and UniProt [12].

3.5. Nanopublication production

As described previously [14], we used a template-driven approach to produce the nanopublication data sets (Fig. 3). A relational data-model of neXtProt is queried by templates utilizing
a library of macros to produce an RDF modeled with different
attributes. The implementation of the template assembly tool is
realized as a light weight wrapper utilizing Apache Velocity
template engine at its core and Velocifero for object-relational
mapping. The nanopublications are dynamically produced in the
trig format12 simultaneously with the entire neXtProt Linked
Data set. Using the December 2013 release of neXtProt version
2013-12-18, this process produced a nanopublication data set containing 179,726,752 quads. Supplementary material, such as data-
model, templates, and software used for generating the RDF as
well as the neXtProt RDF and nanopublications are available from:
http://downloads.nbiceng.net/nextprot/currentrelease.

4. Use cases

With the aim to show a sample of the questions that can
currently be asked of our nanopublication implementation, we
are presenting example queries that answer three biologically
interesting use cases:
4.1. List all proteins with their tissue expression, that have an
SAP of either silver or gold quality resulting in an amino acid
substitution producing a new amino acid target for potential
phosphorylation;

4.2. List all proteins, and their corresponding tissue expression
data, that have an SAP of either silver or gold quality that
results in the loss of a PTM of silver or gold quality (see Fig. 4);
4.3. List all tissues where the proteins have an SAP with the
provenance of the COSMIC database of either silver or gold
quality.

11 ftp://ftp.nextprot.org/pub/currentrelease/controlledvocabularies/caloha.obo.

12 http://www.w3.org/2010/01/Turtle/Trig.

C. Chichester et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 311

The vocabulary used in each type of nanopublication can
be easily obtained by querying for predicates used in assertion
graphs, and grouping the results by the RDF: type of the assertion.
While one is still required to be familiar with the vocabulary
used to express the use case conditions, once the appropriate
named graphs are identified, the remaining triples can be obtained
regardless of the vocabularies and structures used. Similarly,
from a modeling perspective, RDF triples can be associated to
the nanopublication assertion by simply placing them inside the
corresponding graph, rather than having to ensure connected RDF
structures. For example, neither the subject nor the object of the
statement aa:N :substitutionFor aa:S occurs in any other RDF
statement in the example SAP nanopublication of Fig. 2. However,
as the statement is placed in the context of the assertion graph,
the corresponding nanopublication and its provenance are easily
retrieved.

The first use case, 4.1, combines information from the tissue
expression and SAP nanopublications. The query identifies SAP
assertions which describe an amino acid substitution for another
phosphorylatable residue (either aa:S, aa:T or aa:Y) in an isoform,
and tissue expression assertions for the corresponding protein. The
quality of the SAP (neXtProt Gold or Silver) is obtained by querying
the provenance graph for the SAP nanopublication. As noted above,
this use case exemplifies how the use of named graphs allows
access to the amino acid:substitutionFor amino acid statement
required to answer the question, without having the object or
subject of this statement to appear in other RDF triples.

The second use case, 4.2, requires information from all 3
assertion types to be combined. The SPARQL query that returns
the isoforms requested is shown in Fig. 1. The query identifies
isoforms for which two assertions are made: one that states an
isoform is a participant in a PTM, and one where an SAP occurs in
the same isoform. Moreover, the query requires that the range of
the PTM is included within the range of the SNP. The tissues where
the corresponding protein is expressed are retrieved from tissue
expression assertions.

As each :substitutionFor statement appears inside a distinct
assertion graph, we can naturally separate the evidence for the
PTM and SAP assertions and retrieve both.

Biologically, our neXtProt nanopublication results extend posttranslational modification data sets with variant information for
isoforms and normal tissue expression. We determined the number of mutations that has been cataloged in neXtProt that results
in an amino acid substitution that produces, serine (S), threonine
(T), or tyrosine (Y), all representing potential gain of phosphorylation sites and the tissue expression of the proteins to which
those variants belong (Use case 4.1). The over-all prediction for the
gain of phosphorylation sites was determined for 50,596,968 SAPs
from 39,583 unique protein isoform sequences found in 216 tissue types (excluding embryonic and fetal tissues as well as gestational structures). The tissue expression data was grouped by
anatomical systems to simplify visualization (tissues per system
shown in Supplementary Data Use Case 4.1). Serine, the most
common of the three phosphorylatable residues, represented the
amino acid with largest percentage gain-of-phosphorylation-sites
in all anatomical systems, followed by threonine and tyrosine (Ta-
ble 1). It will be important to validate these predicted gain-of-
phosphorylation sites using bioinformatics tools (DISPHOS [45],
Scansite [46], and NetPhos [47]) to triage and improve the estimation of potential effector phosphorylation sites resulting from
SAPs. Further analysis of our data may serve to support the
hypothesis that proteins involved in regulatory and signaling
cellular functions undergo more frequent changes to phosphory-
lation/dephosphorylation sites than proteins involved predominantly in metabolism.

We also assessed how many known phosphorylation sites
are associated with variants that result in the loss of the

Fig. 4. The SPARQL query for use case 4.2 that retrieves data where a SAP results
in the loss of a PTM.

5. Results

The nanopublication approach, which encapsulates the data
in 3 named graphs, provides significant advantages in facilitating
flexible data modeling and exploration. The typing structure of
the named graphs (assertion, provenance, publicationInfo) allows
for separation of concerns when defining queries, which facilities
subsequent query composition. For example, a query pertinent
for retrieving data from the assertion graph can be composed in
isolation or in conjunction with a query that accesses specific
provenance information. The typed named graphs thus allow for
a uniform process in expressing queries to address a variety of use
cases: identify a set of nanopublications whose assertions satisfy
the use case conditions and retrieve additional information from
the associated assertion, provenance, and publicationInfo graphs
as required (query structures examples, see inline Supplementary
SPARQL Queries).

Inline Supplementary SPARQL Queries can be found online at

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2014.05.001.

Table 1
Gain of Phosphorylation Sites. The anatomical system distribution of the number of SAP variants found by querying the nanopublications for new gain of phosphorylation
targets, i.e., serine, threonine, or tyrosine. The SAP variants were grouped by quality rating (Gold, Silver) and by the tissue(s). This table was produced by extending the query
to use the CALOHA ontology in order obtain the corresponding anatomical system of the tissues. We chose to do this using property paths in SPARQL 1.1, although this could
also be achieved through RDFS reasoning. Note that since a protein may be expressed in multiple tissues, a variant may be counted multiple times, such that the total count
does not reflect the total number of variants. The estimated percentage of gain of phosphorylation targets was found to be the highest in all anatomical systems for serine
and the lowest for tyrosine. (Supplementary Table 1 gives the breakdown by specific tissue type.)

Anatomical system

Alimentary system
Cardiovascular system
Dermal system
Endocrine system
Exocrine system
Hemolymphoid and immune system
Musculoskeletal system
Nervous system
Reproductive system
Respiratory system
Sense organ
Urinary system
Unclassified

%Serine
Gold

Silver

Total

%Threonine
Gold

Silver

Total

%Tyrosine
Gold

Silver

Total

phosphorylatable residues, as well as the tissue expression profile
of the corresponding proteins (Use case 4.2). To remove potential
redundancy in counting the different sites, we only took into
account one isoform per protein (corresponding to the largest
protein product). We found a total of 1849 single amino acid
variation sites where S, T, or Y is mutated. There were 1407
mutations resulting in a loss of S, 314 resulting in a loss of T, and
128 resulting in a loss of Y, 76.1%, 17%, and 6.9%, respectively, of
the total mutated phosphorylation sites. Of the 1023 mutations
resulting in the loss of serine, 87 changed from serine to threonine,
which is often phosphorylated by the same kinase as serine, and
thus may still be a target for phosphorylation. The proportion of
mutations to the three residues (S, T, Y) found in our data set is
quite similar to the proportion of phosphorylation sites on each of
those residues in the entire proteome, that is, 78% S, 17% T, and 6%
Y. 1565 of the lost PTMs sites were rated as gold and 283 as silver
quality, whereas 178 of the SAP variants were rated as gold and
1670 as silver. Out of those, 156 sites had both SAP and PTM data
rated as gold. The full data set (Supplementary Data Use Case 4.2)
includes tissue expression data and the isoform-specific data with
small insertions and deletions variants that were removed in the
single amino acid variation data set described previously.

Due to significant medical implications associated with understanding how genetic heterogeneity affects human health, there is
much effort to define the cancer genome, that is the somatic DNA
mutations that contribute to cancer progression [4853]. Among
the variants found in the human genome, we expect to observe
loss of function variants, gain of function variants, and variants that
have no detectable effect [54]. Most identified somatic mutations
are thought to be functionally neutral, caused by the increased
mutation rate in cancer cells, whereas relatively few driver mutations provide selective advantages to tumor cells and are responsible for tumor initiation, maintenance, progression, and metastasis
[55]. To address the effect of variants, computational methods
have been developed to predict the pathogenicity of mutations
based on various criteria such as amino acid conservation across
species, proximity to functionally important residues, or structural
predictions [56]. It is known that certain proteins contribute to specific cancers, for example Breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein (NX P38398) and Breast cancer type 2 susceptibility protein
(NX P5158) [57], and the DNA mismatch repair protein Msh2 (NX
P43246) in colorectal cancer [58]. Thus, combining data describing mutations found in specific cancer types with the actual origin
tissue of the cancer is expected to help in discovering new susceptibility mutations.

To illustrate the wide range of queries that can be made
using nanopublications, Use Case 4.3 combines tissue expression,
PTM, and variation data with provenance information. The
nanopublication expression data, derived from healthy tissue,
were combined with the variation data from cancerous tissues
using data with provenance COSMIC. Although neutral mutations
may comprise an overwhelming majority of variants detected in
disease tissues [59], Use Case 4.3 demonstrates that it is possible
to determine the range of healthy tissues where known neoplastic
mutations could have expression. For example, mothers against
decapentaplegic homolog 4 (SMAD4, NX_Q13485-1) protein,
which is known to play a role in neoplastic processes [60], have
a gold rated mutation that creates S at amino acid position 130.
Scanning the tissue expression data with the COSMIC provenance
(mutation 32332, Supplementary Data Use Case 4.3 COSMIC Gold
Provenance) shows that this protein has been detected in large
variety of tissues and measured but absent in others (e.g. bile duct
as measured by IHC).

We have created a Semantic Web resource that provides
the substituted amino acid variants in protein isoforms, and by
combining it with the tissue expression data (Table 1) it will be
possible to compare to similar data from cancers arising from
the same specific cellular origins. With our control set in place,
we have now provided an opportunity to hypothesize the effects
and classify as loss-of-function, gain-of-function and neutral-
effect-on-function variants arising in cancer cells or other disease
processes.

6. Discussion

Mining of large volumes of transcriptome data is currently
limited by the inability to relate sequence and descriptive
information. In part, this is due to the absence of a common
structured vocabulary to describe the information and in part due
to different designations of sequence attributes. We present here
an approach for nanopublication-based semantic integration of
sequence variation and expression data that can be queried to
evaluate potential functional consequences. By providing detailed
results of protein expression and PTM sites, these data will provide
a firm basis for future targeted research to better understand the
biological roles of each individual protein and their interactions.

Given a list of specific biological characteristics as input, such as
posttranslational modifications, a crucial issue is finding the most
relevant SAPs to analyze. The nanopublication modeling approach
described here permits the retrieval of a list of significant SAPs

C. Chichester et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 311

from any given set of proteins. The graph implementation of all
assertions allows a perspective from any semantic type such as
by tissue, by disease, and by biological process. However, in this
case the selection of SAPs relied on the relevant a priori knowledge
of biomolecular features characterizing the annotated SAPs, such
as the specific amino acid molecules (e.g. serine, threonine, or
tyrosine) that result in the gain or loss of phosphorylation. In the
end of each step, the integration of data from public resources in
a vertical perspective (from genomics to proteomics to systems
biology data), the evaluation of
features from biomolecular
knowledge, the computation of relevant variants produced from
SAPs and finally their evaluation, relying on quality of the data are
needed to reach relevant biological conclusions.

In general, the nanopublication approach depends on RDF for
a machine-readable representation and on shared ontologies in
order to allow the information from different resources to be
semantically connected to each other. But, RDF itself does not
provide domain-specific terms. Adopting shared, community compliant taxonomies, vocabularies, and ontologies is an important aspect of next generation data and information modeling. Suitable
terms and URLs in existing ontologies should be reused whenever
possible and new terms should only be added when necessary.
We are currently witnessing a rapidly growing acceptance of controlled vocabularies as basic references for the concepts that form
nodes (subjects and objects) as well as define the edges (predi-
cates) in biological models. Shared controlled vocabularies, as a
means to describe broad repertoires of biological concepts, serve
as a scaffold for the integration of concepts and data from disparate
biological databases and have enabled a paradigm shift in data
integration. Although, when modeling the nanopublications, we
experienced difficulties in making use of ontologies, which we assume will create quite a high barrier for the adoption of the Linked
Data approach by typical biological scientists. Even with the availability of ontology repositories such as Bioportal [61] or the OBO
foundry [62], we encountered many challenges in locating and
eventually choosing the appropriate RDF properties and resources
to model the data to correctly represent the notions expressed in
the assertions. Often seemingly appropriate concepts were found
although with subsequent extensive investigation of the domains,
ranges, definitions, parents and children, they were rejected due
to small disqualifying aspects of these details. However, solutions
are appearing such as the community owned vocabulary system
ConceptWiki [63], which allows the creation of concept-URL combinations to be used and shared in the nanopublication modeling.
In addition to the technical difficulties encountered when
modeling life science data, to a large extent the Semantic Web
based resources still only constitute a promise to biologists,
as its use by, for instance, wet-lab experimentalists is not yet
widespread. In that sense the Semantic Web represents a typical
combined social and technology barrier; the technology can only
make an impact when brought closer to the end users driving
a cultural change. Due to many factors, including redundancy in
databases, erroneous entries, annotation errors, failure to account
for alternative nomenclatures, lack of interpreted information,
inability to query all fields of the data, as well as the paucity of
experimental data, it is still difficult for biologists to sift through
the available information and to synthesize it with regard to
analyzing and interpreting their own data. This suggests that any of
the effective and user-friendly technologies that can resolve these
issues will eventually be adopted. The Linked Data nanopublication
approach to publish information with rich provenance on the
web will also ease the public acceptance of large scale data
integration strategies due to the fact that all scientific assertions
have the potential to be justified. Therefore, one of the key
issues to tackle before the power of Linked Data can be fully
harnessed is to integrate genomic and proteomic data, including

the provenance, efficiently along with other sources of information
without bothering the wet-lab scientist with the technical details
of the implementation. To accomplish this, one of the future
goals for the neXtProt nanopublications and the entire set of
neXtProt Linked data is full and sustainable integration with
the Open PHACTS Discovery platform [64,65]. The Open PHACTS
project has developed a Linked Data platform for integrating
multiple pharmacology data sets that form the basis for several
drug discovery applications and with the addition of neXtProt
proteomics and genomics data, it will be possible to demonstrate
even more significant biological results.

7. Conclusion

We have demonstrated the feasibility of an approach for
querying formalized knowledge, modeled as nanopublications
using several community-adopted ontologies, with the objective
of integrating variation data and its associated knowledge in a
uniform semantic environment. The use cases presented exemplify
the complexity and significance of the biological information that
can be automatically retrieved in context using these methods.
While similar results may also be achievable using traditional
databases, considerable effort must be spent in understanding the
database schemata and processing intermediate results. Instead,
the neXtProt nanopublication approach allows a uniform strategy
for formulating queries to answer scientific questions, while the
use of semantic technologies in general provides a range of
integration opportunities with other data sets or Linked Data
platforms, such as Open PHACTS.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Innovative Medicines Initiative
Joint Undertaking under grant agreement n 115191 for Open
PHACTS, resources of which are composed of financial contribution
from the European Unions Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/20072013) and EFPIA companies in kind contribution.

We also would like to acknowledge the efforts of the many
reviewers that have lead to the improvement of this manuscript.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found

online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2014.05.001.
