Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 12

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Editorial
Recent applications of web semantics in eLifeScience

1. Introduction

In this special issue we present a series of articles on application
of web semantics to problems in eLifeSciencethe digital conduct
and communication of research in biology and biomedicine.

Life science research presents a number of challenges and
opportunities to web semantics and web science. This special issue
shows some prime examples of how researchers are tackling the
challenge of turning web semantics into working solutions.

Originating as heavily descriptive sciences, biology and
biomedicine have a long tradition of specialized terminologies,
classification systems, and controlled vocabularies. Therefore, we
should not be surprised at the enthusiasm with which bio- and
bio-medical informaticians have developed and made use of semantic technologies (e.g. see [1,2]). Ontologies have a natural
use in the domain. The National Center for Biomedical Ontology
(http://bioportal.bioontology.org) now provides access to over 400
ontologies with over 6 million classes [3,4].

A major challenge in eLifeScience is to establish frameworks
that can integrate developing knowledge over time. Abductive
reasoning  sometimes termed inference to the best explanation
 is a very common mode of arriving at conclusions [5
7]. Published assertions and theoretical constructs are always
subject
to challenge, disproof, revision, and correction [8].
The interpretations of various researchers may be mutually
contradictory, while results that seem to hold up well
in a
laboratory may fall apart, for instance in therapeutic development,
or in human trials [911]. Reported facts can be theory-laden,
encapsulating and requiring a theoretical context [12]. Facts
also require a complex social infrastructure for their production
and validation [1315]. Lastly, the reproducibility of reported
experimental results in the life sciences cannot be guaranteed
there seem to be many false positives strewn about the literature
and the underlying false positive rate is a subject of debate [1618].
Web semantics plays an important role in organizing, clarifying
and formalizing the insights in disparate subfields, allowing them
to shed light upon one another and be reusedor discarded in
timely fashion. All the papers presented in this issue apply a form
of digital scholarly communication that in principle should help to
enhance this process.

Web semantics, over the past decade or so, have been
successfully applied to life science related problems in data
integration, classification,
image segmentation, computational
workflows, document retrieval and exploration, text mining, and
recently to web annotation [19,20]. This is not a comprehensive

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2014.11.005
1570-8268/
 2014 Published by Elsevier B.V.

list of application areas, but simply an indication of the richness of
suitable open problems for these technologies.

The purpose of this special issue, is to provide a recent selection
of some interesting and promising web semantics applications
in eLifeScience. Seven articles cover four specialized topics in
data integration; computational workflows; document retrieval,
annotation and exploration; and ontology maintenance. We hope
it provides a useful glimpse of the current state of work in semantic
eLifeScience.

2. Papers in the special issue

Integrating and publishing life science data in readily useful
form has been a long-time central concern in eLifeSciences. It is
particularly important in translational medicine and pharmaceutical applications, where the ability to intersect and apply results
from many diverse information sources can lend critical insight.

In the first article, Chichester et al. explore a problem set
in precision medicine, in relating genomic variants to protein
modifications. Using the NeXtProt dataset, they show how the
fine-grained nanopublications annotation format may be applied to
enable complex queries on protein sequences, tissue expression,
single amino acid polymorphisms (SAPs) and post-translational
modifications (PTMs). Named graphs are shown to be central to
constructing their solution.

Groth et al. next present an application, OpenPHACTS, motivated
by data integration in pharmacology, and covering diverse
databases in chemistry and biology. They describe the successful
OpenPHACTS Discovery Platform as a case study, illustrating the
central importance of application programming interfaces (APIs)
as an extension of the linked data application architecture for data
integration of pharmacology data. Their approach is of significant
interest for biopharmaceutical research both in academia and
industry.

Scientific workflows offer the promise of increased usability
for assemblages of analytical methods downstream of raw
experimental data, or in pure in silico analysis. But human
interpretation of their execution traces, and preservation and reuse
of the workflows, is a continuing challenge.

Gaignard et al. describe the use of domain ontologies, rule propagation and data analysis tools to create experiment summaries
from workflow provenance traces in a format tractable to human
readers. Their approach is showcased in a Virtual Imaging Platform,
which introduces novel methods to reduce the extensive metadata produced in analysis workflows to informative scientific sum-
maries.

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 29 (2014) 12

The Belhajjame et al. article on Workflow Research Objects
(forthcoming), presents a collection of ontologies and tools
for preservation and reuse of biomedical and other scientific
workflows. Their work applies and reuses the Object Reuse and
Exchange (ORE), Annotation Ontology (AO), and W3C PROV (PROV-
O) ontologies; and is demonstrated in detail with a real world
application to research on Huntingtons Disease, a genetic disorder
with no known cure.

Retrieval and exploration of domain-relevant documents
is of significant interest in eLifeScience, and presents particular
challenges due to the complexity of terminology and conceptual
structure in the domain.

In the Theophrastus system, Fafalios and Panagiotis demonstrate
automatic web document annotation using entity mining, to
enable real-time on-demand intelligent exploration of information
on biological species. The application uses Linked Open Data (LOD)
to assist in studying biodiversity. After retrieval of a document,
entities are identified and linked to semantic information. Users
can explore information sources related to their query target,
assembled in information cards, and/or through external search.

Cameron et al. treats the problem of domain-specific web content search, with specific application to drug abuse epidemiology.
In a system for complex specialized information retrieval from web
documents, they use context-free grammars and ontologies to interpret queries in terms of both ontological concepts and intelligible constructs from the domain of interest. In their evaluation,
their semantic system PREDOSE, applied to searching a large corpus of social media posts on prescription drug abuse, performed
effectively, in comparison to three other popular systems.

Maintenance of cross-ontology mappings under evolution is
a big challenge in eLifeScience applications, considering the size
and complexity of contemporary biomedical ontologies and their
dynamic nature.

Dinh et al. attempt to solve the problem of preserving
mapping under co-evolution of ontologies. Dinh et al.s approach
involves identifying lexical, syntactic and semantic similarity
of correspondence attributes between ontology classes. They
describe their method and then assess it for accuracy and stability
in a series of experiments using the International Classification
of Diseases (ICD) and Snomed Clinical Thesaurus (SCT). This is a
particularly important problem to resolve for the massively crossmapped corpus of biomedical ontologies.

fundamental to the practice and communication of biological and
biomedical science, which are now fully part of the Web-based
ecosystem. We believe web semantics applied to eLifeScience, will
continue to make significant contributions to our understanding of
living systems and ecosystems, and will assist in developing cures
for todays intractable disorders.
