Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 35 (2015) 141

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Editorial
The Semantic Web Challenge 2014

The goal of the Semantic Web Challenge is to provide researchers and industry with a forum to showcase the best Semantic Web applications, to demonstrate practical progress towards
achieving the vision of the Semantic Web, and to show the value of
Semantic Web technologies within various application domains.

The Semantic Web Challenge has been organised annually since

2003.

The Semantic Web Challenge 2014 took place at the 14th
International Semantic Web Conference held in Riva del Garda,
Italy, from 1923 October, 2014. As in previous years, the challenge
required that applications had to provide a practical value to
web users or domain experts. Systems should also make use of
heterogeneous information sources under diverse ownership or
control, and the meaning of data should play a central role.

The Semantic Web Challenge 2014 received 15 submissions.
All submissions were evaluated rigorously by a jury composed
of
leading scientists and experts from industry in a threeround knockout competition, according to a comprehensive set
of challenge requirements. Fifteen submissions were invited to
present a poster and demonstration during the ISWC conference.
Following the presentation, seven finalists were chosen to give an
oral presentation and live demo during a dedicated session, with
the winners then being selected.

In 2014, there were four systems selected as winners, three in
the Open Track, with a special Big Data Prize being awarded to the
best system making use of large-scale data sets. This special issue
presents expanded articles about three of these systems.

The winning system was Mining the Web of Linked Data with
RapidMiner by Petar Ristoski, Christian Bizer and Heiko Paulheim
of the Data and Web Science Group at the University of Mannheim,
Germany. The application provides an extension to the RapidMiner
system that allows data analysts to exploit Linked Data without the
need to be familiar with the details of Semantic Web Technologies.
The submission Enabling Live Exploration on The Graph of
Things by Danh Le Phuoc, Hoan Nguyen Mau Quoc, Hung Ngo
Quoc, Tuan Tran Nhat and Manfred Hauswirth of INSIGHT Centre
for Data Analytics National University of Ireland, Galway was
awarded second place. This application provides a dashboard
pulling together real time data from the Internet of Things.

In third place was DIVE into the Event-Based Browsing of
Linked Historical Media by Victor de Boer, Johan Oomen, Oana

Inel, Lora Aroyo, Elco van Staveren, Werner Helmich and Dennis de
Beurs from Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision, Hilversum;
Department of Computer Science, VU University Amsterdam;
Dutch National Library, the Hague; and Frontwise, Utrecht. This
entry unlocks radio and television archives, providing innovative
access for digital humanities scholars through a well designed and
attractive user interface.

The Big Data Track Prize went to another team from the Data
and Web Science Group at the University of Mannheim, comprising
Oliver Lehmberg, Dominique Ritze, Petar Ristoski, Kai Eckert, Heiko
Paulheim and Christian Bizer, for Extending Tables with Data from
over a Million Websites. The system allows a user to search for
and integrate data from a wide variety of tabular formats on an
impressive scale.

As in previous years, the submissions to the challenge were of
high quality, provided clear demonstrations of the use of Semantic
Web Data, and targeted a wide range of problems. Entries came
from both academic research institutes and industrial research
labs. The winning entries entries were well-designed and polished
and supported clear use cases.

We would like to thank all the members of the jury for
their detailed judgment of the strengths and weaknesses of
the submitted applications. Judging the challenge is an intense
process that requires significant commitment from the jury, which
consisted this year of:
 Enrico Motta (Open University, UK)
 Kerry Taylor (CSIRO, AU)
 Sweitze Roffel (Elsevier, NL)
 Hideaki Takeda (National Institute of Informatics, JP)
 Bryan Thompson (SYSTAP, US)

Our special thanks also go to the sponsor of the Semantic Web

Challenge Elsevier for their long-standing support.

Sean Bechhofer
University of Manchester, UK

Andreas Harth
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2015.11.001
1570-8268/
