Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 34

Editorial

Introduction to the special issue of JWS with

selected papers from ISWC 2005

The series of International Semantic Web Conferences
(ISWC) started in 2002 and over the years has firmly established itself as the premiere international event in this rapidly
expanding field. This special issue contains four of the best
papers submitted to the Research/Academic Track of ISWC
2005, held in Galway, Ireland, on November 610, 2005. ISWC
2005 attracted several hundred participants from academia, government and industry, thus reflecting the growing interest in all
sectors of society towards semantic web technologies.

The Research/Academic Track of ISWC 2005 had 217 sub-
missions, an increase over the number of papers submitted to
ISWC 2004. This confirmed the robustness of the research base
in this area, at a time of increased competition from other events.
In total 54 papers were accepted, for a 25% overall acceptance
rate.

The four papers selected for this special issue illustrate the
range of research areas tackled by the semantic web community.
The work by Peter Mika brings together a number of interesting strands of researchfolksonomies, social network analysis,
ontologies and text mining, in an attempt to go beyond the traditional dichotomy between formally axiomatized ontologies and
informal social tagging, and try and achieve an initial synthe-
sis. An interesting (and possibly controversial) element of Peter
Mikas analysis is his view that folksonomies and ontologies are
actually different points over a common spectrum of increased
formalization and systematization of categorical systems. While
a number of people may disagree with this view, an important
element of Peter Mikas work is the instantiation of these ideas
in concrete applications, which bring together tagging systems,
web mining technology and ontologies. His paper in this special
issue includes two case studies. In the first one he shows the
emergence of a lightweight ontology from an analysis of tags
in the popular del.icio.us system. In the second one he presents
his Flink system, which provides a visualization of the social
networks and research interests of researchers in the semantic
web. This information is extracted from web pages using text
mining methods and presented uniformly in terms of a common ontology. In addition, techniques drawn from social science
research are used to derive formal measures about the social
network.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2006.12.001

The paper by David Huynh, Stefano Mazzocchi, and David
Karger tackles a crucial issue for our community. Although the
size and use of the semantic web continues to increase, it is
still dwarfed by the size and use of the original web. This paper
presents PiggyBank, a creative approach to grow the semantic
web by allowing users of the regular web to contribute semantic markup with minimal effort. By enabling users to annotate
web pages as they access them, PiggyBank collects semantic
annotations that describe and classify their content according to
that particular users use of the information. Users mark pages
by tagging them much as they would do in del.icio.us, and
PiggyBank extracts additional markup through screenscrapers
and by retrieving RDF or RSS markup provided by the original publishers of the page. An interesting aspect of PiggyBank
is that in addition to growing folksonomies (folk taxonomies)
by collecting tags, it can also acquire relations among the tags
from the user to create what the authors call folksologies (folk
ontologies). Each users annotations are then published in shared
Semantic Banks, and include provenance information regarding which users, screenscrapers, or publishers contributed the
markup. If this approach were to become routine practice of Web
users, these shared Semantic Banks would quickly populate the
semantic web.

The work presented by Simon Miles, Sylvia Wong, Weijian Fang, Paul Groth, Klaus-Peter Zauner, and Luc Moreau is
representative of the integration of semantic web technologies
in e-science. Complex on-line analysis of scientific data often
involves complex integration and processing of distributed data.
When these in silico experiments are performed, the results
must be validated by ensuring that the data analysis processes
were correctly used and executed. This paper nicely integrates
scalable techniques to capture this kind of data provenance trails
and semantic web techniques for describing with rich metadata the details of the data sources and computations. The paper
describes several use cases of the use of provenance information
by scientists. The scientific community may be one of the earliest
adaptors and beneficiaries of semantic web technologies.

The paper by Peter Plessers, Olga De Troyer and Sven Casteleyn addresses another key issue for the semantic web, that of
developing effective methods to support Ontology Evolution.

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 34

The reason why this topic is of particular importance in the context of the semantic web is that, given its open and distributed
nature, it is simply not possible to control the evolution of semantic information, in the same way that it was possible in the days
of closed knowledge based systems, where both knowledge
acquisition and system evolution where tightly controlled by a
team of developers. Hence, in the semantic web context it is very
important to have effective methods for managing ontology evo-
lution, as changes in one ontology may impact on a large number
of applications based on that particular ontology. Plessers et al.
provide a methodological framework, a specification language,
and change detection algorithms to support ontology evolution.
Thus, an important element of their approach is that they provide
both a mechanism for developers to describe the changes they
have made to an ontology, according to different viewpoints,
and also ways to propagate changes and maintain consis-
tency. The authors also describe a prototype implementation of
their system, developed as a plug-in for the Prot eg e ontology
editor.

In summary, this special issue illustrates some crucial and
intriguing new directions in semantic web research. By exploring approaches that emphasize the combination of folksonomies
and ontologies, rather than presenting them as diametrical
choices, the research community is addressing the crucial issue
of scaling up the population and use of the semantic web. By
addressing the ontology lifecycle and methodology, researchers

are proactively anticipating and resolving the issues crucial to
supporting long-term large distributed communities using the
semantic web. Through approaches that integrate semantic web
technologies into e-science environments, researchers continue
to demonstrate the benefits of these technologies to a vibrant scientific community that presents many challenges and rewarding
possibilities. We invite you to learn more about these exciting
topics and read this special issue as well as the proceedings
of ISWC 2005. Our young field continues to surprise us with
creative approaches to the great challenges we face.

Yolanda Gil


Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern
California, 4676 Admiralty Way, Suite 1001, Marina del Rey,
CA 90292, USA

Enrico Motta
Knowledge Media Institute, The Open University, Walton
Hall, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA, UK

Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: gil@isi.edu (Y. Gil), e.motta@open.ac.uk
(E. Motta)


12 December 2006
