Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 515

Ontologies are us: A unified model of social networks and semantics

Peter Mika

Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Received 22 June 2006; received in revised form 27 November 2006; accepted 30 November 2006

Available online 1 February 2007

Abstract

In our work the traditional bipartite model of ontologies is extended with the social dimension, leading to a tripartite model of actors, concepts
and instances. We demonstrate the application of this representation by showing how community-based semantics emerges from this model through
a process of graph transformation. We illustrate ontology emergence by two case studies, an analysis of a large scale folksonomy system and a
novel method for the extraction of community-based ontologies from Web pages.
 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Knowledge representation; Folksonomies; Tagging

1. Introduction

According to the most cited definition of the Semantic Web
literature, an ontology is an explicit specification of the conceptualization of a domain [1]. Guarino clarifies Grubers definition
by adding that the AI usage of the term refers to an engineering
artifact, constituted by a specific vocabulary used to describe a
certain reality, plus a set of explicit assumptions regarding the
intended meaning of the vocabulary words [2]. An ontology is
thus engineered by  but often for  members of a domain by
explicating a reality as a set of agreed upon terms and logicallyfounded constraints on their use.

Conceiving ontologies as engineering artifacts allows us to
objectify them, separate them from their original social context
of creation and transfer them across the domain. Problems arise
with this simplistic view, however, if we consider the temporal
extent of knowledge. As the original community evolves through
members leaving and entering or their commitments chang-
ing, a new consensus may shape up invalidating the knowledge
codified in the ontology.

To address the problem of ontology drift, several authors have
suggested emergent semantics as a solution [3]. The expectation
is that the individual interactions of a large number of rational
agents would lead to global effects that could be observed as
semantics. Ontologies would thus become an emergent effect

E-mail address: pmika@cs.vu.nl.
URL: http://www.cs.vu.nl/pmika/.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2006.11.002

of the system as opposed to a fixed, limited contract of the
majority. While the idea quickly caught on due to the promise
of a more scalable and easily maintainable Semantic Web, the
agreement so far only extends to the basic conditions under
which emergence would take place. The vision is a community of self-organizing, autonomous, networked and localized
agents co-operating in dynamic, open environments, each organizing knowledge (e.g. document instances) according to a
self-established ontology, establishing connections and negotiating meaning only when it becomes necessary for co-operation.
Beyond the reasonable belief that individual actions in such
a semantic-social network would lead to ontology emergence,
there is a lack of an abstract model of such a system that could
also explain the process of emergence. Thus there appears to be
a large conceptual gap in the literature between the vision and
the details of implementations of various semantic architectures
based on P2P, Grid, MAS and web technology.

In this paper, we take a step back and formulate a generic,
abstract model of semantic-social networks (Section 2), which
we will call the ActorConceptInstance model of ontologies.
This model is built on an implicit (albeit crucial) realization
of emergent semantics, namely that meaning is necessarily
dependent on a community of agents. Inspired by social tagging mechanisms, we represent semantic-social networks in
the form of a tripartite graph of person, concept and instance
associations, extending the traditional concept of ontologies
(concepts and instances) with the social dimension. We will
show how lightweight ontologies of concepts and social networks of persons emerge from this model through simple graph

P. Mika / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 515

transformations. In Section 3, we will demonstrate these effects
based on two independent, large scale datasets. In Section 4, we
evaluate one of our emergent ontologies (the result of a socialnetwork based ontology extraction process) against the results
of the traditional method of ontology extraction based on co-
occurrence. Lastly, we conclude with a discussion of future work
in Section 6.

2. A tripartite model of ontologies

While expert systems designed for centralized, controlled
environments benefit greatly from the increasing expressivity
of ontology languages such as OWL, especially in domains
that lend naturally to formalization such as engineering and
medicine, lightweight ontologies expressed in RDF(S) have
spread and caught on in the loosely controlled, distributed environment of the Web [4].

The tendency towards lightweight, easily accessible mechanism for ontology and metadata creation is best evidenced by
the recent appearance of folksonomies. Folksonomy (from folk
and taxonomy) is a neologism for a practice of collaborative categorization using freely chosen keywords. Folksonomies (also
called social tagging mechanisms) have been implemented in
a number of online knowledge sharing environments since the
idea was first adopted by social bookmarking site del.icio.us in
2004.

The idea of a folksonomy is to allow the users to describe a
set of shared objects with a set of keywords of their own choice.
What the objects are depends on the goal of the site: while bookmarks are the object of classification in del.icio.us, photos are
shared in Flickr, scientific publications are tagged in CiteULike,
while 43Things allows users to share their goals and plans (e.g.
to travel or loose weight) by annotating their descriptions with
keywords and connecting users with similar pursuits.1

It is important to note that in terms of knowledge represen-
tation, the set of these keywords cannot even be considered as
vocabularies, the simplest possible form of an ontology on the
continuous scale of Smith and Welty [5]. First, the set of words
is not fixed. In fact, the users form no explicit agreement at
all about the use of words, not even in the form of incremen-
tal, need-based, local and temporary agreements suggested by
the research on emergent semantics [3]. Yet, the basic conditions of emergent semantics are given and as we will show there
is semantics emerging at the scale of these systems. Second,
although we use the term concept in the following, it is clear
that there is no one-to-one correspondence between concepts
and keywords. It is not always possible for the users to express
a complex concept with a single keyword and thus they may use
more than one tag to express the concept association that the
item brings up in them. Lastly, the instances of folksonomies
are instances only in the sense of classification.

In order to model networks of folksonomies at an abstract
level, we will represent such a system as a tripartite graph with

1 del.icio.us, http://www.flickr.com, http://www.citeulike.org, http://www.

43things.com.

hyperedges. The set of vertices is partitioned into the three (pos-
sibly empty) disjoint sets A = {a1, . . . , ak}, C = {c1, . . . , cl},
I = {i1, . . . , im} corresponding the set of actors (users), the set
of concepts (tags, keywords) and the set of objects annotated
(bookmarks, photos, etc.). In effect, we extend the traditional
bipartite model of ontologies (concepts and instances) by incorporating actors in the model.

In a social tagging system, users tag objects with concepts,
creating ternary associations between the user, the concept and
the object. Thus the folksonomy is defined by a set of annotations
T  A  C  I. Such a network is most naturally represented
as hypergraph with ternary edges, where each edge represents
the fact that a given actor associated a certain instance with
a certain concept. In particular, we define the representing
hypergraph of a folksonomy T as a (simple) tripartite hypergraph H(T ) = V, E where V = A  C  I, E = {{a, c, i}|
(a, c, i) T}.

Tripartite graphs and hyperedges are rather cumbersome to
work with. However, we can reduce such a hypergraph into
three bipartite graphs (also called two-mode graphs) with regular edges. These three graphs model the associations between
actors and concepts (graph AC), concepts and instances (graph
CI) and actors and instances (graph AI). For example, the AC
valued bipartite graph is defined as follows:
AC = A  C, Eac, Eac = {(a, c)|i I : (a, c, i) E},
w : E  N, e = (a, c) Eac, w(e):=|{i : (a, c, i) E}|
In words, the bipartite graph AC links the persons to the concepts that they have used for tagging at least one object. Each
link is weighted by the number of times the person has used
that concept as a tag. This kind of graph is known in the social
network analysis literature as an affiliation network [6], linking
people to affiliations with weights corresponding to the strength
of the affiliation. An affiliation network can be used to generate two simple, weighted graphs (one-mode networks) showing
the similarities between actors and events, respectively. (At this
point it is recommended to dichotomize the graph by applying
some threshold.)

x=1

bixbxj. In matrix notation S = BB

The process of folding a bipartite graph (the extraction of
a one-mode network) can be most easily understood by looking at the matrix form of the graph. Lets denote this matrix
as B = {bij}. As discussed before, bij = 1 if actor ai is affiliated with concept cj. We define a new matrix S = {sij}, where
sij = k
. This matrix,
known as the co-affiliation matrix, defines a social network that
connects people based on shared affiliations. In our case the
links are between people who have used the same concepts with
weights showing the number of concepts they have used in com-
mon. The dual matrix, O = B

B is a similar graph showing the
association of concepts, weighted by the number of people who
have used both concepts as tags. Note that in both graphs the
diagonal of the corresponding matrices contains the counts of
how many concepts or persons a given person or concept was
affiliated with in the bipartite graph. We can use these values
to normalize the association weights (e.g. by calculating the
Jaccard-coefficient) and then filtering again based on the rela-

tive weights. In case of the S social network, for example, this
means that we have taken into account the relative importance
of the link between persons.

In summary, the AC graph, the affiliation network of people
and concepts can be folded into two graphs: a social network
of users based on overlapping sets of objects and a lightweight
ontology of concepts based on overlapping sets of communities.
Thus in this simple model, social networks and semantics are just
flip-sides of the same coin: the original bipartite graph contains
all the information to generate these networks, while it is not
possible to re-generate the original graph from them.

The other two bipartite graphs that we derived from the original tripartite model can also be folded into one-mode networks
in a similar fashion. In particular, the CI graph leads to another
semantic network, where the links between terms are weighted
by the number of instances that are tagged with both terms. This
type of semantic network is a much more familiar kind: it mimics the basic method applied in text mining, where terms are
commonly associated by their co-occurrence in documents. The
AI graph results in another social network of persons, where the
weight of a pair is given by the number of items they have both
tagged. We also get a network of instances, with associations
showing the number of people who have tagged a given pair of
instances.

In the following we focus our attention on the two lightweight
ontologies based on overlapping communities (Oac) and overlapping sets of instances (Oci).2 The analysis of the emergent
social networks is outside the scope of the current paper.

2.1. Ontology enrichment

The community-based lightweight ontology Oac that we
extract from the affiliation network is rather peculiar from a
knowledge representation perspective. Unlike the manually constructed thesauri known in the Semantic Web literature (such as
Wordnet [7]), it more closely resembles the association thesauri
studied in linguistics. An example is the Edinburgh Associative
Thesaurus (EAT),3 which was collected in 1973 via an experiment using a group of university students as subjects [8]. The
experiment consisted of handing a list of words to students who
were instructed to write down against each stimulus word the
first word it made them think of, working as quickly as possible.
The obtained words were used in a next round of the experiment.
(The cycle was repeated three times, by then the number of different responses was so large that they could not all be re-used
as stimuli.)

Our associative ontology is similar to the EAT in that the
weights of the links between terms are expressed as the number of people who make that association. The difference is that
in the EAT collection, people are prompted explicitly to create
links between concepts, while we deduce such links by observing tagging behavior. More importantly, however, both methods

2 Recall that Oac = B
with concept cj; and Oci = D
is used to tag the instance iq.

B, where B = {bij} with bij = 1 if actor ai is affiliated
D, where D = {dpq} with dpq = 1 if concept cp

3 Consult the EAT online at http://www.eat.rl.ac.uk/.

have the crucial property that the result clearly depends on the
community of people who take part in experiment. The method
of ontology engineering is particularly revealing, because once
the initial set of words is selected there is only one parameter to
the process: the population chosen. (In particular, the knowledge
engineer has no other role than handing out questionnaires and
collecting the responses.) Some of the results are likely to hold
for other communities (like the overwhelming reaction of saying
Noah when hearing the word ark), but many of the aggregated
associations are driven by the collective mind set of the subjects
of the experiment. A collective mindset that is likely shaped by
the well-known law of community formation: interaction creates
similarity, while similarity creates interaction.

We cannot only repeat the experiments with different com-
munities, but given some information about the social structure
of the community, we could also extract local ontologies by
limiting our tripartite ontology to the associations of a certain sub-community of actors. Note that this is the principle
of locality in action, one of the expected hallmarks of emergent
semantics [3]. We will demonstrate this effect in Section 3.2
where we extract an ontology of research topics in the Semantic
Web domain.

In modern terms, the EAT is an emergent ontology based on
empirical data. Unlike ontologies that are meant to codify fixed
agreements, all graphs that we derive are also emergent in the
sense of evolving dynamically with the ActorConceptInstance
network. Changes in the original network can occur in a number
of ways. Users may join or leave the community, changing the set
of actors. The focus of the community may shift, affecting the set
of items tagged and the concepts used. Last, the understanding
and use of terms may change, reflecting in the set of associations
between concepts and instances created by the users.

Although our association networks are very simple ontological structures, there are several opportunities of enriching them
with additional semantics. We start by observing that a significant drawback of the EAT is the heterogeneity of terms. Our
emergent ontologies will also likely to contain a diverse mixture
of specific and generic terms, i.e. terms that we can unambiguously place in a clearly defined context (e.g. instances such as
Peter) and terms that can occur in multiple contexts of use (e.g.
war). From a network view, general words are therefore more
likely to bridge different clusters of words, while specific terms
are expected to exhibit a dense clustering in their neighborhood.
This suggest an opportunity to distinguish between these two
categories by computing the clustering coefficient, the (local)
betweenness centrality or the network constraint on our terms
[6,9]. These well-known ego-network measures of Social Network Analysis are readily available in popular network analysis
packages such as Pajek [10] and UCINET [11]. Based on the
same observation, we also expect that clustering algorithms can
help us in finding synonym sets of the more specific terms.
There is a wide range of clustering algorithms available in the
above mentioned network analysis packages, based on different
definitions of cohesiveness.

We may also extract broader/narrower term relations typical
of thesauri using set theory. In an ideal situation, we would say
that Concept A is a super-concept of Concept B if the set of

P. Mika / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 515

entities (persons or items) classified under B is a subset of the
entities under A(B  A  A  B = B). We might also add the
criterium that the set of A should be significantly larger then the
set of B, i.e. |B|/|A| < k for some value of k. In principle, such
an ordering allows us to define a Galois lattice using the subset
relation. In practice, such a lattice would be very sparse (consid-
ering the number of entities and the number of possible subsets
over them), so we will approximate this method by looking for
near-perfect overlaps, i.e. |A  B|/|B| < n for some value of n.
Finding appropriate values for the k, n parameters of the model
is the task of the researcher.

The reader should note that the meaning of these broader/
narrower relations are very different, depending on whether
we analyze the Oci or the Oac ontology. In the first case, the
interpretation is that all (or most) of the items classified under
the narrower term also appear under the broader term. In other
words, what we extract is a classification hierarchy. In the second case, the meaning is that all the persons associated with
the narrower term are also associated with the broader term. In
other words, we extract a hierarchy based on sub-community
relationships.

3. Case studies

In the following, we demonstrate the broad applicability of
the ActorConceptInstance model of ontologies by looking at
two different semantic social networks. Our first data set comes
from an existing web-based social bookmarking tool called
del.icio.us (Section 3.1), while the second case is built on synthetic data obtained by using web mining techniques (Section
3.2). We will show how the abstract model applies to the particular cases and demonstrate our method of ontology emergence
based on the graph transformation described above.

3.1. Ontology emergence in del.icio.us

According to the definition of author Joshua Schachter,
del.icio.us is a social bookmarking tool. Much like the similar functions of browsers, del.icio.us allows users to manage
a personal collection of links to web sites and describe those
links with one or more keywords. Unlike stand-alone tools,
del.icio.us is a web-based system that allows users to share
bookmarks with each other. Bookmarks can be browsed by
user, by keywords (tags) or by a combination of both crite-
ria. Further, the user interface encourages exchange by showing
how bookmarks are linked together via users and tags. In
terms of the ActorConceptInstance model, registered users
of del.icio.us are the actors who create or remove associations
between terms and webpages (instances) by adding or deleting
bookmarks.

From the perspective of studying emergence, del.icio.us is
remarkable for the dynamics of its user base. The young, technologically aware community gathering around the site closely
follows the latest news and trends in web technology as well
as the evolving vocabulary of the field. Beyond technology,
del.icio.us users also post-bookmarks related to current topics
in politics, media, business and entertainment. The emphasis on

timeliness is reinforced by listing bookmarks in a backwardchronological order as it is typical for blogs.

The process of annotation is made as easy as possible. A
single textbox allows users to enter a set of words without
any recommendations made by the system. On the downside,
this means that synonyms are common in the folksonomy, e.g.
semanticweb, semweb are different keywords. Ambiguity
is also present, since users often pick overly general terms to
describe items (such as web, tool and other popular terms).
Further, users often make the mistake to enter key phrases instead
of keywords (e.g. Bill Clinton), where the words are subsequently parsed as separate tags (Bill and Clinton); or they
escape the one-word-only limitation by concatenating words.
Case sensitivity and the use of punctuation marks further pollute the del.icio.us namespace. However, at the scale of system
(over 30 thousand registered users in December 2004) the imperfections of tagging are reduced to an acceptable level. On the
plus side, users benefit from instant gratification in the form of
linkage to other relevant, timely, socially-ranked posts.

del.icio.us exposes tagging data in the form of RSS feeds,
which we have collected using a focused RDF crawler. The
crawler was initialized with the single most popular tag (web)
and have traversed the RSS network in a breadth-first-search
manner, following links to tags mentioned in the descriptions
of items. The sample data that we collected  over a million
triples of RDF  was stored using the Sesame storage and query
facility [12]. The sample represents 51,852 unique annotations
of 30,790 URLs, by 10,198 persons using 29,476 unique tags.4
Next, we have generated both the ActorConcept and
ConceptInstance graphs. In order to scale down the dataset
(without loosing much information) and to avoid strong associations with a low support we have filtered out those entities that
had only a minimal number of connections, i.e. those tags that
had less than ten items classified under them and those persons
who have used less than five concepts.

Subsequently, we have extracted the above mentioned two
kinds of ontologies by folding these graphs using the network
analysis package Pajek. As a reminder, the first ontology (Oac)
is based on actors sharing concepts as interests, i.e. the associations reflect overlapping communities of interests, while the
second network (Oci) reflects the co-occurrence of tags on items.
We have filtered the networks based on the absolute strength of
associations. Next, we applied geometric normalization to the
resulting graphs and filtered edges again based on the relative
strength of the associations. We have chosen the thresholds in
such a way to obtain networks of equal size (438 concepts).
Fig. 1 shows a high level view of the Oci graph, Fig. 2 shows a
detailed view of the Oac graph.

The results show clear evidence of emerging semantics in
both cases, but the networks we obtain still show very different pictures. With an equal number of vertices, the densities of

4 This is a sample of the complete data set because the RSS feeds expose only
the latest 30 items for each tag. Further, we stopped crawling after reaching this
size. To our knowledge this is still the largest ontology annotation data set ever
studied.

Fig. 1. The del.icio.us tags associated through co-occurrence on items and the clusters emerging.

the two networks are quite different (0.01 for the Oci network,
0.006 for the Oac network), and so is the amount of clustering present (the average clustering coefficients are 0.2 and 0.03,
respectively).

The selection of concepts in the two networks is also very dif-
ferent: only 64 concepts are present in both networks of the total
of 438 nodes in each graph. (A sample is included in Table 1.)

Table 1
Terms starting with A or a in the two lightweight ontologies generated from
the del.icio.us network

Oci

Oac

*/GoogleHacks, 0, 04, 1, 2, 2005, 3g, a, A, a9, Aaron Mankovski,
actona, actors, adult, aduva, advice, ajax, all, Allegrini, america, an,
and, angeles, apparel, Apple, as, assembly, attempt, attention,
attention.xml, aviv, axml, azur
.net, 3d, 43folders, academic, accessibility, acronym, actionscript,
activism, ad, ads, adsense, advertising, advice, advisories, adwords,
agile, ajax, amazon, america, analysis, and, Apache, apache, api,
app, apple, application, architecture, archive, Art, art, articles, asia,
astronomy, atlas, Audio

Fig. 2. Detail view of the del.icio.us tags associated through users: a threeneighborhood of the term ontology. Note that the term sematic is correctly
associated, despite the obvious typo.

P. Mika / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 515

A closer look reveals that the concepts within the clusters of
the first network are often very specialized terms, while those
in between the clusters are overly general terms. A look at the
terms with the lowest clustering and highest betweenness centrality confirms this hypothesis. The top five terms with highest
betweenness are up, cool, hot, in, to. Noticeable also is that
the terms with the highest clustering and lowest network constraint are those related to sex. As mentioned before, the second
network shows much less clustering: overly general and overly
specific terms are both missing.

The clue to the different qualities of these networks lies in the
difference in the way associations are created between the con-
cepts. In the first case, there exist a strong association between
concepts if they share a large percentage of items, independent
of the number of users interested in them and regardless if these
associations were added by the same users or not. The resulting
distribution of association weights shows a very slow decline, the
average weight is fairly high. In the second case, there is a strong
association in the network if two concepts share a large fraction
of the users among them, independent of the number of instances
associated with them and regardless whether these terms were
added to the same instances or not. The resulting weight distribution shows a very steep decline, the average weight is fairly
low.

This suggest that the first network (Oci) is more appropriate
for concept mining. In fact, a -set analysis performed with
UCINET on a slightly larger network of 751 concepts resulted
in meaningful clusters of specific terms, representing various
domains of interests in the del.icio.us community. At a level
of  = 20, we found five cohesive groups of concepts that we
identified as interests related to travel, business, free time, porn
and web design (see Fig. 2 and Table 2).

However, the Oci semantic network ignores the relevance of
the individual concepts from the user perspective and as such it
gives an inaccurate picture of the community. Concepts related
to sex, for example, get a misleadingly high centrality in the
network due to the specificity and extent of the vocabulary used
to describe sex-related sites. On the other hand, the more evenly
distributed community-based network (Oac) contains concepts
that are actually important to del.icio.us users. These concepts
almost all come from the computer domain, the apparent core
interest of users. The strength of links between the concepts are
also a more accurate representation of reality as they are not
biased by the actual number of items that have been tagged with
them.

Table 2
The five main clusters of interest based on the ConceptInstance network

travel

business

free time

sex
web design

cote, provence, villa, azur, mas, holiday, vacation, tourism,
france, heritage
venture capital, enterprise, up, start, venture, newspaper,
capital, Segev, pitango, vc
procrastination, info, advice, gtd, life, notes, planning, daily,
reading, forums
hot, to, street, pictures, on, photos, free, celeb, adult, lesbian
design, designer, webdesign, premium, logo, logos,
dreamweaver, templates, best, good

Table 3
Broader/narrower term relations in the technology domain, based on subcommunities in del.icio.us

Broader

rss
cmyk
cell
phone
ajax
xml
rdf
flickr
ruby
mac
java
google
search
linux
flash
flickr
javascript

Narrower

atom
rgb
umts, wcdma, ev-do
cell
json
xslt
owl
gmail, picasa
rails
iphoto
j2ee
gds
a9, engine
ubuntu, gnome
actionscript
lickr, photoset
xmlhttprequest, dom, sarissa

The ignorance of the item-based extraction method towards
the number of users also makes it problematic to extract taxonomic relations. Namely, many of the relations we extracted are
based on the word usage of a small number of users, and in the
worst case a single user. The ConceptActor ontology yields
much more easily interpretable results, shown in Table 3. As
discussed before, these are sub-community relations: the community associated with a narrower term is a sub-community of
the community associated with the broader term. Nevertheless,
even here we find an association created by a single story marked
by a large number of users. This suggests an improvement to our
original method, namely filtering out concepts that have only a
limited number of items or persons associated to them. We take
this into account as we move on to generalize our method to
community-based ontology extraction from Web pages.

We conclude by noting the potential application of the results
to improving del.icio.us itself, e.g. by offering search and navigation based on broader/narrower terms. Considering the dynamics
of the community and the extent of neologism, the ontologies
emerging from folksonomies such as del.icio.us also have a large
potential for enriching established, but slowly evolving linguistic
ontologies such as Wordnet (Table 3).

3.2. Community-based ontology extraction from Web pages

Folksonomies such as del.icio.us are effective, because they
attract sizeable sub-communities of users pursuing similar inter-
ests. Nevertheless, the community of del.icio.us is still a niche
compared to the general web population, just as the number of
web sites tagged is only a fraction of the number of pages on the
Web.

We would like to show in the following that even without
explicitly assigned tags, it is possible to extend the idea of
community-based ontology extraction to the Web. Lets suppose that we have a selected a community, whose members will
play the role of Actors in our model, and we have prepared a list

of terms whose associations we are interested in. The instances
of our model are the pages of the Web. Further, we assume that
a web page is tagged by a concept if the concept occurs on the
page.

Based on these assumptions, the ConceptInstance ontology
is straightforward to create: we can use a search engine to obtain
page counts for all pairs of concepts and then normalize by their
separate page counts. This is the basic co-occurrence analysis
method of text mining.

Generating the ActorConcept ontology requires another
broad assumption. We will say that there is an association
between a concept, a person and a web page if the name of the
person and the label of the concept co-occur on the page. This
association represents a weaker commitment than in the case
of folksonomies, because it is not guaranteed that the association is made by the person. Nonetheless, we can now generate
the bipartite graph of persons and concepts by measuring the
association using page counts from the search engine.

First, we measure the association between a person (e.g.
Peter Mika) and a concept (e.g. Semantic Web) by submitting a Boolean query combining the two terms (e.g. Peter
Mika AND Semantic Web). We normalize the result with the
number of pages where the concept occurs. We then repeat this
with the same concept and the names of all other members of
the target community. We calculate the mean strength of association with the concept of Semantic Web. Lastly, we associate
those members of the community with this concept whose association strength is at least one standard deviation higher than the
mean. (Note that this is a slightly more sophisticated method of
filtering than a general threshold.) We can now fold the bipartite
graph of actors and concepts to obtain the Oac ontology.

Our method of community-based ontology extraction have
been implemented as part of the Flink system. The system is
a web-based presentation of the social networks and research
interests of Semantic Web researchers.5 The community of
researchers represented in Flink includes all authors, program
committee members and organizers of all past international
Semantic Web events from 2001, altogether 607 persons. The
system extracts the social network of researchers as described in
[13] and associates them with research topics using the search
engine Google.

Flink can also be used to perform co-occurrence analysis
and generate the Oci ontology. We improve the basic method by
adding the disambiguation term Semantic Web OR ontology to
the queries sent to the search engine, limiting the items returned
to those relating to the Semantic Web.

The resulting ontological structures are not included here due
to limitations of space, but we strongly encourage the reader
to consult them online.6 To make the networks comparable,
we have included only the 100 strongest associations in each
network. Again, we see a significant difference in the set of

concepts remaining in the networks. Namely, from the original
60 terms (selected manually from the proceedings of the ISWC
events), the method of text mining found the strongest associations between more general terms. Specific concepts related to
the Semantic Web seem to float to the periphery and are misplaced in general. For example, the term FOAF is related to XML
and OWL-S, technologies not directly related to FOAF. Annotation is related to alignment and databases. The term ontology
is associated, among others, with HTML, XML and databases,
concepts not directly related to the understanding of ontologies
in the Semantic Web community.

The Oac association network represents a clear improvement in these respects. The method found correct associations
between domain specific concepts. For example, the term FOAF
is linked here to Redland and Sesame, the triple stores preferred by FOAF developers for their scalability. Terms related
to ontology languages (OWL, RDF, OIL, DAML+OIL, ontology languages, etc.) are correctly clustered together, just as the
technologies related to ontology storage (query languages, triple
stores), with terms related to ontology development (OilEd,
OntoEdit, ontology development) connecting the two clusters.
More general technologies are also placed correctly in context,
i.e. corresponding to the way they are used in the Semantic
Web. For example, NLP is tied to the notions of annotation and
ontology learning.

The difference in the node sets can be explained in a similar
way as in the case of del.icio.us: the Oci network ignores the
overall relevance of these concepts to the Semantic Web com-
munity. Considering the associations, we believe that there is
another effect in play. By querying the associations of persons
first and then linking concepts through overlapping commu-
nities, we simulate the effect of first asking the members of
the community to associate themselves with certain research
interests and then relating these interests through overlapping
communities. Overlapping communities turn out to be a stronger
link than overlapping sets of web pages. A possible explanation
is that even after including the disambiguating term in the query,
the search engine still suffers from knowing too much, blurring
away community-specific interpretations.

4. Evaluation

In absence of a golden standard, evaluating the results of
ontology learning or ontology mapping is a difficult task:
inevitably, it requires consulting the community or communities whose conceptualizations are being learned or mapped. In
order to evaluate our results, we have thus approached in email
61 researchers active in the Semantic Web domain, most of
whom are members of the ISWC community and many of them
are in the graph-theoretical core of the community.7 The single question we asked was In terms of the associations between

5 Flink itself uses Semantic Web technology and is the winner of the Semantic
Web Challenge of 2004. See http://flink.semanticweb.org and http://challenge.
semanticweb.org.
6 http://www.cs.vu.nl/pmika/research/iswc2005/.

7 We performed a categorical core/periphery analysis with correlation optimization using UCINET 6 based on the connected part of the Flink social
network data (N = 528), available at http://prauw.cs.vu.nl:8080/flink/graph.
The results show a clear C/P structure with 63 persons in the core and 465
persons on the periphery.

P. Mika / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 515

Table 4
Results for the comparison of the community-based (Oac) and item-based (Oci)
ontology extraction methods

All

ISWC-core

Oac

Oci

Ratio (%)

Significance

the concepts, which ontology of Semantic Web related concepts
do you consider more accurate? Lacking a yardstick, there is
no principled correct answer to this question that we expected
to receive. Instead, we were interested to find out if there is a
majority opinion emerging as an answer and if yes, which of the
two ontologies (produced by the two different methods) would
that majority accept as more accurate.

Many respondents expressed difficulty in answering the question due to the (intentional) lack of further explanations or
instructions, e.g. what the associations mean, but also due to the
very different node sets of the two semantic networks. Nonethe-
less, out of the 33 respondents only three persons were not
willing to express any preference (even if a slight one) for one
network or the other. Twenty-three respondents were members
of the ISWC community and 15 of them belong to the core of
the community.

The distribution of the answers for the various subgroups are
summarized in Table 4. First, taking all responses into account,
we can conclude that the participants consider the Oac network
as a more accurate representation of associations between the
concepts than the Oci network (the result is significant at a level
of p = 0.01). The majority vote becomes even stronger if we
consider only the members of the ISWC community, i.e. the
persons whose name has been used to extract the semantic net-
work. Thus as a second finding we can also conclude that the
Oac network is considered more accurate particularly by those
whose names were used in the extraction process. The results
become even more conclusive if we only consider the votes from
the core members of the community. Based on this finding and
assuming a continuum, we can state that the Oac network better reflects the conceptualizations of those closer to the core of
the community. Combined together, our findings confirm that
the Oac network better reflects the conceptualizations of those
involved in Semantic Web research, and this holds especially for
those most actively involved in Semantic Web research.

5. Discussion: ontologies and folksonomies

This paper has been first published at the Fourth International
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC) held in Galway, Ireland in
November 2005. The appearance of this paper was the starting
sign for an important discussion in the Web community about the
place of folksonomies in the Semantic Web vision. This discussion still carries on today.8 Unfortunately, it is often trivialized

Fig. 3. Various forms of ontologies can be classified according to their expressivity (formality) [5].

Fig. 4. The three-dimensional characterization of Elst and Abecker emphasis the
contradiction between various aspects of knowledge including formality [14].

into a slogan-level debate contrasting Web 2.09 and the Semantic Web. This debate between proponents of folksonomies and
controlled vocabularies (ontologies) gives the impression as if a
single choice would need to be made between competing ways
of bringing semantics to the Web.

We would like to argue here that there is no need to make such
a choice: in fact, folksonomies are ontologies. To understand
why, it is useful to revisit some of the fundamental characterizations of ontologies from the literature. For example, based
on reports from others on various uses of ontologies Smith and
Welty characterize ontologies as a set of representation mechanisms that can be classified according their expressivity as shown
in Fig. 3 [5]. They note that there is a point on this scale (marked
with the black bar) where automated reasoning becomes useful:
this is the point where the ontology at least has a stable hierar-
chy, allowing to reason with subclass relations. Elst and Abecker
propose a three-dimensional classification of the formality, sta-
bility, and sharing scope of knowledge [14], noting that the three
qualities are in a sense contradictory (see Fig. 4). In other words,
it is difficult if not impossible to obtain knowledge that is for-

8 See for example the panel discussion at the 15th World Wide Web Conference
(WWW2006) held in Edinburgh, UK, or the similarly titled panel at the 5th
International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC2006) held in Athens, GA.

9 Web 2.0 is a mix of design ideas, technological innovation in building web
application and an entirely different conceptualization of web sites as community
places. Common to many Web 2.0 websites, however, is the use of folksonomies
as user generated models of the domain.

Fig. 5. The classification of Mika and Akkermans emphasizes the aspects of
formality and distribution (the two scales) and the difficulty of moving along
both dimensions simultaneously [4].

Fig. 6. The classification instantiated with technologies. As expected, the upper
right corner is empty. Source: Carole Goble, University of Manchester.

mal, but also dynamic and widely shared. As shown in Fig. 5,
this classification is simplified into two dimensions in our own
survey of ontology-based Knowledge Management [4], where
ontology-based applications are classified according to their
level of expressivity (the Semantic dimension) and their level
of distribution10 (the Web dimension). We also noted based on
the evidence of existing applications that it seems difficult to go
forward along both dimensions simultaneously: highly formal
knowledge requires commitment that is difficult to achieve in a
large scale, while ontologies that are widely shared (lightweight
web ontologies such as RSS and FOAF) are necessarily shallow due to their sharing scope. Stability, although not a separate
dimension, also clearly plays a role in this: large scale systems
like the Web are very dynamic, while achieving significant ontological commitment (formality) would require stability. This
classification has been widely used since, e.g. populated with
applications and technologies as in Fig. 6. As expected, existing
work is situated in the upper left or lower right corners of the
matrix, while the theoretically problematic upper right corner is
empty.

If we interpret the term ontology to cover the whole spectrum,
it is easy to show that folksonomies simply represent different
positions on the scales than the more formal controlled vocabularies traditionally employed by the Semantic Web community.
Folksonomies are lightweight, in fact so light that many in the
Semantic Web community consider them useless in the sense
that automated reasoning using logical approaches cannot be
applied (i.e. folksonomies are to the left of the bar on the scale
of Fig. 3). However, as we have shown in this work there is more
semantics in folksonomies than meets the eye. The methods to
extract it are not logic based, but borrowed from network analysis and in fact folksonomies may require a shift in the methods
applied by the Semantic Web community.

Folksonomies are also dynamic changing over time with
every tagging action  as opposed to the more stable structures that most semantic applications are built on. Again, many
would argue that this renders folksonomies useless for any pur-

pose other than knowledge discovery. For example, one may not
want to describe the parameters of a web service using a folksonomy because such a web service could not be relied on by
dependent services.11 We note here, however, that in practice
folksonomies are much less volatile than many would expect.
We believe that the majority of terms has a single well-defined
meaning that remains stable over long periods of time. Also,
while the objects tagged may change on a daily basis, the overall focus of the del.icio.us community, for example, changes
much slower. Although investigating the temporal dimension of
folksonomies is subject of future work (the work of Dubinko et
al. in visualizing tags over time is an important step in this direction [15]), we expect that folksonomies have a substantial stable
backbone if we observe them for longer periods of time. Much
like ontologies that stabilize after long, heated debates, these stable parts of folksonomies can in fact be considered as lightweight
ontologies that represent a consensus over the meaning of terms.
In terms of sharing, folksonomies have a very limited scope
compared to ontologies. Due to their dynamics and lightweight
nature, the mapping of folksonomies is a predictably difficult,
if not impossible challenge. Tagging systems at the moment
represent islands of semantics that do not cross the boundaries
of a single website. Even if we could capture, for example, the
relationship between the tag ruby on del.icio.us and the same
tag on Flickr that mapping would need to be just as volatile as
the semantics of the terms themselves.

Lightweight, dynamic and limited in sharing scope, folksonomies are a different kind of ontology than the more formal
and stable controlled vocabularies advocated by the Semantic
Web community for the Web. Their applications are also different and thus they are unlikely to replace or even compete with
logic-based approaches. Folksonomies, however, will have a significant impact on realizing the original vision of the Semantic
Web as an enrichment of the current Web. In particular, it is the
first time that the barriers of providing knowledge have been lowered to such an extent that ordinary users are willing to provide
metadata on web resources on a large scale.

10 Not in a physical sense, but in terms of the authority/control over the knowl-
edge.

11 Another Web 2.0 trend, the opening up of service APIs and the appearance
of mash-ups in fact point to the timeliness of Semantic Web technology for the
Web.

P. Mika / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 515

Although the semantics is much more implicit, the collective actions of a large number of individuals can still lead to
the emergence of semantics. Furthermore, the metadata in tagging systems comes with an important new attribute, namely
the identity of the individuals who have associated a certain tag
with a certain object. This social dimension of ontologies and
its effects on semantics has been the subject of our paper.

6. Conclusions and future work

The Semantic Web is a web for machines, but the process of
creating and maintaining it is a social one. Although machines
are helpful in manipulating symbols according to pre-defined
rules, only the users of the Semantic Web have the necessary
interpretive and associative capability for creating and maintaining ontologies. Ontology creation necessitates a social presence
as it requires an actor to reliably predict how other members
of the community would interpret the symbols of an ontology
based on their limited description. With incorporating the notion
of semantics into the web architecture, we have thus made the
users of the system a critical part of the design.

We have argued elsewhere for a three layered view of the
Semantic Web, namely the layer of communities and their rela-
tions, the layer of semantics (ontologies and their relations)
and the layer of content items and their relations (the hypertext Web) [16]. In this paper we have formalized this view as
a tripartite model of ontologies with three different classes of
nodes (actors, concepts, and instances) and hyperedges representing the commitment of a user in terms of classifying an
instance as belonging to a certain concept. We have shown
the usefulness of this model by generating two kinds of association networks: the well-known co-occurrence network of
ontology learning and a novel semantic network based on community relationships. Among the future work is the study of
the two emerging social networks, based on object and concept
overlaps.

The general advantage of the incorporation of the social context into the representation of ontologies is the possibility of
studying emergence from user actions. Emergent semantics is
likely to best complement well-established, but slowly evolving ontologies such as WordNet [7], which lack the associative
component.12 We have also compared the two networks based
on object and person overlap and noted the advantage of the
second network: the possibility to extract semantics pertinent to
a sub-community of the user network. In some sense, this is the
opposite of mining general knowledge from search engines as in
the work of Cimiano et al. or Etzioni et al. [17,18]. In comparison
to these systems, our community-based ontology extraction has
a great potential in extracting ontologies that more closely match

12 For example, according to WordNet the distance of the terms Noah and ark
is quite large: their closest common ancestor in the hypernym tree is object,
physical object. Yet, the Edinburgh masters students overwhelmingly associate
the term Noah with ark and vice versa. The association is so strong in fact (78
and 79% of all terms mentioned in response, respectively) that it is safe to say
that in the mind of the students these terms are solely defined by each other, in
the context of the biblical story of Noahs ark.

the conceptualization of a particular community. For example,
when trying to find associations between concepts used by the
Web Services community, it is natural to consider only the associations created (explicitly or implicitly) by those involved in
developing Web Services. As we have shown, using this method
the resulting ontology is more likely to be accepted as accurate
by the community itself.

It seems that ontologies are us: inseparable from the context of the community in which they are created and used. A
greater acknowledgement of this state  by incorporating the
link between actors and concepts into the model of ontologies
 have only benefits to bring in terms of more meaningful and
easily maintainable conceptual structures. While we are only at
the beginning of realizing these benefits, there is a clear magic
as we see semantics emerge from the individual actions of a
community at work.
