Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 195203

Patterns of semantic relations to improve image content search

Laura Hollink a,

, Guus Schreiber a, Bob Wielinga b

a Section Business Informatics, Free University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
b Human Computer Studies Laboratory, University of Amsterdam, Kruislaan 419, 1098 VA Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Received 24 January 2007; accepted 21 May 2007

Available online 24 May 2007

Abstract

This paper reports on a study to explore how semantic relations can be used to expand a query for objects in an image. The study is part of a project
with the overall objective to provide semantic annotation and search facilities for a virtual collection of art resources. In this study we used semantic
relations from WordNet for 15 image content queries. The results show that, next to the hyponym/hypernym relation, the meronym/holonym
(part-of) relation is particularly useful in query expansion. We identified a number of relation patterns that improve recall without jeopardising
precision.
 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Semantic annotation; WordNet; Query expansion; Image retrieval

1. Introduction

The advance of the semantic web enables more and more
sophisticated information retrieval. Using ontologies or thesauri,
we can now match documents to queries based on semantic
similarity, even if there is no textual match between the query
and the annotation. Tools have emerged that demonstrate this
type of semantic annotation and search. The E-Culture demon-
strator, the winner of the Semantic Web Challenge [21], uses
several existing vocabularies, such as WordNet [9] and the Art
and Architecture Thesaurus (AAT),1 for annotation and search
of a heterogeneous collection of visual resources. Hence, a query
for flower will not only return documents about flowers, but
also documents annotated with roses since there is a subclass
relation between rose and flower. A search for cubist paintings
will return paintings annotated with Picasso as the creator, since
there are links between creators and styles. A query for Venus
will return paintings depicting Aphrodite, if the ontology in the
background contains an equivalence relation between the two.
All these examples use semantic relations between concepts to
improve search results.


Corresponding author. Tel.: +31 20 5987740; fax: +31 20 5987728.
E-mail addresses: hollink@cs.vu.nl (L. Hollink), schreiber@cs.vu.nl

(A.Th. Schreiber), wielinga@science.uva.nl (B. Wielinga).

1 http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting research/vocabularies/aat/.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2007.05.002

While the technology to find such semantically related documents is available, the problem remains that not all related
documents are relevant documents. This becomes apparent from
the following examples: a query for pictures of a car will not be
satisfied by images of the brakes, even though the brakes are
part of the car; a query for finish will not be satisfied with documents annotated with start, even though the two are directly
related (with an antonym relation from WordNet). This problem
becomes bigger when large ontologies or groups of interlinked
ontologies are used, which is a realistic and desirable scenario
on the semantic web. With large ontologies like WordNet or the
AAT, that contain over 15 types of relations, simply returning all
documents that are in some way related to the query is no longer
an option. Therefore, we recognise a need to investigate which
types of semantic relations between a query and a document are
likely to improve search results. Moreover, there is a need to
study the effect of combinations of relations.

In this paper we address this question in an empirical man-
ner. We focus on semantic relations in WordNet, since this
well-known and widely used resource provides a wide variety of relations. We use these relations to find documents
that would not be found by just the initial query. A query
for Eating, for example, could result in paintings annotated
with banquet, since in WordNet wn:banquet (or feast)
is wn:derivationally related to wn:feasting,
which is a wn:hyponym of wn:eating. Intuitively, the more
relations we use to expand the query, the higher recall will be.

L. Hollink et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 195203

On the other hand, if too many relations are used, precision will
be low. The aim of the present work is to identify which relations give the best balance between recall and precision. We will
look into the effect of combinations of relations and the optimal
number of nodes between a query concept and an annotation
concept.

In an experimental setting, we query a collection of annotated paintings using not only our initial query concepts, but
also closely related concepts. In order to discover which relations lead to the best search results, we pose the queries using
different types of relations and examine the results. The collection of paintings is a subset of the Artchive collection [12],
annotated with the E-Culture web demonstrator. The annotations describe objects that are depicted in the paintings, such as
man, rose or castle. All annotations correspond to concepts
from WordNet.

In Section 2 we provide background information about the E-
Culture project and its annotation demonstrator, and give a brief
overview of WordNet terminology. Section 3 contains related
work on query expansion and semantic annotation. Section 4
contains the design of the experiment and Section 5 the experimental results. We conclude in Section 6, where we reflect on
our results and discuss possible generalisations of the findings
to other ontologies and collections.

2. Background

2.1. The E-Culture project

The main objective of the E-Culture project is to employ
novel semantic web and presentation techniques to provide better indexing and search mechanisms for the knowledge-rich
domain of cultural heritage [21]. All annotations used in the
present study were created with the web demonstrator of the
E-Culture project. In this section we will elaborate on the annotation features of the E-Culture demonstrator: the vocabularies
and the metadata schema.

At the time of writing, the demonstrator uses four vocabularies for annotation and search: the AAT, the Union List of
Artist Names (ULAN),2 the Thesaurus of Geographical Names
(TGN)3 and WordNet 2.0. All were translated from their native
format into RDF/OWL.

The metadata schema of the demonstrator is based on Dublin
Core [8]. For content annotations, however, Dublin Core is insufficient since it provides only two elements to describe the content
of an image. Therefore, we specialised the Dublin Core element
dc:subject with subproperties to provide more structure in
the content descriptions. In the present study we use one of these
subproperties, namely ec:object. This property describes
annotations of objects depicted in the image, such as face,
potato, church, but also Seine, Mme Matisse or Van
Gogh. All annotations used in this study were made using
concepts from WordNet.

2.2. WordNet

WordNet is a lexical database of the English language. It
contains 155,327 English words, namely nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs. Many of these words are polysemous, which
means that one word has multiple meanings or senses. The
word tree, for example, has three word-senses: tree#1 (woody
plant), tree#2 (figure) and tree#3 (English actor). WordNet distinguishes 207,016 word-senses.

Word-senses are grouped into synonym sets (synsets) based
on their meaning and use in natural language. Each synset represents one distinct concept. An example of a synset is {cliff#1,
drop#4, drop-off#2}, described as a steep high face of rock.
Semantic relations and lexical relations exist between wordsenses and between synsets. For the purpose of this paper we
will not go into details of all these relations, but rather explain
the most common ones. The main hierarchy in WordNet is built
on hypernym/hyponym relations between synsets, which are
similar to superclass/subclass relations. Other frequent relations
are meronym and holonym relations, which denote part-of and
whole-of relations, respectively.

WordNet is freely available from the Princeton website.4
In addition, W3C has released a RDF/OWL representation of
WordNet.5 For easy integration with our annotation interface,
and for easy querying with semantic web tools such as SeRQL in
Sesame, we use this RDF/OWL version. We treat the RDF/OWL
version of WordNet as if it were an ontology, exploiting its size,
widespread use and large number of relationships.

3. Related work

Query expansion is a term from the Information Retrieval
community, where it is used as a term for adding related words
to a query in order to increase the number of returned documents and with that increase recall. The use of WordNet for
expansion of natural language queries for text retrieval has been
studied extensively (e.g. [26]). A prerequisite for this type of
query expansion is that the correct WordNet word-sense has to be
assigned to words in the query. This process is called word-sense
disambiguation (WSD).

Voorhees [25] demonstrated that the success of query expansion depends on the length of queries and on the selection of the
right synsets. She manually and automatically selected query
synsets and expanded these with directly related synsets. In
her study she showed that when query synsets were manually
selected, recall improved for short queries, but not for longer
queries. When query synsets were automatically selected, query
expansion did not improve the results at all. Gonzalo et al. [10]
measured the sensitivity of retrieval performance to disambiguation errors. They manually indexed both queries and documents
with WordNet synsets, deliberately introducing errors. They
found that indexing with synsets improved search substantially
if the word-sense disambiguation error was less than 10%. A dis-

2 http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting research/vocabularies/ulan/.
3 http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting research/vocabularies/tgn/.

4 http://wordnet.princeton.edu/man/wnstats.7WNon 13 December 2005.
5 http://www.w3.org/TR/wordnet-rdf/.

ambiguation error of more than 30% produced no improvement
over using just the original terms in the queries and documents.
Moldovan and Mihalcea [18] developed a method for WSD
with 87% accuracy for nouns, which is within the 30% error
margin. They expanded short queries with words that belong
to the same WordNet synset. Expansion led to an increase in
precision for queries provided by the sixth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC), but there was no increase for queries posed
by users of internet search engines. Smeaton and Quigley [24]
used expansion techniques on image captions. They manually disambiguated words from both queries and captions, and
added WordNet synonyms to each word. Retrieval based on
these expanded queries and documents gave better results than
retrieval based on just the original words.

Although most expansion techniques rely on WordNet syn-
onyms, also hyponyms, hypernyms and words in the glosses
have been used. Liu et al. [17], for example, expanded queries
with synonyms, hyponyms and glosses and found that this
improved results over non-expanded queries. They do not report
on the accuracy of their WSD method. Buscaldi et al. [5]
expanded geographical terms in queries of GeoCLEF6 with
WordNet synonyms and meronyms. Only meronyms that contained the word capital in the gloss were used. Although their
GeoCLEF results were not promising, they pointed out that this
type of meronym expansion is most helpful when the geographical names represent political entities.

Few studies compare the effect of different types of relations.
Navigli and Velardi [19] compared retrieval results of original
queries to results of synset queries and to results of three types
of expanded queries: (1) expansion with hyponyms, (2) expansion with synsets of disambiguated gloss words and (3) with
plain words from the glosses. They posed 24 queries provided
by TREC 2001 to Google. Expansion with plain words from
the glosses gave the best results (23% increase over original
queries), while the other methods only showed an increase of
13% over original queries. They do not report on the accuracy
of their WSD method and the effect of this on the results. Sim
[22] retrieved URLs, were a URL containing the exact query
word is considered most relevant, followed by a URL with a
synonym, a hyponym and finally a hypernym. They found that
the optimal weight for each query expansion type is 1.0, 0.8, 0.6
and 0.4 for exact words, synonyms, hyponyms and hypernyms,
respectively. None of these papers, however, report on the effect
of combinations of WordNet relations on the results of expanded
queries.

The consensus seems to be that WordNet relations improve
search only if the correct synsets are used in queries and docu-
ments. With the semantic web, a number of retrieval systems
have emerged that make this condition a realistic one; they
facilitate annotation and search with WordNet synsets or with
concepts from other ontologies. Since WSD does not affect
retrieval results of these systems, they enable us to take a more
detailed look at the effect of different types of relations on
retrieval results. Moreover, the semantic web makes it neces-

sary to look into these effects since the number of relations in
the semantic web is too large to simply return all related docu-
ments. We should note that the WSD problem is not solved by
semantic annotation and search systems. Rather, it is circumvented by asking a user to express his or her information needs
in terms of ontological concepts instead of in natural language.
The E-Culture web demonstrator that was discussed in Section 2.1 is an example of a semantic annotation and search
application. Another well-known example is MuseumFinland
[15]. This web-based system integrates collections of several
Finish museums by translating the existing annotations to concepts from a number of ontologies. The collections can be
searched in a multi-faceted browsing interface or with keywords.
Alternatively, users are able to search the collection using a
multi-facetted thesaurus browser [14]. Sinclair et al. [23] have
been working on a portal from which collections of cultural heritage institutions can be searched and annotated with concepts
from ontologies. The CIDOC CRM [7] is used as a common
framework to integrate the different metadata schemas used by
the institutions. Bloehdorn et al. [3] annotate images with a
domain ontology, which is linked to a core ontology (DOLCE)
and a visual ontology (Mpeg-7). Other examples of semantic
annotation and search tools are the Semantic Markup Tool of
Kettler et al. [16] and the annotation tool for NASA images of
Halaschek-Wiener et al. [11].

Many systems use hyponym, subclass or narrower term (NT)
relations to expand queries. Although some systems use more
than one type of relation  in MuseumFinland meronyms are
used as well as hyponyms  none of them report on the added
value of different types of relations for search results, nor on the
effect of combinations of relations.

4. Experimental setup

In order to find out which (combinations of) relations lead
to improvements in search results, we queried a collection of
Artchive paintings annotated with WordNet synsets. A total of
202 paintings by 25 painters were annotated by 12 members
of the E-Culture project. The annotators were given a set of
guidelines to ensure a uniform view on content annotation.7
The annotators were moderately familiar with the vocabulary
(WordNet) and were not aware of the research questions to be
answered in the present experiment. The resulting annotations
and the RDF/OWL version of WordNet were stored in a Sesame
repository and queried with SeRQL [4].

Fifteen query concepts were chosen by looking at objects
depicted in paintings in the Artchive collection that were not
annotated nor used in the experiment. The query concepts were
chosen to be on Roschs basic level [20]. Concepts at the basic
level maximise the number of attributes shared by instances
of that concept and minimise the number of attributes shared
with other concepts. Apple is a good example of a basic level
concept; all apples share a large set of features and are easily
distinguishable from other concepts such as bananas. The super-

6 http://ir.shef.ac.uk/geoclef/.

7 http://www.cs.vu.nl/laurah/ECultureGuidelines.pdf.

L. Hollink et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 195203

Table 1
Precision and recall of queries over query types

Query

Total relevant

Retrieved

Correct hits

Precision

Recall

Mountain
Window
Cloud
Hand
Male child
Guitar
Horse
Chair
Woman
Apple
Bottle
House
River
Tree
Trunk

Ext

Hyp

All

Ext

Hyp

All

Mean

Ext

Hyp

All

Ext

Hyp

All

class Fruit is more general than the basic level as its instances
show large variations. Granny Smith is more specific than
the basic level as these apples share many features with other
types of apples. It was shown that humans prefer the basic level
when verifying if on object belongs to a category, when naming
objects and when learning a language [1]. From these findings
we hypothesise that the basic level is a natural level for people
to query on and therefore a realistic criterion for our set of query
concepts.

One query concept, namely Tree, is more general then the
basic level. In flora and fauna, the basic level is usually on
the level of genus, which for trees would have been oak
or chestnut. The annotators, however, were not able to distinguish a chestnut from an oak, especially in paintings. This
justifies the use of the more general query concept Tree. The
15 query concepts are listed in Table 1. None of the queries
were directly related to each other, although some were related
through one or more intermediate nodes. Window and House are
both related to wn:building; Hand, Male child and Woman
are all related to wn:person. Each query was posed in three
ways:
 Exact-queries: only paintings that are annotated with the
 Hyponym-queries: paintings that are annotated with the query
concept and paintings annotated with a concept that is related
to the query concept through hyponym relations are returned.
Up to four intermediate nodes are allowed.
 All-relations-queries: paintings that are annotated with the
query concept and paintings that are annotated with a concept
that is in any way related to the query concept are returned.
Up to four intermediate nodes are allowed.

query concept are returned.

Recall and precision of each query was measured by comparing the results to a golden standard of matching paintings for
that query concept. To come to a golden standard, all paintings

were judged by two raters. Cohens Kappa () was used to measure correspondence between raters. The mean  of all query
concepts was 0.68, which is acceptable [6].

5. Results

Table 1 shows the number of relevant paintings in the
collection (total relevant), the number of retrieved paintings
(retrieved), the number of correctly retrieved paintings (correct
hits), recall and precision of each query in each condition: exactqueries (Ext), hyponym-queries (Hyp) and all-relations-queries
(All). Recall appears to be low for all query types. This is due
to the fact that the raters were advised to make the golden standard strict; when a query concept was visible in an image, no
matter how small or insignificant, the image was counted as a
hit. The annotators, on the other hand, only annotated objects
that were clearly visible or important in the image. This frequently led to situations in which raters considered a painting
relevant because it depicted an object matching a query con-
cept, but annotators did not annotate the object because it was
not important. A painting depicting, for example, an apple and a
bottle, could be annotated with just apple, but counted as a correct hit for both apple and bottle. This had a negative effect on
recall. Similarly, it might have had a positive effect on precision.
Therefore, the recall and precision values of each query type can
only be understood in relation to the recall and precision of the
other query types.

One of the 15 query concepts, Trunk, was left out of the anal-
ysis. It produced no results on exact-queries or hyponym-queries
and incorporating it would corrupt the statistical analysis. It was
therefore also not used to determine the mean values in Table 1.
Nonetheless, Trunk provides a good illustration of the added
value of other types of relations than just hyponyms. The fact
that Trunk is a meronym of tree made it possible to return
all paintings annotated with tree for the query concept Trunk,
which lead to high recall (0.37) and precision (0.56).

The three conditions were compared amongst each other with
one-way repeated measures analyses of variance (ANOVAs).
There was a significant effect of query type on recall (F (2, 26) =
46.99, p < 0.01). Also, there was a significant effect of query
type on precision (F (2, 26) = 63.8, p < 0.01). Paired t-tests
showed no significant difference between precision of exactqueries and hyponym-queries. There was a significant difference
between precision of exact-queries and all-relations-queries
(p < 0.01) and between hyponym-queries and all-relations-
queries (p < 0.01). Paired t-tests showed that recall differed
between all query types: between exact-queries and all-
relations-queries (p < 0.01), between hyponym-queries and
all-relations-queries (p < 0.01) and between exact-queries and
hyponym-queries (p = 0.017).8

The results showed that expansion with hyponyms of the
query concept increases recall, while maintaining the high precision of exact-queries. The use of other types of relations
further increases recall but lowers precision, as was expected.
Table 1 shows that for some of the queries in particular, such
as Male child and Horse, precision drops dramatically for all-
relations-queries. Closer examination of the results reveals that
through a variety of relations, via the intermediate nodes person or body part, both Male child and Horse are connected
to a large number of people-related concepts: woman, nude,
worker, human head, torso, etc. These examples confirm the
need for a more selective use of relations.

The mean increase in recall of all-relations-queries over
hyponym-queries was 0.30 (0.550.25). This increase could in
part be attributed to the higher number of retrieved images. How-
ever, the increase in recall was more than we would expect from
the additionally retrieved images only. Suppose that the additional number of retrieved images were randomly taken from
the collection, then we would expect an increase in recall of
0.16 according to the following equation9:

Rincr. = 1

i=1

(Ret Alli  Ret Hypi)(Reli  Hit Hypi)

202  Ret Hypi

Reli

where Rincr. is the mean expected increase in recall, Ret Alli the
number of retrieved images by an all-relations-query for query
i, Ret Hypi the number of retrieved images by a hypernymquery for query i, Reli the number of relevant images in the
collection for query i, Hit Hypi the number of hits of a hyponymquery for query i and 202 is the total number of paintings in the
collection. Comparing the increase in recall in our experiment
to the expected increase in recall based on additionally retrieved
images only, we found the experimental values to be significantly
higher (p < 0.01).

8 In the case of three t-tests with d.f.=13 and  = 0.05, Bonferoni adjustment
calls for a significance level p of at most 0.017. None of our p-values exceeded
this level.
9 This equation is derived from the equation Ex = nm/r. This problem is
also known as the urn problem, since it asks for the expected number of white
balls (Ex) out of n balls that are drawn from an urn, containing m white balls
and r  m red balls.

Examining the results of the hyponym- and all-relations-
queries, we found that patterns containing four intermediate
nodes between query and annotation (which was the maximum
in our experiment) were not beneficial to the results: those
patterns led to 231 incorrectly retrieved images and only 25 hits.
For example, Monets The Thames below Westminster was
incorrectly returned for the query concept Mountain, since it was
annotated with Thames, which is a meronym of - England - holonym of - Pennines - hyponym of
- hills - hyponym of - natural elevation -
hypernym of - mountain.

All-relations-queries correctly retrieved 143 paintings that
were not found with hyponym queries. The additional hits were
caused by 21 distinct patterns of relations (excluding patterns
with more than four intermediate nodes). Transitivity of hyper-
nym, hyponym, meronym and holonym relations was assumed
to come to the 23 patterns, so hypernymOf - hyponymOf and hypernymOf - hypernymOf - hyponymOf
were counted as the same pattern. We interpreted the WordNet relations memberHolonym, substanceHolonym and
partHolonym as one type: Holonym. The same was done
for different
types of Meronym relations. Over 90% of
the Meronyms and Holonyms were partMeronyms and
partHolonyms.

The five patterns that led to the most additional hits are
depicted in Fig. 1. Pattern 1 returned annotations that are more
general than the query concept, such as a still life annotated
with Fruit for a query for Apple. The second pattern is called
siblings. It linked, for example, a query for Mountain to a
painting annotated with Hill, since both are children of natural elevation. Pattern 3 uses part-of relations. It retrieved
paintings of Buildings for a query for Window. Pattern 4 combines two types of relations: hyponym and holonym. An
example of a painting that was retrieved by this pattern is
Wheat Field by Van Gogh. It contains a house which is
a hyponym of - building - holonym of our query
concept Window. Pattern 5 was caused solely by the query concept Hand since WordNet contains the following facts: person
- holonym of - body - meronym of - human -
holomym of - hand. This caused all paintings of people to

Fig. 1. Patterns of relations that contributed most to recall and the number of
correct hits they produced. Note that the black diamond symbol is used to denote
both holonym and meronym relations.

L. Hollink et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 195203

Fig. 2. Patterns of relations that caused low precision and the number of incorrectly retrieved paintings.

be returned for the query Hand. As this structure is present for
all body parts, we do not consider this an outlier.

All five successful patterns involve solely hypernym,
hyponym, holonym and meronym relations. Other types of
relations occurring in various patterns led to few hits while
resulting in a considerable number of incorrectly retrieved
images. Examples are patterns involving antonym (5 incorrect,
no hits), inSynset (7 incorrect, no hits), classifiedByRegion (60 incorrect, 1 hit) and classifiedByTopic
(17 incorrect, 3 hits).10 Note that the relations inSynset and
containsWordSense are not between two synsets, but
between words and synsets or words and word-senses,
respectively. Relations involving words or word-senses
occurred because we did not require intermediate nodes to
be synsets. However, these relations were rare and did not
lead to any hits. ClassifiedByTopic was useful only
for the query concept River, since it links wn:river to
wn:body of water.

Fig. 2 shows the five patterns that lead to the highest number
of incorrectly retrieved images. Pattern 5, for example, incorrectly returned The Empire of Lights by Magritte for the
query concept River, because the painting contains a house and
WordNet has the following statements: house - hypernym of - maisonette - classified by region
- France - holonym of - Loire - hyponym of
- river.

Comparison of Figs. 1 and 2 shows that

the pattern
hyponymhypernym, also called siblings, returns many
hits, but even more incorrect images. Siblings are therefore not
advantageous for retrieval. Not only siblings, but all other combinations of hypernym with another property (e.g. meronym
or holonym) appear disadvantageous. Patterns that combined
hypernym with another property led to 154 incorrect images
and only 28 hits. Hypernym alone did give good results. Pat-

10 We use the WordNet property names as published in van Assem [2]. Explanation of the WordNet terminology can also be found in the WordNet manual
on http://wordnet.princeton.edu/man/wngloss.7WN.

Fig. 3. Proposed query for expansion. Q is the query concept and A represents
the annotation concept. Optional intermediate nodes are dashed.

tern 1 in Fig. 1 summarises hypernym relations with zero or
one intermediate node. Longer chains of hypernym relations
did not occur in our experiment.

Concluding, it appears that for optimal retrieval results the
relation between query concept and annotation concept should
be a hypernym relation with up to one intermediate node, or
any combination of hyponym, meronym and holonym with
up to three intermediate nodes. We propose the pattern in Fig. 3
to expand queries with.

We expanded the 15 query concepts with the proposed pat-
tern. Table 2 shows that the proposed query results in a recall of
42% and precision of 64%. The performed t-tests showed a sig-

Table 2
Precision and recall of the proposed query

Query

Total relevant

Retrieved

Correct hits

Precision

Recall

Mountain
Window
Cloud
Hand
Male child
Guitar
Horse
Chair
Woman
Apple
Bottle
House
River
Tree
Trunk

Mean

Table 3
Precision, recall and F1-measure of the four query types

Query type

Exact
Hyponym
All-relations
Proposed

Precision

Recall

F1

nificant difference between hyponym queries (Table 1) and the
proposed query for precision (p < 0.01) and recall (p < 0.01).
This shows that query expansion with the right types of relations can improve recall with almost 70% over expansion with
only hyponym relations (from 0.25 to 0.42), while preserving
an acceptable level of precision.

Although precision and recall are good measures of retrieval
performance, their often opposing values make it hard to interpret the value of a retrieval strategy as a whole. As we have seen
in the present experiment, when precision goes up, recall goes
down, and vice versa. An indication of the overall performance
of a retrieval strategy is the F1-measure, which is the harmonic
mean of precision and recall, as in the following equation:

F1 = 2  precision  recall
precision + recall

The mean F1-scores of exact-queries, hyponym-queries, allrelations queries and the proposed queries were 0.33, 0.36, 0.33
and 0.46, respectively (Table 3). Although a significant increase
in F1 of the proposed query over hyponym-queries could not be
proven (t = 1.95, d.f. = 13, p = 0.07), the numbers indicate
that the proposed query performs better than the other expansion
strategies.

6. Discussion

Although the pattern was obtained in an empirical manner, the
characteristics of the pattern can be explained also from a conceptual point of view. The proposed number of nodes between a
query and an annotation is markedly shorter when going up in the
hypernym/hyponym hierarchy than when going down. The proposed query pattern in Fig. 3 recommends a direct link between
a query and an annotation when going up, while there can be
up to three intermediate nodes when going down. Although the
exact length of the pattern depends on the specific vocabulary
 in our case WordNet  a general rule seems to be that one
should be more conservative with expansion by going up in the
hierarchy than by going down towards more specific concepts.
The depth of the hypernym/hyponym hierarchy varies greatly
in WordNet. Most parts of the hierarchy are relatively shallow,
but some parts, such as the hierarchies of flora and fauna, are
more than 14 levels deep. In our experiment, we tested chains
of relations between query concept and annotation concept of
up to four intermediate nodes. We found that four intermediate nodes performed worse than up to three intermediate nodes.
However, we suspect that in some cases a deeper approach of
up to seven or eight intermediate nodes will make a positive
difference on retrieval of concepts in deep hierarchies such as

plants and animals. In our study, a query for Plant, for example,
could not be related to Apple Tree because they are related with
more then four intermediate nodes. An alternative strategy that
needs additional testing is to allow hyponym relations to have
an arbitrary depth. Some databases interpret hyponym relations
as a transitive property and pre-compute the complete transitive
closure. In those cases, the length of the pattern of hyponym
relations will not cause the query to be computationally expen-
sive. The Mia demonstrator described in [13] applies this
strategy.

For part-of relations we observe a different pattern. Going
up and going down in the hierarchy is equally beneficial. For
retrieval of visual resources, a possible explanation is that in
many cases part-of relations show an inheritance of visibility that goes both up and down the hierarchy: if the whole
is visible, the parts can be visible as well; if a part is visible,
the whole can be visible as well. This holds for many exam-
ples, such as handfinger, houseroof or flocksheep, but not for
internal parts like organs nor for portraits in which the head is
visible but not the body. In brief, our experiments clearly illustrate the importance of part-of relations for retrieval of visual
resources, but the underlying mechanisms are not yet revealed.
Future research is necessary to deepen our understanding of
when to use part-of relations, and to verify if part-of relations
are equally important for text retrieval as they are for image
retrieval.

In the present experiment, the gain in recall caused by expansion was more promising than what was found by the text
retrieval community (see Section 3). This might be due to the fact
that in our application both queries and annotations were short,
often consisting of only a few concepts. Voorhees [25] found that
the effect of expansion is higher for short queries than for long
queries. The same might hold for the length of annotations. This
suggests that query expansion is especially fruitful for image
retrieval, that typically involves short documents (annotations)
and short queries.

The results of the experiment are not specific to the E-Culture
demonstrator, since the experiment did not rely on this system,
other than for collecting the annotations. Also, we expect that
the results can be generalised to other visual domains than the
painting domain. The annotations consisted mostly of everyday concepts that occur in numerous other domains, such as
news, collections of photographs, movies, etc. We recognise
that the specific structure of WordNet, such as the depth of
the hierarchy and the frequency of certain types of relations,
has influenced the pattern of semantic relations that was the
outcome of this study. However, the types of relations that
proved most important in this study  hyponym/hypernym and
meronym/holonym  occur frequently in a variety of other
vocabularies, sometimes explicitly, such as in the Gene Ontol-
ogy, and often implicitly as Broader/Narrower Term relation
such as in the AAT or MeSH.11 This is an indication that
the same pattern might be beneficial for expansion with other
vocabularies.

11 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/.

L. Hollink et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 195203

7. Conclusion

We examined the use of various WordNet relations and concluded on patterns of relations that proved most beneficial for
query expansion.

Expanding queries with hyponyms is intuitive and frequently
used by search tools. The present study showed that it indeed
improves recall while maintaining precision. The results also
show that recall of retrieval results can be further improved
if other types of relations are used as well. Expansion with
a combination of hyponym, holonym and meronym relations
improves recall while maintaining an acceptable level of pre-
cision. Likewise, expansion with hypernym relations improves
search results. However, a combination of hypernyms with other
types of relations (e.g. hyponyms or holonyms) is more detrimental to precision than it is beneficial to recall. Expansion with
other types of WordNet relations, such as inSynset and classi-
fiedByRegion, appeared to harm the results. We can conclude
that semantic annotation and search systems can improve their
recall values by expanding query results with not only hyponym
relations, but also with part-of relations and hypernym relations.
The results of the present study can also be used to improve
ranking of result sets. Images linked to a query concept through a
pattern that produces high precision would then appear higher in
the result list than images linked through a pattern that causes low
precision. Images linked through, for example, the all-relations-
query would end up at the bottom of the list. For queries that
yield very little results, expansion with patterns that cause low
precision might still be advantageous.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Alia Amin, Mark van Assem, Michiel
Hildebrand, Zhicheng Huang, Janneke van Kersen, Borys Ome-
layenko, Jacco van Ossenbruggen, Novan Pavlovich, Ronny
Siebes and Jan Wielemaker from the E-Culture team for creating the annotations. Special thanks go to Jan Wielemaker,
Ronny Siebes, Jacco van Ossenbruggen, Victor de Boer, Mark
van Assem and Alia Amin for their valuable contributions to
the demonstrators, the vocabularies and the experiment. Thanks
to Alistair Vardy for rating the images to produce the golden
standard.
