Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 175179

Web Authoring for Accessibility (WAfA)


Simon Harper

, Yeliz Yesilada

University of Manchester, School of Computer Science, Manchester, UK

Received 22 February 2007; accepted 21 May 2007

Available online 24 May 2007

Abstract

Conventional thought from the Semantic Web community equates the use of ontologies with the representation of the meaning of content. Here,
we skew this viewpoint by describing our ontology, Web Authoring for Accessibility (WAfA), which investigates the way ontologies can describe
the semantic structure of documents. By understanding the way heterogeneous XHTML (Extensible Hypertext Mark-up Language) documents
are structured we can better transform documents, currently inaccessible to visually impaired users. WAfA performs two tasks: (1) it allows us to
flexibly model an XHTML document within the context of navigation and orientation through the Web resource; (2) it enables non-expert users
to quickly annotate a Web document by providing a lingua franca between author and Web Accessibility Domain Experts. Here we describe our
ontology, its use, novelty, and importance.
 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Web accessibility; Ontologies; XHTML; Semantics of document structures

1. Introduction

Access to, and movement around, complex hypermedia envi-
ronments, of which the Web is the most popular example, has
long been considered an important and major issue in the Web
design and usability field. Navigation and orientation in such
an environment requires a knowledge and an understanding of
the visual objects encountered along with their properties and
purpose. This understanding is not problematic when the user
is sighted because any visual cues, or metaphors, presented to a
user dovetail into their tacit understanding of the visual world.
However, semantic annotation of Web document structure can
provide a mechanism to enhance visually impaired peoples
access to information on the Web through an encoding of the
meaning of that information [1]. Annotations can then be consumed by tools that restructure or reorganise documents in order
to pull out salient information (for example, via some triage process [2]). The visual design of a Web page provides knowledge
used by Web surfers to move around. Implicit to sighted users,
this knowledge must be made explicit to visually impaired users.

Our system, DANTE,1 uses a conjugation of semantic technologies for doing just this. WAfA is key to realising DANTE as
it aims to capture knowledge about that Web document in a
manner that enables computational support for humans and technologies that cannot see the visual design. Here we investigate
WAfA, an OWL DL ontology, of interest to Web page authors,
designers, and visually impaired users, which describes: struc-
ture, structural abstraction, meta-knowledge, spatial knowledge
and functionality. It was developed after consultation with the
Web accessibility community including practitioners and users,
but not as part of a specific community development. Designed
with more than Web accessibility in mind it has been used by
other groups2 focusing on software engineering practice and
content management.

2. Novelty and importance

Our main aim is to improve the mobility of visually impaired
users around the Web and this was the reason for creating the
WAfA ontology. Although the existing work to promote Web
accessibility is good [3], it lacks an understanding of how visu-


Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 161 275 0599; fax: +44 161 275 6204.
E-mail addresses: simon.harper@manchester.ac.uk (S. Harper),

1 http://dante.cs.manchester.ac.uk.
2 At the Medical University of Innsbruck, Austria and the Free University of

yeliz.yesilada@manchester.ac.uk (Y. Yesilada).

Brussels (Vrije Universiteit Brussel) in Belgium.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2007.05.001

S. Harper, Y. Yesilada / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 175179

ally impaired people move around Web pages; what kinds of
objects they need or use, and what kind of spatial environment
is easier for them to journey through. Our previous work aimed to
provide just such an understanding and knowledge [1]. Here, we
draw parallels between travelling and movement in the physical
and virtual environment [4]. Travellers use or may need to use
environmental features or elements in order to make a successful journey. We call these features and elements travel objects.
For instance, they use landmarks and memory objects to reassure themselves that they are safe to proceed and going the right
way. If we look at the Web landscape from the travel perspective these objects also exist on the Web pages. For example the
logo found on many Websites can be considered as a unique and
memorable feature of that environment. These kinds of objects
are considered as landmarks or reference points. They play an
important role in acquiring spatial knowledge and provide users
with information on where they are in a page, just as unique
features aid navigation in physical environments. However, in
audio rendering of Web pages, these objects cannot play their
full roles. User agents do not treat them in a special and appropriate form, so their role in supporting travel is diminished [5].
They need to be presented in a way that they can fulfil their
intended roles and support movement around the Web. In this
case, the meaning of the structure plays a central role, and is
represented using formal descriptions to conform to Web stan-
dards. Our structural information is processed to derive explicit
structures, indeed, this semantic information processing plays a
central role in our system as it gives us:

(1) Manipulation accuracy.

Current transformation techniques rely on creating bestfit semi-accurate templates to assist in transcoding.3 These
are not accurate and so an annotation based system to accurately tag visual areas is a logical extension. WAfA, provides
the taxonomy to allow this accurate and uniform tagging.

(2) Formalised concept checking.

By adding additional ontological components onto our
initial taxonomy we can enforce a strict logic. Indeed, metaknowledge provides certain principles regarding the overall
model, for instance, by enforcing Disjoint (Header, Footer)
we can check for annotation accuracy such that a footer and
header cannot be the same thing.

(3) A common interface.

By providing an interface for annotation (DANTE) we
can assist the real process of the designer in annotating
multiple pages. But by using our ontology we can enhance
this interface while enabling modifications of the annotation
terminology to take account of new knowledge discovery.

(4) It enables non-domain experts to interact with DANTE.

WAfA is a multidomain ontology, in that a number of
authoring concepts from different domains are available.
These range from hypertext and hypermedia, through typographical layout, to common Web design, and finally to

digital libraries. These separate domains all map to the technological interface; the mobility model. This de-coupling
means that the ontology can be extended based on the
requirements of other specific domain terminology.

(5) Provides generic tools for semantic creation.

Our ontology can be used to annotate Web pages using
different terminology for different purpose. While our work
is focused on accessibility, third parties can annotate pages
and take advantage of all the other points here, but transcode
for a different purpose.

(6) Freedom of manipulation (most importantly).

Hinted at in point (4 and 5), because the transformation
logic is separated from the annotation mechanism many different tools can make use of the WAfA ontology. This is a
pragmatic point, in that we suspect the number of users who
wish to annotate for Web accessibility is limited. However,
those who may wish to use this ontology to annotate for other
domains (such as the mobile Web) will be large. In this case
we would be able to use these WAfA annotations for our
domain, and they would be able to use our annotations for
theres.

These six points are particularly important when trying to
understand open-world, heterogeneous, real world Web doc-
uments, all from diverse sources without a commonality of
ownership. In our case semantic technology plays a central role
in achieving interesting new levels of functionality or performance and led us to the creation of the WAfA ontology.

3. The WAfA ontology

The WAfA ontology is an evolving ontology for the Web
community, similar to DOLCE [6]. It is a foundational model of
Web pages and is concerned with the representation of concepts
and relationships necessary for the modelling of the structural
and navigational organisation of Web pages into a computable
form. We regard this model as foundational for two reasons:
(1) the structural concepts and relationships are focused on
providing basic components of Web pages and their relationships rather than addressing a specific type of Web page; (2)
the concepts refer to vocabularies used in a number of domain
such as hypermedia design, transcoding literature [7], mark-up
languages, and content management systems, and are generalised to all these domains [8]. WAfA ontology is used as the
controlled vocabulary to drive page transformations. Fundamen-
tally, the ontology is a conjugation of three sub-ontologies (see
Table 1):(1) authoring semantics, see Section 3.1; (2) mobility
semantics, see Section 3.2 and (3) contextual semantics, see Section 3.3. We do not intent to explain all of the concepts within
the ontology here, full details can be found within the complete
ontology,4 and a description of early work on the ontology can
also be found in Ref. [9]. However, it is useful to remember
that WAfA is an ontology as opposed to a simple taxonomy,
XML schema or data-model because it makes use of a number

3 Transcoding is the process of transforming the representation of the content

into another format.

4 See http://www.schemaweb.info/schema/SchemaDetails.aspx?id=275.

Table 1
The overview of the WAfA ontology

Part of the ontology

Concept (children of . . .)

Example children

Total children

(1) Authoring semantics

AuthoringConcept

Object

Atom
Chunk
Node
Collection

Caption, Advertisement, Logo, Headline, Footnote, Label, etc.
Header, LinkMenu, Section, Abstract, SiteMap, Sidebar, etc.
Represent a Web page (or parts of a Webpage)
Represent a Web site (or collection of nodes)

(2) Mobility semantics

MobilityConcept

EnvironmentalRole
JourneyRole

WayPoint, TravelAssistant, etc.
Obstacle, Cue, OutOfView, etc.

(3) Context semantics

Purpose
Connection
Coverage
Position
Order
Structure

ObjectPurpose, TravellerPurpose
AssociativeConnection, ReferentialConnection, etc.
Inter, Intra, etc.
AssociativePoint, CurrentPoint
AlphabeticalOrder, TemporalOrder, SpatialOrder
Hierarchy, Linear, Matrix, etc.

of ontology specific components such as: inverse property and
relations; transitive and explicitly non-transitive properties5; and
distinct is-a and part-of relationships; these additional properties
and restrictions can be viewed online but enable annotations to
be machine validated removing the expert knowledge normally
required of the user.

3.1. Authoring semantics for conceptual structuring

These are primarily intended to be used by authors and
designers in the annotation process. They encode information
about hypermedia concepts, vocabularies used in previous work
on transcoding, mark-up languages, and content management
systems encapsulate information about how the objects are
structured in Web pages to form the overall structure of the
page. The concepts in this part of the ontology are subsumed
by the concept AuthoringConcept. Additionally, the concepts subsumed by Connection, Coverage, Position,
Order and Structure are used to define the Authoring-
Concept. It aims to formalise the common understanding of
a Web page structure. It defines a vocabulary that is already
widely used within the Web community to describe components
of Web pages which is not formally explained and defined. When
we analyse XHTML source code, apart from the XHTML ele-
ments, designers encapsulate tacit knowledge about the meaning
of the structure in their source code. Particularly, comments,
class and id attributes, and file names provide a wealth of information regarding the structure. However, such knowledge is
implicit and is not provided in a controlled way so that user
agents can access and understand it [10]. Therefore, besides
the research literature, we have analysed numerous webpages6
to identify a common vocabulary used by designers. The high
level concepts of this part of the ontology, which are consid-

5 We also need to create restrictions about the direct parts of certain kinds
of objects; therefore, we introduced is-direct-part-of property which is a subproperty of the is-part-of and is not transitive.

6 For example: Amazon, BBC, CNN, IMDB, and the like.

ered as basic units of overall structural organisation, are as
follows:
 Atom: A coherent object that cannot be logically decom-
posed. Physically we might be able to divide the object but
the divided parts cannot be coherent and presented on their
own (e.g., Link, Caption, Footnote, Logo, Adver-
tisement, etc.). For example, an advertisement can be a
composition of several images, but in fact they all represent
only one advertisement.
 Chunk: Several objects grouped together to form a coherent unit (e.g., Header, Footer, Section, Abstract,
LinkMenu, SiteMap, etc.). Chunking is a quite natural
way of presenting information and such units are important
to preserve the content integrality and ease the use and recall
of information. In the literature, they are also referred as
fragments, semantic textual units, block, unit or nodes.
 Node: A composition of atom(s) and chunk(s) to form a mean-
 Collection: A collection of nodes, meant to represent a Web
site. As well as capturing the ordering and grouping of constituent elements of the body of a Web page these higher level
elements have a fundamental purpose in assisting the author
or designer. In some cases it is not possible for a user to identify exactly what an object on the page is. In this case the
author can select a more generic concept and although the
full power of the agent cannot be realised (because we do not
have an accurate description) a limited transcoding solution
is possible.

ingful group which we use to represent a Web page.

3.2. Mobility semantics for navigational structuring

These are mainly used by tools and user agents which enable
authoring terminology to be processed by mobility focused
agents. They encapsulate a knowledge about the travel objects
from real world mobility studies. This part of the ontology
focuses on how the objects are typically used. Objects can have
a journey role which depends on the context of the journey being

S. Harper, Y. Yesilada / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 5 (2007) 175179

undertaken and can also have one or more environmental roles.
Based on the model of travel, this part of the ontology holds
information about the travel objects. Objects might have a specific role in an environment, referred as EnvironmentRole,
and based on the context, they might have another journey role,
referred as JourneyRole in the ontology. Depending on the
context of the journey being undertaken an object can be either
Obstacle or Cue. An Obstacle is an object that directly or
indirectly obstructs the progress of a traveller to a specific destination and a Cue is an object that orientates and encourages
onward navigation. The journey role is context dependent, for
example a graphic site map could be a cue to a sighted user but
it could be an obstacle to a visually impaired user. These objects
are mainly grouped into three broad categories as follows:
 Way points: These are points within a journey at which a
decision may be made that directly facilitates onward jour-
ney. Way points are also further classified and an example is
DecisionPoint which is the point in the journey where
a traveller has to choose from different possible paths (e.g.,
link menu).
 Orientation points: Knowledge about orientation suggests
that a person needs information about location, distance and
direction in order to be orientated in a journey and the objects
that provide such information are orientation points (e.g.,
logo).
 Travel assistants: Sighted or visually impaired travellers
experience problems in orienting themselves from time to
time in both familiar and unfamiliar environments where they
use different strategies to re-orientate themselves. The objects
that they use in these strategies are grouped as travel assistants (e.g., site map). Fundamentally, a traveller navigates
and orientates by consulting, detecting and identifying these
travel objects. Consultation, detection and identification are
accomplished through the mobility instruments of in-journey
guidance, previews, probes and feedbacks.

3.3. Contextual semantics

This category is included for completeness. However, we do
envisage an extension of the ontology and its use in other alternate contexts and so their inclusion is useful for extensibility.
Contextual semantics can be important because a Web journey
can take place in different contexts, and concepts within this
group provide contextual knowledge about a journey such as the
purpose of the journey being undertaken, etc. The concepts in
this part of the ontology are subsumed by the Purpose concept.
Web users have different skills, habits, motivations, intelligence,
intentions and a whole host of other attributes that they bring to
the computer when using the Web. It is highly possible that
potential users will come from all walks of life and age groups.
Obviously, these issues affect a users experience of interacting
with the Web because we do not all interact with the in the same
way. Five issues are considered to be important for the journey
experience: (a) the current travel purpose, (b) the user, (c) the presentation form, (d) the timelines of access and feedback, and (e)
the user agent. This sub-ontology aims to address these issues,

by particularly focusing on the purpose; this can range from the
purpose of the traveller (information seeking, surveying, orien-
tation, navigation, browsing, scanning, etc.) to the travel objects
intended purpose; which is in fact the designers purpose (see
Table 1). One of the roles that this part of the ontology fulfils
is to obtain enough knowledge regarding the purpose of a user
and transform pages accordingly. For example, if the user wants
to scan a page, we provide an overview of the page; if he (she)
wants to orientate them-self in the environment (wants to learn
where he (she) is in the environment) we provide objects that
support orientational information such as a title, logo, etc. The
main problem with this contextual information is that it is difficult to obtain. Typically, the travellers purpose is not explicitly
specified (or well-defined) and the traveller can engage in many
different purposes as they travel through the environment.

4. Discussion and conclusions

So how is the WAfA ontology used? Consider the The New
York Times (NY Times) Website.7 This page has a number
of terms commonly found in many websites. In the case of
the NY Times this includes classes called story and subclasses such as callout, credit and summary. Indeed,
the NY Times even provides IDs for these stories giving an
order such as rank3. For the 20 April 2006 the NY Times has
a story called Nepals Political Crisis Deepens with a credit
of Gautam Singh/Associated Press and a summary of The
coalition that organized the demonstrations demanded that the
king restore Nepals Parliament and relinquish control of the
government. In this case it is easy to understand the semantics (and may remind the reader of informal Dublin Core or
RSS notation) and because they are logical and used in the
news domain are encoded within the WAfA ontology. When
the transformation logic process the page it can now formally
identify these components and process them in a suitable man-
ner. However, now consider CNN International.8 In this case
classes are called cnnT1 and subclasses called cnnT1Hd and
cnnT1Blurb. By looking at the content (cnnT1Hd = Nepal
protests turn deadly and cnnT1Blurb = Police open fire on
pro-democracy activists on the outskirts of Kathmandu, killing
three people and injuring at least 100 others as protests entered
their third week.) and using our DANTE tool a user can annotate these pages such that CNN.cnnT1Hd  WAfA.callout
and CNN.cnnT1Blurb  WAfA.summary. However, there
are many possible valid terms used by authors, designers, jour-
nalists, and the like, that are recognisable and could be encoded
within WAfA. Based on their order, sequence, and sub-class
positions (derived from the box structure of XHTML) within
the Web document, DANTE can use WAfA to build the correct class/sub-class hierarchy from the XHTML as if it were
an individual/instance. This is because after annotation each
element that is tagged becomes an kind of instance specific
to that particular Web page. DANTE uses a common reason-

7 http://www.nytimes.com/.
8 http://edition.cnn.com/.

ing service, FaCT++ in this case, to decide how the authoring
concepts equates to the mobility concepts. Because DANTE
knows how to process these mobility concepts the transformation logic need only work on this constrained set of terms while
the ontology is used to decide on exactly what mobility concept this set of authoring concepts should be classified as. We
conclude that our work has produced an implemented and working application along with a foundational ontology and user
evaluation [11]. When used by our tools, this ontology, provides visually impaired users with an accessibility advantage
over and above un-transformed documents or documents processed using conventional transcoding techniques. While there
are clearly limitations with our system in that each page must be
annotated with WAfA concepts (taking time and effort), we suggest that this is just the kind of system, based on the conjugation
of user and tool, which supports the semantic Web vision.
