Towards Technology Structure Mining from

Scientific Literature

Behrang QasemiZadeh

Unit for Natural Language Processing, DERI

National University of Ireland, Galway

behrang.qasemizadeh@deri.org

Abstract. This paper introduces the task of Technology-Structure Mining to support Management of Technology. We propose a linguistic based
approach for identification of Technology Interdependence through extraction of technology concepts and relations between them. In addition,
we introduce Technology Structure Graph for the task formalization.
While the major challenge in technology structure mining is the lack of
a benchmark dataset for evaluation and development purposes, we describes steps that we have taken towards providing such a benchmark.
The proposed approach is initially evaluated and applied in the domain
of Human Language Technology and primarily results are demonstrated.
We further explain plans and research challenges for evaluation of the
proposed task.

1 Introduction

We are drowning in the sea of data and effective intelligent-contextual information retrieval systems have turned out to be strategic tools in different disciplines,
among them interdisciplinary field of Management of Technology [1](MoT). The
role technology plays in shaping our lives, and its critical role in an increasingly competitive knowledge based economy is a matter of fact. Technology is
developed and propagates globally with a surprising velocity, and managing the
accelerated rate of technology development becomes a universal challenge. MoT
tries to bring efficiency in technology organization mainly through the process of
Technology Watch. Technology Watch in general is the process of extracting tactical information about technology. However, the manual process of extracting
such information is tedious and time consuming considering the gigantic amount
of information. [2]

A long discussed topic in MoT is Technology-structure relationships [3]. One
empirical research aspect of technology-structure relationship deals with interdependence of technologies i.e. how technologies are related to each other. We propose a linguistic based approach to facilitate the process of extracting information
about technologies by proposing a methodology for extracting information about
interdependencies of technologies -e.g. how technologies are built on top of each
other. We have named the proposed task Technology Structure Mining.

The proposed research involves several established research challenges in Information Extraction and Natural Language Processing such as Named Entity

P.F. Patel-Schneider et al.(Eds.): ISWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6497, pp. 305312, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
