Talking about Data: Sharing Richly Structured

Information through Blogs and Wikis

Edward Benson, Adam Marcus, Fabian Howahl, and David Karger

{eob,marcua,fabian,karger}@csail.mit.edu

MIT CSAIL

Abstract. Several projects have brought rich data semantics to collaborative wikis, but blogging platforms remain primarily limited to text.
As blogs comprise a significant portion of the webs content, engagement
of the blogging community is crucial to the development of the semantic
web. We provide a study of blog content to show a latent need for better
data publishing and visualization support in blogging software. We then
present DataPress, an extension to the WordPress blogging platform that
enables users to publish, share, aggregate, and visualize structured information using the same workflow that they already apply to text-based
content. In particular, we aim to preserve those attributes that make
blogs such a successful publication medium: one-click access to the infor-
mation, one-click publishing of it, natural authoring interfaces, and easy
copy and paste of information (and visualizations) from other sources.
We reflect on how our designs make progress toward these goals with a
study of how users who installed DataPress made use of various features.

1 Introduction

Recent efforts to generate and curate high-value structured datasets have made
great headway on several fronts, as exemplified by open government initiatives,
Facebooks Open Graph project, and Freebases structured wiki. While these
centralized, top-down approaches are significant, we have yet to see wide adoption of structured data publication at the grass-roots level. Taking note that the
development of hosted blogging platforms encouraged millions of web readers to
become content authors as well, we aim to entice these users to publish data by
building data-oriented features into their existing blogging software.

Large projects can rely on the promise of societal and technical benefits to
justify the costs required to curate and publish structured data. We believe
that for independent bloggers to take part in data publishing efforts of their
own, the promise of later portability and reuse is not enough. Instead, end-user-
focused data publishing tools should offer immediate gratification in the form
of useful visualizations and interesting data aggregation before they focus on
formal ontologies and namespaces. Only after the user has seen the benefit of
data publishing as part of their content authoring workflow can we take steps to
link, integrate, and further reuse the underlying data.

P.F. Patel-Schneider et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2010, Part I, LNCS 6496, pp. 4863, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
?

?

?
We also take inspiration from efforts such as the Semantic MediaWiki project,
which has brought structured data publishing to wikis by exposing it in the WikiText format already familiar to wiki users. We aim to similarly provide bloggers
with data publishing tools that blend in with existing blogging environments.
The popular blog publishing platforms that we target differ from wikis in that
they depend more heavily on WYSIWYG editing, click-to-embed rich media,
and an easy-access copy-and-paste culture. To facilitate the adoption of grassroots data publishing, we must build tools that minimize the difference between
traditional text-based blogging and the future of publishing, in which all content
producers are data publishers.

To understand how to accommodate the data-blogger of the future, this paper
first examines the properties of blogging platforms that led to their popularity
among content authors on the web. We then demonstrate a latent need of, and
great potential for, data-centric blogging tools with a content study of 210 blog
entries on the web. This study quantifies the kinds of data-supported arguments
that blog authors make and shows that bloggers are already using structured
data in their content, but the tools they have to communicate it are limiting.

We then present DataPress, a plugin for the WordPress blogging platform
which facilitates data visualization from minimally structured files, allows bloggers to point at other data presentations as a starting point for their own,
and allows bloggers to publish and aggregate their own data sets. We build
into DataPress the ability to easily link to external data from spreadsheets,
RDF sources, and Semantic MediaWiki sites. We further demonstrate the ability to rely on Semantic MediaWiki as a community ontology server to encourage
schema convergence across data feeds produced by DataPress bloggers.

Finally, we examine the log data and interview the authors of real DataPress
deployments, one of which having seen over 55,000 page views. These users
provide insight into how web authors are using DataPress to publish data today
(not in their blogs, to our surprise) and where opportunities exist to improve
data publishing tools for tomorrow.

2 Requirements for the 21st Century Blogger

Our goal is to bring structured data publishing to the blogging community, and
to do so we must build tools appropriate to the environment that bloggers expect.
This section examines the properties of blogging platforms that made them such
a successful grass-roots medium of contribution to the web. We expect that by
preserving these traits in a data-oriented blogging tool, we are more likely to
gain traction from the blogging community. Of the many features of blogging
systems that make them popular, we highlight:

One-click Publishing. Though publishing through a blogging platform is equiv-
alent, from a technical standpoint, to uploading HTML documents over FTP,
the increased usability and convenience that a web publishing interface provides encourages participation by a far wider audience.

E. Benson et al.

Visual Authoring Environment. Blog platforms offer users familiar, word-
processor-like WYSIWYG text editors, with HTML forms to guide them
through more complicated tasks. Notably, the author does not have to coordinate her work through several distinct applicationsall her authoring
needs are met within the editing environment of the blogging tool.

Copy and Paste. Web blogs have developed a publishing culture that makes
significant use of copy and paste, both to quote information found in other
sources and also to replicate layout or visualization functionality that the
author could not construct herself. Sometimes, such quoting is an end in
itself; at other times, the goal is to use the original content as a starting point
for publishing by modification. It is much easier to copy someone elses nicely
formatted page and replace its content with your own than to understand
how to create such a layout in the first place.

Pre-Packaged Widgets. Blogging systems make it easy to include rich media
widgetssuch as slide shows and video clipsin article text without having
to manually write code or configuration. By simply uploading several pictures
(in the case of a slide show) or adding a link (in the case of a YouTube video
clip), the blogger benefits from the platforms ability to package up this
simple data into a rich format that entertains visitors.

These traits help blogging platforms turn the technical task of publishing web
content into an easy process accessible to the grassroots authors that provide so
much of the webs long tail of content. If we wish to encourage these grassroots
authors to provide data as well, we must give them tools that work from within
these familiar environments and share their properties.

We use these traits as a guide to construct DataPress, and we argue that as a
result DataPress can support, for rich structured data, the same behaviors that
made the webs text authoring tools so effective:

 It has the same click and you see it immediacy that made hosted blogging
such a big change over the FTP publishing workflow: it enables users to
insert data into a blog post the same way they insert an image, offers readers
embedded data visualizations inside article bodies, and it does so without
leaving the metaphor provided by the blogging platform

 It does not require the author to understand complex data models, but
instead can be based on concepts already familiar to end users: simple forms,
embedded media, and links to data-laden websites

 It offers the same copy-and-paste workflow as text, making it easy for authors
to quote both the data and the data visualizations authored by other users,
either to be used unchanging or as a starting point for authors (who may
not yet know how to author their own data or visualization) to make their
own points by authoring changes in the acquired data or visualizations

 It inspects a users data in order to better guide her through the creation of
rich, interactive visualizations. Users can add faceted navigation, interactive
maps and timelines, and search functionality all by selecting a few options
in the blogging editor.
?

?

?
3 The Latent Potential for Grassroots Data

Blogging platforms facilitated the enormous growth of the web over the past
two decades, but the capabilities of these tools are primarily limited to text. In
contrast, professional publications often deal with rich, structured data: shopping sites offer faceted browsing across their product databases; product review
sites let readers dynamically pit products against each other in feature-by-feature
tables; and news sites such as the New York Times (which runs its own Visualization Lab1) publish interactive presentations of complex information. Arguably,
these professionally managed web sites are significantly more expressive than
grassroots authors pages. One might think that this is because only large professional publishers care for such expressivity, but we observe that the desire to
publish and present data extends far beyond large publishers.

In this section we present the results of a blog content study that indicates
that bloggers are in fact already frequently talking about data; they are just
doing it using text and static images, the best way that they can given their
current publishing platforms. We believe this is a hopeful result for the semantic
web community, for it suggests that grassroots bloggers would be eager to make
use of structured data if their tools made this process easy and beneficial to their
needs.

For the purposes of this study, we use the term blog to refer to any articlestyle publication on the web, including both personal journals and professional
periodicals. A semantic entity refers to an object with one or more properties
described in structured or unstructured (natural language) form. A collection
of semantic entities refers to a sequence of semantic entities of the same type
described in a document. For example, a semantic entity might be a paragraph of
text or a table row that describes the technical specifications of a new camera. A
collection of semantic entities would be a text document or full table comparing
several cameras to each other.

We coded 210 blog articles across 21 blogs to measure the occurrence and
nature of semantic entities and semantic entity collections within their text2.
We generated this blog sample by selecting the 10 most recent entries (at time
of study) from a semi-random list of blogs taken from the Technorati[5] blog
indexing service. This list of blogs included:

 The top ten blogs according to Technoratis authority rank
 Eleven blogs selected at random from Technoratis list of rising articles

We used this selection method to attempt to capture both high quality, professional content (top ten blogs) and also blogs that varied in style and represented
the long tail of the web (top rising posts). For each blog in our sample, we
downloaded its RSS feed and coded each of its ten latest entries.

http://vizlab.nytimes.com/

2 The data for this survey can be found at

http://projects.csail.mit.edu/datapress/content_survey

E. Benson et al.

Table 1. Number of occurrences overall and number of articles with various properties

Lone Semantic Collections of

Visual Referenced Referenced
Semantic Entities Collections Datasets Resources

Entities

Articles with
one or more

occurrences (of 210)

45 (21%)

64 (30%)

22 (10%)

67 (32%) 191 (91%)

Total Count

Aggregating across the articles for each blog, we found that:
 17 of 21 blogs contained at least one article in their latest 10 that enumerated

the properties of a single semantic entity.

 18 of 21 blogs contained at least one article in their latest 10 that enumerated
the properties of a collection of semantic entities.
 Half of these blogs used natural language text to describe the collection.
 The other half used a table or a static image containing an info-graphic.

Aggregating across the articles for all blogs, we found that:

Table 1 shows us that:
 21% of articles surveyed contained at least one semantic entity.
 30% of articles surveyed contained a collection of semantic entities (anecdo-
tally, these were things such as polling results in different states, economic
conditions in different countries, and professional sports records).
 Two-thirds of these collections were presented in natural language text

instead of a structured or visual format.

Finally, our data revealed that blog entries frequently refer to external sources
of data rather than present original content. Authors made reference to some
externally attributed datum or statistic in 91% of articles surveyed. In, 32% of
articles, this reference was to an explicit data set, often given by name (e.g.,
A 2008 Zogby Poll reported that...), while in the other 59% it simply referred
to a person or organization who had claimed the truth of the numerical fact.
In all, we counted 428 total references across the 67 articles which mentioned
data sets. These numbers are surprisingly high, perhaps influenced by the fact
that our study was done in the midst of an electoral season, but they serve to
reinforce the intuition that bloggers are in many respects serving as topic- or
geo-localized journalists. They are writing about issues, and these issues involve
data. We aim to make that data navigable, linked, and reusable.

Anecdotally, much of the presentation of semantic entities was inlined in text,
rather than in a structured tabular format. Interactive data visualizations were
rarestructured presentation tended to be either static tables or images. In fact,
most of these collections were included in an HTML table or rudimentary list
rather than a full-blown visualization. Data links, if at all present, tended to
be narrative references to a data set rather than resolvable URLs.

These results suggest significant latent potential for tools that allow bloggers
to publish data with the same ease with which they already publish text. These
authors are already interested in data, and at times they are publishing tables or
?

?

?
images, indicating that they are willing to adopt non-prose presentation styles
if they are available.

Currently the only non-prose data presentation tools that blogging platforms
support are HTML tables and static images. We aim to fill this gap with DataPress,
which provides both interactive visualization capabilities as well as raw data publishing and linking.

4 DataPress

DataPress3 is our attempt to create a bloggers tool to publish, share, and copy
data and data visualizations. We start from the premise that, from the standpoint of content authors, visualizations are an end in themselvesif a picture
is worth a thousand words, surely a good interactive visualization is worth at
least tens of pictures. They allow anyone encountering that data to understand
it better by exploring it.

But DataPress is also a means to an end: making data more easily available
for reuse. DataPress rich data visualizations encourage authors to use it, but the
tool also exposes the data it is showing off, making it easy to link to or snapshot,
thus enabling the same reuse ecology already pervasive in textual blogs. With
this in mind, we will describe DataPress in its four distinct roles:
1. Authoring data
2. Consuming data originating elsewhere
3. Authoring visualizations
4. Exposing data for consumption by other tools
For the authoring roles, our key goal is to fit data and visualization authoring
naturally into the already existent workflow associated with WordPress. For the
data sharing roles, we arrange for our tool to offer, with no extra user labor,
JSON and RDF data feeds that can be consumed by others. We also facilitate
easy linking of diverse content on the web for aggregation and visualization
within a blog post.

DataPress is implemented as a plugin for the WordPress blogging platform.
We chose WordPress because it has a large install base (over 3,816,965 downloads in 2007 alone [3]) and because it is a blogging tool used widely for both
personal blogs and professional publications, including media outlets as large as
the Washington Post online edition. Like other blogging platforms, WordPress
places a high value on guided workflow and simple form-based configuration, so
the DataPress plugin exposes all of its features as enhancements to the existing
WordPress authoring interface.

This section describes the most recent version of DataPress. Our user study,
presented in Section 6, was conducted across users of a previous release of
DataPress. This previous release contained of all the features described below
except for individual item publishing (in Section 4.1), data feeds (in Section 4.4),
and Semantic MediaWiki hooks (Section 5).
3 Downloadable source code, examples, and demo blog for testing available at:

http://projects.csail.mit.edu/datapress/

E. Benson et al.

4.1 Authoring and Uploading Data
DataPress allows authors to create individual data items to publish with a post
or upload entire datasets at a time. Both these option are accessible from buttons
added to the WordPress post editor, seen in Figure 1.

Authoring a Data Item. By pressing the
Data Item button, bloggers can enter keyvalued information to associate with a typed
semantic entity and publish this information
as metadata with a blog post. This usage scenario fits the type of blogger who publishes
similarly themed articles over time and would like to benefit from being able
to aggregate their structured content for presentation purposes or export to the
community.

Fig. 1. DataPress Entry Points

Consider the practice of blogging ones academic reading listsome students
and professors enjoy blogging summaries of papers they have read so that they
can share their thoughts with others in the community. DataPress allows this
temporal stream of activity to be published as structured data as well. While
writing the blog post, the author clicks the Data Item button seen in Figure 1
and DataPress will bring up a selection of data templates, shown in the first
screenshot in Figure 2. A data template is simply a blank form derived from the
schema of some item type.

Fig. 2. Choosing and filling in a Template

This list of data templates can draw from a variety of places. DataPress comes
with a collection of built-in data templates, such as academic papers, books,
and workouts, but it can also be configured to talk to Semantic Media Wiki
installations or other data template repositories on the web, allowing the blog
author to take advantage of communities that maintain such information and
encouraging schema convergence across web sites (this idea will be expanded in
Section 5). If no template fits the item, DataPress allows users to create their own
by entering a custom class name and the properties that should be associated
with its instances.

Once the user has selected a data template, DataPress loads the template
schema (possibly from a remote repository) and transforms it into a web form
?

?

?
for the user to fill out. One such form is shown in the right-hand side of Figure 2.
From here, the data is stored in DataPress back-end database, while a visual
marker for the data is embedded into the text of the post as a small icon that
allows editing or removal of the item from the post, shown in Figure 3.

The Data Item interface allows a blogger to
follow their natural habit of writing a new article about each data item, while also producing
an aggregate data set over time and across blog
posts for rich visualization. Our reading-list blogger can place, sticky on their front page, a single
rich My Reading List visualization showing all
articles they have read, with links to the individual blog postings about the articles. This visualization becomes a new, non-chronological index
into their blog content.

Fig. 3. Data Item in a Blog
Post

Uploading Data Sets. DataPress also lets users
associate entire data sets with a blog post. Using WordPress built-in file upload
tool, they can upload a file, and then using the Data Set button provided by
DataPress, they can associate that file with a blog post. DataPress utilizes the
data import mechanisms of the Exhibit framework [12] and the MIT Babel [8]
data translation web service to accept a wide variety of formats, including RDF,
JSON, CSV, XML, Microsoft Excel, and Bibtex.

Once a data file is associated with a blog post, DataPress stores this information in its database and provides the option of attaching Data Footnote links
at the end of the blog post, allowing the reader to visually see links to the data
that accompanies the writeup. These associated data sets are also used as inputs
for data visualizations, shown later.

4.2 Data Linking

DataPress also lets authors link to remote data sets via URL. In addition to supporting a wide number of data formats that can be linked to directly, DataPress
contains a special importer that handles what we call approximate linksURLs
that point to web pages that talk about data, rather than links to the raw data
itself. We currently support four such kinds of approximate links:

 URLs of DataPress-powered pages are automatically converted into data

links to that pages data sources

 URLs of web pages containing an Exhibit-powered visualization are auto-

matically converted into data links to that pages data sources

 URLs of Google Spreadsheet files are automatically converted into API calls

into Googles JSON data service

 URLs of third-party JSON data files are converted into JSONP calls routed

through a DataPress JSON-to-JSONP service

E. Benson et al.

We expect to grow support for approximate linking as we believe that it supports,
for data, the same copy-and-paste-ability that made blogging tools successful. If
a user sees a page with data they want to use, they should only have to copy
and paste that pages URL to be able to remix and republish its data. As we
will show in the following section, we are currently also working on support for
easy import of Semantic MediaWiki data via remote ASK queries.

4.3 Visualization Authoring
The Visualization button, shown above the post editor in Figure 1, provides
access to a wizard which walks the user through the creation of a data visual-
ization. DataPress uses the Exhibit framework for displaying interactive visual-
izations. This allows the plugin to benefit from the developer community that
builds data importers and visualization plugins for Exhibit. DataPress configuration wizard, shown in Figure 4, contains many of the various options Exhibit
provides, as well as some blog-specific enhancements.

Fig. 4. Adding a Data Visualization

The wizard consists of four main steps:

Add Visualizations. Supported visualization types include lists, tables, maps,

timelines, scatter plots, and bar charts.

Add Facets. Add faceted navigation to the visualization. Supported facet types

include free-text search, list facets, range sliders, and tag clouds.

Configure Display. Many blogs follow a narrow-width article format while
some rich visualizations are wide, so DataPress includes an lightbox option which presents visualizations as YouTube-style previews that expand
to hover over the full web page when clicked. This step in the wizard also
allows the blogger to link custom CSS files to the visualization.
?

?

?
Lenses. Lenses may be thought of as data style sheetsthey are templates
that define how items of a particular type should be displayed. DataPress
provides a WYSIWYG lens editor that includes support for images whose
URLs appear in the data.

Because DataPress is aware of the data that has already been associated with
the blog post, it is able to suggest values for many of the configuration options
required to create a visualization. When each new data item is added to the blog
post, DataPress uses the Exhibit framework to parse the data in the background
and update a running list of the item types and properties relevant to the vi-
sualization. This is particularly useful if a user is linking to data from another
site on the web. Without even looking at the raw data or schema, the user is
able to immediately begin crafting a visualization, with data-aware autosuggest
fields providing the possible answers to necessary questions.

Once a visualization is configured, it can be inserted into the blog post by
clicking a button in the wizard. The visualization appears in the blog text editor
as the placeholder token {{Exhibit}} to mark its desired placement. Users can
always re-edit their visualization by clicking on the toolbar button once again
(we currently only support one visualization per blog post).

4.4 Data Sharing

After data has been associated with blog posts in DataPress, it can be shared
with others in two different ways. The first is by nature of the fact that blog
posts created with DataPress have links both visible (as optional data footnotes)
and invisible (as links embedded in the markup of the page) that allow others
to re-use the data associated with the post. Other bloggers with DataPress, for
example, need only reference the URL of a data-laden blog post to automatically
import all of its data and begin crafting visualizations to rebut, reinforce, or
simply echo the message.

The second, and more intriguing, form of data sharing is made possible via
data feeds. Just as WordPress allows RSS readers to fetch custom feeds specific
to a particular tag or category of post, DataPress responds to requests to assemble data item feeds along similar lines. This feed generator creates aggregate
collections of data items for a particular tag or category tracked by the blog.
It does so by grouping together all data items published with posts that are
marked with the specified tag or category. The following URL is an example of
such a request:

/.../datapress/feed.php?tag=Research+Paper

Using data feeds web users may fetch a feed (in either JSON or RDF) of the
structured data added to blog posts and incorporate that data into their own
visualizations. A research group, for example, could aggregate the individual
users reading blogs into a group-wide record of readings.

If we accept that many bloggers blog out of the hope that others will consume
what they blog, we can conclude that bloggers will be attracted to the idea of

E. Benson et al.

offering rich consumable data feeds with no additional effort on their part. We
believe that such an access methodology will encourage increased casual data
curation, as users who blog about similar items over time (trips, meals, workouts,
papers, etc.) will value the data feed more than the sum of each individual
annotated item once others can present the data in a visual, interactive manner.

5 DataPress in a Data Ecosystem

While the first step toward data publishing for bloggers is to give them value for
using structured data, we keep in view the eventual goal of integrating linked
data sources across the web. One natural link is the one between blogs run by
individuals and wikis curated by communities. Projects like Semantic MediaWiki
(SMW) and Freebase already offer several tools to support community-curated
datasets. This section describes DataPress features for integrating into such an
ecosystem of data publishing.

To demonstrate the possibilities of such an ecosystem, we extend SMW with a
plugin we have developed called Wibit4. Wibit enables interactive visualizations,
data sharing, and schema sharing using the data contained in the SMW knowledge base. From a visualization perspective, Wibit provides a WikiText syntax
that enables SMW users to create Exhibit visualizations that aggregate the results of an ASK query (to be contrasted with approaches like Project Halo [10]
which make use of graphical interfaces). From a data perspective, our development version of Wibit provides a data API that permits external services to
query the wiki knowledge base.

Working together with DataPress, the Wibit extension provides a number of
integration points between SMW and data-aware blogs. Using the Wibit API,
DataPress users can issue a remote ASK query and visualize its results from within
a blog post. As DataPress allows multiple data sets to be combined, this means
that a blogger can combine a wikis data set with their own data feeds. This
data flow also works in reverse: Wibit can aggregate data feeds across several
blogs to display a visualization of blogged items.

As the data web evolves, we believe this blog-wiki connection is also a mechanism to encourage schema convergence within communities of interest. Users of
a community can collaborate on the common definition of an item type on their
community wiki, and then bloggers can use this schema to publish instances
with their blog articles. Wibits API exports SMW schemas in a JSON format
for the DataPress template loader to read. When DataPress users are adding
data items to their posts, they may pick from one of these community-defined
item schemas instead of creating their own.

By facilitating the transfer of visualizations, data and schemas across blogs
and wikis, data-oriented tasks can live closest to where they are natural: wikis
for crowd curation and blogs for individual publication and reflection.

4 A wiki running the introduced extensions and examples is available at:

http://projects.csail.mit.edu/wibit
?

?

?
6 Lessons Learned

DataPress is available as an open sourced plugin for WordPress. We now describe
initial observations about how early adopters have used DataPress and provide
lessons learned from phone interviews with three of these DataPress users. The
users in this study are all running DataPress 1.2 or earlier, which lacks individual
item publishing, data feeds, and Semantic MediaWiki hooks.

6.1 DataPress in the Wild

Since releasing DataPress, the tool has been downloaded 90 times. Of these
downloads, 21 users chose to participate in a statistic collection study the software offers as an option, including one website whose DataPress-built exhibit
has seen over 55,000 page views. We present some observations about this log
data, though we stress that the number of users does not give our results statistical significance. In total, 56 visualizations were created and reported back to
our servers, receiving 64,324 total page views. Of these, approximately half were
created as permanent pages on their site, while the other half were embedded in
blog entries.
Facets, or Lack Thereof. Facets are an important component for navigating
structured data, and many Exhibits found online are heavily faceted to support
deeper navigation of the data. One might expect highly-faceted Exhibit configurations through DataPress, but many DataPress-based Exhibits we found
consisted of simply an unfaceted map or timeline for inline display of data.
This suggests that even simple tools without the interactive features Exhibit
providessuch as search, faceted navigation, and data lensesare of great help
to bloggers with data to display.
Lightboxing. Because of the narrow-width layout of many blogs, we assumed
that the lightboxing feature of DataPress would be heavily used. However while
lightboxed visualizations received more pageviews than inline visualizations
in our data set, the lightbox setting was not frequently employed. User interviews indicated that some users might not have understood what the feature
provided. Additionally, the reduced use of facets might have resulted in less
space-constrained visualizations than we expected.
Data Footnotes. Finally, in our goal of exposing data for future reuse, we tried
to make data footnotes simple to embed in a blog entry. While data footnotes
are included by default as a textual token in any post that contains a DataPressconfigured visualization, most visualization authors removed the footnotes from
their entries; user interviews indicated the reasons are varied.

6.2 User Interviews

To better understand user motivations for seeking out DataPress and to learn
how they used the tool, we conducted e-mail and phone interviews with three

E. Benson et al.

DataPress users: a scientist managing a publications list, a large website owner
wishing to add dynamic features to HTML tables, and a hobbyist/entrepreneur
who maintains a website for his citys local music scene. None of the three users
were technical: the most experienced felt confident enough to edit CSS, but not
write JavaScript.

None of the three users indicated data blogging as their goal, and none of
them published a visualization inside a blog post. Rather, each used DataPress
to place visualizations on permanent, dedicated pages of their own, more like a
content management system than a blog. Time will tell whether this contradicts
our claims that blogs are a natural place for structured data publishing. Much as
Flash animations or audio files were once a destination of their own, while today
they are casually embedded in blog posts, one might expect a similar transition
for rich data objects.
Latent Data Needs. We claimed in Section 3 that the prevalence of data in
natural language blog posts indicates a latent need for better data publishing
tools. For the three users we spoke with, the need was not so latent: each actively
sought a way to present dynamic data visualizations on their site. One had
heard of Exhibit, and installed WordPress and DataPress in order to create
Exhibits without having to edit HTML. The other two had actively searched for
a data visualization tool over the course of several months and eventually found
Exhibit. After trying unsuccessfully to integrate Exhibit into their WordPress
installations, they returned to the web looking for help and found DataPress.

The fact that some users are searching for months to find data visualization
tools suggests that the many APIs offering data visualization services have an
untapped audience of bloggers who want these services but dont know what to
do with an API. For each of these authors who found our tool, there are surely
more that have yet to find a tool to help them, and still more who havent
even thought to look for such tools because they believe data visualization to be
outside the reach of bloggers.
Crossing the Structured Data Chasm. We learned that tools which provide
a compelling reason for users to publish structured data can lead users to structure previously unstructured or poorly structured collections. One user said that
she previously maintained a list of her publications in a MS Word document,
but the ability to publish a faceted list of publications online motivated her to
structure this list in a Google Spreadsheet. Another user initially maintained
an HTML table to present a hand-curated collection of data, but moved this
data into a separate data file so that he could provide users the ability to better
explore the data.
Features without examples go unused. When we asked authors why they
did not use some of DataPress features, a common response was that our interface did not show examples of what the result of those features would be.
This is food for thought from a design perspective: even though the high-level
function of these feature was often clear (Add a map, for example, or Add a
search box) the users still wanted to see usage examples first. After seeing (or
?

?

?
hearing) these, they decided that the feature would be useful to them in many
cases. Our high-traffic user who was only publishing a dynamic table was so
enthused about the other configuration options after speaking with us that he
added a map, timeline, and several dynamic facets to his visualization the day
after our interview with him.
We must accommodate a spectrum of data ownership philosophies.
We also learned that users are well-aware of the potential perils of publishing
reusable datasets and easily-replicated visualizations. While not deeply technical,
all three users understood that someone could copy their dataset by linking
to it, and replicate their visualization by copying their Exhibit HTML. Their
reactions varied. One author felt ownership over his data and would want any
reuse negotiated beforehand, though he recognized that symbiotic relationships
could be built around collaborative data editing. This author took the time to
modify the CSS of his site to hide Exhibits bundled data copying interface.
Despite that, he was happy see his entire visualization embedded in another site
as long as the site drove traffic back to his. Another author was fine with reuse
of either her data or her visualization, but felt that reuse of both together would
be inexcusable copying. Finally, the third author was fine with his visualizations
and data being reused by others, as long as proper attribution and links were
provided. As tool builders, we must remember to try to accommodate both the
information sharer and the businessperson who seeks benefit in exclusivity.
Users want more data tools. The authors we spoke to also understood
and requestedfeatures related to the wider data ecosystem, apart from the
visualization capabilities. One mentioned encouraging other site owners to collaboratively maintain complimentary data sets so that they could display the
data in different ways on their sites. Two of the three authors specifically requested the ability to communally maintain data on a wiki and then display
visualizations of it from within their blog environment. This is significant because these authors were using a version of DataPress without this feature and
were unaware that it existed.

7 Related Work

The past few years have seen a great number of projects devoted to visualizing and cataloging structured data on the web. Many Eyes [13] allows users to
upload data files and create interesting data visualizations via a web interface.
These visualizations are both viewable on their site and embeddable into other
sites. While Many Eyes facilitates data visualization, it requires the user to step
outside their authoring tool of choice (such as a blog or wiki) and use a thirdparty service to create and host their visualization. DataPress instead enables
authoring from within the blog environment and without third-party services.
Further, while Many Eyes focuses on numerical data and content modeling, we
target faceted navigation [9] across semi-structured data sets. Semi-structured
data opens doors to visualizations involving multiple datasets, allowing authors
to build on discussions with novel contributions from new data.

E. Benson et al.

Sense.us [11] is a study in visualizations which facilitate asynchronous collaboration in a centralized fashion. We want to modify this model by decentralizing
the visualizations and data references, allowing collaboration to occur in the
native content publishing platform(s) of the user(s).

Exhibit [12] is a client-side web framework for creating rich visualizations of
data. Exhibit combines textual data files (such as RDF or JSON) with an HTMLembedded configuration file to produce interactive faceted data displays. While
they neednt be programmers, Exhibit authors must be comfortable editing raw
HTML and often must be familiar with data formats such as JSON. DataPress
relies on Exhibit to power its visualizations, but it relieves the need to understand
Exhibits configuration syntax by providing a wizard that integrates with the
blogging platform. In doing so, we aim to bring Exhibits effective visualization
capabilities to the broader class of users.

The Google Visualization API [4] enables programming-savvy webmasters to
create a variety of data visualizations. As we aim to bring such visualizations into
the realm of blog and wiki content, we see tools like this as potential components
to incorporate into our own framework.

While the New York Times Visualization Lab [6] does not appear to use a
generally-available framework for authoring displays, it deserves mention as an
organization which puts a lot of effort to embed rich information displays in
online content. The fact that the interactive data-driven diagrams appearing in
its online edition appear to be hand-coded only underscore the need for better
general-purpose visualization tools accessible to web authors.

Several projects have also risen to prominence to provide entry and cataloguing of structured data on the web. DBpedia [7] curates the structured information
already present in Wikipedia taxonomies (categories) and Info Boxes. DBpedia
crawls Wikipedia weekly and coerces that information into an RDF database.
Semantic MediaWiki [14] is a MediaWiki extension that enables users to embed
key-value annotations about a wiki topic directly in its article text. An alternative approach to DBpedia, Semantic MediaWiki integrates awareness of the
inherent structure and types of data into the wiki, and thus the authorship pro-
cess, itself rather than attempting to recover structure from the natural-language
oriented MediaWiki database. Other tools, such as Freebase [2] and Factual [1]
provide many-to-many data authorship environments rather than attempting to
interweave structured data curation along with natural language information
repositories. These projects are an interesting new class of democratized data
management tools by themselves, and we see them as being another important
public data source in the connected data ecosystem that is evolving.

8 Conclusion

The design of DataPress reflects a belief that a data-aware web needs tools that
make grassroots authors want to work with data. We show the need for such
tools with a study of data-oriented blog content. DataPress makes progress on
this goal by fitting portions of the semantic web vision into a tool crafted specifically for the blogging workflow. DataPress provides bloggers with an easy way
?

?

?
to create, link, and publish data while preserving many of the properties that
make blogging an attractive publication platform: one-click publishing, flexible
format support, easy copy and paste, and immediate results. DataPress further demonstrates a possible ecosystem of grassroots semantic web publishing in
which community wikis serve to centralize ontology management while bloggers
use these definitions to create feeds of data over time. We reflect on conversations with our users to better understand how this need is manifested and how
to build better tools to facilitate casual use of structured data on the web.
