Time-Oriented Question Answering from
Clinical Narratives Using Semantic-Web

Techniques

Cui Tao1, Harold R. Solbrig1, Deepak K. Sharma1, Wei-Qi Wei1,

Guergana K. Savova2, and Christopher G. Chute1

1 Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN

2 Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA

Abstract. The ability to answer temporal-oriented questions based on
clinical narratives is essential to clinical research. The temporal dimension in medical data analysis enables clinical researches on many areas,
such as, disease progress, individualized treatment, and decision sup-
port. The Semantic Web provides a suitable environment to represent
the temporal dimension of the clinical data and reason about them. In
this paper, we introduce a Semantic-Web based framework, which provides an API for querying temporal information from clinical narratives.
The framework is centered by an OWL ontology called CNTRO (Clinical
Narrative Temporal Relation Ontology), and contains three major com-
ponents: time normalizer, SWRL based reasoner, and OWL-DL based
reasoner. We also discuss how we adopted these three components in the
clinical domain, their limitations, as well as extensions that we found
necessary or desirable to archive the purposes of querying time-oriented
data from real-world clinical narratives.

1 Introduction

The rapid increase in the volume of electronic health records (EHR) available
for research purposes provides new opportunities to create semantically interoperable healthcare applications and solutions for evidence-based medicine. An
important aspect of EHR is the temporal ordering of clinical events. Time is essential in clinical research [20]. Exposing the temporal dimension in medical data
analysis provides new research paths such as (1) uncovering temporal patterns
at the disease and patient level to better understand the progression of a disease,
(2) explaining past events such as the possible causes of a clinical situation, and
(3) predicting future events such as possible complexities based on a patients
current status.

One important objective for enable meaningful use of EHR is to develop software applications to realize the true potential of EHR to improve the safety,
quality, and efficiency of care [3]. In order to facilitate clinical researchers to
expose the temporal dimension in medical data analysis, software platforms that
allow users to ask free-form queries and retrieve temporal information automatically from clinical records are highly desired. First, the temporal information

P.F. Patel-Schneider et al.(Eds.): ISWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6497, pp. 241256, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
