Measuring the Dynamic Bi-directional Influence

between Content and Social Networks

Shenghui Wang and Paul Groth

De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

VU University Amsterdam
{swang,pgroth}@few.vu.nl

Abstract. The Social Semantic Web has begun to provide connections
between users within social networks and the content they produce across
the whole of the Social Web. Thus, the Social Semantic Web provides a
basis to analyze both the communication behavior of users together with
the content of their communication. However, there is little research combining the tools to study communication behaviour and communication
content, namely, social network analysis and content analysis. Further-
more, there is even less work addressing the longitudinal characteristics of such a combination. This paper presents a general framework for
measuring the dynamic bi-directional influence between communication
content and social networks. We apply this framework in two use-cases:
online forum discussions and conference publications. The results provide a new perspective over the dynamics involving both social networks
and communication content.

1 Introduction

Does an informative post on a microblogging service lead to a user gaining
followers? If a user is popular in a social network, will their new status updates
be widely quoted? If a researcher identifies a new topic one year, does that
result in the research having more coauthors the next? As an increasing amount
of content is mediated through social networks, these types of questions are of
great interest, in particular, to developers, social scientists, and business that
aim to understand the link between content generation and social connection. A
key aspect to answering these questions is to understand how the relationships
between users influence the content of their communication and vice versa.

In this paper, we extend our work in [26] by proposing a general framework
for measuring such influence over time. In our approach, we translate both user
relationships and content into two corresponding networks: a social network and
a content networks. The networks are then characterized using common network
properties such as (in-/out-)degree and betweenness centrality. The influence is
then measured using a set of multilevel time-series regression models producing
what we term an influence network showing how these variables impact each
other in time. Additionally, our Influence Framework can integrate other network
properties tailored to a given problem domain.

P.F. Patel-Schneider et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2010, Part I, LNCS 6496, pp. 814829, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
?

?

?
The use of the Influence Framework is facilitated by the emergence of Semantic Web technologies not only to represent relationships between users on
the Social Web but also to link to the content those users exchange. For ex-
ample, the Semantically Interlinked Online Communities (SIOC) ontology is for
the representation of the content of discussions but is explicitly intertwined with
the Friend of a Friend (FOAF) ontology that is used to represent personal rela-
tionships. Because the Semantic Web provides these explicit links, it is easier to
obtain the input data sets required by our Influence Framework. Thus, as more
Social Web content is made available using Semantic Web standards, the Framework can be used to investigate a wider variety of content and social networks.
Later, we show how the Influence Framework can be applied to networks obtained by querying the Semantic Web Dog Food dataset [24] as well as networks
extracted from a Dutch political forum. The ability to study the connection between people through their objects was posited as a key benefit to the Social
Semantic Web [5]. This work is an example of where these benefits are coming
to fruition.

In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows:
 A general framework for measuring the bi-directional influence between net-

works of people and the content associated with those people.

 A multilevel time-series regression model for measuring the longitudinal in-

fluences between the network properties of content and social networks.

 The generation of influence networks for both Dutch political forums and
the World Wide Web conference series, which provide new material for social
scientists to investigate these domains.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We begin by presenting the Influence Framework and its constituent parts. This is followed by a discussion of the
application of the Framework to two use cases: one studying a conference series
and the other studying data from a Dutch political forum. Related work is then
discussed followed by a conclusion.

2 Influence Framework

The Influence Framework is a three stage framework for measuring the influence between (and within) user relationships and the content they communicate.
While such measures of influence are clearly possible to perform on a case-by-
case basis, a key realization in this work is that by representing content and
user relationships as networks, standard network properties can provide a good
initial insight into influence in different domains. We note that influence is a
time-dependent notion and thus our framework requires time series data.

The three stages of the framework are:

1. Network Generation
2. Measuring Network Properties
3. Time Series Analysis
We now discuss each of these stages.

S. Wang and P. Groth

2.1 Network Generation
The first stage of the framework is to generate a series of both content and
social networks as well as bindings between those networks. The starting point
is information about a set of actors who interact over time, e.g. , participants in
online discussions, scientists who co-author, etc. . From these data sets, a series
of social networks representing the interaction of these actors over time can be
produced. Then, a corpus of content related to each actor produced over time is
needed e.g. , the textual content of online discussions a participant posted, the
abstract a scientist wrote, the movies a star acted in, etc. . This content corpus
should also have the property that pieces of content are somehow similar across
a group of actors. Based on some similarity measure between content at each
time step, a series of content networks can be generated. A key artifact for the
framework is documentation of the relationship between actors and the content
they produce at each time step. We term these bindings.

The network generation stage is perhaps the most domain specific part of
the framework as a decision must be made about which content and which sort
of user relationship should be represented in the network. Furthermore, many
domains have different data formats requiring specialized programs to generate
the needed networks. This is where Social Semantic Web technologies are particularly important. By providing common query interfaces and data represen-
tations, the extraction of these networks is significantly easier as demonstrated
in Section 3.1.

2.2 Measuring Network Properties
Once the content networks and social networks have been produced, the properties of those networks that are of interest need to be defined (as variables) and
then measured. The necessary requirement of these properties is that they vary
over time. Because the content and social relationships are defined as networks,
common network properties can be measured first. For a graph G = (V, E) with
a set of vertices V = {v1, . . . , vn} and a set of edges E = {eij | 1  i, j  n},
the common network properties suggested are:
Degree centrality. For a given vertex vi, its degree centrality is equal to the
degree of vi divided by the maximum possible degree. That is, the degree
centrality CD(vi) for vertex vi is:

CD(vi) = deg(vi)
n  1

In a directed network, two separate measures of degree centrality, namely
in-degree and out-degree, should be measured instead.

Betweenness centrality. The betweenness centrality of a vertex is defined as
the fraction of all shortest paths that pass through it over all shortest paths
in the network. That is,
?

?

?
CB(vi) =

st(vi)

st

vs=vi=vtV

vs=vt
?

?

?
where st is the number of shortest paths from vs to vt (vs, vt  V ) and
st(vi) is the number of shortest paths from vs to vt that pass through vi.
Clustering coefficients. Our analysis is at the vertex level, therefore, we measure the local clustering coefficient of a vertex which quantifies how close its
neighbors are to being a clique (complete graph). It is measured as the proportion of links between the vertices within its neighbourhood divided by
the number of links that could possibly exist between them. Let Ni be the
neighbourhood of vertex vi, i.e. , its immediately connected neighbours. For
directed graphs, the local clustering coefficient of vertex vi is given as

CC(vi) =

|{ejk}|
ki(ki  1)

: vj, vk  Ni, ejk  E.

While for undirected graphs, it is defined as

CC(vi) =

2|{ejk}|
ki(ki  1)

: vj, vk  Ni, ejk  E.

A higher CC(vi) means the neighbours of vi are more densely connected.

It is important to note that while these network properties can be measured for
every graph, their underlying meaning with respect to the social reality needs
to be defined on a per domain basis.

While these measures are a useful start, any network property that varies over
time is allowable within the Influence Framework. Later, we show how other more
domain specific network properties can be used to gain additional insight into
the influence between content and social networks.

The output of this stage is a table mapping each actor to values for each

property at each time step.

2.3 Multilevel Time-Series Regression Models

Our Framework aims to model the longitudinal influences between network properties derived from both social and content networks. The output of Stage 2 provides data at successive time steps spaced at uniform time intervals, which form
a time series. Thus, we need to apply time series analysis to extract meaningful
statistics of the data in order to better understand the underlying forces and
structures that produced the observed data. By fitting to a time series model,
we can proceed to forecasting and predicting the forthcoming data [30]. When
modeling variations in the level of a process, one of the typical methods is to use
the autoregressive (AR) models.
Let X be a time series: X = {x(1), x(2), . . .}, where x(t) is the data observa-
(t)
tion at time t. Here, x(t) is a vector, i.e. x(t) = (x
m )T , where m
(t)
, i = 1, . . . , m, is
is the total number of variables we are modelling and each x
i
a variable we are interested in, such as the betweenness and degree centrality of a

(t)
2 , . . . , x

(t)
1 , x

S. Wang and P. Groth

node in the social network or the centrality values of certain political or scientific
topics. The AR(p) model is defined as

p

x(t) = a +

bj x(tj) + (t),

(1)

j=1

where b1, . . . , bp are the parameters of the model, a is a constant and (t) is
the noise with Gaussian distribution. In this paper, we opt for a simple model
for each variable xi independently, which only includes the values from the last
time-point as independent variables, i.e. , an AR(1)-process:

(t)
i

,

(2)

(t1)
(t)
i = ai + b1i x
x

(t)
m + 
i
is Gaussian noise with zero mean and variance 2
.

+  + bmi x(t1)

In these models, each variable x

where 
(t)
i at time t is modelled as a linear combination
of the predictor variables at time t  1, each weighted by a coefficient that
quantifies how variation in the predictor variable at time t  1 is related to the
variation of the predicted variable at time t. Such coefficients or effects can tell
us the influence among different variables over time.

Generally, the above mentioned variables are referred to in statistics as units
of analysis. In social reality, these variables are often from different levels, which
are frequently hierarchically nested. For example, when studying the research
achievements, attributes of individual researchers, research groups, faculties and
the universities as a whole can all be important units of measures. This stage
applies the above introduced regressive model to study the influence between
variables, and the resulting coefficients are also called fixed effects. However,
there exist variations among different actors, i.e. , random effects (actor-level
errors). Therefore, such single-level statistical methods are no longer appropriate
to study these so-called complex data sets [31]. We thus need to apply multilevel
analysis to examine both fixed and random effects of variables measured at
different levels [13,31].

Formally, we define x(t)

p = (x

(t)
1,p, . . . , x

(t)
m,p)T , a vector containing the variables

for actor p at time t. We can then rewrite equation (2) as
i,p x(t1)

(t)
i,p = ai + bT
x

i x(t1)

(t)
i + cT

+ 

p

p

+ 

(t)
i,p,

(3)

where bi = (bi1, . . . , bim)T and ci = (ci1, . . . , cim)T are the fixed-effect coefficients and random-effects coefficients respectively.

In order to compare the resulting fixed effects to each other, all variables
in the random effects regression equations need to be linearly transformed into
standardised values, i.e. , subtraction of their mean, division by their standard
deviation. In this way, the fixed effects can be interpreted as the effect of one
standard deviation of change in the independent variable on the number of standard deviations change in the dependent variable.

The output of this stage is the set of statistics generated in fitting the regression models as well as a diagram, called an influence network, that shows the
statistically significant effects between variables.
?

?

?
3 Use Cases

We now present two use cases applying the Influence Framework. First, a simple
use case based on existing Semantic Web data is discussed. It analyses the influence between co-authorship and the topics addressed at a conference. The second
use case looks at the influence of social status of forum participants and their
focus on particular political parties. This use case is then extended to consider
newly defined variables to answer specific questions of the domain.

3.1 Influence between Co-authors of Academic Papers and the

Topics They Address

Data Collection. The World Wide Web Conference is the preeminent conference on Web Technologies covering both advances in academia and industry. We
obtained a corpus of metadata about this conference from the Semantic Web
Dogfood repository [24]. The metadata covers the conference program including
paper metadata (e.g. , authors, paper titles, keywords, etc. ) and organization
metadata (e.g. , program committee members, collocated workshops, etc. ). Importantly for use with the Influence Framework, the metadata spans four years
of the conference from 2007 to 2010 using generally the same schema. The data
was downloaded in bulk and loaded into separate RDF stores for each year.

Generating Social Networks. We chose the co-author network as the social
network of interest. For every year, we retrieved the co-author pairs for each
article using the SPARQL query shown in Figure 1. From these results, we built
a weighted undirected graph for each year where nodes are authors, edges are
shared authorship of an article and the weights on edges are the number of
co-authorships between the two linked authors. For wider coverage, we did not
distinguish between paper types that is a workshop, main track, or poster paper
are all considered equal for the purposes of co-authorship.

PREFIX rdf: <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>
PREFIX rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#>
PREFIX foaf: <http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/>
PREFIX swrc: <http://swrc.ontoware.org/ontology#>

SELECT ?author ?coauthor ?article WHERE {

?article swrc:author ?author.
?article swrc:author ?coauthor

}

Fig. 1. Query to extract co-author pairs

For each year, we measured the degree and betweenness centrality of each
of the authors. The degree centrality represents how activity the author is in
coauthoring with others. Clustering coefficient provides a measure for how closely

S. Wang and P. Groth

knit a group is. In this case, it provides a measure of whether authors write with
the same set of other authors. For example, one can imagine that the authors
from the same department may form a cluster within the co-author network.

Generating Content Networks. Here, we are interested in the topics under
discussion at the conference in each year. To obtain those topics, we use author
assigned keywords as proxies for those topics. This is common practice within
the bibliometrics community [3]. Similar to the co-author network, we retrieved
the keywords for each article in the conference via a SPARQL query. To improve
overlap between keywords assigned by different authors, keywords containing
more than one word were split into separate words and then stemmed. Stemming
allows keywords such as ontologies and ontology to be treated the same. Based
on the stemmed keywords, a weighted undirected graph is built, where a node
is a keyword and an edge is the co-occurrence between two keywords in the set
of keywords for an article. Edges are weighted by the number of co-occurrences.
A graph is produced for each year.

As prescribed by the Influence Framework, we then compute several common
network metrics. Again, the degree provides information about the popularity of
a given topic. The betweenness centrality provides information about whether a
keyword is a bridge between two other keywords (i.e. topics).

Binding Social Content Networks. We bind the two networks together via
the papers within the conference. Thus, we know which author discusses a topic
and what topics are associated with particular authors via their connection to
papers.

Influence Network. For this use case, we use five network measures.

 Three social network properties: degree centrality, betweenness centrality,

and clustering coefficient.

 Two content-wise properties: degree centrality, betweenness centrality.
The units of analysis are all year  participant combinations. The multilevel
time-series regression models are then constructed to to study the influence
network between topics of a conference and the co-authorship of papers.

Figure 2 shows the resulting influence network. This network only shows effects which are statistically significant. Note, when reading such an influence
network, the edges are directional in time. For example, in Figure 2, the edge
between degree in the content network and clustering coefficient in the social
network, should be read as the degree at some time t has large negative effect
on the clustering coefficient in time t + 1.

The network suggests a number of avenues for investigation. First, there is
strong negative effect between the degree centrality of a topic (i.e. , keyword) on
itself, which suggests that a popular topic one year is likely to be less popular the
next. Degree centrality of a topic also has strong negative effects on the degree
centrality and clustering coefficient for an author. One interpretation of this
?

?

?
 
?

?

?
Fig. 2. Influence network for WWW conference

result is that after a burst of collaboration on a hot topic, the topic becomes less
exciting and the collaboration between authors around it dies down. There are
strong positive effects of the betweenness centrality of a topic and the subsequent
degree centrality and clustering coefficient of an author. A possible explanation
for these effects is that if a topic bridges the gap between other topics in one
conference year, it is likely to become the focus for new collaborations between
authors concentrating on these normally separate topics. Such new collaborations
would then come to the foreground in the next conference year.

3.2 Influence between Social Status of Online Forum Participants

and Their Political Attention

Data Collection. Our data is collected from the biggest and one of the oldest
Dutch forums, NL.politiek, which is entirely devoted to politics. This forum
has more than 40,000 participants. Our dataset contains all the postings from
October 2003 to December 2008, in total more than 1.1 million postings.

Generating Social Networks. All postings were divided into weekly subsets.
In each subset, all postings were grouped by their threads and ranked based on
their time stamps. Each thread corresponded to a mini discussion network, where
the participants reacted to others by replying to their postings. Formally, a mini
discussion network (i.e. , a thread) is a graph G = (V, E), where V is a set of
participants in this thread, and E the weighted and directed connections between
the participants. There is a directed link (vi, vj) if participant vi replied at least
once to one of the postings of participant vj. The frequency of the occurrence
of such replying action was considered as the weight of the link, w(vi, vj). Note,
online participants often post more than once in the same thread, replying to
previous postings which may include their own. Therefore, such networks can be
reflexive.

S. Wang and P. Groth

We then aggregated all the mini discussion networks within one week into a bigger network, producing a series of 259 weekly social networks where 21,127 participants are involved. We note that the extraction of these networks would have
been greatly simplified if they had been represented using SIOC, for example.

For each week, we measured the in-/out-degree and betweenness centrality
of all participants. In this setting, the in-degree centrality of a participant indicates the degree of popularity he has in the online community. The out-degree
centrality indicates how active one participant is. The betweenness centrality is
an indicator of the mediating/brokerage role of a participant. A high betweenness centrality suggests that the participant connects separate communities. The
brokerage role of the persons with a higher betweenness centrality is the key to
understand the structural hole theory of organisational communication [9].

Generating Content Networks. In this use case, we are interested in the
attention to the political parties that online participants have when they discuss
in the forum. We thus extract the co-occurrence of parties as the content network.
Since co-occurrence is symmetric, the content networks are therefore undirected.
In the content network, the vertices are 19 Dutch parties, i.e. , V = {p1, . . . , p19}.
At the weekly basis, for each party pi, we gathered a set of postings where the
party was mentioned,1 noted as Spi, i = 1, . . . , 19. The weight of the edge (pi, pj)
is calculated as the Jaccard similarity coefficient between two sets Spi and Spj ,
that is,

w(pi, pj) = Spi  Spj
Spi  Spj

In this way, we also extracted 259 weekly content networks. We then measured
the betweenness and degree centrality of each party in each week. These centrality can tell us how one partys popularity and breakage role evolves over
time. When a party has a higher degree centrality, then this party is more often
mentioned while other parties are being discussed, i.e. , this party is more relevant or important. A party with a higher betweenness centrality is more often
mentioned as a reference while more than two parties are mentioned.

Binding Social and Content Networks. We bind two networks based on
who talked when, about what. For each participant, we counted how many times
he talked about one or more of the 19 Dutch parties in a particular week, noted
}. Then the degree centrality of this participant in terms of his
as {Op1 , . . . , Op19
discussion content is calculated as

19

cdc =

 dc(pi)

Op1

1 This is done through the AmCAT tool (http://content-analysis.org/) which
uses a dictionary of keywords to signify an occurrence of a party when one of its
keywords is used in the posting.
?

?

?
Fig. 3. Standard influence network

where dc(pi) is the degree centrality of Party pi in the extracted content network
of this week. The betweenness centrality in terms of the content, cbc, is calculated
similarly.

Influence Network. Similar to the conference case, we have five standard
network variables to model:

 Three social network properties: sbc (betweenness centrality), sidc (in-degree

centrality) and sodc (out-degree centrality)

 Two content-wise properties: cbc (betweenness centrality) and cdc (degree

centrality)

The units of analysis are all the week  participant combinations. We built the
multilevel time-series regression models as introduced in Section 2.3 to study
the influence network among political attention and social status in the online
community.

There are 1762 participants have posted more than 10 postings during the
whole period of time. Therefore, the Figure 3 is based on 433,453 observations
from these 1762 participants. The value on the links are the fixed effects, with
the critical value p < 0.05.

Not surprisingly, the in and out degree centrality have positive effect upon each
other and to themselves. When a participant is more active, they are also likely
to be more popular and more active in the social network, and vice versa. Also,
the two degree centralities and the betweenness centrality have positive effects on
each other with the similar strength. Once a participant gains a relatively strong
brokerage role, they are more likely to maintain this role, by continuing to react
to others, which consequently causes more people to reply to them. Looking
at the effects between social network and the content network, the in-degree
centrality (i.e. , the popularity of a participant) has a positive effect on the
degree centrality of the content. This suggests that when a popular participant
talks about certain parties, these parties are likely to become popular in the
next week. When a participant becomes a broker, they tend to communicate
with different opinion-holders, therefore they discuss more parties instead of
only popular ones. This might be the reason for the negative effect from the

S. Wang and P. Groth

social betweenness centrality to the content degree centrality. However, this may
also be because of the correlations between these fixed effects, which needs to
be further investigated.

3.3 Influence between User-Defined Content Variables with Social

Network Properties

Content networks can be extracted in a manner that is more suitable to specific problems within a domain. Communication scientists are interested in not
only the attention that the online forum participants pay to the political parties,
but also the degree to which they follow the agenda of the mass media. Online
discussions are expected to be more emotional and more aggressive (negativity,
hatred, disgust, in short flaming) as compared to the news from the mass media [25]. It is natural for the communication scientists to ask to which degree
emotions and aggression are expressions of autonomous or even anarchistic of
online participants, to which degree they are caused by the news content in the
mass media, as the classic theory of agenda setting would suggest, and to which
degree they reflect depersonalised, scale-free properties of the social network of
online participants that can be predicted from the previous state of their social
networks.

Data Collection. We further collected newspaper articles from five biggest
Dutch national newspapers. The selected national newspapers (Telegraaf, NRC
Handelsblad, Algemeen Dagblad, de Volkskrant and Trouw) represent mainstream politics in the Netherlands. These newspapers reach one third of the
Dutch population (official figures in 2008, http://www.cebuco.nl). The newspaper articles were retrieved from the LexisNexis archive,2 each of which mentioned
at least one political actor (e.g. , Dutch politicians or parties). We took a random subset of newspaper articles published between 2006 and 2008. Therefore,
we also take 157 weekly social networks in these three years into the analysis.

Extracting Content Variables. In this paper, we focus on two aspects related
to the forum content. The first aspect is related to the agenda setting [29,33].
The agenda setting hypothesis maintains that the participants in the online
environment will take over the issue agenda from the mass media in a top-down
fashion. An alternative hypothesis is that the mass media nowadays take over the
topics raised in online discussion forums, in order to express and disseminate the
opinions of their audience to decision-makers in business and politics, or in order
to keep their audience in competitive media markets. Here, we are interested in
whether the social status of the participants is influenced by the extent to which
they follow mass media. Therefore, we use a list of political issues and measure
weekly the attention to these issues (the frequencies of occurrence of these issues)
in the newspaper articles and online discussions, respectively. Then a correlation
is calculated between these two lists of the attention, which gives the first content

http://www.lexisnexis.com/
?

?

?
variable N ewspaperContagion. A higher N ewspaperContagion indicates that
the participant more strongly follows the agenda of the newspapers.

Another interesting aspect is the above-mentioned emotion expressed in the
forum discussions. We would like to check whether the amount of emotion expressed in the online discussion influences the social status of the participants
and his willingness to following the mass media. Starting from Brouwers thesaurus for Dutch [7], a list of keywords was developed for each emotion. Similar
to measuring the attention to political parties, the frequencies of occurrence of
these keywords were also measured. We separated the emotion of disgust and
hate as a separate variable as they are the major emotions the communication scientists are studying [25]. Therefore, we have two other content variables:
DisgustHate and OtherEmotions.

Influence Network. The five variables we investigate are

 Two network properties: IP opularity (=indegree centrality) and

CBetweenness (betweenness centrality)

 Three communication contents: DisgustHate, OtherEmotions and

N ewspaperContagion.

Similar multilevel time-series regression models were built to study the influence
between these variables. The resulting influence network is shown in Figure 4,
based on 171,756 observations from 1101 participants.3

Similar to Figure 3, the betweenness centrality and popularity (in-degree cen-
trality) have strong positive effects on themselves and each other. As we can
see, a popular member or a brokerage member has a strong tendency to express
emotions in their postings, and such emotional expressions also increase their
social status. Especially the social popularity and the usage of the language of
disgust and hate have impressively strong effects on each other. It may be the
case that online participants who feel that they are in the centre of the debate,
as measured by a high popularity and betweenness centrality, feel unhindered or
even obliged to use rather crude words to maintain their position.

In our dataset, there seems no significant effect from the degree one follows
the mass media to the aptitude for flaming and blaming, which is suggested on
the basis of the classic agenda setting theory [21].

The decision of following newspaper agenda is influenced by the previous
popularity in the community and also the expression of disgust and hate. This
finding corresponds with earlier findings that especially citizens who are preoccupied with negativity will like the current type of news, especially men like
negative news [12]. A new finding is that a high popularity in an online discussion forum also contributes to taking over agenda cues from the mass media.
Apparently popular participants feel inclined to follow the news and to take over
the news agenda. This corresponds with the old idea that opinion leaders in a
group tend to follow the mass media closely.

3 Again, only these 1101 participants have more than 9 postings within these three

years.

S. Wang and P. Groth
?

?

?
Fig. 4. Regression model of user-defined variables

4 Related Work

Social network analysis (SNA) has recently become a popular topic of study in
organisation studies, communication studies, information science, etc. It views
social relationships in terms of network theory consisting of nodes and ties. Using
graph algorithms, SNA characterises the structure of social networks, strategic
positions in these networks, specific sub-networks and decompositions of people
and activities [28]. SNA has been applied not only to Web 2.0 platforms such as
Facebook [1] and wikis [32], but also directly to the whole Web, the blogsphere,
ontologies and the Semantic Web [16,17,15]. Recently, Semantic Web techniques
have been adopted to facilitate standard SNA procedures [23,20,10].

On the other hand, content analysis is a research tool which has been used
since the mid-1950s to determine the presence of certain words or concepts
within texts [4,18]. By quantifying and analysing the presence, meanings and
relations of such words and concepts, social scientists can make inferences about
the content of the texts. As it is applicable to any piece of writing or recorded
communication, it has been widely used in many fields, such as media studies,
literature, sociology and political science [14,8,34]. Recently, many efforts have
been focused on automated content analysis, such as [2], which to a large degree
improves the access to large corpora.

These two classes of analysis have been investigated and applied in a rather
parallel style. Only until recently, social scientists started to combine social network analysis and content analysis, such as the discourse network analysis in [19],
and the work in [27]. This paper is the first to combine these two kinds of analysis
in the Semantic Web context.

Another focus of our paper is on the longitudinal analysis over content and social networks. Recognised as a Holy Grail for network researchers, there has been
a large degree of focus on the analysis of social networks over time [22]. However,
there has not been much work with respect to the longitudinal analysis on the
?

?

?
combination of social and content networks. The closest work is that of Gloor et al,
who use network analysis over social networks and corresponding content to identify trends , however, they concentrate on a time dependent betweenness measure
and do not provide a general framework for a variety of network properties [11].
Our previous work in [26] is extended in this paper by providing a general framework which is suitable for the analysis of the longitudinal influence between social
networks and communication content in the Semantic Web context.

5 Conclusion

In this paper, we presented a general framework for analyzing the dynamic bidirectional influence between social relationships and the content produced with
respect to those relationships. The Influence Framework leverages a key insight
that by representing both social relationships and content as networks, common
network properties can be used to bootstrap the analysis of influence. Based on
these properties, the framework applies a time-series regression model to generate
influence network diagrams representing the statistically significant effects of
these properties. We applied our framework to two domains, dutch politics and
a conference series, resulting in interesting conclusions about the influence of
media on political forum participants and the impact of topics on academic
collaboration. The data was acquired from both a web crawl and a Semantic Web
source, we note that the acquisition of networks was easier using the Semantic
Web data source. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that combines
longitudinal social network analysis and content analysis in the context of the
Semantic Web. In future work, we aim to expand the integration with Semantic
Web data sources by providing reusable modules for widely used ontologies such
as SIOC. Additionally, we aim to provide a service allowing others to more easily
apply this framework to their own data sources.

By linking across both content and social networks, the Social Semantic Web
is providing a new data source for understanding the relationship between users
and the content that they produce [6]. The framework described in this paper provides a new tool for analyzing these relationships from a longitudinal
perspective.
