Toponym Resolution in Social Media

Neil Ireson and Fabio Ciravegna

University of Sheffield, UK

Abstract. Increasingly user-generated content is being utilised as a
source of information, however each individual piece of content tends
to contain low levels of information. In addition, such information tends
to be informal and imperfect in nature; containing imprecise, subjec-
tive, ambiguous expressions. However the content does not have to be
interpreted in isolation as it is linked, either explicitly or implicitly, to
a network of interrelated content; it may be grouped or tagged with
similar content, comments may be added by other users or it may be related to other content posted at the same time or by the same author or
members of the authors social network. This paper generally examines
how ambiguous concepts within user-generated content can be assigned
a specific/formal meaning by considering the expanding context of the
information, i.e. other information contained within directly or indirectly
related content, and specifically considers the issue of toponym resolution
of locations.

Keywords: Concept Disambiguation, Social networks, Information
Extraction.

1 Introduction

The growth in the use of social media for sharing content (text, images or video)
to other individuals who can be close personal associates or random strangers,
is staggering. If the latest statistics from Facebook1 are to be believed, around
7% of the worlds population are active users and they spend on average 40
minutes per day on this one site. Whilst the value of this User-Generated Content
(UGC) is being realised, utilising the information it contains poses a number of
challenges. Contributions to social media sites (blogs, forums, Twitter, etc.) are
conversational in nature and thus tend to be brief and informal, containing
imprecise, subjective and ambiguous information. The provider of the content
may make assumptions about the receivers ability to interpret the meaning,
despite the fact that the message (i.e. content and any associated metadata) may
imperfectly represent their intended meaning. For example, incidental finding in
a recent study on photo retrieval [1] indicated that people are unable to retrieve
their own content due to their inconsistent descriptions.

One solution to this issue would be to facilitate the user in providing clear
semantics defining any potential ambiguous concept they use. Recently a number

http://www.facebook.com/press/info.php?statistics

P.F. Patel-Schneider et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2010, Part I, LNCS 6496, pp. 370385, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
?

?

?
of services (such as OpenCalais2) attempt to guide the user providing content
to link concepts in their text to some URI, e.g. to Wikipedia or IMDB3 articles.
If such approaches are to be useful they must make suggestion which match the
content providers intentions. In order to determine the correct resolution of an
ambiguous concept it is necessary to consider its context, whilst this context is
most readily provided by the other information contained in the content (i.e.
other text, image features, tags, etc.) the conversational nature of social media
means that this information might well be limited and imperfect. However the
interrelated nature of social media means that the disambiguation process may
be able to use more distant but still related context, for example content posted
around the same time or by the same user or by members of the users social
network.

In this paper we examine the use of this expanding context to resolve ambiguous concepts in social media and specifically consider the issue of toponym reso-
lution, i.e. the allocation of specific geolocations to target location terms. Section
2 considers the related work; the disambiguation of both generic and location
concepts in text and social media. Section 3 then outlines the methodology used
to determine the expanding information context and discusses measurements for
determining the degree of term ambiguity. Section 4 describes the experiment;
the data used and generation of the disambiguation classification model. Section 5 presents the results and Section 6 discusses the short-comings of the work
and how these might be addressed in the future. Section 7 then summarises the
findings of the paper.

2 Related Work

The automatic disambiguation of concepts in social media has concentrated on
the issue of ambiguous textual tags, this work can be broadly divided into two
areas. The first approach disambiguates a target concept (tag) by creating clusters a frequently co-occurring tags, where each cluster is assumed to provide
a separate meaning, defined by the tags it contains [2]. Such an approach has
the advantage of being applicable to any tag, however as no specific meaning is
assigned to each tag cluster it limits its usefulness and the ability to evaluate the
approach. Although further processing has been used to assign a unique URI to
the clusters based on the co-occurrence between cluster tags and terms found
in an ontology [3], the work suffers from a limited evaluation of the techniques
performance.

The second approach attempts to identify the correct meaning of tag given
its use for a specific resource (i.e. image, web page). The co-occurring tags are
used to provide context, these tags are compared with some tag-concept model
to determine the most likely meaning. Angeletou [4] used WordNet [5] to identify ambiguous tags, however other work claims that WordNet tends to produce

http://www.opencalais.com/

3 Internet Movie Database: http://www.imdb.com

N. Ireson and F. Ciravegna

overly generic concepts [3]. Other approaches use purpose built tag-concept models based on Wikipedia/DBpedia [6,7,8].

The principal difficulty with these approaches is the issue of evaluating whether
the disambiguation processes used actually assigns the correct meaning. All the
studies perform post-experiment, human review of the results, and in general do
not specify the nature of the evaluation (i.e. number of reviewers, inter-annotator
agreement, etc.). The generation of Gold-Standards for the disambiguation of
generic concepts in (multilingual) text has been undertaken by the SENSEVAL4
evaluation exercises. However, this data is concerned with the identification of
concepts in natural language, whilst in social media text, and particularly with
tags, concepts have little or no grammatical context.

Toponym resolution has the advantage over general concept resolution that
user-generated, gold standard data is available, and especially in social media
data. This is due to the ability to, and interest in, geotagging UGC. In addition,
in a limited context it is highly likely that a given location will have only one
meaning [9], a hypothesis which is shown to be true for the data used in this
experiment in respect to a given user context. A number of researchers have examined the disambiguation of locations in text, for example; in news articles [10],
in Wikipedia articles [11] and general Web pages [12,13,14,15]. The disambiguation processes generally combine a number of techniques, including; statistical
likelihood (selecting the most probable location), textual context (considering
the surrounding text of a location) and co-referent locations within the document and, for web pages, hypertext-linked documents. The use of co-occurring
locations to provide disambiguating context is stressed as a key technique which
generally provides high precision, but low recall, when compared with other tech-
niques. This is due to the requirement for related locations to occur, which may
not be satisfied for a given document. One of the key issues in this technique
is deriving a function to determine how co-occurrence of locations affects the
disambiguation. Most frequently this involves using some heuristics to propagate toponym likelihood (based on location similarity, i.e. the spatial distance or
the relative distance in some location taxonomy, between co-occurring locations
and possible toponym resolutions), but more recent work forms a feature vector
based on the co-occurrences and uses machine learning to calculate the most
predictive function [11].

Crandall, et al. [16] combine image features and temporal context to geolocate
Flickr images, and in their conclusion they indicate the potential advantage
which could be derived from also considering social context. Davis, et al. [17]
explore the combination of user and temporal context to determine the location
of an uploaded photograph, but unfortunately do not provide enough description
of the experimental results to determine the relative effects of these two contexts.
The recent work by Serdyukov, et al. [18], examines the issue of geolocating
Flickr photos using the associated tags. Although their work does use the GeoNames5 database to boost the importance of location names, the predictive model

http://www.senseval.org/
http://www.geonames.org
?

?

?
incorporates all the photo tags. Their aim is not specifically toponym resolution,
instead they attempt to calculate the actual latitude/longitude of a photo. The
resultant model provides an association between a tag (or set of tags) and a
location. This is similar to previous work looking at Flickr data to determine
the location (and event) related semantics of a tag [19], i.e. the degree to which
a given tag could be associated with a given location, and Wang et al.s work on
finding the relationships between news/blog tags and countries [20].

Weinberger, et al. [21] explore the general issue of tag ambiguity. The work
defines ambiguity in terms of the probability of observing a given tag in a given
context (i.e. set of tags). They then determine the two tags, if added to the set of
tags, that give rise to maximally different probability distributions. For example
the tags UK AND MA significantly effect the probability distributions of
the tag Cambridge. It is interesting to note that the research, which considers
tag from 100 million images, indicates that 16% of tag ambiguity is explained
by other geographic metadata. This emphasises the importance of determining
the correct location associated with tags not only to geolocate UGC but also
to disambiguate other tags. Indeed there has been work exploring the use of
the known location (and time) of UGC to build a recommendation classifier to
suggest other tags to the user [22,23].

Perhaps a surprising feature of the previous work on toponym resolution in
social media, is that the social context has generally not been exploited. User
models have been utilised in the disambiguation of general tags [6], and recent
work, on tag recommendations [24] and determining the quality of reviews [25],
have demonstrate that using social contextual information, i.e. information relating to a user and their social network, can help improve prediction especially
overcoming the issue of data sparsity. The work in this paper examines how such
information can be applied to improve the toponym resolution process.

3 Methodology

This section describes the techniques applied in toponym resolution (and applicable to concept disambiguation in general) and how social context can be used
to improve performance.

3.1 Information Context
Similar to previous work the surrounding context is used to disambiguate the
target concept. This context is provided by the tags associated with the UGC
or the users themselves. There are both advantages and disadvantages in using
tags over actual textual content; in text you can exploit grammatical structures
and term proximity, whilst tags are, in effect, a bag-of-words. However tags
are intended to provide an overall description of the content so, if efficacious
tagging is performed, tags should provide a valuable source of descriptive in-
formation. However not all tags will be equally informative and the degree of
relevance of a given tag will depend upon the application. For toponym resolution the target concepts (tags) are locations and therefore it is necessary to

N. Ireson and F. Ciravegna

determine those tags which influence the location description of content. The approach adopted was to limit the tags by only considering location names, whilst
there are a number of freely-available geographic resources, Yahoo! GeoPlanet6
was selected due to it providing a semantically structured lexical database. Its
specified aim is to provide geo-referencing data on the Internet, which it does
by providing a common naming convention (each location is allocated a URI in
the form of a Where-On-Earth Identifier (WOEID)) and a framework or taxonomy describing the relative geography of these locations. The version7 used
contains over 5 million locations/toponyms, but more importantly the data provides an analogous structure to that found in general concept resources, such
as WordNet. Each location is a node in a hierarchy from which it is possible to
determine the parental locations (hypernyms) which contain the location, the
child locations (hyponyms) that the location contains and also locations that
share the same parent (coordinate terms). In addition it is possible to extract
neighbouring locations, which are coordinate terms which are adjacent to the
target location. A further attractive feature of Yahoo! GeoPlanet is the work
on namespace concordance8 which maps between the WOEID and a variety of
other namespaces (e.g. location identifiers from; Geonames9, OpenStreetMap10,
Wikipedia11). This means that it become possible to link content identified by
a WOEID to information from multifarious providers including that from the
Linked Data community.

The specific application scenario is a classic Information Retrieval problem
whereby a user wishes to retrieve all the UGC which relates to a given instance
of a concept, e.g. Sheffield, South Yorkshire, UK (WOEID:34503). The user can
apply three strategies to retrieve the desired information:

1. Query for the ambiguous term and sift through the results. The effectiveness
of this strategy is dependent upon the likelihood of content being tagged with
the desired instance. If the user is looking for an obscure location, i.e. one
which is relatively infrequently tagged, or the search term is highly ambiguous then many of the results will be irrelevant. In addition, if the location
can be tagged with several synonyms (e.g. New York, NY, Big Apple) then
relevant results may be missed.

2. Rely on the user to have tagged the content with the actual location URI.
Note that with location it is also possible to use the geocoding coordinates of
the content, if they are provided, although this does not necessarily uniquely
identify the location, for example a point location (latitude/longitude) may
refer to the immediate surroundings or it may simply be the central point
of some wider area, e.g. city, county, country.

http://developer.yahoo.com/geo/geoplanet/

7 Version 7.5.1 released 2010-06-03

http://developer.yahoo.com/geo/geoplanet/guide/
api-reference.html#api-concordance
http://www.geonames.org
http://www.openstreetmap.org
http://en.wikipedia.org
?

?

?
3. Form a query which is likely to return content relating to the desired instance.
This strategy is reliant on the users ability to form the complex query and
the content being tagged with the disambiguating information. Weinberger,
et al.s [21] work on determining the most disambiguating tag would be
relevant to directing the content provider tagging by suggesting the most
effective tags.

The approach adopted, in effect, applies the third strategy by automatically constructing the complex query. In practice the process is applied offline allocating
a location URI to every occurrence of a target location tag by considering all
the co-occurring related location name tags: used to tag content, used by the
tagging user and used by the users in their social network. Note that is is also
possible to allocate a non-location URI, indicating that the target location
term does not relate to any of the possible toponyms. Thus, information context
is provided by a vector of related term frequencies:

IC = f req(T )1, f req(T )2, . . . , f req(T )l

(1)

and the meaning of any given term is provided by some function combining all
the terms information contexts:

M(T ) = f(IC1, IC2, . . . , ICn)

(2)

3.2 Ambiguity

The traditional types of ambiguity include lexical, syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic ambiguity (for a detailed discussion of ambiguity in natural language see
[26]). This current work is only concerned with lexical ambiguity, that is where
a term (i.e. a text string) has several different meanings. Lexical ambiguity can
be subdivided into homonymy and polysemy. Homonymy occurs when a term
can have a number of unrelated meanings, whilst polysemy occurs when a term
has several related meanings. However this distinction is subtle and it is often
unclear which type of ambiguity to apply, and is not considered in this work.

Mich [27] provides two measures for lexical ambiguity:
lexical ambiguity of a term T:

a(T ) = the number of meanings of T

frequency-weighted lexical ambiguity of a term T:

a(T )

(T ) =

a

log2f req(Mi(T )),

(3)

(4)

where Mi(T ) is the ith meaning of T, and freq(m) is the observed frequency of
that meaning.

i=1

N. Ireson and F. Ciravegna

The meanings are provided by some lexical resource (e.g. WordNet) and the
weighted function is calculated from the frequency of occurrences of meanings
found in some text corpus. However the use of frequency seems erroneous; as a
frequently used term with a single meaning is still deemed ambiguous. A preferred measure would be to use Shannons information entropy, which more
accurately measures the degree to which the occurrence of a term determines its
meaning.

H(T ) =  a(T )

P (Mi(T ))log2P (Mi(T )),

(5)

i=1

where P(Mi(T )) is the probability of observing the ith meaning of T.

Whilst a term may appear to be highly ambiguous due to a multitude of possible meanings (i.e. a high value according to Equation 3), in a given usage context
only a limited set of those possibilities may be likely to occur. For example whilst
there are 54 possible toponym resolutions of the location name Cambridge, any
given user is only likely to refer to a single one of those possibilities. Although
users may be unlikely to refer to multiple toponyms with the same name, they
may use the term for meanings other than location names. For example, the
term Barry can be associated with: 14 distinct toponyms, a common first name
and can be used to describe a particular striped pattern in heraldry. Thus an
individual user may use one of the non-geographic meanings in addition to using
a single locational meaning for a given term. In the experiments report below
the relative effect of term ambiguity on performance is considered.

4 Experiment

4.1 Data

The experiments were performed using Flickr data, a summary of the data is
provided in Table 1. Three location areas were chosen; Cambridge, including Ely,
Newmarket and Haverhill (as a classical example of an ambiguous location);
Sheffield, including, Chesterfield, Barnsley, Hope Valley and Rotherham (for
which an accurate local geographic database is available which can be used
to assess the quality of the Geoplanet database); and Cardiff, including Barry,
Ferndale, Sully, Penarth, Porth, Bridgend, Aberdare, Mountain Ash, Pentre,
Cowbridge (which offers a number of highly non-ambiguous location names, and
location names which are ambiguous due to also being common terms, namely
Barry, Sully and Mountain Ash). These 20 target location names can be resolved
into 268 toponyms. In total 1,143,529 photos were tagged with at least one of
the these terms (after removing duplicates), of which 123,124 (10.8%) have an
associated geolocation (latitude/longitude), these were uploaded by 12,326 users
(approximately 10 photos per user). These geolocated photos are used to provide
the gold standard.

The geolocated photos contain 165,389 target location name tags, note that
each photo must contain at least one target location tag to be retrieved. The
?

?

?
users 580,296 contacts produce 1,140,668 target location tags and the contacts
5,700,749 contacts produce 3,998,763 target location tags. Whilst all the collected
data was limited to an upload date before the end of 2009, all the contact and
tag values are up-to-date at the time of retrieve (March 2010).

Each geolocation was then assigned to its nearest toponym, or, if it is greater
than 30km away from any toponym it was assigned a null (i.e. non-location)
value, this resulted in 99,215 photos assigned to toponyms and 23,909 other
non-location meanings. When compared to Overells [28] work on geolocation
of Wikipedia articles, where the data contained 1,395 locations and 7,660 non-
locations, the Flickr data contains over 22 times the proportion of location to
non-location references. This may well be due to the fact tags are less likely to
contain proper names (e.g. Person and Organisation names) when compared to
free-text, as they are intended as a generic label. It is worth noting that in the
experimental data for a given user all the occurrences of a specific target location
term (e.g. Sheffield) resolve to a single toponym (e.g. WOEID:34503). However
1,229 (10%) of the users use the same term for both location and non-location
meanings.

Table 1 shows the number of photos and users for each target location, note
that the row values are not mutually exclusive, as a single document can contain to multiple location tags, therefore the totals are less than the sum of the
rows. The final three columns provide measures for the term ambiguity, the first
column, Num, gives the total number of meanings (toponyms) provided by the
lexical database. The next two columns give the information entropy measures,
computed from Equation 5, for the term ambiguity, the Location column considers the ambiguity with respect to the toponyms, whilst the Term column
also includes the occurrence of non-location meanings. In general the inclusion
of the non-location meaning increases the term ambiguity, however for the term
Barry it is reduced due to the fact 85.1% of the occurrences of Barry refer to
non-location meanings.

4.2 Classification

In order to resolve the location names it is necessary to determine their contextual information. As stated above this is provided by the co-occurrence of
related location names, which are gleaned from the Yahoo! Geoplanet API. For
each toponym the related location names are determined by: their ancestors
(hypernyms), children (hyponyms) and neighbours (adjacent coordinate terms).
However, whilst all the 268 toponyms have ancestors, only 36 possess children
and 203 possess neighbours. In general the larger and more populous locations
have a highly number of children, this is in part due to the fact such locations
actual contain more child locations and also possible due to them being more
accurately represented in the Geoplanet data. As a relatively accurate resource
was available for the Sheffield area this was used to provide a basic analysis of
the Geoplanet data. For Sheffield Geoplanet provides 43 child (suburbs) loca-
tions, whilst the more accurate resource provides 99 possibilities. In addition
two of the suburb names provided by Geoplanet have incorrect spellings. Whilst

N. Ireson and F. Ciravegna

Table 1. Summary of location term data (number of photos, users and term ambiguity)

Location
Name
Cambridge
Ely
Newmarket
Haverhill
Cardiff
Barry
Ferndale
Sully
Penarth
Porth
Bridgend
Aberdare
Mountain Ash
Pentre
Cowbridge
Sheffield
Chesterfield
Barnsley
Hope Valley
Rotherham
Total

Photos

Users

Ambiguity

All
159969
?

?

?
255012
225629
?

?

?
290253
?

?

?
1143529

Geo
?

?

?
123124

All
?

?

?
Geo Num Location Term
1.574

1.852

2.384

1.670
?

?

?
0.389
0.839

1.801

1.394
?

?

?
0.068
1.154

1.109

0.909
?

?

?
0.236
1.526

0.354

0.717

2.056
?

?

?
0.554
1.584
?

?

?
0.460

1.408
1.388
2.135
1.378
0.141
1.559
1.515
1.275
0.000
0.392
0.857
0.105
0.000
1.413
0.060
0.209
1.812
0.022
1.537
0.007
?

?

?
such missing and erroneous data will adversely effect the absolute performance
of the disambiguation process, the aim of the current work is to examine the
relative performance of using an expanding context, rather than maximise the
performance on the given data.

The co-occurrence between each of the 20 target location names and their
related (i.e. ancestor, child and neighbour) locations is calculated. The document
context is provided by all the related tags assigned to the photo. The user context
is provided by all the related tags added by the user who uploads the photo, these
tags are weighted by their frequency. The (uploading) user contacts context
is provided by all the related location tags added by the contacts, with tags
weighted by the number of contacts who have used that tag. Similarly each of
the contacts contacts tag usage provides further context. Although tags can
be assigned any user, the vast majority of tags are provided by the uploading
user, of the 8,193,877 location tags observed in the data only 23,534 (0.28%) are
provided by other users. Thus four experiments are performed:

D : using only the related tags in the immediate document (photo) context
U : as D, including all the (uploading) user related tags as context
?

?

?
C : as U, including all the (uploading) user contacts related tags as context
CC : as C, including all the (uploading) user contacts contacts related tags as

context

For each experiment the set of co-occurring related location name frequencies
provides a feature vector, from which a classification model is constructed. A
Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier used is (LibSVM [29]), applying a
Radial-Basis Function kernel. For each experiment the feature vector values are
normalised (between [0,1]) and a ten-fold cross-validation was performed. The
photos uploaded by a specific user are placed in a single fold to prevent the
classifier learning a user specific rather than generic classification model. For
each fold the cost parameter was optimised using a three-fold cross-validation
experiment on the training data. Note that along with the possible toponyms
associated to a location term the classifier also learns to predict non-location
references.

5 Results

Table 2 provides an overview of the experimental results, showing the location
names, ordered according to increasing term ambiguity and the f-measure for
the four experiments. Note that the reported f-measure for the locations is the
micro-average of all the classes (toponyms), calculated by summing the one-
versus-all matrices, as a result precision equals recall equals f-measure. The final
row provides the macro-average of these micro averages.

The current approaches to concept disambiguation tend to rely on related information found solely within the context of the document, shown by the results
in the second column. From these results it can be seen that including information from the creator of the content can significantly improve the disambiguation
(paired t-test confidence <0.004), in addition including information from their
social network contacts does produce some advantage but not highly significant
(paired t-test confidence <0.42), whilst including information from the contacts
social network produces a slight detrimental effect over just using contacts in-
formation. This trend can be observed in the macro-average values in the final
row.

Note that the three location names where solely using the document context
produced the best results have by far the three highest proportions of nonlocation meanings (i.e. Mountain Ash (0.961), Barry (0.851) and Sully (0.643)).
Therefore the performance of such disambiguation techniques, which rely on the
co-occurrence of related location names, are likely to be adversely affected by
the presence of a significant proportion of non-location meanings.

Figure 1 and 2 examine the relationship between disambiguation performance
and term ambiguity for the four experiments. Figure 1 shows the actual performance which indicates the expected decrease in performance with increasing
ambiguity, this effect can be more clearly in Figure 2 which shows the trend
lines for the data. The graphs indicate that for the experiments including user

N. Ireson and F. Ciravegna

Fig. 1. Performance in relation to Word Ambiguity

Fig. 2. Linear Trend in Performance in relation to Word Ambiguity

(U) and their social network contacts (C) as context the fall in performance is
less sensitive to increase in term ambiguity.

Finally the overall results are depicted in Figure 3, which shows a generalised
Precision-Recall curve for all classes (toponyms). The curve is formed using
?

?

?
Table 2. Performance measure for expanding social context

Location
Name

Penarth
MountainAsh
Cowbridge
Cardiff
Rotherham
Barnsley
Sheffield
Barry
Aberdare
Bridgend
Porth
Sully
Pentre
Cambridge
HopeValley
Haverhill
Ferndale
Ely
Chesterfield
Newmarket
Macro-Average

Term

Performance (F-Measure)

Ambiguity Document User Contacts Contacts
Contacts

0.068
0.236
0.354
0.389
0.460
0.554
0.717
0.839
0.909
1.109
1.154
1.394
1.526
1.574
1.584
1.670
1.801
1.852
2.056
2.384

0.992
0.981
0.947
0.949
0.910
0.911
0.885
0.894
0.760
0.836
0.796
0.792
0.662
0.828
0.850
0.880
0.617
0.776
0.845
0.696
0.832

0.992
0.970
0.934
0.952
0.941
0.935
0.909
0.863
0.949
0.915
0.856
0.762
0.796
0.882
0.896
0.860
0.833
0.827
0.873
0.789
0.891

0.992
0.974
0.954
0.960
0.941
0.931
0.913
0.867
0.889
0.922
0.852
0.742
0.756
0.879
0.882
0.880
0.860
0.857
0.867
0.840
0.892

0.992
0.979
0.941
0.951
0.938
0.932
0.918
0.873
0.882
0.889
0.801
0.728
0.692
0.880
0.880
0.687
0.858
0.844
0.859
0.673
0.860

a similar generalisation approach as outlined by Hand and Till [30] for ROC
curves, whereby each of the individual Precision-Recall curves are combined
with a weight according to the number of instances they represent, and missing
points on each curve are calculate by linear interpolation.

The curve indicates that at low-recall values, where only highly probable
instances are classified, considering more proximate contextual information (i.e.
in the document rather than user tags, or user rather than contact tags) produces
higher precision, which would be intuitively expected. However as recall increases
utilising more distant context becomes more beneficial.

6 Discussion

The experiment and results described above indicate the importance of considering the user context when disambiguating location terms used to tag their
content. In addition a potential benefit in considering the information provided
by the users social network contacts is shown. However the major limitation of
the work is that it only uses a single data source, namely Flickr. Within this
single domain an attempt was made to apply the techniques employed to a wide
variety of concept types, varying the levels of term ambiguity and contextual

N. Ireson and F. Ciravegna

Fig. 3. Precision-Recall Curve

information available, and analyse the resultant performance. However drawing
any conclusions outside the domain of toponym resolution in photo sharing location tags must be made with care, in particular for concepts where the user
is more likely to use multiple meanings. Recently Twitter12 have introduced the
ability to geotag user content, which could be used to provide a comparison for
toponym resolution in a different form of social media. For other, more generic
concept types, the issue of creating an experimental gold standard to provide an
objective evaluation needs to be addressed.

Although the experimental data described above provides a large number of
labelled instances, a number of assumptions have been made. It is presumed that
the user has accurately geocoded their content and any erroneous geocoding will
provide a low level of noise, not significantly affecting the results. Although
the experiment was mainly concerned with determining the relative probability
of resolving a location term to competing toponyms, the limit of 30km set to
determine that a geocoded photo was related to a given toponym is arbitrary
and in practice this limit should be related to the toponym concept type, i.e.
country, county, city, town, suburb, etc. In addition it should be noted that in
their usage location terms do not have strict boundaries and the allocation of a
given point to a toponym depends upon user context [31].

Whilst the main performance variability can be explained by the ambiguity of a given term (shown in the Figures 1 and 2), there is certain variation
from the general trend. Other variables which potentially influence performance
are the number of documents/users available for each target location, the num-
ber/type of related location tags (children, neighbours, ancestors) provided by

http://twitter.com/
?

?

?
the GeoPlanet resource and the number of non-location references for each target
location name. In addition, whilst Yahoo! Geoplanet was used as a semantically
structured lexical database to provide a set of terms related to a concept, the resource is shown to contain missing and erroneous information. Further research
should examine how such data and resource variables and imperfections influence
the disambiguation process. The recent work on linking the various namespaces
used to identify geolocations means it is possible to combine the information
contained in these linked resources.

In this experiment related information is provided by the user and their social
context, however a fairly na ve approach was adopted whereby all the users information is assumed to relate equally to all their content. Similarly all the users
social network is assumed to have an equal impact. A more realistic approach
would be to consider a temporal dimension, where information relatedness is dependent on temporal proximity, which previous work has shown to be effective
[16]. If it is possible to determine the relative strength of social ties, e.g. with
some measure of the degree of mutual interaction, this may also prove significant in determining the relative impact of information provided by the users
contacts. While the experiments showed that considering the information from
the users contacts social network is detrimental to performance, considering the
impact of social ties may allow information to be utilised from more distance
social context.

7 Conclusion

This paper considers the issue of disambiguating concepts in social media. The
approach adopted links the location concepts, found in user-generated content,
to a URI defining its intended meaning; enabling the content to be retrieved
according to a specific semantic query. Due to the nature of social media, the
content containing the ambiguous concept may possess limited contextual information with which to disambiguate, however the interrelationship between
content and users in social media means it is possible to exploit more distant,
related contextual information. The paper shows the importance of considering
user context when disambiguating the location terms they use to describe their
content, and indicates that this is more important for terms with a higher degree
of ambiguity. The information provided by a users social network contacts can
also provide some advantage although further work is required to determine if
a more sensitive consideration of context, i.e. considering a temporal aspect or
the strength of social ties, might improve the significance of using such social
context.

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the European Commission as part of the
WeKnowIt project (FP7-215453).

N. Ireson and F. Ciravegna
