Will Semantic Web Technologies Work for the

Development of ICD-11?

Tania Tudorache, Sean Falconer, Csongor Nyulas, Natalya F. Noy, and Mark A. Musen

Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research, Stanford University, US

{tudorache,sfalc,nyulas,noy,musen}@stanford.edu

Abstract. The World Health Organization is beginning to use Semantic Web
technologies in the development of the 11th revision of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-11). Health officials use ICD in all United Nations
member countries to compile basic health statistics, to monitor health-related
spending, and to inform policy makers. While previous revisions of ICD encoded
minimal information about a disease, and were mainly published as books and
tabulation lists, the creators of ICD-11 envision that it will become a multipurpose and coherent classification ready for electronic health records. Most im-
portant, they plan to have ICD-11 applied for a much broader variety of uses than
previous revisions. The new requirements entail significant changes in the way we
represent disease information, as well as in the technologies and processes that we
use to acquire the new content. In this paper, we describe the previous processes
and technologies used for developing ICD. We then describe the requirements
for the new development process and present the Semantic Web technologies that
we use for ICD-11. We outline the experiences of the domain experts using the
software system that we implemented using Semantic Web technologies. We then
discuss the benefits and challenges in following this approach and conclude with
lessons learned from this experience.

1 The International Classification of DiseasesA New Beginning

The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is the standard diagnostic classification developed by the World Health Organization (WHO) to encode information relevant for epidemiology, health management, and clinical use. Health officials use ICD
in all United Nations member countries to compile basic health statistics, to monitor
health-related spending, and to inform policy makers. ICD is one of the most important classifications used for health care all over the world. ICD is created by a large
collaborative effort among international medical experts. To keep up to date with scientific findings about diseases and to address new uses of the classification, the WHO
publishes revisions of the classification approximately every decade. In 2007, the WHO
started work on the 11th revision of ICD (ICD-11).

Our group is working closely with the WHO to support the collaborative development of ICD-11. The new requirements for ICD-11, which we describe in Section 3,
call for a complete revamping of the classification representation in order to build a
more solid and flexible formal foundation. ICD-11 will use OWL as the underlying
representation language. The workflow for the new development process is also going

P.F. Patel-Schneider et al.(Eds.): ISWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6497, pp. 257272, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

T. Tudorache et al.

to change fundamentally. The process will become a Web-based open process that is
powered by collaboration and social features.

This paper makes the following contributions:

 We analyzed the representational and functional requirements for supporting the

new collaborative workflow for the development of ICD-11 (Section 3).

 We developed a customization of WebProt eg e, a Web-based version of Prot eg e, to

support distributed collaborative development of ICD-11 (Section 4).

 We performed a formative evaluation of the tool (Section 5).
 We analyzed lessons learned and the challenges and advantages of using Semantic
Web technologies for the development of large medical terminologies (Section 6).

2 ICD History, Use, and Development

ICD traces its origins to the 19th century. The initial work on disease statistics actually began in the 16th century with the London Bills of Mortality that listed the number of burials as a warning against the onset of the bubonic plague. The London Bill
of Mortality enumerated 81 causes of death and it is the predecessor of international
mortality classifications.1 Several governments and health organizations recognized the
importance of this classification and became interested in it. In 1948, the World Health
Organization (WHO) took over the responsibility for ICD and its creation and included
for the first time the causes of morbidity, in addition to classifying causes of mortality.2
Since then, ICD underwent revisions approximately every decade. The current revision
of ICD, ICD-10, contains more than 20,000 terms and is used in over 100 countries
around the world. ICD-10 is available in the six official languages of WHO (Arabic,
Chinese, English, French, Russian, and Spanish) as well as in 36 other languages [11].

2.1 Uses of ICD

ICD is an essential resource for health care all over the world. Its strength comes from
enabling researchers to undertake studies of temporal and spatial distributions of certain diseases and to make estimates of the effects of diseases on populations [3]. ICD
also enables the study of numerous other epidemiological aspects of diseases in human
populations. More recent uses include indexing and retrieving of medical records, or
use in reimbursement, audit systems, and public policy. At its core, the most important
contribution of ICD is the ability to exchange comparable data from different regions
and allowing the comparison of different populations over long periods of time.

2.2 The Previous ICD Development Process

WHO publishes three types of ICD revisions and updates: Every decade, a revision
process takes places and results in a new ICD revision, such as ICD-9 or ICD-10. To

1 Mortality is the proportion of deaths to population, or the rate of death.
2 Morbidity is defined as the incidence of disease, or the rate of disease.
