Exploiting Relation Extraction for Ontology

Alignment

Elena Beisswanger

Jena University Language and Information Engineering (JULIE) Lab,

Friedrich-Schiller-Universit at Jena,

F urstengraben 30, 07743 Jena, Germany

elena.beisswanger@uni-jena.de

Abstract. When multiple ontologies are used within one application
system, aligning the ontologies is a prerequisite for interoperability and
unhampered semantic navigation and search. Various methods have been
proposed to compute mappings between elements from different ontolo-
gies, the majority of which being based on various kinds of similarity
measures. As a major shortcoming of these methods it is difficult to decode the semantics of the results achieved. In addition, in many cases they
miss important mappings due to poorly developed ontology structures or
dissimilar ontology designs. I propose a complementary approach making
massive use of relation extraction techniques applied to broad-coverage
text corpora. This approach is able to detect different types of semantic relations, dependent on the extraction techniques used. Furthermore,
exploiting external background knowledge, it can detect relations even
without clear evidence in the input ontologies themselves.

Keywords: Ontology Alignment, Relation Extraction, Wikipedia.

1 Background and Problem Statement

Ontologies specify the major terms and concepts (also called classes) of a domain
and their relations in a formal manner. An increasing number of information systems in different application domains rely on ontologies to organize data. While
in case of the Semantic Web they are used to define the semantics of (Web) doc-
uments, in biomedicine they serve as vocabulary to semantically annotate huge
literature collections and factual data stores. In biomedical natural language
processing (bio-NLP), in turn, ontologies support (amongst others) information
extraction and semantic search applications.

However, especially in the field of biomedicine conceptual knowledge is scattered over various different, often disconnected ontologies. While some of them
topically overlap (such as two different anatomy ontologies), others complement
each other rather by design (such as ontologies for anatomical structures, cells,
proteins, biological processes, drugs and diseases) [19]. Both, extraction patterns
and search queries easily transcend the conceptual coverage of a single ontology.
As a consequence, missing links between ontologies hamper effective information extraction and search, besides generally limiting data interoperability. The

P.F. Patel-Schneider et al.(Eds.): ISWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6497, pp. 289296, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
