Making Sense of Twitter

David Laniado1 and Peter Mika2

1 DEI, Politecnico di Milano

Via Ponzio 34/5, 20133 Milan, Italy

david.laniado@elet.polimi.it

2 Yahoo! Research

Diagonal 177, 08018 Barcelona, Spain

pmika@yahoo.inc.com

Abstract. Twitter enjoys enormous popularity as a micro-blogging service largely due to its simplicity. On the downside, there is little organization to the Twitterverse and making sense of the stream of messages
passing through the system has become a significant challenge for everyone involved. As a solution, Twitter users have adopted the convention of
adding a hash at the beginning of a word to turn it into a hashtag. Hashtags have become the means in Twitter to create threads of conversation
and to build communities around particular interests.

In this paper, we take a first look at whether hashtags behave as strong
identifiers, and thus whether they could serve as identifiers for the Semantic Web. We introduce some metrics that can help identify hashtags
that show the desirable characteristics of strong identifiers. We look at
the various ways in which hashtags are used, and show through evaluation that our metrics can be applied to detect hashtags that represent
real world entities.

1 Introduction

Twitter, a service for publishing short messages has been growing nearly exponentially in the past two years. Twitter handled over 600 messages every second
by January, 20101, and has become a cultural phenomenon in many parts of the
world. This success can be attributed in a large part to the simplicity of system,
and the resulting cleanliness of its web site and its APIs. The ease of publishing also means that Twitter inspires timely contributions and has become an
important source of information for late-breaking news, and it is already being
exploited by major search engines. While appealing to publishers, the simplicity
of Twitter has its downsides for anyone consuming and processing Twitter data,
especially when it comes to aggregating messages. Aggregation is a necessary
first step for many applications of Twitter mining, including news and trend
detection, brand management and customer service, and it is also a crucial first
step in separating personal communications from public discussions.

Within the current system, however, the aggregation functions are limited
to filtering tweets by users or restricting by keywords. Even in the latter case,

http://blog.twitter.com/2010/02/measuring-tweets.html

P.F. Patel-Schneider et al. (Eds.): ISWC 2010, Part I, LNCS 6496, pp. 470485, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
?

?

?
tweets are organized by time, and not by relevance as is common for search en-
gines. Without formal organization, aggregating tweets that belong to the same
conversation or discuss the same topic is daunting. Table 1 shows ten consecutive
messages retrieved for the keyword banana. These messages are not only posted
in different languages, but are part of different ongoing conversations and refer
to very different topics (the plant, a chain store, a dance, a club, and others).
Keyword search is not only imprecise in aggregation, but is also missing out on
a number of messages that do not contain the particular keyword. As Twitter
messages are unusually short, keyword search is likely to fail in recall. As an ex-
ample, during a January, 2010 earthquake in the San Francisco Bay Area, search
engines have been criticized in showing only tweets that explicitly mentioned the
word earthquake. A second, related problem is separating personal communication and news publishing, the two main cases of Twitter usage [12]. This is a
crucial function for aggregators that are interested only in the conversations that
concern topics of broader interests such as news or current events.

As a community solution to these problems, Twitter users have adopted the
convention of adding a hash at the beginning of a word to turn it into a hashtag.
Hashtags are meant to be identifiers for discussions that revolve around the same
topic. By including hashtags in a message, users indicate to which conversations
their message is related to. When used appropriately, searching on these hashtags would return messages that belong to the same conversation (even if they
dont contain the same keywords), and thereby solving the aggregation prob-
lem. Coincidentally, this is the same function that strong identifiers (URIs) play
in the Semantic Web. The questions we ask then is which hashtags behave as
strong identifiers (if any), and could they be mapped to concept identifiers in
the Semantic Web?

In this paper, we propose a set of metrics to measure the extent to which
hashtags exhibit the desirable properties of strong identifiers. Our first contribution is thus formalizing the characteristic properties of strong identifiers in terms
of usage in social media systems. We give a general description of hashtag usage
according to these metrics (Section 2). Using a manually collected data set, we
evaluate how well our metrics can identify those hashtags that represent named
entities and concepts found in Freebase, a large and broad-coverage knowledge
base (Section 3). Our contribution is in measuring the quality of hashtags as
identifiers and selecting the hashtags that are candidate concept identifiers, a
necessary first step in mapping hashtags to Semantic Web knowledge bases and
identifying hashtags that are candidates for extending knowledge bases. We discuss related work in Section 4 and point to future work in Section 5.

2 Metrics for Hashtag Evaluation

There is no special support for tagging in Twitter, and new tags are simply
introduced by prefixing a word with the hash sign. Hashtags may be used for
personal categorization, but in the vast majority of cases the intention of those
who introduce a new hashtag is to evolve it into a symbol that is used by a

D. Laniado and P. Mika

Table 1. A consecutive sequence of Twitter message for the query banana

Boo368
Endivisual

@AvenLantz OMG I WANT A BANANA HAMMOCK XD
Got my dress..from banana republic..uhh im wearing dis dress once..?
Thx..i dont need it to be so expensive - -

DevvonTerrell World of Lala Fuh Sure!!RT @ RosettaStone : Real talk DevvonTerrell grandmother needs to open up a bakery. Her Banana Pudding is
on. HAHA!!

makalovesbieber RT @bieberhechos: RT si te gusta la banana de Justin (? JAJAJA

reidnwrite

jojoserquina

Vol Sus

no mentira.
@EDHMovement Unforgettable goes SUPER hard...he slipped like
banana peels for not having you know you know on the album!
Chicken Tinola with bitter melon, hot long horn and banana pepper,
ginger and spices http://twitgoo.com/14sosn
RT @So Delicious: Hot Fudge-Dipped Frozen Banana Bites wa recipe
for Coconut Peanut Butter Hot Fudge Sauce! http://bit.ly/aknbRe
YUM!
Eating a banana sandwich and watching Hero.

Markaw00
LauraRogers13 Mom asks me if I want a banana and I start doing the banana

MissRicaRica

dance...Ive been at cheer too much!
RT @philthyrichFOD: @MissRiCaRiCa *PHILTHY RICH* Coming
Home Party And Video Shoot July 4th @ Banana Joes 950 10th St
Modesto http://twitpic.com/1oh6ji PLZ RT.

community of users interested in and discussing a particular topic. The goal of
such a hashtag is to help search and aggregation of messages related to the same
topic, a function that is similar to the role of (shared) URIs in the Semantic
Web.

There are a number of desirable criteria that a hashtag should fulfill in this
role, similar to how cool URIs are differentiated from poor URIs. In the follow-
ing, we formalize some of these characteristics.

1. Frequency. The hashtag is used by a community of users with some fre-
quency. We measure frequency both in number of users and number of messages sent, and explore the correlations between the two ways of measuring
frequency.

2. Specificity. The extent to which the usage of a hashtag deviates from the

usage of the word without a hash.

3. Consistency in usage. The hashtag is used consistently by different users

and in different messages to indicate a single topic or concept.

4. Stability over time. The hashtag should become a part of the persistent
vocabulary of Twitter users, i.e. it should have sustained levels of usage and
should have a stable meaning over a period time.

In the following, we formalize these notions based on a Vector Space Model
(VSM) for hashtags.
?

?

?
2.1 A Vector Space Model for Hashtags
The basic model of Twitter can be represented by a set of tuples S  M  U 
P(H)  T where M is the set of all sequences of not more than 140 characters,
U is the set of registered Twitter users, H is the set of hashtags and T is a
set of discrete timestamps with a total order. The set of hashtags is the set of
possible words that start with a hash. Hashtags form part of the message in the
raw data, and we extract them using a regular expression "#[a-zA-Z0-9 ]+".
The size limitation imposed on messages puts an upper bound on the potential
length of hashtags, the number of possible hashtags as well as the number of
hashtags that may appear in a single message.

In line with previous works on the analysis of folksonomy systems [5], we capture the semantics of the hashtags by their usage in the social media system.
In particular, we will represent the meaning of hashtags using a Vector Space
Model (VSM) [20]. VSMs are commonly used in information retrieval as a representation of documents, where each dimension corresponds to a term in the
collection and each value measures the weight of that term for the document. In
our case, we form virtual documents for each hashtag by considering all messages
where the hashtag appears. We dont filter messages by language, but it would
be possible to build language specific representations this way.2
Formally, each hashtag hj can be represented by a vector hj = w1,j, w2,j..wN,j
where wi,j  W, N = |W| and W is the set of unique terms in all of M. The
simplest method for assigning weight is to consider term frequencies, i.e. wi,j is
the number of messages in which term i co-occurs with hashtag hj. In order to
account for the different levels of specificity of terms with respect to hashtags,
and to reduce the importance of the most common words, we obtain a more
accurate model by applying tf-idf normalization: wi,j = tfi,j  idfi where tfi,j =
wi,j
is the relative frequency of term i with respect to hashtag hj; idfi =

i=0 wi,j
log
|{hj : wij >0}| is inversely proportional to the logarithm of the relative number
of hashtags which term i appears with. For reasons of efficiency, we set elements
wi,j lower than a threshold k to zero. In particular, this allows efficient indexing
of the vectors using inverted indices.

|H|

We also introduce a bigram language model for hashtags; to do this, we define
as bigram each pair of consecutive terms in a message, and as bj the vector of
all bigrams coocurring with tag hj, bi,j being the number of messages in which
bigram i and tag hj co-occur. We apply tf-idf normalization in the same way as
we compute it for single word co-occurrence.

Finally, we represent hashtags on a social dimension by means of their user
occurrence vector uj, where ui,j is the number of messages tweeted by user ui
and containing hashtag hj.

2 Based on previous experience, languages can be detected with good accuracy despite
the short length of messages. The Twitter Search API also allows restricting tweets
by language.

D. Laniado and P. Mika

2.2 Frequency of Usage
The frequency of a hashtag hj  H in terms of the number of users and
messages can be defined as

Fu(hj) = |{u : (m, u, Hi, t)  S  hj  Hi}|
Fm(hj) = |{m : (m, u, Hi, t)  S  hj  Hi}|

(1)
(2)

where Hi is the set of tags used in message i.

2.3 Specificity

While in most tagging systems tags are added as external metadata to describe
the content, in Twitter tags are just words making part of the message, highlighted by means of a hash to assign them a special function. Often, the hash
is added as a form of emphasis (e.g.: Im so #happy!), and the user may not
be aware that the word as a hashtag has a more specific or otherwise different
meaning than the word itself. A hashtag can often just refer to the meaning of
the corresponding word, but in some cases it can assume a very different usage.
For example, the hashtag #milan seems to be prominently used to refer to
the Italian town, while the word Milan is much more frequently used in the
context of the football team.

It is thus interesting to observe if a hashtag has a meaning close to the one of
the corresponding word without hash, that we will call a non-tag. As with URIs
on the Semantic Web, we assume that hashtags that closely match the meaning
of the corresponding non-tag will be used more frequently. On the other hand,
we also expect that words that are used mostly as hashtags, or hashtags that are
used with a different semantics than their non-tag, will be used more consistently,
because they are re-used intentionally.

Similarly to our previous definitions, we define nj as the term vector of the
non-tag nj derived from hj by removing the hash. When building the term vector
nj, we only consider non-tag nj occurring in a message when the corresponding
hashtag hj is not used inside the same message. The intuition is that when
a non-tag appears in a message where the corresponding hashtag has already
been used, the semantics of the two are probably the same. We apply tf-idf
normalization to non-tags analogously to the one described in Section 2.1 for
hashtags.

We compute the specificity of a hashtag as the similarity between the vectorial representation of the hashtag and the corresponding non-tag. For computing similarity, we use the well-known cosine similarity of the two co-occurrence
vectors [21].

wsim(hj, nj) =

hj  nj
hj nj

(3)

Analogously, we define  uj as the model of the users of the non-tag uj, where  ui,j
is the number of messages in which user i used non-tag nj. We measure social
?

?

?
specificity by comparing the model of the users of hashtag hj to the model of
the users of non-tag nj:

usim(hj, nj) =

uj   uj
uj  uj

(4)

To be able to compare tags and non-tags also according to frequency, we define
 Fu(ni) and  Fm(ni) the frequency of a non-tag in terms of users and messages,
respectively.

2.4 Consistency of Usage

An important requirement for strong identifiers on the Semantic Web is that
they need to be used consistently across documents and users. As a measure of
the variety of usage contexts of a hashtag, we study the entropy of our vectorial
representations of hashtags. Entropy measures the amount of uncertainty associated with the value of a random variable, in other words how uniformly the
probabilities are distributed across possible values of the variable.

We define the entropy of a hashtag hj as:

p(wi,j) log p(wi,j)

(5)

H(hj) =  n

i=1

Hb(hj) =  n

Higher values of entropy point to more even distributions of probabilities, corresponding to tags being used in a variety of contexts, while lower values of
entropy signifies more restricted usage of a tag.

Similarly, we measure entropy of bigrams co-occurring with a tag as

Non-tag entropy is measured like tag entropy:  H(j) = 

p(bi,j) log p(bi,j)

i=1

(6)

n

i=1 p(  wi,j) log p(  wi,j).

2.5 Stability over Time

To study the evolution of hashtags on a temporal dimension, we chose to analyze
them day by day. First of all, to be able to identify new tags emerging, we define
as new on day d a tag not appearing in the previous k days. We will define
longevity of a new tag ld,k(hj) as the number of days in which tag hj appears
at least once, over the k days after its first occurrence on day d.

We then define hd

j the vector of words appearing with tag hj in some message
on day d, and we measure similarity of a hashtag hj on day d with respect to
the previous day as

wsimd(hj) =

(7)

hd

hd
j

 hd1

hd1

j
?

?

?
j

j

D. Laniado and P. Mika

Analogously, ud
is the similarity among users on day d and d  1.
j

is the vector of users who used tag hj on day d, and usimd(hj)

The intuition behind these measures is that a stable tag should endure over

time and its meaning should not deviate much from one day to the other.

3 Evaluation

3.1 Dataset

For this study we relied on a dataset of 539,432,680 messages, collected over
the whole month of November 2009 (about 18 million per day). Slightly less
than 50% of tweets are in English; to filter out messages in non-latin encoding,
that we are not able to parse and study, we discarded all messages containing
non-ASCII characters, reducing the size of the dataset by about 28%.

Twitter user interfaces allow for forwarding of messages; the original message
is so retweeted with a special string rt at the beginning. As our study is based
on the co-occurrence of words inside the same message, and massive retweeting
that characterizes several tags might have a strong impact biasing the results,
we decided to filter out all retweets. Retweets constitute 5.4% of messages, so the
actual dimension of our dataset, after filtering, is of about 369 million messages.
To compute words co-occurring with a hashtag, we filtered out from the messages all Web links and Twitter usernames (words starting with @). To reduce
the size of co-occurrence vectors, discarding items having a very low tf-idf, we
used a threshold k = 0.01.

3.2 Descriptive Statistics

Figure 1 shows the distribution of the number of hashtags per message; overall,
only 31.5 million messages, corresponding to 8.5%, have at least one hashtag.
The percentage of users using at least a hashtag is higher, around 20%. Figure 2
shows that the number of users per tag follows a power low distribution, with
some outlier tags used by hundreds of thousands of users. Both the distribution
of the number of messages and of distinct tags tweeted by each user also follow
a heavy tailed distribution, with a few extremely active users, tweeting up to 10
thousand messages or one thousand distinct tags in a month. The total number
of distinct tags encountered is over 2 million; however, only about 93 thousand,
corresponding to 4.14%, appeared in more than 20 messages over the whole
month: for our study, we considered only these tags, and discarded all the others.

3.3 Evaluating Hashtags

In this Section we will illustrate some results obtained by applying the metrics
described in Section 2 to evaluate hashtags contained in our dataset.
?

?

?
Fig. 1. Representation of the number of
messages having a given number of hash-
tags, on a logarithmic scale

Fig. 2. Distribution of the number of
users using a hashtag, on a log-log scale

Frequency of usage. A first interesting question about hashtags is whether
the corresponding non-tags also appear; about 73.5% of hashtags have the corresponding non-tag appearing at least once in our dataset. Among these, 57.8%
are more frequent as hashtags than as non-tags. A map representing the frequency Fm of each hashtag in function of the frequency  Fm of the corresponding
non-tag in shown in Figure 3. The graphic exhibits a glove shape, which seems
to point out the distinction between two kinds of tags: those corresponding to
common words, that appear only sometimes preceded by a hash, and those on
the thumb, Twitter specific tags which are more often used with hash, and
do usually not correspond to any commonly used word. Examples of this second
kind of tags are #tagtuesday, #iranelection, #sextips and #tcot (acronym
for top conservatives on Twitter). We obtained a very similar shape for user
frequencies Fu and  Fu.

Specificity. Figure 4 shows the similarity between tags and the corresponding
non-tags, both in terms of co-occurrence vectors and of users. About a half of tags
have null values of usim, meaning no user in common with the corresponding
non-tag, while wsim is null for about one third of tags; while considering this
second result, it must be taken into account the fact that we have cut all values
of tf-idf below a threshold of 0.01.

Among tags having the highest values of wsim we find for example #daylight,
almost always used in the context of daylight savings, #lady, mostly referred
to the singer Lady Gaga both as a tag and as a non-tag, and #comofaz, which
is a Portuguese slang word for How do I do? Among those having null or very
low similarity we find tags like #tweetphoto, mainly found in messages generated by an application, and #li, that corresponds to a common word in several
languages, like Portuguese, Italian and Chinese, but as a hashtag is mainly used
to refer to the social network platform LinkedIn.

D. Laniado and P. Mika

Fig. 3. Frequency of each hashtag in function of the frequency of the corresponding
word with no hash

Fig. 4. Similarities wsim (red) and usim
(blue), in descending order

Fig. 5. Entropies H (red) and Hb (blue)
of tags, in ascending order

In Figures 6 and 7 similarity wsim is plotted in function of tag and non-tag
frequency, respectively. Apart from a tendency of very frequent tags to have a
lower similarity, no precise relationship can be detected between wsim and Fm.
On the other hand, high values of similarity seem to be more likely for tags
corresponding to words having a frequency in the order of a few thousands, with
a peak between 1e+04 and 1e+05.
?

?

?
Fig. 6. Similarity between each tag and
the corresponding non-tag, in function of
tag frequency

Fig. 7. Similarity between each tag and
the corresponding non-tag, in function of
non-tag frequency

Consistency of usage. In Figure 5 we plotted the entropies of tags, in descending order. Most of the tags have values of H lying in the range between 4
and 6; entropy based on bigram co-occurrence tends to be higher, with values
ranging mostly between 5 and 7.

Among tags having very high entropy we find especially tags expressing sen-
timents, like #whocares, #argh, # #, beyond some words used in a variety
of contexts, like #freak. Tags with a very low entropy are typically generated by applications, like #dongdongdong (a tweeting church), #tweetphoto or
#iphonebabes.

3.4 Stability over Time

While until here we have studied tags as static entities for the whole period of ob-
servation, in this Section we will illustrate some results based on the observation
of tags over different days.

As an example, we report some statistics observed for tags appearing on
November 10th, 2009; to identify new tags we used a temporal window of k = 9
days. The total number of distinct hashtags observed on November 10th is over
160 thousand, about 50% of which were not appearing in any of the 9 previous
days. We looked for these new tags in the messages from the 9 following days to
evaluate their longevity l. Most of the tags have l = 0 and only 36 tags (about
0.045%) appear in all days until November 19th. This is an interesting indicator
of how off-handedly users add hashes to words.

In this way, we have selected for each day very few new tags, that are potentially new trending topics; we can now illustrate the results obtained by applying
the measures defined in Section 2.5 to two of these tags, to characterize them.
Tag #ampat stands for American patriot, and seems to have been adopted
by a well defined community. Frequency of messages and users (Figure 8) exhibit
a slow decreasing trend, after starting with about 300 messages in the first day,
tweeted by 50 users; entropy tends to decrease in time (Figure 10) pointing out a

D. Laniado and P. Mika

convergence towards some context; both the meaning and the community behind
the tag seem to be quite stable, though users tend to differentiate a bit in the
last observed days (Figure 9).

#kmartbls stands for Kmarts blue light special offers; the extremely high
similarity between consecutive days in terms of co-occurrences (Figure 12), together with the very low entropy (Figure 13), is a signal of the scarce variety of
information carried by the messages; these data, contrasted with the very high
frequency (Figure 11), can easily bring to the conclusion that the tag has been
massively promoted by some automatic application, retweeting almost identical
messages from different accounts.

Fig. 8. Frequency Fm
(red) and Fu (blue) of tag
#ampat by day (November
12th-30th)

Fig. 9. Values of wsimd
(red) and usimd (blue)
of tag #ampat (November
12th-30th)

Fig. 10. Entropy of tag
#ampat over days (Novem-
ber 12th-30th)

Fig. 11. Frequency Fm
(red) and Fu(blue) of
tag #kmartbls by day
(November 10th-30th)

Fig. 12. Values of wsimd
(red) and usimd (blue) for
tag #kmartbls (November
10th-30th)

Fig. 13. Entropy of tag
days
#kmartbls
(November 10th-30th)

over

3.5 Manual Assessment

In order to assess how well our metrics are able to indicate which hashtags
represent stable concepts with a unique identity, we have performed a manual
evaluation on a random sample of 257 hashtags, relying on 7 evaluators, experts
?

?

?
in the field of NLP. For each tag, we collected a random sample of 100 messages
with that hashtag, and asked our evaluators to answer the following questions:
1. whether they could guess the meaning of the tag just by looking at it;
2. whether the hashtag represented:

 an event, person, organization, product, or other named entity;
 messages generated by an application (e.g. spam);
 messages with a common sentiment;
 other;
 not clear;

3. whether the tag referred to the same meaning in all messages or not.
Furthermore, the evaluators were asked to choose the closest matching concept
from Freebase3, by means of the Freebase Suggest tool4.

In roughly 39% of cases, the messages were found to refer to a named en-
tity; for 20% of the tags the messages were characterized by a common sentiment (e.g. #thankfulfor, #grrr or #youknowyouareuglyif), while 12% of the
times they were recognized as generated automatically by some application (e.g.
#soundcloud, an audio distribution platform that relies on Twitter to spread
notifications about users activities, or #shop, massively used by spammers). In
26% of the cases, the hashtag did not represent a named entity, a sentiment or an
application, but was created for some other reason, typically to discuss a general
topic (e.g. #tv, #politics, #immigration). The meaning of the tag remained
unclear in 6.7% of the cases. Among named entities, organizations were the most
common (27%), followed by products, events, persons and other entities (16%,
12%, 6%, 29%).

Slightly more than half of the tags (137) could be associated to a Freebase en-
try; this is higher than the number of named entities because Freebase contains
also some general terms, like domains or common words, which are not named
entities. As expected, most application and sentiment tags could not be mapped
to Freebase. Only 33% of application and 14% of sentiment tags could be re-
solved, and many of these mappings are rough approximations of the intended
meaning (e.g. the protest tag #freegary mapped to gary mckinnon). We have
also explicitly measured agreement on this task by reevaluating 31 judgments.
18 out of the 31 tags in this sample could be mapped to Freebase. The interannotator agreement on the task of determining if a hashtag can be mapped to
Freebase is very high (Cohens  of 0.79). The judges agreed on the exact target
in 12 out of 18 cases, and 4 of the 6 instances of disagreements were simply
due to the same topic appearing in multiple hierarchies within Freebase. One of
the other two cases was a close match (technician vs technology for the tag
#tech), the other a broader match (bacon vs food for #bacon).

Using the whole set of judgments, we have also performed a logistic regression
on the binary variable indicating whether there was a mapping to Freebase for
a given hashtag. We have normalized the input variables by a linear transformation to the [0,1] interval, so that we obtain coefficients that are comparable

http://freebase.com
http://code.google.com/p/freebase-suggest/

D. Laniado and P. Mika

in magnitude. Table 2 shows the coefficients of the resulting model. This model
shows that tag frequency, non-tag frequency, the number of users are negatively
correlated with the success of mapping to Freebase, because these frequency
measures are indicators of Twitter-specific usage. Entropy is also negatively cor-
related, because the higher the entropy, the less consistently the tag is used. The
number of non-tag users is positively correlated, because it indicates common
words/sentiments. Similarities are also positively correlated, but to a smaller
extent. Altogether our model achieves a 66% accuracy, a relative improvement
of 25% over the baseline of choosing the majority class.

Table 2. Logistic regression coefficients of the input variables reported, for predicting
output variable FBID (i.e., whether a hashtag can be mapped onto a Freebase entry)

Variable Fm  Fm Fu
Coefficient -2.00 -3.45 -6.80 5.45 3.56 -3.68 0.11 0.78 0.34

 Fu Hb H

 H wsim usim Intercept

-0.01

4 Related Work

After the appearance of the first social bookmarking applications, a considerable
effort has been spent in the study of tag semantics. Work in this field is strongly
related to ours, different in that tagging is explicit and often serves personal
categorization. Classifications of tags based on their usage are proposed in [8]
and [22]; an insight into the use of non subject related tags is offered in [11]. Motivations and incentives behind tagging have been investigated in [16] and [2]. In
[7] some metrics are introduced to evaluate tags, based on user behaviour. The
authors of [1] evaluate the potential of folksonomies to generate semantic meta-
data; an assessment of delicious tag vocabulary efficiency from an information
theory perspective is provided in [6]. Among the studies aiming at extracting
emergent semantics from folksonomies, the work described in [24] relies on a
metric of tag entropy to evaluate the ambiguity of tags.

While in our work we could represent hashtags as virtual documents, based
on messages in which they appear, in traditional social tagging applications the
context in which a tag can be analyzed is usually just constitued by other tags
used concurrently; a tripartite model of tags, users and resources is the basis for
most works [17]. In [5] some measures to compute tag relatedness are presented,
and delicious tags are grounded to WordNet synsets in order to contrast semantic
relations with the results of the different metrics proposed; the best semantic
precision was achieved with metrics based on the cosine between each tags
context, represented as a vector of co-occurring tags. Also the study described
in [4] resonates with our work for the use of information retrieval techniques to
compare tags with each other. In [13] a classification of users according to their
tagging behaviour is leveraged to improve the effectiveness of algorithms for
emergent semantics extraction from folksonomies. The idea of integrating tags
into the Semantic Web is pursued in FLOR [3], a framework for the enrichment
?

?

?
of folksonomies with semantic information from existing ontologies. Models have
been proposed to anchor tags to Semantic Web URIs, such as MOAT [19] and
CommonTag5; NiceTag ontology allows for the representation of different kinds
of tagging actions, by means of named graphs [15].

Twitters social network and information diffusion dynamics have been studied in [10] and [12]; the authors of [14] investigate the use of Twitter during
conferences, identifying classes of hashtags and finding out a prevalence of technical terms, and a general tendency to address especially people belonging to the
same community. In [9] tagging behaviour in Twitter is compared with the one
in delicious, and it is described as conversational; the authors in particular study
the phenomenon of memes emerging around hashtags that are often abandoned
after a short time, and introduce statistical metrics to detect them. A tripartite
model of users, hashtags and messages is introduced in [23] to turn Twitter into
a folksonomy, and to extract emergent semantics. Special syntaxes have been
proposed to allow users express structured information inside a tweet; among
these we mention twitlogic6 and HyperTwitter7, which allows users specify relationships among hashtags (equivalent, subtag) and express arbitrary properties;
an alternative distributed platform for microblogging, based on Semantic Web
principles, is described in [18].

5 Conclusions and Future Work

Since their introduction, hashtags have shown to be a popular feature of microblogging platforms as a practical solution to the problem of aggregating content in the disorganized and fragmented stream of information that characterizes
these systems. However, not all hashtags are used in the same way, not all of
them aggregate messages around a community or a topic, not all of them endure
in time, and not all of them have an actual meaning. In this work we have addressed the issue of evaluating Twitter hashtags as strong identifiers, as a first
step in order to bridge the gap between Twitter and the Semantic Web.

The first contribution of this paper stands in the formalization of the problem,
and in the elaboration of a number of desired properties for a good hashtag to
serve as a URI. We have proposed a Vector Space Model for hashtags, representing them as virtual documents; in parallel we have introduced the notion of
non-tag, to be able to compare each tag with the corresponding word without
hash. We have defined several metrics, based both on the messages containing a
hashtag and on the community adopting it, to characterize hashtag usage on a
variety of dimensions: frequency, specificity, consistency, and stability over time.
We have applied these metrics to a dataset of more than half a billion mes-
sages, collected over the whole month of November 2009. Beyond qualitatively
illustrating the results, showing how the metrics proposed tend to correspond
to actual properties of the data, we have performed manual classification of a

http://commontag.org
http://twitlogic.fortytwo.net/
http://semantictwitter.appspot.com/

D. Laniado and P. Mika

sample of tags. Based on these data, we have tested the results obtained with the
algorithms described in the paper, showing how a combination of the proposed
measures can help in the task of assessing which tags are more likely to represent
valuable identifiers. These results are promising, with respect to the perspective
of anchoring Twitter hashtags to Semantic Web URIs, and to detect concepts
and entities valuable to be treated as new identifiers. Also spam detection tasks
can benefit from the metrics we have illustrated.

This work is only a first step in the direction of the investigation of hashtag
semantics, and of automatic hashtag classification. Different machine learning
algorithms can be used to improve the performances; cleaner results might be
obtained by taking into account the different languages of tweets. A more complete analysis may result by considering also links, usernames and emoticons, and
by comprising retweet dynamics in the investigation. As a further step, we plan
to study similarity between hashtags, based both on word and user co-occurrence
vectors, in order to find clusters and study emergent semantics.
