I18n of Semantic Web Applications

S oren Auer1, Matthias Weidl1, Jens Lehmann1,

Amrapali J. Zaveri1, and Key-Sun Choi2

1 Universit at Leipzig, Institut f ur Informatik, Johannisgasse 26,

D-04103 Leipzig, Germany

lastname@informatik.uni-leipzig.de

http://aksw.org

2 KAIST, Semantic Web Research Center

335 Gwahangno Yuseong, Daejeon 305-701, Korea

kschoi@cs.kaist.ac.kr
http://www.kaist.edu

Abstract. Recently, the use of semantic technologies has gained quite
some traction. With increased use of these technologies, their maturation not only in terms of performance, robustness but also with regard
to support of non-latin-based languages and regional differences is of
paramount importance. In this paper, we provide a comprehensive review of the current state of the internationalization (I18n) of Semantic
Web technologies. Since resource identifiers play a crucial role for the
Semantic Web, the internatinalization of resource identifiers is of high
importance. It turns out that the prevalent resource identification mechanism on the Semantic Web, i.e. URIs, are not sufficient for an efficient
internationalization of knowledge bases. Fortunately, with IRIs a standard for international resource identifiers is available, but its support
needs much more penetration and homogenization in various semantic
web technology stacks. In addition, we review various RDF serializations
with regard to their support for internationalized knowledge bases. The
paper also contains an in-depth review of popular semantic web tools
and APIs with regard to their support for internationalization.

1 Introduction

Recently, the use of semantic technologies has gained quite some traction.
With the growing use of these technologies, their maturation not only in terms
of performance, robustness but also with regard to support of non-latin-based
languages and regional differences is of paramount importance. Internationalization and localization are means of adapting computer software to different
languages and regional differences. Internationalization is the process of designing a software application so that it can be adapted to various languages and
regions without engineering changes. Localization is the process of adapting internationalized software for a specific region or language by adding locale-specific
components and translating text. For the localization of Semantic Web applica-
tions, existing software methodologies (such as GNU gettext for translation or

P.F. Patel-Schneider et al.(Eds.): ISWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6497, pp. 116, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

S. Auer et al.

different locales for region-specific data formating) can be applied. Also, with
the datatype and language tags for RDF literals, there is good support for localization of knowledge bases. With regard to internationalization of Semantic Web
technologies the situation, however, is much more challenging as we experienced
during the process of internationalizing the DBpedia extraction framework [4]
for creating a Korean version of DBpedia.

We noticed in particular, that Asian languages and resources pose a special
challenge for Semantic Web and Linked Data applications, tools and technolo-
gies. The (non-standard) generation of URIs (for Asian language resources) can
have a substantial impact also with regard to classification, interlinking, fusing and information quality assessment. The importance of tackling a proper
internationalization of the Semantic Web technology stack is stressed by the
fact that Asia has compared to Europe and the USA the largest number of Internet users1 and many Asian languages are based on fundamentally different
linguistic paradigms and scripts. Hence, for the success of individual tools and
the Web of Data as a whole it is crucial (a) to incorporate and outreach to user
communities beyond the western world and (b) to consider the varying scripting
paradigms in order to achieve a wider applicability of the Semantic Web research
and development results.

In this paper we want to contribute to a successful internationalization of
Semantic Web technologies by summarizing our findings, providing a review of
the current state of the internationalization (I18n) of Semantic Web technologies and outlining some best-practices for Semantic Web tool and application
developers as well as knowledge engineers.

We are starting to look at the situation with one of the uttermost important
building blocks of the Semantic Web  resource identifiers. It turns out that
the currently prevalent resource identification mechanism on the Semantic Web,
i.e. URIs, are not sufficient for an effective internationalization of knowledge
bases. Fortunately, with IRIs a standard for international resource identifiers
is available, but its support needs much more penetration and homogenization
in various semantic web technology stacks. Hence, one goal of this paper is to
sensitize the Semantic Web community for the use of IRIs instead of URIs.
We review various RDF serializations with regard to their support for internationalized ontologies and knowledge bases. Surprisingly, also here, the currently
prevalent serialization technology - RDF/XML - is not adequate for serializing
internationalized knowledge bases. The paper also contains an in-depth review
of popular Semantic Web tools and APIs with regard to support for I18n.

The paper is structured as follows: We describe the internationalization issues with URIs and possible solutions in the Sections 2. We describe problems
with regard to internationalization of the RDF/XML serialization in Section 3.
We survey the other available RDF serialization techniques for their compatibility with internationalization in Section 4. We also provide a comprehensive
evaluation of internationalization support in popular Semantic Web tools and
APIs in Section 5 and conclude in Section 6.
1 http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats3.htm
