Using SPARQL to Test for Lattices:
Application to Quality Assurance in

Biomedical Ontologies

Guo-Qiang Zhang1 and Olivier Bodenreider2

Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA

National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA

Abstract. We present a scalable, SPARQL-based computational pipeline for testing the lattice-theoretic properties of partial orders represented as RDF triples.
The use case for this work is quality assurance in biomedical ontologies, one desirable property of which is conformance to lattice structures. At the core of our
pipeline is the algorithm called NuMi, for detecting the Number of Minimal upper
bounds of any pair of elements in a given finite partial order. Our technical contribution is the coding of NuMi completely in SPARQL. To show its scalability,
we applied NuMi to the entirety of SNOMED CT, the largest clinical ontology
(over 300,000 conepts). Our experimental results have been groundbreaking: for
the first time, all non-lattice pairs in SNOMED CT have been identified exhaustively from 34 million candidate pairs using over 2.5 billion queries issued to
Virtuoso. The percentage of non-lattice pairs ranges from 0 to 1.66 among the
19 SNOMED CT hierarchies. These non-lattice pairs represent target areas for
focused curation by domain experts. RDF, SPARQL and related tooling provide
an ecient platform for implementing lattice algorithms on large data structures.

1 Introduction

Lattices arise naturally from many disciplines. We speak of lattices because of their
familiarity and their elegant structural properties. In the Semantic Web, lattices are intimately related to conceptual structures, since good ontologies often have a lattice structure [23]. The deeper philosophical and mathematical reason for lattice to be a desirable
structural property for the taxonomy relation (e.g. IS-A) in ontologies can be elucidated
using a theory called Formal Concept Analysis (FCA [3,11,15]). Starting from two very
basic types, objects and attributes, with the assumption that intension and extension are
fundamental adjoining facets of the notion of concept, one arrives at the mathematical
structure of (complete) lattices automatically using FCA. The upshot of this is that if we
encounter a non-lattice fragment in a taxonomic hierarchy, then somewhere upstream
the notion of intension and extension has not been rigorously enforced, revealing gaps
in conceptual modeling which can be subtle to detect otherwise.

Though desirable, the lattice property of ontologies is not always found in most
biomedical ontologies. For example, SNOMED CT, the largest clinical ontology, is
only a lattice for the most part (assuming superficial top and bottom elements). As
can be seen from Fig. 1, the double-circled concepts Tissue specimen from breast
and Tissue specimen from heart legitimately share the two features of being a kind

P.F. Patel-Schneider et al.(Eds.): ISWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6497, pp. 273288, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010
