Knowledge Engineering for Historians on the Example

of the Catalogus Professorum Lipsiensis

Thomas Riechert1, Ulf Morgenstern2, Soren Auer1,

Sebastian Tramp1, and Michael Martin1

1 AKSW, Institut fur Informatik, Universitat Leipzig, Pf 100920, 04009 Leipzig


	
		
	



2 Historisches Seminar, Universitat Leipzig, Pf 100920, 04009 Leipzig


		
	

	
		

Abstract. Although the Internet, as an ubiquitous medium for communica-
tion, publication and research, already significantly influenced the way historians work, the capabilities of the Web as a direct medium for collaboration in
historic research are not much explored. We report about the application of an
adaptive, semantics-based knowledge engineering approach for the development
of a prosopographical knowledge base on the Web - the Catalogus Professorum
Lipsiensis. In order to enable historians to collect, structure and publish prosopographical knowledge an ontology was developed and knowledge engineering
facilities based on the semantic data wiki OntoWiki were implemented. The resulting knowledge base contains information about more than 14.000 entities and
is tightly interlinked with the emerging Web of Data. For access and exploration
by other historians a number of access interfaces were developed, such as a visual SPARQL query builder, a relationship finder and a Linked Data interface.
The approach is transferable to other prosopographical research projects and historical research in general, thus improving the collaboration in historic research
communities and facilitating the reusability of historic research results.

1 Introduction

The World Wide Web, as an ubiquitous medium for publication and exchange, already
significantly influenced the way historians work: the online availability of catalogs and
bibliographies allows to eciently search for content relevant for a certain investiga-
tion; the increasing digitization of works from historical archives and libraries, in addi-
tion, enables historians to directly access historical sources remotely. The capabilities
of the Web as a medium for collaboration, however, are only starting to be explored.
Many, historical questions can only be answered by combining information from different sources, from dierent researchers and organizations. Also, after original sources
are analyzed, the derived information is often much richer, than can be captured by
simple keyword indexing. These factors pave the way for the successful application of
knowledge engineering techniques in historical research communities.

P.F. Patel-Schneider et al.(Eds.): ISWC 2010, Part II, LNCS 6497, pp. 225240, 2010.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

T. Riechert et al.

In this article we report about the application of an adaptive, semantics-based
knowledge engineering approach for the development of a prosopographical knowledge base. In prosopographical research, historians analyze common characteristics of
historical groups by studying statistically relevant quantities of individual biographies.
Untraceable periods of biographies can be determined on the basis of such accomplished analyses in combination with statistically examinations as well as patterns of
relationships between individuals and their activities.

In our case, researchers from the historical seminar at Universitat Leipzig aimed
at creating a prosopographical knowledge base about the life and work of professors
in the 600 years history of Universitat Leipzig ranging from the year 1409 till 2009
- the Catalogus Professorum Lipsiensis (CPL). In order to enable historians to collect,
structure and publish this prosopographical knowledge an ontological knowledge model
was developed and incrementally refined over a period of three years. The community
of historians working on the project was enabled to add information to the knowledge
base using an adapted version of the semantic data wiki OntoWiki [1]1. For the general
public, a simplified user interface2 is dynamically generated based on the content of the
knowledge base. For access and exploration of the knowledge base by other historians a
number of access interfaces was developed and deployed, such as a graphical SPARQL
query builder, a relationship finder and plain RDF and Linked Data interfaces. As a
result, a group of 10 historians supported by a much larger group of volunteers and
external contributors collected information about 1,300 professors, 10,000 associated
periods of life, 400 institutions and many more related entities.

The benefits of the developed knowledge engineering platform for historians are
twofold: Firstly, the collaboration between the participating historians has significantly
improved: The ontological structuring helped to quickly establish a common understanding of the domain. Collaborators within the project, peers in the historic community as well as the general public were enabled to directly observe the progress, thus
facilitating peer-review, feedback and giving direct benefits to the contributors. Sec-
ondly, the ontological representation of the knowledge facilitated original historical in-
vestigations, such as historical social network analysis, professor appointment analysis
(e.g. with regard to the influence of cousin-hood or political influence) or the relation
between religion and university. The use of the developed model and knowledge engineering techniques is easily transferable to other prosopographical research projects
and with adaptations to the ontology model to other historical research in general. In
the long term, the use of collaborative knowledge engineering in historian research
communities can facilitate the transition from largely individual-driven research (where
one historian investigates a certain research question solitarily) to more communityoriented research (where many participants contribute pieces of information in order
to enlighten a larger research question). Also, this will improve the reusability of the
results of historic research, since knowledge represented in structured ways can be used
for previously not anticipated research questions.

The article is structured as follows: we present the overall technical architecture of
the knowledge engineering approach in Section 2. We describe how the collaboration in

1 Online at: 


2 Available at: 	
		


