Computational Linguistics Research on Philippine Languages 
Rachel Edita O . ROXAS
Software Technology Department
DeLa Salle University
2401 Taft Avenue , Manila , Philippines

Allan BORRA
Software Technology Department
DeLa Salle University
2401 Taft Avenue , Manila , Philippines


This is a paper that describes computational linguistic activities on Philippines languages  . The Philippines is an archipelago with vast numbers of islands and numerous languages  . The tasks of understanding , representing and implementing these languages require enormous work  . An extensive amount of work has been done on understanding at least some of the major Philippine languages  , but little has been done on the computational aspect  . Majority of the latter has been on the purpose of machine translation  . 
1Philippine Languages
Within the 7 , 200 islands of the Philippine archipelago , there are about one hundred and one ( 101 ) languages that are spoken . This is according to the nation wide 1995 census conducted by the National Statistics Office of the Philippine Government  ( NSO ,  1997) . The languages that are spoken by at least one percent of the total household population include Tagalog  , Cebuano , Ilocano , Hiligaynon , Bikol , 
Waray , Pampanggo or Kapangpangan,
Boholano , Pangasinan or Panggalatok , Maranao,
Maguin-danao , and Tausug.
Aside from these major languages , there are other Philippine dialects , which are variants of these major languages . Fortunato ( 1993 ) classified these dialects into the top nine major languages as above  ( except for Boholano which is similar to Cebuano )  . 
2 Language Representations
Linguistics information on Philippine languages are extensive on the languages mentioned above  , except for Maranao , Maguin-danao , and Tausug , which are some of the languages spoken in Southern Philippines  . But as of yet , extensive research has already been done on theoretical linguistics and little is known for computational linguistics  . In fact , the computational linguistics researches on Philippine languages are mainly focused on Tagalog  . 1 There are also notable work done on

Kroeger ( 1993 ) showed the importance of the grammatical relations in Tagalog  , such as subject and object relations , and the insufficiency of a surface phrase structure paradigm to represent these relations  . This issue was further discussed in the LFG98 , which is on the problem of voice and grammatical functions in Western Austronesian Languages  . Musgrave ( 1998 ) introduced the problem certain verbs in these languages that can head more than one transitive clause type  . Foley (1998) and Kroeger (1998) , in particular , discussed about long debated issues such as nouns in Tagalog that can be verbed  , the voice system of Tagalog , and
Tagalog as a symmetrical voice system.
Latrouite ( 2000 ) argued that a level of semantic representation is still necessary to explicitly capture a word?s meaning  . 
Crawford ( 1999 ) contributed to an issue on interrogative sentences and suggested that the restriction on wh-movement reveals the syntactic structure of Tagalog  . 
Potet ( 1995 ) and Trost ( 2000 ) provided general materials on computational morphology  , though , both presented examples on Tagalog . 
Rubino (1997 , 1996) provided an indepth analysis of I locano . Among the major contributions of the work include an extensive treatment of the complex morphology in the language  , a thorough treatment of the discourse 1Tagalog ( or Pilipino ) has the most number of speakers in the country . This may be due to the fact that it was officially declared the nation all nguage of the Philippines in  1946  . 
particles , and the reference grammar of the language . 
3 Applications in Machine Translation
Currently , most of the empirical endeavours in computational linguistics are in machine translation  . 
3.1 Filipino MT Software
There are several commercially available translation software  , which include Philippine language , but translation is done word-for-word . 
One such software is the Universal Translator 2000 , which includes Tagalog among 40 other languages . Although omni-directional , translation involving Tagalog excludes morphological and syntactic aspects of the language Another software is the Filipino Language Software  , which includes Tagalog , Visayan , 
Cebuano , and Ilocano languages.
3.2 Machine Translation Research
IsaWika ! is an English to Filipino machine translator that uses the augmented transition network as its computational architecture  ( Roxas ,  1999) . It translates simple and compound declarative statements as well as imperative English statements  . To date , it is thmost serious research undertaking in machine translation in the Philippines  . 
Borra ( 1999 ) presented another translation software that translates simple declarative and imperative statements from English to Filipino  . 
The computational architecture of the system is based on LFG  , which differs from IsaWika?s ATN implementation . Part of the research was describing a possible set of semantic information on every grammar category to establish a semantically-close translation  . 
4 Conclusion
There are various theoretical linguistic studies on Philippine languages  , but computational linguistics research is currently limited  . CL activities in the Philippines had yet to gain acceptance from its computing science community  . 

Borra , A .   ( 1999 ) A Transfer-Based Engine for an English to Filipino Machine Translation Software  . 
MS Thesis . Institute of Computer Science , University of the Philippines Los Ba?os . 

Crawford , C ( 1999 ) A Condition on Wh-Extraction and What it Reveals about the Syntactic Structure of Tagalog  . 
http://www . people . cornell . edu/pages/cjc26/l304 final . html Foley , B ( 1998 ) Symmetric Voice Systems and Precategoriality in Philippine Languages  . In LFG98 Conference , Workshop on Voice and
Grammatical Functions in Austronesian

Fortunato , Teresita , Mga Pangunahing Etnoling-guistikong Grupos a Pilipinas  ,  1993 . 
Kroeger , P ( 1998 ) Nouns and Verbs in Tagalog : AR sponse to Foley . In LFG98 Conference . 
_____  ( 1993 ) Phrase Structure and Grammatical Relations in Tagalog  . CLSI Publications , Center for the Study of Language and Information , 
Stanford , California.
Latrouite , Anja (2000) Argument Marking in Tagalog . In Austronesian Formal Linguistics Association 7th Annual Meeting ( AFLA7 )  . Vriji Universiteit , Amsterdam , The Netherlands . 
Musgrave , S ( 1998 ) The Problem of Voice and Grammatical Functions in Western Austronesian 
Languages . In LFG98 Conference.
National Statistics Office (1997) ? Report No . 2:
Socio-Economic and Demographic Characteristic ? , StaMes a , Manila . 
Potet , J (1995) Tagalog Monosyllabic Roots . In Oceanic Linguistics , Vol . 34, no . 2, pp .  345-374 . 
Roxas , R . , Sanchez , W . & Buenaventura , M ( 1999 ) Final Report of Machine Translation from English to Filipino : Second Phase  . DOST/UPLB . 
Rubino , C(1997) A Reference Grammar of Ilocano.
UCSB Dissertation , UMI Microfilms.
_____(1996) Morphological Integrity in Ilocano.
Studies in Language , vol . 20, no . 3, pp .  333-366 . 
Trost , Harald (2000) Computational Morphology.

