Good Spelling of Vietnamese Texts,
one aspect of computational linguistics in Vietnam
PHAN Huy Khanh
Department of Information Technology
Da Nang University
17, Le Duan Street , Da Nang City , Vietnam


There are many challenging problems for
Vietnames elanguage processing . It will be a long time before these challenges are met  . Even some apparently simple problems such as spelling correction are quite difficult and have not been approached systematically yet  . In this paper , we will discuss one aspect of this type of work : designing the socalled Vie tools to detect and correct spelling of Vietnames e texts by using a spelling database based on TELEX code  . Vietools is also extended to serve many purposes in Vietnames elanguage processing  . 

For the past two decades computational linguistics  ( CL ) has progressed substantially in Vietnam , mainly in these basic aspects : data acquisition from the keyboard  , encoding , and restitution through an output device for Vietnamesedia critic characters  , updates on the fonts in Microsoft DOS/Windows , standardization for Vietnamese ( James Do , Ngo Thanh Nhan ) , automatic translation of English documents into Vietnamese and vice versa  ( Phan
Thi Tuoi , Dinh Dien ) , recognition of handwriting ( Hoang Kiem , Nguyen Van Khuong) , speech processing ( Nguyen Thanh Phuc , Quach Tuan Ngoc) , building bilingual dictionaries such as English -Vietnamese and V-E  , French-Vietnamese and VF dictionaries ( LacViet )  , archives of old Sino-Vietnames e documents ( NgoTrung Viet , Cong Tam ) , etc . 
Some of these works have been presented in Informatics and IT workshops organized in Vietnam  . These efforts are modest and do not yets how our full potential  . There are many reasons for this weakness . The major reasons that the different efforts are quite isolated and there is not enough coordination  . Some coordinated workshops held from time to time would be very helpful  . 
At the IT Dept . DaNang University we are building a lexical database based on TELEX code for accomplishing the following tasks : - Converting Vietnames e texts from any font to any other font  . 
-Putting texts in alphabetical order independently of the fontin use  . 
-Looking up words up in the monolingual and/or multilingual dictionary  . 
-Building specialized monolingual dictionaries.
At present , we are taking part in the GETA , CLIPS , IMAG , France , in the FEV project : for a multilingual dictionary : French-Vietnamese via English  . 
In fact , inputting Vietnamese texts still encounters many problems  , not yet solved properly . The most common mistakes in detecting and correcting spelling errors are :- wrong intonation or misspelling  , -not following spelling specialization , not using syllables systematically in the same texts  , etc . 
Winword , a commercial text processor , is not able to detect and correct spelling mistakes  . 
The program designed by Ngo Thanh Nhan ( without an associated spelling dictionary ) and other software packages for Vietnames estill do not offer adequate solutions  . 
We propose here a general solution for building the socalled Vie tools for detecting and correcting spelling errors  . Vietools is designed for office application such as W in word  , Excel , Acess , Power Point , etc . in Microsoft Windows . Vie tools has also been extended for converting and rearranging Vietnamese words in the dictionaries and consulting the Vietnamese dictionaries  , including multilingual dictionaries . 
1 Building spelling database
In the spelling dictionary by Hoang Phe (1995) , there are 6760 syllables in the writing system ( 6616 syllables in the phonology system ) to compose single words or complex words . Each syllable has two parts : initial consonant ( optional ) and rhyme pattern ( including rhyme and tone )  . Altogether , there are 27 initial consonants , and 1160 rhyme patterns ( including 6 tones ) . 
Based on Vietnames esyllable structure , the spelling database is builtin at a bular form . Each element of the table helps to check the correction of a syllable based on the column position of initial consonants and the row position of rhyme patterns  , for example , the syllable lamf(work ) in the TELEX form , is composed of the initial consonant l and rhyme patternam with by low falling tone  ( or grave accent ) f . Each element of the table can be understood as: -syllables used in Vietnamese  . 
-elements between tone sign positions ( ono:o jaor on a:o aj )  , pronunciation or dialect with spelling ( z is equivalent to d or g i , y is equivalent to i . . . ) and borrowings such as karaoke , photocopy , fax . . . 
-Sino-Vietnamese word:coongj ( addition ) ? congj , quoocs ( country ) ? nu wowcs . . . 
-being unable to form syllables : quts , quoon , coan , cue e . . . 
Techniques have been developed to recognize the compound words from two syllables  , such as baord amror damrba or ( guarantee ) , chung chung ( vague ) , etc . , from three syllables , such as how pj tacs xax ( cooperative ) , etc . , from four syllables , such as coongawn vieecjlamf ( work , job ) , etc . 
2 Designing Vietools
The error detecting program reads one syllable at a time from the text  . The syllable is divided into an initial consonant and a rhyme pattern  , paying attention to solving initial consonants such as : gi containing voweli  ; the consonant qu has vowel u , but it is easy to separate it from the syllable for it does not have the consonant q  ; the other combined initial consonants have the length of  2  , or 3 . The error-correcting unit checks the conformity of initial consonants  ( if present ) and the rhyme pattern . 
3 Code converting
At present , there are many Vietnamese fonts built on different codes  ( different in number of bytes used : 1 byte or 2 bytes , order of tones , letter arrangements , etc . ) . Because there has not been a unified code for Vietnamese text  , we selected a pivot code and TELEX code . There are many codes to convert from such as IBM-CP01129  , 
Microsoft-CP1258, VISCII , VietKey,
VietWare , VNI , TCVN3, Unicode , etc.
Vietools works on syllables converted to
TELEX . Vietools analyses syllables to detect initial consonants and rhyme pattern in TELEX code  . 

The main advantage of our method is that the tool operates independently of the 
Vietnamese font used . The design of
Vietools is open : one can add new functions such as text or data conversion Spelling database structure design helps building multifunctional dictionaries  , which are essential for natural language processing  . 

My thanks go to my students for the realization of Vietools and my colleagues for their opinions  . In particular , I thank Professor Aravind Joshi , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , USA , for his helpful suggestions I am grateful to Christian Boitet  , Professor , Joseph Fourier University , GETA , CLIPS , 
IMAG , France , for his comments on this paper.
References 1 . Hoang Phe (1995) Dictionary of Orthography . 
Center of Lexicography , Da Nang Publishing
House , 509p.
2. Hoang Phe (1997) Vietnamese Dictionary.
Center of Lexicography , Da Nang Publishing
House , 1130p.
