Development of Computational Linguistics Research :
a Challenge for Indonesia
Bobby Nazief , Ph.D.
Computer Science Center , University of Indonesia
Jakarta , Indonesia

1 Introduction
The emergence of Internet as a global
information repository , where information of all kind is stored , requires intelligent information processing tools  ( i . e . , computer applications ) to help the information seeker to retrieve the stored information  . To build these intelligent information processing tools  , we need to build computer applications that understand human language since most of those information is represented in human language  . This is where computational linguistics becomes important  , especially for countries like Indonesia that hosts more than  200 million people . We need to develop a systematic understanding of the Bahasa Indonesia  ( the Indonesian national language ) to enable us develop the needed computer applications that will help us manage information intelligently  . 
However , until recently , there is only a few research activities in computational linguistics conducted in Indonesia  . The establishment of Computer Science departments in Indonesian universities that did not start until the beginning of  1980?s may be partially responsible for this1  . 
In addition , the Indonesian linguists seem to be keen on working ? manually ? instead of using computers in conducting their linguistics researches as stated in Muhadjir  ( 1995 )  , only few of them really make use of the technology  . 
While , on the other hand , most computer scientists tend to use the practical approach rather than constructing a complete framework to understand the language when building related applications such as a specific information retrieval system  . 
In the following , I will describe past research activities in computational linguistics among public universities that established Computer 
Science department in 1980.
on Bahasa Indonesia . This description is by no means exhaustive since it is very difficult to find out research activities in computational linguistics in Indonesia  . 
2 Past Research Activities 2 . 1 Corpus Analysis Corpus analysis is an important means as a way to understand the evolution of language usage by its people  . In the case of Bahasa Indonesia , research activities on corpus analysis were almost none  . There was one work by R . R . 
Hardja dibrata (1969) from Monash University , who conducted word frequency analysis of Indonesian newspapers  . There was also similar work conducted the MMTS project  ( will be described later , in the following section ); however , the result of the group?s corpus analysis was not made public  . 
Given this condition , with a group of colleague both from the Faculty of Computer Science and the Faculty of Letters  , I conducted an Indonesian corpus analysis using newspapers as the text source  . We collected 52 editions of Kompas , a national newspaper with a large number of readers  , published in the year of 1994 . Each of the 52 editions corresponds to a particular week of the year and was taken randomly from the  7 daily editions of that given week . From this collection , we constructed a corpus consisting of 2 . 200 . 818 words that were formed by 74 . 559 unique words . Of these more than 2 million words , 1 . 826 . 740 words that were formed by 27 . 7 38 unique words are actually words that matched with the  KBBI2 entries , while the rest are either names or foreign words . 
Detailed analysis can be found in Muhadjir (1996).
standard word dictionary for Bahasa Indonesia , contains a little more than 70 . 000 word entries . 
2.2 Morphological Analysis
Everyone who has used a word processor understands the importance of a spelling checker in helping him/her to produce an error-free document  . To develop a spelling checker , we need to understand the morphological structure of words especially how derived-words are constructed from their root-words and the addition of affixes  . 
We have conducted research to analyze the morphological structure of Indonesian words and based on this analysis we have developed a stemming algorithm suitable for those words  . 
Unlike English , where the role of suffix dominates the generation of derived-words  , Bahasa Indonesia depends on both prefix and suffix to derive new words  . Therefore , to stem a derived Indonesian word in order to obtain its root-word  , we have to look at the presence of both prefix and suffix in that derived-word  ( Nazief ,  1996) . In addition , similar to English , multiple suffixes can also be present on a given derived-word  . 
Based on this stemming algorithm , we have developed a spelling checker and spelling -error corrector utilities as part of the Lotus 
Smart suite 3 package.
2.3 The MMTS Project
One notable research activity among the few computational linguistics research activities in Indonesia is the Multilingual Machine Translation System  ( MMTS ) project conducted by the Agency for Assessment and Application of Technology  ( BPPT ) as part of multinational research project between China  , Indonesia , Malaysia , Thailand , and lead by Japan ( see http://www . cicc . or . jp/homepage/english/about/act/mt/mt . htm , http://www . aia . bppt . go . id/mmts) . 
Unfortunately , there are very few publications about this work that could have benefited the computational linguistic community in the country  . One of the few publications that the MMTS project made available for public is the Indonesian Word Electronic Dictionary  ( KEBI )  , which could be accessed online on http://nlp . aia . bppt . go . id / . The dictionary contains consisting word processor  , spread sheet , presentation editor , and database applications developed by Lotus
Development Corporation.
22.500 root-word and 43.500 derived-word entries.
3 Understanding Indonesian Grammar
Currently , I am concentrating my work on developing syntax analyzer for sentences written in Ba has a Indonesia  . The approach taken initially was to use the contextfree grammar with restriction such as that used in the linguistic string analysis  ( Sager ,  1981) . Using this approach , we have developed grammar that understands declarative sentences  ( Shavitri ,  1999) . However , our experience shows that we need to have a more detailed word categories than is currently available in the standard Indonesian word dictionary  ( KB BI ) before the grammar can be used effectively . 
This finding really shows us the importance of collaborating with the linguists who understand this field better  . But before we do this , we need to educate our linguist-fellows the importance of computer in their fields  . 
4 Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Mirna , bu Multamia , pakMuhadjir , bu Kiswartini , and all of my students who have collaborated with me in these efforts to understand Ba has a Indonesia better  . 
5 References
R . R . Hardja dibrata ( 1969 ) An Indonesian Newspaper Word count . Department of Indonesian and Malay , Faculty of Arts , Monash University , Cayton , 

Muhadjir (1995) Menjaring Datadari Teks.
Lembaran Sastra Universitas Indonesia , edisik husus : Tautan Sastra & Komputer , Faculty of Letters , University of Indonesia , Depok , pp .  81--91 . 
Muhadjir , et . al . (1996) Frekuensi Kosakata Bahasa Indonesia . Faculty of Letters , University of
Indonesia , Depok , 207p.
Bobby A . A . Nazief and Mirna Adriani ( 1996 ) Confix Stripping : Approach to Stemming Algorithm for Bahasa Indonesia  . Internal publication . Faculty of Computer Science , University of Indonesia , Depok . 
Naomi Sager ( 1981 ) Natural Language Information Processing : A Computer Grammar of English and Its Aplications  . Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company , Massachusetts.
Shelly Shavitri ( 1999 ) Analisa Struktur Kalimat Bahasa Indonesia dengan Menggunakan Pengurai Kalimat Berbasis Linguistic String Analysis  . 
Bachelor?s Thesis . Faculty of Computer Science,
University of Indonesia , Depok , 88p.
