Extracting Causal Knowledge from a Medical Database 
Using Graphical Patterns
Christopher S.G . Khoo , Syin Chan and Yun Niu
Centre for Advanced Information Systems , School of Computer Engineering
BlkN4, Rm2A-32, Nanyang Avenue
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore 639798
assgkhoo@ntu . edu . sg ; asschan@ntu . edu . sg ; niuyn@hotmail . com

This paper reports the first part of a project that aims to develop a knowledge extraction and knowledge discovery system that extracts causal knowledge from textual databases  . In this initial study , we develop a method to identify and extract cause -effect information that is explicitly expressed in medical abstracts in the Medline database  . 
A set of graphical patterns were constructed that indicate the presence of a causal relation in sentences  , and which part of the sentence represents the cause and which part represents the effect  . The patterns are matched with the syntactic parse trees of sentences  , and the parts of the parse tree that match with the slots in the patterns are extracted as the cause or the effect  . 
1 Introduction
Vast amounts of textual documents and databases are now accessible on the Internet and the World Wide Web  . However , it is very difficult to retrieve useful information from this huge disorganized storehouse  . Programs that can identify and extract useful information  , and relate and integrate information from multiple sources are increasingly needed  . The World Wide Web presents tremendous opportunities for developing knowledge extraction and knowledge discovery programs that automatically extract and acquire knowledge about a domain by integrating information from multiple sources  . 
New knowledge can be discovered by relating disparate pieces of information and by inferencing from the extracted knowledge  . 
This paper reports the first phase of a project to develop a knowledge extraction and knowledge discovery system that focuses on causal knowledge  . A system is being developed to identify and extract cause-effect information from the Medline database ? a database of abstracts of medical journal articles and conference papers  . In this initial study , we focus on cause-effect information that is explicitly expressed  ( i . e . indicated using some linguistic marker ) in sentences . We have selected four medical areas for this study ? heart disease  , AIDS , depression an schizophrenia . 
The medical domain was selected for two reasons : 1  . The causal relation is particular important in medicine  , which is concerned with developing treatments and drugs that can effect a cure for some disease  2  . Because of the importance of the causal relation in medicine  , the relation is more likely to be explicitly indicated using linguistic means  ( i . e . using words such as result , effect , cause , etc . ) . 
2 Previous Studies
The goal of information extraction research is to develop systems that can identify the passage  ( s ) in a document that contains information that is relevant to a prescribed task  , extract the information and relate the pieces of information by filling a structured template or a database record  ( Cardie , 1997; Cowie & Lehnert , 1996; Gaizauskas & Wilks ,  1998) . 
Information extraction research has been influenced tremendously by the series of Message Understanding Conferences  ( MUC-5 , MUC6 , MUC7) , organized by the U . S . Advanced Research Projects Agency ( ARPA )   ( http://www . muc . saic . com/proceedings/proceedings_index . html ) . Participants of the conferences develop systems to perform common information extraction tasks  , defined by the conference organizers . 
For each task , a template is specified that indicates the slots to be filled in and the type of information to be extracted to fill each slot  . The set of slots defines the various entities , aspects and roles relevant to a prescribed task or topic of interest  . Information that has been extracted can be used for populating a database of facts about entities or events  , for automatic summarization , for information mining , and for acquiring knowledge to use in a knowledge -based system  . 
Information extraction systems have been developed for a wide range of tasks  . However , few of them have focused on extracting cause -effect information from texts  . 
Previous studies that have attempted to extract cause-effect information from text have mostly used knowledge-based inferences to infer the causal relations  . Selfridge , Daniell & Sim-mons (1985) and Joskowsicz , Ksiezyk & Grishman ( 1989 ) developed prototype computer programs that extracted causal knowledge from short explanatory messages entered into the knowledge acquisition component of an expert system  . When there was an ambiguity whether a causal relation was expressed in the text  , the systems used a domain model to check whether such a causal relation between the events was possible  . 
Kontos & Sidiropoulou ( 1991 ) and Kaplan & Berry-Rogghe ( 1991 ) used linguistic patterns to identify causal relations in scientific texts  , but the grammar , lexicon , and patterns for identifying causal relations were hand coded and developed just to handle the sample texts used in the studies  . Knowledgebased inferences were also used . The authors pointed out that substantial domain knowledge was needed for the system to identify causal relations in the sample texts accurately  . 
More recently , Garcia ( 1997 ) developed a computer program to extract cause -effect information from French technical texts without using domain knowledge  . He focused on causative verbs and reported a precision rate of  85%  . 
Khoo , Kornfilt , Oddy & Myaeng ( 1998 ) developed an automatic method for extracting cause-effect information from Wall Street Journal texts using linguistic clues and pattern matching  . 
Their system was able to extract about 68% of the causal relations with an error rate of about  36%  . 
The emphasis of the current study is on extracting cause-effect information that is explicitly expressed in the text without knowledge-based inferencing  . It is hoped that this will result in a method that is more easily portable to other subject areas and document collections  . We also make use of a parser ( Conexor?s FDG parser ) to construct syntactic parse trees for the sentences  . 
Graphical extraction patterns are constructed to extract information from the parse trees  . As a result , a much smaller number of patterns need be constructed  . Khoo et al ( 1998 ) who used only part-of-speech tagging and phrase bracketing  , but not full parsing , had to construct a large number of extraction patterns  . 
3 Initial Analysis of the Medical Texts 200 abstracts were downloaded from the Medline database for use as our training sample of texts  . They are from four medical areas : depression , schizophrenia , heart disease and AIDs ( fifty abstracts from each area )  . The texts were analysed to identify : 1 . the different roles and attributes that are involved in a causal situation  . Cause and effect are , of course , the main roles , but other roles also exist including enabling conditions  , size of the effect , and size of the cause ( e . g . dos-age ) . 
2 . the various linguistic markers used by the writers to explicitly signal the presence of a causal relation  , e . g . as a result , affect , reduce , etc . 
3.1 Cause-effect template
The various roles and attributes of causals it u -tions identified in the medical abstracts ares ructured in the form of a template  . There are three levels in our cause-effect template  , Level 1 giving the high-level roles and Level 3 giving the most specific sub-roles . The first two levels are given in Table 1 . A more detailed description i provided in Khoo , Chan & Niu (1999) . 
The information extraction system developed in this initial study attempts to fill only them in slots of cause  , effect and modality , without attempting to divide the main slots into subslots  . 
Table 1. The cause-effect template
Level1 Level 2






Polarity ( e.g.?Increase ?, ? Decrease ?, etc.)





Degree of necessity
Modality ( e . g . ? True ? , ? False ? , ? Probable ? , ? Possible ? , etc . )
Research method
Sample size
Significance level
Information source


Type of causal relation
Table 2 . Common causal expressions for depression & schizophrenia 
Expression No . of
Occurrences causative verb 69 effect ( of )  ? ( on )   51 associate with 35 treatment of 31 have effect on 28 treat with 26 treatment with 22 effective ( for ) 14 related to 10
Table 3. Common causal expressions for
AIDs & heart disease Expression No . of
Occurrences causative verb 119 have effect on 30 effect ( of ) ? ( on )   25 due to 20 associate with 19 treat with 15 causative noun ( including nominalized verbs )  3 . 2 Causal expressions in medical texts Causal relations are expressed in text in various ways  . Two common ways are by using causal links and causative verbs  . Causal links are words used to link clauses or phrases  , indicating a causal relation between them . Altenburg ( 1984 ) provided a comprehensive typology of causal links  . He classified them into four main types : the adverbial link  ( e . g . hence , therefore ), the prepositional link ( e . g . because of , on account of ), subordination ( e . g . because , as , since , for , so ) and the clause-integrated line ( e . g . that?s why , the result was ) . Causative verbs are transitive action verbs that express a causal relation between the subject and object or prepositional phrase of the verb  . For example , the transitive verb break can be paraphrased as to cause to break  , and the transitive verb kill can be paraphrased as to cause to die  . 
We analyzed the 200 training abstracts to identify the linguistic markers  ( such as causal links and causative verbs ) used to indicate causal relations explicitly . The most common linguistic expressions of cause -effect found in the Depression and Schizophrenia bstracts  ( occurring at least 10 times in 100 abstracts ) are listed in Table 2 . The common expressions found in the AIDs and Heart Disease abstracts  ( with at least 10 occurrences ) are listed in Table 3 . The expressions listed in the two tables cover about  70% of the explicit causal expressions found in the sample abstracts  . Six expressions appear in both tables , indicating a substantial overlap in the two groups of medical areas  . The most fr-quent way of expressing cause and effect is by using causative verbs  . 
4 Automatic Extraction of Cause-
Effect Information
The information extraction process used in this study makes use of pattern matching  . This is similar to methods employed by other researchers for information extraction  . Whereas most studies focus on particular types of events or topics  , we are focusing on a particular type of relation . Furthermore , the patterns used in this study are graphical patterns that are matched with syntactic parse trees of sentences  . The patterns represent different words and sentence structures that indicate the presence of a causal relation and which parts of the sentence repr-sent which roles in the causal situation  . Any part of the sentence that matches a particular pattern is considered to describe a causal situation  , and the words in the sentence that match slots in the pattern are extracted and used to fill the appropriate slots in the cause-effect template  . 
4.1 Parser
The sentences are parsed using Conex or ? s Functional Dependency Grammar of English  ( FDG ) parser ( http://www . conexor . f i ) , which generates a representation of the syntactic structure of the sentence  ( i . e . the parse tree ) . For the example sentence Paclit axel was well tolerated and resulted in a significant clinical response in this patient  . 
a graphical representation of the parser output is given in Fig  .  1 . For easier processing , the syntactic structure is converted to the linear conceptual graph formalism  ( Sowa , 1984) given in
Fig . 2.
A conceptual graph is a graph with the nodes representing concepts and the directed arcs representing relations between concepts  . 
Although the conceptual graph formalism was developed primarily for semantic representation  , we use it to represent the syntactic structure of sentences  . In the linear conceptual graph notation , concept labels are given within square brackets and relations between concepts are Fig  .  1 . Syntactic structure of a sentence given within parentheses  . Arrows indicate the direction of the relations . 
4.2 Construction of causality patterns
We developed a set of graphical patterns that specifies the various ways a causal relation can be explicitly expressed in a sentence  . We call them causality patterns . The initial set of patterns was constructed based on the training set of  200 abstracts mentioned earlier . Each abstract was analysed by two of the authors to identify the sentences containing causal relations  , and the prts of the sentences representing the cause and the effect  . For each sentence containing a causal relation , the words ( causality identifiers ) that were used to signal the causal relation were also idenified  . These are mostly causal links and causative verbs described earlier  . 
Example sentence
Paclitaxel was well tolerated and resulted in a significant clinical response in this patient  . 
Syntactic structure in linear conceptual grph format [ tolerate]-  ( vch ) ->[be]-> ( subj ) -> [ paclitaxel ] ( man ) -> [ well ] ( cc ) -> [ and ] ( cc ) ->[result]- ( loc ) ->[in]-> ( pcomp ) ->[response]- ( det ) -> [ a ] ( attr ) ->[clinical]-> ( attr ) -> [ significant ] ,   ( phr ) ->[in]-> ( pcomp ) -> [ patient ] -> ( det ) ->[this] , , . 
Example causality pattern [*] -& ( v-ch ) -> ( subj ) ->[T:cause . object ] ( cccnd ) ->[result]+- ( loc ) +->[in]+-> ( pcomp ) -> [ T : effect . event](phr)->[in]->(pcomp)->[T : effect . object],, . 
Cause-effect template
Cause : paclitaxel
Effect : a significant clinical response in this patient Fig  .  2 . Sentence structure and causality pattern in conceptual graph format main root tolerate be v -chwell and manccresult ccin in locphr response p comp patient p comp clinical attrade t this det significant attr We constructed the causality patterns for each causality identifier  , to express the different sentence constructions that the causality identifier can be involved in  , and to indicate which parts of the sentence represent the cause and the effect  . For each causality identifier , at least 20 sentences containing the identifier were analysed  . If the training sample abstracts did not have 20 sentences containing the identifier , additional sentences were downloaded from the Medline database  . After the patterns were constructed , they were applied to a new set of 20 sentences from Medline containing the identifier . Measures of precision and recall were calculated . Each set of patterns are thus associated with a precision and a recall figure as a rough indication of how good the set of patterns is  . 
The causality patterns are represented in linear conceptual graph format with some extensions  . The symbols used in the patterns are as follows :   1  . Concept nodes take the following form : [ concept_label]or [ concept_label : role_indicator ]  . Concept_label can be : ? a character string in lower case  , representing a stemmed word ? a character string in uppercase  , refering to a class of synonymous words that can occupy that place in a sentence ??*?  , a wildcard character that can match any word ?? T ?  , a wildcard character that can match with any subtree  . 
Role_indicator refers to a slot in the cause -effect template  , and can take the form : ? role_label which is the name of a slot in the cause-effect template ? role_label = ? value ?  , where value is a character string that should be entered in the slot in the cause-effect template  ( if ? value ? is not specified , the part of the sentence that matches the conc pt_label is entered in the slot  )  . 
2 . Relation nodes take the following form : ( set_of_relations )  . Set_of_relations can be : ? a relation_label , which is a character string representing a syntactic relation  ( these are the relation tags used by Conexor?s FDG parser  ) ? relation_label set of relations ( ? ? indicates a logical ? or ? )  3 . & subpattern_label refers to a set of subgraphs . 
Each node can also be followed by a ?+? indicating that the node is mandatory  . If the mandatory nodes are not found in the sentence  , then the pattern is rejected and no information is extracted from the sentence  . All other nodes are optional . An example of a causality pattern is given in Fig  .  2 . 
4.3 Pattern matching
The information extraction process involves matching the causality patterns with the parse trees of the sentences  . The parse trees and the casality patterns are both represented in the linear conceptual graph notation  . The pattern matching for each sentence follows the following procedure :  1  . the causality identifiers that match with keywords in the sentence are identified  ,  2 . the causality patterns associated with each matching causality identifier are short listed  ,  3 . for each short listed pattern , a matching process is carried out on the sentence . 
The matching process involves a kind of spreading activation in both the causality pattern graph and the sentence graph  , starting from the node representing the causality identifier  . If a pattern node matches a sentence node , the matching node in the pattern and the sentence are activated  . This activation spreads outwards , with the causality identifier node as the center . 
When a pattern node does not match a sentence node  , then the spreading activation stops for that branch of the pattern graph  . Procedures are attached to the nodes to check whether there is a match and to extract words to fill in the slots in the cause-effect template  . The pattern matching program has been implemented in Java  ( JDK1 . 2 . 1) . An example of a sentence , matching pattern and filled template is given in Fig  .  2 . 
5 Evaluation
A total of 68 patterns were constructed for the 35 causality identifiers that occurred at least twice in the training abstracts  . The patterns were applid to two sets of new abstracts downloaded from Medline :  100 new abstracts from the original four medical areas  ( 25 abstracts from each area )  , and 30 abstracts from two new domains ( 15 each ) ? digestive system diseases and respiratory tract diseases  . Each test abstract was analyzed by at least 2 of the authors to identify ? medically relevant ? cause and effect  . A fair number of causal relations in the abstracts are trivial and not medically relevant  , and it was felt that it would not be useful for the information extraction system to extract these trivial causal relations  . 
Of the causal relations manually identified in the abstracts  , about 7% are implicit ( i . e . have to be inferred using knowledge-based inferencing  ) or occur across sentences . Since the focus of the study is on explicitly expressed cause and effect within a sentence  , only these are included in the evaluation . The evaluation results are presented in Table 4 . Recall is the percentage of the slots filled by the human analysts that are correctly filled by the computer program  . Precision is the percentage of slots filled by the computer program that are correct  ( i . e . the text entered in the slot is the same as that entered by the human analysts  )  . If the text entered by the computer program is partially correct  , it is scored as 0 . 5 ( i . e . half correct ) . The Fmeasure given in Table 4 is a combination of recall and precision equally weighted  , and is calculated using the formula ( MUC7 ) :2* precision * recall / ( precision + recall ) 
Table 4. Extraction results
Slot Recall



Results for 100 abstracts from the original 4 medical areas

Identifier .759 .768 .763
Cause .462 .565 .508
Effect .549 .611 .578
Modality .410 .811 .545
Results for 30 abstracts from 2 new medical areas

Identifier .618 .759 .681
Cause .415 .619 .497
Effect .441 .610 .512
Modality .542 .765 .634
For the 4 medical areas used for building the extraction patterns  , the Fmeasure for the cause and effect slots are 0 . 508 and 0 . 578 respectively . 
If implicit causal relations are included in the evaluation  , the recall measures for cause and effect are 0 . 405 and 0 . 481 respectively , yielding an Fmeasure of 0 . 47 for cause and 0 . 54 for effect . The results are not very good , but not very bad either for an information extraction task  . 
For the 2 new medical areas , we can see in Table 4 that the precision is about the same as for the original  4 medical areas , indicating that the current extraction patterns work equally well in th new areas  . The lower recall indicates that nw causality identifiers and extraction patterns need to be constructed  . 
The sources of errors were analyzed for the set of  100 test abstracts and are summarized in Table 5  . Most of the spurious extractions ( information extracted by the program as cause or effect but not identified by human analysts  ) were actually causal relations that were not medically relevant  . As mentioned earlier , the manual identification of causal relations focused on medically relevant causal relations  . In the cases wher the program did not correctly extract cause and effect information identified by the analysts  , half were due to incorrect parser output , and in 20% of the cases , causality patterns have not been constructed for the causality identifier found in the sentence  . 
We also analyzed the instances of implicit causal relations in sentences  , and found that many of them can be identified using some amount of semantic analysis  . Some of them involve words like when , after and with that indicate a time sequence , for example : ? The results indicate that changes to  8-OH-DPAT and clonidine-induced responses occur quicker with the combination treatment than with either reboxetine or sertraline treatments alone  . 
? There are also no reports of serious adverse events when lithium is added to a monoam-ine oxidase inhibitor  . 
? Four days after flupent hixoladministration , the patient developed or olingual dyskinetic movements involving mainly tongue biting and protrusion  . 
Table 5. Sources of Extraction Errors
A . Spurious errors ( the program identified cause or effect not identified by the human judges  ) A 1 . The relations extraced are not relevant to medicine or disease  .  (84 . 1%) A2 . Nominalized or adjectivized verbs are identified ascausative verbs by the program because of parser error  .  (2 . 9%) A3 . Some words and sentence constructions that are used to indicate cause-effect can be used to indicate other kinds of relations as well  .  (13 . 0%) B . Missing slots ( cause or effect not extracted by program )  , incorrect text extracted , and partially correct extraction B1 . Complex sentence structures that are not included in the pattern  .  (18 . 8%) B2 . The parser gave the wrong syntactic structure of a sentence  .  (49 . 2%) B3 . Unexpected sentence structure resulting in the program extracting information that is actually not a cause or effect  .  (1 . 5%) B4 . Patterns for the causality identifier have not been constructed  .  (19 . 6%) B5 . Sub-tree error . The program extracts the relevant subtree ( of the parse tree ) to fill in the cause or effect slot . However , because of the sentence construction , the subtree includes both the cause and effect resulting into o much text being extracted  .  (9 . 5%) B 6 . Errors caused by pronouns that refer to a phrase or clause within the same sentence  .  (1 . 3%) In these cases , a treatment or drug is associated with a treatment response or physiological event  . 
If noun phrases and clauses in sentences can be classified accurately into treatments and treatment responses  ( perhaps by using Medline?s Medical Subject Headings  )  , then such implicit causal relations can be identified automatically  . 
Another group of words involved in implicit causal relations are words like receive  , get and take , that indicate that the patient received a drug or treatment  , for example : ? The nine subjects who received p24-VLP and zi dovudine had an augmentation and/or broadening of their CTL response compared with baseline  ( p = 0 . 004) . 
Such causal relations can also be identified by semantic analysis and classifying noun phrases and clauses into treatments and treatment r -sponses  . 
6. Conclusion
We have described a method for performing automatic extraction of cause-effect information from textual documents  . We use Conexor?s FDG parser to construct a syntactic parse tree for each target sentence  . The parse tree is matched with a set of graphical causality patterns that indicate the presence of a causal relation  . When a match is found , various attributes of the causal relation ( e . g . the cause , the effect , and the modality ) can then be extracted and entered in a cause -effect template  . 
The accuracy of our extraction system is not yet satisfactory  , with an accuracy of about 0 . 51 ( Fmeasure ) for extracting the cause and 0 . 5 8 for extracting the effect that are explicitly expressed  . If both implicit and explicit causal relations are included  , the accuracy is 0 . 41 for cause and 0 . 48 for effect . We were heartened to find that when the extraction patterns were applied to  2 new medical areas , the extraction precision was the same as for the original  4 medical areas . 
Future work includes : 1 . Constructing patterns to identify causal relations across sentences  2  . Expanding the study to more medical areas 3 . Incorporating semantic analysis to extract implicit cause-effect information  4  . Incorporating discourse processing , including anaphor and coreference resolution 5 . Developing a method for constructing extraction patterns automatically  6  . Investigating whether the cause-effect information extracted can be chained together to synthesize new knowledge  . 
Two aspects of discourse processing is being studied : coreference resolution and hypothesis confirmation  . Coreference resolution is impor-tnt for two reasons  . The first is the obvious reason that to extract complete cause-effect information  , pronouns and references have to be r solved and replaced with the information that they refer to  . The second reason is that quite often a causal relation between two events is expressed more than once in a medical abstract  , each time providing new information about the causal situation  . The extraction system thus needs to be able to recognize that the different causal expressions refer to the same causal situation  , and merge the information extracted from the different sentences  . 
The second aspect of discourse processing being investigated is what we refer to as hypothesis confirmation  . Sometimes , a causal relation is hypothesized by the author at the beginning of the abstract  . This hypothesis may be confirmed or disconfirmed by another sentence later in the abstract  . The information extraction system thus has to be able to link the initial hypothetical cause -effect expression with the confirmation or disconfirmation expression later in the abstract  . 
Finally , we hope eventually to develop a system that not only extracts cause-effect information from medical abstracts accurately  , but also synthesizes new knowledge by chaining the extracted causal relations  . In a series of studies , Swanson ( 1986 ) has demonstrated that logical connections between the published literature of two medical research are as can provide new and useful hypotheses  . Suppose an article reports that A causes B , and another article reports that B causes C , then there is an implicit logical link between A and C  ( i . e . A causes C ) . This relation would not become explicit unless work is done to extract it  . Thus , new discoveries can be made by analysing published literature automatically  ( Finn , 1998; Swans on & Smalheiser ,  1997) . 

Altenberg , B .  (1984) . Causal linking in spoken and written English . Studia Linguistica , 38(1), 20-69 . 
Cardie , C .  (1997) . Empirical methods in information extraction . AI Magazine , 18(4), 6579 . 
Cowie , J . , & Lehnert , W .  (1996) . Information extraction . Communications of the ACM , 39(1), 80-91 . 
Finn , R .  (1998) . Program Uncovers Hidden Connections in the Literature  . Th Scientist , 12(0), 1213 . 
Gaizauskas , R . , & Wilks , Y .  (1998) . Information extraction beyond document retrieval . Journlof
Documentation , 54(1), 70-105.
Garcia , D .  (1997) . COATIS , an NLP system to locate expressions of actions connected by causality links  . 
In Knowledge Acquisition , Modeling and Ma-agement , 10th European Workshop , EKAW?97 Proceedings ( pp .  347-352) . Berlin : Springer-

Joskowsicz , L . , Ksiezyk , T . , & Grishman , R .  (1989) . 
Deep domain models for discourse analysis . In The Annual AI Systems in Government Conference  ( pp . 
195-200) . Silver Spring , MD : IEEE Computer Society . 
Kaplan , R . M . , & Berry-Rogghe , G .  (1991) . Knowl-edge-based acquisition of causal relationships in text  . Knowledge Acquisition , 3(3), 317-337 . 
Khoo , C . , Chan , S . , Niu , Y . , & Ang , A .  (1999) . A method for extracting causal knowledge from textual databases  . Singapore Journal of Library &
Information Management , 28, 48-63.
Khoo , C . S . G . , Kornfilt , J . , Oddy , R . N . , & Myaeng , S . H .  (1998) . Automatic extraction of cause-effect information from newspaper text without knowl-edge-based inferencing  . Literary and Linguistic
Computing , 13(4), 177-186.
Kontos , J . , & Sidiropoulou , M .  (1991) . On the acquisition of causal knowledge from scientific texts with attribute grammars  . Expert Systems for Information Management ,  4(1) ,  31-48 . 
MUC-5 .  (1993) . Fifth Message Understanding Co-fernce ( MUC-5) . San Francisco : Morgan Kaufmann . 
MUC6 .  (1995) . Sixth Message Understanding Conference ( MUC6) . San Francisco : Morgan Kaufmann . 
MUC7 .  (2000) . Message Understanding Confer-ece proceedings ( MUC7 ) [ Online ] . Available : http://www . muc . saic . com/proceedings/muc_7_toc . 

Selfrige , M . , Daniell , J . , & Simmons , D .  (1985) . 
Learning causal models by understanding realworld natural language explanations  . In The Second Conference on Artificial Intelligence Applications : The Engineering of Knowledge-Based Systems  ( pp .  378-383) . Silver Spring , MD:IEEE
Computer Society.
Sowa , J . F .  (1984) . Conceptual structures : Informa-processing in man and machine  . Reading,
MA : Addison-Wesley,.
Swanson , D . R .  (1986) . Fishoil , Raynaud?s Syndrome , and undiscovered public knowledge . Perspectives in Biology and Medicine , 30(1), 718 . 
Swanson , D . R . , & Smalheiser , N . R .  (1997) . An interactive system for finding complementary literatures : A stimulus to scientific discovery  . Artificial
Intelligence , 91, 183-203.
