The State of the Art in Thai Language Processing
Virach Sornlertlamvanich , Tanapong Potipiti , Chai Wutiwiwatchai and Pradit Mittrapiyanuruk
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center  ( NECTEC )  , 
National Science and Technology Development Agency  , Ministry of Science and Technology Environment . 
2 2nd Floor Gypsum Metropolitan Tower 539/2 Sriayudhya Rd . Rajthevi Bangkok 10400 Thailand . 
Email : virach , tanapong , chai@nectec . or . th , pmittrap@notes . nectec . or . th

This paper reviews the current state of technology and research progress in the Thailanguage processing  . It resumes the characteristics of the Thai language and the approaches to overcome the difficulties in each processing task  . 
1 Some Problematic Issues in the Thai

It is obvious that the most fundamental semantic unit in a language is the word  . Words are explicitly identified in those languages with word boundaries  . In Thai , there is no word boundary . 
Thai words are implicitly recognized and in many cases  , they depend on the individual judgement . This causes a lot of difficulties in the Thai language processing  . To illustrate the problem , we employed a classic English example . 
The segmentation of ? GODIS NOW HERE?.
No . Segmentation Meaning (1) God is now here . Godisher e . 
(2) God is no where . God doesn?t exist.
(3) God is no where . God doesn?t exist.
With the different segmentations , (1) and (2) have absolutely opposite meanings .   ( 2 ) and 3 are ambiguous that no where is one word or two words  . And the difficulty becomes greatly ag-gravated when unknown words exist  . 
As a tonal language , a phoneme with different tone has different meaning  . Many unique approaches are introduced for both the tone generation in speech synthesis research and tone recognition in speech recognition research  . 
These difficulties propagate to many levels in the language processing area such as lexical acquisition  , information retrieval , machine translation , speech processing , etc . Furthermore the similar problem also occurs in the levels of sentence and paragraph  . 
2 Word and Sentence Segmentation
The first and most obvious problem to attack is the problem of word identification and segmentation  . For the most part , the Thailanguage processing relies on manually created dictionaries  , which have inconsistencies in defining word units and limitation in the quantity  .   [1] proposed a word extraction algorithm employing C4  . 5 wit some string features such as entropy and mutual information  . They reported a result of 85% in precision and 50% in recall measures . 
For word segmentation , the longest matching , maximal matching and probabilistic segmentation had been applied in the early research  [2]  ,  [3] . However , these approaches have some limitations in dealing with unknown words  . 
More advanced techniques of word segmentation captured many language features such as context words  , parts of speech , collocations and semantics [4] ,  [5] . These reported about 95-99% of accuracy . For sentence segmentation , the tr-gram model was adopted and yielded 85% of accuracy [6]  . 
3 Machine Translation
Currently , there is only one machine translation system available to the public  , called ParSit ( http://www . 
links . nectec . or . th/services/parsit ) , it is a service of English-to-Thai web page translation  . Par SiT is a collaborative work of NECTEC , Thailand and NEC , Japan . This system is based on an interlingual approach MT and the translation accuracy is about  80%  . Other approaches such as generate-and-repair [7] and sentence pattern mapping have been also studied  [8]  . 
4 Language Resources
The only Thaitext corpus available for research use is the ORCHID corpus  . ORCHID is a 9-MB Thai part-of-speech tagged corpus initiated by NECTEC  , Thailand and Communications Research Laboratory , Japan . ORCHID is available at http://www . links . nectec . or . th/or chid . 
5 Research in Thai OCR
Frequently used Thai characters are about 80 characters , including alphabets , vowels , to nemarks , special marks , and numerals . Thai writing are in 4 levels , without spaces between words , and the problem of similarity among many patterns has made research challenging  . 
Moreover , the use of English and Thai in general Thai text creates many more patterns which must be recognized by OCR  . 
For more than 10 years , there has been a considerable growth in Thai OCR research  , especially for ? printed character ? task . The early proposed approaches focused on structural matching and tended towards neural -network-based algorithms with input for some special characteristics of Thai characters e  . g . , curves , heads of characters , and placements . At least 3 commercial products have been launched including ? Arn Thai ? by NECTEC  , which claims to achieve 95% recognition performance on clean input . Recent technical improvement of Arn Thai has been reported in  [9]  . Recently , focus has been changed to develop system that are more robust with any unclean scanning input  . 
The approach of using more efficient features , fuzzy algorithms , and document analysis is required in this step . 
At the same time , ? Offline Thaih and written character recognition ? task has been investigated but is only in the research phase of isolated characters  . Almost all proposed engines were neural network -based with several styles of input features  [10]  ,  [11] . There has been a small amount of research on ? Online handwritten character recognition ?  . One attempt was proposed by [12] , which was also neural network-based with chain code input  . 
6 Thai Speech Technology
Regarding speech , Thai , like Chinese , is a tonal language . The tonal perception is important to the meaning of the speech  . The research currently being done in speech technology can be divided into  3 major fields : ( 1 ) speech analysis , (2) speech recognition and (3) speech synthesis . 
Most of the research in ( 1 ) done by the linguists are on the basic study of Thai phonetics e  . g . 

In speech recognition , most of the current research [14] focus on the recognition of isolated words . To develop continuous speech recognition , a largescale speech corpus is needed . Th status of practical research on continuous speech recognition is in its initial step with at least one published paper  [15]  . In contrast to western speech recognition , topics specifying tonal languages or tone recognition have been deeply researched as seen in many paper se  . g . , [16] . 
For text-to-speech synthesis , processing the idiosyncrasy of Thaitext and h ling the tone siter playing with intonation are the topics that make the TTS algorithm for the Thai language different from others  . In the research , the first sucessful system was accomplished by [14] and later by NECTEC [15]  . Both systems employ the same synthesis technique based on the con-atention of demisyllable inventory units  . 
Rferences [1] V . Sornlertlamvanich , T . Potipiti and T . Charoenporn . Automatic Corpus-Based Thai Word Extraction with the  C4  . 5 Learning Algorithm . In forthcoming Proceedings of COLING 2000 . 
[2] V . Sornlertlamvanich . Word Segmentation for Thai in Machine Translation System Machine Translation  . Ntial Electronics and Computer Technology Center  , Bangkok . pp .  50-56, 1993 . 
( in Thai).
[3] A . Kawtrakul , S . Kumtanode , T . Jamjuny and A . Jewriyavech . 
Lexibase Model for Writing Production Assistant System  . In Proceedings of the Symposium on Natural Language Processing in Thailand  ,  1995 . 
[4] S . Meknavin , P . Charoenpornsawat and B . Kijsirikul . Featured Based Thai Word Segmentation . In Proceedings of Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium  , pp .  41-46, 1997 . 
[5] A . Kawtrakul , C . Thumkanon , P . Varasarai and M . Sukta-rachan . Autmatic Thai Unknown Word Recognition . I Proceedings of Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium  , pp .  341-347, 1997 . 
[6] P . Mitrapiyanurak and V . Sornlertlamvanich . The Automatic Thai Sentence Extraction . In Proceedings of the Fourth Symposium on Natural Language Processing  , pp . 2328, May 2000 . 
[7] K . Narue domkul and N . Cercone . Generate and Repair Machine Translation . I Proceedings of the Fourth Symposium on Natural Language Processing  , pp . 63-79, May 2000 . 
[8] K . Chancharoen and B . Sirinao wakul . English Thai Machine Translation Using Sentence Pattern Mapping  . In Proceedings of the Fourth Symposium on Natural Language Processing  , pp . 29-36, May 2000 . 
[9] C . Tanprasert and T . Koanantakool . Thai OCR : A Neural Network Application . I Proceedings of IEEE Region Ten Conference , vol . 1, pp . 90-95, November 1996 . 
[10] I . Methasate , S . Jitapankul , K . Kiratiratanaphung and W . 
Unsiam . Fuzzy Feature Extraction for Thai Handwritten Character Recognition  . I Proceedings of the Forth Symposium on Natural Language Processing  , pp . 136-141, May 2000 . 
[11] P . Phokharatkul and C . Kimpan . Handwritten Thai Character Recognition using Fourior Descriptors and Genetic Neural Networks  . In Proceedings of the Fourth Symposium on Natural Language Processing  , pp . 108-123, May 2000 . 
[12] S . Madarasmi and P . Lekhachai worakul . Customizable Online Thai-English Handwriting Recognition  . In Proceedings of the Forth Symposium on Natural Language Processing  , pp . 142-153,
May 2000.
[13] J . T . Gandour , S . Potisuk and S . Dechongkit . Tonal Coarticu-lation in Thai , Journal of Phonetics , vol 22 , pp . 477-492, 1994 . 
[14] S . Luksaneeyanawin , et alAThai Text-to-Speech System . In Proceedings of Fourth NECTEC Conference , pp . 65-78, 1992 . ( in

[15] P . Mittrapiyanuruk , C . Hansakunbuntheung , V . Tesprasit and V . Sornlertlamvanich . Improving Naturalness of Thai Text-to-Speech Synthesis by Prosodic Rule  . In forthcoming Proceedings of ICSLP 2000 . 
[16] S . Jitapunkul , S . Luksaneeyanawin , V . Ahkuputra , C . Wuti-wiwatchai . Recent Advances of Thai Speech Recognition in Thailand  . In Proceedings of IEEE Asia-Pacific conference on Circuits and Systems  , pp . 173-176, 1998 . 
