COMPUTATION ALLINGUISTICSININDIA : ANOVERVIEW
Akshar Bharati , Vineet Chaitanya , Rajeev Sangal
Language Technologies Research Centre
Indian Institute of Information Technology , Hyderabad

1. Introduction
Computational linguistics activities in India are being carried out at many institutions  . The activities are centred around development of machine translation systems and lexical resources  . 
2. Machine Translation
Four major efforts on machine translation in India are presented below  . The first one is from one Indian language to another  , the next three are from English to Hindi . 
2 . 1 . Anusaaraka Systems among Indian languages In the an usaaraka systems  , the load between the human reader and the machine is divided as follows : language-based analysis of the text is carried out by the machine  , and knowledge-based analysis or interpretation is left to the reader  . The machine uses a dictionary and grammar rules , to produce the output . Most importantly , it does not use world knowledge to interpret ( or disambiguate )  , as it is an error prone task and involves guessing or inferring based on knowledge other than the text  . An usaaraka aims for perfect " information preservation "  . We relax the requirement that the output be grammatical  . In fact , an usaaraka output follows the grammar of the source language  ( where the grammar rules differ , and cannot be applied with 100 percent confidence )  . This requires that the reader undergo a short training to read and understand the output  . 
Among Indian languages , which share vocabulary , grammar , pragmatics , etc . the task ( and the training ) is easier . For example , words in a language are ambiguous , but if the two languages are close , one is likely to finda one to one correspondence between words such that the meaning is carried across from the source language to target language  . For example , for 80 percent of the Kannada words in the anusaaraka dictionary of  30  , 000 root words , there is a single equival end Hindi word which covers the senses of the original Kannada word  . Similarly , wherever the two languages differing rammatical constructions  , either an existing construction in the target language which expresses the same meaning is used  , or a new construction is invented ( or an old construction used with some special notation  )  . For example , adjectival participial phrases in the south Indian languages are mapped to relative clauses in Hindi with the ?*? notation  ( Bharati ,  2000) . Similarly , existing words in the target language may be given wider or narrower meaning  ( Narayana ,  1994) . An usaarakas are available for use as email servers  ( an usaaraka , URL ) . 
2.2. Mantra System
The Mantra system translates appointment letters in government from English to Hindi  . It is based on synchronous Tree Adjoining Grammar and uses tree-transfer for translating from English to Hindi  . 
The system is tailored to deal with its narrow subject-domain  . The grammar is specially designed to accept analyze and generate sential constructions in " officialese "  . Similarly , the lexicon is suitably restricted to deal with meanings of English words as used in its subject -domain  . The system is ready for use in its domain . 
2.3. MaTra System
The Matra system is a tool for human aided machine translation from English to Hindi for news stories  . It has a text categorisation component at the front  , which determines the type of news story ( political , terrorism , economic , etc . ) before operating on the given story . Depending on the type of news , it uses an appropriate dictionary . For example , the word ? party ? is usually a ? political entity ? and not a ? social event ?  , in political news . 
The text categorisation component uses word -vectors and is easily trainable from pre -categorized news corpus  . The parser tries to identify chunks ( such as noun phrases , verb groups ) but does not attempt to join them together . It requires considerable human assistance in analysing the input  . Another novel component of the system is that given a complex English sentence  , it breaks it up into simpler sentences , which are then analysed and used to generate Hindi  . The system is under development and expected to be ready for use so on  ( Rao ,  1998) . 
2 . 4 . Anusaaraka System from English to Hindi The English to Hindian usaaraka system follows the basic principles of information preservation  . It uses XTAG based supertagger and light dependency analyzer developed at University of Pennsylvania [ Joshi  ,   94] for performing the analysis of the given English text  . It distributes the load on man and machine in novel ways  . The system produces several outputs corresponding to a given input  . The simplest possible ( and the most robust ) output is based on the machine taking the load of lexicon  , and leaving the load of syntax on man . Output based on the most detailed analysis of the English input text  , uses a full parser and a bilingual dictionary . The parsing system is based on XTAG ( consisting of supertagger and parser ) wherein we have modified them for the task at hand  . A user may read the output produced after the full analysis  , but when he finds that the system has " obviously " gone wrong or failed to produce the output  , he can always switch to a simpler output . 
3 . Corpora and Lexical Resources 3 . 1 Corpora for Indian Languages Text Corpora for 12 Indian languages has been prepared with funding from Ministry of Information Technology  , Govt . of India . Each corpus is of about 3-million words , consisting of randomly chosen text-pieces published from  1970 to 1980  . The texts are categorized into : literature ( novel , short story ) , science , social science , mass media etc . The corpus can be used remotely over the net or obtained on CDs  ( Corpora , URL ) . 
3.2 Lexical Resources
A number of bilingual dictionaries among Indian languages have been developed for the purpose of machine translation  , and are available " freely " under GPL . Collaborative creation of a very large English to Hindi lexical resource is underway  . As a first step , dictionary with 25000 entries with example sentences illustrating each different sense of a word  , has been released on the web ( Dictionary , URL ) . Currently work is going on to refine it and to add contextual information for use in the an usaaraka system  , by involving volunteers . 
4 . Linguistic Tools and Others 4 . 1 . Morphological Analyzers Morphological analyzers for  6 Indian languages developed as part of Anusaaraka systems are available for download and use  ( Anusaaraka , URL ) . Sanskrit morphological analyzers have been developed with reasonable coverage based on the Paninian theory by 
Ramanujan and Melkote.
4.2 Parsers
Besides the parsers mentioned above , a parsing formalism called UCSG identifies clause boundaries without using subcategorization information  . 
4.3 others
Some work has also started on building search engines  . However , missing are the terminological databases and thesauri  . Spelling checkers are available for many languages  . There is substantial work based on alternative theoretical models of language analysis  . Most of this work is based on
Paninian model ( Bharati , 1995).
5. Conclusions
In conclusion , there is a large computational linguistic activity in Indian languages  , mainly centred around machine translation and lexical resources  . Most recently , a number of new projects have been started for Indian languages with Govt  . funding , and a regetting off the ground . 

Anusaaraka URL : http://www . iiit . net , http://www . tdil . gov . in Bharati , Akshar , and Vineet Chaitanya and Rajeev Sangal , Natural Language Processing : A Paninian Perspective  , Prentice-Hall of India , New Delhi ,  1995 , Bharati , Akshar , et . al , Anusaaraka : Overcoming the Language Barrier in India  , To appear in " An uvad ? . 
(Available from an usaaraka URL.)
CDACURL : http://www.cdac.org.in
Corpora URL : http://www.iiit.net
Dictionary URL : http://www.iiit.net
Narayana , V . N , An usarak : A Device to Overcome the Language Barrier  , PhD thesis , Dept . of CSE,
IIT Kanpur , January 1994.
Rao , Durgesh , Pushpak Bhattacharya and Radhika Mamidi , " Natural Language Generation for English to Hindi Human-Aided Machine Translation "  , pp . 179-189, in KBCS-98, NCST , Mumbai . 
Joshi , A . K . Tree Adjoining Grammar , In D . Dowty et . al . ( eds . ) Natural Language Parsing , Cambridge
University Press , 1985.
Joshi , AK and Srinivas , B . , Disambignation of Supertags : Almost Parsing , COLING ,  1994 . 
