Topic-focus and salience *
Eva Haji?ov ?
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Charles University
Malostransk?n?m .25
11800 Praha , Czech Republic

Petr Sgall
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
Charles University
Malostransk?n?m .25
11800 Praha , Czech Republic

* Acknowledgement : The work reported on in this paper has been carried out under the projects GACR  405/96/K214 and
MSMTLN 00A063.
1 Objectives and Motivation
Most of the current work on corpus annotation is concentrated on morphemics  , lexical semantics and sentence structure . However , it becomes more and more obvious that attention should and can be also paid to phenomena that reflect the links between a sentence and its context  , i . e . the discourse anchoring of utterances . If conceived in this way , an annotated corpus can be used as a resource for linguistic research not only within the limits of the sentence  , but also with regard to discourse patterns . Thus , the applications of the research to issues of information retrieval and extraction may be made more effective  ; also applications in new domains become feasible , be it to serve for inner linguistic ( and literary ) aims , such as text segmentation , specification of topics of parts of a discourse , or for other disciplines . 
These considerations have been a motivation for the tectogrammatical  ( i . e . underlying , see below ) tagging done within the Prague Dependency Treebank  ( PDT ) to contain also attributes concerning certain contextual features  , i . e . the contextual anchoring of word tokens and their relationships to their coreferential antecedents  . 
Along with this enrichment in the intersentential aspect  , we do not neglect to pay attention to intrasentential issues  , i . e . to sentence structure , which displays its own features oriented towards the contextual potential of the sentence  , namely its topic-focus articulation ( TFA ) . 
In the present paper , we give first an outline of the annotation scenario of the PDT  ( Section 2 )  , concentrating the nonthe use of one of the PDT attributes for the specification of the Topic and the Focus  ( the ' information structure ' ) of the sentence ( Section 3 )  . In Section 4 . we present certain heuristics that partly are based on TFA and that allow for the specification of the degrees of salience in a discourse  . The application of these heuristics is illustrated in 
Section 5.
2 Outline of the Prague Dependency

The Prague Dependency Treebank ( PDT ) is being built on the basis of the Czech National Corpus  ( CNC )  , which grows rapidly in the range of hundreds of millions of word occurrences in journalistic and fiction texts  . The PDT scenario comprises three layers of annotation :  ( i ) the morphemic ( POS ) layer with about 2000 tags for the highly inflectional Czech language ; the whole CNC has been tagged by a stochastic tagger  ( Haji ? and Hladk?1997 ; 1998 , B?hmov ? and Haji?ov ? 1999 , Hladk?2000) with a success rate of 95% ; the tagger is based on a fully automatic morphemic analysis of 
Czech(Haji ? in press ) ;   ( ii ) a layer of ' analytic ' ( " surface " ) syntax ( see Haji?1998 ) : cca 100000 Czech sentences , i . e . samples of texts ( each randomly chosen sample consisting of 50 sentences of a coherent text )  , taken from CNC , have been assigned dependency tree structures ; every word ( as well as every punctuation mark ) has a node of its own , the label of which specifies its analytic function  , i . e . Subj , Pred , Obj , Adv , different kinds of function words , etc . ( total of 40 values ) ; no nodes are added that are not in the surface shape of the sentence  ( except for the root of the tree , carrying the identification number of the sentence  )  ; the sentences from CNC are preprocessed by a dependency-based modification of Collins et al ' s  ( 1999 ) automatic parser ( with a success rate of about 80% )  , followed by a manual tagging procedure that is supported by a special user-friendly software tool that enables the annotators to work with  ( i . e . modify ) the automatically derived graphic representations of the trees  ;   ( iii ) the tectogrammatical ( underlying ) syntactic layer : tectogrammatical tree structures  ( TGTSs ) are being assigned to a subset of the set tagged according to  ( ii )  ; by now , the experimental phase has resulted in 20 samples of 50 sentences each ; the TGTSs , based on dependency syntax , are much simpler than structural trees based on constituency  ( minimalist or other )  , displaying a much lower number of nodes and a more per spicuous patterning  ; their basic characteristics are as follows ( a more detailed characterization of tectogrammatics and motivating discussion  , which cannot be reproduced here , can be found in Sgall et al 1986 ; Haji?ov ? et al 1998 ) :  ( a ) only autosemantic ( lexical ) words have nodes of their own ; function words , as far as semantically relevant , are reflected by parts of complex node labels ( with the exception of coordinating conjunctions )  ;   ( b ) nodes are added in case of deletions on the surface level  ; ( c ) the condition of projectivity is met ( i . e . no crossing of edges is allowed ) ;   ( d ) tectogrammatical functions ( ' functors ' ) such as Actor/Bearer , Patient , Addressee , Origin , Effect , different kinds of Circumstantials are assigned ; ( e ) basic features of TFA are introduced ;   ( f ) elementary coreference links ( both grammatical and textual ) are indicated . 
Thus , a TGTS node label consists of the lexical value of the word  , of its ' ( morphological ) grammate mes'(i . e . the values of morphological categories ) , its ' functors ' ( with a more subtle differentiation of syntactic relations by means of ' syntactic grammatemes '  ( e . g . ' in ' , ' at ' , ' on ' , ' under ') , of the attribute of Contextual
Boundness ( see below ) , and of values concerning intersentential links ( see below )  . 
3 From Contextual Boundness to the
Topic and the Focus of the Sentence
The dependency based TGTSs in PDT allow for a highly perspicuous notation of sentence structure  , including an economical representation of TFA , understood as one of the main aspects of ( underlying ) sentence structure along with all other kinds of semantically relevant information expressed by grammatical means  . TFA is accounted for by one of the following three values of a specific TFA attribute assigned to every lexical  ( autosemantic ) occurrence : t for ' contextually bound ' ( prototypically in Topic )  , c for ' contrastive ( part of ) Topic ' , or f(?non-bound ? , typically in Focus ) . The opposition of contextual boundness is understood as the linguistically structured counterpart of the distinction between " given " and " new " information  , rather than in a straightforward etymological way  ( see Sgall , Haji?ov ? and Panevov ? 1986 , Ch .  3) . Our approach to TFA , which uses such operational criteria of empirical adequateness as the question test  ( with the item corresponding to a question word prototypically constituting the focus of the answer  )  , represents an elaboration of older ideas , discussed especially in Czech linguistics since V  . Mathesius and J . Firbas , in the sense of an explicit treatment meeting the methodological requirements of formal syntax  . 
The following rules determine the appurtenance of a lexical occurrence to the Topic  ( T ) or to the Focus ( F ) of the sentence : ( a ) the main verb ( V ) and any of its direct dependents belong to F iff they carry index f  ;   ( b ) every item i that does not depend directly on V and is subordinated to an element of F different from V  , belongs to F ( where " subordinated to " is defined as the irreflexive transitive closure of " depend on "  )  ;   ( c ) iff V and all items kj directly depending on it carry indext  , then those items kj to which some item slm carrying fare subordinated are called'proxy foci ' and the item slm together with all items subordinated to one of them belong to F  , where 1? j , m ;   ( d ) every item not belonging to F according to ( a )  -  ( c ) belongs to T . 
To illustrate how this approach makes it possible to analyze also complex sentences as for their TFA patterns  , with neither Tn or F corresponding to a single constitutent  , let us present the following example , in which ( 1' ) is a highly simplified linearized TGTS of ( 1 )  ; every dependent item is enclosed in a pair of parentheses  ; for the sake of transparency , syntactic subscripts of the parentheses are left out here  , as well as subscripts indicating morphological values  , with the exception of the two which correspond to function words  , i . e . 
Temp and Necess(ity ); Fig .  1 . presents the respective tree structure , in which three parts of each node label are specified  , namely the lexical value , the syntactic function ( with ACT for Actor/Bearer , RSTR for Restrictive , MANN for Manner , and OBJ for Objective ) , and the TFA value : ( 1 ) ? esk?radiokomunikacemus?vtomtorocerychle splatit dluhtelevizn?m div ? k?m  . 
This year , Czech Radio communications have quickly to pay their debt to the TV viewers  . 
(1') ((? esk ? . f ) radiokomunikace . t ) (( tom to . t)CzechRadio communications this roce . Temp . t ) splat it . Necess . f(rychle . f ) in-year must-pay quickly ( dluh . f((televizn?m . f ) div ? k ? m . f )) debtTV viewers
Figure 1.
4 Degrees of Salience in a Discourse
During the development of a discourse , in the prototypical case , a new discourse referent emerges as corresponding to a lexical occurrence that carries the index f  ; its further occurrences in the discourse carry t and are primarily guided by the scale of their degrees of salience  . This scale , which was discussed by Haji?ov ? and Vrbov ? ( 1982 )  , has to be reflected in a description of the semantico-pragmatic layer of the discourse  . In this sense our approach can be viewed as pointing to a useful enrichment of the existing theories of discourse representation  ( cf . also Kruijffov ? 1998 , Krahmer 1998; Krahmer and Theune 1999) . 
In the annotation system of PDT , not only values of attributes concerning sentence structure are assigned  , but also values of attributes for coreferential links in the discourse  , which capture certain features typical for the linking of sentences to each other and to the context of situation and allow for a tentative characterization of the discourse pattern in what concerns the development of salience degrees during the discourse  . 
The following attributes of this kind are applied within a selected part of PDT  , called ' model collection ' ( for the time being , essentially only pronouns such as ' on'(he ) , including its zero form , or ' ten ' ( this ) are handled in this way ) : COREF : the lexical value of the antecedent , CORNUM : the serial number of the antecedent , 
CORSNT : if the antecedent in the same sentence : NIL  , if not : PREVi for the ith preceding sentence . 
An additional attribute , ANTEC , with its value equal to the functor of the antecedent  , is used with the socalled grammatical coreference  ( relative clauses , pronouns such as ' se'(-self ) , the relation of control ) . 
On the basis of these attributes ( and of further judgments , concerning especially associative links between word occurrences  )  , it is possible to study the referential identity of different word tokens in the flow of the discourse  , and thus also the development of salience degrees . 
The following basic rules determining the degrees of salience  ( in a preliminary formulation ) have been designed , with x ( r ) indicating that the referent r has the salience degree x  , and 1 ? m , n : ( i ) if r is expressed by a weak pronoun ( or zero ) in a sentence , it retains its salience degree after this sentence is uttered : n  ( r ) - -> n ( r )  ;   ( ii ) if r is expressed by a noun ( group ) carrying f , then n(r)-->0(r ) ;   ( iii ) if r is expressed by a noun ( group ) carrying to rc , then n(r)-->1(r ) ; ( iv ) if n(r)-->m(r ) in sentence S , then m+2 ( q ) obtains for every referent q that is not itself referred to in S  , but is immediately associated with the item r present  here1  ; ( v ) if rneither is included in S , nor refers to an associated object , then n(r)-->n+2(r ) . 
These rules , which have been checked with several pieces of English and Czech texts  , capture such points as e . g . the fact that in the third utterance of Jimmet Martin  . He immediately started to speak of the old school in Sussex  . Jimin vited him for lunch the weak pronoun in object can only refer to Martin  , whose image has become the most salient referent by being mentioned in the second utterance  ; on the other hand , the use of such a pronoun also in the subject ( in Heinvited him for lunch ) would make the reference unclear . 
Since the only fixed point is that of maximal salience  , our rules technically determine the degree of salience reduction  ( indicating 0 as the maximal salience )  . Whenever an entity has a salience distinctly higher than all competing entities which can be referred to by the given expression  , this expression may be used as giving the addressee a sufficiently clear indication of the reference specification  . 2  5 Illustrations The development of salience degrees during a discourse  , as far as determined by these rules , may be illustrated on the basis of five sentence tokens  ( utterances ) from PDT , starting from (1) , which constitute a segment of a newspaper text ( we indicate the numerical values of salience reduction for every noun token that is a referring expression  )  . We present here-similarly as with ( 1' ) in Section 3 above-highly simplified representations of these sentences  , with parentheses for every dependent member and the symbols t  , c , and f for contextual boundness ;   1 Only immediate associative links are taken into account for the time being  , such as those between ( Czech ) crown and money , or between TV or ( its ) signal and ( its ) viewer . 
2 These tentative rules , which have been presented at several occasions ( starting with Haji?ov ? and Vrbov ? 1982 ) for the aims of a further discussion , still wait for a systematic testing and evaluation  , as well as for enrichments and more precise formulations  . These issues may find new opportunities now , whene . g . a comparison with the centering theory gets possible and when a large set of annotated examples from continuous texts in PDT is available  . An automatic derivation of such features can only be looked for after the lexical units included get a very complex and subtle semantic classification  . 
numbers of the degrees of salience ( more precisely , of salince reduction ) for every referring expression are inserted in the sentences themselves  . This example should enable the reader to check ( at least in certain aspects ) the general function of the procedure we use , as well as the degree of its empirical adequacy in the points it covers  , and also our consistence in assigning the indices  . We are aware of the preliminary character of our analysis  , which may and should be enriched in several respects  ( not to cover only noun groups , to account for possible episodic text segments , for oral speech with the sentence prosody , for cases of deictically , rather than anaphorically conditioned salience , etc . ) . 
We do not reflect several peripheral points , such as the differences between surface word order and the scale of CD  ( underlying WO )  , mainly caused by the fact that a dependent often precedes its head word on the surface  ( in morphemics )  , although if the dependent has f(ase . g . rychle(quickly ) has in(1)) , then it follows its head under CD ( with the exceptions of focussensitive particles , cf . Haji?ov ? , Partee and Sgall 1998) ; our translations are literal . 
(1) ? esk?radiokomunikace . 1 mus ? vtomtoroce . 1 rychlesplatit dluh . 0 televizn ? m div ? k ? m . 0 In this year , Czech Radio communications have quickly to pay their debt to the TV viewers  . 
(1') ((? esk ? . f ) radiokomunikace . t ) (( tom to . t)CzechRadio communications this roce . Temp . t ) splat it . Necess . f(rychle . f ) in-year must-pay quickly ( dluh . f((televizn?m . f ) div ? k ? m . f )) debtTV viewers (2) Jejich . 1vys?la?e . 1 do sudpokr ? vaj ? sign ? lem . 0 program u . 0 ? T . 1 2 . 0 m?n?ne?-polovinu . 0 ? zem ? . 0 republiky . 0 . 
Their transmitters hither to cover by-signal of-the -program ?  T2 less than a-half of-the-territory of-the-Republic . 
(2') (( jejich . t)vys?la?e . t ) ( do sud . t ) pokr ? vaj ? . f(sign?lem . f(programu . f(?T . t(2 . f )))) (( m?n ? . f(ne?-polovinu . f )) ? zem ? . f(republiky . t )) (3) Namor avsko-sloven sk?mpome z ? . 1je ? adam ? st . 0, k denezachy t?aniprvn ? program . 0 ? esk ? televize . 1 . 
On the-Moravian-Slovakian borderline there is a -number of-places where  ( they ) do-not-get even the-first program of-Czech Television  . 
(3') (( na-mora vsko-sloven sk?m . t ) pome z ? . t ) j e . f(?ada . f(m?st . f((kde . t ) ( oni . t ) ( ne . f)zachyt ? . f((ani . f ) ( prvn ? . f ) program . t((?esk ? . t ) televize . t ))))) (4) Dorozd ? len ? . 1 federace . 1 to ti ? sign ? l . 1 zaji ? ? ovalyvys ? la ? e . 0 vSR . 0 . 
Until the-division of-the-federation as-a-matter -of-fact the-signal  . Accusative provided transmitters . Nominative in S(lovac)R ( epublic) . 
(4') ( do-rozd ? len ? . t(federace . t )) ( toti ? . t ) ( sign?l . t)zaji??ovaly . t(vys?la?e . f(v-SR . f)) . 
(5 ) ? esk ? televize ? ? d?urychlenouv?stavbunov ? chvys?la ??  . 
Czech Television requires quick construction of -new transmitters  . 
(5') ((? esk ? . t ) televize . t ) ? ? d ? . f((urychlenou . f)v?stavbu . f((nov ? ch . f)vys?la ? ? . t ) ) The development of salience reduction of the referents most frequently mentioned in  ( 1 )  -  ( 5 ) is characterized in Tab .  1 , which includes numbers of salience reduction degrees and of those rules from Section  3 that are the main sources of the degrees . Two further remarks may be added , concerning details of our analysis that have not been discussed above and may not be directly found in the previous publications we refer to :   ( a ) a noun group consisting of a head with tor c and of one or more adjuncts with f constitutes a referring expression as a whole  , in the prototypical case , and gets degree 0 , if it occurs in F ; this concerns e . g . the group vys?la?ev SR ( ? transmitters in the Slovac Republic ? ) in sentence ( 4 )  , or ? T2(CTV2) in (2) ; here 2 is treated as an adjunct of CT ;   ( b ) the difference between the degrees 0 and 1 is not sufficient for as a fechoice of reference , so that , e . g . , the reference of the pronoun jejich ( their ) after ( 1 ) by itself is in distinct , and only inferencing helps to establish that ? esk?radiokomunikace  ( Czech Radio communications ) are referred to ( viewers normally do not have transmitters at their diposal  )  . 
after (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
CRC 11357 ( iii ) ( iii ) ( iv)(v)
CTV 31 12 1(iv ) ( iii ) ( iv ) ( iii)
CTV 122023 ( iv ) ( ii ) ( iv)
CTV 220 223 ( iv )   ( ii )   ( iv )   ( iv )   ( iv ) viewer 02233 ( ii )   ( iv )   ( i )   ( iv )   ( iv ) sig . 30213 ( iv ) ( ii ) ( iii ) ( iv)
CR 31 333 ( i ii ) ( iv ) ( iv)
CSF--313 ( i ii ) ( v ) terr . 30224 ( iv ) ( ii ) ( iv ) ( iv ) ( v)tr . -1200 ( iii ) ( ii ) ( ii )
Table 1.

CRC-Czech Radio ( tele ) communications
CTV-Czech TV
CR-Czech Republic
CSF-(CS ) Federation
CTV1(2)-1st(2nd ) program of CTVtr . -transmitter terr . -territory of CR sig . -signal of CTV Even with this short piece of discourse  , its segmentation is reflected , if its first subsegment , discussed up to now ( sentences (1)-(5)) , is compared with its continuation , i . e . sentences (6)-(9), given below . While the first segment deals primarily with CTV and its signal  ( cf . the relatively high salience of CTV , CTV 1 , CTV 2 , RC , signal and viewer in most parts of the segment ) , sentences ( 6 )  ?  ( 9 ) are devoted to financial issues , as can be seen from the following facts : ( a ) money gets degree 0 after ( 6 )  , in which it functions as its focus proper ( the most dynamic item )  , ( b ) Czech crown gets degree 1 after (7) , in which it is an embedded part of the focus , and ( c ) the group financial coverage gets degree 1 in sentence ( 8 )  . 
The continuation is presented here without the TGTSs :  ( 6 ) Na?espole?nostm??e?kolsplnit , alechyb?j?n?mpen?ze . 
Our company can the-task . Accusative fulfil , but is-lacking us . Dative the-money . Nominative . 
(7 ) Letosbyv?stavbatechnick?hoza??zen?vsedmi lokalit ? chst ? la  120 mili?n ? korun , alem ? ? emeuvolnit jen 80 mili?n ? . 
This-year , would the-construction of-technical equipment in seven localities cost  120 million crowns , but we-can spend only 80 million . 
(8 ) Protoofinan?n?mzabezpe?en?jedn?mes?eskou televiz ?  , uv ? d?ekonomick ? ? edit el?esk?ch radio telekomunikac ? MiroslavCu??n  . 
Therefore about ( its ) financial coverage we-discuss with Czech Television  , states the-economic director of-Czech
Radiotel communications M.C.
(9 ) Dal??ch 62 mili?n ? ko runsivy ? ? d?v?stavbavy s?la ? ? ap ? evad???sign ? luvpohrani ? ?  . 
Further 62 million crowns . Accusative Refl . will-require the-construction . Nominative of-transmitters and transferrers of-the -signal in the-border-area  . 
6 Conclusions
We are aware that , along with the rules characterized above , there are other factors that have to be investigated  , which are important for different kinds of discourses  . This concerns various aspects of the discourse situation  , of domain knowledge , of specific textual patterns ( with episodes , poetic effects , and so on ) . 
Factors of these and further kinds can be studied on the basis of the salience degrees  , which are typical for basic discourse situations . 
In any case , we may conclude that it is useful for a theory of discourse semantics to reflect the degrees of salience  . This makes it possible to distinguish the reference potential of referring expressions and thus the connectedness of the discourse  . Discourse analysis of this kind may also be useful for application domains such as text segmentation  ( in accordance with topics of individual segments )  , or data mining ( specifying texts in which a given topic is actually treated  , rather than being just occasionally mentioned ) . 

B?hmov ? A . and E . Haji?ov ? (1999) . The Prague Dependency TreeBank I : How much of the underlying syntactic structure can be tagged automatically ? The Prague Bulletin of 
Mathematical Linguistics 71, 512.
Collins M . , Haji?J . , Brill E . , Ramshaw L . and C . 
Tillmann (1999) . A statistical parser for Czech . In : Proceedings of 37th Annual Meeting of ACL , Cambridge , Mass . : M . I . T . Press , 505-512 . 
Haji?J .  (1998) . Building a syntactically annotated corpus : The Prague Dependency Treebank  . In : Issues of Valency and Meaning . Studies in Honour of Jarmila Panevov ?, ed . by E . Haji?ov ?, 106-132 . 
Prague : Karolinum.
Haji?J . ( in press ) . Disambiguation of rich inflection ( Computational morphology of Czech )  . 

Haji?J . and Hladk ? B .  (1997) . Probabilistic and rule-based tagger of an inflective language-a comparison  . In Proceedings of the Fifth
Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing , Washington , D.C ., 111-118.
Haji?J . and Hladk ? B .  (1998) . Czech language processing-POS tagging . In : Proceedings of the First International Conference on Language 
Resources & Evaluation , Granada.
Haji?ov ? E . , Partee B . and P . Sgall (1998): Topic-focus articulation , tripartite structures , and semantic content . Amsterdam : Kluwer Haji?ov ? E . and J . Vrbov ? (1982) . On the role of the hierarchy of activation in the process of natural language understanding  . In : COLING 82 . Ed . by J . 
Horeck ?. Amsterdam : North Holland , 107-113.
Krahmer E . (1998), Presupposition and anaphora.
CSLI Lecture Notes 89. CSLI , Stanford , CA.
Krahmer E . and M . The une (1999) , Efficient generation of descriptions in context . In : R . Kibble and K . van Deemter ( eds . ) , Proceedings of the workshop The Generation of Nominal Expression  , associated with the 11th European Summer School in Logic , Language and Information . 
Kruijff-Korbayov ? I .   ( 1998 ) : The dynamic potential of topic and focus : A Praguian approach to Discourse Representation Theory  . Prague : Charles University , Faculty of Mathematics and Physics , 
Ph.D . dissertation.
Sgall P . , Haji?ov ? E . and J . Panevov ? ( 1986 ) : The Meaning of the Sentence in Its Semantic and
Pragmatic Aspects , ed . by J.L . Mey,
Dordrecht : Reidel-Prague : Academia.
