Alternative Phrases and Natural Language Information 

Gann Bierner
Division of Informatics
University of Edinburgh


This paper presents a formal analysis for a large class of words called alternative markers  , which includes other ( than ) , such ( as ) , and besides . These words appear frequently enough in dialog to warrant serious attention  , yet present natural language search engines perform poorly on queries containing them  . I show that the performance of a search engine can be improved dramatically by incorporating an approximation of the formal analysis that is compatible with the search engine?s operational semantics  . The value of this approach is that as the operational semantics of natural language applications improve  , even larger improvements are possible . 
1 Introduction
Consider the following examples discovered in a corpus of queries submitted to the Electric Knowledge search  engine12  , the successor of the OnPoint natural language search system described in Cooper  ( 1997 )  . Each consists of a query , a response ( not shown ) , and then a follow up query . 
(1 ) What is the drinking age in Afghanistan ? What is the drinking age in other countries ?  ( 2 ) Where can I find web browsers for download ? Where can I find other web browsers than 
Netscape for download ? ( 3 ) Where can I find a list of all the shoe manufacturers in the world ? Where can I find shoes made by Buffalino  , such as the Bush wackers ? ( 4 ) Where are online auctions indexed ? Are there other auction search engines besides BidFind ?  1formerly known as The Electric Monk 2http://www  . electricknowledge . com In each case , particular words are used to constrain the space of appropriate answers : e  . g . 
such(as ), other ( than ), and besides . Ic all these words , and others like them , alternative markers , and alternative markers along with their syntactic argument  ( e . g . other countries ), I call alternative phrases . Alternative phrases that are closely bound to the noun phrase to which they refer  , like those above , Ic all connected alternative phrases ( modeled after similar terminology in Hoeksema ( 1995 ) ) . There are also free alternative phrases , such as Other than Fido , every doglikes going for walks , which are not discussed here but are discussed in depth in Bierner  ( 2001 )  . I have found queries containing all these forms despite the fact that no current NLIR system can handle them  , either ignoring the alternative phrase or , worse , treating the queries as if the alternative marker were absent  . 
The fact that these phrases define the space of correct answers makes it absolutely necessary to correctly interpret them in an IR application  . The user requires countries that are not Afghanistan  , web browsers that are not Netscape , shoes with similar properties to Bush wackers , and auction search engines that are not BidFind . Answers that do not conform are wrong . 
Another feature of alternative markers are their presuppositions  . Through these presuppositions , alternative markers can provide a rich source of knowledge about the world  , as Hearst (1992) has already recognized . For example , these queries imply that Afghanistan is a country  , Netscape is a web browser , Bushwackers are shoes , and Bid Find is an auction search engine . Anaphoric resolution can sometimes be critical for these inferences  . 
In (1) , for instance , other countries anaphorically depends on Afghanistan in the previous query  . 
While not as obviously important to natural language information retrieval  , this property of alternative phrases can be used to improve future queries  ( see Section 4 . 1) . 
The purpose of this paper is , first , to briefly provide a well-founded semantic analysis for alternative phrases that is amenable to computation  . The main thrust is then to show that a motivated approximation of this analysis can dramatically improve the results of a practical natural language application ? in particular  , a natural language search engine . The value of this two-step approach is that as the operational semantics of practical applications are gradually extended  , progressively more extensive approximations can be transparently incorporated  . 
2 Previous Work
Work on alternative phrases has previously been limited to Hearst?s work in connection with knowledge base construction and formal semantics by Hoeksema and von Fintel  . Hearst ( 1992 ) demonstrates cases where pattern matching can be used to extract knowledge from some constructions with alternative phrases and gives the patterns in  ( 5 ) as examples . 
(5) a . such NP as NP , * or and NP b . NP , NP *, or and other NP c . NP , including NP , * or and NP d . NP , especially NP , * or and NP This technique is adequate for the purpose of acquiring hyponyms from large corpora because the goal is to take advantage of easily available information  , not to handle a wide variation of linguistic phenomena  . Handling a full range of natural language queries requires a deeper approach  . 
For example , pattern matching alone cannot account for anaphoric reference such as in  ( 1 ) or examples where discourse knowledge invalidates the hyponym relation as in  ( 6 )  . 
(6) John?s pet dog , Fido , wassick.
So John and the other dogs went for a walk.
In contrast , von Fintel (1993) and
Hoeksema ( 1995 ) provide in depth semantic analyses of a limited class of alternative phrases  ; namely they focus entirely on exceptive phrases ( ways of referring to exceptions ) illustrated by the lexical items but and except ( for )  . The thrust of their analyses is directed towards how these words interact with quantifiers to determine the final set of entities  . Since in queries , quantifiers rarely interact with alternative phrases in the manner discussed in Hoeksema and von Fintel?s work  , their analyses have not been carried over into the present work  . 
3 Analysis
I present a formal approach to alternative phrases that is wider in scope than the alternatives reviewed in Section  2   ( although less detailed in some respects than v on Fintel and Hoeksema?s work  )  . 
3.1 Presupposition and Assertion
In my analysis of alternative phrases , I make use of the pragmatic view of presuppositions explored by Lewis  ( 1979 ) and Stalnaker ( 1974 ) which , stated loosely , sees them as propositions that must be true for an utterance to make sense  . ( For an overview of presupposition , see Beaver (1997) . ) The semantics of lexical entries are separated into assertion and presupposition as in Stalnaker  ( 1974 ) and Karttunen and Peters ( 1979 )  . The idea is also used in Webber et al ( 1999 ) to capture anaphoric ( nonstructural ) links between discourse connectives and material derivable from previous discourse  , and in Stone and Doran ( 1997 ) and Stone and Webber ( 1998 ) for natural language generation . 
Lexical entries are written in the following form , where the semantic parameters scope both the assertion and presuppositions : word `????? syn:syntactic category sem : ?  . . . 
assert : proposition presup : proposition * 3 . 2 Alternative Sets The concept of alternative sets plays an important role in the semantics of alternative phrases  . 
An alternative set is a set of propositions which differ with respect to how one or more arguments are filled  . For example , the alternative set like ( mary , jen ) , like ( mary , bob ) ,   . . . represents the entities that Mary likes . An early discussion of these structures is provided in Karttunen and Peters  ( 1979 ) where an analysis is given for the focus particle even  . Alternative sets are also used by Rooth ( 1985 ) and Rooth ( 1992 ) to develop a detailed account of focus , particularly with the focus particle only . 
My analysis approximates this set of properties as a pair consisting of a set of entities  ( e . g . 
jen , bob , . . . ) and the property they share ( e . g . 
?x . like(mary , x)) . My analyses of alternative phrases uses the relation alts  ( p , q ) which , intuitively , specifies that the two sets of entities denoted by p and q can be found together in at least one alternative set in the knowledge base  . The description component of the alternative set ( i . e . 
the property ) need not be known . It is important to note that although here I focus on unifying such structures  , I also make use of the fact that alts is a relation that is symmetric and reflexive  , but not transitive . 
The alternative phrases I have analyzed fall into two classes : those that assemble a set from elements and those that excise a set from a larger set  ( as in exceptive phrases )  . In either case , one particular set of elements is of interest , the figure . With assembly words , the figure is either admitted into the set or combined with a complement to form a set  . With excision , the figure is explicitly excluded from the ground  . The figure may derive from structurally-related constituents  ( as with besides )  , or it may be presupposed ( as with other ) . 
3.3 A Grammar Formalism
I implement my analyses with Combinatory Categorial Grammar  ( Steedman , 1996; Steedman ,  2000) . CCG is a lexicalized grammar that encodes both the syntactic and semantic properties of a word in the lexicon  . For the analyses presented in this paper , standard Categorial Grammar suffices . 
A minor variation is that rather than having the basic categories N and NP  , I simply use NP . 
Noun phrases with and without determiners are distinguished with the bare feature  . 
3.4 An Example
In this section , I provide an analysis of one syntactic form of other in order to illustrate the semantic technique described above  . Discussion of alternate syntactic forms and other alternative markers can be found in Bierner  ( 2001 )  . 
The semantic analysis below defines other as an excision word that excludes the figure from the ground  . The figure is a free variable that must be provided from the common ground or discourse  , as is the case in (1) . 
other ` ? ? ? ? ? syn:NP comp + , eq?/NP bare+sem:?g ??? assert : ? x . g(x ) ? ? f(x ) presup : ? x . f(x ) ? g(x ) alts(f , ? x . g ( x ) ? ? f ( x ) ) The analysis allows the derivation in Figure 1 . 
other countries
NP/NP : ? g?x.g(x ) ? ? f(x ) NP : country >
NP : ? x . country(x ) ? ? f(x ) presupposition set : ? x . f(x ) ? country(x ) alts(f , ? x . country ( x ) ? ? f ( x ) ) Figure 1: Derivation for other countries At this point , the semantics is dependent on the free variable f  , the figure . This is reflected by the fact that , in isolation , other countries does not make sense . Although such anaphoric reference is difficult to resolve  , in some constructions we can identify the figure without bringing full resolution techniques to bear ? as we would have to in  ( 1 )  . 
Some of these constructions , as in Figure 2 , are those that contain the word than , whose analysis is given below . 
than ` ? ? ? ? ? syn:NP\NP eq ? , comp+/NP sem:?x ? yassert : ypresup : alts(x , y ) The presupposition set in Figure 2 is the union of the presuppositions of other and than  , as bound during the derivation . The remaining variable , f , can be determined solely from the derivation?s presupposition set using the old AI planning heuristic ? use existing objects ?  ( Sacer-doti ,  1977 ) to avoid inventing new objects when others are already available  . In particular , we can unify alts ( f , ? x . browser(x ) ? ? f(x )) and alts(net scape,?x . browser(x ) ? ? f(x )) , discovering that f , the figure , is nets cape . This then instantiates the remaining presupposition  , yielding ? x . nets cape(x ) ? browser(x ): i . e . Netscape is a browser . Unifying logical forms to instantiate variables in this way follows the ? interpretation as abduction ? paradigm  ( Hobbs et al ,  1993) , where this merging is performed to exploit redundancy for ? getting a minimal  , and hence a best , interpretation . ? Similar analyses in terms of alternative sets have been developed for many other alternative phrases in Bierner  ( 2001 )  . 
In the next section I show that practical applications such as natural language search engines can benefit from appropriate approximations of this kind of analysis  . 
4 Natural Language IR
There are a variety of techniques for allowing natural language queries in information retrieval systems  . The simplest approach is simply to remove the ? function words ? from the query and use the remaining words in a standard keyword search  ( Alta Vista )  . In more complex approaches , pattern matching ( the EK search engine ) , parsing ( Ask Jeeves ) , and machine learning ( Zelle and Mooney ,  1993 ) techniques can support the association of more appropriate keywords with a query  . 
I will concentrate on the pattern matching technique of the Electric Knowledge search engine and other web browsers than Netscape NP comp+/NP : NP comp?:  ( NP\NP comp + ) /NP : NP : ? g?x . g(x ) ? ? f(x ) browser ? x ? y . ynets cape >> NP comp+:?x . browser(x ) ? ? f(x ) NP\NP comp+:?y . y <
NP : ? x . browser ( x ) ? ? f ( x ) presupposition set : ? ? ? ? x . f(x ) ? browser(x ) alts(f , ? x . browser(x ) ? ? f(x )) alts(net scape,?x . browser ( x ) ? ? f ( x ) ) Figure 2: Derivation for other web browsers than Netscape shown how a theory of alternative phrases can drastically improve results  . 
4.1 The EK search engine?s Operational

The Electric Knowledge search engine uses pattern recognition to transform a natural language question into a series of increasingly more general Boolean queries that can be used with standard backend retrieval techniques  . The question is filtered through a hierarchy of regular expressions  , and handcrafted rules are used to extract information from the question into Boolean expressions  . The regular expression matching is aided by an ISA hierarchy such that generalizations of keywords can be captured  . As mentioned in Section 1 , the fact that the presuppositions of alternative phrases encode hyponym information can be useful in augmenting this aspect of systems like the EK search engine  . 
This technique suffers from the fact that , in order to be tractable , this set of patterns is limited and important information in the query can be lost  . In particular , the Electric Knowledge search engine does not have patterns that attempt to associate alternative phrases with appropriate pieces of boolean query  . 
To overcome this , an appropriate approximation of the semantic result of my analysis that is compatible with the backend search system must be found  . For the Electric Knowledge search engine ( similar approaches are certainly possible for other NLIR systems  )  , a hybrid query has been introduced to account for alternative phrases  , which combines a natural language query with further restrictions added in a system-specific language  . 
The syntax is shown in (7).
(7 ) Query : : ANSWERNOTNEAR ( word list )   ( 8 ) What are some web browsers ?:: ANSWER
NOT NEAR ( nets cape)
The natural language query is separated from the restrictions by the :: symbol  . The restrictions specify that the answer to the query must not be near to certain words  . 
The hybrid query in (8) , for example , is a transformation of the original query What are some other web browsers than Netscape ?  . The EK search engine uses the natural language part of the query to initially locate possible answering documents  . 
The rest of the query is used when gathering evidence for including a document in the final results  . 
The EK search engine finds a location in the document that should answer the query and then compares it against the criteria appended to the end of the query  . If it does not meet the criteria ( that it not be near the wordNets cape )  , another location is tried . If there are no more possible answers , the document is rejected . 
This is , of course , not exactly what the original query meant . However , it is superior to queries like ? ? browsers ? ? AND NOT ?? nets cape ? ? which rejects all pages containing Netscape  , even if they also contain other browsers . 
The evaluation in Section 5 shows that this operational semantics is sufficient to dramatically improve the results for queries with alternative phrases  . 
4.2 The Algorithm
Instead of using the EK search engine?s pattern matching on the initial question  , the algorithm does a post-analysis of the syntactic structure produced by parsing the question with my analysis  . 
The algorithm recursively descends the derivation , searching for semantic forms that result from alternative phrases  . The information from the alternative phrase is removed and then appended to the end of the hybrid query in a different form  . In Figure 2 , for example , the information other than Netscape is removed , leaving only web browsers , to form the hybrid query in (8) . 
Physics EE Total
StudTutStudTut in addition to 0   0   0   3   3 besides 1   3   0   2   6 another 56   124   10   38   228 especially 0   1   0   0   1 except 0   17   1   1   19 other 107   484   36   59   686 in particular 0   6   0   0   6 such 2   18   3   10   33 unlike 0   0   0   1   1 
Total 1666 5350 114983
Alternative Phrases per Dialog
Dialogs 203 2036 66 62 69
AP/dialog 0.82 3.22 0.76 1.73 3.65
Alternative Phrases in Queries per Dialog
Query APs 5126 1168 6414 per dialog 0 . 25 1 . 29 0 . 24 1 . 3 1 . 5 4 Table 1: Frequency of Alternative Phrases in Dialog 5 Evaluation 5  . 1 Frequency of Alternative Phrases First , it is useful to determine how many queries contain alternative phrases in order to judge how large a problem this really is  . Unfortunately , this is complicated by the fact that users , in general , know that such constructions are not understood by search engines  , so they avoid them . In fact , even in NLIR systems , users often use keywords even though doing so performs worse than asking natural language questions  . They do this because they do not trust the system  . Work will be necessary to improve users ? awareness of NL capabilities through advertising and by implementing new user interfaces  . Work will also be needed to take more account of the fact that search is often an iterative and even interactive process  . As noted by Lewis and SparckJones (1996) , the results of largescale document-retrieval competitions such as the Text Retrieval Conference  ( TREC ,  2000 ) do not necessarily reflect the experience many users have with retrieval systems  . 
In the meantime , I have attempted to find a baseline for this number by considering two corpora of human/human dialogs  . The corpora are both from tutorial situations where a ment or helps a student through problems in the subject of Physics for one corpus  ( VanLehn et al , 1998; VanLehn et al , in press ) , and Basic Electricity and Electronics ( Rose et al ,  1999) , for the other . Tutoring dialogs are an ideal place to look for data relevant to NLIR because they consist entirely of one party attempting to elicit information from the other  . In some cases , it is the tutore liciting information from the student  , and in others it is the other way around . 
Table 1 shows the frequencies of some alternative phrases  . A more illuminating statisticis how often alternative phrases appear in a single dialog  . 
I consider a dialog to be a single session between the student and tutor where the discussion of each problem is considered a separate session  . The table shows that in 269 total dialogs , each dialog contained , on average ,  3 . 65 alternative phrases . If one only considers alternative phrases that occur in the context of a question  , there are , on average ,  1 . 54 alternative phrases per dialog . I consider an alternative phrase to be in a question context if it is in the same dialog turn as a question  . Because tutors ask questions in order to lead the student to the answer  , it is perhaps better to consider just the student data  , where a quarter of the dialogs contained question contexts with alternative phrases  . 
This data is not meant to be considered a rigorous result  , but it is a strong indication that any query -answering system is likely to confront an alternative phrase during the course of interacting with a user  . Furthermore , the data shows that during the course of the interaction it will be appropriate for the system to respond using an alternative phrase  , which is important when considering more responsive search engines than are available today  . 
It is also interesting to note that a wide variety of alternative phrases occur in this data  . (9) contains some examples . Because excision words , especially other , are by far the most frequent , I have only considered them in the evaluation presented here  . 
(9) a . The battery is the greency linder right ? I don?t see anything negative other than  #5  . 
b . And what do you have in addition to voltage ? c . Are there any other forces on that knobbesides that one you ? ve labeled 
W1?5.2 Potential Improvement
Of interest is the potential for improving various search engines through a better way of treating alternative phrases  . To start with , given a set of queries containing alternative phrases  , it is important to see how well these systems perform without enhancement  . Table 2 shows the performance of Alta Vista , Ask Jeeves , and the EK search engine on eight excision examples taken from the 
AV Jeeves Monk
Cancer 2/9,62/5,32/3, 0
BidFind 2/7,51/6,00/0, 0
Jobs 2/9,02/5,03/9,6
Warts 0/9, 61/4, 20/1, 1
Drinking 4/10,00/5,10/2,0
Browsers 2/8,63/5, 20/9, 8
Witches 0/10, 100/5, 40/0, 0
Hondo 0/7, 61/6, 30/0, 0
Avr . Precision 17% 25% 20%
Avr . % false positives due to searching for the figure  67%   53%   58% Table 2: Potential Improvement for NLIR Systems corpus of EK search engine queries  . For a data entry ? x/y , z ? , y is the total number of returned documents and x are those which contain an answer to the query  . z are the number of answers that are wrong because they are about the subject that was explicitly being excluded in the query  . 
As the data shows , none of the search engines f are particularly well  . The precision for all three is around 20% . That is , only about one in five of the responses contain an answer to the query  . Furthermore , from a half to two thirds of the incorrect responses were specifically about the subject the query wanted to exclude  , displaying little or noun derstanding of excision alternative phrases  . 
The point is not to draw any conclusions about the relative merits of the search engines from this test  . Rather , it is that each NLIR system shows room for improvement  . Since I will demonstrate that improvement only for the Electric Knowledge search engine  , next , this shows that that improvement is not due to exceptionally bad prior performance by the EK search engine  . 
5.3 Enhancing the EK search engine
Table 3 shows the results of asking the EK search engine questions in three different forms : without an alternative phrase  , with an alternative phrase that has not been translated  , and with the alternative phrase translated as described in Section  4  . 2 . 
The first row of the table , for instance , refers to the questions in (10) . The remaining sentences can be found in Bierner ( 2001 )  . Although an implementation exists that is capable of performing the translation in Section  4  . 2 , this was done by hand for this evaluation to abstract away from parsing issues  . 
(10) What are some works by Edgar Allan Poe ?
What are some works by Edgar Allan Poe other than the Raven ? What are some works by Edgar Allan Poe ?:: ANSWERNOTNEAR  ( raven ) Unfortunately , at the time of this evaluation , Electric Knowledge had taken down their public portal in favor of providing search for the web pages of specific clients  . This means that the large index used to process the queries in Table  2 was no longer available , and Itherefore used different indices and different queries for this evaluation  . 
I used indices of pages about American history and literature ? each about  11  , 000 pages . These new , more specialized , indices have the benefit of abstracting this evaluation away from coverage issues  ( explaining the differences in precision between Table  2 and Table 3  )  . 
I created the questions in two ways . For several , I began by asking a question without an alternative phrase  . I then added an alternative phrase in order to remove some responses I was not interested in  . For example , when I asked Who are the romantic poets ? , all responses were about female romantic poets . I therefore used the query Who are the romantic poets not including women ? in the evaluation  . 
Some queries were made without first trying the non-alternative phrase version : What are some epics besides Beowulf ?  , for example . This variation reflects the fact that it is unclear which is more common  , excluding clutter from a set of responses or a priori excluding cases that the questioner is not interested in  . The queries also vary in their syntactic structure  , information requested , and alternative phrase used . The purpose of varying the queries in these ways is to ensure that the results do not simply reflect a quirk in the EK search engine?s implementation  . 
For each query , Table 3 shows total , the number of documents returned ; good , the number of true positives ; and top 5 , the number of true positives in the top five returned documents  . A true positive was given to a document if it contained an answer to the question  , and half a point was given to a document that contained an obvious link to a document with an answer to the question  . Precision is computed for all documents and for the top five  . It is important to note that the scores for the queries without alternative phrases are still computed with respect to the alternative phrase  . 
That is , documents only about the ? Raven ? are considered false positives  . In this way , we can view these scores as a baseline ? what would have happened had the system simply removed the alternative phrase  . This should be taken with a grain
Baseline Original Query Hybrid
Tot Good Top 5 Tot Good Top 5 Tot Good Top 5
Poe1 26.53 100.5 0.510 5.5 2.5
Romantics 1000 1500 1033
Witch Hunts 1083 1421 1085
US Wars 1512 2000 16134
Sonnets 15 10 5 10 20 10 84
Presidents 1522 1500 1522
Epics 1074 1053 1074
Decof Ind 10 20000 105.52
Avr . Precision 48% 47 . 5% 14 . 9% 15% 58% 66 . 3% Table 3: Evaluation of Improvement for NLIR Systems of salt because  , in many cases , I chose the query because there were documents to remove  ( as in the Romantics example )  . However , a concern was that the transformed query would cause numerous false negatives  . This is not the case as seen by the fact that the precision of the transformed query is not lower than the baseline  . In fact , inno example was the precision less than the baseline  , and at worse , the precision remained the same . 
Performance on questions containing alternative phrases was quite poor  , with an average of 15% precision . This is significantly worse than the transformed query  , and even the baseline . The performance drop is due to the fact that the complex syntax of the query confuses the EK search engine?s analysis  . The EK search engine is forced to reduce the query to a simple set of keywords including the figure  , which we were trying to avoid . 
Thus as predicted in the discussion of potential improvement  , not accounting for alternative phrases can greatly increase the number of false positives containing the figure  ( FPF )  , the very thing the query is attempting to exclude  . Table 4 shows that in the baseline case , where there is no alternative phrase , on average for 28% of the returned documents the only answer was the one we wanted to exclude  . Adding the alternative phrase has the opposite of the intended effect as the percentage of FPFs increases to  44% for reasons described above . Transforming the query , on the other hand , causes the desired effect , more than halving the percentage of FPFs of the baseline  . 
6 Conclusions
In this paper , I briefly presented a formal analysis for a large class of words called alternative markers  . The analysis elegantly captures the desired phenomena by separating assertion and presupposition and making use of alternative phrases and the ? use existing objects ? heuristic  . 
A simple pattern matching approach would fail to capture examples requiring knowledge and those with anaphora  . Furthermore , sophisticated noun phrase detection would be required for many examples  . 
I then show that alternative phrases appear frequently enough in dialog to warrant serious attention  , yet present natural language search engines perform poorly on queries containing alternative phrases  . However , by approximating my semantic analysis into a form understood by a natural language search engine  , I showed that the performance of that search engine improved dramatically  . As the operational semantics of natural language applications improves  , even larger improvements are possible . 
Further improvement is also possible by approaching the problem from the other direction  . 
Alternative phrases can be used to help characterize documents beyond the simple word indices used in many current systems  . This richer data can be used in the retrieval process to more effectively identify appropriate documents  . 

David Beaver .  1997 . Presupposition . In Johan van Benthem and Aliceter Meulen , editors , Handbook of Logic and Language , pages 939?1008 . North Holland , Amsterdam . 
Gann Bierner .  2001 . Alternative phrases : theoretical analysis and practical applications  . Ph . D . 
thesis , Division of Informatics , University of Edinburgh . 
Edwin Cooper .  1997 . The OnPoint system : A natural language search engine for the world wide web  . Master?s thesis , University of

Marti Hearst .  1992 . Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text corpora  . In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference 
Baseline Original Query Hybrid
F P F F P F/T ot FP F FP F/T ot FP F FP F/T ot
Poe 1.08 1.1 1.1
Romantics 8.815 12.2
WitchHunts 2.2 1.0 700
USWars 3.2 3.19
Sonnets 5.3 38.8 2.2
Presidents 5.33 10.6 72.13
Epics 0 0 0 0 0 0
DecofInd 3.3 2.22 8.1% 44% 12.8%
Table 4: False Positives Containing Figure on Computational Linguistics  , Nantes , France , 

Jerry R . Hobbs , Mark E . Stickel , Douglas E . Appelt , and P . Martin .  1993 . Interpretation as abduction . Artificial Intelligence , 63(1?2):69?142,

Jacob Hoeksema .  1995 . The semantics of exception phrases . In Jaapvander Does and Janvan Eijck , editors , Quantifiers , Logic , and Language , chapter 6 , pages 145?177 . Cambridge
University Press.
Lauri Karttunen and Stanley Peters .  1979 . Conventional implicature . In Choon-Kyu Oh and David Dinneen , editors , Syntax and Semantics 11: Presupposition . New York , Academic Press . 
David Lewis and Karen Sparck Jones .  1996 . Natural language processing for information retrieval  . In Communications of the ACM , volume 39 , pages 92?101 , January . 
David Lewis .  1979 . Score keeping in a language game . Journal of Philosophical Logic , 8:339?359 . 
Mats Rooth . 1985. Association with Focus . Ph.D.
thesis , University of Massachusetts , Amherst.
Mats Rooth .  1992 . A theory of focus interpretation . Natural Language Semantics , 1:75?116 . 
C . P . Rose , B . Di Eugenio , and J . D . Moore .  1999 . 
A dialogue based tutoring system for basic electricity and electronics  . In Proceedings of AI in

Earl Sacerdoti .  1977 . A Structure for Plans and Behavior . Elsevier/North-Holland , Amsterdam . 
Robert Stalnaker .  1974 . Pragmatic presuppositions . Semantics and Philosophy , pages 129?214 . 
Mark Steedman .  1996 . Surface Structure and Interpretation . MIT Press , Cambridge Mass . Linguistic Inquiry Monograph , 30 . 
Mark Steedman . 2000. The Syntactic Process.
The MIT Press , Cambridge Mass.
Matthew Stone and Christine Doran .  1997 . Sentence planning as description using tree adjoining grammar  . In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the  8th Conference of the European Association for Computational Linguistics  , Madrid , July , pages 198?205 . 
Matthew Stone and Bonnie Webber .  1998 . Textual economy through close coupling of syntax and semantics  . In International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , pages 178?187 , 
Niagara-on-the-Lake , Canada , August.
TREC . 2000. http://trec.nist.gov/.
K . VanLehn , S . Siler , C . Murray , and W . B.
Baggett .  1998 . What makes a tutorial event effective ? In M . A . Gernsbacher and S . Derry , editors , Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society  , pages 1084?1089 , Hillsdale , NJ . 
K . VanLehn , S . Siler , C . Murray , T . Yamauchi , and W . B . Baggett . in press . Human tutoring : Why do only some events cause learning ? Cognition and Instruction  . 
Kaivon Fintel . 1993. Exceptive constructions.
Natural Language Semantics , 1(2):123?148.
Bonnie Webber , Alistair Knott , Matthew Stone , and Aravind Joshi .  1999 . Discourse relations : A structural and presuppositional account using lexicalised tag  . In Proceedings of the 37th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 41?48 , College Park , MD . 
John M . Zelle and Raymond J . Mooney . 1993.
Learning semantic grammars with constructive inductive logic programming  . In Proceedings of the 11th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 817?823 , Menlo Park , CA , USA . 
AAAI Press.
