Word Order in German:
A Formal Dependency Grammar Using a Topological Hierarchy 
Kim Gerdes
Lattice , Universit ? Paris 7
75251 Paris Cedex05


Sylvain Kahane
Lattice , Universit ? Paris 7
75251 Paris Cedex05



This paper proposes a description of
German word order including phenomena considered as complex  , such as scrambling , ( partial ) VP fronting and verbal pied piping . Our description relates a syntactic dependency structure directly to a topological hierarchy without resorting to movement or similar mechanisms  . 1  1 Introduction The aim of this article is to describe the word order of German verbs and their complements  . German word order is not free , but based on fairly simple rules , forming what is usually called topological model , which sub-divides the sentence into a hierarchy of topological domains that are themselves composed of fields  ( Vorfeld , Mittelfeld , right bracket ?) ( Drach , 1937; Bech ,  1955) . 
We start from a syntactic dependency tree , i.e.
an unordered tree whose nodes are labeled with the words of the sentence  , and whose branches are labeled with syntactic relations among the words  ( subject , direct object ?) . 
The syntactic dependency structure only encodes subcategorization and modification and must be completed by the communicative structure  ( partition into theme/rheme , focus ?) , which plays a fundamental role in word order . 
It permits us to choose among all the different possible orders corresponding to a given dependency structure  . In this paper we do not Becker , Ralph Debusmann , Denys Duchier , and Stefan M?ller for fruitful discussions . Particular thanks to Igor Mel'cuk for the inspiration of the particular status we give to the phrase structure  . 
pursue this problem any further , but have limited our description to the link between dependency and topology  . Note that it is fundamental to our approach that syntactic structure does not include word order  . 
To get the words in order , we group them in a hierarchy of phrases . The nature and the position of these phrases are constrained by our topological model  . For instance , a nonfinite verb can open two kinds of topological phrases  , either a phrase , which we call domain , with positions for all of its dependents , or a restricted phrase , which forms the verb cluster , with no positions for dependents other than predicative elements  . These two kinds of phrases must be placed in very different topological positions  . 
The fact that we pass through a ( topological ) phrase structure in order to relate dependency and word order distinguishes our approach from usual dependency grammars  ( Mel'cuk & Pertsov , 1987; Br?ker , 1998; Kahane et al , 1998; Duchier & Debusmann ,  2001) . The description of German word order closest to our analysis is the HPSG grammar of Kathol  ( 1995 ; see also Reape 1994) , who proposes linearization rules exclusively based on a formalization of the topological structure  . However , as required by the formalism he uses , a regular phrase structure , which we do not need in our analysis , still underlies the structures obtained . 
Our work constitutes a syntactic module which links  ( unordered ) syntactic structures with topological phrase structures  . Syntactic structures are related to semantic structures  , whereas topological phrase structures are related to phonological structures  . In other words , our work lies within the scope of the general framework of Meaning-Text-Theory  ( Mel'cuk 1988 )  , which considers the modeling of a language as a modular  ( bidirectional ) correspondence between meaning and text . It must be clear that , in contrast to X bar syntax , our topological phrase structure does not represent the syntactic structure of the sentence  . 
Although the dependency information is essential in its construction  , the phrase structure only represents topology , i . e . the surface grouping of the words . Topological phrases can be directly related to prosodic groups  , and topology represents an intermediate level between dependency and phonology  . 
In Section 2 , the results of our findings are presented , without recourse to any mathematical formalism , in the usual terminology of traditional German grammars  . In Section 3 , a mathematical formalism is proposed to state the rules and the grammar fragment described in Section  2  . 
2 Description
Word order in German is much freer than in English  . The dependency tree of Fig .  1 , which will be our reference example , has a few dozen linearizations : (1) a . Niemandhat diesem Mann das Buch zu lesen versprochen b  . Diesem Mannhatdas Buchniem and zu lesen versprochenc  . Das Buch zu lesen hat diesem Mannniem and versprochend  . Diesem Mannhatniem and verspro-chen , das Buch zu lesen e . Diesem Mannhat , das Buch zu lesen , niem and versprochenf . Zulesenhat diesem Manndas Buchniem and versprocheng  . Das Buch hatniem and diesem Mannvers prochenzu lesen ? Nobody promised this man to read the book  . ? Fig .  1 . Dependency tree of the sentences in ( 1 ) In this paper , we do not attempt to characterize wellformed German dependency trees although we recognize that such a characterization is essential if we attempt to describe the acceptable sentences of German  . 
2.2 Topological model
The internal structure of a domain is a sequence of fields  . For example , the main domain is the underlying pattern of a declarative sentence  , and it consists of the following sequence of five fields : [ V or feld  , left bracket , Mittelfeld , right bracket , Nachfeld ] . A domain resembles a box whose ordered compartments  , called fields , can themselves accommodate new boxes . In addition to the rules listing the fields of each type of box  , we propose two further types of rules : ? rules that indicate into which field a word can go ? depending on the position of its governor  ; ? rules that indicate which type of box a word can create when it is placed into a given field  . 
The hierarchy of boxes forms the phrase structure we construct  . 
2.3 Word order rules
We have established the following rules for the linear order of verbs and their dependents : ? The finite verb takes the second position of the main domain  , the left bracket . This verb is also called V2 . 
? A nonfinite verb depending on V2 can go into the right bracket . 2As a result , it opens a reduced phrase with only one position for a verbal dependent  ( see Section 2 . 8 for another possibility ) . If a subsequent third verb joins the verb already in the right bracket  , it will again open a phrase with a position to its left  , and so on . 
The verbal constituent occupying the right bracket is called the verb cluster  . 
? Some nonverbal dependents , such as separable verbal prefixes ( for example the an of an fangen ? begin ? )  , predicative adjectives , and nouns governed by a copular verb or a support verb  , can go into the right bracket ( the prefix even forms one word with its following governor  )  . In contrast to verbs , these elements do not usually open up a new position for their dependents  , which consequently have to be placed somewhere else  . 3 hat gelesen ? has read ? the past participle depends syntactically on the auxiliary  , which is the finite verb form ( cf . Tesni?re 1959, Mel'cuk 1988) . The V2 is thus always the root of the syntactic dependency tree  . 
3In examples such as ( i ) , these parable verbal prefix an behaves like a subordinated verb intervening between the ? main ? verb and its dependent : has?niem and ? noboby ?- NOM dobj subj aux das Buch ? the book ? -ACC zulesen ? to read ? iobj inf diesem Mann ? this man ?- DAT vers prochen ? promised ? ? One dependent  ( verbal or nonverbal ) of any of the verbs of the main domain ( V2 , any verb in the right bracket or even an embedded verb  ) has to occupy the first position , called the Vorfeld ( V F , prefield ) . 
? All the other nonverbal dependents of the verbs in the domain  ( V2 or part of the verbal cluster ) can go in the Mittelfeld ( MF , middle-field ) . 
? Some phrases , in particular sentential complements ( complementizer and relative clauses )  , prepositional phrases , and even some sufficiently heavy noun phrases , can be positioned in a field right of the right bracket  , the Nachfeld ( NF , af-ter-field ) . Like the Mittelfeld , the Nachfeld can accommodate several dependents . 
? When a verb is placed in any of the Major Fields  ( Vor- , Mittel- , Nachfeld ) , it opens a new embedded domain . 
In the following section we illustrate our rules with the dependency tree of Fig  .   1 and show how we describe phenomena such as scrambling and  ( partial ) VP fronting . 
2 . 4 Non-embedded construction and ? scrambling ? Let us start with cases without embedding  , i . e . 
where the subordinated verbs versprochen ? promised ? and zu lesen ? to read ? will go into the right bracket of the main domain  ( Fig .  2) . 
The constituents which occupy the left and right brackets are represented by shadowed ovals  . The other three phrases , niem and ? nobody ? , diesem Mann ? to this man ? , and das Buch ? the book ? , are on the same domain level ; one of them has to take the Vorfeld , the other two will go into the Mittelfeld . We obtain thus 6 possible orders , among them (1a ) and (1b ) . There are nevertheless some general restrictions on the relative constituent order in the Mittelfeld  . We do not consider these rules here ( see for instance Lenner z 1977 , Uszkoreit 1987) , but we want to insist on the fact that the order of the constituents depends very little on their hierarchical position in the syntactic structure  . 4 Even if the order is not free , there ( i ) Erf?ngtgleich zu schreienan . 
He begins right_a way to shout AN.
? He begins to shout right away . ? has lost morphological case except on pronouns . For a simplified description of the order in the Dutch Mittelfeld  , we have to attach to each complement placed in the Mittelfeld its height in the syntactic are restrictions that weigh more heavily than the hierarchical position : pronominalization  , focus , new information , weight , etc . 
hat?has?niem and ? noboby?dobjsubjaux das Buch ? the book ? zu lesen ? to read ? iobj in f diesem Mann ? to this man ? versprochen ? promised ? Fig  .  2 . A phrase structure without embedded domains for ( 1a , b ) The fact that a verbal projection ( i . e . the verb and all of its direct and indirect dependents  ) does not in general form a continuous phrase , unlike in English and French , is called scrambling ( Ross ,  1967) . This terminology is based on an erroneous conception of syntax that supposes that word order is always an immediate reflection of the syntactic hierarchy  ( i . e . 
every projection of a given element forms a phrase  ) and that any deviation from this constitutes a problem  . In fact , it makes little sense to form a phrase for each verb and its dependents  . On the contrary , all verbs placed in the same domain put their dependents in a common pot  . In other words , there is no scrambling in German , or more precisely , there is no advantage in assuming an operation that derives ? scrambled ? sentences from ? non -scrambled ? ones  . 
2 . 5 Embedding hat ? has ? niemand ? noboby ? subj aux zu lesen ? to read?diesem Mann ? to this man ? versprochen ? promised ? dobj das Buch ? the book ? iobj inf Fig  .  3 . A phrase structure with an embedded domain for ( 1a , 1c , 1d , 1 e ) dependency tree , and linearize them in descending order . 
As we have said , when a verb is placed in one of the major fields , it opens an embedded domain . We represent domains by ovals with a bold outline  . In the situation of Fig .  3 , where zu lesen ? to read ? opens an embedded domain  , hat ? has ? and vers prochen ? promised ? occupy the left and right bracket of the main domain and we find three phrases on the same level : niemand ? nobody ?  , diesem Mann ? to this man ? , and das Buch zu lesen ? to read the book ? . The embedded domain can go into the Vorfeld (1c ) , the Nachfeld (1d ) , or the Mittelfeld (1a , e) . 
Note that we obtain the word order ( 1a ) a second time , giving us two phrase structures : (2) a . [Niemand][hat][diesemMann][das
Buchzulesen ] [ versprochen]b . [Niemand][hat][diesemMann][das
Buch ] [ zule senvers prochen]
This structural ambiguity corresponds , we believe , to a semantic ambiguity of communicative type : In  ( 2a )  , the fact of reading the book is marked ( as in Reading the book , nobody promised him that ) , whereas ( 2b ) is neutral in this respect ( Nobody promised him to read the book )  . 
Moreover , the structures ( 2a ) and ( 2b ) correspond to different prosodies ( the left border of the right bracket is clearly marked with an accent on the first syllable of the radical  )  . 
Finally , the existence of this ambiguity is also confirmed by the contrast between full infinitives  ( with zu ) and b are infinitives ( without zu ) : B are infinitives cannot form an embedded domain outside of the Vorfeld  . Consequently , there are two different prosodies for ( 3a )   ( with or without detachment of das Buch ? the book ? from zu lesen ? to read ?  )  , whereas only one prosody without detachment is permitted for  ( 3b )  , although ( 3a ) and ( 3b ) have isomorphic dependency trees . Evidence comes also from the written form recommending a comma for  ( 3a )   ( i . e . preference for the embedded structure ) , whereas the comma is not allowed for (3b ) . 
(3) a . Niem and versucht ( , ) das Buch zu lesen ? Nobody tries to read the book  . ? b . Niemand will das Buch lesen ? Nobody wants to read the book  . ? 2 . 6 Emancipation The dependents of a verb do not have to be in their governor?s domain : They can be ? eman-cipated ? and end up in a superior domain  . For example , in Fig .  4 , the verb zulesen ? to read ? has created an embedded domain from which its dependent das Buch ? the book ? has been emancipated  . We have thus four complements to place in the superior domain  , allowing more than thirty word orders , among them (1f ) and (1g ) . Among these orders , only those that have das Buch or zu lesen in the Vorfeld are truly acceptable  , i . e . those where embedding and emancipation are communicatively motivated by focus on das Buch or zulesen  . 
hat?has?niem and ? noboby ? subjaux zulesen ? to read ? diesem Mann ? to this man ? versprochen ? promised ? dobj das Buch ? the book ? iobj inf Fig  .  4 . A phrase structure with emancipation for (1f , g ) 2 . 8 Word order in the right bracket German permits different orders inside the verb cluster  . The tense auxiliaries haben ? have ? ( past ) and werden ? become/will ? ( future ) also allow their dependents to take a place on their right in the right bracket  ( Oberfel dum stellung or auxiliary flip ; Bech , 1955) (4a ) . The dependents of this verb go again on the left side of their governor  , just as in standard order ( we thus obtain V1V2 , V1V3V2 , V1 V4 V3 V2 ) but it can also join the place to the left of the auxiliary  ( we thus obtain the marginal Zwischenstellung V3V1V2  ( 4c )  , V4 V3 V1 V2) . 
The governed verbs V2 accepting this inverse order form a closed class including the modal and perception verbs and some others  ( helfen , ? help ? , the causative/permissive lassen ? make/let ??? haben ? have ? itself also allows this right -placement  , which suffices to explain the cases of ? double flip ? as in  ( 4b ) giving V1 V2 V4 V3 )  . Note that the dependent of haben ? have ? is the bare infinitive  . This form , called the Ersatz infinitiv , is also possible or even preferable for certain verbs when the auxiliary is in  V2 position . 
(4) a . Erwird das Buch haben lesen k?nnen.
He will the book have read can.
? He will have been able to read the book . ? b . Ich glaube , dasser das Buch wird ha-benlesenk?nnen . 
I believe that he the book will have read can.
? I believe that he will have been able to read the book  . ? c . Ich glaube , dasser das Buch lesen wird k?nnen . 
I believe that he the book read will can.
? I believe that he will be able to read the book . ?In related languages like Dutch or Swiss-German , which have the same topological structure , the standard order in the right bracket is somewhat similar to the German Oberfeldum stellung  . The resulting order gives rise to cross serial dependencies  ( Evers 1975 , Bresnan et al 1982 ) Such constructions have often been studied for their supposed complexity  . With our subsequent description of the Oberfeldum stellung  , we obtain a formal structure that applies equally to Dutch  . Indeed , the two structures have identical descriptions with the exception of the relative order of dependent verbal elements in the right bracket  ( keeping in mind that we do not describe the order of the Mittelfeld  )  . 
2.9 Relatives and pied-piping
Relative clauses open an embedded domain with the main verb going into the right bracket  . The relative pronoun takes the first position of the domain  , but it can take other elements along ( pied-piping )   ( 5 )  . German differs from English and Romance languages in that even verbs can be brought along by the relative pronoun  ( 5b )  . 
(5) a . DerMann [[ vondem][Maria][gek?sstwird ]] liebtsie  . 
Theman [[ by whom][Maria][kissedis ]] loves her  . 
b . Daswarei newichtige Einna hmequel-le , [[ die zuerhalten ] [ sich ] [ die EU ] [ verp flichtethat ]]  . 
This was an important source_of_income , [[ that to conserve ] [ itself ] [ the EU ] [ com -mited has ]]  . 
? This was an important source_of_income , that the EU obliged itself to conserve . ? Before we discuss the topological structure of relative clauses  , we will discuss their syntactic representation . Following Tesni?re ( 1959 ) and numerous analyses that have since corroborated his analysis  , we assume that the relative pronoun plays a double syntactic role : ? On one hand  , it has a pronominal role in the relative clause where it fills a syntactic position  . 
? On the other hand , it plays the role of a complementizer allowing a sentence to modify a noun  . 
For this reason , we attribute to the relative pronoun a double position : as a complementizer  , it is the head of the relative clause and it therefore depends directly on the antecedent noun and it governs the main verb of the relative clause  . As a pronoun , it takes its usual position in the relative clause  . 
verpflichtetsubjinf die EU hatsich " die " eine Einah mequelle conj relinf zuer halten die dobj dobjIt is now possible to give the word order rules for relative clauses  . The complementizing part of the relative pronoun opens an embedded domain consisting of the complementizer field  ( Kathol 1995 )  , Mittelfeld , right bracket , and Nachfeld . The main verb that depends on it joins the right bracket  . The other rules are identical to those for other domains  , with the group containing the pronominal part of the relative pronoun having to jo in the other part of the pronoun in the complementizer field  . 
In a sense , the complementizer field acts like the fusion of the Vorfeld and the left bracket of the main domain : The complementizing part of the pronoun  , being the root of the dependency tree of the relative clause  , takes the left bracket ( just like the top node of the whole sentence in the main domain  )  , while the pronominal part of the relative pronoun takes the Vorfeld  . The fact that the pronoun is one word requires the fusion of the two parts and hence of the two fields into one  . Note that verbal pied-piping is very easy to explain in this analysis : It is just an embedding of a verb in the complementizer field  . Just like the Vorfeld , the complementizer field can be occupied by a nonverbal phrase or by a verb creating an embedded domain  . 
3 Formalization
A grammar in the formalism we introduce in the following will be called a Topological 
Dependency Grammar.
Fig .  5 . Dependency and phrase structure for (5b ) 3 . 1 Definition of the Grammar For a grammar , the parameters to instantiate are the vocabulary V  , the set of ( lexical ) categories C , the set of syntactic relations R , the set of box names B , the set of field names F , the initial field i , the order of permeability of the boxes , which is a partial ordering on B ( used for emancipation ) and four sets of rules : 51 . Box description rules : The rule b ? f1   f2 ? fn indicates that the boxb consists of the list of fields  f1  , f2 ,  ? , f n . 
f1 f2 ? fnb2 . Field description rules : The pair ( f , ?) in F?! , ? , + , ? indicates that the field f has to contain exactly one element  ( ! )  , at most one element (?) , at least one element ( + ) or any number of elements ( ? )  . 
3 . Correspondence rules ( between the dependency and the topological structure  ) : The rule ( r , c1 , c2 , f2 , b ) indicates that a word w2 of category c2 , that exhibits a dependency of typeron a word w1 of category c1  , can go into field f2 of a box containing w1 , if this box is separated from w1 by borders of type ? b ( in other words , the parameter b controls the emancipation ) . 
c1 bf2 c2r > ( In all our figures , boxes are represented by ovals , fields by rectangles or sections of a noval . ) 4 . Box creation rules : The rule ( c , f , b , f ?) indicates that a word of category c , placed into a field f , can create a boxb and go into the field f ? of this box  . 
Box creation rules are applied recursively until a lexical rule of type  ( c , f , b , - ) is encountered where b is a lexical box with a unique lexical field  , into which the word has to be placed . 
Phrase structure derivation starting from a dependency tree The word labeling the root node of the tree is placed into the initial field i  . Box creation rules are then activated until the word is placed lexical entry?s characteristics  , in particular its category . 
in a lexical field (-) . A correspondence rule is activated for one of the dependents of the root node  , placing it in an accessible field . Just as for the root node , box creation rules are activated until the word is assigned to a lexical field  . This procedure continues until the whole tree is used up  . Each time a box creation rule is triggered , abox is created and a description rule for this box has to be activated  . Finally , the constraints of the field description rules have to be respected  ( e . g . a field requiring at least one element cannot remain empty  )  . 
3.2 Example of a grammar
We will now instantiate our formalism for the German grammar fragment described in section  2   ( leaving a side nonverbal elements in the right bracket  ) and we will put forward the derivation of ( 1f ) with this grammar ( Fig . 5) . 
V = the German words
C =  V , AV , EV , Vf in , V inf , Vbse , Vpp ,  ? , C , 
N , X , Y(V=verb , AV = auxiliary verb , EV = verb with Ersatz infinitiv , Vfin = finite verb , V inf = infinitive with zu , Vbse = base infinitive , Vpp = past participle , C = complementizer , X = nonverbal element , Y = anything ) ; R = r ( we consider a unique syntactic relation r subsuming all others  ) 
B = md , ed , c d , vc , vb , v , x p(md=main domain , ed = embedded domain , cd = comp domain , vc = verbal cluster , vb = verbal box , v = verb , xp = nonverbal phrase ) F = i , vf ,  [ , mf ,  ] , nf , cf , h , o , u , -( i = initial field , vf = Vorfeld , ? [?= left bracket , mf = Mittelfeld , ?]? = right bracket , nf = Nachfeld , cf = compfield , h = head , o = Oberfeld , u = Unterfeld , -= lexical field , f = vf/mf/nf/cf = major field ) i is the initial field
Permeability order vb < vc < xp = ed < cd < md
Box description md->vf[mf]nfed->mf]nf cd -> cfmf ] nfvc -> oh uv b -> oh v ->- xp -> undescribed 
Field description ( i , !) ,  (- , !) , ( vf , !) , ( cf , !) , ( mf , ?) , ( nf , ?) ,  ([ , !) ,  (] , ?) , ( h , !) , ( o , ?) , ( u , ?) . 
mf]nf[vfi [
Vfinm dhat , Vfin : versprochen , Vpp : zu lesen , Vinf:das Buch , X : niemand , X : diesem Mann , X :+ ??
V ]
Vr >
YVfr > ed]h
Vvc+++o huvc
YVfr > ed+f ]
Ved++vf]nfed]h
Vvc + + oh uvc + YV fr > ed+YV fr > ed + oh uvcmf[nfohuvc[zulesen][hat ] [ diesem Mann][dasBuch][niemand][versprochen] vf[mf]nf ? io huvcmf[n fohuv cvf[mf] n fieded ? mf md ] nf vf [ 
Vfinimfmdnfvf [
Vf in io huvc ]




VV X X X
Fig . 6. Derivation de (1e)
Correspondence rules
Positioning of the first verb in the right bracket:6   ( r , Y , V ,  ] ,  - ) Positioning of a verb to the left of the preceding verb in the right bracket :  ( r , V , V ? fin , o , vc ) Positioning of a verb to the right of the preceding verb in the right  bracket:7   ( r , AV ? inf , EV , u ,  - ) bracket of a given domain is not accessible when emancipating an element from an embedded domain  . 
7 Auxiliaries with zu do not allow auxiliary flip :   ( i ) ? Ermeint das Buch zuhaben lesenk?nnen . 
He thinks the book to have read can.
Positioning of a nonverbal element in a major field:8   ( r , V , X , f , ed )
Box creation rules
Creation of the main domain in the initial field :   ( Vf in , i , md ,  [ ) Creation of an embedded domain in a major field :   ( V ? fin , f , ed ,  ] ) Creation of a verbal cluster in the right bracket or the Unterfeld :  ( V , ]/u , vc , h ) emancipate out of any type of box inferior to ? ed ? in the order of permeability  , i . e . ed , xp , v borvc , but not out of cd . Moreover , this rule puts no restrictions on the field of the governor  . This rule would have to be refined to account for NP-internal word order phenomena  . 
Creation of a verbal box in the Oberfeld : ( V , o , vb , h )
Positioning of a verb : ( V , [/ h,v,-)
Creation of a nonverbal phrase : ( X , f , xp ,  ? ) Creation of a domain for a relative clause : 9 ( " C " , f , c d , " cf " )   4 Conclusion We have shown how to obtain all acceptable linear orders for German sentences starting from a syntactic dependency tree  . To do that we have introduced a new formalism which constructs phrase structures  . These structures differ from Xbar phrase structures in at least two respects : First  , we do not use the phrase structure to represent the syntactic structure of the sentence  , but only for linearization , i . e . as an intermediate step between the syntactic and the phonological levels  . Secondly , the nature of the phrase opened by a lexical element depends not only on the syntactic position of this element  , but also on its position in the topological structure  ( e . g . the different behaviors of a verb in the right bracket vs  . in a major field ) . 
We have to investigate further in various directions : From a linguistic point of view  , the natural continuation of our study is to find out how the communicative structure  ( which completes the dependency tree ) restricts us to certain word orders and prosodies and how to incorporate this into our linearization rules  . It would also be interesting to attempt to describe other languages in this formalism  , configurational languages such as English or French  , as well as languages such as Russian where the surface order is mainly determined by the communicative structure  . However , German is an especially interesting case because surface order depends strongly on both the syntactic position  ( e . g . finite verb in V2 or
Vfinal position ) and the communicative structure ( e . g . content of the Vorfeld ) . 
From a computational point of view , we are interested in the complexity of our formalism  . 
It is possible to obtain a polynomial parser provided that we limit the number of nodes simultaneously involved in nonprojective configurations  ( see Kahane et al 1998 for similar techniques )  . Such limitations seem reasonable for Germanic languages  ( e . g . verb tizing part of the relative pronoun is not a real word  , and hence it does not actually occupy the complementizer field  , and must consequently accommodate another element . 
clusters with more than four verbs are unusual).

Bech Gunnar ,  1955 , Studien?ber das deutsche Verbum inf initum , 2nd edition 1983 , Linguisti-sche Arbeiten 139 , Niemeyer , T?bingen . 
Bresnan Joan , Ronald M . Kaplan , Stanley Peters , Annie Zaenen ,  1982 , ? Cross-serial Dependencies in Dutch ? , Linguistic Inquiry 13(4):613-635 . 
Br?ker Norbert ,  1998 , ? Separating Surface Order and Syntactic Relations in a Dependency Grammars ?  , 
COLING-ACL?98, 174-180.
Drach , Erich , Grundge dank ender deutschen Satzleh-re , Diesterweg , Frankfurt ,  1937 . 
Duchier Denys , Ralph Debusmann ,  2001 , ? Topological Dependency Trees : A Constraint -Based Account of Linear Precedence ?  , ACL 2001 . 
Evers Arnoldus ,  1975 , The transformational cycle in Dutch and German . PhD thesis , University of

Kahane Sylvain , Alexis Nasr , Owen Rambow ,  1998 , ? Pseudo-Projectivity : a Polynomially Parsable Non-Projective Dependency Grammar ?  , COLING-
ACL?98, Montreal , 646-52.
Kathol Andreas ,  1995 , Linearization-based German Syntax , PhD thesis , Ohio State University . 
Lenerz J?rgen ,  1977 , ZurAbfolge nominaler Satz-gliederim Deutschen , TBL Verlag G?nter Narr , 

Hudson Richard , 2000, ? Discontinuity ?, in S . Kahane ( ed . ), Dependency Grammars , T . A . L . , 41(1):15-56, Herm?s , Paris . 
Mel'cuk Igor ,  1988 , Dependency Syntax : Theory and
Practice , SUNY Press , New York.
Mel'cuk Igor , Nicolas Pertsov ,  1987 , Surface syntax of English?A Formal Model within the Mean-ing-Text Framework  , Benjamins , Amsterdam . 
M?ller Stefan ,  1999 , Deutsche Syntax deklarativ : Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar f?rd as Deutsche  , Linguistische Arbeiten394; Niemeyer :

Reape M . , 1994 , ? Domain Union and Word Order Variation in German  ?  , in J . Nerbonne et al(eds . ) , German in Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar , CSLI Lecture Notes 46 , Stanford . 
Tesni?re Lucien ,  1959 , El?ments de syntaxe structu-rale , Kliencksieck , Paris . 
Uszkoreit Hans ,  1987 , Word Order and Constituent Structure in German , CSLI Lecture Notes 8 , 
Stanford , CA.
