METER : ME asuring TExtReuse
Paul Clough and Robert Gaizauskas and Scott S . L . Piao and Yorick Wilks
Department of Computer Science
University of She?eld
Regent Court , 211 Portobello Street,
She?eld , England , S14 DP


In this paper we present results from the METER ( ME asuring TExtReuse ) project whose aim is to explore issues pertaining to text reuse and derivation  , especially in the context of newspapers using newswire sources  . Although the reuse of text by journalists has been studied in linguistics  , we are not aware of any investigation using existing computational methods for this particular task  . We investigate the classication of newspaper articles according to their degree of dependence upon  , or derivation from , a newswire source using a simple 3-level scheme designed by journalists . Three approaches to measuring text similarity are considered : ngram overlap  , Greedy String Tiling , and sentence alignment . Measured against a manually annotated corpus of source and derived news text  , we show that a combined classier with features automatically selected performs best overall for the ternary classica-tion achieving an average F score of  0  . 664 across all three categories . 
1 Introduction
A topic of considerable theoretical and practical interest is that of text reuse : the reuse of existing written sources in the creation of a new text  . Of course , reusing language is a sold as the retelling of stories  , but current technologies for creating , copying and disseminating electronic text , make it easier than ever before to take some or all of any number of existing text sources and reuse them verb a timor with varying degrees of mod-ication  . 
One form of unacceptable text reuse , plagiarism , has received considerable attention and software for automatic plagiarism detection is now available  ( see , e . g . ( Clough , 2000) for a recent review ) . But in this paper we present a benign and acceptable form of text reuse that is encountered virtually everyday : the reuse of news agency text  ( called copy ) in the production of daily newspapers . The question is not just whether agency copy has been reused  , but to what extent and subject to what transformations  . Using existing approaches from computational text analysis  , we investigate their ability to classify newspapers articles into categories indicating their dependency on agency copy  . 
2 Journalistic reuse of a newswire
The process of gathering , editing and publishing newspaper stories is a complex and specialised task often operating within specic publishing constraints such as :  1  ) short deadlines ; 2) prescriptive writing practice ( see , e . g . Evans (1972)) ; 3) limits of physical size ; 4) readability and audience comprehension , e . g . at a bloid's vocabulary limitations ; 5) journalistic bias , e . g . 
political and 6) a newspaper's house style . Often news workers , such as the reporter and editor , will rely upon news agency copy as the basis of a news story or to verify facts and assess the Computational Linguistics  ( ACL )  , Philadelphia , July 2002 , pp .  152-159 . 
Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for importance of a story in the context of all those appearing on the newswire  . Because of the nature of journalistic text reuse , dierences will arise between reused news agency copy and the original text  . For example consider the following : Original ( news agency ) A drink-driver who ran into the Queen Mother'so ? cial Daim-ler was ned  $700 and banned from driving for two years . 
Rewrite ( tabloid ) ADRUNK driver who ploughed into the Queen Mother ' slimowasned  $700 and banned for two years yesterday . 
This simple example illustrates the types of rewrite that can occur even in a very short sentence  . The rewrite makes use of slang and exaggeration to capture its readers ' attention  ( e . g . DRUNK , limo , ploughed) . Deletion ( e . g . 
from driving ) has also been used and the addition of yesterday indicates when the event occurred  . Many of the transformations we observed between moving from news agency copy to the newspaper version have also been reported by the summarisation community  ( see , e . g . , McKeown and Jing (1999)) . 
Given the value of the information news agencies supply  , the ease with which text can be reused and commercial pressures  , it would be benecial to be able to identify those news stories appearing in the newspapers that have relied upon agency copy in their production  . Potential uses include : 1 ) monitoring take-up of agency copy ; 2) identifying the most reused stories ;  3 ) determining customer dependency upon agency copy and  4  ) new methods for charging customers based upon the amount of copy reused  . Given the large volume of news agency copy output each day  , it would be infeasible to identify and quantify reuse manually  ; therefore an automatic method is required . 
3 A conceptual framework
To begin to get a handle on measuring text reuse , we have developed a document-level clas-sication scheme  , indicating the level at which a newspaper story as a whole is derived from a gency copy  , and a lexical level classication scheme , indicating the level at which individual word sequences within a newspaper story are derived from a gency copy  . This framework rests upon the intuitions of trained journalists to judge text reuse  , and not on an explicit lex-ical/syntactic de nition of reuse  ( which would presuppose what we are setting out to discover  )  . 
At the document level , newspaper stories are assigned to one of three possible categories coarsely reecting the amount of text reused from the news agency and the dependency of the newspaper story upon news agency copy for the provision of \ facts "  . The categories indicate whether a trained journalist can identify text rewritten from the news agency in a candidate derived newspaper article  . They are : 1 ) wholly-derived ( WD ) : all text in the newspaper article is rewritten only from news agency copy  ;  2 ) partially-derived ( PD ) : some text is derived from the news agency , but other sources have also been used ; and 3 ) nonderived ( ND ) : news agency has not been used as the source of the article  ; although words may still cooccur between the newspaper article and news agency copy on the same topic  , the journalistis condent the news agency has not been used  . 
At the lexical or word sequence level , individual words and phrases within a newspaper story are classied as to whether they are used to express the same information as words in news agency copy  ( i . e . paraphrases ) and or used to express information not found in agency copy  . 
Once again , three categories are used , based on the judgement of a trained journalist : 1  ) verbatim : text appearing word-for-word to express the same information  ;  2 ) rewrite : text paraphrased to create a dierent surface appearance  , but express the same information and 3 ) new : tr xt used to express information not appearing in agency copy  ( can include verbatim/rewritten text , but being used in a dierent context ) . 
3.1 The METER corpus
Based on this conceptual framework , we have constructed a small annotated corpus of news texts using the UK Press Association  ( PA ) as the news agency source and nine British daily newspapers date reusers  . The METER corpus ( Gaizauskas et al , 2001) is a collection of 1716 texts ( over 500 , 000 words ) carefully selected from a 12 month period from the areas of law and court reporting  ( 769 stories ) and show business ( 175 stories )  .   772 of these texts are PA copy and 944 from the nine newspapers . These texts cover 265 dierent stories from July 1999 to June 2000 and all newspaper stories have been manually classi-ed at the document-level  . They include 300 wholly-derived , 438 partially-derived and 206 nonderived ( i . e . 77% are thought to have used PA in some way ) . In addition ,   355 have been classied according to the lexical level scheme  . 
4 Approaches to measuring text similarity Many problems in computational text analysis involve the measurement of similarity  . For example , the retrieval of documents to full a user information need  , clustering documents according to some criterion , multidocument summarisation , aligning sentences from one language with those in another  , detecting exact and near duplicates of documents , plagiarism detection , routing documents according to their style and identifying authorship attribution  . Methods typically vary depending upon the matching method  , e . g . exact or partial , the degree to which natural language processing techniques are used and the type of problem  , e . g . searching , clustering , aligning etc . We have not had time to investigate all of these techniques  , nor is the respace here to review them . We have concentrated on just three : ngram overlap measures  , Greedy String Tiling , and sentence alignment . The rst was investigated because it offers perhaps the simplest approach to the problem  . The second was investigated because it has been successfully used in plagiarism detection  , a problem which at least supercially is quite close Sun  , The Daily Mail , Daily Star , Daily Mirror ) and four quality papers ( e . g . Daily Telegraph , The Guardian , The
Independent and The Times).
to the text reuse issues we are investigating . Finally , alignment ( treating the derived text as a \ translation " of the rst  ) seemed an intriguing idea , and contrasts , certainly with the ngram approach , by focusing more on local , as opposed to global measures of similarity . 
4.1 Ngram Overlap
An initial , straightforward approach to assessing the reuse between two texts is to measure the number of shared word ngrams  . This method underlies many of the approaches used in copy detection including the approach taken by Lyon et al  ( 2001 )  . 
They measure similarity using the set-theoretic measures of containment and resemblance of shared trigrams to separate texts written independently and those with su?cient similarity to indicate some form of copying  . 
We treat each document as a set of overlapping n word sequences  ( initially considering only n word types ) and compute a similarity score from this . Given two sets of ngrams , we use the set-theoretic containment score to measure similarity between the documents for ngrams of length  1 to 10 words . For a source text A and a possibly derived text B represented by sets of ngrams Sn  ( A ) and Sn ( B ) respectively , the proportion of ngrams in B also in A , the ngram containment Cn(A ; B ) , is given by:
Cn(A ; B ) = jSn ( A ) \ Sn ( B ) jjSn ( B ) j ( 1 ) Informally containment measures the number of matches between the elements of ngram sets 
Sn(A ) and Sn(B ) , scaled by the size of Sn(B ) . 
In other words we measure the proportion of unique ngrams in B that are found in A  . The score ranges from 0 to 1 , indicating none to all newspaper copy shared with PA respectively  . 
We also compare texts by counting only those ngrams with low frequency  , in particular those occurring once . For 1grams , this is the same as comparing the hapax legomena which has been shown to discriminate plagiarised texts from those written independently even when lexical overlap between the texts is already high  ( e . g . 
70%) ( Finlay , 1999) . Unlike Finlay's work , wend that repetition in PA copyduces the number of shared hapax legomena thereby inhibiting classication of derived and nonderived texts  . Therefore we compute the containment of hapax legomena  ( hapax containment ) by comparing words occurring once in the newspaper  , i . e . those 1grams in Scuronce with all 1grams in PA copy , S This containment score represents the number of newspaper hapax legomena also appearing at least once in PA copy  . 
4.2 Greedy String-Tiling
Greedy String-Tiling ( GST ) is a substring matching algorithm which computes the degree of similarity between two strings  , for example software code , freetext or biological subsequences ( Wise ,  1996) . Compared with previous algorithms for computing string similarity  , such as the Longest Common Subsequence or Levenshtein distance  , GST is able to deal with transposition of tokens ( in earlier approaches transposition is seen as a number of single inser-tions/deletions rather than a single block move  )  . 
The GST algorithm performs a 1:1 matching of tokens between two strings so that as much of one token stream is covered with maximal length substrings from the other  ( called tiles )  . In our problem , we consider how much newspaper text can be maximally covered by words from PA copy  . A minimum match length ( MML ) can be used to avoid spurious matches ( e . g . of 1 or 2 tokens ) and the resulting similarity between the strings can be expressed as a quantitative similarity match or a qualitative list of common substrings  . Figure 1 shows the result of GST for the example in Section  2  . 
Figure 1: Example GST results ( MML = 3 ) as previous versions of the story Given PA copy A  , a newspaper text B and a set of maximal matches , tiles , of a given length between A and B , the similarity , gstsim(A , B ) , is expressed as : gstsim(A;B ) =
P i 2 tiles length i j B j (2) 4 . 3 Sentence alignment In the past decade , various alignment algorithms have been suggested for aligning multilingual parallel corpora  ( Wu ,  2000) . These algorithms have been used to map translation equivalents across dierent languages  . In this specic case , we investigate whether alignment can map derived texts  ( or parts of them ) to their source texts . PA copy may be subject to various changes during text reuse  , e . g . a single sentence may derive from parts of several source sentences  . Therefore , strong correlations of sentence length between the derived and source sentences cannot be guaranteed  . As a result , sentence-length based statistical alignment algorithms  ( Brown et al , 1991; Gale and Church , 1993) are not appropriate for this case . On the other hand , cognate-based algorithms ( Simard et al , 1992; Melamed ,  1999 ) are more e?cient for coping with change of text format  . Therefore , a cognate-based approach is adopted for the METER task  . He recognates are dened as pairs of terms that are identical  , share the same stems , or are substitutable in the given context . 
The algorithm consists of two principal components : a comparison strategy and a scoring function  . In brief , the comparison works as follows ( more details may be found in Piao ( 2001 ) ) . 
For each sentence in the candidate derived text DT the sentences in the candidate source text ST are compared in order tond the best match  . 
ADT sentence is allowed to match up to three possibly nonconsecutive ST sentences  . The candidate pair with the highest score ( see below ) above a threshold is accepted as a true alignment  . If no such candidate is found , the DT sentence is assumed to be independent of the ST  . Based on individual DT sentence alignments , the overall possibility of derivation for the DT is estimated with a score ranging between  0 and 1  . This score reects the proportion of aligned sentences in the newspaper text  . 
Note that not only may multiple sentences in the ST be aligned with a single sentence in the DT  , but also multiple sentences in the DT may be aligned with one sentence in the ST  . 
Given a candidate derived sentence DS and a proposed  ( set of ) source sentence ( s ) SS , the scoring function works as follows . Three basic measures are computed for each pair of candidate DS and SS : SNG is the sum of lengths of the maximum length nonoverlapping shared ngrams with n   2  ; SWD is the number of matched words sharing stems not in an ngram guring in SNG  ; and SUB is the number of substitutable terms ( mainly synonyms ) notg-uring in SNG or SWD . Let L the candidate DS and LSS . Then , three scores PD , PS ( Dice score ) and
PVS are calculated as follows:
PSD =
SWD+SNG+SUB
L2(SWD+SNG+SUB )


SWD+SNG+SUB
These three scores reect dierent aspects of relations between the candidate DS and SS :  1  . PSD : The proportion of the DS which is shared material  . 
2 . PS : The proportion of shared terms in DS and SS . This measure prefers SS's which not only contain many terms in the DS  , but also do not contain many additional terms . 
3 . PSNG : The proportion of matching ngrams amongst the shared terms  . This measure captures the intuition that sentences sharing not only words  , but word sequences are more likely to be related . 
These three scores are weighted and combined together to provide an alignment metric WS  ( weighted score )  , which is calculated as follows:
WS = ? where ? ables ? i ( i = 1 ;  2 ;  3 ) have been determined empirically and are currently set to : ?  0:05  ;  ?  5 Reuse Classiers To evaluate the previous approaches for measuring text reuse at the document-level  , we cast the problem into one of a supervised learning task  . 
5.1 Experimental Setup
We used similarity scores as attributes for a machine learning algorithm and used the Weka  3  . 2 software ( Witten and Frank , 2000) . Because of the small number of examples , we used tenfold crossvalidation repeated 10 times ( i . e . 10 runs ) and combined this with stratication to ensure approximately the same proportion of samples from each class were used in each fold of the crossvalidation  . All 769 newspaper texts from the courts domain were used for evaluation and randomly permuted to generate  10 sets . For each newspaper text , we compared PA source texts from the same story to create results in the form : newspaper  ; class ; score . These results we reordered according to each set to create the same  10 datasets for each approach thereby enabling comparison  . 
Using this data werst trained vesingle-feature Naive Bayes classiers to do the ternary class i cation task  . The feature in each case was a variant of one of the three similarity measures described in Section  4  , computed between the two texts in the training set  . The target classi-cation value was the reuse classication category from the corpus  . A Naive Bayes classier was used because of its success in previous classi-cation tasks  , however we are aware of its naive assumptions that attributes are assumed independent and data to be normally distributed  . 
We evaluated results using the F ( harmonic mean of precision and recall given equal weighting  )  . For each run , we calculated the average F overall average F puted from the  10 runs for each class ( a single accuracy measure would su?ce but the Weka package outputs F the standard deviation of Fputed for each class and F approaches were tested for statistical signi-cance using  1-way analysis of variance at a 99% condence-level . Statistical dierences between results were identied using Bonferroni analysis After examining the results of these single feature classiers  , we also trained a \ combined " classier using a correlation-based lter approach  ( Hall and Smith ,  1999 ) to select the combination of features giving the highest classica-tion score  ( correlation-based ltering evaluates all possible combinations of features  )  . Feature selection was carried for each fold during crossvalidation and features used in all  10 folds were chosen as candidates . Those which occurred in at least 5 of the 10 runs formed the nal selection . 
We also tried splitting the training data into various binary partitions  ( e . g . WD/PD vs . ND ) and training binary classiers , using feature selection , to see how well binary classication could be performed  . Eskin and Bogosian ( 1998 ) have observed that using cascaded binary clas-si ers  , each of which splits the data well , may work better on nary classication problems than a single nway classier  . We then computed how well such a cascaded class i er should perform using the best binary classier results  . 
5.2 Results
Table 1 shows the results of the single ternary class i ers  . The baseline F upon the prior probability of a document falling into one of the classes  . The gures in parenthesis are the standard deviations for the Facross the ten evaluation runs  . Then alrow shows the results for combining features selected using the correlation-based lter  . 
Table 2 shows the result of training binary classiers using feature selection to select the most discriminating features for various binary splits of the training data  . 
For both ternary and binary classiers feature selection produced better results than using all 
Approach Category Avg Fmeasure
Baseline WD 0.340 (0.000)
PD 0.444(0.000)
ND 0 . 216 (0 . 000) total 0 . 333 (0 . 000) 3gram WD 0 . 631 (0 . 004) containment PD 0 . 624 (0 . 004)
ND 0.549 (0.005) total 0.601 (0.003)
GSTSimWD 0.669 (0.004)
MML=3 PD 0.633 (0.003)
ND 0.556 (0.004) total 0.620 (0.002)
GSTSimWD 0.681 (0.003)
MML=1PD 0.634 (0.003)
ND 0 . 559 (0 . 008) total 0 . 625 (0 . 004) 1gram WD 0 . 718 (0 . 003) containment PD 0 . 643 (0 . 003)
ND 0.551 (0.006) total 0.638 (0.003)
Alignment WD 0.774 (0.003)
PD 0.624 (0.005)
ND 0 . 537 (0 . 007) total 0 . 645 (0 . 004) hapax WD 0 . 736 (0 . 003) containment PD 0 . 654 (0 . 003)
ND 0 . 549 (0 . 010) total 0 . 646 (0 . 004) hapax cont . WD 0 . 756 (0 . 002) 1gram cont . PD 0 . 599 (0 . 006) alignment ND 0 . 629 (0 . 008) (\ combined ") total 0 . 664 (0 . 004 ) Table 1: A summary of classication results possible features  , with the one exception of the binary class i cation between PD and ND  . 
5.3 Discussion
From Table 1 , wend that all classier results are signicantly higher than the baseline  ( at p < 0:01 ) and all dierences are signicant except between hapax containment and alignment  . 
The highest Fmeasure for the 3-class problem is 0 . 664 for the\combined " classier , which is signicantly greater than 0 . 651 obtained without . We notice that highest WD classication is with alignment at  0  . 774, highest PD classi-cation is 0 . 6 54 with hapax containment and highest ND class i cation is  0  . 629 with combined features . Using hapax containment gives higher results than  1gram containment alone and in fact provides results as good as or better than the more complex sentence alignment and GST approaches  . 
Previous research by ( Lyon et al , 2001) and ( Wise ,  1996 ) had shown derived texts could be distinguished using trigram overlap and tiling with a match length of  3 or more , respectively . 
Attributes Category AvgF based ND 0 . 909 (0 . 011) lter total 0 . 926 (0 . 010) alignment PD/ND 0 . 870 (0 . 003)
WD 0 . 770 (0 . 003) total 0 . 820 (0 . 002) alignment WD 0 . 778 (0 . 003)
PD 0 . 812 (0 . 002) total 0 . 789 (0 . 002) hapax cont . WD/PD 0 . 882 (0 . 002) alignment ND 0 . 649 (0 . 007) 1gram cont . total 0 . 763 (0 . 002) 1gramPD 0 . 802 (0 . 002)
GST mml 3ND 0.638 (0.007)
GSTmml 1 total 0.720 (0.004) alignment
GST mml1 WD/ND 0 . 672 (0 . 002) alignment PD 0 . 662 (0 . 003) total 0 . 668 (0 . 003 ) Table 2: Binary Classiers with feature selection However , our results run counter to this because the highest classication scores are obtained with  1grams and an MML of 1  , i . e . as nor MML length increases , the Fcrease . We believe this results from two factors which are characteristic of reuse in journalism  . 
First , since even ND texts are thematically similar ( same events being described ) there is high likelihood of coincidental overlap of ngrams of length  3 or more ( e . g . quoted speech ) . Secondly , when journalists rewrite it is rare for them not to vary the source  . 
For the intended application helping the PA to monitor text reuse the cost of dierent mis -classications is not equal  . If the classier makes a mistake , it is better that WD and ND texts are mis-class i ed as PD  , and PD as WD . Given the dierence in distribution of documents across classes where PD contains the most documents  , the classier will be biased towards this class anyway as required  . Table 3 shows the confusion matrix for the combined ternary classier  . 
WDP DND
WD 203554
PD 7919 270
ND 353 109
Table 3: Confusion matrix for combined ternary classier
Although the overall F (0 . 664) , mis-classication of both WD as ND and ND as WD is also very low  , as most mis-classications are as PD . Note the high mis-classication of PD as both WD and ND  , re-ecting the di ? culty of separating this class . 
From Table 2 , wend alignment is a selected feature for each binary partition of the data  . 
The highest binary classication is achieved between the WD and ND classes using alignment only  , and the highest three scores show WD is the easiest class to separate from the others  . 
The PD class is the hardest to isolate , reect-ing the mis-classications seen in Table 3 . 
To predict how well a cascaded binary classi-er will perform we can reason as follows  . From the preceding discussion we see that WD can be separated most accurately  ; hence we choose WD versus PD/ND as therst binary classier  . 
This forces the second classier to be PD versus ND  . From the results in Table 2 and the following equation to compute the F twostage binary classier 
WD+(PD = ND )(
PD+ND sication of 0 . 703 , which is signicantly higher than the best single stage ternary classier  . 
6 Conclusions
In this paper we have investigated text reuse in the context of the reuse of news agency copy  , an area of theoretical and practical interest . We present a conceptual framework in which we measure reuse and based on which the METER corpus has been constructed  . We have presented the results of using similarity scores  , computed using ngram containment , Greedy String Tiling and an alignment algorithm , as attributes for a supervised learning algorithm faced with the task of learning how to classify newspaper stories as to whether they are wholly  , partially or nonderived from a news agency source  . We show that the best single feature ternary clas -sier uses either alignment or simple hapax containment measures and that a cascaded binary classier using a combination of features can outperform this  . 
The results are lower than one might like , and reect the problems of measuring journalistic reuse  , stemming from complex editing transformations and the high amount of verbatim text overlapping as a result of thematic similarity and \ expected " similarity due to  , e . g . , di-rect/indirect quotes . Given the relative closeness of results obtained by all approaches we have considered  , we speculate that any comparison method based upon lexical similarity will probably not improve classication results by much  . Perhaps improved performance at this task may possible by using more advanced natural language processing techniques  , e . g . better modeling of the lexical variation and syntactic transformation that goes on in journalistic reuse  . 
Nevertheless the results we have obtained are strong enough in some cases  ( e . g . wholly derived texts can be identied with > 80% accuracy ) to begin to be exploited . 
In summary measuring text reuse is an exciting new area that will have a number of applications  , in particular , but not limited to , monitoring and controlling the copy produced by a newswire  . 
7 Future work
We are adapting the GST algorithm to deal with simple rewrites  ( e . g . synonym substitution ) and to observe the eects of rewriting upon nding longest common substrings  . We are also experimenting using the more detailed METER corpus lexical level annotations to investigate how well the GST and ngrams approaches can identify reuse at this level  . 
A prototype browser-based demo of both the GST algorithm and alignment program  , allowing users to test arbitrary text pairs for similarity  , is now available enhanced . 

The authors would like to acknowledge the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council for funding the METER project  ( GR/M 340 41 )  . Thanks also to Mark Hepple for helpful comments on earlier drafts  . 

See http://www.dcs.shef.ac.uk/nlp/meter.

P . F . Brown , J . C . Lai , and R . L . Mercer .  1991 . Aligning sentences in parallel corpora . In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Assoc . for Computational Linguistics , pages 169176 , Berkeley , CA , USA . 
PC lough .  2000 . Plagiarism in natural and programming languages : An overview of current tools and technologies  . Technical Report CS-00-05, Dept . of Computer
Science , University of She?eld , UK.
E . Eskin and M . Bogosian .  1998 . Classifying text documents using modular categories and linguisticallymotivated indicators  . In AAAI98 Workshop on Learning for Text Classication . 
H . Evans .  1972 . Essential English for Journalists , Editors and Writers . Pimlico , London . 
S . Finlay .  1999 . Copy catch . Master's thesis , Dept . of
English . University of Birmingham.
R . Gaizauskas , J . Foster , Y . Wilks , J . Arundel , P . Clough , and S . Piao .  2001 . The meter corpus : A corpus for analysing journalistic text reuse  . In Proceedings of the Corpus Linguistics 2001 Conference , pages 214223 . 
W . A . Gale and K . W . Church .  1993 . A program for aligning sentences in bilingual corpus  . Computational Linguistics , 19:75102 . 
M . A . Hall and L . A . Smith .  1999 . Feature selection for machine learning : Comparing a correlation-based l-ter approach to the wrapper  . In Proceedings of the Florida Articial Intelligence Symposium  ( FLAIRS-99 )  , pages 235239 . 
C . Lyon , J . Malcolm , and B . Dickerson .  2001 . Detecting short passages of similar text in large document collections  . In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing  ( EMNLP 2001 )  , pages 118125 . 
K . McKeown and H . Jing .  1999 . The decomposition of human-written summary sentences  . In SIGIR 1999, pages 129136 . 
I . Dan Melamed .  1999 . Bitext maps and alignment via pattern recognition  . Computational Linguistics , pages 107130 . 
Scott S . L . Piao .  2001 . Detecting and measuring text reuse via aligning texts  . Research Memorandum CS-01-15, Dept . of Computer Science , University of

M . Simard , G . Foster , and P . Isabelle .  1992 . Using cognates to align sentences in bilingual corpora  . In Proceedings of the 4th Int . Conf . on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation  , pages 6781 , Montreal , Canada . 
M . Wise .  1996 .   Yap3: Improved detection of similarities in computer programs and other texts  . In Proceedings of SIGCSE'96 , pages 130134 , Philadelphia , USA . 
I . H . Witten and E . Frank .  2000 . Data mining-practical machine learning tools and techniques with Java implementations  . Morgan Kaufmann . 
D . Wu .  2000 . Alignment . In R . Dale and H . Moisl and H . Somers ( eds . ) , A Handbook of Natural Language Processing , pages 415458 . New York : Marcel Dekker . 
