Total Recall : A Bilingual Concordance for Computer Assisted Translation and 
Language Learning

Jian-Cheng Wu , Kevin C . Yeh
Department of Computer Science
National Tsing Hua University
101, Kuangfu Road , Hsinchu,
300, Taiwan , ROC

Thomas C . Chuang
Department of Computer Science
Van Nung Institute of Technology
No . 1 Van-Nung Road
Chung-Li Tao-Yuan , Taiwan , ROC

Wen-Chi Shei , Jason S . Chang
Department of Computer Science
National Tsing Hua University
101, Kuangfu Road , Hsinchu , 300,
Taiwan , ROC


This paper describes a Web-based Eng-
lish-Chinese concordance system , Total-
Recall , developed to promote translation
reuse and encourage authentic and idio-
matic use in second language writing . We
exploited and structured existing high-
quality translations from the bilingual Si-
nor a ma Magazine to build the concor-
dance of authentic text and translation.
Novel approaches were taken to provide
high precision bilingual alignment on the
sentence , phrase and word levels.A
browser-based user interface ( UI ) is also
developed for ease of access over the
Internet . Users can search for word,
phrase or expression in English or Chi-
nese . The Web-based user interface facilitates the recording of the user actions to provide data for further research  . 
1 Introduction
A concordance tool is particularly useful for studying a piece of literature when thinking in terms of a particular word  , phrase or theme . It will show exactly how often and where a word occurs  , so can be helpful in building up some idea of how different themes recur within an article or a collection of articles  . Concordances have been indispensable for lexicographers and increasingly considered useful for language instructor and learners  . A bilingual concordance tool is like a monolingual concordance  , except that each sentence is followed by its translation counterpart in a second language  . It could be extremely useful for bilingual lexicographers  , human translators and second language learners . Pierre Isabelle , in 1993 , pointed out : ? existing translations contain more solutions to more translation problems than any other existing resource  . ? It is particularly useful and convenient when the resource of existing translations is made available on the Internet  . A webbased bilingual system has proved to be very useful and popular  . 
For example , the English-French concordance system , TransSearch ( Macklovitch et al 2000) . Provides a familiar interface for the users who only need to type in the expression in question  , a list of citations will come up and it is easy to scroll down until one finds one that is useful  . Total Recall comes with an additional feature making the solution more easily recognized  . The user not only get all the citations related to the expression in question  , but also gets to see the translation counterpart highlighted  . 

Total Recall extends the translation memory technology and provide an interactive tool intended for translators and nonnative speakers trying to find ideas to properly express themselves  . To tal-Recall empower the user by all owher to take the initiative in submitting queries for searching authentic  , contemporary use of English . These queries may be single words , phrases , expressions or even full sentence , the system will search a substantial and relevant corpus and return bilingual citations that are helpful to human translators and second language learners  . 
2 Aligning the corpus
Central to Total Recall is a bilingual corpus and a set of programs that provide the bilingual analyses to yield a translation memory database out of the bilingual corpus  . Currently , we are working with a collection of ChineseEnglish articles from the Sinorama magazine  . A large bilingual collection of Studio Class room English lessons will be provided in the near future  . That would allow us to offer bilingual texts in both translation directions and with different levels of difficulty  . Currently , the articles from Sinaroma seems to be quite usefully by its own  , covering a wide range of topics , reflecting the personalities , places , and events in
Taiwan for the past three decade.

The concordance database is composed of bilingual sentence pairs  , which are mutual translation . In addition , there are also tables to record additional information  , including the source of each sentence pairs , metadata , and the information on phrase and word level alignment  . With that additional information , Total Recall provides various functions , including 1 . viewing of the full text of the source with a simple click  .  2 . highlighted translation counterpart of the query word or phrase  . 
3 . ranking that is pedagogically useful for translation and language learning  . 

We are currently running an experimental prototype with Sinorama articles  , dated mainly from 1995 to 2002 . There are approximately 50 , 0 00 bilingual sentences and over 2 million words in total . 
We also plan to continuously updating the database with newer information from Sinorama magazine so that the concordance is kept current and relevant to the  . To make these up to date and relevant . 

The bilingual texts that go into Total Recall must be rearranged and structured  . We describe the main steps below : 2 . 1 Sentence Alignment After parsing each article from files and put them into the database  , we need to segment articles into sentences and align them into pairs of mutual translation  . While the length-based approach ( Church and Gale 1991 ) to sentence alignment produces surprisingly good results for the close language pair of French and English at success rates well over  96%  , it does not fair as well for distant language pairs such as English and Chinese  . 
Work on sentence alignment of English and Chinese texts  ( Wu 1994 )  , indicates that the lengths of English and Chinese texts are not as highly correlated as in French -English task  , leading to lower success rate ( 85-94% ) for length-based aligners . 

Table 1 The result of Chinese collocation candidates extracted  . The shaded collocation pairs are selected based on competition of whole phrase loglikelihood ratio and word-based translation probability  . Unshaded items 7 and 8 are not selected because of conflict with previously chosen bilingual collocations  , items 2 and 3 . 

Simard , Foster , and Isabelle ( 1992 ) pointed out cognates in two close languages such as English and French can be used to measure the likelihood of mutual translation  . However , for the EnglishChinese pair , there are no orthographic , phonetic or semantic cognates readily recognizable by the computer  . Therefore , the cognate-based approach is not applicable to the ChineseEnglish tasks  . 

At first , we used the length-based method for sentence alignment  . The average precision of aligned sentence pairs is about  95%  . We are now switching to a new alignment method based on punctuation statistics  . Although the average ratio of the punctuation counts in a text is low  ( less than 15% )  , punctuations provide valid additional evidence , helping to achieve high degree of alignment precision  . It turns out that punctuations are telling evidences for sentence alignment  , if we do more than hard matching of punctuations and take into consideration of intrinsic sequencing of punctuation in ordered comparison  . Experiment results show that the punctuation -based approach outperforms the length-based approach with precision rates approaching  98%  . 
2.2 Phrase and Word Alignment
After sentences and their translation counterparts are identified  , we proceeded to carry out finer-grained alignment on the phrase and word levels  . 
We employ part of speech patterns and statistical Figure  1  . The results of searching for ? hard +? with default ranking  . 
analyses to extract bilingual phrases/collocations from a parallel corpus  . The preferred syntactic patterns are obtained from idioms and collocations in the machine readable EnglishChinese version of Longman Dictionary of Contemporary of English  . 

Phrases matching the patterns are extract from aligned sentences in a parallel corpus  . Those phrases are subsequently matched up via crosslinguistic statistical association  . Statistical association between the whole phrase as well as words in phrases are used jointly to link a collocation and its counterpart collocation in the other language  . See Table 1 for an example of extracting bilingual collocations  . The word and phrase level information is kept in relational database for use in processing queries  , hightlighting translation counterparts , and ranking citations . Sections 3 and 4 will give more details about that . 
3 The Queries
The goal of the Total Recall System is to allow a user to look for instances of specific words or expressions  . For this purpose , the system opens up two text boxes for the user to enter queries in any one of the languages involved or both  . We offer some special expressions for users to specify the following queries : ? Exact single word query-W  . For instance , enter ? work ? to find citations that contain ? work  , ? but not ? worked ? , ? working ? , ? works . ? ? Exact single lemma query ? W + . For instance , enter ? work + ? to find citations that contain ? work ?  , ? worked ? , ? working ? , ? works . ? ? Exact string query . For instance , enter ? in the work ? to find citations that contain the three words  , ? in , ? ? the , ? ? work ? in a row , but not citations that contain the three words in any other way  . 
? Conjunctive and disjunctive query . For instance , enter ? give + advice +? to find citations that contain ? give ? and ? advice  . ? It is also possible to specify the distance between ? give ? and ? advice  , ? so they are from a VO construction . Similarly , enter ? hard difficult tough ? to find citations that involve difficulty to do  , understand or bear something , using any of the three words . 
Once a query is submitted , Total Recall displays the results on Web pages . Each result appears as a pair of segments , usually one sentence each in English and Chinese , inside-by-side format . The words matching the query are highlighted , and a ? context ? hypertext link is included in each row  . If this link is selected , a new page appears displaying the original document of the pair  . 
If the user so wishes , she can scroll through the following or preceding pages of context in the original document  . 
4 Ranking
It is wellknown that the typical user usual has no patient to go beyond the first or second pages returned by a search engine  . Therefore , ranking and putting the most useful information in the first one or two is of paramount importance for search engines  . This is also true for a concordance . 

Experiments with a focus group indicate that the following ranking strategies are important : ? Citations with a translation counterpart should be ranked first  . 
? Citations with a frequent translation counterpart appear before ones with less frequent translation ? Citations with same translation counterpart should be shown in clusters by default  . The cluster can be called out entirely on demand . 
? Ranking by nonlinguistic features should also be provided  , including date , sentence length , query position in citations , etc . 

With various ranking options available , the users can choose one that is most convenient and productive for the work at hand  . 
5 Conclusion
In this paper , we describe a bilingual concordance designed as a computer assisted translation and language learning tool  . Currently , Total Recall uses Sinorama Magazine corpus as the translation memory and will be continuously updated as new issues of the magazine becomes available  . We have already put a betaversion online and experimented with a focus group of second language learners  . Novel features of Total Recall include highlighting of query and corresponding translations  , clustering and ranking of search results according translation and frequency  . 

Total Recall enable the nonnative speaker who is looking for a way to express an idea in English or Chinese  . We are also adding on the basic functions to include a log of user activities  , which will record the users ? query behavior and their background  . We could then analyze the data and find useful information for future research  . 

We acknowledge the support for this study through grants from National Science Council and Ministry of Education  , Taiwan ( NSC90-2411-H-007-033-MC and MOEEX-91-E-FA06-4-4 ) and a special grant for preparing the Sinorama Corpus for distribution by the Association for Computational Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing  . 

Chuang , T . C . and J . S . Chang (2002) , Adaptive Sentence Alignment Based on Length and Lexical Information  , ACL 2002 , Companion Vol . P .  91-2 . 
Gale , W . & K . W . Church , "A Program for Aligning Sentences in Bilingual Corpora " Proceedings of the  29th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics , Berkeley , CA , 1991.
Macklovitch , E . , Simard , M . , Langlais , P . : TransSearch : A Free Translation Memory on the World Wide Web  . Proc . 
LREC 2000 III , 1201--1208 (2000).
Nie , J . -Y . , Simard , M . , Isabelle , P . and Durand , R . (1999 ) CrossLanguage Information Retrieval based on Parallel Texts and Automatic Mining of Parallel Texts in the Web  . 
Proceedings of SIGIR?99, Berkeley , CA.
Simard , M . , G . Foster & P . Isabelle (1992) , Using cognates to align sentences in bilingual corpora  . In Proceedings of
TMI92, Montreal , Canada , pp . 67-81.
Wu , Dekai (1994) , Aligning a parallel EnglishChinese corpus statistically with lexical criteria  . In The Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , New Mexico , USA , pp .  80-87 . 
Wu , J . C . and J . S . Chang (2003) , Bilingual Collocation Extraction Based on Syntactic and Statistical Analyses  , ms . 
Yeh , K . C . , T . C . Chuang , J . S . Chang (2003) , Using Punctua-tions for Bilingual Sentence Alignment-Preparing Parallel Corpus for Distribution by the ACL CLP  , ms . 
