Bilingual Terminology Acquisition from Comparable Corpora and Phrasal 
Translation to CrossLanguage Information Retrieval
Fatiha Sadat
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
Nara , 630-0101, Japan
fatia-s,yosikawa , uemura@is.aist-nara.ac.jp
Masatoshi Yoshikawa
Nagoya University
Nagoya , 464-8601, Japan
Shunsuke Uemura
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
Nara , 630-0101, Japan

The present paper will seek to present an approach to bilingual lexicon extraction from nonaligned comparable corpora  , phrasal translation as well as evaluations on CrossLanguage Information Retrieval  . A two-stages translation model is proposed for the acquisition of bilingual terminology from comparable corpora  , disambiguation and selection of best translation alternatives according to their linguistics-based knowledge  . Different rescoring techniques are proposed and evaluated in order to select best phrasal translation alternatives  . Results demonstrate that the proposed translation model yields better translations and retrieval effectiveness could be achieved across Japanese- 
English language pair.
1 Introduction
Although , corpora have been an object of study of some decades  , recent years saw an increased interest in their use and construction  . With this increased interest and awareness has come an expansion in the application to knowledge acquisition  , such as bilingual terminology . In addition , nonaligned comparable corpora have been given a special interest in bilingual terminology acquisition and lexical resources enrichment  ( Dejean et al , 2002; Fung , 2000; Koehn and Knight , 2002; Rapp ,  1999) . 
This paper presents a novel approach to bilingual terminology acquisition and disambiguation from scarce resources such as comparable corpora  , phrasal translation through rescoring techniques as well as evaluations on CrossLanguage Information Retrieval  ( CLIR )  . CLIR consists of retrieving documents written in one language using queries written in another language  . An application is completed on a largescale test collection  , NTCIR for Japanese-
English language pair.
2 The Proposed Translation Model in

Figure 1 shows the overall design of the proposed translation model in CLIR consisting of three main parts as follows : - Bilingual terminology acquisition from bidirectional comparable corpora  , completed through a two-stages term-by-term translation model  . 
-Linguistic-based pruning , which is applied on the extracted translation alternatives in order to filter and detect terms and their translations that are morphologically close enough  , i . e . , with close or similar part-of-speech tags . 
-Phrasal translation , completed on the source query after rescoring the translation alternatives related to each source query term  . The proposed rescoring techniques are based on the World Wide Web  ( WWW )  , a largescale test collection such as NTCIR , the comparable corpora or a possible interaction with the user  , among others . 
Finally , a linear combination to bilingual dictionaries , bilingual thesauri and transliteration for the special phonetic alphabet of foreign words and loanwords  , would be possible depending on the cost and availability of linguistic resources  . 
2.1 Two-stages Comparable Corpora-based

The proposed two-stages approach on bilingual terminology acquisition and disambiguation from comparable corpora  ( Sadat et al ,  2003 ) is described as follows : - Bilingual terminology acquisition from source language to target language to yield a first translation model  , represented by similarity vectors SIMS ? T . 
-Bilingual terminology acquisition from target language to source language to yield a second translation model  , represented by similarity vectors
SIMT ? S .
-Merge the first and second models to yield a two -stages translation model  , based on bidirectional comparable corpora and represented by similarity vectors SIM  ( S?T . 
We follow strategies of previous researches ( De-jean et al , 2002; Fung , 2000; Rapp ,  1999 ) for the first and second models and propose a merging and disambiguation process for the two -stages translation model  . Therefore , context vectors of each term in source and target languages are constructed following a statistics -based metric  . Next , context vectors related to source words are translated using a preliminary bilingual seed lexicon  . Similarity vectors SIMS?T and SIMT ? S related to the first and second models respectively  , are constructed for each pair of source term and target translation using the cosine metric  . 
The merging process will keep common pairs of source term and target translation  ( s , t ) which appear in SIMS ? Tas(s , t ) but also in SIMT ? Sas(t , s ) , to result in combined similarity vectors SIMS?T for each pair  ( s , t) . The product of similarity values in vectors SIMS?T and SIM  ( T ? S will yield similarity values in SIMS ? T for each pair  ( s , t ) of source term and target translation . 
2.2 Linguistics-based Pruning
Morphological knowledge such as Part-of-Speech ( POS )  , context of terms extracted from thesauri could be valuable to filter and prune the extracted translation candidates  . POS tags are assigned to each source term ( Japanese ) via morphological analysis . 
Bilingual Seed

Linguistic-based Pruning ( Filtering based on Morphological knowledge of source terms and translation alternatives  ) 
Phrasal Translation ( Rescoring the translation alternatives ) 
Bilingual Terminology

Japanese?English
Merging & Disambiguation
Japanese?English
Translation Candidates

Phrasal Translation Candidates
Bilingual Terminology Acquisition ( Two-stages Comparable Corpora-ba sed Model  ) 
Linguistic-based Pruning
Phrasal Translation/Selection


Content words ( nouns , verbs , adjectives , adverbs , foreign words )
Bilingual Terminology

English ? Japanese Japanese





Filtered Translation Candidates
Comparable Corpora ( JapaneseEnglish ) English

Linguistic Preprocessing










Figure 1: The Overall Design of the Proposed Model for Bilingual Terminology Acquisition and Phrasal 
Translation in CLIR
As well , a target language morphological analysis will assign POS tags to the translation candidates  . We restricted the pruning technique to nouns , verbs , adjectives and adverbs , although other POS tags could be treated in a similar way  . For JapaneseEnglish pair of languages , Japanese nouns and verbs are compared to English nouns and verbs  , respectively . Japanese adverbs and adjectives are compared to English adverbs and adjectives  , because of the close relationship between adverbs and adjectives in Japanese  ( Sadat et al ,  2003) . 
Finally , the generated translation alternatives are sorted in decreasing order by similarity values and rank counts are assigned in increasing order  . A fixed number of top-ranked translation alternatives are selected and misleading candidates are discarded  . 
2.3 Phrasal Translation
Query translation ambiguity can be drasticallymit -igated by considering the query as a phrase and restricting the single term translation to those candidates that were selected by the proposed combined statistics-based and linguistics-based approach  ( Sadat et al ,  2003) . Therefore , after generating a ranked list of translation candidates for each source term  , rescoring techniques are proposed to estimate the coherence of the translated query and decide the best phrasal translation  . 
Assume a source query Q having n terms s1 .   .   . sn . Phrasal translation of the source query Q is completed according to the selected top-ranked translation alternatives for each source terms i and a rescoring factor RFk  , as follows:
Qphras = ? k=1 . .thres [ Qk(s1 . .sn)?RFk(t1 . .tn ; s1 . .sn )] Where , Qk(s1 . .sn ) represents the phrasal translation candidate associated to rank k  . The rescoring factor RFk(t1 . .tn ; s1 . .sn ) is estimated using one of the rescoring techniques  , described below . 
Rescoring through the WWW
The WWW can be considered as an exemplar linguistic resource for decision making  ( Grefenstette ,  1999) . In the present study , the WWW is exploited in order to rescore the set of translation candidates related to the source terms  . 
Sequences of all possible combinations are constructed between elements of sets of highly ranked translation alternatives  . Each sequence is sent to a popular Web portal ( here , Google ) to discover how often the combination of translation alternatives appears  . Number of retrieved WWW pages in which the translated sequence occurred is used to represent the rescoring factor RF for each sequence of translation candidates  . Phrasal translation candidates are sorted in decreasing order by rescoring factors RF  . 
Finally , a number ( thres ) of highly ranked phrasal translation sequences is selected and collated into the final phrasal translation  . 
Rescoring through a Test Collection
Large-scale test collections could be used to rescore the translation alternatives and complete a phrasal translation  . We follow the same steps as the WWW-based technique  , replacing the WWW by a test collection and a retrieval system to index documents of the test collection  . 
NTCIR test collection ( Kando ,  2001 ) could be a a good alternative for JapaneseEnglish language pair  , especially if involving the comparable corpora . 
Rescoring through the Comparable Corpora Comparable corpora could be considered for the disambiguation of translation alternatives and thus selection of best phrasal translations  ( Sadat et al ,  2002) . Our proposed algorithm to estimate the rescoring factor RF  , relies on the source and target language parts of the comparable corpora using statistics-based measures  . Cooccurrence tendencies are estimated for each pair of source terms using the source language text and each pair of translation alternatives using the target language text  . 
Rescoring through an Interactive Mode
An interactive mode(Ogden and Davis ,  2000 ) could help solve the problem of phrasal translation  . 
The interactive environment setting should optimize the phrasal translation  , select best phrasal translation alternatives and facilitate the information access across languages  . For instance , the user can access a list of all possible phrases ranked in a form of hierarchy on the basis of word ranks associated to each translation alternative  . Selection of a phrase will modify the ranked list of phrases and will provide an access to documents related to the phrase  . 
3 Experiments and Evaluations in CLIR
Experiments have been carried out to measure the improvement of our proposal on bilingual JapaneseEnglish tasks in CLIR  , i . e . Japanese queries to retrieve English documents . Collections of news articles from Mainichi Newspapers  ( 1998-1999 ) for Japanese and Mainichi Daily News ( 1998-1999 ) for English were considered as comparable corpora  . We have also considered documents of NTCIR2 test collection as comparable corpora in order to cope with special features of the test collection during evaluations  . NTCIR2 ( Kando ,  2001 ) test collection was used to evaluate the proposed strategies in CLIR  . SMART information retrieval system ( Salton ,  1971) , which is based on vector space model , was used to retrieve English documents . 
Thus , Content words ( nouns , verbs , adjectives , adverbs ) were extracted from English and Japanese texts . Morphological analyzers , Cha Senversion 2 . 2 . 9 ( Matsumoto and al . , 1997) for texts in Japanese and OAK2 ( Sekine ,  2001 ) for texts in English were used in linguistic preprocessing  . EDR(EDR ,  1996 ) was used to translate context vectors of source and target languages  . 
First experiments were conducted on the several combinations of weighting parameters and schemes of SMART retrieval system for documents terms and query terms  . The best performance was realized by
ATN . NTC combined weighting scheme.
The proposed two-stages model using comparable corpora showed a better improvement in terms of average precision compared to the simple model  ( one-stage comparable corpora-based translation ) with +27 . 1% and a difference of -32 . 8 7% in terms of average precision of the monolingual retrieval  . Combination to linguistics-based pruning showed a better performance in terms of average precision with  +41  . 7% and +11 . 5% compared to the simple comparable corpora-based model and the two-stages comparable corpora-based model  , respectively . 
Applying rescoring techniques to phrasal translation yields significantly better results with  10  . 35%, 8 . 27% and 3 . 08% for the WWW-based , the NTCIR-based and comparable corpora-based techniques  , respectively compared to the hybrid two-stages comparable corpora and linguistics-based pruning  . 
The proposed approach based on bidirectional comparable corpora largely affected the translation because related words could be added as translation alternatives or expansion terms  . Effects of extracting bilingual terminology from bidirectional comparable corpora  , pruning using linguistics-based knowledge and rescoring using different phrasal translation techniques were positive on query transla-tion /expansion and thus document retrieval  . 
4 Conclusion
We investigated the approach of extracting bilingual terminology from comparable corpora in order to enrich existing bilingual lexicons and enhance CLIR  . We proposed a two-stages translation model involving extraction and disambiguation of the translation alternatives  . Linguistics-based pruning was highly effective in CLIR  . Most of the selected terms can be considered as translation candidates or expansion terms  . Exploiting different phrasal translation techniques revealed to be effective in CLIR  . Although we conducted experiments and evaluations on JapaneseEnglish language pair  , the proposed translation model is common across different languages  . 
Ongoing research is focused on the integration of other linguistics-based techniques and combination to transliteration for katakana  , the special phonetic alphabet to Japanese language  . 

H . Dejean , E . Gaussier and F . Sadat .  2002 . An Approach based on Multilingual Thesauri and Model Combination for Bilingual Lexicon Extraction  . In Proc . COL-
ING 2002, Taipei , Taiwan.
EDR .  1996 . Japan Electronic Dictionary Research Institute , Ltd . EDR electronic dictionary version 1 . 5 EDR . 
Technical guide . Technical report TR2-007.
P . Fung .  2000 . A Statistical View of Bilingual Lexicon Extraction : From Parallel Corpora to Non -Parallel Corpora  . In Jean Veronis , Ed . Parallel Text Processing . 
G . Grefenstette .  1999 . The WWW as a Resource for Example-based MT Tasks . In ASLIB ?99 Translating and the Computer 21 . 
N . Kando .  2001 . Overview of the Second NTCIR Workshop . In Proc . Second NTCIR Workshop on Research in Chinese and Japanese Text Retrieval and Text Summarization  . 
P . Koehn and K . Knight .  2002 . Learning a Translation Lexicon from Monolingual Corpora  . In Proc .   ACL02 Workshop on Unsupervised Lexical Acquisition . 
Y . Matsumoto , A . Kitauchi , T . Yamashita , O . Imaichi and T . Imamura .  1997 . Japanese morphological analysis system ChaSen manual  . Technical Report NAIST-IS-

W . C . Ogden and M . W . Davis .  2000 . Improving CrossLanguage Text Retrieval with Human Interactions  . In Proc .   33rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences  . 
R . Rapp .  1999 . Automatic Identification of Word Translations from Unrelated English and German Corpora  . 
In Proc . European Association for Computational Linguistics  EACL?99  . 
F . Sadat , A . Maeda , M . Yoshikawa and S . Uemura . 
2002 . Exploiting and Combining Multiple Resources for Query Expansion in CrossLanguage Information Retrieval  . IPSJ Transactions of Databases , TOD 15 , 43 ( SIG9):39?54 . 
F . Sadat , M . Yoshikawa and S . Uemura .  2003 . Learning Bilingual Translations from Comparable Corpora to CrossLanguage Information Retrieval : Hybrid Statistics-based and Linguistics-based Approach  . In
Proc . IRAL 2003, Sapporo , Japan.
G . Salton .  1971 . The SMART Retrieval System , Experiments in Automatic Documents Processing . Prentice-
Hall , Inc ., Englewood Cliffs , NJ.
G . Salton and J . McGill .  1983 . Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval . New York , McGraw-Hill . 
S . Sekine .  2001 . OAK System-Manual . New York University . 
