The FrameNet Data and Software
Collin F . Baker
International Computer Science Institute
Berkeley , California , USA

Hiroaki Sato
Senshu University
Kawasaki , Japan


The FrameNet project has developed a lexical knowledge base providing a unique level of detail as to the the possible syntactic realizations of the specific semantic roles evoked by each predicator  , for roughly 7 , 000 lexical units , on the basis of annotating more than 100 , 000 example sentences extracted from corpora . 
An interimversion of the FrameNet data was released in October  , 2002 and is being widely used . A new , more portable version of the FrameNet software is also being made available to researchers elsewhere  , including the Spanish FrameNet project . 
This demo and poster will briefly explain the principles of Frame Semantics and demonstrate the new unified tools for lexicon building and annotation and also FrameSQL  , a search tool for finding patterns in annotated sentences  . We will discuss the content and format of the data releases and how the software and data can be used by other NLP researchers  . 
1 Introduction
FrameNet 1 ( Fontenelle , 2003; Fillmore , 2002; Baker et al ,  1998 ) is a lexicographic research project which aims to produce a lexicon containing very detailed information about the relation  be-1http://framenet  . ICSI . berkeley . edu/framenettween the semantics and the syntax of predicators  , including verbs , nouns and adjectives , for a substantial subset of English . 
The basic unit of analysis is the semantic frame , defined as a type of event or state and the participants and ? props ? associated with it  , which we call frame elements ( FEs ) . 2 Frames range from highly abstract to quite specific  . An example of an abstract frame would be the Replacement frame  , with FEs such as OLD and NEW as in the sentence Pat replaced [ Old the curtains ] [ New with wooden blinds ]  . 
One sense of the verb replace is associated with the Replacement frame  , thus constituting one lexical unit ( LU ) , the basic unit of the FrameNet lexicon . 
An example of a more specific frame is Apply heat , with FEs such as COOK , FOOD , MEDIUM , and DURATION . as in Boil [ Foodtherice ] [ Duration for 3 minutes][Mediumin water] , then drain . 3 LUs in Apply heat include char , fry , grill , and mi-crowave , etc . 
In our daily work , we define a frame and its FEs , make lists of words that evoke the frame ( its LUs )  , extract example sentences containing these LUs from corpora  , and semiautomatically annotate the parts of the sentences which are the realizations of these FEs  , including marking the phrase type ( PT ) and grammatical function ( GF )  . We can then automatically create a report which constitutes a lexical entry for this LU  , detailing all the possible ways in which these FEs can be syntactically realized  . The 2In similar approaches , these have been referred to as schemas or scenarios  , with their associated roles or slots . 
3 In this sentence , as in most examples of boil in recipes , the COOK is constructionally null-instantiated , because of the imperative . 
annotated sentences and lexical entries for approximately  7  , 0 00 LUs will be available on the FN website and the data will be released by the end of August in several formats  . 
2 Frame Semantics and FrameNet II 2 . 1 Frame Semantics in Theory and Practice The development of the theory of Frame Semantics began more than  25 years ago ( Fillmore , 1976; Fillmore ,  1977) , but since 1997 , thanks to two NSF grants 4 , we have been able to apply it in a serious way to building a lexicon which we intend to be both usable by human beings and machine-tractable  , so that it can serve as a lexical database for NLP  , computational lexical semantics , etc . In FrameNet II , all the data , including the definitions of frames , FEs , and LUs and all of the sentences and the annotation associated with them is stored in one relational database implemented in MySQL  ( Baker et al . , 2003; Fillmore et al , 2001) . 
The FrameNet public website contains an index by frame and an index by LU which links to both the lexical entry and the full annotation for each LU  . 
The frame-to-frame relations which are now being entered in the database will be visible on the website so on  . 
2.2 FrameNet II Data Release 1.0
The HTML version of the data consists of all the files on the website  , so that users can set up a local copy and browse it with any web browser  . It is fairly compact , less than 100M binall . 
The plain XML version of the data consists of the following files : frames  . xml This file contains the descriptions of all the  450 frames and their FEs , totaling more than 3 , 000 . Each frame also includes information as to frame -to-frame relations  . 
luNNN . xml There is one such file per LU ( roughly 7500 ) which contain the example sentences and annotation  ( if any ) for each LU . 
4We are grateful to the National Science Foundation for funding the project through two grants  , IRI #9618838 and ITR/HCI #0086132 . We refer to these two three-year stages in the life of the project as FrameNet I and FrameNet II  . 
relations . xml A file containing information about frame-to -frame and FE-to-FE relations and metarelations between them  . 
We intend to have a version of the XML that includes RDF of the DAML+OIL flavor  , so that the FN frames and FEs can be related to existing ontologies and Semantic Web-aware applications can access FN data using a standard methodology  . 
Narayanan has created such a version for the FNI data  , and a new version reflecting the more complex FN II data is under construction  ( Narayanan et al ,  2002) . 
3 The FrameNet Software Suite 3 . 1 The FrameNet Desktop tools The FN software used for frame definition and annotation has been fundamentally rewritten since the demo at the LREC conference last summer  ( Fillmore et al , 2002a ) . The two major changes are ( 1 ) combining the frame editing tools and the annotation tools into a single GUI  , making the interface more intuitive and ( 2 ) moving to a client-server model . 
In the previous version , each client accessed the database directly , which made it very difficult to avoid collisions between users  , and meant that each client was large , containing a lot of the logic of the application , MySQL-specific queries , etc . In the new version , the basic modules are now the MySQL database , an application server , and one or more client processes . This has a number of advantages : ( 1 ) All the database calls are made by the server , making it much easier to avoid conflicts between users  .   ( 2 ) The application server contains nearly all the logic  , meaning that the clients are ? thin ? processes , concerned mainly with the GUI .   ( 3 ) The separation into client and server makes it easier to setup remote access to the FN database  .   ( 4 ) The increased overhead caused by the more complex architecture is at least offset by the ability to cache frequently-requested data on the server  , making access much faster . 
The public FrameNet web pages contain static versions of several reports drawn from the database  , notably , the lexical entry report , displaying all the valences of each LU . The working environment for the staff includes dynamic versions of these reports and several others  , all written as java applets . Partially shared code makes these reports accessible within the desktop package as well  . 
3.2 API , Library , and Utilities
We are currently working on defining a FNAPI and writing libraries for accessing the database from other programs  . We plan to distribute a command-line utility as a demonstration of this API  . 
4 FrameSQL and Kernel Dependency
Graphs 4.1 Searching with Frame SQL
Prof . Hiroaki Sato of Senshu University has written a webbased tool which allows users to search existing FN annotations in a variety of ways  . The tool also makes conveniently available several other electronic resources such as WordNet  , and other online dictionaries . It is especially useful for doing conventional lexicography  . 
4.2 Kernel Dependency Graphs
The major product of the project is the lexical database of frame descriptions and annotated sentences  ; although these clearly are potentially very useful in many sorts of NLP task  , FrameNet ( at least in its present phase ) remains primarily lexicographic . Nevertheless , as a an intermediate step toward applications such as automatic text summarization  , we have recently begun studying kernel dependency graphs  ( KDGs )  , which provide a sort of automatic summarization of annotated sentences  . 
KDGs consist of   the predicator ( verb , noun , or adjective ) ,   the lexical heads of its dependents   the ? marking ? on the dependents  ( prepositions , complementizers , etc . if any ), and   the FEs of the dependents . 
To take a simple example , (1a ) , which is annotated for the target chained in the Attaching frame  , could be represented as the KDG in (1b ) . 
(1) a . [ Agent Four activists ] chained [ Item themselves][Goal to a noild rilling rig being to wed to the BarentsSea ] [ Time in early August ]  . 

< KDG frame="Attaching"LU="chain . v "> < Agent > activists </ Agent > < Item > themselves < /Item><Goal>to:oil\_drilling\_rig</Goal > < Time > in : August </ Time > </ KDG > The situation can be complicated by the presence of higher control verbs and ? transparent ? nouns which bring about a mismatch between the semantic head and the syntactic head of an FE  ( Fillmore et al , 2002b ) , as in (2) , which should have the same KDG as (1a ) . 
(2 ) [ Agent Four activists]planned to chain [ Item themselves ] [ Goal to the bottom of an oil drilling rig being to wed to the BarentsSea ] [ Timeinearly August ]  . 
5 Layered Annotation and Frame
Semantic Parsing
A large majority of FEs are annotated with a triplet of labels  , one for the FE name , one for the phrase type and one for the grammatical function of the constituent with regard to the target  . But the FN software allows more than three layers of annotation for a single target  , for situations such as when one FE contains another  ( e . g . in [ Agent You ]? rehurting [ Bodypart [ Victimmy]arms]  )  . 
In addition , the FN software allows us to annotate more than one target in a sentence  . A full representation of the meaning of a sentence can be built up by composing the semantics of the frames evoked by the major predicators  . 
6 Applications and Related Projects
In addition to the original lexicographic goal , a preliminary version of our frame descriptions and the set of more than  100  , 0 00 annotated sentences have been released to more than  80 research groups in more than 15 countries . The FN data is being used for a variety of purposes  , some of which we had foreseen and others which we had not  ; these include uses a steaching materials for lexical semantics classes  , as a basis for developing multilingual lexica , as an interlingua for machine translation , and as training data for NLP systems that perform question answering  , information retrieval ( Mohit and Narayanan ,  2003) , and automatic semantic parsing ( Gildea and Jurafsky ,  2002) . 
A number of scholars have expressed interest in building FrameNets for other languages  . Of these , three have already begun work : In Spain , a team from several universities , led by Prof . Carlos Subirats of UA Barcelona , is building using their own extraction software and the FrameNet desktop tools to build a Spanish FrameNet  ( Subirats and Petruck , forthcoming 2003) http://www . gemini . es/SFN . In Saarbru?cken , Germany , work is proceeding on hand-annotating a parsed corpus with FrameNet FE labels  ( Erk et al ,  ) . Andin Japan , researchers from Keio University and University of Tokyo are building a Japanese FrameNet in the domains of motion and communication  , using a large newspaper corpus . 
7 Contents of the Demo
We will demonstrate how the software can be used to create a frame  , create a frame element , create a lexical unit , define a set of rules for extracting example sentences  ( and , optionally , marking FEs on them ) , open an existing LU and annotate sentences , mark an LU as finished , create a frame-to-frame relation , and attach a semantic type to an FE or an LU . 
We will demonstrate the reports available on the internal web pages  . We will show the complex searches against the FrameNet data that can be run using FrameSQL  , including displaying the resulting sentences as KDGs  . We will demonstrate how frames can be composed to represent the meaning of sentences using a  ( manual ) frame semantic parsing of a newspaper crime report as an example  . 

Collin F . Baker , Charles J . Fillmore , and John B . Lowe . 
1998 . The Berkeley FrameNet project . In ACL , editor , COLINGACL ?98: Proceedings of the Conference , held at the University of Montre?al , pages 86?90 . 
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Collin F . Baker , Charles J . Fillmore , and Beau Cronin . 
2003 . The structure of the FrameNet database . International Journal of Lexicography . 
K . Erk , A . Kowalski , and M . Pinkal . A corpus resource for lexical semantics . Submitted . Available at http://www . coli . uni-sb . de/erk/Online Papers/Lex-

Charles J . Fillmore , Charles Wooters , and Collin F . 
Baker .  2001 . Building a large lexical databank which provides deep semantics  . In Benjamin Tsou and Olivia Kwong , editors , Proceedings of the 15th Pacific Asia Conference on Language , Information and Computation , Hong Kong . 
Charles J . Fillmore , Collin F . Baker , and Hiroaki Sato . 
2002a . The FrameNet database and software tools . In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Languag Resources and Evaluation  , volume IV , Las
Palmas . LREC.
Charles J . Fillmore , Collin F . Baker , and Hiroaki Sato . 
2002b . Seeing arguments through transparent structures . In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Languag Resources and Evaluation  , volume III , Las Palmas . LREC . 
Charles J . Fillmore .  1976 . Frame semantics and the nature of language . In Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences : Conference on the Origin and Development of Language and Speech  , volume 280 , pages 20?32 . 
Charles J . Fillmore .  1977 . Scenes-and-frames semantics . In Antonio Zampolli , editor , Linguistic Structures Processing , number 59 in Fundamental Studies in Computer Science . North Holland Publishing . 
Charles J . Fillmore .  2002 . Linking sense to syntax in FrameNet . In Proceedings of 19th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Taipei . COL-

Thierry Fontenelle , editor .  2003 . International Journal of Lexicography . Oxford University Press . ( Special issue de voted to FrameNet . ) . 
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky .  2002 . Automatic labeling of semantic roles . Computational Linguistics , 28(3):245?288 . 
Behrang Mohit and Srinivas Narayanan .  2003 . Semantic extraction with wide-coverage lexical resources  . In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference  ( HLTNAACL )  , Edmonton , Canada . 
Srinivas Narayanan , Charles J . Fillmore , Collin F . Baker , and Miriam R . L . Petruck .  2002 . FrameNet meets the semantic web : ADAML+OIL frame representation  . 
In Proceedings of the 18th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Edmonotn , Alberta . AAAI . 
Carlos Subirats and Miriam R . L . Petruck . forthcoming 2003 . The Spanish FrameNet project . In Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Congress of Linguists  , 

