Extraction and Verification of KO-OU Expressions from Large Corpora 
Atsukokida ? , Eiko Yamamoto ? , Kyoko Kanzaki ? , and Hitoshi Isahara ?
? The Institute of Behavioral Sciences ? Communications Research Laboratory 
29 Honmura-cho , Ichigaya , Shinjuku-ku , 35 Hikaridai , Seikacho , Souraku-gun , 
Tokyo , 162-0845, Japan Kyoto , 619-0289, Japan
akida@ibs.or.jpeiko,kanzaki,isahara@crl.go.jp




In the Japanese language , as a predicate is placed at the end of a sentence  , the content of a sentence cannot be inferred until reaching the end  . However , when the content is complicated and the sentence is long  , people want to know at an earlier stage in the sentence whether the content is negative  , affirmative , or interrogative . 
In Japanese , the grammatical form called the KO-OU relation exists  . The KO-OU relation is a kind of concord . If a KO element appears , then an OU element appears in the latter part of a sentence  . It is being pointed out that the KO-OU relation gives advance notice to the element that appears in the latter part of a sentence  . In this paper , we present the method of extracting automatically the KO-OU expression data from largescale electronic corpus and verify the usefulness of the 
KO-OU expression data.
1 Introduction
The Japanese language has a grammatical form called the KO-OU relation  . The KO-OU relation is a kind of concord , also referring to a sort of bound relation that a KO element appearing in a sentence is followed by an OU element in the latter part of the same sentence  . On the contrary , the cooccurrence relation refers to two words appearing in the same sentence  . 
Because Japanese predicates are usually located at the end of sentences  , the contents of Japanese sentences cannot be decided until reaching the end  . 
Furthermore , in Japanese , it is hard to comprehend the meaning of the sentence without reading through the entire sentence  . The KO-OU relation is the grammatical form which can be helpful for understanding the sentence meaning at the early stage  . 
While in archaic Japanese , KAKARI-MUSUBI , which had morphemic KO-OU relation between KAKARI-JOSI1 and the conjugation at the end of a sentence , had been used . KAKARI-MUSUBI gave advance notice to the elements that would appear toward the end of a sentence due to KAKARI-JOSI  . 
Today , KAKARI-MUSUBI has dropped out of use.
However , the KO-OU relation such as " sika-nai ( only ) " or " kessite-nai ( never ) " is present . In this research , we have attempted to collect such elements to extract KO-OU expression data  . In this paper , the main points of argument are as follows : ( 1 ) Method of extracting automatically the KO-OU expression data  . 
(2) What the KO-OU expression data can be used for . 
2 The Previous Works and How to Position this Study  ( Ohno ,  1993 ) pointed out that there were expressions that try to give advance notice to whether a sentence is affirmative  , negative , or interrogative at the early stage of a language expression which continues timewise  . It suggested that there were certain adverbs that have replaced KAKARI-JOSI in the archaic Japanese words  . 
( Masuoka ,  1991 ) described the KO-OU relation of sentence elements  . According to Masuoka , some sentences have the KO-OU expressions as shown in Table  1  . 
However , this has the following weaknesses.
The KO and OU elements in a KO-OU relation are placed together in the same category  , and there is 1AJapanese particle . 
no description as to the OU element . Furthermore , only a limited number of elements are listed . And the objectivity of the KO and OU elements is not guaranteed  . 
The KO-OU expression data is useful as basic data to dissolve ambiguity in parsing and to decide on the modification relation  . However , first of all , it is necessary for the data to have a certain length for being useful basic data  . Secondly , it also needs to be objective . Therefore , we have attempted to extract KO-OU relations automatically from largescale corpus  . 

Table 1 Masuoka?s KO-OU expression data 3 Assumed Usage of KO-OU Expression
Data 3.1 To Dissolve Ambiguity
The KO-OU expression data is useful for dissolv -ing ambiguity of parsing  . Furthermore , it is useful for deciding the modification relation  ( Figure 1 )  . 
3.2 Gradual Understanding
Using the KO-OU expression data will enable the reader to guess the end expression midway through a sentence  . This is because as the KO elements appear it is possible to predict the appearance of the OU elements  ( Figure 2 )  . It can be used as a basic data for understanding sentences  . In addition , this technology can be used to guess the point in the minutes of a meeting at which the speakers change  . 

Figure 1To Dissolve Ambiguity
Figure 2Gradual Understanding
KO element OU element
Nee , oite-kudasai , naatabun , doumo daro-u , rasii , you-dakes site , kanarazu-si-monai conviction ( If youche wit , you will certainly tastes alm on . ) ??? ?????????? ?? ? ? ? ?? ????? ? kamisimereba kittosakeno ajigasuruni-chiga-in ai ????????? ?????????????? kami sime rebakit to sake no a jigasuruni-chiga-in ai 
To Dissolve
Ambiguity refer
KO element OU element Similarity score Distance Meaningkittoni-chigai-nai  0  . 004726 6 . 062697 conviction kittokoto-daro-u 0 . 00418 11 . 297666 guesskit to hazu 0 . 003722 12 . 702345 conviction
KO-OU relation data ( image )   ( Works that you see at the opense aside should look attractive  . ) ??? ?? ? ?? ?? ? ??? ??? ? ?? ?? ?? koudaina umi be demirus a kuhin wak it to miryokutekini utsuruhazuda ??????????? Gradual Understanding KO element OU element Similarity score Distance Meaningkittoni-chigai-nai  0  . 004726 6 . 062697 conviction kittokoto-daro-u 0 . 00418 11 . 297666 guesskit to hazu 0 . 003722 12 . 7 02345 conviction refer guess ? conviction ? KO-OU relation data  ( image ) 4 Extraction of KO-OU Expression Data 4 . 1 Method ( Yamamoto and Umemura ,  2002 ) considered the estimation of the one-to-many relation between entities in corpus  . They carried out experiments on extracting one-to -many relation of phenomena from corpus using complementary similarity measure  ( CSM ) which can cope very well with inclusion relation of appearance patterns  . The KO-OU relation in this research can be regarded as a type of one-to-many relation  . 
4.2 Data Used
In this paper , we dealt with what is called FUKU-JOSI2 , KAKARI-JOSI , and some adverbs shown below . We proceeded on the assumption that these are the KO elements in the KO-OU relation  . For our research , we used newspaper articles from the Mainichi Shimbun  , Nihon Keizai Shimbun , and Yomiuri Shimbunissued between 1991 and 2000 . 
[ Target words]ko so , sika , sae , ha , mo , bakari , nomi , sura , nara , kurai , dake , nannte , kessite , osoraku , tabun , zehi , marude , mosi , kitto
Figure 3 Process flow 4.3 Process Flow
Processflow is shown in Figure 3.
(1 ) We calculated the similarity measure using CSM for newspaper articles data that had been morphologically analyzed with  ChaSen3  . 
(2 ) We extracted pairs containing the target words from the results of similarity measure calculation  . 
2A Japanese particle.
3 Morphological Analyzer Cha Sen . See http://chasen . aist-nara . ac . jp/ . 
(3) Out of the pairs in (2) , we extracted words that appeared in the order of KO and OU elements  . 
( We judge the pairs based on this word order . ) (4) We carried out judgment based on reliability . 
As a result of this process , we obtained 14 pairs of data which had " kesshite " as KO element  , 16 which had " sae , " and 23 which had " wa . " Data of approximately 20 pairs was obtained per target word . 
5 Verification of KO-OU Expression
Data 5 . 1 Necessity to Give Meaning/Information If the KO -OU expression data is used for gradual understanding of sentences  , it was necessary for the data to be given meaning /information  . When the KO element appears , it will be possible to sufficiently grasp or guess the contents of a sentence by referring the KO-OU expression data  ( Figure 2 )  . 
However it is difficult to give mean-ing /information using the data obtained from the process in Chapter  4 because the data is broken down into each morpheme by the morphological analysis  , and each element is too short . 
In Japanese sentences , there are many cases in which continuation of a particle and an auxiliary verb builds a predicate  . This continuation plays an important role in determining the event of the sentence  . P articles and auxiliary verbs are functional words  . Therefore , it is not possible to determine the meaning of some of the particles and auxiliary verbs when they appeared independently  . Furthermore , there are some cases in which they change their meaning when paired with another word  . 
Table 2 shows the OU elements obtained pursu-ant to the procedure in Chapter  4 for KO element " kitto " . " Da " listed in Table 2 has an assertive meaning when used in a sentence like " kyouwaameda  . ( It is raining today . ) " On the other hand , it has an inferential meaning in the context of " a suwahareru daro-u  . ( It should be fine tomorrow . ) " In addition , although " nai " is a negative auxiliary verb , when it is paired as in " ka-mo-shire-nai ( may be ) " and " chigai-nai ( must be )  , " the negative meaning disappears . And the overall pairing stands for guess and conviction  . 
morphologically analyzed data ( 1 ) Calculate similarity
KO-OU expression data ( 2 ) Extract pairs ( 3 ) Judgment based on word ( 4 ) Judgment based on reliability . 
Table 2K O-OU expression data
KO element OU element KO element OU element Kitto u  ( auxiliary ) kittoyo ( particle ) kittoda ( auxiliary ) kittochigai ( noun ) k it to to ( particle ) kittoka ( particle ) kittoomou ( verb ) kittoNe ( particle ) kittonai ( auxiliary ) kittoyou ( noun ) kittohazu ( noun )  : : 5 . 2 Verification of OU Element Using " Kitto " In this section  , we carry out an analytical example using OU element for KO element " k it to  ( certainly )  . " We can classify the OU elements obtained from the procedure in Chapter  4  , as follows: ( a ) It can be an OU element by itself ,   ( b ) It can become an OU element when paired with others  ,   ( c ) It does not have the possibility of becoming an
OU element.
Words of ( c ) were not found in the OU elements obtained for KO element " k it to  . " In the following , we will describe the details on ( a ) and ( b ) . 
( a ) OU element by itself
Out of the OU elements for KO element " kitto " in Table  2  , " hazu " can be an OU element by itself . 
[ 1] koudain aumi be demirusa kuhin wak it to miryokutekiniut suru hazuda  . 
(Works that you see at the open seaside should look attractive  . ) This is the only sentence with an independent OU element for " k it to " in the data obtained from the process in Chapter  4  . The same can be said of data for KO elements other than " k it to  . " Because of morphological analysis , the row of letters has been shortened . As a result , there are few elements that can be regarded as an OU element by itself  . And just looking at this element does not determine the meaning  . 
( b ) OU element when paired with others
When " chigai " is paired with " ni " and " nai " to make " ni-chigai-nai  ( must be )  , " it becomes an OU element . Similarly , pairing " da " with " u " results in an OU element " daro-u  ( perhaps )  . "" Da " is the original form of " daro " and becomes " daro-u " when paired with " u  . "[2] kit tokint you suru daro-u . 
( It is certain that one will bener vous . ) [3] kami sime reba , kittosake noa jigasuruni-chiga-in ai . 
( If youchew it , you will certainly tastes alm on . ) If we look over the entire pairing shown above , we can give meaning to such guess and conviction . 
6 Questions for the Future
As we described in Chapter 5 , it is necessary to pair multiple elements before giving mean-ing/information  . We currently persuade the issue of automatic generation of pairing multiple elements  . Now , we are carrying out experiments on calculating the similarity measure of pairing of elements  . These will give us pairing of automatically generated elements and the similarity measure of the pairings  . This should be useful data for resolving ambiguity  ( Figure 1 )  . 
7 Conclusion
This paper presented the process of extracting KO -OU expression data using CSM and the usefulness of the extracted KO-OU expression data  . 
We are planning to report on the findings of experiments on automatic generation of OU elements pairings  . 

Acknowledgments To compile this paper , we used newspaper articles from The Mainichi Newspapers  , The Yomiuri Shimbun , and Nihon Keizai Shimbun . 
We would like to sincerely thank Dr . M . Utiyama of the Communications Research Laboratory for allowing us to use a KWIC tool "  tea4  . "

A . Kida , E . Yamamoto and H . Isahara .  2002 . Analysis of expression which projects the following elements beforehand  . IPSJ SIG Notes NL-152, pp . 137-143 . 
A . Kida , E . Yamamoto , K . Kanzaki and H . Isahara .  2003 . 
The key on the syntax which brings for tha concord relation  . Proceedings of the 9th Annual Meeting of the Association for NLP . pp . 23-26 . 
T . Masuoka .  1991 . Grammar of modality . Kurosio-syuppan . 
S . Ohno .  1993 . Research of a KAKARI-MUSUBI . Iwa-nami-Shoten . 
E . Yamamoto and K . Umemura .  2002 . A similarity Measure for Estimation of One-to -Many Relationship in Corpus  . Jourmal of Natural Lamguage Processing . Vol . 9 No . 2 . pp . 45-75 . 
4See http://www2 . crl . go . jp/jt/a132/members/mutiyama/software . html . 
