A Limited-Domain English to Japanese Medical Speech Translator 
Built Using REGULUS2
Manny Rayner
Research Institute for Advanced
Computer Science ( RIACS),
NAS AAmes Research Center,
Moffet Field , CA 94035

Pierrette Bouillon
University of Geneva

40, bvd du Pont-d?Arve,
CH-1211 Geneva 4,


Vol Van Dalsem III
ElCamino Hospital
2500 Grant Road
Mountain View , CA 94040

Hitoshi Isahara , Kyoko Kanzaki
Communications Research Laboratory
35 Hikaridai
Seikacho , Sorakugun
Kyoto , Japan 619-0289

Beth Ann Hockey
Research Institute for Advanced
Computer Science ( RIACS),
NAS AAmes Research Center,
Moffet Field , CA 94035


We argue that verbal patient diagnosis is a promising application for limited-domain speech translation  , and describe an architecture designed for this type of task which represents a compromise between principled linguistics-based processing on the one hand and efficient phrasal translation on the other  . We propose to demonstrate a prototype system instantiating this architecture  , which has been built on top of the Open Source REGULUS  2 platform . 
The prototype translates spoken yesno questions about headache symptoms from English to Japanese  , using a vocabulary of about 200 words . 
1 Introduction and motivation
Language is crucial to medical diagnosis . During the initial evaluation of a patient in an emergency department  , obtaining an accurate history of the chief complaint is of equal importance to the physical examination  . In many parts of the world there are large recent immigrant populations that require medical care but are unable to communicate fluently in the local language  . In the US these im-migrants are especially likely to use emergency facilities because of insurance issues  . In an emergency setting there is acute need for quick accurate physician-patient communication but this communication is made substantially more difficult in cases where there is a language barrier  . Our system is designed to address this problem using spoken machine translation  . 
Designing a spoken translation system to obtain a detailed medical history would be difficult if not impossible using the current state of the art  . The reason that the use of spoken translation technology is feasible is because what is actually needed in the emergency setting is more limited  . Since medical histories traditionally are obtained through two-way physician-patient conversations that are mostly physician initiative  , there is a preestablished limiting structure that we can follow in designing the translation system  . This structure allows a physician to sucessfully use one way translation to elicit and restrict the range of patient responses while still obtaining the necessary information  . 
Another helpful constraint on the conversational requirements is that the majority of medical conditions can be initiatlly characterized by a relatively small number of key questions about quality  , quantity and duration of symptoms . For example , key questions about chest pain include intensity , location , duration , quality of pain , and factors that increase or decrease the pain . These answers to these questions can be sucessfully communicated by a limited number of one or two word responses  ( e . g . 
yes/no , left/right , numbers ) or even gestures ( e . g . 
pointing to an area of the body ) . This is clearly a domain in which the constraints of the task are sufficient for a limited domain  , one way spoken translation system to be a useful tool  . 
2 An architecture for limited-domain speech translation The basic philosophy behind the architecture of the system is to attempt an intelligent compromise between fixed-phrase translation on one hand  ( e . g . 
( Integrated Wave Technologies ,  2002 ) ) and linguistically motivated grammar-based processing on the other  ( e . g . VERB MOBIL ( Wahlster ,  2000 ) and Spoken Language Translator ( Rayner et al , 2000a )) . 
At runtime , the system behaves essentially like a phrasal translator which allows some variation in the input language  . This is close in spirit to the approach used in most normal phrase books  , which typically allow ? slots ? in at least some phrases  ( ? How much does ? cost ?? ; ? How do I get to ???) . However , in order to minimize the overhead associated with defining and maintaining large sets of phrasal patterns  , these patterns are derived from a single large linguistically motivated unification grammar  ; thus the compile-time architecture is that of a linguistically motivated system  . Phrasal translation at runtime gives us speed and reliability  ; the linguistically motivated compile-time architecture makes the system easy to extend and modify  . 
The runtime system comprises three main modules . These are respectively responsible for source language speech recognition  , including parsing and production of semantic representation  ; transfer and generation ; and synthesis of target language speech . 
The speech processing modules ( recognition and synthesis ) are implemented on top of the standard Nuance Toolkit platform  ( Nuance ,  2003) . Recognition is constrained by a CFG language model written in Nuance Grammar Specification Language  ( GSL )  , which also specifies the semantic representations produced  . This language model is compiled from a linguistically motivated unification grammar using the Open Source REGULUS  2 platform ( Rayner et al , 2003; Regulus ,  2003) ; the compilation process is driven by a small corpus of examples  . The language processing modules ( transfer and generation ) are a suite of simple routines written in SICStus Prolog  . The speech and language processing modules communicate with each other through a minimal file-based protocol  . 
The semantic representations on both the source and target sides are expressed as attribute-value structures  . In accordance with the generally minimalistic design philosophy of the project  , semantic representations have been kept as simple as possible  . The basic principle is that the representation of a clause is a flat list of attribute-value pairs : thus for example the representation of ? Did your headache start suddenly ?? is the attribute -value list [[ utterance_type  , ynq] , [tense , past ] , [ symptom , headache] , [state , start ] , [manner , suddenly ]] In a broad domain , it is of course trivial to construct examples where this kind of representation runs into serious problems  . In the very narrow domain of a phrasebook translator  , it has many desirable properties . In particular , operations on semantic representations typically manipulate lists rather than trees  . In a broad domain , we would pay a heavy price : the lack of structure in the semantic representations would often make them ambiguous  . The very simple ontology of the phrase book domain however means that ambiguity is not a problem  ; the components of a flat list representation can never be derived from more than one functional structure  , so this structure does not need to be explicitly present  . 
Transfer rules define mappings of sets of attribute-value pairs to sets of attribute-value pairs  ; the majority of the rules map single attribute -value pairs to single attribute-value pairs  . Generation is handled by a small Definite Clause Grammar  ( DCG )  , which converts attribute-value structures into surface strings  ; its output is passed through a minimal post -transfer component  , which applies a set of rules which map fixed strings to fixed strings  . Speech synthesis is performed either by the Nuance Vocalizer TTS engine or by concatenation of recorded wave-files  , depending on the output language . 
One of the most important questions for a medical translation system is that of reliability  ; we address this issue using the methods of ( Rayner and Bouillon ,  2002) . The GSL form of the recognition grammar is run in generation mode using the Nuance generate utility to generate large numbers of random utterances  , all of which are by construction within system coverage  . These utterances are then processed through the system in batch mode using all-solutions versions of the relevant processing algorithms  . The results are checked automatically to find examples where rules are either deficient or ambiguous  . With domains of the complexity under consideration here  , we have found that it is feasible to refine the rule sets in this way so that holes and ambiguities are effectively eliminated  . 
3 A medical speech translation system
We have built a prototype medical speech translation system instantiating the functionality outlined in Section  1 and the architecture of Section 2  . The system permits spoken English input of constrained yes/no questions about the symptoms of headaches  , using a vocabulary of about 200 words . This is enough to support most of the standard examination questions for this subdomain  . There are two versions of the system , producing spoken output in French and Japanese respectively  . Since English ? Japanese is distinctly the more interesting and challenging language pair  , we will focus on this version . 
Speech recognition and source language analysis are performed using REGULUS  2  . The grammar is specialised from the large domain -independent grammar using the methods sketched in Section  2  . 
The training corpus has been constructed by hand from an initial corpus supplied by a medical professional  ; the content of the questions was kept unchanged , but where necessary the form was revised to make it more appropriate to a spoken dialogue  . 
When we felt that it would be difficult to remember what the canonical form of a question would be  , we added two or three variant forms . For example , we permit ? Does bright light make the headache worse ?? as a variant for ? Is the headache aggravated by bright light ??  , and ? Do you usually have headaches in the morning ?? as a variant for ? Does the headache usually occur in the morning ??  . The current training corpus contains about 200 examples . 
The granularity of the phrasal rules learned by grammar specialisation has been set so that the constituents in the acquired rules are VBARs  , postmodifier groups , NPs and lexical items . VBARs may include both inverted subject NPs and adverbs1  . 
Thus for example the training example ? Are the headaches usually caused by emotional upset ?? induces a toplevel rule whose contextfree skeleton is 
UTT-->VBAR,VBAR,POSTMODS
For the training example , the first VBAR in the induced rule spans the phrase ? are the headaches usually ?  , the second VBAR spans the phrase ? caused ? , and the POST MODS span the phrase ? by emotional upset ?  . The same rule could potentially be used to cover utterances like ? Is the pain sometimes preceded by nause a ?? and ? Is your headacheever associated with blurred vision ??  . The same training example will also induce several lower-level rules  , the least trivial of which are rules for VBAR and
POSTMODS with contextfree skeletons
VBAR - - > are , NP , ADV
POST MODS-->P , NP
The grammar specialisation method is described in full detail in  ( Rayner et al , 2000b ) . 
With regard to the transfer component , we have had two main problems to solve . Firstly , it is wellknown that translation from English to Japanese requires major reorganisation of the syntactic form  . 
Word-order is nearly always completely different , and category mismatches are very common . It is mainly for this reason that we chose to use a flat semantic representation  . As long as the domain is simple enough that the flat representations are unambiguous  , transfer can be carried out by mapping lists of elements into lists of elements  . For example , we translate ? are your headaches caused by fatigue ? as ? tsukare de zutsugaok or imasuka ?   ( lit . ?fatigue-CAUSAL headache-SUBJ occur-PRESENT QUESTION ?  )  . Here , the source-language representation is [[ utterance_type  , ynq ] , [ tense , present ] , [ symptom , headache ] , [ event , cause ] , [ cause , fatigue ]] and the target-language one is [[ utterance_type  , sentence ] , [ tense , present ] , [ symptom , zutsu ] ,   1This nonstandard definition of VBAR has technical advantages discussed in  ( Rayner et al , 2000c ) do your headaches often appear at night ? yoku yo runi zutsugaari masuka  ( often night-ATheadache-SUBJ is-PRES-Q ) is the pain in the front of the head ? it a miwa at a manomae no hou desu ka  ( pain-TOPIC head-OF front side is-PRES-Q ) did your headache start suddenly ? zutsuwa to tsuzen hajimarimashitaka  ( headache-TOPIC sudden start-PRES-Q ) have you had headaches for weeks ? sushukan zutsu gatsuzuiteimasuka  ( weeks headache-SUBJ have-CONT-PRES-Q ) is the pain usually superficial ? its umoit a miwa hyomenteki desu ka  ( usually pain-SUBJ superficial is-PRES-Q ) is the severity of the headaches increasing ? zutsuwahidokunatteimasuka  ( headache-TOPIC severe becoming is-PRES-Q ) Table 1: Examples of utterances covered by the prototype [ event  , okoru] , [postpos , causal] , [ cause , tsukare ]] Each line in the source representation maps into the corresponding one in the target in the obvious way  . 
The target-language grammar is constrained enough that there is only one Japanese sentence which can be generated from the given representation  . 
The second major problem for transfer relates to elliptical utterances  . These are very important due to the one-way character of the interaction : instead of being able to ask a WH-question  ( ? What does the pain feel like ?? )  , the doctor needs to ask a series of YN questions ( ? Is the pain dull ?? , ? Is the pain burning ?? , ? Is the pain a ching ?? , etc ) . We rapidly found that it was much more natural for questions after the first one to be phrased elliptically  ( ? Is the pain dull ?? , ? Burning ?? , ? A ching ??) . 
English and Japanese have however different conventions as to what types of phrase can be used elliptically  . Here , for example , it is only possible to allow some types of Japanese adjectives to standalone  . Thus we can grammatically and semantically say ? hageshii desu ka ?  ( lit . ? burning is-QUESTION ? ) but not ? * uzu kuyona desu ka ? ( lit . ?* aching is-QUESTION ?) . The problem is that adjectives like ? uzukuy on a ? must combine adnominally with a noun in this context : thus we in fact have to generate ? uzukuyo naita midesuka ?  ( ? aching-ADNOMINAL-USAGE pain is-QUESTION ? )  . Once again , however , the very limited domain makes it practical to solve the problem robustly  . There are only a handful of transformations to be implemented  , and the extra information that needs to be added is always clear from the sortal types of the semantic elements in the target representation  . 
Table 1 gives examples of utterances covered by the system  , and the translations produced . 

Integrated Wave Technologies , 2002 . http://www . i-w-t . com/investor . html . As of 15 Mar 2002 . 
Nuance , 2003 . http://www . nuance . com . As of 25 February 2003 . 
M . Rayner and P . Bouillon .  2002 . A phrase book style medical speech translator . In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ( demo track )  , Philadelphia , PA . 
M . Rayner , D . Carter , P . Bouillon , V . Digalakis , and M . Wire?n , editors . 2000a . The Spoken Language Translator . Cambridge University Press . 
M . Rayner , D . Carter , and C . Samuelsson . 2000b . Grammar specialisation . In Rayner et al ( Rayner et al , 2000a ) . 
M . Rayner , B . A . Hockey , and F . James . 2000c . Compiling language models from a linguistically motivated unification grammar  . In Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Saarbrucken , Germany . 
M . Rayner , B . A . Hockey , and J . Dowding .  2003 . An open source environment for compiling typed unification grammars into speech recognisers  . In Proceedings of the 10th EACL ( demo track ) , Budapest , Hungary . 
Regulus , 2003 . http://sourceforge . net/projects/regulus/ . 
As of 24 April 2003.
W . Wahlster , editor .  2000 . Verbmobil : Foundations of Speech-to-Speech Translation  . Springer . 
