Approaches to ZeroAdnominal Recognition
Mitsuko Yamura-Takei
Graduate School of Information Sciences
Hiroshima City University
Hiroshima , JAPAN



This paper describes our preliminary attempt to automatically recognize zero ad-nominals  , a subgroup of zero pronouns , in Japanese discourse . Based on the corpus study , we define and classify what we call ? argument -taking nouns  ( ATNs )  , ? i . e . , nouns that can appear with zero adnomi-nals . We propose an ATN recognition algorithm that consists of lexicon-based heuristics  , drawn from the observations of our analysis . We finally present the result of the algorithm evaluation and discuss future directions  . 
1 Introduction ( 1 ) Zebras always need to watch out for lions . 
Therefore , even while eating grass , so that able to see behind , eyes are placed at face-side . 

This is a surface-level English translation of a naturally occurring ? unambiguous ? Japanese discourse  . By ? unambiguous , ? we mean that Japanese speakers find no difficulty in interpreting this discourse segment  , including whose eyes are being talked about . Moreover , Japanese speakers find this segment quite ? coherent  , ? even though there seems to be no surface level indication of who is eating or seeing  , or whose eyes are being mentioned in this four -clause discourse segment  . 1 However , this is not always the case with Japanese as a Second Language  ( JSL ) learners . 2 What constitutes ? coherence ? has been studied by many researchers  . Reference is one of the linguistic devices that create textual unity  , i . e . ,  cohe-1 This was verified by an informal poll conducted on  15 native speakers of Japanese . 
2Personal communication with a JSL teacher.
sion ( Halliday and Hasan , 1976) . Reference also contributes to the semantic continuity and content connectivity of a discourse  , i . e . , coherence . Coherence represents the natural and reasonable connections between utterances that make for easy understanding  , and thus lower inferential load for hearers . 
The Japanese language uses ellipsis as its major type of referential expression  . Certain elements are ellipted when they are recoverable from a given context or from relevant knowledge  . These ellip-ses may include verbals and nominals ; the missing nominals have been termed ? zero pronouns  , ? ? zero pronominals , ? ? zero arguments , ? or simply ? zeros ? by researchers . 
How many zeros are contained in (1) , for example , largely depends on how zeros are defined . 
In the literature , zeros are usually defined as elements recoverable from the valency requirements of the predicate with which they occur  . However , does this cover all the zeros in Japanese ? Does this explain all the content connectivity created by nominal ellipsis in Japanese ? In this paper  , we introduce a subgroup of zeros , what we call ? zero adnominals , ? in contrast to other well-recognized ? zero arguments ? and investigate possible approaches to recognizing these newly-defined zeros  , in an attempt to incorporate them in an automatic zero detecting tool for JSL teachers that aims to promote effective instruction of zeros  . In section 2 , we provide the definition of zero adnominals , and present the results of their manual identification in the corpus  . Section 3 describes the theoretical and pedagogical motivations for this study  . Section 4 illustrates the syntac-tic/semantic classification of the zero adnominal examples found in the corpus  . Based on the classification results , we propose lexical information-based heuristics , and present a preliminary evaluation . In the final two sections , we present related work , and discuss possible future directions . 
2 Zero Adnominals 2.1 Definition
Recall the discourse segment in (1). Its original
Japanese is analyzed in (2).
(2) a . simauma-warai on niitumoze bra-TOP lion-DAT alwayski-o-tuke-nake reba-narimasen  . 
watch-out-for-need-to ? Zebras always need to watch out for lions  . ? b . desu kara , ? kusa-otabete-ite-mo , so ? - NOM grass-ACC eating-even-while ? So even while  ( they ) are eating grass , ? c . ?? usiro-no-ho-made mieru-yo-ni?-NOM?-ADN -behind-even see-can-for?so that  ( they ) can see even what is behind ( them )  , ? d . ? me-ga?kao-no-yoko-ni?-ADN-eye-NOM?-ADN -face-side LOC tuite-imasu  . 
placed-be ? ( their ) eyes are on the sides of ( their ) faces . ? Zero arguments are unexpressed elements that are predictable from the valency requirements of their heads  , i . e . , a given predicate of the clause . Zero nominatives in ( 2b ) and ( 2c ) are of this type . Zeroad nominals , analogously , are missing elements that can be inferred from some features specified by their head nouns  . A noun for body part , me?eyes ? in ( 2d ) usually calls hearers ? attention to ? of-whom ? information and hearers recover that information in the flow of discourse  . That missing information can be supplied by a noun phrase  ( NP ) followed by an adnominal particle no , i . e . , si-mauma-no ? zebras ? ( = their ) ? in the case of ( 2d ) above . Hence , as a first approximation , we define a zero adnominal as an unexpressed ? NP no ? in the NP no NP  ( a . k . a . , Ano B ) construction . 
2.2 The Corpus
Before we proceed , we will briefly describe the corpus that we investigated  . The corpus consists of a collection of 83 written narrative texts taken from seven different JSL textbooks with levels ranging from beginning to intermediate  . Thus , it is a representative sample of naturally -occurring  , but maximally canonical , free-from-deviation , and coherent narrative discourse . 
2.3 Identification
Our primary goal is to identify relevant information for recognizing zero adnominals  . Since such information is unavailable in the surface text  , the identification of missing adnominal elements and their referents in the corpus was based on the native speaker intuitions and the linguistic expertise of the author  , who used the definition in 2 . 1 , with occasional consultation with a JSL teaching ex-pert/linguist  . As a result , we located a total of 320 zero adnominals . These adnominals serve as the zero adnominal samples on which our later analysis is based  . 
3 Theoretical/Pedagogical Motivations 3 . 1 Centering Analysis One discourse account that models the perceived degree of coherence of a given discourse in relation to local focus of attention and the choice of referring expressions is centering  ( e . g . , Grosz,
Joshi and Weinstein , 1995).
The investigation of zeros behavior in our corpus , within the centering framework , shows that zero adnominals make a considerable contribution to center continuity in discourse by realizing the central entity in an utterance  ( called Cb ) just as well-acknowledged zero arguments do . 
Recall example (2) . Its center data structure is given in (3) . The Cf ( forward-looking center ) list is a set of discourse entities that appear in each utterance  ( U i )  . The Cb ( backward-looking center ) is a special member of the Cf list , and is meant to represent the entity that the utterance is most centrally about  ; it is the most highly ranked element of the Cf ( Ui-1 ) that is realized in Ui . 
(3) a . Cb:none [ Cf:zebra , lion]b . Cb:zebra [ Cf:zebra , grass]c . Cb:zebra [ Cf:zebra , what is behind]d . Cb : zebra [ Cf : zebra , eye , face-side]In(3b ) and (3c ) , the Cb is realized as a zero nominative , and in (3d ) , it is realized by the same entity ( zebra ) as a zero adnominal , maintaining the CONTINUE transition that by definition is maximally coherent  . This matches the intuitively perceived degree of coherence in the utterance  . Our corpus contains a total of 138 zero adnominals that refer to previously mentioned entities  ( 15 . 56% of all the zero Cbs ) , and realize the Cb of the utterance in which they occur  , as in (3d = 2d ) . 
Our corpus study shows that discourse coherence can be more accurately characterized  , in the centering account , by recognizing the role of zero adnominals as a valid realization of Cbs  ( see Ya-mura-Takei et al , ms . for detailed discussion ) . 
This is our first motivation towards zero adnominal recognition  . 
3.2 Zero Detector
Yamura-Takei et al ( 2002 ) developed an automatic zero identifying tool . This program , Zero Detector ( henceforth , ZD ) takes Japanese written narrative texts as input and provides the zero-specified texts and their underlying structures as output  . This aims to draw learners ? and teachers ? attention to zeros  , on the basis of a hypothesis about ideal conditions for second language acquisition  , by making invisible zeros visible . ZD regards teachers as its primary users , and helps them predict the difficulties with zeros that students might encounter  , by analyzing text in advance . Such difficulties often involve failure to recognize discourse coherence created by invisible referential devices  , i . e . , the center continuity maintained by the use of various types of zeros  . 
As our centering analysis above indicates , inclusion of zero adnominals into ZD?s detecting capability enables a more comprehensive coverage of the zeros that contributes to discourse coherence  . 
This is our project goal.
4 Towards Zero Adnominal Recognition 4 . 1 Semantic Classification Unexpressed elements need to be predicted from other expressed elements  . Thus , we need to characterize B nouns ( which are overt ) in the ( Ano ) B construction , assuming that zero adnominals ( A ) are triggered by their head nouns ( B ) and that certain types of NPs tend to take implicit  ( A ) arguments . Our first approach is to use an existing A no B classification scheme  . We adopted , from among many AnoB works , a classification modeled on Shimazu , Naito and Nomura (1985 ,  1986 , and 1987 ) because it offers the most comprehensive classification  ( Fais and Yamura-Takei , ms ) . 
Table 1 below describes the five main groups that we used to categorize  ( Ano ) B phrases . 
4.2 Results
We classified our 320? ( Ano ) B ? examples into the five groups described in the previous section  . 
Group V comprised the vast majority , while approximately the same percentage of examples was included in Groups I  , II and III . There were no Group IV examples . The number and percentage of examples of each group are presented in Table  2  . 

Group  #of examples
I 33 (10.31%)
II 23 (7.19%)
III 35 (10.94%)
IV0 (0.00%)
V 229 (71.56%)
Total 320 (100%)
Table 2: Distribution of semantic types
Group  #Definition Example from Shimazu et al ( 1986 ) IA : argument B : nominalized verbal element ko to banorikai ? word-no-understanding ? IIA : noun denoting an entity B : abstract relational noun birunomae ? building-no-front ? IIIA : noun denoting an entity B : abstract attribute noun has in on a gasa ? bridge-no-length ? IVA : nominalized verbal element B : argument kenkano hutari ? argument-no-two people ? VA : noun expressing attribute B : noun denoting an entity ningenno at a ma?human-no-head ? Table  1:   ( Ano ) B classification scheme We conjecture that certain nouns are more likely to take zero adnominals than others  , and that the head nouns which take zero adnominals  , extracted from our corpus , are representative samples of this particular group of nouns  . We call them ? argument-taking nouns ( ATNs ) . ? ATNs syntactically require arguments and are semantically dependent on their arguments  . We use the term ATN only to refer to a particular group of nouns that can take implicit arguments  ( i . e . , zero adnominals ) . 
We closely examined the 127 different ATN tokens among the 320 cases of zero adnominals and classified them into the four types that correspond to Groups I  , II , III and V in Table 1 . We then listed their syntactic/semantic properties based on the syntactic/semantic properties presented in the GoiTaikei Japanese Lexicon  ( hereafter GT , Ikehara , Miyazaki , Shirai , Yokoo , Nakaiwa , Ogura , Oyama , and Hayashi ,  1997) . GT is a semantic feature dictionary that defines 300  , 0 00 nouns based on an ontological hierarchy of approximately  2  , 800 semantic attributes . It also uses nine part-of-speech codes for nouns . Table 3 lists the syntactic/semantic characterizations of the nouns in each type and the number of examples in the corpus  . What bold means in the table will be explained later in section  4  . 3 . 
Type Syntactic properties Semantic properties # Examples Human activity  21 zikosyokai ? self-introduction ? I Nominalized verbal  , derived ( from verb ) noun , common noun phenomenon 3 ent yo ? extension ? Location 13 mae ? front ? II formal noun , common noun Time 1yokuzitu?next day ?
Amount 9 sinty o ? height ?
Value 2 nedan ? price ?
Emotion 1 kimoti ? feeling ?
Material phenomenon 1nioi?smell ?
Name 1 namae ? name ?
III Derived ( from verb/ad-jective ) noun , suffix noun , common noun
Order1ichiban ? first ?
Human ( kinship ) 14 haha ? mother ?
Animate ( body part ) 14 at a ma?head ?
Organization 7 kaisya ? company ?
Housing ( part ) 7 do a ? door ?
Human ( profession ) 4 sensei ? teacher ?
Human ( role ) 4 dokus ya ? reader ?
Human ( relationship ) 3 dooryoo ? colleague ?
Clothing 3 kutu ? shoes ?
Tool2 saihu ? purse ?
Human ( biological feature ) 2zyosei ? woman ?
Man-made 2 kuruma ? car ?
Facility 1 by oin ? hospital ?
Building 1niwa ? garden ?
Housing ( body ) 1 garee ji ? garage ?
Housing ( attachment ) 1 do a ? door ?
Creative work 1 sakuhin ? work ?
Substance 1kuuki ? air ?
Language 1nihongo ? Japanese ?
Document1 pasupooto ? passport ?
Chart 1 chizu ? map ?
Animal 1 pet to ? pet ?
V Common noun ? ( unregistered ) 2 hoomusute i ? homestay ? Total 127
Table 3: Subtypes of ATNs
When we examine these four types , we see that they partially overlap with some particular types of nouns studied theoretically in the literature  . Teramura ( 1991 ) subcategorizes locative relational nouns like mae ? front ?  , naka ? inside ? , and migi ? right ? as ? incomplete nouns ? that require elements to complete their meanings  ; these are a subset of Type II . Iori ( 1997 ) argues that certain nouns are categorized as ? one-place nouns  , ? in which he seems to include Type I and some of Type V nouns  . 
Kojima ( 1992 ) examines socalled ? low-independence nouns ? and categorizes them into three types  , according to their syntactic behaviors in Japanese copula expressions  . These cover subsets of our Type I , II , III and V . In computational work , Bond , Ogura , and Ikehara ( 1995 ) extracted 205 ? trigger nouns ? from a corpus aligned with English  . These nouns trigger the use of possessive pronouns when they are machine-translated into English  . They seem to correspond mostly to our Type V nouns  . Our result offers a comprehensive coverage which subsumes all of the types of nouns discussed in these accounts  . 
Next , let us more closely look at the properties expressed by our samples  . The most prevalent ATNs ( 21 in number ) are nominalized verbals in the semantic category of human activity  . The next most common are kinship nouns ( 14 in number ) and body part nouns ( 14 )  , both in the common noun category ; location nouns (13) , either in the common noun or formal noun category  ; and nouns that express amount ( 9 ) whose syntactic category is either common or de adjectival  . The others include some ? human ? subcategories , etc . 
The part-of-speech subcategory , ? nominalized verbal ? ( sahen-meishi ) is a reasonably accurate indicator of Type 1 nouns . So is ? formal noun ? ( keishiki-meishi ) for Type II , although this does not offer a full coverage of this type  . Numeral noun and counter suffix noun compounds also represent a major subset of Type III  . 
Semantic properties , on the other hand , seem helpful to extract certain groups such as location  ( Type II )  , amount ( Type III ) , k in ship , body part , organization , and some human subcategories ( Type V ) . But other low-frequency ATN samples are problematic for determining an appropriate level of categorization in GT?s semantic hierarchy tree  . 
4.3 Algorithm
Our goal is to build a system that can identify the presence of zero adnominals  . In this section , we propose an ATN ( hence zero adnominal ) recognition algorithm . The algorithm consists of a set of lexicon-based heuristics  , drawn from the observations in section 4 . 2 . 
The algorithm takes morphologically-analyzed text as input and provides ATN candidates as output  . The process consists of the following three phases :  ( i ) bare noun extraction ,   ( ii ) syntactic category ( part-of-speech ) checking , and ( iii ) semantic category checking . 
Zero adnominals usually cooccur with ? bare nouns . ? Bare nouns , in our definition , are nouns without any prenominal modifiers , including demonstratives , explicit adnominal phrases , relative clauses , and adjectives . 3 Bare nouns are often simplex as in (4a ) , and sometimes are compound ( e . g . , numeral noun+counter suffix noun ) as in (4b ) . 
These are immediately followed by case-marking , topic/focus-marking or other particles ( e . g . , ga , o , ni , wa , mo) . 
(4) a . at a ma-gahead-NOM b .   70-paasento-o   70-percent-ACC The extracted nouns under this definition are initial candidates for ATNs  . 
Once bare nouns are identified , they are checked against our syntactic-property -   ( i . e . , part-of-speech , POS ) based- , followed by semantic-attribute ( SEM ) based-heuristics . For semantic filtering , we decided to use the noun groups of high frequency  ( more than two tokens categorized in the same group  ; indicated in bold in Table 3 above ) to minimize a risk of overgeneralization . 
The algorithm checks the following two conditions , for each bare noun , in this order : [1] If POS = [ nominalized verval , derived noun , formal noun , numeral + counter suffix compound] , label it as ATN . 
[2] If SEM = [2610: location , 2585: amount , 362: organization , 552: animate(part) , 111: human ( relation ) , 224: human ( profession ) ,   72:   3 Japanese do not use determiners for its nouns . 
human ( kinship ) , 866: housing ( part ) , 813: clothing ] , label it as ATN . 4 Therefore , nouns that pass condition [1] are labeled as ATNs , without checking their semantic properties . A noun that fails to pass condition [1] and passes condition [2] is labeled as ATN . A noun that fails to match both [1] and [2] is labeled as non-ATN . Consider the nouns int yo ? height ? for example . Its POS code in GT is common noun , so it fails condition [1] and goes to [2] . This noun is categorized in the ?2591: measures ? group which is under the ?2585: amount ? node in the hierarchy tree , so it is labeled as ATN . In this way , the algorithm labels each bare noun as either ATN or non- 

4.4 Evaluation
To assess the performance of our algorithm , we ran it by hand on a sample text . 5 The test corpus contains a total of 136 bare nouns . We then matched the result against our manually -extracted ATNs  ( 34 in number )  . The result is shown in Table 4 below , with recall and precision metrics . As a baseline measurement , we give the accuracy for classifying every bare noun as ATN  . For comparison , we also provide the results when only either POS -based or semantic-based heuristics are applied  . 
Recall Precision
Baseline 34/34 (100%) 34/136 (25.00%)
POS only 2/34 (5.88%) 2/6 (33.33%)
Semantic only 30/34 (88 . 23%) 30/35 (85 . 71%) POS/Semantic 32/34 (94 . 11%) 32/41 (78 . 04%)
Table 4: Algorithm evaluation
Semantic categories make a greater contribution to identifying ATNs than POS  . However , the POS/Semantic algorithm achieved a higher recall but a lower precision than the semantic -only algorithm did  . This is mainly because the former produced more over detected errors  . Closer examination of those errors indicates that most of them  ( 8 out of 9 cases ) involve verbal idiomatic expressions that contain ATN candidate nouns  , as example (5) shows . 
4 These numbers indicate the numbers assigned to each semantic category in GoiTaikei Japanese Lexicon  ( GT )  . 
5 This is taken from the same genre as our corpus for the initial analysis  , i . e . , another JSL textbook . 
(5 ) me-o-sama sue ye-ACC-wake ? wake up ? Although me ? eye ? is a strong ATN candidate  , as in example (2) above , case ( 5 ) should be treated as part of an idiomatic expression rather than as a zero adnominal expression  . 6 Thus , we decided to add another condition , [0] below , before we apply the POS/SEM checks . The revised algorithm is as follows: [0] If part of idiom in [ idiom list] , 7 label it as non-ATN . 
[1] If POS = [ nominalized verval , derived noun , formal noun , numeral + counter suffix compound] , label it as ATN . 
[2] If SEM = [2610: location , 2585: amount , 362: organization , 552: animate(part) , 111: human ( relation ) , 224: human ( profession ) , 72: human ( kinship ) , 866: housing ( part ) , 813: clothing ] , label it as ATN . 

When a noun matches condition [0] , it will not be checked against [1] and [2] . When this applies , the evaluation result is no was shown below . 
Recall Precision
POS only 2/34 (5.88%) 2/4 (50.00%)
Semantic only 30/34 (88 . 23%) 31/35 (88 . 57%) POS/Semantic 32/34 (94 . 11%) 32/33 (96 . 96%)
Table 5: Revised-algorithm evaluation
The revised algorithm , with both syntac-tic/semantic heuristics and the additional idiom-filtering rule  , achieved a precision of 96 . 96% . The result still includes some over/under -detecting errors  , which will require future attention . 
5 Related Work
Associative anaphora ( e . g . , Poesio and Vieira , 1998) and indirect anaphora ( e . g . , Murata and Nagao ,  2000 ) are virtually the same phenomena that this paper is concerned with  , as illustrated in (6) . 
6 Vieira and Poesio ( 2000 ) also list ? idiom ? as one use of definite descriptions  ( English equivalent to Japanese bare nouns )  , along with same head/associative anaphora , etc . 
7 The list currently includes eight idiomatic samples from the test data  , but it should of course be expanded in the future . 
(6) a . a house ? the roof b . i e ? house ? ? y ane ? roof ? c . i e ? house ?? ( ?- no ) yane ? ( ? ? s ) roof ? We take a zero adnominal approach , as in (6c ) , because we assume , for our pedagogical purpose discussed in section 3  . 2 , that zero adnominals , by making them visible , more effectively prompt people to notice referential links than lexical relations  , such as meronymy in (6a ) and (6b ) . 
However , insights from other approaches are worth attention  . There is a strong resemblance between bare nouns ( that zero adnominals cooccur with ) in Japanese and definite descriptions in English in their behaviors  , especially in their referential properties ( Sakahara ,  2000) . The task of classifying several different uses of definite descriptions  ( Vieira and Poesio , 2000; Bean and Riloff ,  1999 ) is somewhat analogous to that for bare nouns . Determining definiteness of Japanese noun phrases  ( Heine , 1998; Bond et al , 1995; Murata and Nagao ,  1993 ) 8 is also relevant to ATN ( which is definite in nature ) recognition . 
6 Future Directions
We have proposed an ATN ( hence zero adnominal ) recognition algorithm , with lexicon-based heuristics that were inferred from our corpus investigation  . The evaluation result shows that the syntactic /semantic feature-based generalization  ( using GT ) is capable of identifying potential ATNs . The evaluation on a larger corpus , of course , is essential to verify this claim . Implementation of the algorithm is also in our future agenda  . 
This approach has its limitations , too , as is pointed out by Kurohashi et al (1999) . One limitation is illustrated by a pair of Japanese nouns  , sakusya ? author ? and sakka ? writer , ? which fall under the same GT semantic property group  ( at the deepest level )  . 9 These nouns have an intuitively different status for their valency requirements  ; the former requires ? of-what work ? information , while the latter does not .   10 We risk over - or under generation when we designate certain semantic properties  , no matter how finegrained they might 8 Their interests are in machine translation of Japanese into languages that require determiners for their nouns  . 
9This example pair is taken from Iori (1997).
1 0 This intuition was verified by an informal poll conducted on seven native speakers of Japanese  . 
be . We proposed the idiom-filtering rule to solve one case of over-detection  . A larger-scale evaluation of the algorithm and its error analysis might lead to additional rules that refine extracted ATN candidates  . Insights from the works presented in the previous section could also be incorporated  . 
Determining an appropriate level of generalization is a significant factor for this type of approach  , and this was done , in this study , according to our introspective judgments . More systematic methods should be explored . 
A related issue is the notoriously hard-to-define argument-adjunct distinction for nouns  , which is closely related to the distinction between ATNs and non-ATNs  . We experimentally tested seven native-Japanese -speaking subjects in distinguishing these two  . We presented 26 nouns in the same GT semantic category ( at the deepest level ) : ? persons who write . ? There were six nouns which all the subjects agreed on categorizing as ATNs  , including sakusha ? author . ? Five nouns , including sakka ? writer , ? on the other hand , were judged as non-ATNs by all the subjects . For the remaining 15 nouns , however , their judgments varied widely . 
As Somers (1984) suggests for verbs , binary distinction does not work well for nouns , either . This distinction might largely depend on the context in some cases  . This is also something we will need to address . 
In this study , we focused on ? implicit argu-ment-taking nouns . ? There may be a line ( although it may be very thin ) between nouns which take explicit arguments and those which take implicit arguments  . This distinction also needs further investigation in the corpus  . 


Some of the foundation work for this paper was done while the author was at NTT Communication Science Laboratories  , NTT Corporation , Japan , as a research intern . The author would like to thank Laurel Fais and Miho Fujiwara for their support  , and anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions that helped elaborate an earlier draft into this paper  . 


Bean , David L . and Ellen Riloff .  1999 . Corpusbased identification of nonanaphoric noun phrases  . In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the ACL ,  373-380 . 
Bond , Francis , Kentaro Ogura , and Satoru Ikehara .  1995 . 
Possessive pronouns as determiners in Japanese-to -English machine translation  . In Proceedings of the 2nd Pacific Association for Computational Linguistics conference  . 
Bond , Francis , Kentaro Ogura , and Tsukasa Kawaoka . 
1995 . Noun phrase reference in Japanese-to-English machine translation  . In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation  ,  114 . 
Fais , Laurel and Mitsuko Yamura-Takei ( under review ) . 
Salience ranking in centering : The case of a Japanese complex nominal  . ms . 
Grosz , Barbara J . , Aravind Joshi , and Scott Weinstein . 
1995 . Centering : a framework for modeling the local coherence of discourse  . Computational Linguistics , 21(2), 203-225 . 
Halliday , M . A . K . and Ruqaiya Hasan .  1976 . Cohesion in English . Longman , New York . 
Heine , Julia E .  1998 . Definiteness prediction for Japanese noun phrases  . In Proceedings of the
COLING/ACL?98, Quebec , 519-525.
Ikehara , Satoru , Masahiro Miyazaki , Satoshi Shirai , Akio Yokoo , Hiromi Nakaiwa , Kentarou Ogura , and Yoshifumi Oyama , editors .  1997 . GoiTaikei ? Japanese Lexicon . Iwanami Publishing , Tokyo . 
Iori , Isao .  1997 . Aspects of Cohesion in Japanese Texts . 
Unpublished PhD dissertation , Osaka University ( in

Kojima , Sachiko .  1992 . Low-independence nouns and copula expressions . In IPA Technical Report No . 3-125, 175-198 ( in Japanese) . 
Kurohashi and Sakai .  1999 . Semantic analysis of Japanese noun phrases : A new approach to dictionary-based understanding  . In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the ACL ,  481-488 . 
Murata , Masaki and Makoto Nagao .  1993 . Determination of referential property and number of nouns in Japanese sentences for machine translation into English  . In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in 
Machine Translation , 218-225.

Murata , Masaki and Makoto Nagao .  2000 . Indirect reference in Japanese sentences . In Botley , S . and McEnerry , A . ( eds . ) Corpusbased and Computational Approaches to Discourse Anaphora  ,  189-212 . 
John Benjamins , Amsterdam/Philadelphia.
Poesio , Massimo and Renata Vieira .  1998 . A corpus-based investigation of definite description use  . Computational Linguistics , 24(2):183-216 . 
Sakahara , Shigeru .  2000 . Advances in Cognitive Linguistics . Hituzi Syobo Publishing , Tokyo , Japan ( in

Shimazu , Akira , Shozo Naito , and Hirosato Nomura . 
1985 . Classification of semantic structures in Japanese sentences with special reference to the noun phrase  ( in Japanese )  . In Information Processing Society of Japan , Natural Language Special Interest
Group Technical Report , No . 47-4.
Shimazu , Akira , Shozo Naito , and Hirosato Nomura . 
1986 . Analysis of semantic relations between nouns connected by a Japanese particle ? no  . ? Mathematical Linguistics ,  15(7) , 247-266 ( in Japanese) . 
Shimazu , Akira , Shozo Naito , and Hirosato Nomura . 
1987 . Semantic structure analysis of Japanese noun phrases with adnominal particles  . In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the ACL , Stanford ,  123-130 . 
Somers , Harold L .  1984 . On the validity of the comple-ment-adjunct distinction in valency grammar  . Linguistics 22,507-53 . 
Teramura , Hideo .  1991 . Japanese Syntax and Meaning II . Kurosio Publishers , Tokyo ( in Japanese) . 
Vieira , Renata and Massimo Poesio .  2000 . An empirically based system for processing definite descriptions  . Computational Linguistics , 26(4):525-579 . 
Yamura-Takei , Mitsuko , Laurel Fais , Miho Fujiwara and Teruaki Aizawa .  2003 . Forgotten referential links in Japanese discourse and centering  . ms . 
Yamura-Takei , Mitsuko , Miho Fujiwara , Makoto Yo-shie , and Teruaki Aizawa .  2002 . Automatic linguistic analysis for language teachers : The case of zeros  . 
In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING )  , Taipei ,  1114-1120 . 

