Improving the Accuracy of Subcategorizations Acquired from Corpora 
Naoki Yoshinaga
Department of Computer Science,
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo , Bunkyoku , Tokyo , 113-0033


This paper presents a method of improving the accuracy of subcategorization frames  ( SCFs ) acquired from corpora to augment existing lexicon resources  . I estimate a confidence value of each SCF using corpus-based statistics  , and then perform clustering of SCF confidence -value vectors for words to capture cooccurrence tendency among SCFs in the lexicon  . I apply my method to SCFs acquired from corpora using lexicons of two largescale lexicalized grammars  . 
The resulting SCFs achieve higher precision and recall compared to SCFs obtained by naive frequency cutoff  . 
1 Introduction
Recently , a variety of methods have been proposed for acquisition of subcategorization frames  ( SCFs ) from corpora ( surveyed in ( Korhonen ,  2002)) . 
One interesting possibility is to use these techniques to improve the coverage of existing largescale lexicon resources such as lexicons of lexicalized grammars  . However , there has been little work on evaluating the impact of acquired SCFs with the exception of  ( Carroll and Fang ,  2004) . 
The problem when we integrate acquired SCFs into existing lexicalized grammars is lower quality of the acquired SCFs  , since they are acquired in an unsupervised manner  , rather than being manually coded . If we attempt to compensate for the poor precision by being less strict in filtering out less likely SCFs  , then we will end up with a larger number of noisy lexical entries  , which is problematic for parsing with lexicalized grammars  ( Sarkar et al ,  2000) . We thus need some method of selecting the most reliable set of SCFs from the system output as demonstrated in  ( Korhonen ,  2002) . 
In this paper , I present a method of improving the accuracy of SCFs acquired from corpora in order to augment existing lexicon resources  . If irst estimate a confidence value that a word can have each SCF  , using corpus-based statistics . To capture latent cooccurrence tendency among SCFs in the target lexicon  , I next perform clustering of SCF confidence-value vectors of words in the acquired lexicon and the target lexicon  . Since each centroid value of the obtained clusters indicates whether the words in that cluster have each SCF  , we can eliminate SCFs acquired in error and predict possible SCFs according to the centroids  . 
I applied my method to SCFs acquired from a corpus of newsgroup posting about mobile phones  ( Carroll and Fang ,  2004) , using the XTAG English grammar ( XTAG Research Group ,  2001 ) and the LinGO English Resource Grammar ( ERG )   ( Copestake ,  2002) . I then compared the resulting SCFs with SCFs obtained by naive frequency cutoff to observe the effects of clustering  . 
2 Background 2.1 SCF Acquisition for Lexicalized

I start by acquiring SCFs for a lexicalized grammar from corpora by the method described in  ( Carroll and Fang ,  2004) . 
#S ( EPATTERN:TARGET yield:SUBCAT ( VSUBCAT NP ) : CLASSES ( (24 51 161 )  5293 ) : RELIABILITY0:FREQSCORE 0 . 26861903: FREQCNT1:TLTL ( VV 0 ) : SLTL ( ( route  NN1 ) ) : OLT1L ( ( result  NN2 ) ) : OLT2L NIL : OLT3L NIL : LRL 0 ) ) Figure 1: An acquired SCF for a verb ? yield ? In their study  , they first acquire finegrained SCFs using the unsupervised method proposed by Briscoe and Carroll  ( 1997 ) and Korhonen ( 2002 )  . 
Figure 1 shows an example of one acquired SCF entry for a verb ? yield  . ? Each SCF entry has several fields about the observed SCF  . I explain here only its portion related to this study  . The TARGET field is a word stem , the first number in the CLASSES field indicates an SCF type  , and the FREQCNT field shows how often words derivable from the word stem appeared with the SCF type in the training corpus  . The obtained SCFs comprise the total 163 SCF types which are originally based on the SCFs in the ANLT  ( Boguraev and Briscoe , 1987) and COMLEX ( Grishman et al , 1994) dictionaries . In this example , the SCF type 24 corresponds to an SCF of transitive verb . 
They then obtain SCFs for the target lexicalized grammar  ( the LinGOERG ( Copestake ,  2002 ) in their study ) using a handcrafted translation map from these 163 types to the SCF types in the target grammar . They reported that they could achieve a coverage improvement of  4  . 5% but that average parse time was doubled . This is because they did not use any filtering method for the acquired SCFs to suppress an increase of the lexical ambiguity  . We definitely need some method to control the quality of the acquired SCFs  . 
Their method is extendable to any lexicalized grammars  , if we could have a translation map from these 163 types to the SCF types in the grammar . 
2 . 2 Clustering of Verb SCF Distributions There is some related work on clustering of verbs according to their SCF probability distributions  ( Schulte im Walde and Brew , 2002; Korhonen et al ,  2003) . Schulte im Walde and ( true ) probability distribution 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 subcategorization frame pr o ba bi lit y apply recognition threshold Figure  2: SCF probability distributions for apply Brew ( 2002 ) used the k-Means ( Forgy ,  1965 ) algorithm to cluster SCF distributions for monosemous verbs while Korhonen et al  ( 2003 ) applied other clustering methods to cluster polysemic SCF data  . These studies aim at obtaining verb semantic classes  , which are closely related to syntactic behavior of argument selection  ( Levin ,  1993) . 
Korhonen ( 2002 ) made use of SCF distributions for representative verbs in Levin?s verb classes to obtain accurate backoff estimates for all the verbs in the classes  . In this study , I assume that there are classes whose element words have identical SCF types  . I then obtain these classes by clustering acquired SCFs  , using information available in the target lexicon  , and directly use the obtained classes to eliminate implausible SCFs  . 
3 Method 3 . 1 Estimation of Confidence Values for SCFs I first create an SCF confidence-value vector vi for each word wi  , an object for clustering . Each element vij in vi represents a confidence value of SCFsj for a word wi  , which expresses how strong the evidence is that the word wi has SCF sj  . Note that a confidence value confij is not a probability that a word wi appears with SCF sj but a probability of existence of SCF sj for the word wi  . In this study , I assume that a word wi appears with each SCF sj with a certain  ( nonzero ) probability ? ij ( = p ( sij  wi ) > 0 where ? j ? ij = 1 )  , but only SCFs whose probabilities exceed a certain threshold are recognized in the lexicon  . I hereafter call this threshold recognition threshold  . Figure 2 depicts a probability distribution of SCF for apply  . 
In this context , I can regard a confidence value of each SCF as a probability that the probability of that SCF exceeds the recognition threshold  . 
One intuitive way to estimate a confidence value is to assume an observed probability  , i . e . , relative frequency , is equal to a probability ? ij of SCF sj for a word wi  ( ? ij = freq ij/?j freq ij where freqij is a frequency that a word wi appears with SCFs j in corpora  )  . When the relative frequency of sj for a word wi exceeds the recognition threshold  , its confidence value confij is set to 1 , and otherwise confij is set to 0 . However , an observed probability is unreliable for infrequent words  . Moreover , when we want to encode confidence values of reliable SCFs in the target grammar  , we cannot distinguish the confidence values of those SCFs with confidence values of acquired SCFs  . 
The other promising way to estimate a confidence value  , which I adopt in this study , is to assume a probability ? ij as a stochastic variable in the context of Bayesian statistics  ( Gelman et al ,  1995) . In this context , a posteriori distribution of the probability ? i j of an SCF sj for a word w i is given by : p  ( ? ijD )  =
P (? ij)P ( D?ij)
P ( D ) =
P (? ij)P ( D ? ij ) ? 10P ( ? ij)P ( D ? ij ) d?ij , (1) where P (? ij ) is a priori distribution , and D is the data we have observed . Since every occurrence of SCFs in the data D is independent with each other  , the data D can be regarded as Bernoulli trials . When we observe the data D that a word wi appears n times in total and x  ( ? n ) times with SCF sj , 1 its conditional distribution is represented by binominal distribution : 
P ( D ? ij ) = ( nx ) ? xij(1 ? ? ij)(n?x) . (2) To calculate this a posteriori distribution , I need to define the a priori distribution P ( ? ij )  . The question is which probability distribution of ? ij can appropriately reflects prior knowledge  . In other words , it should encode knowledge we use to estimate SCFs for unknown words  . I simply determine it from distributions of observed probability values of sj for words seen in  corpora2 by using 1The values of FREQCNT is used to obtain n and x . 
2I estimated a priori distribution separately for each type of SCF from words that appeared more than  50 times in the training corpus in the following experiments  . 
a method described in ( Tsuruoka and Chikayama ,  2001) . In their study , they assume a priori distribution as the beta distribution defined as : p  ( ? ij ? , ?) = ???1ij(1? ? ij ) ? ?1
B (? , ? )  , (3) where B (? , ?) = ?10 ? ? ?1 ij(1 ? ? ij ) ? ?1 d?ij . The value of ? and ? is determined by momentest i -mation  . 3 By substituting Equations 2 and 3 into Equation 1  , If inally obtain the a posteriori distribution p ( ? ijD ) as : p ( ? ij ? , ?  , D ) = c ? ? x + ? ? 1 ij(1 ? ? ij ) n ? x + ? ? ? ? ? ? , (4) where c = ( nx ) /( B(? , ?)?10P (? ij)P ( D?ij)d?ij ) . 
When I regard the recognition threshold as t , I can calculate a confidence value confij that a word w i can have s j by integrating the a posteriori distribution p  ( ? ijD ) from the threshold t to 1: confij = ? 1 tc ?? x+??1i j ( 1? ? ij ) n ? x + ? ? 1 d ? ij . (5) By using this confidence value , I represent an SCF confidence-value vector vi for a word wi in the acquired SCF lexicon  ( vij = confij )  . 
In order to combine SCF confidence-value vectors for words acquired from corpora and those for words in the lexicon of the target grammar  , I also represent an SCF confidence-value vector v ? i for a word w ? i in the target grammar by : v?ij  =    1? ? w?i has sj in the lexicon ? otherwise ,   ( 6 ) where ? expresses an unreliability of the lexicon . 
In this study , It rust the lexicon as much as possible by setting ? to the machine epsilon  . 
3.2 Clustering of SCF Confidence-Value

I next present a clustering algorithm of words according to their SCF confidence-value vectors  . 
Given k initial representative vectors called centroids  , my algorithm iteratively updates clusters by assigning each data object to its closest centroid  3The expectation and variance of the beta distribution are made equal to those of the observed probability values  . 
Input : a set of SCF confidence-value vectors V =     v1  , v2 ,   .   .   .   , vn ? Rma distance function d : Rm ? Zm ? Ra function to compute a centroid ?: v  j1   , vj2 ,   .   .   . , vjl ? Zminitial centroids C =  c1, c2, .   .   . , ck?Zm
Output : a set of clusters Cj while cluster members are not stable do for each cluster CjC j = vi?cl  , d(vi , cj ) ? d(vi , cl )   ( 1 ) end for each for each clusters C j c j = ? ( C j )   ( 2 ) end for each end while return C j
Figure 3: Clustering algorithm for SCF confidence-value vectors and recomputing centroids until cluster members becomes table  , as depicted in Figure 3 . 
Although this algorithm is roughly based on the k -Means algorithm  , it is different from k-Means in important respects  . I assume the elements of the centroids of the clusters as a discrete value of  0 or 1 because I want to obtain clusters whose element words have the exactly same set of SCFs  . 
I then derive a distance function d to calculate a probability that a data object vi should have an SCF set represented by a centroid cm as follows: d  ( vi , cm ) = ? cmj=1vij ? ? cmj = 0(1 ? vij ) . (7) By using this function , I can determine the closest cluster as argmax
Cmd(vi , cm ) ((1) in Figure 3).
After every assignment , I calculate a next centroid cm of each cluster Cm  ( (2 ) in Figure 3 ) by comparing a probability that the words in the cluster have an SCF sj and a probability that the words in the cluster do not have the SCF sj as follows : cmj = ???  1 when ? vi ? Cmvij > ? vi?Cm ( 1?vij ) 0 otherwise . 

In ext address the way to determine the number of clusters and initial centroids  . In this study , I assume that the most of the possible set of SCFs for words are included in the lexicon of the target grammar  , 4 and make use of the existing sets of 4When the lexicon is less accurate , I can determine the number of clusters using other algorithms  ( Hamerly ,  2003) . 
SCFs for the words in the lexicon to determine the number of clusters and initial centroids  . If irst extract SCF confidence-value vectors from the lexicon of the grammar  . By eliminating duplications from them and regarding ? =  0 in Equation 6  , I obtain initial centroids cm . I then initialize the number of clusters k to the number of cm  . 
If in ally update the acquired SCFs using the obtained clusters and the confidence values of SCFs in this order  . I call the following procedure centroid cutoff t when the confidence values are estimated under the recognition threshold t  . Since the value cmj of a centroid cmin a cluster Cm represents whether the words in the cluster can have SCF sj  , I first obtain SCFs by collecting SCF sj for a word wi ? Cm when cmj is  1  . I then eliminate implausible SCF ssj for w i from the resulting SCFs according to their confidence values confij  . 
In the following , I compare centroid cutoff with frequency cutoff and confidence cutoff t  , which use relative frequencies and confidence values calculated under the recognition threshold t  , respectively . Note that these cutoffs use only corpus-based statistics to eliminate SCFs  . 
4 Experiments
I applied my method to SCFs acquired from 135 , 9 02 sentences of mobile phone newsgroup postings archived by Google  . com , which is the same data used in ( Carroll and Fang ,  2004) . The number of acquired SCFs was 14 , 783 for 3 , 864 word stems , while the number of SCF types in the data was 97 . I then translated the 163 SCF types into the SCF types of the XTAG English grammar  ( XTAG Research Group , 2001) and the LinGOERG ( Copestake ,  2002 ) 5 using translation mappings built by Ted Briscoe and Dan Flickinger from  23 of the SCF types into 13   ( out of 57 possible ) XTAGSCF types , and 129 into 54 ( out of 216 possible ) ERG SCF types . 
To evaluate my method , I split each lexicon of the two grammars into the training SCFs and the testing SCFs  . The words in the testing SCFs were included in the acquired SCFs  . When I apply my method to the acquired SCFs using the training SCFs and evaluate the resulting SCFs with the  5I used the same version of the LinGOERG as ( Carroll and Fang ,  2004) (1 . 4; April 2003) but the map is updated . 

Recall


BCD
A : frequency cutoff
B : confidence cutoff 0.01
C : confidence cutoff 0.03
D : confidence cutoff 0.05 0.4 0.6 0.8
Recall





A : frequency cutoff
B : confidence cutoff 0.01
C : confidence cutoff 0.03
D : confidence cutoff 0.05
XTAGERG
Figure 4: Precision and recall of the resulting SCFs using confidence cutoffs and frequency cutoff : the XTAG English grammar  ( left ) the LinGOERG ( right )  0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8
Recall





A : frequency cutoff
B : centroid cutoff *0.05
C : centroid cutoff 0.05
D : confidence cutoff 0.05 0.4 0.6 0.8
Recall

A B


A : frequency cutoff
B : centroid cutoff *0.05
C : centroid cutoff 0.05
D : confidence cutoff 0.05
XTAGERG
Figure 5: Precision and recall of the resulting SCFs using confidence cutoff and centroid cutoff : the XTAG English grammar  ( left ) the LinGOERG ( right ) testing SCFs , we can estimate to what extent my method can preserve reliable SCFs for words unknown to the grammar  . 6 The XTAG lexicon was split into 9 , 437 SCFs for 8 , 3 99 word stems as training and 423 SCFs for 280 word stems as testing , while the ERG lexicon was split into 1 , 608 SCFs for 1 , 0 62 word stems as training and 292 SCFs for 179 word stems as testing . I extracted SCF confidence-value vectors from the training SCFs and the acquired SCFs for the words in the testing SCFs  . The number of the resulting data objects was 8 , 679 for XTAG and 1 , 241 for ERG . 
The number of initial centroids7 extracted from the training SCFs was 49 for XTAG and 53 for ERG . I then performed clustering of 8 , 679 data objects into 49 clusters and 1 , 2 41 data objects into 6I here assume that the existing SCFs for the words in the lexicon is more reliable than the other SCFs for those words  . 
7I used the vectors that appeared for more than one word  . 
53 clusters , and then evaluated the resulting SCFs by comparing them to the testing SCFs  . 
I first compare confidence cutoff with frequency cutoff to observe the effects of Bayesian estimation  . Figure 4 shows precision and recall of the SCFs obtained using frequency cutoff and confidence cutoff  0  . 01, 0 . 03, and 0 . 0 5 by varying threshold for the confidence values and the relative frequencies from  0 to 1  . 8 The graph indicates that the confidence cutoffs achieved higher recall than the frequency cutoff  , thanks to the apriori distributions . When we compare the three confidence cutoffs , we can improve precision using higher recognition thresholds while we can improve recall using lower recognition thresholds  . This is quite consistent with our expectations . 
8 Precision =
Correct SCFs for the words in the resulting SCFs All SCFs for the words in the resulting SCFs Recall = Correct SCFs for the words in the resulting SCFs All SCFs for the words in the test SCFs I then compare centroid cutoff with confidence cutoff to observe the effects of clustering  . Figure 5 shows precision and recall of the resulting SCFs using centroid cutoff  0  . 05 and the confidence cutoff 0 . 0 5 by varying the threshold for the confidence values  . In order to show the effects of the use of the training SCFs  , I also performed clustering of SCF confidence -value vectors in the acquired SCFs with random initialization  ( k = 49 ( for XTAG ) and 53 ( for ERG )  ; centroid cutoff 0 . 05*) . The graph shows that clustering is meaningful only when we make use of the reliable SCFs in the manually-coded lexicon  . The centroid cutoff using the lexicon of the grammar boosted precision compared to the confidence cutoff  . 
The difference between the effects of my method on XTAG and ERG would be due to the finer-grained SCF types of ERG  . This resulted in lower precision of the acquired SCFs for ERG  , which prevented us from distinguishing infrequent  ( correct ) SCFs from SCFs acquired in error . However , since unusual SCFs tend to be included in the lexicon  , we will be able to have accurate clusters for unknown words with smaller SCF variations as we achieved in the experiments with XTAG  . 
5 Concluding Remarks and Future Work
In this paper , I presented a method to improve the quality of SCFs acquired from corpora using existing lexicon resources  . I applied my method to SCFs acquired from corpora using lexicons of the XTAG English grammar and the LinGOERG  , and have shown that it can eliminate implausible
SCFs , preserving more reliable SCFs.
In the future , I need to evaluate the quality of the resulting SCFs by manual analysis and by using the extended lexicons to improve parsing  . I will investigate other clustering methods such as hierarchical clustering  , and use other information for clustering such as semantic preference of arguments of SCFs to have more accurate clusters  . 

Ithank Yoshimasa Tsuruoka and Takuya Matsuzaki for their advice on probabilistic modeling  , Alex Fang for his help in using the acquired SCFs  , and Anna Korhonen for her insightful suggestions on evaluation  . I am also grateful to Jun?ichi Tsujii , Yusuke Miyao , John Carroll and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments  . This work was supported in part by JSPS Research Fellow-ships for Young Scientists and in part by CREST  , JST ( Japan Science and Technology Agency) . 

B . Boguraev and T . Briscoe .  1987 . Large lexicons for natural language processing : utilising the grammar coding system of LDOCE  . Computational Linguistics , 13(4):203?218 . 
T . Briscoe and J . Carroll .  1997 . Automatic extraction of subcategorization from corpora  . In Proc . the fifth ANLP , pages 356?363 . 
J . Carroll and A . C . Fang .  2004 . The automatic acquisition of verb subcategorizations and their impact on the performance of an HPSG parser  . In Proc . the first ijc-NLP , pages 107?114 . 
A . Copestake .  2002 . Implementing typed feature structure grammars . CSLI publications . 
E . W . Forgy .  1965 . Cluster analysis of multivariate data : Efficiency vs  . interpretability of classifications . Biometrics , 21:768?780 . 
A . Gelman , J . B . Carlin , H . S . Stern , and D . B . Rubin , editors . 
1995. Bayesian Data Analysis . Chapman and Hall.
R . Grishman , C . Macleod , and A . Meyers .  1994 . Comlex syntax : Building a computational lexicon . In Proc . the 15th COLING , pages 268?272 . 
G . Hamerly .  2003 . Learning structure and concepts in data through data clustering  . Ph . D . thesis , University of California , San Diego . 
A . Korhonen , Y . Krymolowski , and Z . Marx .  2003 . Clustering polysemic subcategorization frame distributions semantically  . In Proc . the 41st ACL , pages 64?71 . 
A . Korhonen .  2002 . Subcategorization Acquisition . Ph . D . 
thesis , University of Cambridge.
B . Levin .  1993 . English Verb Classes and Alternations . 
Chicago University Press.
A . Sarkar , F . Xia , and A . K . Joshi .  2000 . Some experiments on indicators of parsing complexity for lexicalized grammars  . In Proc . the 18th COLING workshop , pages 37?42 . 
S . Schulte im Walde and C . Brew .  2002 . Inducing German semantic verb classes from purely syntactic subcategorisation information  . In Proc . the 41st ACL , pages 223?230 . 
Y . Tsuruoka and T . Chikayama .  2001 . Estimating reliability of contextual evidences in decision-list classifiers under Bayesian learning  . In Proc . the sixth NLPRS , pages 701?707 . 
XTAG Research Group .  2001 . A Lexicalized Tree Adjoining Grammar for English . Technical Report IRCS-01-03,
IRCS , University of Pennsylvania.
