TANGO : Bilingual Collocational Concordancer
Jia-Yan Jian
Department of Computer

National Tsing Hua

101, Kuangfu Road,
Hsinchu , Taiwan

Yu-Chia Chang
Inst . of Information
System and Applictaion
National Tsing Hua

101, Kuangfu Road,
Hsinchu , Taiwan


Jason S . Chang
Department of Computer

National Tsing Hua

101, Kuangfu Road,
Hsinchu , Taiwan



In this paper , we describe TANGO as a
collocational concordancer for looking up collocations  . The system was designed to answer user?s query of bilingual collocational usage for nouns  , verbs and adjectives . We first obtained collocations from the large monolingual British National Corpus  ( BNC )  . 
Subsequently , we identified collocation instances and translation counterparts in the bilingual corpus such as Sinorama Parallel 
Corpus ( SPC ) by exploiting the word-alignment technique . The main goal of the concordance r is to provide the user with a reference tools for correct collocation use so as to assist second language learners to acquire the mosteminent characteristic of native-like writing  . 
1 Introduction
Collocations are a phenomenon of word combination occurring together relatively often  . 
Collocations also reflect the speaker?s fluency of a language  , and serve as a hallmark of near native-like language capability  . 
Collocation extraction is critical to a range of studies and applications  , including natural language generation , computer assisted language learning , machine translation , lexicography , word sense disambiguation , cross language information retrieval , and so on . 
Hanks and Church ( 1990 ) proposed using pointwise mutual information to identify collocations in lexicography  ; however , the method may result in unacceptable collocations for low-count pairs  . The best methods for extracting collocations usually take into consideration both linguistic and statistical constraints  . Smadja ( 1993 ) also detailed techniques for collocation extraction and developed a program called XTRACT  , which is capable of computing flexible collocations based on elaborated statistical calculation  . Moreover , loglikelihood ratios are regarded as a more effective method to identify collocations especially when the occurrence count is very low  ( Dunning ,  1993) . 
Smadja?s X TRACT is the pioneering work on extracting collocation types  . XTRACT employed three different statistical measures related to how associated a pair to be collocation type  . It is complicated to set different thresholds for each statistical measure  . We decided to research and develop a new and simple method to extract monolingual collocations  . 
We also provide a webbased user interface capable of searching those collocations and its usage  . The concordancer supports language learners to acquire the usage of collocation  . In the following section , we give a brief overview of the
TANGO concordancer.
2 TANGO
TANGO is a concordancer capable of answering users ? queries on collocation use  . Currently , TANGO supports two text collections : a monolingual corpus  ( BNC ) and a bilingual corpus ( SPC )  . The system consists of four main parts : 2 . 1 Chunk and Clause Information

For CoNLL 2000 shared task , chunking is considered as a process that divides a sentence into syntactically correlated parts of words  . With the benefits of CoNLL training data , we built a chunker that turn sentences into smaller syntactic structure of nonrecursive basic phrases to facilitate precise collocation extraction  . It becomes easier to identify the argument -predicate relationship by looking at adjacent chunks  . By doing so , we save time as opposed to ngram statistics or full parsing  . Take a text in CoNLL2000 for example : The words correlated with the same chunk tag can be further grouped together  ( see Table 1 )  . For instance , with chunk information , we can extract Confidence/B-NP in/B-PP the/B-NP pound/I-NP is/B-VP widely/I-VP ex-pected/I-VP to /I-VP take/I-VP an-other/B-NP sharp/I-NP dive/I-NP if / B- 
SBAR trade/B-NP figures/I-NP for/B-PP
September/B-NP ( Note : Every chunk type is associated with two different chunk tags : B-CHUNK for the first word of the chunk and I-CHUNK for the other words in the same chunk  ) the target VN collocation ? take dive ? from the example by considering the last word of two adjacent VP and NP chunks  . We build a robust and efficient chunking model from training data of the CoNLL shared task  , with up to 93 . 7% precision and recall . 
Sentence chunking Features
Confidence NP in PP the pound NP is expected to take VP another sharp dive NP if SBAR trade figures NP for PP 
September NP
Table 1: Chunked Sentence
In some cases , only considering the chunk information is not enough  . For example , the sentence ?? the attitude he had towards the country is positive ?? may cause problem  . With the chunk information , the system extracts out the type ? have towards the country ? as a VPN collocation  , yet that obviously cuts across two clauses and is not a valid collocation  . To avoid that kind of errors , we further take the clause information into account  . 
With the training and test data from CoNLL-2001 , we built an efficient HMM model to identify clause relation between words  . The language model provides sufficient information to avoid extracting wrong collocations  . Examples show as follows ( additional clause tags will be attached ) :  ( 1 )  ? . the attitude ( S * he has * S ) toward the country ( 2 )   ( S * I think ( S * that the people are most concerned with the question of  ( S * when conditions may become ripe . * S)S)S)As a result , we can avoid combining a verb with an irrelevant noun as its collocate as ? have toward country ? in  ( 1 ) or ? think ? people ? in ( 2 )  . When the sentences in the corpus are annotated with the chunk and clause information  , we can consequently extract collocations more precisely  . 
2.2 Collocation Type Extraction
A large set of collocation candidates can be obtained from BNC  , via the process of integrating chunk and clause information  . We here consider three prevalent Verb-Noun collocation structures in corpus : VP+NP  , VP+PP+NP , and VP+NP+PP . 
Exploiting Logarithmic Likelihood Ratio ( LLR ) statistics , we can calculate the strength of association between two collocates  . The collocational type with threshold higher than  7  . 88 ( confidence level 99 . 5% ) will be kept as one entry in our collocation type list  . 
2.3 Collocation Instance Identification
We subsequently identify collocation instances in the bilingual corpus  ( SPC ) with the collocation types extracted from BNC in the previous step  . 
Making use of the sequence of chunk types , we again single out the adjacent structures of VN  , VP N , and VNP . With the help of chunk and clause information , we thus find the valid instances where the expected collocation types are located  , so as to build a collocational concordance . Moreover , the quantity and quality of BNC also facilitate the collocation identification in another smaller bilingual corpus with better statistic measure  . 
English sentence Chinese sentence
If in this time no one shows concern for them , and directs them to correct thinking , and teaches them how to express and release emotions  , this could very easily leave them with a terrible personality complex they can never resolve  . 

Occasionally some kungfu movies may appeal to foreign audiences  , but these too are exceptions to the rule . 

Table 2: Examples of collocational translation memory
Type Collocation types in BNC
VN 63 1,638
VPN 15,394
VNP 14,008
Table 3: The result of collocation types extracted from BNC and collocation instances identified in 
SPC 2.4 Extracting Collocational Translation
Equivalents in Bilingual Corpus
When accurate instances are obtained from bilingual corpus  , we continue to integrate the statistical word -alignment techniques  ( Melamed ,  1997 ) and dictionaries to find the translation candidates for each of the two collocates  . We first locate the translation of the noun . Subsequently , we locate the verb nearest to the noun translation to find the translation for the verb  . We can think of collocation with corresponding translations as a kind of translation memory  ( shows in Table 2 )  . The implementation result of BNC and SPC shows in the Table  3  ,  4 , and 5 . 
3 Collocation Concordance
With the collocation types and instances extracted from the corpus  , we built an online collocational concordancer called TANGO for looking up translation memory  . A user can type in any English query and select the intended part of speech of query and collocate  . For example in Figure 1 , after query for the verb collocates of the noun ? influence ? is submitted  , the results are displayed on the return page . The user can then browse through different collocates types and also click to get to see all the instances of a certain collocation type  . 
Noun VN types
Language 320
Influence 319
Threat 222
Doubt 199
Crime 183
Phone 137
Cigarette 121
Throat 86
Living 79
Suicide 47
Table 4: Examples of collocation types including a given noun in BNC 
VN type Example
Exert influence
That means they would already be exerting their influence by the time the microwave background was born  . 
Exercise influence
The Davies brothers , Adrian ( who scored 14 points ) and
Graham ( four ) , exercised an important creative influence on Cambridge for tunes while their flankers Holmes and 
Pool-Jones were full of fire and tenacity in the loose  . 
Wield influence
Fortunately , George V had worked well with his father and knew the nature of the current political trends  , but he did not wield the same influence internationally as his his esteemed father  . 
Table 5: Examples of collocation instances extracted from SPC Moreover  , using the technique of bilingual collocation alignment and sentence alignment  , the system will display the target collocation with highlight to show translation equivalents in context  . Translators or learners , through this webbased interface , can easily acquire the usage of each collocation with relevant instances  . This collocational concordancer is a very useful tool for self-inductive learning tailored to intermediate or advanced English learners  . 
Users can obtain the result of the VN or AN collocations related to their query  . TANGO shows the collocation types and instances with collocations and translation counterparts highlighted  . 
The evaluation ( shows in Table 6 ) indicates an average precision of 89 . 3% with regard to satisfactory . 
4 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper , we describe an algorithm that employs linguistic and statistical analyses to extract instance of VN collocations from a very large corpus  ; we also identify the corresponding translations in a parallel corpus  . The algorithm is applicable to other types of collocations without being limited by collocation ?s span  . The main difference between our algorithm and previous work lies in that we extract valid instances instead of types  , based on linguistic information of chunks and clauses  . Moreover , in our research we observe
Type The number of selected sentences



Memory (*)
Precision of


Precision of

Memory (*)
VN 10073 907390
VPN 10066 896 689
VNP 100788 97889
Table 6: Experiment result of collocational translation memory from Sinorama parallel Corpus 
Figure 1: The caption of the table other types related to VN such as VPN  ( i e . verb+preposition+noun ) and VNP(ie . verb+noun+preposition ) , which will also be crucial for machine translation and computer assisted language learning  . In the future , we will apply our method to more types of collocations  , to pave the way for more comprehensive applications  . 

This work is carried out under the project ? CANDLE ? funded by National Science Council in Taiwan  ( NSC92-2524-S007-002 )  . Further information about CANDLE is available at http://candle  . cs . nthu . edu . tw/ . 

Dunning , T ( 1993 ) Accurate methods for the statistics of surprise and coincidence  , Computational
Linguistics 19: 1, 61-75.
Hanks , P . and Church , K . W . Word association norms , mutual information , and lexicography . 
Computational Linguistics , 1990, 16(1), pp .  2229 . 
Melamed , I . Dan . " A Word-to-Word Model of Translational Equivalence "  . In Procs . of the ACL97 . 
pp 490-497. Madrid Spain , 1997.
Smadja , F .  1993 . Retrieving collocations from text : Xtract . Computational Linguistics , 19(1):143-177 . 

