Hierarchy Extraction based on Inclusion of Appearance 
Eiko Yamamoto Kyoko Kanzaki Hitoshi Isahara
Computational Linguistics Group,
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology 
35 Hikaridai , Seikacho , Sorakugun , Kyoto ,  619-0289 , Japan . 
eiko@nict . go . jpkanzaki@nict . go . jp is a hara@nict . go . jp


In this paper , we propose a method of automatically extracting word hierarchies based on the inclusion relation of appearance patterns from corpora  . We apply a complementary similarity measure to find a hierarchical word structure  . This similarity measure was developed for the recognition of degraded machine-printed text in the field and can be applied to estimate one-to -many relations  . Our purpose is to extract word hierarchies from corpora automatically  . As the initial task , we attempt to extract hierarchies of abstract nouns cooccurring with adjectives in Japanese and compare with hierarchies in the EDR electronic dictionary  . 
1 Introduction
The hierarchical relations of words are useful as language resources  . Hierarchical semantic lexical databases such as WordNet  ( Miller et al ,  1990 ) and the EDR electronic dictionary ( 1995 ) are used for NLP research worldwide to fully understand a word meaning  . In current thesauri in the form of hierarchical relations  , words are categorized manually and classified in a topdown manner based on human intuition  . This is a good way to make a lexical database for users having a specific purpose  . 
However , word hierarchies based on human intuition tend to vary greatly depending on the lexicographer  . In addition , hierarchical relations based on various data may be needed depending on each user  . 
Accordingly , we try to extract a hierarchical relation of words automatically and statistically  . In previous research , ways of extracting from definition sentences in dictionaries  ( Tsurumaru et al , 1986; Shoutsu et al ,  2003 ) or from a corpus by using patterns such as ? a part of ?  , ? is a ? , or ? and ? ( Berland and Charniak , 1999; Caraballo , 1999) have been proposed . Also , there is a method that uses the dependence relation between words taken from a corpus  ( Matsumoto et al ,  1996) . In contrast , we propose a method based on the inclusion relation of appearance patterns from corpora  . 
In this paper , to verify the suitability of our method , we attempt to extract hierarchies of abstract nouns cooccurring with adjectives in Japanese  . We select two similarity measures to estimate the inclusion relation between word appearance patterns  . One is a complementary similarity measure ; i . e . , a similarity measure developed for the recognition of degraded machine-printed text in the field  ( Hagita and Sawaki ,  1995) . This measure can be used to estimate one-to-many relations such as superordinate ? subordinate relations from appearance patterns  ( Yamamoto and Umemura ,  2002) . 
The second similarity measure is the overlap coefficient  , which is a similarity measure to calculate the rate of overlap between two binary vectors  . 
Using each measure , we extract hierarchies from a corpus . After that , we compare these with the EDR electronic dictionary  . 
2 Experiment Corpus
A good deal of linguistic research has focused on the syntactic and semantic functions of abstract nouns  ( Nemoto , 1969; Takahashi , 1975; Schmid , 2000; Kanzaki et al ,  2003) . In the example , ? Yagi ( goat ) wase is hits u ( nature ) gaotonashii ( gentle )   ( The nature of goats is gentle )  . ? , Takahashi ( 1975 ) recognized that the abstract noun ? seishitsu ( nature ) ? is a hypernym of the attribute that the predicative adjective ? otonashi  ( gentle ) ? expresses . 
Kanzaki et al ( 2003 ) defined such abstract nouns that cooccur with adjectives as adjective hypernyms  , and extracted these cooccurrence relations between abstract nouns and adjectives from many corpora such as newspaper articles  . In the linguistic data , there are sets of cooccurring adjectives for each abstract noun ? the total number of abstract noun types is  365 and the number of adjective types is 10  , 525 . Some examples are as follows . 
OMOI ( feeling ) : ureshii ( glad) , kanashii ( sad ) , shiawase na ( happy ) , ? KANTEN ( viewpoint ): i gakutek in a ( medical ) , rekishitekina(historical ) ,   . . . 
3 Complementary Similarity Measure
The complementary similarity measure ( CSM ) is used in a character recognition method for binary images which is robust against heavy noise or graphical designs  ( Sawaki and Hagita ,  1996) . Yamamoto et al ( 2002 ) applied CSM to estimate one-to-many relations between words  . They estimated one-to-many relations from the inclusion relations between the appearance patterns of two words  . 
The appearance pattern is expressed as an n -dimensional binary feature vector  . Now , let F = ( f1 , f2 ,  ? , fn ) and T = ( t1 , t2 ,  ? , tn ) ( where f i , ti = 0 or 1 ) be the feature vectors of the appearance patterns for a word and another word  , respectively . The
CSM of F to T is defined as d c bant f d tf ctf a db cab cad TFCSM n i ii n i i i i n i i i + + += ? ??=??= ??=?= ++ ?= ?? ?? == ==   , )1()1( , )1(  , )1( ,  ))(( ) , ( The CSM of F to T represents the degree to which F includes T  ; that is , the inclusion relation between the appearance patterns of two words  . 
In our experiment , each ? word ? is an abstract noun . Therefore , n is the number of adjectives in the corpus , a indicates the number of adjectives cooccurring with both abstract nouns  , b and c indicate the number of adjectives cooccurring with either abstract noun  , and d indicates the number of adjectives cooccurring with neither abstract noun  . 
4 Overlap Coefficient
The overlap coefficient ( OVLP ) is a similarity measure for binary vectors ( Manning and Schutze ,  1999) . OVLP is essentially a measure of inclusion . 
It has a value of 1 . 0 if every dimension with a nonzero value for the first vector is also nonzer o for the second vector or vice versa  . In other words , the value is 1 . 0 when the first vector completely includes the second vector or vice versa  . OVLP of F and T is defined as ) , () , ( ) , ( caba MINa


TFOVLP + +==
I5EDR hierarchy
The EDR Electronic Dictionary ( 1995 ) was developed for advanced processing of natural language by computers and is composed of eleven subdictionaries  . The subdictionaries include a concept dictionary , word dictionaries , bilingual dictionaries , etc . We verify and analyse the hierarchies that are extracted based on a comparison with the EDR dictionary  . However , the hierarchies in EDR consist of hypernymic concepts represented by sentences  . On the other hand , our extracted hierarchies consist of hypernyms such as abstract nouns  . Therefore , we have to replace the concept composed of a sentence with the sequence of the words  . We replace the description of concepts with entry words from the ? Word List by Semantic Principles  ?   ( 1964 ) and add synonyms . We also add to abstract nouns in order to reduce any difference in representation  . In this way , conceptual hierarchies of adjectives in the EDR dictionary are defined by the sequence of words  . 
6 Hierarchy Extraction Process
The processes for hierarchy extraction from the corpus are as follows  . ? TH ? is a threshold value for each pair under consideration  . If TH is low , we can obtain long hierarchies . However , if TH is too low , the number of wordpairs taken into consideration increases overwhelmingly and the measurement reliability diminishes  . In this experiment , we set 0 . 2 as TH . 
1 . Compute the similarity between appearance patterns for each pair of words  . The hierarchical relation between the two words in a pair is determined by the similarity value  . We express the pair as ( X , Y ) , where X is a hypernym of Y and Y is a hyponym of X  . 
2 . Sort the pairs by the normalized similarities and reduce the pairs where the similarity is less than TH  . 
3. For each abstract noun,
A ) Choose a pair ( B , C ) where word B is the hypernym with the highest value  . 
The hierarchy between B and C is set to the initial hierarchy  . 
B ) Choose a pair ( C,D ) where hyponym
D is not contained in the current hierarchy and has the highest value in pairs where the last word of the current hierarchy C is a hypernym  . 
C ) Connect hyponym D with the tail of the current hierarchy  . 
D ) While such a pair can be chosen , repeat
B ) and C).
E ) Choose a pair ( A , B ) where hypernym
A is not contained in the current hierarchy and has the highest value in pairs where the first word of the current hierarchy B is a hypernym  . 
F ) Connect hypernym A with the head of the current hierarchy  . 
G ) While such a pair can be chosen , repeat
E ) and F).
4. For the hierarchies that are built,
A ) If a short hierarchy is included in a longer hierarchy with the order of the words preserved  , the short one is dropped from the list of hierarchies  . 
B ) If a hierarchy has only one or a few different words from another hierarchy  , the two hierarchies are merged . 
7 Extracted Hierarchy
Some extracted hierarchies are as follows . In our experiment , we get ko to ( matter ) as the common hypernym . 
ko to ( matter ) -- joutai ( state ) -- kankei ( relation ) -- kakawari ( something to do with ) - - tsukiai ( have an acquaintance with ) ko to ( matter ) -- toki ( when ) -- yousu ( aspect ) - - omomochi ( one?s face ) --manazashi ( a look ) -- iro ( on one?s face ) --shisen ( one?s eye )   8 Comparison We analyse extracted hierarchies by using the number of nodes that agree with the EDR hierarchy  . Specifically , we count the number of nodes ( nouns ) which agree with a word in the EDR hierarchy , preserving the order of each hierarchy . Here , two hierarchies are ? A-B-C-D-E ? and ? A -B-D-F-G  . ? They have three agreement nodes ; ? A-B-D . ? Table 1 shows the distribution of the depths of a CSM hierarchy  , and the number of nodes that agree with the EDR hierarchy at each depth  . Table 2 shows the same for an OVLP one . ? Agreement Level ? is the number of agreement nodes  . The bold font represents the number of hierarchies completely included in the EDR hierarchy  . 
8.1 Depth of Hierarchy
The number of hierarchies made from the EDR dictionary  ( EDR hierarchy ) is 932 and the deepest level is 14 . The number of CSM hierarchies is 105 and the depth is from 3 to 14   ( Table 1 )  . The number of OVLP hierarchies is 179 and the depth is from 2 to 9   ( Table 2 )  . These results show that CSM builds a deeper hierarchy than OVLP  , though the number of hierarchies is less than OVLP  . Also , the deepest level of CSM equals that of EDR . 
Therefore , comparison with the EDR dictionary is an appropriate way to verify the hierarchies that we have extracted  . 
In both tables , we find most hierarchies have an agreement level from  2 to 4  . The deepest agreement level is 6 . For an agreement level of 5 or better , the OVLP hierarchy includes only two hierarchies while the CSM hierarchy includes nine hierarchies  . This means CSM can extract hierarchies having more nodes which agree with the EDR hierarchy than is possible with OVLP  . 

Depth of

Agreement Level 1   2   3   4   5   6   3   1   4   1   4   8   6   2   5   9   8   1   6   8   9   4   1   7   2   6   1   1   8   1   5   2   2   9   3   2   3   1   10   1   2   11   4   1   12   1   1   13   1   2   14   1 Table 1: Distribution of CSM hierarchy for each depth
Depth of

Agreement Level 1   2   3   4   5   6   2   1   3   2   8   1   4   25   9   1   5   24   13   7   6   21   31   5   7   5   12   1   1   8   3   5   2   1   9   1   3   1 Table 2: Distribution of OVLP hierarchy for each depth Also  , many abstract nouns agree with the hy-peronymic concept around the top level  . In current thesauri , the categorization of words is classified in a topdown manner based on human intuition  . 
Therefore , we believe the hierarchy that we have built is consistent with human intuition  , at least around the top level of hyperonymic concepts  . 
9 Conclusion
We have proposed a method of automatically extracting hierarchies based on an inclusion relation of appearance patterns from corpora  . In this paper , we attempted to extract objective hierarchies of abstract nouns cooccurring with adjectives in Japanese  . In our experiment , we showed that complementary similarity measure can extract a kind of hierarchy from corpora  , though it is a similarity measure developed for the recognition of degraded machine-printed text  . Also , we can find interesting hierarchies which suit human intuition  , though they are different from exact hierarchies . Kanzaki et al ( 2004 ) have applied our approach to verify classification of abstract nouns by using self -organization map  . We can look a suitability of our result at that work  . 
In our future work , we will use our approach for other parts of speech and other types of word  . 
Moreover , we will compare with current alternative approaches such as those based on sentence patterns  . 

Berland , M . and Charniak , E .  1999 . Finding Parts in Very Large Corpora , In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp . 57-64 . 
Caraballo , S . A .  1999 . Automatic Construction of a Hypernym-labeled Noun Hierarchy from Text  , In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp . 120-126 . 
EDR Electronic Dictionary . 1995.
http://www2 . nict . go . jp/kk/e416/EDR/index . html Hagita , N . and Sawaki , M .  1995 . Robust Recognition of Degraded Machine-Printed Characters using Complementary Similarity Measure and Er-ror-Correction Learning ? In Proceedings of the SPIE ? The International Society for Optical Engineering  , 2442: pp . 236-244 . 
Kanzaki , K . , Ma , Q . , Yamamoto , E . , Murata , M . , and Isahara , H .  2003 . Adjectives and their Abstract concepts --- Toward an objective thesaurus from Semantic Map  . In Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Generative Approaches to the Lexicon  , pp . 177-184 . 
Kanzaki , K . , Ma , Q . , Yamamoto , E . , Murata , M . , and Isahara , H .  2004 . Extraction of Hyperonymy of Adjectives from Large Corpora by using the Neural Network Model  . In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation  , Volume II , pp . 423-426 . 
Kay , M .  1986 . Parsing in Functional Unification Grammar . In ? Readings in Natural Language Processing ? , Grosz , B . J . , Spark Jones , K . and Webber , B . L . , ed . , pp . 125-138 , Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Los Altos , California . 
Manning , C . D . and Schutze , H .  1999 . Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing  , The
MIT Press , Cambridge MA.
Matsumoto , Y . and Sudo , S . , Nakayama , T . , and Hirao , T .  1996 . Thesaurus Construction from Multiple Language Resources  , In IPSJ SIG
Notes NL-93, pp . 23-28 ( In Japanese).
Miller , A . , Beckwith , R . , Fellbaum , C . , Gros , D . , Millier , K . , and Tengi , R .  1990 . Five Papers on WordNet , Technical Report CSL Report 43 , Cognitive Science Laboratory , Princeton University . 
Mosteller , F . and Wallace , D .  1964 . Inference and Disputed Authorship : The Federalist  . Addison-
Wesley , Reading , Massachusetts.
Nemoto , K .  1969 . The combination of the noun with ? ga-Case ? and the adjective  , Language re-search 2 for the computer , National Language Research Institute , pp . 63-73 ( In Japanese) . 
Shmid , HJ .  2000 . English Abstract Nouns as Conceptual Shells , Mouton de Gruyter . 
Shoutsu , Y . , Tokunaga , T . , and Tanaka , H .  2003 . 
The integration of Japanese dictionary and thesaurus  , In IPSJ SIGNotes NL-153 , pp . 141-146 ( In Japanese) . 
SparckJones , K .  1972 . A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its application in retrieval  . 
Journal of Documentation , 28(1): pp . 11-21.
Takahashi , T .  1975 . A various phase related to the part-whole relation investigated in the sentence  , Studies in the Japanese language 103 , The Society of Japanese Linguistics , pp . 1-16 ( In

Tsurumaru , H . , Hitaka , T . , and Yoshita , S .  1986 . 
Automatic extraction of hierarchical relation between words  , In IPSJ SIGNotes NL-83 , pp . 121-128 ( In Japanese) . 
Yamamoto , E . and Umemura , K .  2002 . A Similarity Measure for Estimation of One ? to -Many Relationship in Corpus  , In Journal of Natural Language Processing , pp . 45-75 ( In Japanese) . 
Word List by Semantic Principles .  1964 . National Language Research Institute Publications  , Shuei
Shuppan ( In Japanese).
