Subsentential Translation Memory for
Computer Assisted Writing and Translation
Jian-Cheng Wu
Department of Computer Science
National Tsing Hua University
101, Kuangfu Road , Hsinchu , 300,
Taiwan , ROC

Thomas C . Chuang
Department of Computer Science
Van Nung Institute of Technology
No . 1 Van-Nung Road
Chung-Li Tao-Yuan , Taiwan , ROC

Wen-Chi Shei , Jason S . Chang
Department of Computer Science
National Tsing Hua University
101, Kuangfu Road , Hsinchu , 300,
Taiwan , ROC



This paper describes a database of translation memory  , Total Recall , developed to encourage authentic and idiomatic use in second language writing  . Total Recall is a bilingual concordancer that support search query in English or Chinese for relevant sentences and translations  . Although initially intended for learners of English as Foreign Language  ( EFL ) in Taiwan , it is a gold mine of texts in English or Mandarin Chinese  . Total Recall is particularly useful for those who write in or translate into a foreign language  . We exploited and structured existing high-quality translations from bilingual corpora from a 
Taiwan-based Sinorama Magazine and
Official Records of Hong Kong Legislative Council to build a bilingual concordance  . 
Novel approaches were taken to provide high precision bilingual alignment on the subsentential and lexical levels  . A browser-based user interface was developed for ease of access over the Internet  . Users can search for word , phrase or expression in English or Mandarin . The Web-based user interface facilitates the recording of the user actions to provide data for further research  . 
1 Introduction
Translation memory has been found to be more effective alternative to machine translation for translators  , especially when working with batches of similar texts  . That is particularly true with so called delta translation of the next versions for publications that need continuous revision such as an encyclopaedia or user?s manual  . On another area of language study , researchers on English Language Teaching ( ELT ) have increasingly looked to concordancer of very large corpora as a new resource for translation and language learning  . 
Concordancers have been indispensable for lexicographers  . But now language teachers and students also embrace the concordancer to foster datadriven  , student-centered learning . 
A bilingual concordance , in a way , meets the needs of both communities , the computer assisted translation ( CAT ) and computer assisted language learning ( CALL )  . A bilingual concordance r is like a monolingual concordance  , except that each sentence is followed by its translation counterpart in a second language  . ? Existing translations contain more solutions to more translation problems than any other existing resource  . ? ( Isabelle 1993) . The same can be argued for language learning ; existing texts offer more answers for the learner than any teacher or reference work do  . 
However , it is important to provide easy access for translators and learning writers alike to find the relevant and informative citations quickly  . For instance , the English-French concordance system , TransSearch provides a familiar interface for the users  ( Macklovitch et al 2000 )  . The user type in the expression in question , a list of citations will come up and it is easy to scroll down until one finds translation that is useful much like using a search engine  . TransSearch exploits sentence alignment techniques  ( Brown et al 1990 ; Gale and Church 1990 ) to facilitate bilingual search at the granularity level of sentences  . 
In this paper , we describe a bilingual concordancer which facilitate search and visualization with fine granularity  . Total Recall exploits subsentential and word alignment to provide a new kind of bilingual concordancer  . 
Through the interactive interface and clustering of short subsentential bilingual citations  , it helps translators and nonnative speakers find ways to translate or express themselves in a foreign language  . 
2 Aligning the corpus
Central to Total Recall is a bilingual corpus and a set of programs that provide the bilingual analyses to yield a translation memory database out of the bilingual corpus  . Currently , we are working with A : Database selection B : English query C : Chinese query D : Number of items per page E : Normal view F : Clustered summary according to translation G : Order by counts or lengths H : Submit bottom I : Help file J : Page index K : English citation L : Chinese citation M : Date and title N : All citations in the cluster O : Full text context P : Side-by -side sentence alignment Figure  2  . The results of searching for ? hard ? bilingual corpora from a Taiwan-based Sinorama Magazine and Official Records of Hong Kong Legislative Council  . A large bilingual collection of Studio Class room English lessons will be provided in the near future  . That would allow us to offer bilingual texts in both translation directions and with different levels of difficulty  . Currently , the articles from Sinorama seems to be quite usefully by its own  , covering a wide range of topics , reflecting the personalities , places , and events in
Taiwan for the past three decades.
The concordance database is composed of bilingual sentence pairs  , which are mutual translation . 
In addition , there are also tables to record additional information  , including the source of each sentence pairs , metadata , and the information on phrase and word level alignment  . With that additional information , Total Recall provides various functions , including 1 . viewing of the full text of the source with a simple click  .  2 . 
highlighted translation counterpart of the query word or phrase  .  3 . ranking that is pedagogically useful for translation and language learning  . 
We are currently running an operational system with Sinorama Magazine articles and HKLEG CO records  . These bilingual texts that go into Total Recall must be rearranged and structured  . We describe the main steps below : 2 . 1 Subsentential alignment While the length-based approach  ( Church and Gale 1991 ) to sentence alignment produces very good results for close language pairs such as French and English at success rates well over  96%  , it does not fair as well for disparate language pairs such as English and Mandarin Chinese  . Also sentence alignment tends to produce pairs of along Chinese sentence and several English sentences  . 
Such pairs of mutual translation make it difficult for the user to read and grasp the answers embedded in the retrieved citations  . 
We develop a new approach to aligning English and Mandarin texts at subsentential level in parallel corpora based on length and punctuation marks  . 
The subsentential alignment starts with parsing each article from corpora and putting them into the database  . Subsequently articles are segmented into subsentential segments  . Finally , segments in the two languages which are mutual translation are aligned  . 
Sentences and subsentenial phrases and clauses are broken up by various types of punctuation in the two languages  . For fragments much shorter than sentences , the variances of length ratio are larger leading to unacceptably low precision rate for alignment  . We combine length-based and punctuation-based approach to cope with the difficulties in subsentential alignment  . 
Punctuations in one language translate more or less consistently into punctuations in the other language  . 
Therefore the information is useful in compensating for the weakness of length-based approach  . In addition , we seek to further improve the accuracy rates by employing cognates and lexical information  . We experimented with an implementation of the proposed method on a very large Mandarin-English parallel corpus of records of Hong Kong Legislative Council with satisfactory results  . Experiment results show that the punctuation -based approach outperforms the length-based approach with precision rates approaching  98%  . 

Figure 1 The result of subsentential alignment and collocation alignment  . 
2.2 Word and Collocation Alignment
After sentences and their translation counterparts are identified  , we proceeded to carry out finer-grained alignment on the word level  . We employed the Competitive Linking Algorithm ( Melamed 2000 ) produce high precision word alignment . We also extract English collocations and their translation equivalent based on the result of word alignment  . These alignment results were subsequently used to cluster citations and highlight translation equivalents of the query  . 
3 Aligning the corpus
Total Recall allows a user to look for instances of specific words or expressions and its translation counterpart  . For this purpose , the system opens up two text boxes for the user to enter queries in any or both of the two languages involved  . We offer some special expressions for users to specify the following queries : ? Single or multiword query ? spaces between words in a query are considered as ? and  . ? For disjunctive query , use ?? to denote ? or . ? ? Every word in the query will be expanded to all surface forms for search  . That includes singular and plural forms , and various tense of the verbs . 
? Total Recall automatically ignore high frequency words in a stoplist such as ? the  , ? ? to , ? and ? of . ? ? It is also possible to ask for exact match by submitting query in quotes  . Any word within the quotes will not be ignored . It is useful for searching named entities . 
Once a query is submitted , Total Recall displays the results on Web pages . Each result appears as a pair of segments in English and Chinese  , inside-by-side format . A ? context ? hypertext link is included for each citation  . If this link is selected , a new page appears displaying the original document of the pair  . If the user so wishes , she can scroll through the following or preceding pages of context in the original document  . Total Recall present the results in a way that makes it easy for the user to grasp the information returned to her : ? When operating in the monolingual mode  , Total Recall presents the citation according to lengths  . 
? When operating in the bilingual mode , To-talRecall clusters the citations according to the translation counterparts and presents the user with a summary page of one example each for different translations  . The query words and translation counterparts are highlighted  . 
4 Conclusion
In this paper , we describe a bilingual concordance designed as a computer assisted translation and language learning tool  . Currently,
Total Reclluses Sinorama Magazine and
HKLEGCO corpora as the databases of translation memory  . We have already put a betaversion online and experimented with a focus group of second language learners  . Novel features of Total Recall include highlighting of query and corresponding translations  , clustering and ranking of search results according translation and frequency  . 
Total Recall enable the nonnative speaker who is looking for a way to express an idea in English or Mandarin  . We are also adding on the basic functions to include a log of user activities  , which will record the users ? query behavior and their background  . We could then analyze the data and find useful information for future research  . 
Subsentential alignment results
From 1983 to 1991 , the average rate of wage growth for all trades and industries was only  1  . 6% . 

This was far lower than the growth in labour productivity  , which averaged 5 . 3% . 

But , it must also be noted that the average inflation rate was as high as  7  . 7% during the same period . 

As I have said before , even when the economy is booming , the workers are unable to share the fruit of economic success  . 


We acknowledge the support for this study through grants from National Science Council and Ministry of Education  , Taiwan ( NSC91-2213-E-007-061 and MOEEX-92-E-FA06-4-4 ) and a special grant for preparing the Sinorama Corpus for distribution by the Association for Computational Linguistics and Chinese Language 


Brown P . , Cocke J . , Della Pietra S . , Jelinek F . , Lafferty J . , Mercer R . , & Rooss in P .  (1990) . A statistical approach to machine translation . 
Computational Linguistics , vol . 16.
Gale , W . & K.W . Church , " A Program for
Aligning Sentences in Bilingual Corpora " Proceedings of the  29th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , 
Berkeley , CA , 1991.
Isabelle , Pierre , M . Dymetman , G . Foster , JM . 
Jutras , E . Macklovitch , F . Perrault , X . Ren and M . Simard .  1993 . Translation Analysis and Translation Automation . In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine 
Translation , Kyoto , Japan , pp . 12-20.
I . Dan Melamed .  2000 . Models of translational equivalence among words . Computational
Linguistics , 26(2):221?249, June.
