Exploiting Aggregate Properties of Bilingual Dictionaries For Distinguishing 
Senses of English Words and Inducing English Sense Clusters 
Charles SCHAFER and David YARO WSKY
Department of Computer Science and
Center for Language and Speech Processing
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore , MD , 21218, USA


We propose a novel method for inducing monolingual semantic hierarchies and sense clusters from numerous foreign-language-to-English bilingual dictionaries  . The method exploits patterns of non-transitivity in translations across multiple languages  . No complex or hierarchical structure is assumed or used in the input dictionaries : each is initially parsed into the ? lowest common denominator ? form  , which is to say , a list of pairs of the form ( foreign word , English word ) . We then propose a monolingual synonymy measure derived from this aggregate resource  , which is used to derive multilingually-motivated sense hierarchies for monolingual English words  , with potential applications in word sense classification  , lexicography and statistical machine translation . 
1 Introduction
In this work we consider a learning resource comprising over  80 foreign-language-to-English bilingual dictionaries  , collected by downloading electronic dictionaries from the Internet and also scanning and running optical character recognition  ( OCR ) software on paper dictionaries . Such a diverse parallel lexical dataset has not , to our knowledge , previously been assembled and examined in its aggregate form as a lexical semantics training resource  . We show that this aggregate dataset admits of some surprising applications  , including discovery of synonymy relationships between words and automatic induction of high -quality hierarchical word sense clusterings for English  . 
We perform and describe several experiments deriving synonyms and sense groupings from the aggregate bilingual dictionary  , and subsequently suggest some possible applications for the results  . 
Finally , we propose that sense taxonomies of the kind introduced here  , being of different provenance from those produced explicitly by lexicographers or using unsupervised corpus-driven methods  , have significant value because they add diversity to the set of available resources  . 
2 Resources
First we collected , from Internet sources and via scanning and running OCR on print dictionaries  ,   82 dictionaries between English and a total of 44 distinct foreign languages from a variety of language families  . 
Over 213K distinct English word types were present in a total of  5  . 5M bilingual dictionary entries , for an av-fair blond just S
SS are synonymous with fair differing senses of blond and just Figure  1: Detecting a synonymy via unbalanced synonymy relationships among  3 words . The derived synonymy relation Sholds between fair and blond  , and between fair and just . S does not hold between blond and fair . We can infer that fair has at least 2 senses and , further , we can represent them by blond and just . 
English French Spanish German fairblond , blondo , blond , just elicito , rectoge recht blond blond blon do blond just just e licito  ; rectogere cht Figure 2: This excerpt from the dataset illustrates the kind of support the aggregate bilingual dictionary provides for partitioning the meanings of fair into distinct senses : blond and just  . 
erage of 26 and a median of 3 foreign entries per English word . Roughly 15K English words had at least 100 foreign entries ; over 64K had at least 10 entries . 
No complex or hierarchical structure was assumed or used in our input dictionaries  . Each was initially parsed into the ? lowest common denominator ? form  . This consisted of a list of pairs of the form ( foreign word , English word ) . Because bilingual dictionary structure varies widely  , and even the availability and compatibility of part-of-speech tags for entries is uncertain  , we made the decision to compile the aggregate resource only with data that could be extracted from every individual dictionary into a universally compatible format  . The unique pairs extracted from each dictionary were then converted to  4-tuples of the form : < foreign language , dictionary name , foreign word , English word > before being inserted into the final  , combined dictionary dataset . 
3 A Synonymy Relation
We began by using the above-described dataset to obtain a synonymy relation between English words  . 
In general , in a paper bilingual dictionary , each foreign word can be associated with a list of English words which are possible translations  ; in our reduced form at each entry lists a single foreign word and single possible English translation  , though taking a union of all English translations for a particular foreign word recreates this list  . 
We use the notion of coentry to build the synonymy relation between English words  . The per-entry coentry count C per ? entry ( e1 , e2 ) for two English words e1 and e2 is simply the number of times e1 and e2 both appear as the translation of the same foreign word  ( over all foreign words , dictionaries and languages ) . The per-dictionary coentry count Cper?dict ( e1 , e2) , ignores the number of individual coentries within a particular dictionary and merely counts as  1 any number of coentries inside a particular dictionary  . Finally , per-language coentry count Cper ? lang(e1 , e2 ) counts as 1 any number of coentries for e1 and e2 for a particular language . Thus , for the following snippet from the database : Eng  . W d . Foreign Wd . Foreign Language Dict . ID hitschlagen GERMA Nger . dict 1 pounds ch lagen GERMAN ger . dict 1hitschlag GER MANger . dict 1 pounds ch lag GERMAN ger . dict 1hitschlag GER MANger . dict 2 pounds ch lag GER MAN ger . dict2hit battereITAL ital . dict 1 pound battere ITAL ital . dict1
Cper ? entry(hit , pound ) = 4, while
Cper?dict(hit , pound ) = 3 , since the two individual coentries inger . dict 1 are only counted once . 
Cper?lang(hit , pound ) = 2 ; hit and pound are coentries in the Italian and German languages  . We found the more conservative per-dictionary and per-language counts to be a useful device  , given that some dictionary creators appear sometimes to copy and paste identical synonym sets in a fairly indiscriminate fashion  , spuriously inflating the C per ? entry ( e1 , e2) counts . 
Our algorithm for identifying synonyms was simple : we sorted all pairs of English words by decreasing Cper?dict  ( e1 , e2) and , after inspection of the resulting list , cut it off at a per-dictionary and per-language count  threshold1 yielding qualitatively strong results . For all word pairs e1 , e2 above threshold , we say the symmetric synonymy relation S(e1 , e2) holds . The following tables provide a clarifying example showing how synonymy can be inferred from multiple bilingual dictionaries in a way which is impossible with a single such dictionary  ( because of idiosyncratic foreign language polysemy  )  . 
Lang . Dict . ID Foreign Wd English Translations GER MA Nger . dict 1abset zen deposit drop deducts ell GERMAN ger . d ict1 a blagerung deposits ediment settlement The table above displays entries from one German-English dictionary  . How can we tell that ? sediment ? is a better synonym for ? de-posit ? than ? sell ? ? We can build and examine the  1The threshold was 10 and 5 respectively for per-dictionary and per-language coentry counts  . 
co entry counts C per ? lang(deposit , sediment ) and C per ? lang(deposit , sell ) using dictionaries from many languages , as illustrated below : FRENCH fre . d ict1 de?po?tarsen alde posit depository depot entrusting filing sludges to retrust submission repository scale sediment TURKISH tk  . d ict1 to rt use diment deposit faeces remain der dregs crust CZECH cz  . d ict1 sedlina clot depos its ediment warp Polysemy which is specific to German ? ? deposit ? and ? sell ? senses coexisting in a particular word form ? abset zen ? ? will result in total coentry counts Cper?lang  ( deposit , sell ) , over all languages and dictionaries , which are low . In fact , ? deposit ? and ? sell ? are coentries under only  2 out of 44 languages in our database ( German and Swedish , which are closely related ) . On the other hand , near-synonymous English translations of a particular sense across a variety of languages will result in high coentry counts  , as is the case with C per ? lang ( deposit , sediment ) . As illustrated in the tables , German , French , Czech and Turkish all support the synonymy hypothesis for this pair of English words  . 
? deposit ? Coentries Per Entry PerDict . Per Lang . 
sell 442 sediment 68 4018
The above table , listing the various coentry counts for ? deposit  ?  , demonstrates the empirical motivation in the aggregate dictionary for the synonymy relationship between deposit and sediment  , while the aggregate evidence of synonymy between deposit and sell is weak  , limited to 2 languages , and is most likely the result of a word polysemy restricted to a few Germanic languages  . 
4 Different Senses : Asymmetries of
Synonymy Relations
After constructing the empirically derived synonymy relation S described in the previous section  , we observed that one can draw conclusions from the topology of the graph of S relationships  ( edges ) among words ( vertices )  . 
Specifically , consider the case of three words e1 , e2 , e3 for which S(e1 , e2) and S(e1 , e3) hold , but S(e2 , e3) does not . Figure 1 illustrates this situation with an example from data  ( e1 = ? fair ? )  , and more examples are listed in Table 1 . As Figure 1 suggests and inspection of the random extracts presented in Table  1 will confirm , this topology can be interpreted as indicating that  e2 and e3 exemplify differing senses of e1  . 
We decided to investigate and apply it with more generality  . This will be discussed in the next section . 
5 Inducing Sense Taxonomies : Clustering with Synonym Similarity With the goal of using the aggregate bilingual dictionary to induce interesting and useful sense distinctions of English words  , we investigated the following strategy . 
syn1 ( W ) Wsyn2 ( W ) quiet still yet desire want lack delicate tender offer conceal hidesk in nice kind sort assault chargeload filters train stretch flow run manage clothfabric structure blond fair just foundation base ignobled eny decline fall hurl cast mould bright clear open harm wrong incorrect crackle crackfissure impeach chargeloadenthusiastic keen sharp coarserough difficult fling cast form firm fast speedy fashion mold mildew incline lean meagrearouse raise increase digit figure shape dyepaint pictures potstaint incture shape cast toss claim calls hout earth ground ground work associate fellow guy arrest stop plug Table  1: A representative sampling of high-confidence sense distinctions derived via unbalanced synonymy relationships among three words  , W and two of its synonyms syn1(W ) & syn2(W ) , such that C per ? dict(W , syn1(W )) and Cper?dict(W , syn2(W )) are high , whereas C per?dict(syn1(W ) , syn2(W )) is low (0) . Extracted from a list sorted by descending C per ?dict  ( W , syn1(W )) ? C per?dict(W , syn2(W ))/ Cper?dict(syn1(W ) , syn2 ( W ) )  ( counts were smoothed to prevent division by zero )  . 
For each target word Wt in English having a sufficiently high dictionary occurrence count to allow interesting  results2  , a list of likely synonym words Ws was induced by the method described in Section  33  . Additionally , we generated a list of all words W chaving nonzero C per?dict  ( Wt , Wc) . 
The synonym words Ws ? the sense exemplars for target words Wt ? were clustered based on vectors of coentry counts C per ? dict  ( Ws , Wc ) . This restriction on vector dimension to only words that have nonzero co-entries with the target word helps to exclude distractions such as coentries of Ws corresponding to a sense which doesn?t overlap with Wt  . The example given in the following table shows an excerpt of the vectors for synonyms of strike  . The hit synonym overlaps strike in the beat/bang /knock sense  . Restricting the vector dimension as described will help prevent noise from hit?s common  2For our experiments , English words occurring in at least 15 distinct source dictionaries were considered . 
3 Again , the threshold for synonyms was 10 and 5 respectively for per-dictionary and per-language coentry counts  . 
chart-topper/recording/hit single sense . The following table also illustrates the clarity with which major sense distinctions are reflected in the aggregate dictionary  . The induced clustering for strike ( tree as well as flat cluster boundaries ) is presented in Figure 4 . 
attack bang hit knock walk out find attack- 4   18   7   0   0 bang- 38   43   2   0   0 hit- 44   2   29 knock- 2   0 walkout- 0 find-We used the CLUTO clustering toolkit ( Karypis ,  2002 ) to induce a hierarchical agglomerative clustering on the vectors for Ws  . Example results for vital and strike are in Figures  3 and 4   respectively4  . Figure 4 also presents flat clusters automatically derived from the tree  , as well as a listing of some foreign words associated with particular clusters  . 
Figure 3: Induced sense hierarchy for the word ? vital ? 6 Related Work There is a distinguished history of research extracting lexical semantic relationships from bilingual dictionaries  ( Copestake et al , 1995; Chen and Chang ,  1998) . There is also a longstanding goal of mapping translations and senses in multiple languages in a linked ontology structure  ( Resnik and Yarowsky , 1997; Risk , 1989; Vossen ,  1998) . The recent work of Ploux and Ji ( 2003 ) has some similarities to the techniques presented here in that it considers topological properties of the graph of synonymy relationships between words  . The current paper can be distinguished on a number of dimensions  , including our much greater range of participating languages  , and the fundamental algorithmic linkage between multilingual translation distributions and monolingual synonymy clusters  . 
4In both ? vital ? and ? strike ? examples , the rendered hierarchical clusterings were pruned  ( automatically ) in order to fit in this paper . 
Figure 4: Induced sense hierarchy for the word ? strike ? and some translations of individual ? strike ? synonyms  . Flat clusters automatically derived from the tree are denoted by the horizontal lines  . 
7 Analysis and Conclusions
This is the first presentation of a novel method for the induction of word sense inventories  , which makes use of aggregate information from a large collection of bilingual dictionaries  . 
One possible application of the induced sense inventories presented here is as an aid to manual construction of monolingual dictionaries or thesauri  , motivated by translation distinctions across numerous world languages  . While the desired granularity of sense distinction will vary according to the requirements of taste and differing applications  , treating our output as a proposal to be assessed and manually modified would be a valuable labor -saving tool for lexicographers  . 
Another application of this work is a supplemental resource for statistical machine translation  ( SMT )  . It is possible , as shown graphically in Figure 4 , to recover the foreign words associated with a cluster  ( not just a single word )  . Given that the clusters provide a more complete coverage of English word types for a given sense than the English side of a particular bilingual dictionary  , clusters could be used to unify bitext cooccurrence counts of foreign words with English senses in a way that typical bilingual dictionaries cannot  . Unifying counts in this way would be a useful way of reducing data sparsity in 
SMT training.
Finally , evaluation of induced sense taxonomies is always problematic  . First of all , there is no agreed ? correct ? way to classify the possible senses of a particular word  . To some degree this is because human experts disagree on particular judgments of classification  , though a larger issue , as pointed out in Resnik and Yarowsky 1997 , is that what constitutes an appropriate set of sense distinctions for a word is  , emphatically , a function of the task at hand . The sense-distinction requirements of English-to -French machine translation differ from those of English-to-Arabic machine translation  ( due to differing degrees of parallel polysemy across the language pairs  )  , and both differ from those of English dictionary construction  . 
We believe that the translingually-motivated word sense taxonomies developed here will prove useful for the a variety of tasks including those mentioned above  . The fact that they are derived from a novel resource  , not constructed explicitly by humans or derived in fully unsupervised fashion from text corpora  , makes them worthy of study and incorporation in future lexicographic  , machine translation , and word sense disambiguation efforts . 

J . Chen and J . Chang .  1998 . Topical Clustering of MRD Senses Based on Information Retrieval Techniques  . 
Computational Linguistic , 29(2):61-95.
A . Copestake , E . Briscoe , P . Vossen , A . Ageno , I . 
Castellan , F . Ribas , G . Rigau , H . Rodriguez and A . 
Samiotou .  1995 . Acquisition of Lexical Translation Relations from MRDs  . Machine Translation : Special
Issue on the Lexicon , 9(3):33-69.
G . Karypis .  2002 . CLUTO : A Clustering Toolkit . Tech Report 02-017, Dept . of Computer Science , University of Minnesota . Available at http://www . cs . umn . edu ? clutoS . Ploux and H . Ji .  2003 . A Model for Matching Semantic Maps Between Languages  ( French/English , English/French ) . Computational Linguistics , 29(2):155-178 . 
P . Resnik and D . Yarowsky .  1997 . A Perspective on Word Sense Disambiguation Methods and Their Evaluation  . In Proceedings of SIGLEX-1997, pp .  7986 . 
O . Risk .  1989 . Sense Disambiguation of Word Translations in Bilingual Dictionaries : Trying to Solve The Mapping Problem Automatically  . RC 14666, IBMT . J . 
Watson Research Center . Yorktown Heights.
P . Vossen ( ed . ) .  1998 . EUROWORDNET : A Multilingual Database with Lexical Semantic Networks  . Kluwer Academic Publishers . Dordrecht , The Netherlands . 
