Extracting Regulatory Gene Expression Networks from PubMed 
Jasmin ? Saric ?
EML Research gGmbH
Heidelberg , Germany

Lars J . Jensen

Heidelberg , Germany

Rossitza Ouzounova

Heidelberg , Germany

Isabel Rojas
EML Research gGmbH
Heidelberg , Germany

Peer Bork

Heidelberg , Germany


We present an approach using syntacto-
semantic rules for the extraction of rela-
tional information from biomedical ab-
stracts . The results show that by over -
coming the hurdle of technical term i-
no logy , high precision results can be
achieved . From abstracts related to
baker?s yeast , we manage to extract a
regulatory network comprised of 441
pairwise relations from 58,664 abstracts
with an accuracy of 83?90%. To achieve
this , we made use of a resource of
gene/protein names considerably larger
than those used in most other biology related information extraction approaches  . 
This list of names was included in the lexicon of our retrained part-of-speech tagger for use on molecular biology abstracts  . For the domain in question an accuracy of 93 . 6?97 . 7% was attained on
POS tags . The method is easily adapted to other organisms than yeast  , allowing us to extract many more biologically relevant relations  . 
1 Introduction and related work
A massive amount of information is buried in scientific publications  ( more than 500 , 000 publications per year ) . Therefore , the need for information extraction ( IE ) and textmining in the life sciences is drastically increasing  . Most of the ongoing work is being dedicated to deal with  PubMed1 abstracts . The technical terminology of biomedicine presents the main challenge of applying IE to such a corpus  ( Hobbs ,  2003) . 
The goal of our work is to extract from biological abstracts which proteins are responsible for regulating the expression  ( i . e . transcription or translation ) of which genes . This means to extract a specific type of pairwise relations between biological entities  . This differs from the BioCreAtIvE competition tasks2 that aimed at classifying entities ( gene products ) into classes based on Gene
Ontology ( Ashburner et al , 2000).
A task closely related to ours , which has received some attention over the past five years  , is the extraction of protein?protein interactions from abstracts  . This problem has mainly been addressed by statistical ? bag of words ? approaches  ( Marcotte et al ,  2001) , with the notable exception of Blaschke et al ( 1999 )  . All of the approaches differ significantly from ours by only attempting to extract the type of interaction and the participating proteins  , disregarding agens and patiens . 
Most NLP based studies tend to have been focused on extraction of events involving one particular verb  , e . g . bind ( Thomas et al , 2000) or inhibit ( Pustejovsky et al ,  2002) . From a biological point of view , there are two problems with such approaches : 1 ) the meaning of the extracted events 1PubMed is a bibliographic database covering life sciences with a focus on biomedicine  , comprising around 12?106 articles , roughly half of them including abstract ( http://www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov/PubMed/) . 
2Critical Assessment of Information Extraction systems in Biology  , http://www . mitre . org/public/biocreative/will depend strongly on the selectional restrictions and  2  ) the same meaning can be expressed using a number of different verbs  . In contra standalike ( Friedman et al ,  2001) , we instead set out to handle only one specific biological problem and  , in return , extract the related events with their whole range of syntactic variations  . 
The variety in the biological terminology used to describe regulation of gene expression presents a major hurdle to an IE approach  ; in many cases the information is buried to such an extent that even a human reader is unable to extract it unless having a scientific background in biology  . In this paper we will show that by overcoming the terminological barrier  , high precision extraction of entity relations can be achieved within the field of molecular biology  . 
2 The biological task and our approach
To extract relations , one should first recognize the named entities involved  . This is particularly difficult in molecular biology where many forms of variation frequently occur  . Synonymy is very common due to lack of standardization of gene names  ; BYP1 , CIF1 , FDP1 , GGS1 , GLC6 , TPS1 , TSS1 , and YBR126C are all synonyms for the same gene/protein . Additionally , these names are subject to orthographic variation originating from differences in capitalization and hyphenation as well as syntactic variation of multiword terms  ( e . g . rib of lavin synthetase betachain = beta chain of ribof lavin synthetase  )  . Moreover , many names are homonyms since a gene and its gene product are usually named identically  , causing cross over of terms between semantic classes  . Finally , para-grammatical variations are more frequent in lifescience publications than in common English due to the large number of publications by nonnative speakers  ( Netzel et al ,  2003) . 
Extracting that a protein regulates the expression of a gene is a challenging problem as this fact can be expressed in a variety of ways ? possibly mentioning neither the biological process  ( expression ) no rany of the two biological entities ( genes and proteins )  . Figure 1 shows a simplified ontology providing an overview of the biological entities involved in gene expression  , their ontological relationships , and how they can interact with


Geneproduct



Binding site
Upstream activating sequence
Upstream repressing sequence mRNA Protein
Transcription regulator
Transcription activator
Transcription repressor is a part of produces binds to Figure  1: A simplified ontology for transcription regulation  . The background color used for each term signifies its semantic role in relations : regulator  ( white )  , target ( black ) , or either ( gray ) . 
one another . An ontology is a great help when writing extraction rules  , as it immediately suggests a large number of relevant relations to be extracted  . Examples include ? promoter contains upstream activating sequence ? and ? transcription regulator binds to promoter ?  , both of which follow from indirect relationships via binding site  . 
It is often not known whether the regulation takes place at the level of gene transcription or translation or by an indirect mechanism  . For this reason , and for simplicity , we decided against trying to extract how the regulation of expression takes place  . We do , however , strictly require that the extracted relations provide information about a protein  ( the regulator , R ) regulating the expression of a gene ( the target , X ) , for which reason three requirements must be fulfilled :  1  . It must be ascertained that the sentence mentions gene expression  . ? The protein R activates X ? fails this requirement  , as R might instead activate X post -translationally  . Thus , whether the event should be extracted or not depends on the type of the accusative object X  ( e . g . geneor gene product ) . Without a head noun specifying the type , X remains ambiguous , leaving the whole relation underspecified , for which reason it should not be extracted . It should be noted that two thirds of the gene /protein names mentioned in our corpus are ambiguous for this reason  . 
2 . The identity of the regulator ( R ) must be known . ? The X promoter activates X expression ? fails this requirement  , as it is not known which transcription factor activates the expression when binding to the X promoter  . Linguistically this implies that noun chunks of certain semantic types should be disallowed as agens  . 
3. The identity of the target ( X ) must be known.
? The transcription factor R activates R dependent expression ? fails this requirement  , as it is not know which gene?s expression is dependent on R  . The semantic types allowed for patiens should thus also be restricted  . 
The two last requirements are important to avoid extraction from noninformative sentences that ? despite them containing no information ? occur quite frequently in scientific abstracts  . The coloring of the entities in Figure 1 helps discern which relations are meaningful and which are not  . 
The ability to genetically modify an organism in experiments brings about further complication to IE : biological texts often mention what takes place when an organism is artificially modified in a particular way  . In some cases such modification can reverse part of the meaning of the verb : from the sentence ? Deletion of R increased X expression ? one can conclude that R represses expression of X  . The key point is to identify that ? deletion of R ? implies that the sentence describes an experiment in which R has been removed  , but that R would normally be present and that the biological impact of R is thus the opposite of what the verb increased alone would suggest  . In other cases the verb will lose part of its meaning : ? Mutation of R increased X expression ? implies that R regulates expression X  , but we cannot infer whether R is an activator or are pressor  . In this case mutation is dealt in a manner similar to deletion in the previous example  . Finally , there are those relations that should be completely avoided as they exist only because they have been artificially introduced through genetic engineering  . In our extraction method we address all three cases  . 
We have opted for a rule based approach ( implemented as finite state automata ) to extract the relations for two reasons . The first is , that a rule based approach allows us to directly ensure that the three requirements stated above are fulfilled for the extracted relations  . This is desired to attain high accuracy on the extracted relations  , which is what matters to the biologist . Hence , we focus in our evaluation on the semantic correctness of our method rather than on its grammatical correctness  . 
As long as grammatical errors do not result in semantic errors  , we do not consider it an error . Conversely , even a grammatically correct extraction is considered an error if it is semantically wrong  . 
Our second reason for choosing a rule based approach is that our approach is theory-driven and highly interdisciplinary  , involving computational linguists , bioinformaticians , and biologists . The rule based approach allows us to benefit more from the interplay of scientists with different backgrounds  , as known biological constraints can be explicitly incorporated in the extraction rules  . 
3 Methods
Table 1 shows an overview of the architecture of our IE system  . It is organized in levels such that the output of one level is the input of the next one  . 
The following sections describe each level in detail  . 
3.1 The corpus
The PubMed resource was downloaded on January 19 ,  2004 .  58 , 6 64 abstracts related to they east Saccharomyces cerevisiae were extracted by looking for occurrences of the terms ? Sac-charomyces cerevisiae ?  , ? S . cerevisiae ? , ? Baker?s yeast ? , ? Brewer?s yeast ? , and ? Budding yeast ? in the title/abstractor as head of a MeSH  term3  . 
These abstracts were filtered to obtain the 15 , 777 that mention at least two names ( see section 3 . 4 ) and subsequently divided into a training and an evaluation set of  9137 and 6640 abstracts respectively . 
3 Medical Subject Headings ( MeSH ) is a controlled vocabulary for manually annoting PubMed articles  . 
Level Component
L0 Tokenization and multiwords
Word and sentence boundaries are detected and multiwords are recognized and recomposed to one token  . 
L1 POS Tagging
A part-of-speech tag is assigned to each word ( or multiword ) of the tokenized corpus . 
L2 Semantic labeling
A manually built taxonomy is used to assign semantic labels to tokens  . The taxonomy consists of genames , cue words relevant for entity recognition , and classes of verbs for relation extraction . 
L3 Named entity chunking
Based on the POS tags and the semantic labels , a cascaded chunk grammar recognizes noun chunks relevant for the gene transcription domain  , e . g . 
[ nx gene The GAL4 gene].
L4 Relation chunking
Relations between entities are recognized , e . g . The expression of the cytochrome genes CYC1 and CYC7 is controlled by HAP1  . 
L 5 Output and visualization
Information is gathered from the recognised patterns and transformed into predefined records  . From the example in L4 we extract that HAP1 regulates the expression of CYC1 and CYC7  . 
Table 1: Overview over the extraction architecture 3  . 2 Tokenization and multiword detection The process of tokenization consists of two steps  ( Grefenstette and Tapanainen ,  1994 ) : segmentation of the input text into a sequence of tokens and the detection of sential boundaries  . We use the tokenizer developed by Helmut Schmid at IMS  ( University of Stuttgart ) because it combines a high accuracy ( 99 . 56% on the Brown corpus ) with unsupervised learning ( i . e . no manually labelled data is needed ) ( Schmid ,  2000) . 
The determination of token boundaries in technical or scientific texts is one of the main challenges within information extraction or retrieval  . 
On the one hand , technical terms contain special characters such as brackets  , colons , hyphens , slashes , etc . On the other hand , they often appear as multiword expressions which makes it hard to detect the left and right boundaries of the terms  . Although a lot of work has been invested in the detection of technical terms within biology related texts  ( see Nenadic ? et al ( 2003 ) or Yamamoto et al ( 2003 ) for representative results ) this task is not yet solved to a satisfying extent  . As we are interested in very special terms and high precision results we opted for multiword detection based on semi-automatical acquisition of multiwords  ( see sections 3 . 4 and 3 . 5) . 
3.3 Part-of-speech tagging
To improve the accuracy of POS tagging on PubMed abstracts  , TreeTagger ( Schmid , 1994) was retrained on the GENIA 3 . 0 corpus ( Kim et al . , 2003) . Furthermore , we expanded the POS tagger lexicon with entries relevant for our application such as gene names  ( see section 3 . 4) and multiwords ( see section 3 . 5) . As tagset we use the UPenn tagset ( Santorini ,  1991 ) plus some minor extensions for distinguishing auxiliary verbs  . 
The GENIA 3 . 0 corpus consists of PubMed abstracts and has 466 , 179 manually annotated tokens . For our application we made two changes in the annotation  . The first one concerns seemingly undecideable cases like in/or annotated as in cc  . These were split into three tokens : in ,  / , and or each annotated with its own tag . This was done because TreeTagger is not able to annotate two POS tags for one token  . The second set of changes was to adapt the tag set so that vb  . . . is used for derivates of to be , vh . . . for derivates of to have , and vv . . . for all other verbs . 
3.4 Recognizing gene/protein names
To be able to recognize gene/protein names as such  , and to associate them with the appropriate database identifiers  , a list of synonymous names and identifiers in six eukaryotic model organisms was compiled from several sources  ( available from http://www . bork . embl . 
de/synonyms /) . For S . cerevisiae specifically ,  51 , 6 40 uniquely resolvable names and identifiers were obtained from Saccharomyces Genome Database  ( SGD ) and SWISS-PROT ( Dwight et al , 2002; Boeckmann et al ,  2003) . 
Before matching these names against the POS-tagged corpus  , the list of names was expanded to include different orthographic variants of each name  . Firstly , the names were allowed to have various combinations of uppercase and lowercase letters : all uppercase  , all lower case , first letter uppercase , and ( for multiword names ) first letter of each word upper case . In each of these versions , we allowed whitespace to be replaced by hyphen , and hyphen to be removed or replaced by whitespace  . In addition , from each gename a possible protein name was generated by appending the letter p  . The resulting list containing all orthographic variations comprises  516  , 799 entries . 
The orthographically expanded name list was fed into the multiword detection  , the POS tagger lexicon , and was subsequently matched against the POS -tagged corpus to retaggene/protein names as such  ( nnpg )  . By accepting only matches to words tagged as common nouns  ( nn )  , the problem of homonymy was reduced since e . g . the name MAP can occur as a verb as well . 
3.5 Semantic tagging
In addition to the recognition of the gene and protein names  , we recognize several other terms and annotate them with semantic tags  . This set of semantically relevant terms mainly consists of nouns and verbs  , as well as some few prepositions like from , or adjectives like dependent . The first main set of terms consists of nouns , which are classified as follows : ? Relevant concepts in our ontology : gene  , protein , promoter , binding site , transcription factor , etc . (153 entries ) . 
? Relational nouns , like nouns of activation ( e . g . de repression and positive regulation ) , nouns of repression ( e . g . suppression and negative regulation ) , nouns of regulation ( e . g . 
affect and control ) (69 entries).
? Triggering experimental ( artificial ) contexts : mutation , deletion , fusion , defect , vector , plasmids , etc . (11 entries ) . 
? Enzymes : gyrase , kinase , etc . (569 entries).
? Organism names extracted from the NCBI taxonomy of organisms  ( Wheeler et al ,  2004) (20 , 746 entries ) . 
The second set of terms contains 50 verbs and their inflections . They were classified according to their relevance in gene transcription  . These verbs are crucial for the extraction of relations between entities : ? Verbs of activation e  . g . enhance , increase , induce , and positively regulate . 
? Verbs of repression e . g . block , decrease , down regulate , and down regulate . 
? Verbs of regulation e.g . affect and control.
? Other selected verbs like code ( or encode ) and contain where given their own tags . 
Each of the terms consisting of more than one word was utilized for multiword recognition  . 
We also have have two additional classes of words to prevent false positive extractions  . The first contains words of negation , like not , cannot , etc . The other contains nouns that are to be distinguished from other common nouns to avoid them being allowed within named entitities  , e . g . allele and diploid . 
3.6 Extraction of named entities
In the preceding steps we classified relevant nouns according to semantic criteria  . This allows us to chunk noun phrases generalizing over both POS tags and semantic tags  . Syntacto-semantic chunking was performed to recognize named entities using cascades of finite state rules implemented as a CASS grammar  ( Abney ,  1996) . As an example we recognize gene noun phrases : [ nxgene[dt the][nnpg  CYC1] [ genegene][inin][yeastSaccharomyces cer evisia e ]] Other syntactic variants  , as for example ? the glu-cokinase gene GLK1? are recognized too . Similarly , we detect at this early level noun chunks denoting other biological entities such as proteins  , activators , repressors , transcription factors etc . 
Subsequently , we recognize more complex noun chunks on the basis of the simpler ones  , e . g . promoters , upstream activating/repressing sequences ( UAS/URS )  , binding sites . At this point it becomes important to distinguish between agens and patiens forms of certain entities  . Since a binding site is part of a target gene , it can be referred to either by the name of this gene or by the name of the regulator protein that binds to it  . It is thus necessary to discriminate between ? binding site of ? and ? binding site for ?  . 
As already mentioned , we have annotated a class of nouns that trigger experimental context  . 
On the basis of these we identify noun chunks mentioning  , as for example deletion , mutation , or overexpression of genes . At a fairly late stage we recognize events that can occur as arguments for verbs like ? expression of ?  . 
3 . 7 Extraction of relations between entities This step of processing concerns the recognition of three types of relations between the recognized named entities : up regulation  , down-regulation , and ( underspecified ) regulation of expression . We combine syntactic properties ( subcategorization restrictions ) and semantic properties ( selectional restrictions ) of the relevant verbs to map them to one of the three relation types  . 
The following shows a reduced bracketed structure consting of three parts  , a promoter chunk , a verbal complex chunk , and a UAS chunk in patiens : [ nx prom the ATR1 promoter region ] [ contain contains ] [ nxu as pt[dt?aa ] [ bsbinding site ] [ for for ] [ nxactivator the  GCN4 activator protein ]] . 
From this we extract that the GCN4 protein activates the expression of the ATR1 gene . We identify passive constructs too e . g .  ?  RNR1 expression is reduced by CLN1 or CLN2 over expression ? . In this case we extract two pairwise relations , namely that both CLN1 and CLN2 down-regulate the expression of the RNR1 gene . We also identify nominalized relations as exemplified by ? the binding of  GCN4 protein to the SER1 promoter in vitro ? . 
4 Results
Using our relation extraction rules , we were able to extract 422 relation chunks from our complete corpus . Since one entity chunk can mention several different named entities  , these corresponded to a total of 597 extracted pairwise relations . However , as several relation chunks may mention the same pairwise relations  , this reduces to 441 unique pairwise relations comprised of 126 up-regulations , 90 down-regulations , and 225 regulations of unknown direction . 
Figure 2 displays these 441 relations as a regulatory network in which the nodes represent genes or proteins and the arcs are expression regulation relations  . Known transcription factors according to the Saccharomyces Genome Database  ( SGD )   ( Dwight et al , 2002) are denoted by black nodes . 
From a biological point of view , it is reassuring that these tend to correspond to proteins serving as regulators in our relations  . 
Figure 2: The extracted network of gene regulation The extracted relations are shown as a directed graph  , in which each node corresponds to a gene or protein and each arc represents a pairwise relation  . The arcs point from the regulator to the target and the type of regulation is specified by the type of arrow head  . Known transcription factors are highlighted as black nodes  . 
4.1 Evaluation of relation extraction
To evaluate the accuracy of the extracted relation  , we manually inspected all relations extracted from the evaluation corpus using the TIGER Search visualization tool  ( Lezius ,  2002) . 
The accuracy of the relations was evaluated at the semantic rather than the grammatical level  . We thus carried out the evaluation in such a way that relations were counted as correct if they extracted the correct biological conclusion  , even if the analysis of the sentence is not as to be desired from a linguistic point of view  . Conversely , a relation was counted as an error if the biological conclusion was wrong  . 
75 of the 90 relation chunks ( 83% ) extracted from the evaluation corpus were entirely correct  , meaning that the relation corresponded to expression regulation  , the regulator ( R ) and the regulate e ( X ) were correctly identified , and the direction of regulation ( up or down ) was correct if extracted . 
Further 6 relation chunks extracted the wrong direction of regulation but were otherwise correct  ; our accuracy increases to 90% if allowing for this minor type of error . Approximately half of the errors made by our method stem from overlooked genetic modifications ? although mentioned in the sentence  , the extracted relation is not biologically relevant  . 
4.2 Entity recognition
For the sake of consistency , we have also evaluated our ability to correctly identify named entities at the level of semantic rather than grammatical correctness  . Manual inspection of 500 named entities from the evaluation corpus revealed  14 errors , which corresponds to an estimated accuracy of just over  97%  . Surprisingly , many of these errors were commited when recognizing proteins  , for which our accuracy was only 95% . Phrases such as ? telomerase associated protein ?   ( which got confused with ? telomerase protein ? itself  ) were responsible for about half of these errors . 
Among the 153 entities involved in relations no errors were detected  , which is fewer than expected from our estimated accuracy on entity recognition  ( 99% confidence according to hypergeometric test )  . This suggests that the templates used for relation extraction are unlikely to match those sentence constructs on which the entity recognition goes wrong  . False identification of named entities are thus unlikely to have an impact on the accuracy of relation extraction  . 
4.3 POS tagging and tokenization
We compared the POS tagging performance of two parameter files on  55  , 1 66 tokens from the GENIA corpus that were not used for retraining  . Using the retrained tagger , 93 . 6% of the tokens were correctly tagged , 4 . 1% carried questionable tags ( e . g . confusing proper nouns for common nouns ), and 2 . 3% were clear tagging errors . This compares favourably to the 85 . 7% correct , 8 . 5% questionable tags , and 5 . 8% errors obtained when using the Standard English parameter file  . Retraining thus reduced the error rate more than twofold  . 
Of 198 sentences evaluated , the correct sentence boundary was detected in all cases  . In addition , three abbreviations incorrectly resulted in sentence marker  , corresponding to an overall precision of 98 . 5% . 
5 Conclusions
We have developed a method that allows us to extract information on regulation of gene expression from biomedical abstracts  . This is a highly relevant biological problem , since much is known about it although this knowledge has yet to be collected in a database  . Also , knowledge on how gene expression is regulated is crucial for interpreting the enormous amounts of gene expression data produced by high-throughput methods likes potted microarrays and Gene Chips  . 
Although we developed and evaluated our method on abstracts related to baker?s yeast only  , we have successfully applied the method to other organisms including humans  ( to be published elsewhere )  . The main adaptation required was to replace the list of synonymous gene/protein names to reflect the change of organism  . Furthermore , we also intend to reuse the recognition of named entities to extract other  , specific types of interactions between biological entities  . 

The authors wish to thank Sean Hooper for help with Figure  2  . Jasmin ? Saric ? is funded by the Klaus Tschira Foundation gGmbH  , Heidelberg ( http://www . kts . villa-bosch . de ) . Lars Juhl Jensen is funded by the Bundesministerium fu?r Forschung und Bildung  , BMBF-01-GG-9817 . 

S . Abney .  1996 . Partial parsing via finite-state cascades . In Proceedings of the ESSLLI ?96 Robust Parsing Workshop , pages 8?15 , Prague , Czech Republic . 
M . Ashburner , C . A . Ball , J . A . Blake , D . Botstein , H . Butler , J . M . Cherry , A . P . Davis , K . Dolinski , S . S . Dwight , J . T . Eppig , M . A . Harris , D . P . Hill , L . Issel-Tarver , A . Kasarskis , S . Lewis , J . C . Matese , J . E . Richardson , M . Ringwald , G . M . Rubin , and G . Sherlock .  2000 . Gene Ontology : tool for the unification of biology  . Nature Genetics , 25:25?29 . 
C . Blaschke , M . A . Andrade , C . Ouzounis , and A . Valencia .  1999 . Automatic extraction of biological information from scientific text : protein ? protein interactions  . In Proc . , Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology , volume 7 , pages 60?67 , Menlo Park , CA . 
AAAI Press.
B . Boeckmann , A . Bairoch , R . Apweiler , M . C . Blatter , A . Estreicher , E . Gasteiger , M . J . Martin , KMi-choud , C . O?Donovan , I . Phan , S . Pilbout , and M . Schneider .  2003 . The SWISS-PROT protein knowledge base and its supplement TrEMBL in  2003  . Nucleic Acids Res . , 31:365?370 . 
S . S . Dwight , M . A . Harris , K . Dolinski , C . A . Ball , G . Binkley , K . R . Christie , D . G . Fisk , L . Issel-Tarver , M . Schroeder , G . Sherlock , A . Sethuraman , S . Weng , D . Botstein , and J . M . Cherry .  2002 . Sac-charomyces Genome Database ( SGD ) provides secondary gene annotation using the Gene Ontology  ( GO )  . Nucleic Acids Res . , 30:69?72 . 
C . Friedman , P . Kra , H . Yu , M . Krauthammer , and A . Rzhetsky .  2001 . GENIES : a natural language processing system for the extraction of molecular pathways from journal articles  . Bioinformatics , 17
Suppl . 1:S74?S82.
G . Grefenstette and P . Tapanainen .  1994 . What is a word , what is a sentence ? problems of tokenization . 
In The 3rd International Conference on Computational Lexicography  , pages 79?87 . 
J . R . Hobbs .  2003 . Information extraction from biomedical text . J . Biomedical Informatics . 
J . -D . Kim , T . Ohta , Y . Tateisi , and J . Tsujii .  2003 . GENIA corpus ? a semantically annotated corpus for bio-textmining  . Bioinformatics , 19 suppl . 1: i180?i182 . 
W . Lezius .  2002 . TIGER Search?e in Such werkzeug fu?r Baumbanken . In S . Busemann , editor , Proceedings der 6 . Konferenz zur Verarbeitung natrlicher Sprache ( KONVENS 2002 )  , Saarbru?cken , Germany . 
E . M . Marcotte , I . Xenarios , and D . Eisenberg .  2001 . 
Mining literature for protein?protein interactions . 
Bioinformatics , 17:359?363.
G . Nenadic ?, S . Rice , I . Spasic ?, S . Ananiadou , and B . Stapley .  2003 . Selecting text features for gene name classification : from documents to terms  . In S . Ananiadou and J . Tsujii , editors , Proceedings of the ACL 2003 Workshop on Natural Language Processing in Biomedicine  , pages 121?128 . 
R . Netzel , Perez-Iratx et a C . , P . Bork , and M . A . Andrade .  2003 . The way we write . EMBOR ep . , 4:446?451 . 
J . Pustejovsky , J . Castan?o , J . Zhang , M . Kotecki , and B . Cochran .  2002 . Robust relational parsing over biomedical literature : Extracting inhibit relations  . 
In Proceedings of the Seventh Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing  , pages 362?373 , Hawaii . World Scientific . 
B . Santorini .  1991 . Part-of-speech tagging guidelines for the penn treebank project  . Technical report , University of Pennsylvania . 
H . Schmid .  1994 . Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging using decision trees  . In International Conference on New Methods in Language Processing  , Manchester , 

H . Schmid .  2000 . Unsupervised learning of period disambiguation for tokenisation  . Technical report , Institut fr Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung , University of Stuttgart . 
J . Thomas , D . Milward , C . Ouzounis , S . Pulman , and M . Carroll .  2000 . Automatic extraction of protein interactions from scientific abstracts  . In Proceedings of the Fifth Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing  , pages 707?709 , Hawaii . World Scientific . 
D . L . Wheeler , D . M . Church , R . Edgar , S . Feder-hen , W . Helmberg , Madden T . L . , Pontius J . 
U . , Schuler G . D . , Schriml L . M . , E . Sequeira , T . O . Suzek , T . A . Tatusova , and L . Wagner . 
2004 . Database resources of the national center for biotechnology information : update  . Nucleic Acids
Res ., 32: D35?40.
K . Yamamoto , T . Kudo , A . Konagaya , and Y . Matsumoto .  2003 . Protein name tagging for biomedical annotation in text  . In S . Ananiadou and J . Tsujii , editors , Proceedings of the ACL 2003 Workshop on Natural Language Processing in Biomedicine  , pages 65?72 . 
