Proceedings of the ACL Student Research Workshop , pages 61?66,
Ann Arbor , Michigan , June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Towards an Optimal Lexicalization in a Natural-Sounding Portable
Natural Language Generator for Dialog Systems

Inge M . R . De Bleecker
Department of Linguistics
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin , TX 78712, USA
imrdb@mail.utexas.edu




Abstract
In contrast to the latest progress in speech recognition , the state-of-the-art in natural language generation for spoken language dialog systems is lagging behind . The core dialog managers are now more sophisticated ; and natural-sounding and flexible output is expected , but not achieved with current simple techniques such as template-based systems . Portability of systems across subject domains and languages is another increasingly important requirement in dialog systems . This paper presents an outline of LEGEND , a system that is both portable and generates natural-sounding output . This goal is achieved through the novel use of existing lexical resources such as FrameNet and
WordNet.
1 Introduction
Most of the natural language generation ( NLG ) components in current dialog systems are implemented through the use of simple techniques such as a library of handcrafted and prerecorded utterances , or a template-based system where the templates contain slots in which different values can be inserted . These techniques are unmanageable if the dialog system aims to provide variable , natural-sounding output , because the number of prerecorded strings or different templates becomes very large ( Theune , 2003). These techniques also make it difficult to port the system into another subject domain or language.
In order to be widely successful , natural language generation components of future dialog systems need to provide natural-sounding output while being relatively easy to port . This can be achieved by developing more sophisticated techniques based on concepts from deep linguistically-based NLG and text generation , and through the use of existing resources that facilitate both the natural-sounding and the portability requirement.
We might wonder what exactly it means for a computer to generate ? natural-sounding ? output.
Computer-generated natural-sounding output should not mimic the output a human would construct , because spontaneous human dialog tends to be teeming with disfluencies , interruptions , syntactically incorrect and incomplete sentences among others ( Zue , 1997). Furthermore , Oberlander (1998) points out that humans do not always take the most efficient route in their reasoning and communication . These observations lead us to define natural-sounding computer-generated output to consist of utterances that are free of disfluencies and interruptions , and where complete and syntactically correct sentences convey the meaning in a concise yet clear manner.
Secondly we can define the portability requirement to include both domain and language independence . Domain-independence suggests that the system must be easily portable between different domains , while language-independence requires that the system must be able to accommodate a new natural language without any changes to the core components.
Section 2 of this paper explains some prerequisites , such as the NLG pipeline architecture our system is based on , and the FrameNet and WordNet resources . Next an overview of the system ar-depth analysis of the lexicalization component are presented . Section 3 presents related work . Section 4 outlines a preliminary conclusion and lists some outstanding issues.
2 System Architecture 2.1 Three-Stage Pipeline Architecture Our natural language generator architecture follows the three-stage pipeline architecture , as described in Reiter & Dale (2000). In this architecture , the generation component of a text generation system consists of the following subcomponents : ? The document planner determines what the actual content of the output will be on an abstract level and decides how pieces of content should be grouped together.
? The microplanner includes lexicalization , aggregation , and referring expression generation tasks.
? The surface realizer takes the information constructed by the microplanner and generates a syntactically correct sentence in a natural language.
2.2 Lexical Resources
The use of FrameNet and WordNet in our system is critical to its success . The FrameNet database ( Baker et al , 1998) is a machine-readable lexicographic database which can be found at http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu /. It is based on the principles of Frame Semantics ( Fillmore , 1985).
The following quote explains the idea behind Frame Semantics : ? The central idea of Frame Semantics is that word meanings must be described in relation to semantic frames ? schematic representations of the conceptual structures and patterns of beliefs , practices , institutions , images , etc . that provide a foundation for meaningful interaction in a given speech community .? ( Fillmore et al , 2003, p . 235). In FrameNet , lexical units are grouped in frames ; frame hierarchy information is provided for each frame , in combination with a list of semantically annotated corpus sentences and syntactic valence patterns.
WordNet is a lexical database that uses conceptual-semantic and lexical relations in order to group lexical items and link them to other groups ( Fellbaum , 1998).
2.3 System Overview
Our system , called LEGEND ( LExicalization in natural language GENeration for Dialog systems ) adapts the pipeline architecture presented in section 2.1 by replacing the document planner with the dialog manager . This makes it more suitable for use in dialog systems , since the dialog manager decides on the actual content of the output in dialog systems . Figure 1 below shows an overview of our system architecture.

Figure 1. System Architecture As figure 1 shows , the dialog manager provides the generator with a dialog manager meaning representation ( DM MR ), which contains the content information for the answer.
Our research focuses on the lexicalization subcomponent of the microplanner ( number 1 in figure 1). Lexicalization is further divided into two processes : lexical choice and lexical search . Based on the DM MR , the lexical choice process ( number 2 in figure 1) constructs a set of all potential output candidates . Section 2.5 describes the lexical choice process in detail . Lexical search ( number 3 in figure 1) consists of the decision algorithm that de-most appropriate in any situation . Lexical search is also responsible for packaging up the most appropriate candidate information in an adapted F-structure , which is subsequently processed through aggregation and referring expression generation , and finally sent to the surface realizer . Section 2.6 describes the details of the lexical search process.
2.4 Implementation Details
Given time and resource constraints , our implementation will consist of a prototype ( written in Python ) of the lexical choice and lexical search processes only of the microplanner . We take a DM MR as our input . Aggregation and referring expression generation requirements are hardcoded for each example ; algorithm development , identification and implementation for these modules is beyond the scope of this research.
Our system uses the LFG-based XLE system?s generator component as a surface realizer . For more information , refer to Shemtov (1997) and
Kaplan & Wedekind (2000).
2.5 Lexical Choice
The task of the lexical choice process is to take the meaning representation presented by the dialog manager ( refer to figure 1), and to construct a set of output candidates . We will illustrate this by taking a simple example through the entire dialog system . The example question and answer are deliberately kept simple in order to focus on the workings of the system , rather than the specifics of the example.
Assume this is a dialog system that helps the consumer in buying camping equipment . The user says to the dialog system : ? Where can I buy a tent ?? The speech recognizer recognizes the utterance , and feeds this information to the parser . The semantic parser parses the input and builds the meaning representation shown in figure 2. The main event ( main verb ) is identified as the lexical item buy . The parser looks up this lexical item in FrameNet , and identifies it as belonging to the commerce_buy frame . This frame is defined in FrameNet as : ?? describing a basic commercial transaction involving a buyer and a seller exchanging money and goods , taking the perspective of the buyer .? ( http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu /). All other elements in the meaning representation are extracted from the input utterance.

Figure 2. Parser Meaning Representation This meaning representation is then sent to the dialog manager . The dialog manager consults the domain model for help in the query resolution , and subsequently composes a meaning representation consisting of the answer to the user?s question ( figure 3). For our example , the domain model presents the query resolution as ? Camping World ?, the name of a ( fictitious ) store selling tents . The DM MR also shows that the Agent and the Patient have been identified by their frame element names.
This DM MR serves as the input to the microplanner , where the first task is that of lexical choice.

Figure 3. Dialog Mgr Meaning Representation In order to construct the set of output candidates , the lexical choice process mines the FrameNet and WordNet databases in order to find acceptable generation possibilities . This is done in several steps : ? In step 1, lexicalization variations of the main Event within the same frame are identified.
? Step 2 consists of the investigation of lexical variation in the frames that are one link away in the hierarchy , namely the frame the current frame inherits from , and the subframes , if any exist.
? Step 3 is concerned with special relations within FrameNet , such as the ? use?-relation The lexical variation within these frames is investigated.
We return to our example in figure 3 to clarify these 3 steps.
In step 1, appropriate lexical variation within the same frame is identified . This is done by listing all
Event : buy
Frame : commerce_buy
Query Resolution : place ? Camping World?
Agent : buyer (1st p.s . => 2nd p.s.)
Object : goods (? tent?)
Event : buy
Frame : commerce_buy
Query : location
Agent : 1st pers sing
Patient : tent original word . The following verbs are lexical units in commerce_buy : buy , lease , purchase , rent.
These verbs are not necessarily synonyms or near-synonyms of each other , but do belong to the same frame . In order to determine which of these lexical items are synonyms or near-synonyms , we turn to WordNet , and look at the entry for buy . The only lexical item that is also listed in one of the senses of buy is purchase . We thus conclude that buy and purchase are both good verb candidates.
Step 2 investigates the lexical items in the frames that are one link away from the commerce_buy frame . Commerce_buy inherits from getting , and has no subframes . The lexical items of the getting frame are listed . The lexical items of the getting frame are : acquire , gain , get , obtain , secure . For each entry , WordNet is consulted as a first pruning mechanism . This results in the following : ? Acquire : get ? Gain : acquire , win ? Get : acquire ? Obtain : get , find , receive , incur ? Secure : no items on the list How exactly lexical choice determines that get and acquire are possible candidates , while the others are not ( because they aren?t suitable in the context in which we use them ) is as of yet an open issue . It is also an open issue whether WordNet is the most appropriate resource to use for this goal ; we must consider other options , such as Thesaurus , etc ? In step 3 we investigate the other relations that FrameNet presents . To date , we have only investigated the ? use relation ?. Other relations available are the inchoative and causative relations . At this point , it is not entirely clear how those relations will prove to be of any value to our task . The commerce_buy frame uses com-merce_goods_transfer , which is also used by commerce_sell . We find our frame elements goods and buyer in the commerce_sell frame as well.
Lexical choice concludes that the use of the lexical items in this frame might be valuable and repeats step 1 on these lexical items.
After all 3 steps are completed , we assume our set of output candidates to be complete . The set of output candidates is presented to the lexical search process , whose task it is to choose the most appropriate candidate . For the example we have been using throughout this section , the set of output candidates is as follows : ? You can buy a tent at Camping World.
? You can purchase a tent at Camping World.
? You can get a tent at Camping World.
? You can acquire a tent at Camping World.
? Camping World sells tents.
As mentioned at the beginning of this section , this example is very simple . For this reason , one can definitely argue that the first 4 output possibilities could be constructed in much simpler ways than the method used here , e.g . by simply taking the question and making it an affirmative sentence through a simple rule . However , it should be pointed out that the last possibility on the list would not be covered by this simple method.
While user studies would need to provide backup for this assumption , we feel that possibility 5 is a very good example of natural-sounding output , and thus proves our method to be valuable , even for simple examples.
2.6 Lexical Search
The set of output candidates for the example above contains 5 possibilities . The main task of the lexical search process is to choose the most optimal candidate , thus the most natural-sounding candidate ( or at least one of the most natural-sounding candidates , if more than one candidate fits that criterion ). There are a number of directions we can take for this implementation.
One option is to implement a rule-based system.
Every output candidate is matched against the rules , and the most appropriate one comes out at the top . Problems with rule-based systems are wellknown : they must be handcrafted , which is very time-consuming , constructing the rule base such that the desired rules fire in the desired circumstances is somewhat of a ? black ? art , and of course a rule base is highly domain-dependent.
Extending and maintaining it is also a laborious effort.
Next we can look at a corpus-based technique.
One suggestion is to construct a language model of the corpus data , and use this model to statistically (2000) uses this approach . However , the main problem here is that one needs a large corpus in the domain of the application . Rambow (2001) agrees that most often , no suitable corpora are available for dialog system development.
Another possibility is to use machine learning to train the microplanner . Walker et al (2002) use this approach in the SPOT sentence planner . Their ranker?s main purpose is to choose between different aggregation possibilities . The authors suggest that many generation problems can successfully be treated as ranking problems . The advantage of this approach is that no domain-dependent handcrafted rules need to be constructed , and no existence of a corpus is needed.
Our current research idea is somewhat related to option two . A relatively small domain-independent corpus of spoken dialogue is semiautomatically labeled with frames and semantic roles . For each frame , all the occurrences in the corpus are ordered according to their frequency for each separate valence pattern . This model is then used as a comparator for all output candidates , and the most optimal one ( most frequent one ) will be selected.
This approach is currently not implemented ; further work needs to determine the viability of the approach.
Independent of the method used to find the most suitable candidate , the output must be packaged up to be sent to the surface realizer . The XLE system expects a fairly detailed syntactic description of the utterance?s argument structure . We construct this through the use of FrameNet and its valence pattern information . In returning to our example , let?s assume the selected candidate is ? Camping World sells tents .? Its meaning representation is as follows : Figure 4. ? Camping World sells tents .? FrameNet provides an overview of the frame elements a given frame requires (? core elements ?) and those that are optional (? peripheral elements?).
For the commerce_sell frame , the two core elements are Goods and Seller . It also provides an overview of the valence patterns that were found in the annotated sentences for this frame . FrameNet does not include frequency information for each annotation . We thus need to pick a valence pattern at random . One way of doing this is to find a pattern that includes all ( both ) frame elements in our utterance , and then use the ( nonstatistical ) frequency information . Figure 5 shows that , for our example above , this results in:
FE_Seller sell FE_goods
With the following syntactic pattern:
NP.Ext sell NP.Obj
No . Annotated Patterns
Goods Seller 3 -- NP.Ext 2 NP.Comp NP.Ext 27 NP --4 NP.Ext PP[by].Comp 27 NP.Obj NP.Ext Figure 5. Valence Patterns ? commerce_sell ? Thus our output to the surface realizer indicates that the seller frame element fills the subject role and consists of an NP , while the goods frame element fills the object role and consists of an NP.
Given this syntactic pattern information that we gather from FrameNet , we are able to construct an F-structure that is suitable as the input to the surface realizer.
3 Related Work
To date , only a limited amount of research has dealt with deep linguistically-based natural language generation for dialog systems . Theune (2003) presents an extensive overview of different NLG methods and systems . A number of stochas-tic-based generation efforts have been undertaken in recent years . These generators generally consist of an architecture similar to ours , in which first a set of possible candidates is constructed , followed by a decision process to choose the most appropriate output . Some examples are the Nitrogen system ( Langkilde and Knight , 1998) and the SPoT trainable sentence planner ( Walker et al , 2002).
4 Outlook and Future Work
We propose a novel approach to lexicalization in NLG in order to generate natural-sounding speech in a portable environment . The use of existing
Event : sell
Frame : commerce_sell
Seller : Camping World
Goods : tents able across subject domains and languages , as long as those resources are available for the targeted domains and languages . FrameNet in particular allows us to generate multiple possibilities of natu-ral-sounding output while WordNet helps in a first step to prune this set . FrameNet is further applied on an existing corpus to help with the final decision on choosing the most optimal candidate among the presented possibilities . The valence pattern information in FrameNet helps constructing the detailed syntactic pattern required by the surface realizer.
A number of issues need further consideration , including the following : ? lexical choice : investigation of semantic distances ( step 2 of algorithm ), use of WordNet and/or other resources for first-step pruning.
? lexical search : develop initial research ideas further and implement ? a user study to assess whether the goals of natural-sounding output and portability have successfully been fulfilled.
Furthermore , for this generator to be used in a real-life environment , the entire dialog system must be developed ; for our research purposes , we have left out the construction of a semantic parser , the dialog manager , and an appropriate domain model . We have also not focused on the development of the aggregation and referring expression generation subtasks in the microplanner.
References
Baker , Collin F . and Charles J . Fillmore and John B.
Lowe . 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project . In Proceedings of the COLINGACL , Montreal , Canada.
Dale , Robert and Ehud Reiter . 1995. Computational interpretations of the Gricean maxims in the generation of referring expressions . Cognitive Science 18:233-263.
Fellbaum , Christiane . 1998. A Semantic Network of English : The Mother of All WordNets . In Computers and the Humanities , Kluwer , The Netherlands , 32: 209-220.
Fillmore , Charles J . and Christopher R . Johnson and Miriam R.L . Petruck . 2003. Background to FrameNet . In International Journal of Lexicography . Vol.
16 No . 3. 2003. Oxford University Press . Oxford,
UK.
Fillmore , Charles J . 1985. Frames and the semantics of understanding . In Quaderni di Semantica , Vol . 6.2: 222-254.
Oberlander , Jon . 1998. Do the Right Thing ? but Expect the Unexpected . Computational Linguistics.
Volume 24, Number 3. September 1998, pp . 501-507. The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA.
Shemtov , Hadar . 1997. Ambiguity Management in Natural Language Generation , PhD Thesis , Stanford.
Kaplan , R . M . and J . Wedekind . 2000. LFG generation produces contextfree languages . In Proceedings of COLING-2000, Saarbruecken , pp . 297-302.
Langkilde , Irene . 2000. Forestbased Statistical Sentence Generation . In Proceedings of the North American Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( NAACL ), 2000.
Langkilde , Irene and Kevin Knight . 1998. Generation that Exploits Corpus-Based Statistical Knowledge . In Proceedings of Coling-ACL 1998. Montr?al , Canada.

Rambow , Owen , 2001. Corpusbased Methods in Natural Language Generation : Friend or Foe ? Invited talk at the European Workshop for Natural Language
Generation , Toulouse , France.

Reiter , Ehud and Robert Dale . 2000. Building Natural Language Generation Systems . Cambridge University Press . Cambridge , UK.

Theune , Mari?t . 2000. From data to speech : language generation in context . Ph.D . thesis , Eindhoven University of Technology.

Theune , Mari?t . 2003. Natural Language Generation for Dialogue : System Survey . University of Twente.
Twente , the Netherlands.

Walker , Marilyn and Owen Rambow and Monica Rogati . 2002. Training a Sentence Planner for Spoken Dialogue Using Boosting . Computer Speech and Language , Special Issue on Spoken Language Generation , July 2002.

Zue , Victor . 1997. Conversational Interfaces : Advances and Challenges . Keynote in Proceedings of Eurospeech 1997. Rhodes , Greece.

