Proceedings of the ACL Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
pages 85?88, Ann Arbor , June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Two diverse systems built using
generic components for spoken dialogue
(Recent Progress on TRIPS)
James Allen , George Ferguson , Mary Swift , Amanda Stent , Scott Stoness , Lucian Galescu , Nathan Chambers , Ellen Campana , and Gregory Aist
University of Rochester
Computer Science Department
UR Comp Sci RC 270226
Rochester NY 14627 USA { james , ferguson , swift , stoness , campana , gaist } @ cs.rochester.edu
Institute for
Human and Machine Cognition 40 South Alcaniz St.
Pensacola FL 32502 { lgalescu,nchambers}@ihmc.us
State University of New York at
Stony Brook 1418 Computer Science
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook NY 11794 USA stent@cs.sunysb.edu
Abstract
This paper describes recent progress on the TRIPS architecture for developing spoken-lan-guage dialogue systems . The interactive poster session will include demonstrations of two systems built using TRIPS : a computer purchasing assistant , and an object placement ( and manipulation ) task.
1 Introduction
Building a robust spoken dialogue system for a new task currently requires considerable effort , including extensive data collection , grammar development , and building a dialogue manager that drives the system using its " backend " application ( e.g.
database query , planning and scheduling ). We describe progress in an effort to build a generic dialogue system that can be rapidly customized to a wide range of different types of applications , primarily by defining a domain-specific task model and the interfaces to the backend systems . This is achieved by using generic components ( i.e ., ones that apply in any practical domain ) for all stages of understanding and developing techniques for rapidly customizing the generic components to new domains ( e.g . Aist , Allen , and Galescu 2004). To achieve this goal we have made several innovations , including (1) developing domain independent models of semantic and contextual interpretation , (2) developing generic dialogue management components based on an abstract model of collaborative problem solving , and (3) extensively using an ontol-ogy-mapping system that connects the domain independent representations to the representations/query languages used by the backend applications , and which is used to automatically optimize the performance of the system in the specific domain.
2 Theoretical Underpinnings : The Prob-lem-Solving Model of Dialogue While many have observed that communication is a specialized form of joint action that happens to involve language and that dialogue can be viewed as collaborative problem solving , very few implemented systems have been explicitly based on these ideas . Theories of speech act interpretation as intention recognition have been developed ( including extensive prior work in TRIPS ' predecessor , the TRAINS project ), but have been generally considered impractical for actual systems . Planning models have been more successful on the generation side , and some systems have used the notion of executing explicit task models to track and drive the interactions ( e.g ., Sidner and Rich's COLLAGEN framework ). But collaborative problem solving , and dialogue in general , is much more general than executing tasks . In our applications , in addition to executing tasks , we see dialogue that is used to define the task ( i.e ., collaborative planning ), evaluate the task ( e.g ., estimating how long it will take , comparing options , or likely effects ), debug a task ( e.g ., identifying and discussing problems and how to remedy them ), learn new tasks ( e.g ., by demonstration and instruction).
85
In the remainder of the paper , we'll first discuss the methods we've developed for building dialogue systems using generic components . We'll then describe two systems implemented using the TRIPS architecture that we will demonstrate at the interactive poster session.
3 Generic Methods : Ontology Mappings and Collaborative Problem Solving The goal of our work is to develop generic spoken dialogue technology that can be rapidly customized to new applications , tasks and domains . To do this , we have developed generic domain independent representations not only of sentence meaning but also of the collaborative actions that are performed by the speech acts as one engages in dialogue . Furthermore , we need to be able to easily connect these generic representations to a wide range of different domain specific task models and applications , ranging from data base query systems to state-of-the-art planning and scheduling systems . This paper describes the approach we have developed in the TRIPS system . TRIPS is now being used in a wide range of diverse applications , from interactive planning ( e.g ., developing evacuation plans ), advice giving ( e.g ., a medication advisor ( Ferguson et al.
2002)), controlling teams of robots , collaborative assistance ( e.g ., an assistant that can help you purchase a computer , as described in this paper ), supporting human learning , and most recently having the computer learn ( or be taught ) tasks , such as learning to perform tasks on the web . Even though the tasks and domains differ dramatically , these applications use the same set of core understanding components.
The key to supporting such a range of tasks and applications is the use of a general ontology-mapping system . This allows the developer to express a set of mapping rules that translate the generic knowledge representation into the specific representations used by the backend applications ( called the KR representation ). In order to support generic discourse processing , we represent these mappings as a chain of simpler transformations . These representations are thus transformed in several stages . The first , using the ontology mapping rules , maps the LF representation into an intermediary representation ( AKRL - the abstract KR language ) that has a generic syntax but whose content is expressed in terms of the KR ontology . The second stage is a syntactic transformation that occurs at the time that calls to the backend applications actually occur so that interactions occur in the representations the backend expects . In addition to using ontology mapping to deal with the representational issues , TRIPS is unique in that it uses a generic model of collaborative problem solving to drive the dialogue itself ( e.g . Allen , Blaylock , and Ferguson 2002).
This model forms the basis of a generic component ( the collaboration manager ) that supports both intention recognition to identify the intended speech acts and their content , planning the system's actions to respond to the user ( or that take initiative ), and providing utterance realization goals to the generation system . To develop this , we have been developing a generic ontology of collaborative problem solving acts , which provide the framework for managing the dialogue . The collaboration manager queries a domain-specific task component in order to make decisions about interpretations and responses.
4 TRIPS Spoken Dialogue Interface to the CALO Purchasing Assistant The CALO project is a large multisite effort which aims at building a computerized assistant that learns how to help you with day-to-day tasks . The overarching goal of the CALO project is to ... create cognitive software systems , that is , systems that can reason , learn from experience , be told what to do , explain what they are doing , reflect on their experience , and respond robustly to surprise ( Mark and Perrault 2004).
Within this broad mandate , one of our current areas of focus is user-system dialogue regarding the task of purchasing - including eliciting user needs , describing possibilities , and reviewing & finalizing a purchase decision . ( Not necessarily as discrete stages ; these elements may be interleaved as appropriate for the specific item(s ) and setting .) Within the purchasing domain , we began with computer purchasing and have branched out to other equipment such as projectors.
How to help with purchasing ? The family of tasks involving purchasing items online , regardless of the type of item , have a number of elements in common . The process of purchasing has some common tures available , allowing the user to specify constraints , and so forth . Also , regarding the goal that must be reached at the end of the task , the eventual item must : Meet requirements . The item needs to meet some sort of user expectations . This could be as arbitrary as a specific part number , or as compositional - and amenable to machine understanding - as a set of physical dimensions ( length , width , height , mass , etc .) Be approved . Either the system will have the authority to approve it ( cf . Amazon's one-click ordering system ), or more commonly the user will review and confirm the purchase . In an office environment the approval process may extend to include review by a supervisor , such as might happen with an item costing over ( say ) $1000.
Be available . ( At one time a certain electronics store in California had the habit of leaving out floor models of laptops beyond the point where any were actually available for sale . ( Perhaps to entice the unwitting customer into an ? upsale ?, that is , buying a similar but more expensive computer .)) On a more serious note , computer specifications change rapidly , and so access to online information about available computers ( provided by other research within CALO ) would be important in order to ensure that the user can actually order the machine he or she has indicated a preference for.
At the interactive poster session , we will demonstrate some of the current spoken dialogue capability related to the CALO task of purchasing equipment . We will demonstrate a number of the aspects of the system such as initiating a conversation , discussing specific requirements , presenting possible equipment to purchase , system-initiated reminders to ask for supervisor approval for large purchases , and finalizing a decision to purchase.
Figure 1. Fruit carts display.
87 5 TRIPS Spoken Dialogue Interface to choosing , placing , painting , rotating , and filling ( virtual ) fruit carts TRIPS is versatile in its applications , as we've said previously . We hope to also demonstrate an interface to a system for using spoken commands to modifying , manipulating , and placing objects on a computer-displayed map . This system ( aka ? fruit carts ?) extends the TRIPS architecture into the realm of continuous understanding . That is , when state-of-the-art dialogue systems listen , they typically wait for the end of the utterance before deciding what to do . People on the other hand do not wait in this way ? they can act on partial information as it becomes available . A classic example comes from M . Tanenhaus and colleagues at Rochester : when presented with several objects of various colors and told to ? click on the yel -?, people will already tend to be looking relatively more at the yellow object(s ) even before the word ? yellow ? has been completed . To achieve this type of interactivity with a dialogue system ? at least at the level of two or three words at a time , if not parts of words ? imposes some interesting challenges . For example : 1. Information must flow asynchronously between dialogue components , so that actions can be triggered based on partial utterances even while the understanding continues 2. There must be reasonable representations of incomplete information ? not just ? incomplete sentence ?, but specifying what is present already and perhaps what may potentially follow 3. Speech recognition , utterance segmentation , parsing , interpretation , discourse reasoning , and actions must all be able to happen in real time The fruit carts system consists of two main components : first , a graphical interface implemented on Windows 2000 using the . NET framework , and connected to a high-quality eyetracker ; second , a TRIPS-driven spoken dialogue interface implemented primarily in LISP . The actions in this domain are as follows : 1. Select an object (? take the large plain square ?) 2. Move it (? move it to central park ?) 3. Rotate it (? and then turn it left a bit ? that's good ?) 4. Paint it (? and that one needs to be purple ?) 5. Fill it (? and there's a grapefruit inside it ?) Figure 1 shows an example screenshot from the fruit carts visual display . The natural language interaction is designed to handle various ways of speaking , including conventional definite descriptions (? move the large square to central park ?) and more interactive language such as (? up towards the flag pole ? right a bit ? more ? um - stop there .?) 6 Conclusion In this brief paper , we have described some of the recent progress on the TRIPS platform . In particular we have focused on two systems developed in TRIPS : a spoken dialogue interface to a mixed-initiative purchasing assistant , and a spoken interface for exploring continuous understanding in an object-placement task . In both cases the systems make use of reusable components ? for input and output such as parsing and speech synthesis , and also for dialogue functionality such as mapping between language , abstract semantics , and specific representations for each domain.
References
Aist , G . 2004. Speech , gaze , and mouse data from choosing , placing , painting , rotating , and filling ( virtual ) vending carts . International Committee for Coordination and Standardisation of Speech Databases ( COCOSDA ) 2004 Workshop , Jeju Island , Korea , October 4, 2004.
Aist , G.S ., Allen , J ., and Galescu , L . 2004. Expanding the linguistic coverage of a spoken dialogue system by mining human-human dialogue for new sentences with familiar meanings . Member Abstract , 26th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
Chicago , August 57, 2004.
James Allen , Nate Blaylock , and George Ferguson . A problem-solving model for collaborative agents . In First International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems , Bologna , Italy , July 1519 2002.
George Ferguson , James F . Allen , Nate J . Blaylock , Donna K . Byron , Nate W . Chambers , Myrsolava O.
Dzikovska , Lucian Galescu , Xipeng Shen , Robert S.
Swier , and Mary D . Swift . The Medication Advisor Project : Preliminary Report , Technical Report 776, Computer Science Dept ., University of Rochester,
May 2002.
Mark , B ., and Perrault , R . ( principal investigators).
2004. Website for Cognitive Assistant that Learns and Organizes . http://www.ai.sri.com/project/CALO
