Proceedings of the ACL Interactive Poster and Demonstration Sessions,
pages 1?4, Ann Arbor , June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Information-State Approach to Collaborative Reference
David DeVault1 Natalia Kariaeva2 Anubha Kothari2 Iris Oved3 and Matthew Stone1
1Computer Science 2Linguistics 3Philosophy and Center for Cognitive Science
Rutgers University
Piscataway NJ 08845-8020
Firstname.Lastname@Rutgers.Edu
Abstract
We describe a dialogue system that works with its interlocutor to identify objects.
Our contributions include a concise , modular architecture with reversible processes of understanding and generation , an information-state model of reference , and flexible links between semantics and collaborative problem solving.
1 Introduction
People work together to make sure they understand one another . For example , when identifying an object , speakers are prepared to give many alternative descriptions , and listeners not only show whether they understand each description but often help the speaker find one they do understand ( Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs , 1986). This natural collaboration is part of what makes human communication so robust to failure . We aim both to explain this ability and to reproduce it.
In this paper , we present a novel model of collaboration in referential linguistic communication , and we describe and illustrate its implementation . As we argue in Section 2, our approach is unique in combining a concise abstraction of the dynamics of joint activity with a reversible grammar-driven model of referential language . In the new information-state model of reference we present in Section 3, interlocutors work together over multiple turns to associate an entity with an agreed set of concepts that characterize it . On our approach , utterance planning and understanding involves reasoning about how domain-independent linguistic forms can be used in context to contribute to the task ; see Section 4.
Our system reduces to four modules : understanding , update , deliberation and generation , together with some supporting infrastructure ; see Section 5. This design derives the efficiency and flexibility of referential communication from carefully-designed representation and reasoning in this simple architecture ; see Section 6. With this proof-of-concept implementation , then , we provide a jumping-off point for more detailed investigation of knowledge and processes in conversation.
2 Overview and Related Work
Our demonstration system plays a referential communication game , much like the one that pairs of human subjects play in the experiments of Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs (1986). We describe each episode in this game as an activity involving the coordinated action of two participants : a director D who knows the referent R of a target variable T and a matcher M whose task is to identify R . Our system can play either role , D or M , using virtual objects in a graphical display as candidate targets and distractors , and using text as its input and output . Our system uses the same task knowledge and the same grammar whichever role it plays . Of course , the system also draws on private knowledge to decide how best to carry out its role ; for now it describes objects using the domain-specific iteration proposed by Dale and Reiter (1995). The knowledge we have formalized is targeted to a proof-of-concept implementation , but we see no methodological obstacle in adding to the We exemplify what our system does in (1).
(1) a . S : This one is a square.
b . U : Um-hm...
c . S : It?s light brown.
d . U : You mean like tan ? e . S : Yeah.
f . S : It?s solid.
g . U : Got it.
The system ( S ) and user ( U ) exchange seven utterances in the course of identifying a tan solid square.
We achieve this interaction using the information-state approach to dialogue system design ( Larsson and Traum , 2000). This approach describes dialogue as a coordinated effort to maintain an agreed record of the state of the conversation . Our model contrasts with traditional plan-based models , as exemplified by Heeman and Hirst?s model of goals and beliefs in collaborative reference (1995). Our approach abstracts away from such details of individuals ? mental states and cognitive processes , for principled reasons ( Stone , 2004a ). We are able to capture these details implicitly in the dynamics of conversation , whereas plan-based models must represent them explicitly . Our representations are simpler than Heeman and Hirst?s but support more flexible dialogue.
For example , their approach to (1) would have interlocutors coordinating on goals and beliefs about a syntactic representation for the tan solid square ; for us , this description and the interlocutors ? commitment to it are abstract results of the underlying collaborative activity.
Another important antecedent to our work is Purver?s (2004) characterization of clarification of names for objects and properties . We extend this work to develop a treatment of referential descriptive clarification . When we describe things , our descriptions grow incrementally and can specify as much detail as needed . Clarification becomes correspondingly cumulative and open-ended . Our revised information state includes a model of cumulative and open-ended collaborative activity , similar to that advocated by Rich et al (2001). We also benefit from a reversible goal-directed perspective on descriptive language ( Stone et al , 2003).
3 Information State
Our information state ( IS ) models the ongoing collaboration using a stack of tasks . For a task of collaborative reference , the IS tracks how interlocutors together set up and solve a constraint-satisfaction problem to identify a target object . In any state , D and M have agreed on a target variable T and a set of constraints that the value of T must satisfy . When M recognizes that these constraints identify R , the task ends successfully . Until then , D can take actions that contribute new constraints on R . Importantly , what D says adds to what is already known about R , so that the identification of R can be accomplished across multiple sentences with heterogeneous syntactic structure.
Our IS also allows subtasks of questioning or clarification that interlocutors can use to maintain alignment . The same constraint-satisfaction model is used not only for referring to displayed objects but also for referring to abstract entities , such as actions or properties . Our IS tracks the salience of entity and property referents and , like Purver?s , maintains the previous utterance for reference in clarification questions . Note , however , that we do not factor updates to the IS through an abstract taxonomy of speech acts . Instead , utterances directly make domain moves , such as adding a constraint , so our architecture allows utterances to trigger an open-ended range of domain-specific updates.
4 Linguistic Representations
The way utterances signal task contributions is through a collection of presupposed constraints . To understand an utterance , we solve the utterance?s grammatically-specified semantic constraints . An interpretation is only feasible if it represents a contextually-appropriate contribution to the ongoing task . Symmetrically , to generate an utterance , we use the grammar to formulate a set of constraints ; these constraints must identify the contribution the system intends to make . We view interpreted linguistic structures as representing communicative intentions ; see ( Stone et al , 2003) or ( Stone , 2004b).
As in ( DeVault et al , 2004), a knowledge interface mediates between domain-general meanings and the domain-specific ontology supported in a particular application . This allows us to build inter-referents , for task moves , and for the domain properties that characterize referents.
5 Architecture
Our system is implemented in Java . A set of interface types describes the flow of information and control through the architecture . The representation and reasoning outlined in Sections 3 and 4 is accomplished by implementations of these interfaces that realize our approach . Modules in the architecture exchange messages about events and their interpretations . (1) Deliberation responds to changes in the IS by proposing task moves . (2) Generation constructs collaborative intentions to accomplish the planned task moves . (3) Understanding infers collaborative intentions behind user actions . Generation and understanding share code to construct intentions for utterances , and both carry out a form of inference to the best explanation . (4) Update advances the IS symmetrically in response to intentions signaled by the system or recognized from the user ; the symmetric architecture frees the designer from programming complementary updates in a symmetrical way . Additional supporting infrastructure handles the recognition of input actions , the realization of output actions , and interfacing between domain knowledge and linguistic resources.
Our system is designed not just for users to interact with , but also for demonstrating and debugging the system?s underlying models . Processing can be paused at any point to allow inspection of the sys-tem?s representations using a range of visualization tools . You can interactively explore the IS , including the present state of the world , the agreed direction of the ongoing task , and the representation of linguistic distinctions in salience and information status . You can test the grammar and other interpretive resources . And you can visualize the search space for understanding and generation.
6 Example
Let us return to dialogue (1). Here the system represents its moves as successively constraining the shape , color and pattern of the target object . In generating (1c ), the system iteratively elaborates its description from brown to light brown in an attempt to identify the object?s color unambiguously . The user?s clarification request at (1d ) marks this description of color as problematic and so triggers a nested instance of the collaborative reference task.
At (1e ) the system adds the user?s proposed constraint and ( we assume ) solves this nested subtask.
The system returns to the main task at (1f ) having grounded the color constraint and continues by identifying the pattern of the target object.
Let us explore utterance (1c ) in more detail . The IS records the status of the identification process.
The system is the director ; the user is the matcher.
The target is represented provisionally by a discourse referent t1, and what has been agreed so far is that the current target is a square of the relevant sort for this task , represented in the agent as square-figure-object(t1). In addition , the system has privately recorded that square o1 is the referent it must identify . For this IS , it is expected that the director will propose an additional constraint identifying t1. The discourse state represents t1 as being in-focus , or available for pronominal reference.
Deliberation now gives the generator a specific move for the system to achieve : (2) add-constraint(t1,color-sandybrown(t1)) The content of the move in (2) is that the system should update the collaborative reference task to include the constraint that the target is drawn in a particular , domain-specific color ( RGB value F4-A4-60, or XHTML standard ? sandy brown ?). The system finds an utterance that achieves this by exploring head-first derivations in its grammar ; it arrives at the derivation of it?s light brown in (3).
(3) brown [ present predicative adjective ]   
H
HH
HH it [ subject ] light [ color degree adverb ] A set of presuppositions connect this linguistic structure to a task domain ; they are given in (4a).
The relevant instances in this task are shown in (4b).
(4) a . predication(M)?brown(C )? light(C ) b . predication(add-constraint )? brown(color-sandybrown )? light(color-sandybrown ) X so presupposes that in-focus(X ) holds . The move effected by the utterance is schematized as M(X , C(X )). Given the range of possible task moves in the current context , the constraints specified by the grammar for (3) are modeled as determining the instantiation in (2). The system realizes the utterance and assumes , provisionally , that the utterance achieves its intended effect and records the new constraint on t1.
Because the generation process incorporates entirely declarative reasoning , it is normally reversible.
Normally , the interlocutor would be able to identify the speaker?s intended derivation , associate it with the same semantic constraints , resolve those constraints to the intended instances , and thereby discover the intended task move . In our example , this is not what happens . Recognition of the user?s clarification request is triggered as in ( Purver , 2004). The system fails to interpret utterance (1d ) as an appropriate move in the main reference task . As an alternative , the system ? downdates ? the context to record the fact that the system?s intended move may be the subject of explicit grounding . This involves pushing a new collaborative reference task on the stack of ongoing activities . The system remains the director , the new target is the variable C in interpretation and the referent to be identified is the property color-sandybrown . Interpretation of (1d ) now succeeds.
7 Discussion
Our work bridges research on collaborative dialogue in AI ( Rich et al , 2001) and research on pragmatics in computational linguistics ( Stone et al , 2003).
The two traditions have a lot to gain from reconciling their assumptions , if as Clark (1996) suggests , people?s language use is coextensive with their joint activity . There are implications both ways.
For pragmatics , our model suggests that language use requires collaboration in part because reaching agreement about content involves substantive social knowledge and coordination . Indeed , we suspect that collaborative reference is only one of many relevant social processes . For collaborative dialogue systems , adopting rich declarative linguistic representations enables us to directly interface the core modules of a collaborative system with one another.
In language understanding , for example , we can collapse together notional subprocesses like semantic reconstruction , reference resolution , and intention recognition and solve them in a uniform way.
Our declarative , reversible approach supports an analysis of how the system?s specifications drive its input-output behavior . The architecture of this system thus provides the groundwork for further investigations into the interaction of social , linguistic , cognitive and even perceptual and developmental processes in meaningful communication.
Acknowledgements
Supported in part by NSF HLC 0308121. Thanks to
Paul Tepper.
References
H . H . Clark and D . Wilkes-Gibbs . 1986. Referring as a collaborative process . Cognition , 22:1?39.
H . H . Clark . 1996. Using Language . Cambridge.
R . Dale and E . Reiter . 1995. Computational interpretations of the Gricean maxims in the generation of referring expressions . Cognitive Science , 18:233?263.
D . DeVault , C . Rich , and C . L . Sidner . 2004. Natural language generation and discourse context : Computing distractor sets from the focus stack . In FLAIRS.
P . Heeman and G . Hirst . 1995. Collaborating on referring expressions . Comp . Ling ., 21(3):351?382.
S . Larsson and D . Traum . 2000. Information state and dialogue management in the TRINDI dialogue move engine toolkit . Natural Language Eng ., 6:323?340.
M . Purver . 2004. The Theory and Use of Clarification Requests in Dialogue . Ph.D . thesis , Univ . of London.
C . Rich , C . L . Sidner , and N . Lesh . 2001. COLLAGEN : applying collaborative discourse theory to humancomputer interaction . AI Magazine , 22:15?25.
M . Stone , C . Doran , B . Webber , T . Bleam , and M . Palmer.
2003. Microplanning with communicative intentions.
Comp . Intelligence , 19(4):311?381.
M . Stone . 2004a . Communicative intentions and conversational processes . In J . Trueswell and M . K . Tanenhaus , editors , Approaches to Studying World-Situated
Language Use , pages 39?70. MIT.
M . Stone . 2004b . Intention , interpretation and the computational structure of language . Cognitive Science , 28(5):781?809.
4
