Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL , pages 622?629,
Ann Arbor , June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Randomized Algorithms and NLP : Using Locality Sensitive Hash Function
for High Speed Noun Clustering
Deepak Ravichandran , Patrick Pantel , and Eduard Hovy
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey , CA 90292.
{ravichan , pantel , hovy}@ISI.EDU
Abstract
In this paper , we explore the power of randomized algorithm to address the challenge of working with very large amounts of data . We apply these algorithms to generate noun similarity lists from 70 million pages . We reduce the running time from quadratic to practically linear in the number of elements to be computed.
1 Introduction
In the last decade , the field of Natural Language Processing ( NLP ), has seen a surge in the use of corpus motivated techniques . Several NLP systems are modeled based on empirical data and have had varying degrees of success . Of late , however , corpus-based techniques seem to have reached a plateau in performance . Three possible areas for future research investigation to overcoming this plateau include : 1. Working with large amounts of data ( Banko and
Brill , 2001) 2. Improving semisupervised and unsupervised algorithms.
3. Using more sophisticated feature functions.
The above listing may not be exhaustive , but it is probably not a bad bet to work in one of the above directions . In this paper , we investigate the first two avenues . Handling terabytes of data requires more efficient algorithms than are currently used in NLP.
We propose a web scalable solution to clustering nouns , which employs randomized algorithms . In doing so , we are going to explore the literature and techniques of randomized algorithms . All clustering algorithms make use of some distance similarity ( e.g ., cosine similarity ) to measure pair wise distance between sets of vectors . Assume that we are given n points to cluster with a maximum of k features . Calculating the full similarity matrix would take time complexity n2k . With large amounts of data , say n in the order of millions or even billions , having an n2k algorithm would be very infeasible.
To be scalable , we ideally want our algorithm to be proportional to nk.
Fortunately , we can borrow some ideas from the Math and Theoretical Computer Science community to tackle this problem . The crux of our solution lies in defining Locality Sensitive Hash ( LSH ) functions.
LSH functions involve the creation of short signatures ( fingerprints ) for each vector in space such that those vectors that are closer to each other are more likely to have similar fingerprints . LSH functions are generally based on randomized algorithms and are probabilistic . We present LSH algorithms that can help reduce the time complexity of calculating our distance similarity atrix to nk.
Rabin (1981) proposed the use of hash functions from random irreducible polynomials to create short fingerprint representations for very large strings . These hash function had the nice property that the fingerprint of two identical strings had the same fingerprints , while dissimilar strings had different fingerprints with a very small probability of collision . Broder (1997) first introduced LSH . He proposed the use of Minwise independent functions to create fingerprints that preserved the Jaccard sim-niques are used today , for example , to eliminate duplicate web pages . Charikar (2002) proposed the use of random hyperplanes to generate an LSH function that preserves the cosine similarity between every pair of vectors . Interestingly , cosine similarity is widely used in NLP for various applications such as clustering.
In this paper , we perform high speed similarity list creation for nouns collected from a huge web corpus . We linearize this step by using the LSH proposed by Charikar (2002). This reduction in complexity of similarity computation makes it possible to address vastly larger datasets , at the cost , as shown in Section 5, of only little reduction in accuracy . In our experiments , we generate a similarity list for each noun extracted from 70 million page web corpus . Although the NLP community has begun experimenting with the web , we know of no work in published literature that has applied complex language analysis beyond IR and simple surface-level pattern matching.
2 Theory
The core theory behind the implementation of fast cosine similarity calculation can be divided into two parts : 1. Developing LSH functions to create signatures ; 2. Using fast search algorithm to find nearest neighbors . We describe these two components in greater detail in the next subsections.
2.1 LSH Function Preserving Cosine Similarity We first begin with the formal definition of cosine similarity.
Definition : Let u and v be two vectors in a k dimensional hyperplane . Cosine similarity is defined as the cosine of the angle between them : cos(?(u , v )). We can calculate cos(?(u , v )) by the following formula : cos(?(u , v )) = | u.v | | u||v | (1) Here ?( u , v ) is the angle between the vectors u and v measured in radians . | u.v | is the scalar ( dot ) product of u and v , and | u | and | v | represent the length of vectors u and v respectively.
The LSH function for cosine similarity as proposed by Charikar (2002) is given by the following theorem : Theorem : Suppose we are given a collection of vectors in a k dimensional vector space ( as written as Rk ). Choose a family of hash functions as follows : Generate a spherically symmetric random vector r of unit length from this k dimensional space . We define a hash function , hr , as : hr(u ) = { 1 : r.u ? 0 0 : r.u < 0 (2)
Then for vectors u and v,
Pr[hr(u ) = hr(v )] = 1? ?( u , v ) pi (3)
Proof of the above theorem is given by Goemans and Williamson (1995). We rewrite the proof here for clarity . The above theorem states that the probability that a random hyperplane separates two vectors is directly proportional to the angle between the two vectors ( i,e ., ?( u , v )). By symmetry , we have Pr[hr(u ) 6= hr(v )] = 2Pr[u.r ? 0, v.r < 0]. This corresponds to the intersection of two half spaces , the dihedral angle between which is ?. Thus , we have Pr[u.r ? 0, v.r < 0] = ?( u , v)/2pi . Proceeding we have Pr[hr(u ) 6= hr(v )] = ?( u , v)/pi and Pr[hr(u ) = hr(v )] = 1 ? ?( u , v)/pi . This completes the proof.
Hence from equation 3 we have , cos(?(u , v )) = cos((1? Pr[hr(u ) = hr(v)])pi ) (4) This equation gives us an alternate method for finding cosine similarity . Note that the above equation is probabilistic in nature . Hence , we generate a large ( d ) number of random vectors to achieve the process . Having calculated hr(u ) with d random vectors for each of the vectors u , we apply equation 4 to find the cosine distance between two vectors.
As we generate more number of random vectors , we can estimate the cosine similarity between two vectors more accurately . However , in practice , the number ( d ) of random vectors required is highly domain dependent , i.e ., it depends on the value of the total number of vectors ( n ), features ( k ) and the way the vectors are distributed . Using d random vectors , we d.
Carefully looking at equation 4, we can observe that Pr[hr(u ) = hr(v )] = 1 ? ( hamming distance)/d1 . Thus , the above theorem , converts the problem of finding cosine distance between two vectors to the problem of finding hamming distance between their bit streams ( as given by equation 4). Finding hamming distance between two bit streams is faster and highly memory efficient.
Also worth noting is that this step could be considered as dimensionality reduction wherein we reduce a vector in k dimensions to that of d bits while still preserving the cosine distance between them.
2.2 Fast Search Algorithm
To calculate the fast hamming distance , we use the search algorithm PLEB ( Point Location in Equal Balls ) first proposed by Indyk and Motwani (1998).
This algorithm was further improved by Charikar (2002). This algorithm involves random permutations of the bit streams and their sorting to find the vector with the closest hamming distance . The algorithm given in Charikar (2002) is described to find the nearest neighbor for a given vector . We modify it so that we are able to find the top B closest neighbor for each vector . We omit the math of this algorithm but we sketch its procedural details in the next section . Interested readers are further encouraged to read Theorem 2 from Charikar (2002) and Section 3 from Indyk and Motwani (1998).
3 Algorithmic Implementation
In the previous section , we introduced the theory for calculation of fast cosine similarity . We implement it as follows : 1. Initially we are given n vectors in a huge k dimensional space . Our goal is to find all pairs of vectors whose cosine similarity is greater than a particular threshold.
2. Choose d number of ( d << k ) unit random vectors { r0, r1, ......, rd } each of k dimensions.
A k dimensional unit random vector , in general , is generated by independently sampling a 1Hamming distance is the number of bits which differ between two binary strings.
Gaussian function with mean 0 and variance 1, k number of times . Each of the k samples is used to assign one dimension to the random vector . We generate a random number from a Gaussian distribution by using Box-Muller transformation ( Box and Muller , 1958).
3. For every vector u , we determine its signature by using the function hr(u ) ( as given by equation 4). We can represent the signature of vector u as : u ? = { hr1(u ), hr2(u ), ......., hrd(u)}.
Each vector is thus represented by a set of a bit streams of length d . Steps 2 and 3 takes O(nk ) time ( We can assume d to be a constant since d << k).
4. The previous step gives n vectors , each of them represented by d bits . For calculation of fast hamming distance , we take the original bit index of all vectors and randomly permute them ( see Appendix A for more details on random permutation functions ). A random permutation can be considered as random jumbling of the bits of each vector2. A random permutation function can be approximated by the following function : pi(x ) = ( ax + b)mod p (5) where , p is prime and 0 < a < p , 0 ? b < p , and a and b are chosen at random.
We apply q different random permutation for every vector ( by choosing random values for a and b , q number of times ). Thus for every vector we have q different bit permutations for the original bit stream.
5. For each permutation function pi , we lexicographically sort the list of n vectors ( whose bit streams are permuted by the function pi ) to obtain a sorted list . This step takes O(nlogn ) time . ( We can assume q to be a constant).
6. For each sorted list ( performed after applying the random permutation function pi ), we calculate the hamming distance of every vector with 2The jumbling is performed by a mapping of the bit index as directed by the random permutation function . For a given permutation , we reorder the bit indexes of all vectors in similar fashion . This process could be considered as column reording of bit vectors.
624
B of its closest neighbors in the sorted list . If the hamming distance is below a certain predetermined threshold , we output the pair of vectors with their cosine similarity ( as calculated by equation 4). Thus , B is the beam parameter of the search . This step takes O(n ), since we can assume B , q , d to be a constant.
Why does the fast hamming distance algorithm work ? The intuition is that the number of bit streams , d , for each vector is generally smaller than the number of vectors n ( ie . d << n ). Thus , sorting the vectors lexicographically after jumbling the bits will likely bring vectors with lower hamming distance closer to each other in the sorted lists.
Overall , the algorithm takes O(nk+nlogn ) time.
However , for noun clustering , we generally have the number of nouns , n , smaller than the number of features , k . ( i.e ., n < k ). This implies logn << k and nlogn << nk . Hence the time complexity of our algorithm is O(nk + nlogn ) ? O(nk ). This is a huge saving from the original O(n2k ) algorithm . In the next section , we proceed to apply this technique for generating noun similarity lists.
4 Building Noun Similarity Lists
A lot of work has been done in the NLP community on clustering words according to their meaning in text ( Hindle , 1990; Lin , 1998). The basic intuition is that words that are similar to each other tend to occur in similar contexts , thus linking the semantics of words with their lexical usage in text . One may ask why is clustering of words necessary in the first place ? There may be several reasons for clustering , but generally it boils down to one basic reason : if the words that occur rarely in a corpus are found to be distributionally similar to more frequently occurring words , then one may be able to make better inferences on rare words.
However , to unleash the real power of clustering one has to work with large amounts of text . The NLP community has started working on noun clustering on a few gigabytes of newspaper text . But with the rapidly growing amount of raw text available on the web , one could improve clustering performance by carefully harnessing its power . A core component of most clustering algorithms used in the NLP community is the creation of a similarity matrix . These algorithms are of complexity O(n2k ), where n is the number of unique nouns and k is the feature set length . These algorithms are thus not readily scalable , and limit the size of corpus manageable in practice to a few gigabytes . Clustering algorithms for words generally use the cosine distance for their similarity calculation ( Salton and McGill , 1983). Hence instead of using the usual naive cosine distance calculation between every pair of words we can use the algorithm described in Section 3 to make noun clustering web scalable.
To test our algorithm we conduct similarity based experiments on 2 different types of corpus : 1. Web Corpus (70 million web pages , 138GB ), 2. Newspaper Corpus (6 GB newspaper corpus ) 4.1 Web Corpus We set up a spider to download roughly 70 million web pages from the Internet . Initially , we use the links from Open Directory project3 as seed links for our spider . Each webpage is stripped of HTML tags , tokenized , and sentence segmented . Each document is language identified by the software TextCat4 which implements the paper by Cavnar and Trenkle (1994). We retain only English documents . The web contains a lot of duplicate or near-duplicate documents . Eliminating them is critical for obtaining better representation statistics from our collection . The problem of identifying near duplicate documents in linear time is not trivial . We eliminate duplicate and near duplicate documents by using the algorithm described by Kolcz et al (2004). This process of duplicate elimination is carried out in linear time and involves the creation of signatures for each document.
Signatures are designed so that duplicate and near duplicate documents have the same signature . This algorithm is remarkably fast and has high accuracy.
This entire process of removing non English documents and duplicate ( and near-duplicate ) documents reduces our document set from 70 million web pages to roughly 31 million web pages . This represents roughly 138GB of uncompressed text.
We identify all the nouns in the corpus by using a noun phrase identifier . For each noun phrase , we identify the context words surrounding it . Our context window length is restricted to two words to 3http://www.dmoz.org / 4http://odur.let.rug.nl/?vannoord/TextCat /
Corpus Newspaper Web
Corpus Size 6GB 138GB
Unique Nouns 65,547 655,495
Feature size 940,154 1,306,482 the left and right of each noun . We use the context words as features of the noun vector.
4.2 Newspaper Corpus
We parse a 6 GB newspaper ( TREC9 and
TREC2002 collection ) corpus using the dependency parser Minipar ( Lin , 1994). We identify all nouns.
For each noun we take the grammatical context of the noun as identified by Minipar5. We do not use grammatical features in the web corpus since parsing is generally not easily web scalable . This kind of feature set does not seem to affect our results . Curran and Moens (2002) also report comparable results for Minipar features and simple word based proximity features . Table 1 gives the characteristics of both corpora . Since we use grammatical context , the feature set is considerably larger than the simple word based proximity feature set for the newspaper corpus.
4.3 Calculating Feature Vectors
Having collected all nouns and their features , we now proceed to construct feature vectors ( and values ) for nouns from both corpora using mutual information ( Church and Hanks , 1989). We first construct a frequency count vector C(e ) = ( ce1, ce2, ..., cek ), where k is the total number of features and cef is the frequency count of feature f occurring in word e . Here , cef is the number of times word e occurred in context f . We then construct a mutual information vector MI(e ) = ( mie1,mie2, ..., miek ) for each word e , where mief is the pointwise mutual information between word e and feature f , which is defined as : mief = log cef
N ? n i=1 cif
N ? ? k j=1 cej
N (6) where n is the number of words and N = 5We perform this operation so that we can compare the performance of our system to that of Pantel and Lin (2002).
?n i=1 ? m j=1 cij is the total frequency count of all features of all words.
Having thus obtained the feature representation of each noun we can apply the algorithm described in Section 3 to discover similarity lists . We report results in the next section for both corpora.
5 Evaluation
Evaluating clustering systems is generally considered to be quite difficult . However , we are mainly concerned with evaluating the quality and speed of our high speed randomized algorithm . The web corpus is used to show that our framework is web-scalable , while the newspaper corpus is used to compare the output of our system with the similarity lists output by an existing system , which are calculated using the traditional formula as given in equation 1. For this base comparison system we use the one built by Pantel and Lin (2002). We perform 3 kinds of evaluation : 1. Performance of Locality Sensitive Hash Function ; 2. Performance of fast Hamming distance search algorithm ; 3. Quality of final similarity lists.
5.1 Evaluation of Locality sensitive Hash function To perform this evaluation , we randomly choose 100 nouns ( vectors ) from the web collection . For each noun , we calculate the cosine distance using the traditional slow method ( as given by equation 1), with all other nouns in the collection . This process creates similarity lists for each of the 100 vectors.
These similarity lists are cut off at a threshold of 0.15. These lists are considered to be the gold standard test set for our evaluation.
For the above 100 chosen vectors , we also calculate the cosine similarity using the randomized approach as given by equation 4 and calculate the mean squared error with the gold standard test set using the following formula : errorav = ? ? i ( CSreal,i ? CScalc,i ) 2/total (7) where CSreal,i and CScalc,i are the cosine similarity scores calculated using the traditional ( equation 1) and randomized ( equation 4) technique re-
Number of random vectors d
Average error in cosine similarity
Time ( in hours ) 1 1.0000 0.4 10 0.4432 0.5 100 0.1516 3 1000 0.0493 24 3000 0.0273 72 10000 0.0156 241 spectively . i is the index over all pairs of elements that have CSreal,i >= 0.15 We calculate the error ( errorav ) for various values of d , the total number of unit random vectors r used in the process . The results are reported in Table 26. As we generate more random vectors , the error rate decreases . For example , generating 10 random vectors gives us a cosine error of 0.4432 ( which is a large number since cosine similarity ranges from 0 to 1.) However , generation of more random vectors leads to reduction in error rate as seen by the values for 1000 (0.0493) and 10000 (0.0156). But as we generate more random vectors the time taken by the algorithm also increases . We choose d = 3000 random vectors as our optimal ( time-accuracy ) cut off . It is also very interesting to note that by using only 3000 bits for each of the 655,495 nouns , we are able to measure cosine similarity between every pair of them to within an average error margin of 0.027. This algorithm is also highly memory efficient since we can represent every vector by only a few thousand bits . Also the randomization process makes the the algorithm easily parallelizable since each processor can independently contribute a few bits for every vector.
5.2 Evaluation of Fast Hamming Distance
Search Algorithm
We initially obtain a list of bit streams for all the vectors ( nouns ) from our web corpus using the randomized algorithm described in Section 3 ( Steps 1 to 3). The next step involves the calculation of hamming distance . To evaluate the quality of this search algorithm we again randomly choose 100 vectors ( nouns ) from our collection . For each of these 100 vectors we manually calculate the hamming distance 6The time is calculated for running the algorithm on a single Pentium IV processor with 4GB of memory with all other vectors in the collection . We only retain those pairs of vectors whose cosine distance ( as manually calculated ) is above 0.15. This similarity list is used as the gold standard test set for evaluating our fast hamming search.
We then apply the fast hamming distance search algorithm as described in Section 3. In particular , it involves steps 3 to 6 of the algorithm . We evaluate the hamming distance with respect to two criteria : 1.
Number of bit index random permutations functions q ; 2. Beam search parameter B.
For each vector in the test collection , we take the top N elements from the gold standard similarity list and calculate how many of these elements are actually discovered by the fast hamming distance algorithm . We report the results in Table 3 and Table 4 with beam parameters of ( B = 25) and ( B = 100) respectively . For each beam , we experiment with various values for q , the number of random permutation function used . In general , by increasing the value for beam B and number of random permutation q , the accuracy of the search algorithm increases . For example in Table 4 by using a beam B = 100 and using 1000 random bit permutations , we are able to discover 72.8% of the elements of the Top 100 list . However , increasing the values of q and B also increases search time . With a beam ( B ) of 100 and the number of random permutations equal to 100 ( i.e ., q = 1000) it takes 570 hours of processing time on a single Pentium IV machine , whereas with B = 25 and q = 1000, reduces processing time by more than 50% to 240 hours.
We could not calculate the total time taken to build noun similarity list using the traditional technique on the entire corpus . However , we estimate that its time taken would be at least 50,000 hours ( and perhaps even more ) with a few of Terabytes of disk space needed . This is a very rough estimate.
The experiment was infeasible . This estimate assumes the widely used reverse indexing technique , where in one compares only those vector pairs that have at least one feature in common.
5.3 Quality of Final Similarity Lists
For evaluating the quality of our final similarity lists , we use the system developed by Pantel and Lin (2002) as gold standard on a much smaller data set.
We use the same 6GB corpus that was used for train-Random permutations q Top 1 Top 5 Top 10 Top 25 Top 50 Top 100 25 6.1% 4.9% 4.2% 3.1% 2.4% 1.9% 50 6.1% 5.1% 4.3% 3.2% 2.5% 1.9% 100 11.3% 9.7% 8.2% 6.2% 5.7% 5.1% 500 44.3% 33.5% 30.4% 25.8% 23.0% 20.4% 1000 58.7% 50.6% 48.8% 45.0% 41.0% 37.2% Table 4: Hamming search accuracy ( Beam B = 100) Random permutations q Top 1 Top 5 Top 10 Top 25 Top 50 Top 100 25 9.2% 9.5% 7.9% 6.4% 5.8% 4.7% 50 15.4% 17.7% 14.6% 12.0% 10.9% 9.0% 100 27.8% 27.2% 23.5% 19.4% 17.9% 16.3% 500 73.1% 67.0% 60.7% 55.2% 53.0% 50.5% 1000 87.6% 84.4% 82.1% 78.9% 75.8% 72.8% ing by Pantel and Lin (2002) so that the results are comparable . We randomly choose 100 nouns and calculate the top N elements closest to each noun in the similarity lists using the randomized algorithm described in Section 3. We then compare this output to the one provided by the system of Pantel and Lin (2002). For every noun in the top N list generated by our system we calculate the percentage overlap with the gold standard list . Results are reported in Table 5. The results shows that we are able to retrieve roughly 70% of the gold standard similarity list . In Table 6, we list the top 10 most similar words for some nouns , as examples , from the web corpus.
6 Conclusion
NLP researchers have just begun leveraging the vast amount of knowledge available on the web . By searching IR engines for simple surface patterns , many applications ranging from word sense disambiguation , question answering , and mining semantic resources have already benefited . However , most language analysis tools are too infeasible to run on the scale of the web . A case in point is generating noun similarity lists using cooccurrence statistics , which has quadratic running time on the input size . In this paper , we solve this problem by presenting a randomized algorithm that linearizes this task and limits memory requirements . Experiments show that our method generates cosine similarities between pairs of nouns within a score of 0.03.
In many applications , researchers have shown that more data equals better performance ( Banko and Brill , 2001; Curran and Moens , 2002). Moreover , at the web-scale , we are no longer limited to a snapshot in time , which allows broader knowledge to be learned and processed . Randomized algorithms provide the necessary speed and memory requirements to tap into terascale text sources . We hope that randomized algorithms will make other NLP tools feasible at the terascale and we believe that many algorithms will benefit from the vast coverage of our newly created noun similarity list.
Acknowledgement
We wish to thank USC Center for High Performance Computing and Communications ( HPCC ) for helping us use their cluster computers.
References
Banko , M . and Brill , E . 2001. Mitigating the paucity of dat-aproblem . In Proceedings of HLT . 2001. San Diego , CA.
Box , G . E . P . and M . E . Muller 1958. Ann . Math . Stat . 29, 610?611.
Broder , Andrei 1997. On the Resemblance and Containment of Documents . Proceedings of the Compression and Complexity of Sequences.
Cavnar , W . B . and J . M . Trenkle 1994. N-Gram-Based Text Categorization . In Proceedings of Third Annual Symposium on Document Analysis and Information Retrieval , Las Vegas , NV , UNLV Publications/Reprographics , 161?175.
628
Table 5: Final Quality of Similarity Lists Top 1 Top 5 Top 10 Top 25 Top 50 Top 100 Accuracy 70.7% 71.9% 72.2% 71.7% 71.2% 71.1% Table 6: Sample Top 10 Similarity Lists JUST DO IT computer science TSUNAMI Louis Vuitton PILATES HAVE A NICE DAY mechanical engineering tidal wave PRADA Tai Chi FAIR AND BALANCED electrical engineering LANDSLIDE Fendi Cardio POWER TO THE PEOPLE chemical engineering EARTHQUAKE Kate Spade SHIATSU NEVER AGAIN Civil Engineering volcanic eruption VUITTON Calisthenics NO BLOOD FOR OIL ECONOMICS HAILSTORM BURBERRY Ayurveda KINGDOM OF HEAVEN ENGINEERING Typhoon GUCCI Acupressure If Texas Wasn?t Biology Mudslide Chanel Qigong BODY OF CHRIST environmental science windstorm Dior FELDENKRAIS WE CAN PHYSICS HURRICANE Ferragamo THERAPEUTIC TOUCH Weld with your mouse information science DISASTER Ralph Lauren Reflexology Charikar , Moses 2002. Similarity Estimation Techniques from Rounding Algorithms In Proceedings of the 34th Annual
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing.
Church , K . and Hanks , P . 1989. Word association norms , mutual information , and lexicography . In Proceedings of ACL89. pp . 76?83. Vancouver , Canada.
Curran , J . and Moens , M . 2002. Scaling context space . In Proceedings of ACL02 pp 231?238, Philadelphia , PA.
Goemans , M . X . and D . P . Williamson 1995. Improved Approximation Algorithms for Maximum Cut and Satisfiability Problems Using Semidefinite Programming . JACM 42(6): 1115?1145.
Hindle , D . 1990. Noun classification from predicate-argument structures . In Proceedings of ACL90. pp . 268?275. Pittsburgh , PA.
Lin , D . 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering of similar words . In Proceedings of COLING/ACL-98. pp . 768?774.
Montreal , Canada.
Indyk , P ., Motwani , R . 1998. Approximate nearest neighbors : towards removing the curse of dimensionality Proceedings of 30th STOC , 604?613.
A . Kolcz , A . Chowdhury , J . Alspector 2004. Improved robustness of signature-based near-replica detection via lexicon randomization . Proceedings of ACMSIGKDD (2004).
Lin , D . 1994 Principar - an efficient , broadcoverage , principle-based parser . Proceedings of COLING94, pp . 42? 48. Kyoto , Japan.
Pantel , Patrick and Dekang Lin 2002. Discovering Word Senses from Text . In Proceedings of SIGKDD-02, pp . 613? 619. Edmonton , Canada Rabin , M . O . 1981. Fingerprinting by random polynomials.
Center for research in Computing technology , Harvard University , Report TR-15-81.
Salton , G . and McGill , M . J . 1983. Introduction to Modern
Information Retrieval . McGraw Hill.
Appendix A . Random Permutation
Functions
We define [ n ] = {0, 1, 2, ..., n ? 1}.
[n ] can thus be considered as a set of integers from 0 to n ? 1.
Let pi : [ n ] ? [ n ] be a permutation function chosen at random from the set of all such permutation functions.
Consider pi : [4] ? [4].
A permutation function pi is a one to one mapping from the set of [4] to the set of [4].
Thus , one possible mapping is : pi : {0, 1, 2, 3} ? {3, 2, 1, 0} Here it means : pi(0) = 3, pi(1) = 2, pi(2) = 1, pi(3) = 0
Another possible mapping would be : pi : {0, 1, 2, 3} ? {3, 0, 1, 2} Here it means : pi(0) = 3, pi(1) = 0, pi(2) = 1, pi(3) = 2 Thus for the set [4] there would be 4! = 4?3?2 = 24 possibilities . In general , for a set [ n ] there would be n ! unique permutation functions . Choosing a random permutation function amounts to choosing one of n ! such functions at random.
629
