Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the ACL , pages 105?112,
Sydney , July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Meaningful Clustering of Senses
Helps Boost Word Sense Disambiguation Performance
Roberto Navigli
Dipartimento di Informatica
Universita ` di Roma ? La Sapienza?
Roma , Italy
navigli@di.uniroma1.it
Abstract
Fine-grained sense distinctions are one of the major obstacles to successful Word
Sense Disambiguation . In this paper , we present a method for reducing the granularity of the WordNet sense inventory based on the mapping to a manually crafted dictionary encoding sense hierarchies , namely the Oxford Dictionary of English . We assess the quality of the mapping and the induced clustering , and evaluate the performance of coarse WSD systems in the Senseval3 English allwords task.
1 Introduction
Word Sense Disambiguation ( WSD ) is undoubtedly one of the hardest tasks in the field of Natural Language Processing . Even though some recent studies report benefits in the use of WSD in specific applications ( e.g . Vickrey et al (2005) and Stokoe (2005)), the present performance of the best ranking WSD systems does not provide a sufficient degree of accuracy to enable realworld , language-aware applications.
Most of the disambiguation approaches adopt the WordNet dictionary ( Fellbaum , 1998) as a sense inventory , thanks to its free availability , wide coverage , and existence of a number of standard test sets based on it . Unfortunately , WordNet is a finegrained resource , encoding sense distinctions that are often difficult to recognize even for human annotators ( Edmonds and Kilgariff , 1998).
Recent estimations of the interannotator agreement when using the WordNet inventory report figures of 72.5% agreement in the preparation of the English allwords test set at Senseval3 ( Snyder and Palmer , 2004) and 67.3% on the Open Mind Word Expert annotation exercise ( Chklovski and Mihalcea , 2002). These numbers lead us to believe that a credible upper bound for unrestricted finegrained WSD is around 70%, a figure that state-of-the-art automatic systems find it difficult to outperform . Furthermore , even if a system were able to exceed such an upper bound , it would be unclear how to interpret such a result.
It seems therefore that the major obstacle to effective WSD is the fine granularity of the WordNet sense inventory , rather than the performance of the best disambiguation systems . Interestingly , Ng et al (1999) show that , when a coarse-grained sense inventory is adopted , the increase in interannotator agreement is much higher than the reduction of the polysemy degree.
Following these observations , the main question that we tackle in this paper is : can we produce and evaluate coarse-grained sense distinctions and show that they help boost disambiguation on standard test sets ? We believe that this is a crucial research topic in the field of WSD , that could potentially benefit several application areas.
The contribution of this paper is twofold . First , we provide a wide-coverage method for clustering WordNet senses via a mapping to a coarse-grained sense inventory , namely the Oxford Dictionary of English ( Soanes and Stevenson , 2003) ( Section 2).
We show that this method is well-founded and accurate with respect to manually-made clusterings ( Section 3). Second , we evaluate the performance of WSD systems when using coarse-grained sense inventories ( Section 4). We conclude the paper with an account of related work ( Section 5), and some final remarks ( Section 6).
105
