Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions , pages 337?344,
Sydney , July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Local constraints on sentence markers and focus in Somali
Katherine Hargreaves
School of Informatics
University of Manchester
Manchester M60 1QD , UK
kat@evilution.co.uk
Allan Ramsay
School of Informatics
University of Manchester
Manchester M60 1QD , UK
Allan.Ramsay@manchester.ac.uk
Abstract
We present a computationally tractable account of the interactions between sentence markers and focus marking in Somali . Somali , as a Cushitic language , has a basic pattern wherein a small ? core ? clause is preceded , and in some cases followed by , a set of ? topics ?, which provide scene-seting information against which the core is interpreted . Some topics appear to carry a ? focus marker ?, indicating that they are particularly salient . We will outline a computationally tractable grammar for Somali in which focus marking emerges naturally from a consideration of the use of a range of sentence markers.
1 Introduction
This paper presents a computationally tractable account of a number of phenomena in Somali . Somali displays a number of properties which distinguish it from most languages for which computational treatments are available , and which are potentially problematic . We therefore start with a brief introduction to the major properties of the language , together with a description of how we cover the key phenomena within a general purpose
NLP framework.
2 Morphology
Somali has a fairly standard set of inflectional affixes for nouns and verbs , as outlined below . In addition , there are a substantial set of ? spelling rules ? which insert and delete graphemes at the boundaries between roots and suffixes ( and clitics ). There is not that much to be said about the spelling rules ? Fig . 1 shows the format of a typical rule , which we compile into an FST to be used during the process of lexical lookup.
[q/x/c/h,?,v0] ==> [+, k , v0]
Figure 1: Insert ? k ? and a morpheme boundary between ? q/x/c/h ? and a following vowel The rule in Fig . 1 would , for instance , say that the surface form ? saca ? might correspond to the underlying form ? sac+ka ?, with a morpheme boundary and a ? k ? inserted after the ? c ?. These rules , of which we currently employ about 30, can be efficiently implemented using the standard machinery of cascaded FSTs ( Koskiennemi , 1985) interwoven with the general lookup process.
2.1 Noun morphology
In general , a noun consists of a root and a single affix , which provides a combination of gender and number marking . The main complication is that there are several declension classes , with specific singular and plural suffixes for groups of classes ( e.g . the plural ending for declensions 1 and 3 is ? o ?) ( Saeed , 1999; Lecarme , 2002). Some plural forms involve reduplication of some part of the word ending , e.g . declension 4 nouns form their plural by adding ? aC ? where ? C ? is the final consonant of the root , but this can easily be handled by using spelling rules.
2.2 Verb morphology
Verb morphology is slightly more complex.
Again , a typical verb consists of a root plus a number of affixes . These include derivational affixes ( Somali includes a passivising form which can only be applied to verbs which have a ? causative ? argument , and a causative affix which adds such mark aspect , tense and agreement ( Andrzejewski , 1968).
The forms of the tense and agreement markers vary depending on whether the clause containing the verb is the main clause or is a subordinate clause ( either a relative clause or a sentential complement ), marked by ? main and on whether it is in a context where the subject is required to be a zero item , marked by?fullForm.
Note that the situation here is fairly complicated : - fullForm versions are required in situations where the subject is forced by local syntactic constraints to be a zero . There are also situations where the subject is omitted for discourse reasons , and here the + fullForm version is used (( Lecarme , 1995) uses the terms ? restrictive ? and ? extensive ? for - fullForm and + fullForm respectively).
2.3 Cliticisation
There are a number of Somali morphemes which can appear either bound to an adjacent word ( usually the preceding word ) or as freestanding lexical items . The sentence marker ? waa ? and the pronoun ? uu ?, for instance , combine to produce the form ? wuu ? when they are adjacent to one another.
In several cases , there are quite dramatic morphophonemic alterations at the boundary , so that it is extremely important to ensure that the processes of applying spelling rules and inspecting the lexicon are appropriately interwoven . The definite articles , in particular , require considerable care . There are a number of forms of the definite article , as in
Fig . 2: masculine feminine the-acc ka ta the-nom ku tu ? remote ? ( nom or acc ) kii tii this-acc tan kan this-nom tanu kanu that-acc taas kaas that-nom taasu kaasu
Figure 2: Definite articles
We deal with this by assuming that determiners have the form gender-root-case , where the gender markers are ? k -? ( masculine ) and ? t -? ( feminine ), and the case markers are ?-? ( accusative ) and ?- u ? ( nominative ), with spelling rules that collapse ? kau ? to ? ku ? and ? kiiu ? to ? kii?.
The definite articles , however , cliticise onto the preceding word , with consequential spelling changes . It is again important to ensure that the spelling changes are applied at the right time to ensure that we can recognise ? barahu ? as ? bare ? plus ? k+a+u ?, with appropriate changes to the ? e ? at the end of the root ? bare ? and the ? k ? at the start of the determiner ? ku?.
3 Syntax 3.1 Framework
The syntactic description is couched in a framework which provides a skeletal version of the HPSG schemas , supplemented by a variant on the wellknown distinction between internal and external syntax.
3.1.1 Lexical heads and their arguments
We assume that lexical items specify a ( possibly empty ) list of required arguments , together with a description of whether these arguments are normally expected to appear to the left or right.
The direction in which the arguments are expected is language dependent , as shown in Fig . 3. Note that the description of where the arguments are to be found specifies the order of combination , very much like categorial descriptions . The description of an English transitive verb , for instance , is like the categorial description ( S\NP)/NP , which corresponds to an SVO surface order.
English transitive verb(SOV ) { syn(nonfoot(head(cat(xbar(+v , - n )))), subcat(args([????????NP?(obj ), ????????? NP?(subj)])))}
Persian transitive verb ( SOV ) { syn(nonfoot(head(cat(xbar(+v , - n )))), subcat(args([????????NP?(obj ), ????????? NP?(subj)])))}
Arabic transitive verb ( VSO ) { syn(nonfoot(head(cat(xbar(+v , - n )))), subcat(args([?????????NP?(subj ), ???????? NP?(obj)])))}
Figure 3: Subcat frames 3.1.2 Adjuncts and modifiers Items such as adjectival phrases , PPs and relative clauses which add information about some target item combine via a principle captured in Fig . 4 R =? { syntax(target=??T , result=R )}, T R =? T , { syntax(target=??T , result=R)}
Figure 4: Modifiers and targets tive was of type { syntax(target=????NN ?, result="NN ") the first rule in Fig . 4 would allow it to combine with an NN to its right to form an NN , and likewise saying that a
PP was of type { syntax(target=????VP ?, result="VP")would allow it to combine with a VP to its left to form a VP.
3.1.3 Non-canonical order
The patterns and principles outlined in ?3.1.1 and ?3.1.2 specify the unmarked orders for the relevant phenomena . Other orders are often permitted , sometimes for discourse reasons ( particularly in free word order languages such as Arabic and Persian ) and sometimes for structural reasons ( e.g.
the left shifting of the WH-pronoun in ? I distrust the man whoi she wants to marry ? i.?).
We take the view that rather than introducing explicit rules to allow for various noncanonical orders , we will simply allow all possible orders subject to the application of penalties . This approach has affinities with optimality theory ( Grimshaw , 1997), save that our penalties are treated cumulatively rather than being applied once and for all to competing local analyses . The algorithm we use for parsing withing this framework is very similar to the algorithm described by ( Foth et al , 2005), though we use the scores associated with partial analyses to guide the search for a complete analysis , whereas Foth et al use them to choose a complete but flawed analysis to be reconstructed . We have described the application of this algorithm to a variety of languages ( including Greek , Spanish , German , Persian and Arabic ) elsewhere ( Ramsay and Scha?ler , 1997; Ramsay and Mansour , 2003; Ramsay et al , 2005): space precludes a detailed discussion here.
3.1.4 Internal:external syntax
In certain circumstances a phrase that looks as though it belongs to category A is used in circumstances where you would normally expect an item belonging to category B . The phrase ? eating the owl ? in ? He concluded the banquet by eating the owl .?, for instance , has the internal structure of a VP , but is being used as the complement of the preposition ? by ? where you would normally expect an NP . This notion has been around for too long for its origin to be easily traced , but has been used more recently in ( Malouf , 1996)?s addition of ? lexical rules ? to HPSG for treating English nominal gerunds , and in ( Sadler , 1996)?s description of the possibility of allowing a single c-structure to map to multiple fstructures in LFG . We write ? equivalence rules ? of the kind given in Fig . 5 to deal with such phenomena : { syn(head(cat(xbar(-v , + n ))), + specified )} <==>{ syn(head(cat(xbar(+v , - n )), vform(participle,present )), subcat(args([{struct(B )}])))} Figure 5: External and internal views of English verbal gerund The rule in Fig . 5 says that if you have a present participle VP ( something of type + v , - n which has vform participle , present and which needs one more argument ) then you can use whereever you need an NP ( type - v , + n with a specifier + specified).
3.2 Somali syntax
As noted earlier , the framework outlined in ?3.1 has been used to provide accounts of a number of languages . In the current section we will sketch some of the major properties of Somali syntax and show how they can be captured within this framework.
3.2.1 The ? core & topic ? structure
Every Somali sentence has a ? core ?, or ? verbal complex ? ( Svolacchia et al , 1995), consisting of the verb and a number of pronominal elements.
The structure of the core can be fairly easily described by the rule in Fig . 6: CORE ==> SUBJ,(OBJ1),(ADP*),(OBJ2),VERB
Figure 6: The structure of the core
The situation is not , in fact , quite as simple as suggested by Fig . 6. The major complications are outlined below : 1. the third person object pronouns are never actually written , so that in many cases what you see has the form SUBJ , VERB , as in (1a ), rather than the full form given in (1b ) ( we will write ?( him )? to denote zero pronouns ): (1) a . uu sugayhe ( him ) waited for b . uu i sugayhe me waited for 2. The second complication arises with ditransitive verbs . The distinction between OBJ1 the surface order of the two pronouns , and has very little connection with their semantic roles ( Saeed , 1999). Thus each of the sentences in (2a ) could mean ? He gave me to you ?, and neither of the sentences in (2b ) is grammatical.
(2) a . i . uu i kaa siiyeyhe me1 you2 gave ii . uu ku kay siiyeyhe you1 me2 gave b . i . uu kay ku siiyeyhe me2 you1 gave ii . uu kaa i siiyeyhe you2 me1 gave 3. The next problem is that subject pronouns are also sometimes omitted . There are two cases : ( i ) in certain circumstances , the subject pronoun must be omitted , and when this happens the verb takes a form which indicates that this has happened . ( ii ) in situations where the subject is normally present , and hence where the verb has its standard form , the subject may nonetheless be omitted ( usually for discourse reasons ) ( Gebert , 1986).
4. There are a small number of preposition-like items , referred to as adpositions in Fig . 6, which can occur between the two objects , and which cliticise onto the preceding pronoun if there is one . The major complication here is that just like prepositions , these require an NP as a complement : but unlike prepositions , they can combine either with the preceding pronoun or the following one , or with a zero pronoun . Thus a core like (3) has two analyses , as shown in Fig . 7: (3) uu ika sugaa uu i ka sugaa he me at ( it ) waits-for sug++++aa uu agent i object ka mod uu agent ka mod i Figure 7: Analyses for (3) (0.010 secs ) The second analysis in Fig . 7, ? he waits for it at me ?, doesn?t make much sense , but it is nonetheless perfectly grammatical.
5. Finally , there are a number of other minor elements that can occur in the core . We do not have space to discuss these here , and their presence or absence does not affect the discussion in ?3.3 and ?3.4.
To capture these phenomena within the framework outlined in ?3.1, we assign Somali transitive verbs a subcat frame like the one in Fig . 8 ( the patterns for intransitive and ditransitive verbs differ from this in the obvious ways).
{syn(nonfoot(head(cat(xbar(+v , - n )))), subcat(args([????????????????NP?(obj , + clitic),?????????????????NP?(subj , + clitic )])), foot(...))}
Figure 8: Somali transitive verb
Fig . 8 says that the core of a Somali sentence is a clause of the form S-O-V , where S and O are both clitic pronouns.
The canonical position of S and O is as given.
They can appear further to the left than that to allow for clitic modifiers : exactly where they can go is specified by requiring the clitic modifiers to appear adjacent to the verb ( subject to further local constraints on their positions relative to one another ), and requiring S and O to fall inside the scope of the ? sentence markers?.
3.3 Sentence markers
A core by itself cannot be uttered as a free standing sentence . At the very least , it has to include a ? sentence marker ?. The simplest of these is the word ? waa ?. (4), for instance , is a wellformed sentence , with the structure shown in Fig . 9.
(4) wuu sugaa.
waa uu sugaa.
s-marker he ( it ) waits-for sug++ay++aa waa comp(waa ) uu agent
Figure 9: Analysis for (4) (0.01 secs)
Note that the pronoun ? uu ? cliticises onto the end of the sentence marker ? waa ?, producing the written form ? wuu ?, as discussed above.
In general , however , the situation is not quite as simple as in (4). Most sentences contain NPs other than the pronouns in the core . The first such examples involve introducing ? topics ? in front of the sentence marker.
Topics are normally definite NPs or PPs which set the scene for the interpretation of the core . A typical example is given in (5): ninka wuu sugaa.
nim ka waa uu sugaa.
man the S-marker he ( him ) waits-for predication k+a det waa comp(waa ) somaliTopic wax + k+a det
Figure 10: Sentence with topic
The analysis in Fig . 10 was obtained by exploiting an equivalence rule which says that an item which has the internal properties of a - clitic NP can be used as a ? topic ?, which we take to be a sentence modifier.
Topics set the scene for the interpretation of the core by providing potential referents for the pronominal elements in the core . There are no very strong syntactic links between the topics and the clitic pronouns ? if a topic is + nom then it will provide the referent for the subject , but in some ( focused ) contexts subject referents are not explicitly marked as + nom . The situation is rather like saying ? You know that man we were talking about , and you know the girl we were talking about . Well , she?s waiting for him.?.
topical(ref(?B(NIM(B )))) & claim(?C : { aspect(now , simple,C )} ?( C , agent , ref(?Dfemale(D ))) &?( C , object , ref(?Fthing(F ))) & SUG(C))
Figure 11: Interpretation of (5)
The logical form given in Fig . 11, which was constructed using using standard compositional techniques ( Dowty et al , 1981), says the speaker is marking some known man ref(?B(NIM(B ))) as being topical , and is then making a claim about the existence of a waiting event SUG(C ) involving some known female as its agent and some other known entity as its object.
Note that we include discourse related information ? that the speaker is first marking something as being topical and then making a claim ? in the logical form . This seems like a sensible thing to do , since this information is encoded by lexical and syntactic choices in the same way as the propositional content itself , and hence it makes sense to extract it compositionally at the same time and in the same way as we do the propositional content.
Somali provides a number of such sentence markers . ? in ? is used for marking sentential complements , in much the same way as the English complementiser ? that ? is used to mark the start of a sentential clause in ? I know that she like strawberry icecream .? ( Lecarme , 1984). There is , however , an alternative form for main clauses , where one of the topics is marked as being particularly interesting by the sentence markers ? baa ? or ? ayaa ? (? baa ? and ? ayaa ? seem to be virtually equivalent , with the choice between them being driven by stylistic/phonological considerations ): (6) baraha baa ninka sugaa.
?baa?/?ayaa ? and ? waa ? are in complementary distribution : every main clause has to have a sentence marker , which is nearly always one of these two , and they never occur in the same sentence.
The key difference is that ? baa ? marks the item to its left as being particularly significant . Ordinary topics introduce an item into the context , to be picked up by one of the core pronouns , without marking any of them as being more prominent than the others . The item to the left of ? baa ? is indeed available as an anchor for a core pronoun , but it is also marked as being more important than the other topics.
We deal with this by assuming that ? baa ? subcategorises for an NP to its left , and then forms a sentence marker looking to modify a sentence to its right . The resulting parse tree for (6) is given in Fig . 12, with the interpretation that arises from this tree in Fig . 13.
sug++++aa somaliTopic nim + k+a det baa comp(baa ) somaliTopic focus bare + k+a det
Figure 12: Parse tree for (6) topical(ref(?C(NIM(C )))) & focus(ref(?D(BARE(D )))) & claim(?B : { aspect(now , simple , B )} ?( B , object , ref(?Ething(E ))) &?( B , agent , ref(?Gspeaker(G ))) & SUG(B))
Figure 13: Interpretation for (6)
Treating ? baa ? as an item which looks first to its left for an NP and then acts as a sentence modifier gives us a fairly simple analysis of (6), ensuring that when we have ? baa ? we do indeed have a mentary distribution with ? waa ?. The fact that the combination of ? baa ? and the focussed NP can be either preceded or followed by other topics means that we have to put very careful constraints on where it can appear . This is made more complex by the fact that the subject of the core sentence can cliticise onto ? baa ?, despite the fact that there may be a subsequent topic , as in (7).
(7) baraha buu ninku sugaa.
sug++++aa uu agent baa comp(baa ) somaliTopic bare + k+a det somaliTopic nim + k+a det i caseMarker
Figure 14: Parse tree for (7)
To ensure that we get the right analyses , we have to put the following constraints on ? baa ? and ? waa ?: 1. if the subject of the core is realised as an explicit short pronoun , it cliticises onto the sentence marker 2. the sentence marker attaches to the sentence before any topics ( note that this is a constraint on the order of combination , not on the left?right surface order : the tree in Fig . 14 shows that ? baraha baa ? was attached to the tree before ? ninka ?, despite the fact that ? ninka ? is nearer to the core than ? baraha baa?.
Between them , these two ensure that we get unique analyses for sentences involving a sentence marker and a number of topics , despite the wide range of potential surface orders.
3.4 Relative clauses & ? waxa?-clefts
We noted above that in general Somali clauses contain a sentence marker ? generally one of ? waa ?, ? baa ? and ? ayaa ? for main clauses , or one of ? in ? for subordinate clauses . There are two linked exceptions to this rule : relative clauses , and ? waxa?-clefts.
Somali does not possess distinct WH-pronouns ( Saeed , 1999). Instead , the clitic pronouns ( including the zero third-person pronoun ) can act as
WH-markers.
This is a bit awkward for any parsing algorithm which depends propagating the WH-marker up the parse tree until a complete clause has been analysed , and then using it to decide whether that clause is a relative clause or not . We do not want to introduce two versions of each pronoun , one with a WH-marker and the other without , and then produce alternative analyses for each . Doing this would produce very large numbers of alternative analyses , since each core item is can be viewed either way , so that a simple clause involving a transitive clause would produce three analyses ( one with the subject WH-marked , one with the object WH-marked , and one with neither).
We therefore leave the WH-marking on the clitic pronouns open until we have an analysis of the clause containing them . If we need to consider using this clause in a context where a relative clause is required , we inspect the clitic pronouns and decide which ones , if any are suitable for use as the pivot ( i.e . the WH-pronoun which links to the modified analysis).
Relative clauses do not require a sentence marker . We thus get analyses of relative clauses as shown in Fig . 15 for (8).
(8) ninka wadaya wuu shaqeeyayaa nim ka wadaya waa uu shaqeeyaa man the is-driving s-marker he is-working The man who is driving it : he?s working shaqee++ay++aa uu agent waa comp(waa ) somaliTopic nim + k+a det headless whmod wad++ay++a
Figure 15: Parse tree for (8)
Note the reduced form of ? wadaya ? in (8). The key here is that the subject of ? wadaya ? is the ? pivot ? of the relative clause ( the item linking the clause to the modified nominal ). When the subject plays this role it is forced to be a zero item , and it is this that makes the verb take the - fullForm versions of the agreement and tense markers.
Apart from the fact that you can?t tell whether a clitic pronoun is acting as a WH-marker or not until you see the context , and the requirement for ative clauses are not all that different from relative clauses in other languages . They are , however , related to a phenomenon which is rather less common.
We start by considering nominal sentences . Somali allows for scarenominal sentences consisting of just a pair of NPs . This is a fairly common phenomenon , where the overall semantic effect is as though there were an invisible copula linking them ( see Arabic , malay , English ? small clauses ?, . . . ). We deal with this by assuming that any accusative NP could be the predication in a zero sentence . The only complication is that in ordinary Somali sentences the only items which follow the sentence marker are clitic pronouns and modifiers.
For nominal sentences , the predicative NP , and nothing else , follows the sentence marker.
For uniformity we assume that there is in fact a zero subject , with the + nom NP that appears before the sentence marker acting as a topic.
(9) waxu waa baabuurka.
wax ka I waa baabuur ka thing the + NOM s-marker truck the Any normal NP can appear as the topic of such a sentence . In particular , the noun ? wax ?, which means ? thing ?, can appear in this position : predication k+a det waa comp(waa ) somaliTopic wax k+a det i caseMarker
Figure 16: ? the thing : it?s the truck?
The analysis in Fig . 16 corresponds to an interpretation something like ? The thing we were talking about , well it?s the truck ?. Note the analysis of ? waxu ? here as the noun ? wax ? followed by the definite article ? ka ? and the nominative case marker ? I?.
There is no reason why the topic in such a sentence should not contain a relative clause . In (10), for instance , the topic is ? waxaan doonayo I ? ? ? the thing which I want?.
(10) waxaan doonayaa waa lacag.
wax ka aan doonayo I waa lacag thing the I want + NOM s-marker money Note that ? doonayaa ? here is being read as the {+ fullForm,-main } version of the verb ? doonayo ? followed by a cliticised nominative marker ? I ?. The choice of + fullForm this time arises because the subject pronoun is not WH-marked , which means that it is not forced to be zero : remember that - fullForm is used if the local constraints require the subject to be zero , not just if it happens to be omitted for discourse or stylistic reasons . Then in the analysis in Fig . 17 ? wax ka aan doonayo I ? is a + nom NP functioning as the topic of a nominal sentence.
0 lacag + predication waa comp(waa ) somaliTopic wax k+a det headless whmod doon++ay++o aan agent
I caseMarker
Figure 17: (10) the thing I want : it?s some money So far so simple . ? waxa ?, however , also takes part in a rather more complex construction.
In general , the items that occur as topics in Somali are definite NPs ( Saeed , 1984). In all the examples above , we have used definite NPs in the topic positions , because that it is what normally happens . If you want to introduce something into the conversation it is more usual to use a ? waxa-cleft ?, or ? heralding sentence ? ( Andrzejewski , 1975).
The typical surface form of such a construction is shown in (11): (11) waxaan doonayaa lacag.
waxa aan doonayaa lacag waxa I want money The key things to note about (11) are as follow : ? There is no sentence marker . Or at any rate , the standard sentence markers ? waa ? and ? baa ? are missing.
? The subject pronoun ? aan ? has cliticised onto the word ? waxa ? to form ? waxaan?.
? The verb ? doonayaa ? is + fullForm ? The noun ? lacag ? follows the verb . This is unusual , since generally NPs are used as topics preceding the core and , generally , the sentence marker.
343
These facts are very suggestive : ( i ) the lack of any other item acting as sentence marker suggests that ? waxa ? is playing this role . ( ii ) the fact that ? uu ? has cliticised onto this item supports this claim , since subject pronouns typically cliticise onto sentence markers rather than onto topic NPs.
We therefore suggest that ? waxa ? here is functioning as sentence marker . Like ? baa ?, it focuses attention on some particular NP , but in this case the NP follows the core.
doon++ay++aa aan agent waxa comp(waxa ) lacag + focus
Figure 18: Parse tree for (11)
Thus ? waxa ?, as a sentence marker , is just like ? baa ? except that ? baa ? expects its focused NP to follow it immediately , with the core following that , whereas the order is reversed for ? waxa ? ( Andrzejewski , 1975).
It seems extremely likely that ? waxa?-clefts are historically related to sentences like (10). The subtle differences in the surface forms ( presence or absence of ? waa ? and form of the verb ), however , lead to radically different analyses . How simple nominal sentences with topics including ? waxa ? and a relative clause turned into ? waxa?-clefts is beyond the scope of this paper . The key observation here is that ? waxa?-clefts can be given a straightforward analysis by assuming that ? waxa ? can function as a sentencemarker that focuses attention on a topical NP that ? follows ? the core of the sentence.
4 Conclusions
We have outlined a computational treatment of Somali that runs right through from morphology and morphographemics to logical forms . The construction of logical forms is a fairly routine activity , given that we have carried out this work within a framework that has already been used for a number of other languages , and hence the machinery for deriving logical forms from semantically annotated parse trees is already available . The most notable point about Somali semantics within this framework is the inclusion of the basic illocutionary force within the logic form , which allows us to also treat topic and focus as discourse phenomena within the logical form.
References
B W Andrzejewski . 1968. Inflectional characteristics of the socalled weak verbs in Somali . African Language Studies , 9:1?51.
B W Andrzejewski . 1975. The role of indicator particles in Somali . Afroasiatic Linguistics , 1(6):123? 191.
D R Dowty , R E Wall , and S Peters . 1981. Introduction to Montague Semantics . D . Reidel , Dordrecht.
Killian Foth , Wolfgang Menzel , and Ingo Schro?der.
2005. Robust parsing with weighted constraints.
Natural Language Engineering , 11(1):1?25.
L Gebert . 1986. Focus and word order in Somali.
Afrikanistische Arbeitspapiere , 5:43?69.
J Grimshaw . 1997. Projection , heads , and optimality.
Linguistic Inquiry , 28:373?422.
K Koskiennemi . 1985. A general two-level computational model for wordform recognition and production . In COLING-84, pages 178?181.
J Lecarme . 1984. On Somali complement constructions . In T Labahn , editor , Proceedings of the Second International Congress of Somali Studies , 1: Linguistics and Literature , pages 37?54, Hamburg.
Helmut Buske.
J Lecarme . 1995. L?accord restrictif en Somali.
Langues Orientals Anciennes Philologie et Linguistique , 5-6:133?152.
J Lecarme . 2002. Gender polarity : Theoretical aspects of Somali nominal morphology . In P Boucher , editor , Many Morphologies , pages 109? 141, Somerville . Cascadilla Press.
Robert Malouf . 1996. A constructional approach to english verbal gerunds . In Proceedings of the Twenty-second Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society , Marseille.
A M Ramsay and H Mansour . 2003. Arabic morphosyntax for text-to-speech . In Recent advance in natural language processing , Sofia.
A M Ramsay and R Scha?ler . 1997. Case and word order in English and German . In R Mitkov and N Nicolo , editors , Recent Advances in Natural Language
Processing . John Benjamin.
A M Ramsay , Najmeh Ahmed , and Vahid Mirzaiean.
2005. Persian word-order is free but not ( quite ) discontinuous . In 5th International Conference on Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing ( RANLP05), pages 412?418, Borovets , Bulgaria.
Louisa Sadler . 1996. New developments in LFG . In Keith Brown and Jim Miller , editors , Concise Encyclopedia of Syntactic Theories . Elsevier Science,
Oxford.
J I Saeed . 1984. The Syntax of Focus and Topic in
Somali . Helmut Buske Verlag , Hamburg.
J I Saeed . 1999. Somali . John Benjamins Publishing
Co , Amsterdam.
M Svolacchia , L Mereu , and A . Puglielli . 1995. Aspects of discourse configurationality in Somali . In K E Kiss , editor , Discourse Configurational Languages , pages 65?98, New York . Oxford University
Press.
344
