Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the ACL , pages 409?416,
Sydney , July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Improved Redundancy Elimination Algorithm
for Underspecified Representations
Alexander Koller and Stefan Thater
Dept . of Computational Linguistics
Universit?t des Saarlandes , Saarbr?cken , Germany
{koller,stth}@coli.uni-sb.de
Abstract
We present an efficient algorithm for the redundancy elimination problem : Given an underspecified semantic representation ( USR ) of a scope ambiguity , compute an USR with fewer mutually equivalent readings . The algorithm operates on underspecified chart representations which are derived from dominance graphs ; it can be applied to the USRs computed by largescale grammars . We evaluate the algorithm on a corpus , and show that it reduces the degree of ambiguity significantly while taking negligible runtime.
1 Introduction
Underspecification is nowadays the standard approach to dealing with scope ambiguities in computational semantics ( van Deemter and Peters , 1996; Copestake et al , 2004; Egg et al , 2001; Blackburn and Bos , 2005). The basic idea behind it is to not enumerate all possible semantic representations for each syntactic analysis , but to derive a single compact underspecified representation ( USR ). This simplifies semantics construction , and current algorithms support the efficient enumeration of the individual semantic representations from an USR ( Koller and Thater , 2005b).
A major promise of underspecification is that it makes it possible , in principle , to rule out entire subsets of readings that we are not interested in wholesale , without even enumerating them . For instance , realworld sentences with scope ambiguities often have many readings that are semantically equivalent . Subsequent modules ( e.g . for doing inference ) will typically only be interested in one reading from each equivalence class , and all others could be deleted . This situation is illustrated by the following two ( out of many ) sentences from the Rondane treebank , which is distributed with the English Resource Grammar ( ERG ; Flickinger (2002)), a largescale HPSG grammar of English.
(1) For travellers going to Finnmark there is a bus service from Oslo to Alta through Sweden . ( Rondane 1262) (2) We quickly put up the tents in the lee of a small hillside and cook for the first time in the open . ( Rondane 892) For the annotated syntactic analysis of (1), the ERG derives an USR with eight scope bearing operators , which results in a total of 3960 readings.
These readings are all semantically equivalent to each other . On the other hand , the USR for (2) has 480 readings , which fall into two classes of mutually equivalent readings , characterised by the relative scope of ? the lee of ? and ? a small hillside .? In this paper , we present an algorithm for the redundancy elimination problem : Given an USR , compute an USR which has fewer readings , but still describes at least one representative of each equivalence class ? without enumerating any readings . This algorithm makes it possible to compute the one or two representatives of the semantic equivalence classes in the examples , so subsequent modules don?t have to deal with all the other equivalent readings . It also closes the gap between the large number of readings predicted by the grammar and the intuitively perceived much lower degree of ambiguity of these sentences . Finally , it can be helpful for a grammar designer because it is much more feasible to check whether two readings are linguistically reasonable than 480. Our algorithm is applicable to arbitrary USRs ( not just those computed by the ERG ). While its effect is particularly significant on the ERG , which uniformly treats all kinds of noun phrases , including proper names and pronouns , as generalised quantifiers , it will generally help deal with spurious ambiguities ( such as scope ambiguities between indef-most theories of scope since Montague Grammar.
We model equivalence in terms of rewrite rules that permute quantifiers without changing the semantics of the readings . The particular USRs we work with are underspecified chart representations , which can be computed from dominance graphs ( or USRs in some other underspecification formalisms ) efficiently ( Koller and Thater , 2005b).
We evaluate the performance of the algorithm on the Rondane treebank and show that it reduces the median number of readings from 56 to 4, by up to a factor of 666.240 for individual USRs , while running in negligible time.
To our knowledge , our algorithm and its less powerful predecessor ( Koller and Thater , 2006) are the first redundancy elimination algorithms in the literature that operate on the level of USRs.
There has been previous research on enumerating only some representatives of each equivalence class ( Vestre , 1991; Chaves , 2003), but these approaches don?t maintain underspecification : After running their algorithms , they are left with a set of readings rather than an underspecified representation , i.e . we could no longer run other algorithms on an USR.
The paper is structured as follows . We will first define dominance graphs and review the necessary background theory in Section 2. We will then introduce our notion of equivalence in Section 3, and present the redundancy elimination algorithm in Section 4. In Section 5, we describe the evaluation of the algorithm on the Rondane corpus . Finally , Section 6 concludes and points to further work.
2 Dominance graphs
The basic underspecification formalism we assume here is that of ( labelled ) dominance graphs ( Althaus et al , 2003). Dominance graphs are equivalent to leaf-labelled normal dominance constraints ( Egg et al , 2001), which have been discussed extensively in previous literature.
Definition 1. A ( compact ) dominance graph is a directed graph ( V,E unionmultiD ) with two kinds of edges , tree edges E and dominance edges D , such that : 1. The graph ( V,E ) defines a collection of node disjoint trees of height 0 or 1. We call the trees in ( V,E ) the fragments of the graph.
2. If ( v,v ?) is a dominance edge in D , then v is a hole and v ? is a root . A node v is a root if v does not have incoming tree edges ; otherwise , v is a hole.
A labelled dominance graph over a ranked signature ? is a triple G = ( V,E unionmultiD,L ) such that ( V,E unionmultiD ) is a dominance graph and L : V ? is a partial labelling function which assigns a node v a label with arity n iff v is a root with n outgoing tree edges . Nodes without labels ( i.e . holes ) must have outgoing dominance edges.
We will write R(F ) for the root of the fragment F , and we will typically just say ? graph ? instead of ? labelled dominance graph?.
An example of a labelled dominance graph is shown to the left of Fig . 1. Tree edges are drawn as solid lines , and dominance edges as dotted lines , directed from top to bottom . This graph can serve as an USR for the sentence ? a representative of a company saw a sample ? if we demand that the holes are ? plugged ? by roots while realising the dominance edges as dominance , as in the two configurations ( of five ) shown to the right . These configurations are trees that encode semantic representations of the sentence . We will freely read configurations as ground terms over the signature ?.
2.1 Hypernormally connected graphs
Throughout this paper , we will only consider hypernormally connected ( hnc ) dominance graphs.
Hnc graphs are equivalent to chain-connected dominance constraints ( Koller et al , 2003), and are closely related to dominance nets ( Niehren and Thater , 2003). Fuchss et al (2004) have presented a corpus study that strongly suggests that all dominance graphs that are generated by current largescale grammars are ( or should be ) hnc.
Technically , a graph G is hypernormally connected iff each pair of nodes is connected by a simple hypernormal path in G . A hypernormal path ( Althaus et al , 2003) in G is a path in the undirected version Gu of G that does not use two dominance edges that are incident to the same hole.
Hnc graphs have a number of very useful structural properties on which this paper rests . One which is particularly relevant here is that we can predict in which way different fragments can dominate each other.
Definition 2. Let G be a hnc dominance graph . A fragment F1 in G is called a possible dominator of another fragment F2 in G iff it has exactly one hole h which is connected to R(F2) by a simple hy-sample y see x,y a x repr-of x,z a z comp z 1 2 3 4 5 6 y a x a z y see x,y repr-of x,z comp z a y a x sample y see x,y repr-of x,z a z comp z company saw a sample ? ( left ) and two of its five configurations.
{1,2,3,4,5,6,7} :?1,h1 7? {4},h2 7? {2,3,5,6,7}? ?2,h3 7? {1,4,5},h4 7? {3,6,7}? ?3,h5 7? {5},h6 7? {1,2,4,5,7}? {2,3,5,6,7} :?2,h3 7? {5},h4 7? {3,6,7}? ?3,h5 7? {6},h6 7? {2,5,7}? {3,6,7} :?3,h5 7? {6},h6 7? {7}? {2,5,7} :?2,h3 7? {5},h4 7? {7}? {1,4,5} :?1,h1 7? {4},h2 7? {5}? {1,2,4,5,7} :?1,h1 7? {4},h2 7? {2,5,7}? ?2,h3 7? {1,4,5},h4 7? {7}? Figure 2: The chart for the graph in Fig . 1.
pernormal path which doesn?t use R(F1). We write ch(F1,F2) for this unique h.
Lemma 1 ( Koller and Thater (2006)). Let F1, F2 be fragments in a hnc dominance graph G . If there is a configurationC ofG in which R(F1) dominates R(F2), then F1 is a possible dominator of F2, and in particular ch(F1,F2) dominates R(F2) inC.
By applying this rather abstract result , we can derive a number of interesting facts about the example graph in Fig . 1. The fragments 1, 2, and 3 are possible dominators of all other fragments ( and of each other ), while the fragments 4 through 7 aren?t possible dominators of anything ( they have no holes ); so 4 through 7 must be leaves in any configuration of the graph . In addition , if fragment 2 dominates fragment 3 in any configuration , then in particular the right hole of 2 will dominate the root of 3; and so on.
2.2 Dominance charts
Below we will not work with dominance graphs directly . Rather , we will use dominance charts ( Koller and Thater , 2005b ) as our USRs : they are more explicit USRs , which support a more finegrained deletion of reading sets than graphs.
A dominance chart for the graph G is a mapping of weakly connected subgraphs of G to sets of splits ( see Fig . 2), which describe possible ways of constructing configurations of the subgraph.
A subgraph G ? is assigned one split for each fragment F in G ? which can be at the root of a configuration of G ?. If the graph is hnc , removing F from the graph splits G ? into a set of weakly connected components ( wccs ), each of which is connected to exactly one hole of F . We also record the wccs , and the hole to which each wcc belongs , in the split . In order to compute all configurations represented by a split , we can first compute recursively the configurations of each component ; then we plug each combination of these sub-configurations into the appropriate holes of the root fragment . We define the configurations associated with a subgraph as the union over its splits , and those of the entire chart as the configurations associated with the complete graph.
Fig . 2 shows the dominance chart corresponding to the graph in Fig . 1. The chart represents exactly the configuration set of the graph , and is minimal in the sense that every subgraph and every split in the chart can be used in constructing some configuration . Such charts can be computed efficiently ( Koller and Thater , 2005b ) from a dominance graph , and can also be used to compute the configurations of a graph efficiently.
The example chart expresses that three fragments can be at the root of a configuration of the complete graph : 1, 2, and 3. The entry for the split with root fragment 2 tells us that removing 2 splits the graph into the subgraphs {1,4,5} and {3,6,7} ( see Fig . 3). If we configure these two subgraphs recursively , we obtain the configurations shown in the third column of Fig . 3; we can then plug these sub-configurations into the appropriate holes of 2 and obtain a configuration for the entire graph.
Notice that charts can be exponentially larger than the original graph , but they are still exponentially smaller than the entire set of readings because common subgraphs ( such as the graph {2,5,7} in the example ) are represented only once , 4 5 6 7 h 4 5 6 7 h 1 3 4 5 6 7 4 5 6 7 ? Figure 3: Extracting a configuration from a chart.
and are small in practice ( see ( Koller and Thater , 2005b ) for an analysis ). Thus the chart can still serve as an underspecified representation.
3 Equivalence
Now let?s define equivalence of readings more precisely . Equivalence of semantic representations is traditionally defined as the relation between formulas ( say , of first-order logic ) which have the same interpretation . However , even first-order equivalence is an undecidable problem , and broadcoverage semantic representations such as those computed by the ERG usually have no well-defined modeltheoretic semantics and therefore no concept of semantic equivalence.
On the other hand , we do not need to solve the full semantic equivalence problem , as we only want to compare formulas that are readings of the same sentence , i.e . different configurations of the same USR . Such formulas only differ in the way that the fragments are combined . We can therefore approximate equivalence by using a rewrite system that permutes fragments and defining equivalence of configurations as mutual rewritability as usual.
By way of example , consider again the two configurations shown in Fig . 1. We can obtain the second configuration from the ( semantically equivalent ) first one by applying the following rewrite rule , which rotates the fragments 1 and 2: ax(az(P,Q),R )? az(P,ax(Q,R )) (3) Thus we take these two configurations to be equivalent with respect to the rewrite rule . ( We could also have argued that the second configuration can be rewritten into the first by using the inverted rule .) We formalise this rewriting-based notion of equivalence as follows . The definition uses the abbreviation x[1,k ) for the sequence x1, . . . , xk?1, and x(k,n ] for xk+1, . . . , xn.
Definition 3. A permutation system R is a system of rewrite rules over the signature ? of the following form : f1(x[1,i ), f2(y[1,k),z,y(k,m]),x(i,n ])? f2(y[1,k ), f1(x[1,i),z,x(i,n]),y(k,m ]) The permutability relation P(R ) is the binary relation P(R ) ? (?? N)2 which contains exactly the tuples (( f1, i ),( f2,k )) and (( f2,k ),( f1, i )) for each such rewrite rule . Two terms are equivalent with respect to R , s?R t , iff there is a sequence of rewrite steps and inverse rewrite steps that rewrite s into t.
If G is a graph over ? and R a permutation system , then we write SCR(G ) for the set of equivalence classes Conf(G)/?R , where Conf(G ) is the set of configurations of G.
The rewrite rule (3) above is an instance of this schema , as are the other three permutations of existential quantifiers . These rules approximate classical semantic equivalence of first-order logic , as they rewrite formulas into classically equivalent ones . Indeed , all five configurations of the graph in Fig . 1 are rewriting-equivalent to each other.
In the case of the semantic representations generated by the ERG , we don?t have access to an underlying interpretation . But we can capture linguistic intuitions about the equivalence of readings in permutation rules . For instance , proper names and pronouns ( which the ERG analyses as scope-bearers , although they can be reduced to constants without scope ) can be permuted with anything . Indefinites and definites permute with each other if they occur in each other?s scope , but not if they occur in each other?s restriction ; and so on.
4 Redundancy elimination
Given a permutation system , we can now try to get rid of readings that are equivalent to other readings.
One way to formalise this is to enumerate exactly one representative of each equivalence class . However , after such a step we would be left with a collection of semantic representations rather than an USR , and could not use the USR for ruling out further readings . Besides , a naive algorithm which hibitively slow.
We will instead tackle the following underspecified redundancy elimination problem : Given an USR G , compute an USR G ? with Conf(G ?) ?
Conf(G ) and SCR(G ) = SCR(G ?). We want
Conf(G ?) to be as small as possible . Ideally , it would contain no two equivalent readings , but in practice we won?t always achieve this kind of completeness . Our redundancy elimination algorithm will operate on a dominance chart and successively delete splits and subgraphs from the chart.
4.1 Permutable fragments
Because the algorithm must operate on USRs rather than configurations , it needs a way to predict from the USR alone which fragments can be permuted in configurations . This is not generally possible in unrestricted graphs , but for hnc graphs it is captured by the following criterion.
Definition 4. Let R be a permutation system . Two fragments F1 and F2 with root labels f1 and f2 in a hnc graph G are called R-permutable iff they are possible dominators of each other and (( f1,ch(F1,F2)),( f2,ch(F2,F1))) ? P(R).
For example , in Fig . 1, the fragments 1 and 2 are permutable , and indeed they can be permuted in any configuration in which one is the parent of the other . This is true more generally : Lemma 2 ( Koller and Thater (2006)). Let G be a hnc graph , F1 and F2 be R-permutable fragments with root labels f1 and f2, and C1 any configuration of G of the form C ( f1(. . . , f2(. . .), . . .)) ( where C is the context of the subterm ). Then C1 can be R-rewritten into a tree C2 of the form C ( f2(. . . , f1(. . .), . . .)) which is also a configuration of G.
The proof uses the hn connectedness ofG in two ways : in order to ensure that C2 is still a configuration of G , and to make sure that F2 is plugged into the correct hole of F1 for a rule application ( cf . Lemma 1). Note thatC2 ? R C1 by definition.
4.2 The redundancy elimination algorithm Now we can use permutability of fragments to define eliminable splits . Intuitively , a split of a subgraph G is eliminable if each of its configurations is equivalent to a configuration of some other split of G . Removing such a split from the chart will rule out some configurations ; but it does not change the set of equivalence classes.
Definition 5. Let R be a permutation system . A split S = ( F , . . . , hi 7?Gi , . . .) of a graph G is called eliminable in a chartCh if some Gi contains a fragment F ? such that ( a ) Ch contains a split S ? of G with root fragment F ?, and ( b ) F ? is R-permutable with F and all possible dominators of F ? in Gi.
In Fig . 1, each of the three splits is eliminable.
For example , the split with root fragment 1 is eliminable because the fragment 3 permutes both with 2 ( which is the only possible dominator of 3 in the same wcc ) and with 1 itself.
Proposition 3. Let Ch be a dominance chart , and let S be an eliminable split of a hnc subgraph . Then
SC(Ch ) = SC(Ch?S).
Proof . Let C be an arbitrary configuration of S = ( F,h1 7? G1, . . . , hn 7? Gn ), and let F ? ? Gi be the root fragment of the assumed second split S?.
Let F1, . . . , Fn be those fragments in C that are properly dominated by F and properly dominate F ?. All of these fragments must be possible dominators of F ?, and all of them must be in Gi as well , so F ? is permutable with each of them . F ? must also be permutable with F . This means that we can apply Lemma 2 repeatedly to move F ? to the root of the configuration , obtaining a configuration of
S ? which is equivalent toC.
Notice that we didn?t require that Ch must be the complete chart of a dominance graph . This means we can remove eliminable splits from a chart repeatedly , i.e . we can apply the following redundancy elimination algorithm:
REDUNDANCY-ELIMINATION(Ch,R ) 1 for each split S inCh 2 do if S is eliminable with respect to R 3 then remove S fromCh Prop . 3 shows that the algorithm is a correct algorithm for the underspecified redundancy elimination problem . The particular order in which eliminable splits are removed doesn?t affect the correctness of the algorithm , but it may change the number of remaining configurations.
The algorithm generalises an earlier elimination algorithm ( Koller and Thater , 2006) in that the earlier algorithm required the existence of a single split which could be used to establish eliminability of all other splits of the same subgraph.
We can further optimise this algorithm by keeping track of how often each subgraph is referenced z
D x,y,z a y a x 1 2 3
A x
B y
C z 4 5 6 complete.
by the splits in the chart . Once a reference count drops to zero , we can remove the entry for this subgraph and all of its splits from the chart . This doesn?t change the set of configurations of the chart , but may further reduce the chart size . The overall runtime for the algorithm is O(n2S ), where S is the number of splits in Ch and n is the number of nodes in the graph . This is asymptotically not much slower than the runtime O((n+m)S ) it takes to compute the chart in the first place ( where m is the number of edges in the graph).
4.3 Examples and discussion
Let?s look at a run of the algorithm on the chart in Fig . 2. The algorithm can first delete the eliminable split with root 1 for the entire graphG . After this deletion , the splits for G with root fragments 2 and 3 are still eliminable ; so we can e.g . delete the split for 3. At this point , only one split is left for G . The last split for a subgraph can never be eliminable , so we are finished with the splits for G . This reduces the reference count of some subgraphs ( e.g . {2,3,5,6,7}) to 0, so we can remove these subgraphs too . The output of the algorithm is the chart shown below , which represents a single configuration ( the one shown in Fig . 3).
{1,2,3,4,5,6,7} :?2,h2 7? {1,4},h4 7? {3,6,7}? {1,4} :?1,h1 7? {4}? {3,6,7} :?3,h5 7? {6},h6 7? {7}? In this case , the algorithm achieves complete reduction , in the sense that the final chart has no two equivalent configurations . It remains complete for all variations of the graph in Fig . 1 in which some or all existential quantifiers are replaces by universal quantifiers . This is an improvement over our earlier algorithm ( Koller and Thater , 2006), which computed a chart with four configurations for the graph in which 1 and 2 are existential and 3 is universal , as opposed to the three equivalence classes of this graph?s configurations.
However , the present algorithm still doesn?t achieve complete reduction for all USRs . One example is shown in Fig . 4. This graph has six configurations in four equivalence classes , but no split of the whole graph is eliminable . The algorithm will delete a split for the subgraph {1,2,4,5,7}, but the final chart will still have five , rather than four , configurations . A complete algorithm would have to recognise that {1,3,4,6,7} and {2,3,5,6,7} have splits ( for 1 and 2, respectively ) that lead to equivalent configurations and delete one of them . But it is far from obvious how such a nonlocal decision could be made efficiently , and we leave this for future work.
5 Evaluation
In this final section , we evaluate the the effectiveness and efficiency of the elimination algorithm : We run it on USRs from a treebank and measure how many readings are redundant , to what extent the algorithm eliminates this redundancy , and how much time it takes to do this.
Resources . The experiments are based on the Rondane corpus , a Redwoods ( Oepen et al , 2002) style corpus which is distributed with the English Resource Grammar ( Flickinger , 2002). The corpus contains analyses for 1076 sentences from the tourism domain , which are associated with USRs based upon Minimal Recursion Semantics ( MRS).
The MRS representations are translated into dominance graphs using the opensource utool tool ( Koller and Thater , 2005a ), which is restricted to MRS representations whose translations are hnc.
By restricting ourselves to such MRSs , we end up with a data set of 999 dominance graphs . The average number of scope bearing operators in the data set is 6.5, and the median number of readings is 56.
We then defined a ( rather conservative ) rewrite system RERG for capturing the permutability relation of the quantifiers in the ERG . This amounted to 34 rule schemata , which are automatically expanded to 494 rewrite rules.
Experiment : Reduction . We first analysed the extent to which our algorithm eliminated the redundancy of the USRs in the corpus . We computed dominance charts for all USRs , ran the algorithm on them , and counted the number of configurations of the reduced charts . We then compared these numbers against a baseline and an upper bound . The upper bound is the true number of 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 log(#configurations)
F a c t o r
Algorithm Baseline Classes
Figure 5: Mean reduction factor on Rondane.
equivalence classes with respect to RERG ; for efficiency reasons we could only compute this number for USRs with up to 500.000 configurations (95% of the data set ). The baseline is given by the number of readings that remain if we replace proper names and pronouns by constants and variables , respectively . This simple heuristic is easy to compute , and still achieves nontrivial redundancy elimination because proper names and pronouns are quite frequent (28% of the noun phrase occurrences in the data set ). It also shows the degree of nontrivial scope ambiguity in the corpus.
For each measurement , we sorted the USRs according to the number N of configurations , and grouped USRs according to the natural logarithm of N ( rounded down ) to obtain a logarithmic scale.
First , we measured the mean reduction factor for each log(N ) class , i.e . the ratio of the number of all configurations to the number of remaining configurations after redundancy elimination ( Fig . 5). The upperbound line in the figure shows that there is a great deal of redundancy in the USRs in the data set . The average performance of our algorithm is close to the upper bound and much 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 log(#configurations)
Algorithm Baseline
Figure 6: Percentage of USRs for which the algorithm and the baseline achieve complete reduction.
0 log(#configurations ) t i m e ( m s )
Full Chart Reduced Chart Enumeration
Figure 7: Mean runtimes.
better than the baseline . For USRs with fewer than e8 = 2980 configurations (83% of the data set ), the mean reduction factor of our algorithm is above 86% of the upper bound . The median number of configurations for the USRs in the whole data set is 56, and the median number of equivalence classes is 3; again , the median number of configurations of the reduced charts is very close to the upper bound , at 4 ( baseline : 8). The highest reduction factor for an individual USR is 666.240.
We also measured the ratio of USRs for which the algorithm achieves complete reduction ( Fig . 6): The algorithm is complete for 56% of the USRs in the data set . It is complete for 78% of the USRs with fewer than e5 = 148 configurations (64% of the data set ), and still complete for 66% of the USRs with fewer than e8 configurations.
Experiment : Efficiency . Finally , we measured the runtime of the elimination algorithm . The runtime of the elimination algorithm is generally comparable to the runtime for computing the chart in the first place . However , in our experiments we used an optimised version of the elimination algorithm , which computes the reduced chart directly from a dominance graph by checking each split for eliminability before it is added to the chart.
We compare the performance of this algorithm to the baseline of computing the complete chart . For comparison , we have also added the time it takes to enumerate all configurations of the graph , as a lower bound for any algorithm that computes the equivalence classes based on the full set of configurations . Fig . 7 shows the mean runtimes for each log(N ) class , on the USRs with less than one million configurations (958 USRs).
As the figure shows , the asymptotic runtimes for computing the complete chart and the reduced chart are about the same , whereas the time for ( Note that the runtime is reported on a logarithmic scale .) For USRs with many configurations , computing the reduced chart actually takes less time on average than computing the complete chart because the chart-filling algorithm is called on fewer subgraphs . While the reduced-chart algorithm seems to be slower than the complete-chart one for USRs with less than e5 configurations , these runtimes remain below 20 milliseconds on average , and the measurements are thus quite unreliable . In summary , we can say that there is no overhead for redundancy elimination in practice.
6 Conclusion
We presented an algorithm for redundancy elimination on underspecified chart representations . This algorithm successively deletes eliminable splits from the chart , which reduces the set of described readings while making sure that at least one representative of each original equivalence class remains . Equivalence is defined with respect to a certain class of rewriting systems ; this definition approximates semantic equivalence of the described formulas and fits well with the underspecification setting . The algorithm runs in polynomial time in the size of the chart.
We then evaluated the algorithm on the Rondane corpus and showed that it is useful in practice : the median number of readings drops from 56 to 4, and the maximum individual reduction factor is 666.240. The algorithm achieves complete reduction for 56% of all sentences . It does this in negligible runtime ; even the most difficult sentences in the corpus are reduced in a matter of seconds , whereas the enumeration of all readings would take about a year . This is the first corpus evaluation of a redundancy elimination in the literature.
The algorithm improves upon previous work ( Koller and Thater , 2006) in that it eliminates more splits from the chart . It is an improvement over earlier algorithms for enumerating irredundant readings ( Vestre , 1991; Chaves , 2003) in that it maintains underspecifiedness ; note that these earlier papers never made any claims with respect to , or evaluated , completeness.
There are a number of directions in which the present algorithm could be improved . We are currently pursuing some ideas on how to improve the completeness of the algorithm further . It would also be worthwhile to explore heuristics for the order in which splits of the same subgraph are eliminated . The present work could be extended to allow equivalence with respect to arbitrary rewrite systems . Most generally , we hope that the methods developed here will be useful for defining other elimination algorithms , which take e.g . full world knowledge into account.
References
E . Althaus , D . Duchier , A . Koller , K . Mehlhorn , J . Niehren , and S . Thiel . 2003. An efficient graph algorithm for dominance constraints . Journal of Algorithms , 48:194?219.
P . Blackburn and J . Bos . 2005. Representation and Inference for Natural Language . A First Course in Computational
Semantics . CSLI Publications.
R . P . Chaves . 2003. Non-redundant scope disambiguation in underspecified semantics . In Proc . 8th ESSLLI Student
Session.
A . Copestake , D . Flickinger , C . Pollard , and I . Sag . 2004.
Minimal recursion semantics : An introduction . Journal of
Language and Computation . To appear.
M . Egg , A . Koller , and J . Niehren . 2001. The Constraint Language for Lambda Structures . Logic , Language , and
Information , 10.
D . Flickinger . 2002. On building a more efficient grammar by exploiting types . In J . Tsujii S . Oepen , D . Flickinger and H . Uszkoreit , editors , Collaborative Language Engineering . CSLI Publications , Stanford.
R . Fuchss , A . Koller , J . Niehren , and S . Thater . 2004. Minimal recursion semantics as dominance constraints : Translation , evaluation , and analysis . In Proc . of the 42nd ACL.
A . Koller and S . Thater . 2005a . Efficient solving and exploration of scope ambiguities . In ACL05 Demonstration
Notes , Ann Arbor.
A . Koller and S . Thater . 2005b . The evolution of dominance constraint solvers . In Proceedings of the ACL05 Workshop on Software , Ann Arbor.
A . Koller and S . Thater . 2006. Towards a redundancy elimination algorithm for underspecified descriptions . In Proc.
5th Intl . Workshop on Inference in Computational Semantics ( ICoS-5).
A . Koller , J . Niehren , and S . Thater . 2003. Bridging the gap between underspecification formalisms : Hole semantics as dominance constraints . In Proc . 10th EACL.
J . Niehren and S . Thater . 2003. Bridging the gap between underspecification formalisms : Minimal recursion semantics as dominance constraints . In Proc . of the 41st ACL.
S . Oepen , K . Toutanova , S . Shieber , C . Manning , D . Flickinger , and T . Brants . 2002. The LinGO Redwoods treebank : Motivation and preliminary applications.
In Proceedings of COLING?02.
K . van Deemter and S . Peters . 1996. Semantic Ambiguity and Underspecification . CSLI , Stanford.
E . Vestre . 1991. An algorithm for generating nonredundant quantifier scopings . In Proc . of the Fifth EACL , Berlin.
416
