Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions , pages 89?96,
Sydney , July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Unsupervised Relation Disambiguation Using Spectral Clustering
Jinxiu Chen1 Donghong Ji1 Chew Lim Tan2 Zhengyu Niu1
1Institute for Infocomm Research 2Department of Computer Science
21 Heng Mui Keng Terrace National University of Singapore
119613 Singapore 117543 Singapore
{jinxiu,dhji,zniu}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg tancl@comp.nus.edu.sg
Abstract
This paper presents an unsupervised learning approach to disambiguate various relations between name entities by use of various lexical and syntactic features from the contexts . It works by calculating eigenvectors of an adjacency graph?s Laplacian to recover a submanifold of data from a high dimensionality space and then performing cluster number estimation on the eigenvectors . Experiment results on ACE corpora show that this spectral clustering based approach outperforms the other clustering methods.
1 Introduction
In this paper , we address the task of relation extraction , which is to find relationships between name entities in a given context . Many methods have been proposed to deal with this task , including supervised learning algorithms ( Miller et al , 2000; Zelenko et al ., 2002; Culotta and Soresen , 2004; Kambhatla , 2004; Zhou et al , 2005), semisupervised learning algorithms ( Brin , 1998; Agichtein and Gravano , 2000; Zhang , 2004), and unsupervised learning algorithm ( Hasegawa et al , 2004).
Among these methods , supervised learning is usually more preferred when a large amount of labeled training data is available . However , it is time-consuming and labor-intensive to manually tag a large amount of training data . Semisupervised learning methods have been put forward to minimize the corpus annotation requirement . Most of semisupervised methods employ the bootstrapping framework , which only need to predefine some initial seeds for any particular relation , and then bootstrap from the seeds to acquire the relation . However , it is often quite difficult to enumerate all class labels in the initial seeds and decide an ? optimal ? number of them.
Compared with supervised and semisupervised methods , Hasegawa et al (2004)?s unsupervised approach for relation extraction can overcome the difficulties on requirement of a large amount of labeled data and enumeration of all class labels . Hasegawa et al (2004)?s method is to use a hierarchical clustering method to cluster pairs of named entities according to the similarity of context words intervening between the named entities . However , the drawback of hierarchical clustering is that it required providing cluster number by users . Furthermore , clustering is performed in original high dimensional space , which may induce nonconvex clusters hard to identified.
This paper presents a novel application of spectral clustering technique to unsupervised relation extraction problem . It works by calculating eigenvectors of an adjacency graph?s Laplacian to recover a submanifold of data from a high dimensional space , and then performing cluster number estimation on a transformed space defined by the first few eigenvectors . This method may help us find nonconvex clusters . It also does not need to predefine the number of the context clusters or pre-specify the similarity threshold for the clusters as Hasegawa et al (2004)?s method.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows . Section 2 formulates unsupervised relation extraction and presents how to apply the spectral clustering experiments and results . Finally we will give a conclusion about our work in section 4.
2 Unsupervised Relation Extraction
Problem
Assume that two occurrences of entity pairs with similar contexts , are tend to hold the same relation type . Thus unsupervised relation extraction problem can be formulated as partitioning collections of entity pairs into clusters according to the similarity of contexts , with each cluster containing only entity pairs labeled by the same relation type . And then , in each cluster , the most representative words are identified from the contexts of entity pairs to induce the label of relation type . Here , we only focus on the clustering subtask and do not address the relation type labeling subtask.
In the next subsections we will describe our proposed method for unsupervised relation extraction , which includes : 1) Collect the context vectors in which the entity mention pairs cooccur ; 2) Cluster these Context vectors.
2.1 Context Vector and Feature Design
Let X = { xi}ni=1 be the set of context vectors of occurrences of all entity mention pairs , where xi represents the context vector of the ith occurrence , and n is the total number of occurrences of all entity mention pairs.
Each occurrence of entity mention pairs can be denoted as follows:
R ? ( Cpre , e1, Cmid , e2, Cpost ) (1) where e1 and e2 represents the entity mentions , and Cpre,Cmid,and Cpost are the contexts before , between and after the entity mention pairs respectively.
We extracted features from e1, e2, Cpre , Cmid , Cpost to construct context vectors , which are computed from the parse trees derived from Charniak Parser ( Charniak , 1999) and the Chunklink script 1 written by Sabine Buchholz from Tilburg University.
Words : Words in the two entities and three context windows.
1 Software available at http://ilk.uvt.nl / sabine/chunklink / Entity Type : the entity type of both entities , which can be PERSON , ORGANIZATION , FACIL-
ITY , LOCATION and GPE.
POS features : Part-Of-Speech tags corresponding to all words in the two entities and three context windows.
Chunking features : This category of features are extracted from the chunklink representation , which includes : ? Chunk tag information of the two entities and three context windows . The ?0? tag means that the word is outside of any chunk . The ? I-XP ? tag means that this word is inside an XP chunk . The ? BXP ? by default means that the word is at the beginning of an XP chunk.
? Grammatical function of the two entities and three context windows . The last word in each chunk is its head , and the function of the head is the function of the whole chunk . ? NP-SBJ ? means a NP chunk as the subject of the sentence . The other words in a chunk that are not the head have ? NOFUNC ? as their function.
? IOB-chains of the heads of the two entities . So-called IOB-chain , noting the syntactic categories of all the constituents on the path from the root node to this leaf node of tree.
We combine the above lexical and syntactic features with their position information in the context to form the context vector . Before that , we filter out low frequency features which appeared only once in the entire set.
2.2 Context Clustering
Once the context vectors of entity pairs are prepared , we come to the second stage of our method : cluster these context vectors automatically.
In recent years , spectral clustering technique has received more and more attention as a powerful approach to a range of clustering problems . Among the efforts on spectral clustering techniques ( Weiss , 1999; Kannan et al , 2000; Shi et al , 2000; Ng et al , 2001; Zha et al , 2001), we adopt a modified version technique.
Input : A set of context vectors X = { x1, x2, ..., xn},
X ? < n?d;
Output : Clustered data and number of clusters ; 1. Construct an affinity matrix by Aij = exp (? s ?2 ) if i 6=j , 0 if i = j . Here , sij is the similarity between xi and xj calculated by Cosine similarity measure . and the free distance parameter ?2 is used to scale the weights ; 2. Normalize the affinity matrix A to create the matrix L = D?1/2AD?1/2, where D is a diagonal matrix whose ( i,i ) element is the sum of A?s ith row ; 3. Set q = 2; 4. Compute q eigenvectors of L with greatest eigenvalues.
Arrange them in a matrix Y .
5. Perform elongated Kmeans with q + 1 centers on Y , initializing the ( q + 1)-th mean in the origin ; 6. If the q+1-th cluster contains any data points , then there must be at least an extra cluster ; set q = q + 1 and go back to step 4. Otherwise , algorithm stops and outputs clustered data and number of clusters.
(Sanguinetti et al , 2005) of the algorithm by Ng et al . (2001) because it can provide us model order selection capability.
Since we do not know how many relation types in advance and do not have any labeled relation training examples at hand , the problem of model order selection arises , i.e . estimating the ? optimal ? number of clusters . Formally , let k be the model order , we need to find k in Equation : k = argmaxk{criterion(k )}. Here , the criterion is defined on the result of spectral clustering.
Table 1 shows the details of the whole algorithm for context clustering , which contains two main stages : 1) Transformation of Clustering Space ( Step 14); 2) Clustering in the transformed space using Elongated Kmeans algorithm ( Step 56).
2.3 Transformation of Clustering Space
We represent each context vector of entity pair as a node in an undirected graph . Each edge ( i,j ) in the graph is assigned a weight that reflects the similarity between two context vectors i and j . Hence , the relation extraction task for entity pairs can be defined as a partition of the graph so that entity pairs that are more similar to each other , e.g . labeled by the same relation type , belong to the same cluster . As a relaxation of such NP-hard discrete graph partitioning problem , spectral clustering technique computes eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a Laplacian matrix related to the given graph , and construct data clusters based on such spectral information.
Thus the starting point of context clustering is to construct an affinity matrix A from the data , which is an n ? n matrix encoding the distances between the various points . The affinity matrix is then normalized to form a matrix L by conjugating with the the diagonal matrix D?1/2 which has as entries the square roots of the sum of the rows of A . This is to take into account the different spread of the various clusters ( points belonging to more rarified clusters will have lower sums of the corresponding row of A ). It is straightforward to prove that L is positive definite and has eigenvalues smaller or equal to 1, with equality holding in at least one case.
Let K be the true number of clusters present in the dataset . If K is known beforehand , the first K eigenvectors of L will be computed and arranged as columns in a matrix Y . Each row of Y corresponds to a context vector of entity pair , and the above process can be considered as transforming the original context vectors in a d-dimensional space to new context vectors in the K-dimensional space . Therefore , the rows of Y will cluster upon mutually orthogonal points on the K dimensional sphere,rather than on the coordinate axes.
2.4 The Elongated Kmeans algorithm
As the step 5 of Table 1 shows , the result of elongated Kmeans algorithm is used to detect whether the number of clusters selected q is less than the true number K , and allows one to iteratively obtain the number of clusters.
Consider the case when the number of clusters q is less than the true cluster number K present in the dataset . In such situation , taking the first q < K eigenvectors , we will be selecting a q-dimensional subspace in the clustering space . As the rows of the K eigenvectors clustered along mutually orthogonal vectors , their projections in a lower dimensional space will cluster along radial directions . Therefore , the general picture will be of q clusters elongated in the radial direction , with possibly some clusters very near the origin ( when the subspace is orthogonal to some of the discarded eigenvectors).
Hence , the Kmeans algorithm is modified as the elongated Kmeans algorithm to downweight distances along radial directions and penalize dis--3 -2 -1 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 44 -3 -2 -1 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08-0.08 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 ( c ) -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 44 -3 -2 -1 Figure 1: An Example:(a ) The Three Circle Dataset.
(b ) The clustering result using Kmeans ; ( c ) Three elongated clusters in the 2D clustering space using Spectral clustering : two dominant eigenvectors ; ( d ) The clustering result using Spectral-based clustering (?2=0.05). (4,? and + denote examples in different clusters ) tances along transversal directions . The elongated Kmeans algorithm computes the distance of point x from the center ci as follows : ? If the center is not very near the origin , cTi ci > ? (? is a parameter to be fixed by the user ), the distances are calculated as : edist(x , ci ) = ( x ? ci)TM(x ? ci ), where
M = 1? ( Iq ? cicTi cTi ci ) + ? cic
T i cTi ci , ? is the sharpness parameter that controls the elongation ( the smaller , the more elongated the clusters ) 2.
? If the center is very near the origin,cTi ci < ?, the distances are measured using the Euclidean distance.
In each iteration of procedure in Table 1, elongated Kmeans is initialized with q centers corresponding to data points in different clusters and one center in the origin . The algorithm then will drag the center in the origin towards one of the clusters not accounted for . Compute another eigenvector ( thus increasing the dimension of the clustering space to q + 1) and repeat the procedure . Eventually , when one reach as many eigenvectors as the number of clusters present in the data , no points will be assigned to the center at the origin , leaving the cluster empty . This is the signal to terminate the algorithm.
2.5 An example
Figure 1 visualized the clustering result of three circle dataset using Kmeans and Spectral-based clustering . From Figure 1(b ), we can see that Kmeans can not separate the nonconvex clusters in three circle dataset successfully since it is prone to local minimal . For spectral-based clustering , as the algorithm described , initially , we took the two eigenvectors of L with largest eigenvalues , which gave us a two-dimensional clustering space . Then to ensure that the two centers are initialized in different clusters , one center is set as the point that is the farthest from the origin , while the other is set as the point that simultaneously farthest the first center and the origin . Figure 1(c ) shows the three elongated clusters in the 2D clustering space and the corresponding clustering result of dataset is visualized in Figure 1(d ), which exploits manifold structure ( cluster structure ) in data.
2 In this paper , the sharpness parameter ? is set to 0.2 training and devtest corpus.
Type SubType Training Devtest
ROLE General-Staff 550 149
Management 677 122
Citizen-Of 127 24
Founder 11 5
Owner 146 15
Affiliate-Partner 111 15
Member 460 145
Client 67 13
Other 15 7
PART PartOf 490 103
Subsidiary 85 19
Other 2 1
AT Located 975 192
Based-In 187 64
Residence 154 54
SOC Other-Professional 195 25
Other-Personal 60 10
Parent 68 24
Spouse 21 4
Associate 49 7
Other-Relative 23 10
Sibling 7 4
GrandParent 6 1
NEAR Relative-Location 88 32 3 Experiments and Results 3.1 Data Setting Our proposed unsupervised relation extraction is evaluated on ACE 2003 corpus , which contains 519 files from sources including broadcast , newswire , and newspaper . We only deal with intra-sentence explicit relations and assumed that all entities have been detected beforehand in the EDT subtask of ACE . To verify our proposed method , we only collect those pairs of entity mentions which have been tagged relation types in the given corpus . Then the relation type tags were removed to test the unsupervised relation disambiguation . During the evaluation procedure , the relation type tags were used as ground truth classes . A breakdown of the data by 24 relation subtypes is given in Table 2.
3.2 Evaluation method for clustering result When assessing the agreement between clustering result and manually annotated relation types ( ground truth classes ), we would encounter the problem that there was no relation type tags for each cluster in our clustering results.
To resolve the problem , we construct a contingency table T , where each entry ti,j gives the number of the instances that belong to both the ith estimated cluster and jth ground truth class . Moreover , to ensure that any two clusters do not share the same labels of relation types , we adopt a permutation procedure to find an one-to-one mapping function ? from the ground truth classes ( relation types ) TC to the estimated clustering result EC.
There are at most | TC | clusters which are assigned relation type tags . And if the number of the estimated clusters is less than the number of the ground truth clusters , empty clusters should be added so that | EC | = | TC | and the one-to-one mapping can be performed , which can be formulated as the function : ?? = argmax ? ?| TC | j=1 t?(j),j , where ?( j ) is the index of the estimated cluster associated with the jth class.
Given the result of one-to-one mapping , we adopt Precision , Recall and Fmeasure to evaluate the clustering result.
3.3 Experimental Design
We perform our unsupervised relation extraction on the devtest set of ACE corpus and evaluate the algorithm on relation subtype level . Firstly , we observe the influence of various variables , including Distance Parameter ?2, Different Features , Context Window Size . Secondly , to verify the effectiveness of our method , we further compare it with other two unsupervised methods.
3.3.1 Choice of Distance Parameter ?2
We simply search over ?2 and pick the value that finds the best aligned set of clusters on the transformed space . Here , the scattering criterion trace(P?1W PB ) is used to compare the cluster quality for different value of ?2 3, which measures the ratio of between-cluster to withincluster scatter . The higher the trace(P?1W PB ), the higher the cluster quality.
In Table 3 and Table 4, with different settings of feature set and context window size , we find out the 3 trace(P?1W PB ) is trace of a matrix which is the sum of its diagonal elements . PW is the withincluster scatter matrix as : PW = ? c j=1 ?
Xi??j ( Xi ? mj)(Xi ? mj ) t and PB is the between-cluster scatter matrix as : PB = ? c j=1(mj ? m)(mj ? m)t , where m is the total mean vector and mj is the mean vector for jth cluster and ( Xj ? mj)t is the matrix transpose of the column vector ( Xj ? mj).
93
Table 3: Contribution of Different Features Features ?2 cluster number trace value Precison Recall Fmeasure
Words 0.021 15 2.369 41.6% 30.2% 34.9% + Entity Type 0.016 18 3.198 40.3% 42.5% 41.5% + POS 0.017 18 3.206 37.8% 46.9% 41.8% + Chunking Infomation 0.015 19 3.900 43.5% 49.4% 46.3% Table 4: Different Context Window Size Setting Context Window Size ?2 cluster number trace value Precision Recall Fmeasure 0 0.016 18 3.576 37.6% 48.1% 42.2% 2 0.015 19 3.900 43.5% 49.4% 46.3% 5 0.020 21 2.225 29.3% 34.7% 31.7% corresponding value of ?2 and cluster number which maximize the trace value in searching for a range of value ?2.
3.3.2 Contribution of Different Features As the previous section presented , we incorporate various lexical and syntactic features to extract relation . To measure the contribution of different features , we report the performance by gradually increasing the feature set , as Table 3 shows.
Table 3 shows that all of the four categories of features contribute to the improvement of performance more or less . Firstly,the addition of entity type feature is very useful , which improves Fmeasure by 6.6%. Secondly , adding POS features can increase Fmeasure score but do not improve very much.
Thirdly , chunking features also show their great usefulness with increasing Precision/Recall/F-measure by 5.7%/2.5%/4.5%.
We combine all these features to do all other evaluations in our experiments.
3.3.3 Setting of Context Window Size
We have mentioned in Section 2 that the context vectors of entity pairs are derived from the contexts before , between and after the entity mention pairs.
Hence , we have to specify the three context window size first . In this paper , we set the mid-context window as everything between the two entity mentions.
For the pre - and post - context windows , we could have different choices . For example , if we specify the outer context window size as 2, then it means that the pre-context ( post-context )) includes two words before ( after ) the first ( second ) entity.
For comparison of the effect of the outer context of entity mention pairs , we conducted three different Table 5: Performance of our proposed method ( Spectral-based clustering ) compared with other unsupervised methods : (( Hasegawa et al , 2004))?s clustering method and Kmeans clustering.
Precision Recall Fmeasure
Hasegawa?s Method1 38.7% 29.8% 33.7%
Hasegawa?s Method2 37.9% 36.0% 36.9%
Kmeans 34.3% 40.2% 36.8%
Our Proposed Method 43.5% 49.4% 46.3% settings of context window size (0, 2, 5) as Table 4 shows . From this table we can find that with the context window size setting , 2, the algorithm achieves the best performance of 43.5%/49.4%/46.3% in Precision/Recall/F-measure . With the context window size setting , 5, the performance becomes worse because extending the context too much may include more features , but at the same time , the noise also increases.
3.3.4 Comparison with other Unsupervised methods In ( Hasegawa et al , 2004), they preformed unsupervised relation extraction based on hierarchical clustering and they only used word features between entity mention pairs to construct context vectors . We reported the clustering results using the same clustering strategy as Hasegawa et al (2004) proposed.
In Table 5, Hasegawa?s Method1 means the test used the word feature as Hasegawa et al (2004) while Hasegawa?s Method2 means the test used the same feature set as our method . In both tests , we specified the cluster number as the number of ground truth classes.
We also approached the relation extraction problem using the standard clustering technique , K-fined in our proposed method to cluster the context vectors of entity mention pairs and prespecified the cluster number as the number of ground truth classes.
Table 5 reports the performance of our proposed method comparing with the other two unsupervised methods . Table 5 shows our proposed spectral based method clearly outperforms the other two unsupervised methods by 12.5% and 9.5% in Fmeasure respectively . Moreover , the incorporation of various lexical and syntactic features into Hasegawa et al (2004)?s method2 makes it outperform Hasegawa et al . (2004)?s method1 which only uses word feature.
3.4 Discussion
In this paper , we have shown that the modified spectral clustering technique , with various lexical and syntactic features derived from the context of entity pairs , performed well on the unsupervised relation extraction problem . Our experiments show that by the choice of the distance parameter ?2, we can estimate the cluster number which provides the tightest clusters . We notice that the estimated cluster number is less than the number of ground truth classes in most cases . The reason for this phenomenon may be that some relation types can not be easily distinguished using the context information only . For example , the relation subtypes ? Located ?, ? Based-In ? and ? Residence ? are difficult to disambiguate even for human experts to differentiate.
The results also show that various lexical and syntactic features contain useful information for the task . Especially , although we did not concern the dependency tree and full parse tree information as other supervised methods ( Miller et al , 2000; Culotta and Soresen , 2004; Kambhatla , 2004; Zhou et al ., 2005), the incorporation of simple features , such as words and chunking information , still can provide complement information for capturing the characteristics of entity pairs . This perhaps dues to the fact that two entity mentions are close to each other in most of relations defined in ACE . Another observation from the result is that extending the outer context window of entity mention pairs too much may not improve the performance since the process may incorporate more noise information and affect the clustering result.
As regards the clustering technique , the spectral-based clustering performs better than direct clustering , Kmeans . Since the spectral-based algorithm works in a transformed space of low dimensionality , data can be easily clustered so that the algorithm can be implemented with better efficiency and speed . And the performance using spectral-based clustering can be improved due to the reason that spectral-based clustering overcomes the drawback of Kmeans ( prone to local minima ) and may find nonconvex clusters consistent with human intuition.
Generally , from the point of view of unsupervised resolution for relation extraction , our approach already achieves best performance of 43.5%/49.4%/46.3% in Precision/Recall/F-measure compared with other clustering methods.
4 Conclusion and Future work
In this paper , we approach unsupervised relation extraction problem by using spectral-based clustering technique with diverse lexical and syntactic features derived from context . The advantage of our method is that it doesn?t need any manually labeled relation instances , and predefinition the number of the context clusters . Experiment results on the ACE corpus show that our method achieves better performance than other unsupervised methods , i.e.Hasegawa et al . (2004)?s method and Kmeans-based method.
Currently we combine various lexical and syntactic features to construct context vectors for clustering . In the future we will further explore other semantic information to assist the relation extraction problem . Moreover , instead of cosine similarity measure to calculate the distance between context vectors , we will try other distributional similarity measures to see whether the performance of relation extraction can be improved . In addition , if we can find an effective unsupervised way to filter out unrelated entity pairs in advance , it would make our proposed method more practical.
References
Agichtein E . and Gravano L .. 2000. Snowball : Extracting Relations from large Plain-Text Collections , In Proc . of the 5th ACM International Conference on
Digital Libraries ( ACMDL?00).
95
Brin Sergey . 1998. Extracting patterns and relations from world wide web . In Proc . of WebDB Workshop at 6th International Conference on Extending Database
Technology ( WebDB?98). pages 172-183.
Charniak E .. 1999. A Maximum-entropy-inspired parser.
Technical Report CS-99-12.. Computer Science Department , Brown University.
Culotta A . and Soresen J . 2004. Dependency tree kernels for relation extraction , In proceedings of 42th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . 2126 July 2004. Barcelona , Spain.
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency . 1995.
Proceedings of the Sixth Message Understanding Conference ( MUC6) Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc.
Hasegawa Takaaki , Sekine Satoshi and Grishman Ralph.
2004. Discovering Relations among Named Entities from Large Corpora , Proceeding of Conference
ACL2004. Barcelona , Spain.
Kambhatla N . 2004. Combining lexical , syntactic and semantic features with Maximum Entropy Models for extracting relations , In proceedings of 42th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . 2126 July 2004. Barcelona , Spain.
Kannan R ., Vempala S ., and Vetta A .. 2000. On clustering : Good,bad and spectral . In Proceedings of the 41st Foundations of Computer Science . pages 367-380.
Miller S.,Fox H.,Ramshaw L . and Weischedel R . 2000.
A novel use of statistical parsing to extract information from text . In proceedings of 6th Applied Natural Language Processing Conference . 29 April-4 may 2000,
Seattle USA.
Ng Andrew.Y , Jordan M ., and Weiss Y .. 2001. On spectral clustering : Analysis and an algorithm . In Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . pages 849-856.
Sanguinetti G ., Laidler J . and Lawrence N .. 2005. Automatic determination of the number of clusters using spectral algorithms.In : IEEE Machine Learning for Signal Processing . 2830 Sept 2005, Mystic , Connecticut , USA.
Shi J . and Malik.J . 2000. Normalized cuts and image segmentation . IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence . 22(8):888-905.
Weiss Yair . 1999. Segmentation using eigenvectors : A unifying view . ICCV(2). pp.975-982.
Zelenko D ., Aone C . and Richardella A .. 2002. Kernel Methods for Relation Extraction , Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP ). Philadelphia.
Zha H.,Ding C.,Gu.M,He X.,and Simon H .. 2001. Spectral Relaxation for kmeans clustering . In Neural Information Processing Systems ( NIPS2001). pages 1057-1064, 2001.
Zhang Zhu . 2004. Weakly-supervised relation classification for Information Extraction , In proceedings of ACM 13th conference on Information and Knowledge Management ( CIKM?2004). 813 Nov 2004. Washington D.C.,USA.
Zhou GuoDong , Su Jian , Zhang Jie and Zhang min.
2005. Exploring Various Knowledge in Relation Extraction , In proceedings of 43th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . USA.
96
