Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation Sessions , pages 37?40,
Sydney , July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Chinese Named Entity and Relation Identification System


Tianfang Yao
Department of Computer Science and
Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai , 200030, China
yao-tf@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
Hans Uszkoreit
Department of Computational Linguistics and
Phonetics
Saarland University
Saarbr?cken , 66041, Germany
uszkoreit@coli.uni-sb.de



Abstract
In this interactive presentation , a Chinese named entity and relation identification system is demonstrated . The domain-specific system has a three-stage pipeline architecture which includes word segmentation and part-of-speech ( POS ) tagging , named entity recognition , and named entity relation identitfication . The experimental results have shown that the average Fmeasure for word segmentation and POS tagging after correcting errors achieves 92.86 and 90.01 separately.
Moreover , the overall average Fmeasure for 6 kinds of name entities and 14 kinds of named entity relations is 83.08% and 70.46% respectively.
1 Introduction
The investigation for Chinese information extraction is one of the topics of the project COLLATE ( DFKI , 2002) dedicated to building up the German Competence Center for Language Technology . The presented work aims at investigating automatic identification of Chinese named entities ( NEs ) and their relations in a specific domain.
Information Extraction ( IE ) is an innovative language technology for accurately acquiring crucial information from documents . NE recognition is a fundamental IE task , that detects some named constituents in sentences , for instance names of persons , places , organizations , dates , times , and so on . Based on NE recognition , the identification of Named Entity Relation ( NER ) can indicate the types of semantic relationships between identified NEs . e.g ., relationships between person and employed organization ; person and residing place ; person and birthday ; organization and seat , etc . The identified results for NEs and NERs can be provided as a resource for other application systems such as question-answering system . Therefore , these two IE tasks are selected as our investigation emphases.
Chinese has a very different structure from western languages . For example , it has a large character set involving more than 48,000 characters ; there is no space between words in written texts ; and Chinese words have fewer inflections , etc . In the past twenty years there have been significant achievements in IE concerning western languages such as English . Comparing with that , the research on the relevant properties of Chinese for IE , especially for NER , is still insufficient.
Our research focuses on domain-specific IE.
We picked the sports domain , particularly , texts on soccer matches because the number and types of entities , relations and linguistic structures are representative for many applications.
Based on the motivations above mentioned , our goals for the design and implementation of the prototype system called CHINERIS ( Chinese Named Entity and Relation Identification System ) are : ? Establishing an IE computational model for Chinese web texts using hybrid technologies , which should to a great extent meet the requirements of IE for Chinese web texts ; ? Implementing a prototype system based on this IE computational model , which extracts information from Chinese web texts as accurately and quickly as possible ; ? Evaluating the performance of this system in a specific domain.
37 2 System Design
In the model , the IE processing is divided into three stages : ( i ) word segmentation and part-of-speech ( POS ) tagging ; ( ii ) NE recognition ; ( iii ) NER identification . Figure 1 demonstrates a Chinese IE computational model comprised of these three stages . Each component in the system cor-
Figure 1. A threes responds to a stage.
tage Chinese IE computa-
In general , the e first stage has co e di al ., 2000).
Th ication performance for
N defined a hierarchical taxon mentation During the implementation , object-oriented design and programming methods are thoroughly tional model.
accuracy of th nsiderable influence on the performance of the consequent two stages . It has been demonstrated by our experiments ( Yao et al , 2002). In order to reduce unfavorable influence , we utilize a trainable approach ( Brill , 1995) to automatically generate effective rules , by which the first component can repair different errors caused by word segmentation and POS tagging.
At the second stage , there are two kinds of NE constructions to be processed ( Yao et al , 2003).
One is the NEs which involve trigger words ; the other those without trigger words . For the former NEs , a shallow parsing mechanism , i.e ., finite-state cascades ( FSC ) ( Abney , 1996) which are automatically constructed by sets of NE recognition rules , is adopted for reliably identifying different categories of NEs . For the latter NEs , however , some special strategies , such as the valence constraints of domain verbs , the constituent analysis of NE candidates , the global context clues and the analysis for preposition objects etc ., are designed for identifying them.
After the recognition for NEs , NER identification is performed in the last stage . Because of th versity and complexity of NERs , at the same time , considering portability requirement in the identification , we suggest a novel supervised machine learning approach called positive and negative case-based learning ( PNCBL ) used in this stage ( Yao and Uszkoreit , 2005).
The learning in this approach is a variant of memory-based learning ( Daelemans et e goal of that is to capture valuable information from NER and non-NER patterns , which is implicated in different features . Because not all features we predefine are necessary for each NER or non-NER , we should select them by a reasonable measure mode . According to the selection criterion we propose - self-similarity , which is a quantitative measure for the concentrative degree of the same kind of NERs or non-NERs in the corresponding pattern library , the effective feature sets - General-Character Feature ( GCF ) sets for NERs and Individual-Character Feature ( ICF ) sets for non-NERs are built . Moreover , the GCF and ICF feature weighting serve as a proportion determination of feature?s degree of importance for identifying NERs against non-NERs . Subsequently , identification thresholds can also be determined.
Therefore , this approach pursues the improvement of the identif ERs by simultaneously learning two opposite cases , automatically selecting effective multilevel linguistic features from a predefined feature set for each NER and non-NER , and optimally making an identification tradeoff . Further , two other strategies , resolving relationship conflicts and inferring missing relationships , are also integrated in this stage.
Considering the actual requirements for domain knowledge , we omy and constructed conceptual relationships among Object , Movement and Property concept categories under the taxonomy in a lexical sports ontology ( Yao , 2005). Thus , this ontology can be used for the recognition of NEs with special constructions - without trigger words , the determination of NE boundaries , and the provision of feature values as well as the computation of the semantic distance for two concepts during the identification of NERs.
3 System Imple
Word Seg . and
POS Tag.
NE
Recognition
NER
Identification
Error Repair
Resources
Texts from Internet or Disk
Word Seg . and
POS Tag.
Resources
Texts with Word Seg.
and POS Tags
NER Identification
Resources
NE-Recognized Texts
NE Recognition
Resources
Lexical
Ontology
NER-Identified Texts eriments for testing three components . Table 1 shows the experimen-r f these compo-avoid repeated development , we integrate other application system and resource , e.g ., Modern Chinese Word Segmentation and POS Tagging System ( Liu , 2000) and HowNet ( Dong and Dong , 2000) into the system . Additionally , we utilize Prot?g?-2000 ( version 1.9) ( Stanford Medical Informatics , 2003) as a development environment for the implementation of lexical sports ontology.
The prototype system CHINERIS has been implemented in Java . The system can automatically identify 6 types of NEs1 and 14 types of NERs 2 in the sports domain . Furthermore , its runtime efficiency is acceptable and the system user interfaces are friendly.
4 Testing and Evaluation
We have finished three exp tal esults for the performance o nents.
Stage Task ( Total ) Ave . Rec.
(Total)
Ave . Pre.
(Total)
Ave . FM
Word Seg . 95.08 90.74 92.86 1st
POS Tag . 92.39 87.75 90.01 2nd N E Ident . 83.38 82.79 83.08 3rd NER Ident . 78.50 63.92 70.46 Table 1. Performance for the Sy CHINERIS.
In the first experiment , the training set consists of 94 texts including 3473 sentences collected stem from the soccer matches of the Jie Fang Daily ( http://www.jfdaily.com /) in 2001. During manual error-correction , we adopted a double-person annotation method . After training , we obtain error repair rules . They can repair at least one error in the training corpus . The rules in the rule library are ranked according to the errors they correct . The testing set is a separate set that contains 20 texts including 658 sentences . The texts in the entity identification which incl ing learning . They ha 1 Personal Name ( PN ); Date or Time ( DT ); Location Name ( LN ); Team Name ( TN ); Competition Title ( CT ); Personal
Identity ( PI).
2 Person ? Team ( PS_TM ); Person ? Competition ( PS_CP ); Person ? City / Province / Country ( PS_CPC ); Person ? Identification ( PS_ID ); Home Team ? Visiting Team ( HT_VT ); Winning Team ? Losing Team ( WT_LT ); Draw Team ? Draw Team ( DT_DT ); Team ? Competition ( TM_CP ); Team ? City / Province / Country ( TM_CPC ); Identification ? Team ( ID_TM ); Competition ? Date ( CP_DA ); Competition ? Time ( CP_TI ); Competition ? Location ( CP_LOC ); Location ? City / Province /
Country ( LOC_ CPC).
testing set have been randomly chosen from the Jie Fang Daily from May 2002. In the testing , the usage of error repair rules with context constraints has priority over those without context constraints , and the usage of error repair rules for word segmentation has priority over those for POS tagging . Through experimental observation , this processing sequence can ensure that the rules repair many more errors . On the other hand , it can prevent new errors occurring during the repair of existing errors . The results indicate that after the correction , the average Fmeasure of word segmentation has increased from 87.75 % to 92.86%; while that of POS tagging has even increased from 77.47% to 90.01%. That is to say , the performance of both processes has been distinctly enhanced.
In the second experiment , we utilize the same testing set for the error repair component to check the named udes regular and special entity constructions.
The rule sets provided for TN , CT , and PI recognition have 35, 50, and 20 rules respectively . In lexical sports ontology , there are more than 350 domain verbs used for the identification of TN with special constructions . Among six NEs , the average Fmeasure of DT , PI , and CT exceeds 85%. Therefore , it specifies that the identification performance of named entities after adding the special recognition strategies in this component has reached a good level.
In the third experiment , both pattern libraries are established in terms of the annotated texts and lexical sports ontology dur ve 142 (534 NERs ) and 98 (572 non-NERs ) sentence groups respectively . To test the performance of our approach , we randomly choose 32 sentence groups from the Jie Fang Daily in 2002 ( these sentence groups are out of either NER or non-NER pattern library ), which embody 117 different NER candidates . Table 1 shows the total average recall , precision , and Fmeasure for 14 different NERs by positive and negative case-based learning and identification.
Among 14 types of NERs , the highest total average Fmeasure is 95.65 from the relation LOC_CPC and the lowest total average Fmeasure is 34.09 from TM_CPC . The total average Fmeasure is 70.46. In addition , we also compared the performance between the total average recall , precision , and Fmeasure for all NERs only by positive and by positive and negative case-based learning and identification separately . It shows the total average Fmeasure is enhanced from 63.61% to 70.46% as a whole , cases.
From the result , we also realize that the selection of relation features is critical . First , they should be selected from multiple linguistic levels , e.g ap effective for Chinese named y cation in sports domain.
wo constraint sy sit
Es , identi-fic successful for the sample appl is a part of the COLLATE project un-01B , which is supported ry for Education and Research.
g Workshop , pages 815. Prague , Czech Re - Transformation-Based Error-Driven W ans , A . Bosch , J . Zavrel , K . Van der Sloot,
Netherlands.
DF
Z . wNet.
K.
T . . Ding , and G . Erbach . 2002. Correcting 29-36.
T.
),
T.
., morphology , syntax and semantics . Second , they should also embody the crucial information of Chinese language processing , such as word order , the context of words , and particles etc.
Moreover , the proposed self-similarity is a reasonable measure for selecting GCF and ICF for NERs and non-NERs identification respectively.
5 Conclusion
This three-stage IE prototype system CHINERIS is propriate and entit and relation identifi In the first component , it is a beneficial exploration to develop an error repairer which simultaneously enhances the performance of Chinese rd segmentation and POS tagging.
In the second component , we theoretically extend the original definition of Finite State Automata ( FSA ), that is , we use complex mbols rather than atomic constraint symbols.
With this extension , we improve the practicability for the FSC mechanism . At the same time , the new issue for automatically constructing FSC also increases the flexibility of its maintenance.
In order to improve the NE identification performance , some special strategies for the identification of NEs without trigger words are added in this stage , which cannot be recognized by FSC.
In the third component , automatically selecting effectual multilevel linguistic features for each NER and non-NER and learning two oppo-e types of cases simultaneously are two innovative points in the PNCBL approach.
The lexical sports ontology plays an important role in the identification of NEs and NERs , such as determination of the boundary of N ation for NE with special constructons and calculation of similarity for the features ( e.g . semantic distance).
The experimental results for the three components in the prototype system show that the system CHINERIS is ication.
Acknowledgement
This work der contract no . 01INA by the German Minist
References
S . Abney . 1996. Partial Parsing via FiniteState Cascades . In Proceedings of the ESSLLI ?96 Robust
Parsin public.
E . Brill . 1995.
Learning and Natural Language Processing : A Case Study in Part of Speech Tagging . Computational Linguistics , 21(4): 543-565.
. Daelem and A . Vanden Bosch . 2000. TiMBL : Tilburg Memory Based Learner , Version 3.0, Reference Guide . Technical Report ILK-00-01, ILK , Tilburg
University . Tilburg , The http://ilk.kub.nl/~ilk/papers/ilk0001.ps.gz.
KI . 2002. COLLATE : Computational Linguistics and Language Technology for Real Life Applications . DFKI , Saarbr?cken , Germany.
http://collate.dfki . de/.
Dong and Q . Dong . 2000. Ho http://www.keenage.com/zhiwang/e_zhiwang.html.
Liu . 2000. Automatic Segmentation and Tagging for Chinese Text . The Commercial Press . Beijing,
China.
Stanford Medical Informatics . 2003. The Prot?g ? Ontology Editor and Knowledge Acquisition System.
The School of Medicine , Stanford University.
Stanford , USA . http://protege.stanford.edu/.
Yao , W
Word Segmentation and Part-of-Speech Tagging Errors for Chinese Named Entity Recognition . In G.
Hommel and H . Sheng , editors , The Internet Challenge : Technology and Applications , pages Kluwer Academic Publishers . The Netherlands.
Yao , W . Ding and G . Erbach . 2003. CHINERS : A Chinese Named Entity Recognition System for the Sports Domain . In : Proc . of the Second SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing ( ACL 2003 Workshop ), pages 5562. Sapporo , Japan.
T . Yao and H . Uszkoreit . 2005. A Novel Machine Learning Approach for the Identification of Named Entity Relations . In : Proc . of the Workshop on Feature Engineering for Machine Learning in Natural
Language Processing ( ACL 2005 Workshop pages 18. Michigan , USA.
Yao . 2005. A Lexical Ontology for Chinese Information Extraction . In M . Sun and Q . Chen , editors , Proc . of the 8th National Joint Symposium on Computational Linguistics ( JSCL-2005), pages 241-246. Nanjing , China.
40
