Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions , pages 874?881,
Sydney , July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Word Alignment for Languages with Scarce Resources
Using Bilingual Corpora of Other Language Pairs

Haifeng Wang Hua Wu Zhanyi Liu
Toshiba ( China ) Research and Development Center
5/F ., Tower W2, Oriental Plaza , No.1, East Chang An Ave ., Dong Cheng District
Beijing , 100738, China
{wanghaifeng , wuhua , liuzhanyi}@rdc.toshiba.com.cn



Abstract
This paper proposes an approach to improve word alignment for languages with scarce resources using bilingual corpora of other language pairs . To perform word alignment between languages L1 and L2, we introduce a third language L3. Although only small amounts of bilingual data are available for the desired language pair L1L2, largescale bilingual corpora in L1-L3 and L2-L3 are available.
Based on these two additional corpora and with L3 as the pivot language , we build a word alignment model for L1 and
L2. This approach can build a word alignment model for two languages even if no bilingual corpus is available in this language pair . In addition , we build another word alignment model for L1 and L2 using the small L1L2 bilingual corpus . Then we interpolate the above two models to further improve word alignment between L1 and L2. Experimental results indicate a relative error rate reduction of 21.30% as compared with the method only using the small bilingual corpus in L1 and L2.
1 Introduction
Word alignment was first proposed as an intermediate result of statistical machine translation ( Brown et al , 1993). Many researchers build alignment links with bilingual corpora ( Wu , 1997; Och and Ney , 2003; Cherry and Lin , 2003; Zhang and Gildea , 2005). In order to achieve satisfactory results , all of these methods require a largescale bilingual corpus for training . When the largescale bilingual corpus is unavailable , some researchers acquired classbased alignment rules with existing dictionaries to improve word alignment ( Ker and Chang , 1997). Wu et al (2005) used a largescale bilingual corpus in general domain to improve domain-specific word alignment when only a small-scale domain-specific bilingual corpus is available.
This paper proposes an approach to improve word alignment for languages with scarce resources using bilingual corpora of other language pairs . To perform word alignment between languages L1 and L2, we introduce a third language L3 as the pivot language . Although only small amounts of bilingual data are available for the desired language pair L1L2, largescale bilingual corpora in L1-L3 and L2-L3 are available.
Using these two additional bilingual corpora , we train two word alignment models for language pairs L1-L3 and L2-L3, respectively . And then , with L3 as a pivot language , we can build a word alignment model for L1 and L2 based on the above two models . Here , we call this model an induced model . With this induced model , we perform word alignment between languages L1 and L2 even if no parallel corpus is available for this language pair . In addition , using the small bilingual corpus in L1 and L2, we train another word alignment model for this language pair . Here , we call this model an original model . An interpolated model can be built by interpolating the induced model and the original model.
As a case study , this paper uses English as the pivot language to improve word alignment between Chinese and Japanese . Experimental results show that the induced model performs better than the original model trained on the small Chinese-Japanese corpus . And the interpolated model further improves the word alignment results , achieving a relative error rate reduction of the original model.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows . Section 2 discusses the related work.
Section 3 introduces the statistical word alignment models . Section 4 describes the parameter estimation method using bilingual corpora of other language pairs . Section 5 presents the interpolation model . Section 6 reports the experimental results . Finally , we conclude and present the future work in section 7.
2 Related Work
A shared task on word alignment was organized as part of the ACL 2005 Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts ( Martin et al , 2005).
The focus of the task was on languages with scarce resources . Two different subtasks were defined : Limited resources and Unlimited resources . The former subtask only allows participating systems to use the resources provided.
The latter subtask allows participating systems to use any resources in addition to those provided.
For the subtask of unlimited resources , Aswani and Gaizauskas (2005) used a multi-feature approach for many-to-many word alignment on EnglishHindi parallel corpora . This approach performed local word grouping on Hindi sentences and used other methods such as dictionary lookup , transliteration similarity , expected English words , and nearest aligned neighbors . Martin et al (2005) reported that this method resulted in absolute improvements of up to 20% as compared with the case of only using limited resources . Tufis et al (2005) combined two word aligners : one is based on the limited resources and the other is based on the unlimited resources.
The unlimited resource consists of a translation dictionary extracted from the alignment of Romanian and English WordNet . Lopez and Resnik (2005) extended the HMM model by integrating a tree distortion model based on a dependency parser built on the English side of the parallel corpus . The latter two methods produced comparable results with those methods using limited resources . All the above three methods use some language dependent resources such as dictionary , thesaurus , and dependency parser . And some methods , such as transliteration similarity , can only be used for very similar language pairs.
In this paper , besides the limited resources for the given language pair , we make use of large amounts of resources available for other language pairs to address the alignment problem for languages with scarce resources . Our method does not need language-dependent resources or deep linguistic processing . Thus , it is easy to adapt to any language pair where a pivot language and corresponding largescale bilingual corpora are available.
3 Statistical Word Alignment
According to the IBM models ( Brown et al , 1993), the statistical word alignment model can be generally represented as in equation (1).
?= a ' c|f,a ' c|fa , c|fa , ) Pr ( ) Pr ( ) Pr ( (1) Where , and represent the source sentence and the target sentence , respectively c f 1.
In this paper , we use a simplified IBM model 4 ( Al-Onaizan et al , 1999), which is shown in equation (2). This version does not take into account word classes in Brown et al (1993).
))))(()](([ ))()](([( )|( )|( ) Pr ( 0,1 0 00 ? ? ?? ?= > ?= ? == ? ??? +??= ?? ???? ? ??? ? ?= m aj j m aj ij m j aj l i ii m j j j jpjdahj jdahj cftcn pp m ? ? ? ? ?? c|fa , (2) ml , are the lengths of the source sentence and the target sentence respectively.
j is the position index of the target word.
ja is the position of the source word aligned to the jth target word.
i ? is the fertility of . ic 0p , are the fertility probabilities for , and 1p 0c 110 =+ pp .
)| jaj ct(f is the word translation probability.
)|( ii cn ? is the fertility probability.
)( 11 ?? ijd ? is the distortion probability for the head word of the cept.
))((1 jpjd ?> is the distortion probability for the nonhead words of the cept.
1 This paper uses c and f to represent a Chinese sentence and a Japanese sentence , respectively . And e represents an
English sentence.
875 }:{ min )( k k aikih == is the head of cept i.
}:{max )( kj jk aakjp == < .
i ? is the center of cept i.
During the training process , IBM model 3 is first trained , and then the parameters in model 3 are employed to train model 4. For convenience , we describe model 3 in equation (3). The main difference between model 3 and model 4 lies in the calculation of distortion probability.
?? ?? ?== == ? ? ?? ???? ? ??? ? ?= m aj j m j aj l i i l i ii m j j mlajdcft cn pp m 0,11 ),,|()|( ! )|( ) Pr ( 00 ?? ? ? ?? c|fa , (3) 4 Parameter Estimation Using Bilingual
Corpora of Other Language Pairs
As shown in section 3, the word alignment model mainly has three kinds of parameters that must be specified , including the translation probability , the fertility probability , and the distortion probability . The parameters are usually estimated by using bilingual sentence pairs in the desired languages , namely Chinese and Japanese here . In this section , we describe how to estimate the parameters without using the Chinese-Japanese bilingual corpus . We introduce English as the pivot language , and use the ChineseEnglish and English-Japanese bilingual corpora to estimate the parameters of the Chinese-Japanese word alignment model . With these two corpora , we first build ChineseEnglish and English-Japanese word alignment models as described in section 3.
Then , based on these two models , we estimate the parameters of Chinese-Japanese word alignment model . The estimated model is named induced model.
The following subsections describe the method to estimate the parameters of Chinese-Japanese alignment model . For reversed Japa-nese-Chinese word alignment , the parameters can be estimated with the same method.
4.1 Translation Probability
Basic Translation Probability
We use the translation probabilities trained with ChineseEnglish and English-Japanese corpora to estimate the Chinese-Japanese probability as shown in equation (4). In (4), we assume that the translation probability is independent of the Chinese word .
),|(EJ ikj ceft ic )|()|( )|(),|( )|(
CEEJ
CEEJ
CJ ik e kj ik e ikj ij ceteft cetceft cft k k ? ? ?= ?= (4)
Where is the translation probability for Chinese-Japanese word alignment.
is the translation probability trained using the English-Japanese corpus . is the translation probability trained using the Chi-nese-English corpus.
)|(CJ ij cft )|( EJ kj eft )|( CE ik cet
CrossLanguage Word Similarity
In any language , there are ambiguous words with more than one sense . Thus , some noise may be introduced by the ambiguous English word when we estimate the Chinese-Japanese translation probability using English as the pivot language . For example , the English word " bank " has at least two senses , namely : bank1 - a financial organization bank2 - the border of a river
Let us consider the Chinese word : ?? - bank2 ( the border of a river)
And the Japanese word : ?? - bank1 ( a financial organization ) In the ChineseEnglish corpus , there is high probability that the Chinese word "??( bank2)" would be translated into the English word " bank".
And in the English-Japanese corpus , there is also high probability that the English word " bank " would be translated into the Japanese word "? ?( bank1)".
As a result , when we estimate the translation probability using equation (4), the translation probability of "?? ( bank1)" given "?? ( bank2)" is high . Such a result is not what we expect.
In order to alleviate this problem , we introduce cross-language word similarity to improve translation probability estimation in equation (4).
The cross-language word similarity describes how likely a Chinese word is to be translated into a Japanese word with an English word as the pivot . We make use of both the ChineseEnglish corpus and the English-Japanese corpus to calculate the cross language word similarity between a Chinese word c and a Japanese word f given an The ChineseEnglish corpus ; The English-Japanese corpus.
(1) Construct Set 1: identify those ChineseEnglish sentence pairs that include the given Chinese word and English word , and put the English sentences in the pairs into Set 1. c e (2) Construct Set 2: identify those English-Japanese sentence pairs that include the given English word and Japanese word , and put the English sentences in the pairs into Set 2. e f (3) Construct the feature vectors and of the given English word using all other words as context in Set 1 and Set 2, respectively.
CEV EJV >=< ),(, ... ),,(),,( 1122111CE nn ctectecteV >=< ),(, ... ),,(),,( 2222211EJ nn ctectecteV Where is the frequency of the context word . ijct je 0=ijct if does not occur in Set i . je (4) Given the English word e , calculate the cross-language word similarity between the Chinese word and the Japanese word as in equation (5) c f ?? ? ? ? == j j j j j jj ctct ctct
VVefcsim )()( ), cos ();,( (5) Output : The cross language word similarity of the Chinese word c and the Japanese word given the English word );,( efcsim f e
Figure 1. Similarity Calculation
English word e . For the ambiguous English word e , both the Chinese word c and the Japanese word f can be translated into e . The sense of an instance of the ambiguous English word e can be determined by the context in which the instance appears . Thus , the cross-language word similarity between the Chinese word c and the Japanese word f can be calculated according to the contexts of their English translation e . We use the feature vector constructed using the context words in the English sentence to represent the context . So we can calculate the cross-language word similarity using the feature vectors . The detailed algorithm is shown in figure 1. This idea is similar to translation lexicon extraction via a bridge language ( Schafer and Yarowsky , 2002).
For example , the Chinese word "??" and its English translation " bank " ( the border of a river ) appears in the following ChineseEnglish sentence pair : ( a ) ?????????? ( b ) They walked home along the river bank.
The Japanese word "??" and its English translation " bank " ( a financial organization ) appears in the following English-Japanese sentence pair : ( c ) He has plenty of money in the bank.
(d ) ????????????
The context words of the English word " bank " in sentences ( b ) and ( c ) are quite different . The difference indicates the cross language word similarity of the Chinese word "??" and the Japanese word "??" is low . So they tend to have different senses.
Translation Probability Embedded with Cross
Language Word Similarity
Based on the cross language word similarity calculation in equation (5), we reestimate the translation probability as shown in (6). Then we normalize it in equation (7).
The word similarity of the Chinese word "? ? ( bank2)" and the Japanese word " ? ? ( bank1)" given the word English word " bank " is low . Thus , using the updated estimation method , the translation probability of "?? ( bank1)" given "??( bank2)" becomes low.
));,()|()|(( )|('
CEEJ
CJ kjiik e kj ij efcsimceteft cft k ??= ? (6) ?= '
CJ
CJ
CJ )|'(' )|(' )|( f i ij ij cft cft cft (7) 4.2 Fertility Probability The induced fertility probability is calculated as shown in (8). Here , we assume that the probabil-word . ic )|()|( )|(),|( )|(
CEEJ
CEEJ
CJ ik e ki ik e iki ii ceten cetcen cn k k ?= ?= ? ? ? ? ? (8) Where , )|( CJ ii cn ? is the fertility probability for the Chinese-Japanese alignment . )|( EJ ki en ? is the trained fertility probability for the English-
Japanese alignment.
4.3 Distortion Probability in Model 3
With the English language as a pivot language , we calculate the distortion probability of model 3.
For this probability , we introduce two additional parameters : one is the position of English word and the other is the length of English sentence.
The distortion probability is estimated as shown in (9).
)),,|Pr(),,,|Pr ( ),,,,|( Pr ( ),,|, Pr(),,,,|Pr ( ),,|,, Pr ( ),,|( , , ,
CJ mlinmlink mlinkj mlinkmlinkj mlinkj mlijd nk nk nk ? ?= ?= = ? ? ? (9)
Where , is the estimated distortion probability . is the introduced position of an English word . n is the introduced length of an
English sentence.
).,|(CJ mlijd k
In the above equation , we assume that the position probability is independent of the position of the Chinese word and the length of the Chinese sentence . And we assume that the position probability is independent of the length of Japanese sentence.
Thus , we rewrite these two probabilities as follows.
),,,,|Pr ( mlinkj ),,,| Pr ( mlink ),,|(),,| Pr(),,,,|Pr ( EJ mnkjdmnkjmlinkj =? ),,|(),,| Pr(),,,|Pr ( CE nlikdnliknmlik =? For the length probability , the English sentence length n is independent of the word positions i . And we assume that it is uniformly distributed . Thus , we take it as a constant , and rewrite it as follows.
constant),|Pr(),,|Pr ( == mlnmlin
According to the above three assumptions , we ignore the length probability . Equation (9) is rewritten in (10).
),|Pr ( mln ? ?= nk nlikdmnkjd mlijd ,
CEEJ
CJ ),,|(),,|( ).,|( (10) 4.4 Distortion Probability in Model 4 In model 4, there are two parameters for the distortion probability : one for head words and the other for nonhead words.
Distortion Probability for Head Words
The distortion probability for head words represents the relative position of the head word of the i )( 11 ?? ijd ? th cept and the center of the ( i-1)th cept . Let 1??=? ijj ? , then is independent of the absolute position . Thus , we estimate the distortion probability by introducing another relative position j ? ' j ? of English words , which is shown in (11).
? ? ? ????= ?=? '
EJCE,1 1CJ,1 )'|( Pr )'( )( j i jjjd jjd ? (11) Where , )( 1CJ1, ??=? ijjd ? is the estimated distortion probability for head words in Chinese-
Japanese alignment . is the distortion probability for head word in ChineseEnglish alignment.
)'(CE1, jd ? )'|( PrEJ jj ?? is the translation probability of relative Japanese position given relative English position.
In order to simplify , we introduce and and let )'|( PrEJ jj ?? ' j 1'?i ? 1''' ??=? ijj ? , where and are positions of English words . We rewrite ' j 1'?i ? )'|( PrEJ jj ?? in (12).
? ?=? ?=? ?? ?? ?? ?? = ??= ?? '':,' :, 1'1EJ 1'1EJ
EJ 1'1' )'|( Pr )'|( Pr jjj jjj ii ii ii ii jj jj jj ?? ?? ?? ?? (12) The English word in position is aligned to the Japanese word in position , and the English word in position is aligned to the Japanese word in position .
'j j 1'?i ? 1?i?
We assume that and are independent , only depends on , and only depends on . Then can be estimated as shown in (13).
j 1?i ? j ' j 1?i ? 1'?i ? ),'|,( Pr 1'1EJ ?? ii jj ?? ),'|,( Pr 1'1EJEJ 1'1EJ ?? ?? ?= ii ii jj jj ?? ?? (13) Both of the two parameters in (13) represent the position translation probabilities . Thus , we can estimate them from the distortion probability in model 3. is estimated as shown in (14). And can be estimated in the same way . In (14), we also assume that the sentence length distribution is independent of the word position and that it is uniformly distributed.
)'|(PrEJ jj )|( Pr 1'1EJ ?? ii ?? )'|, Pr ( jml ? ? ? = ?= = ml ml ml mljjd jmlmljjd jmljjj ,
EJ ,
EJ ,
EJEJ ),,'|( )'|, Pr (),,'|( )'|,,( Pr)'|(Pr (14) Distortion Probability for Non-Head Words
The distortion probability describes the distribution of the relative position of nonhead words . In the same way , we introduce relative position of English words , and model the probability in (15).
))((1 jpjd ?> ' j ? ? ? > > ????= ?=? '
EJCE,1
CJ,1 )'|( Pr )'( ))(( j jjjd jpjjd (15) ))(( CJ1, jpjjd ?=?> is the estimated distortion probability for the nonhead words in Chinese-Japanese alignment . is the distortion probability for nonhead words in Chinese-
English alignment.
)'(CE1, jd ?> )'|( PrEJ jj ?? is the translation probability of the relative Japanese position given the relative English position.
In fact , has the same interpretation as in (12). Thus , we introduce two parameters and and let , where and are positions of English words . The final distortion probability for nonhead words can be estimated as shown in (16).
)'|(PrEJ jj ?? ' j )'( jp )'('' jpjj ?=? ' j )'( jp )))'(|)(( Pr)'|(Pr )'(())(( ')'(':)'(,' )(:)(,
EJEJ '
CE1,CJ1, ? ? ?=? ?=? ? >> ? ??=?=? jjpjjpj jjpjjpj j jpjpjj jdjpjjd (16) 5 Interpolation Model With the ChineseEnglish and English-Japanese corpora , we can build the induced model for Chi-nese-Japanese word alignment as described in section 4. If we have small amounts of Chinese-Japanese corpora , we can build another word alignment model using the method described in section 3, which is called the original model here.
In order to further improve the performance of Chinese-Japanese word alignment , we build an interpolated model by interpolating the induced model and the original model.
Generally , we can interpolate the induced model and the original model as shown in equation (17).
)(Pr)1( )( Pr ) Pr(
IO c|fa,c|fa , c|fa , ??+?= ?? (17)
Where is the original model trained from the Chinese-Japanese corpus , and is the induced model trained from the ChineseEnglish and English-Japanese corpora.
)(PrO c|fa , )( PrI c|fa , ? is an interpolation weight . It can be a constant or a function of f and . c In both model 3 and model 4, there are mainly three kinds of parameters : translation probability , fertility probability and distortion probability.
These three kinds of parameters have their own interpretation in these two models . In order to obtain finegrained interpolation models , we interpolate the three kinds of parameters using different weights , which are obtained in the same way as described in Wu et al (2005). t ? represents the weights for translation probability . n ? represents the weights for fertility probability.
d3? and d4? represent the weights for distortion probability in model 3 and in model 4, respectively . d4? is set as the interpolation weight for both the head words and the nonhead words.
The above four weights are obtained using a manually annotated heldout set.
6 Experiments
In this section , we compare different word alignment methods for Chinese-Japanese alignment . The " Original " method uses the original model trained with the small Chinese-Japanese corpus . The " Basic Induced " method uses the induced model that employs the basic translation probability without introducing cross-language word similarity . The " Advanced Induced " method uses the induced model that introduces the cross-language word similarity into the calculation of the translation probability . The " Interpolated " method uses the interpolation of the word alignment models in the " Advanced Induced " and " Original " methods.
879 6.1 Data
There are three training corpora used in this paper : Chinese-Japanese ( CJ ) corpus , ChineseEnglish ( CE ) Corpus , and English-Japanese ( EJ ) Corpus . All of these tree corpora are from general domain . The Chinese sentences and Japanese sentences in the data are automatically segmented into words . The statistics of these three corpora are shown in table 1. "# Source Words " and "# Target Words " mean the word number of the source and target sentences , respectively.
Language
Pairs # Sentence
Pairs # Source
Words # Target
Words
CJ 21,977 197,072 237,834
CE 329,350 4,682,103 4,480,034
EJ 160,535 1,460,043 1,685,204
Table 1. Statistics for Training Data
Besides the training data , we also have heldout data and testing data . The heldout data includes 500 Chinese-Japanese sentence pairs , which is used to set the interpolated weights described in section 5. We use another 1,000 Chi-nese-Japanese sentence pairs as testing data , which is not included in the training data and the heldout data . The alignment links in the heldout data and the testing data are manually annotated.
Testing data includes 4,926 alignment links2.
6.2 Evaluation Metrics
We use the same metrics as described in Wu et al (2005), which is similar to those in ( Och and Ney , 2000). The difference lies in that Wu et al (2005) took all alignment links as sure links.
If we use to represent the set of alignment links identified by the proposed methods and to denote the reference alignment set , the methods to calculate the precision , recall , fmeasure , and alignment error rate ( AER ) are shown in equations (18), (19), (20), and (21), respectively.
It can be seen that the higher the fmeasure is , the lower the alignment error rate is . Thus , we will only show precision , recall and AER scores in the evaluation results.
GS
CS || ||
G
CG
S
SS precision ?= (18) || ||
C
CG
S
SS recall ?= (19) 2 For a non one-to-one link , if m source words are aligned to n target words , we take it as one alignment link instead of m?n alignment links.
|||| ||2
CG
CG
SS
SS fmeasure + ?= (20) fmeasure
SS
SS
AER ?=+ ??= 1 |||| ||2
CG (21) 6.3 Experimental Results
We use the heldout data described in section 6.1 to set the interpolation weights in section 5. t ? is set to 0.3, n ? is set to 0.1, d3? for model 3 is set to 0.5, and d4? for model 4 is set to 0.1. With these parameters , we get the lowest alignment error rate on the heldout data.
For each method described above , we perform bidirectional ( source to target and target to source ) word alignment and obtain two alignment results . Based on the two results , we get a result using " refined " combination as described in ( Och and Ney , 2000). Thus , all of the results reported here describe the results of the " refined " combination . For model training , we use the
GIZA ++ toolkit3.
Method Precision Recall AER
Interpolated 0.6955 0.5802 0.3673
Advanced
Induced 0.7382 0.4803 0.4181
Basic
Induced 0.6787 0.4602 0.4515
Original 0.6026 0.4783 0.4667
Table 2. Word Alignment Results
The evaluation results on the testing data are shown in table 2. From the results , it can be seen that both of the two induced models perform better than the " Original " method that only uses the limited Chinese-Japanese sentence pairs . The " Advanced Induced " method achieves a relative error rate reduction of 10.41% as compared with the " Original " method . Thus , with the ChineseEnglish corpus and the English-Japanese corpus , we can achieve a good word alignment results even if no Chinese-Japanese parallel corpus is available . After introducing the cross-language word similarity into the translation probability , the " Advanced Induced " method achieves a relative error rate reduction of 7.40% as compared with the " Basic Induced " method . It indicates that cross-language word similarity is effective in the calculation of the translation probability.
Moreover , the " interpolated " method further improves the result , which achieves relative error 3 It is located at http://www.fjoch.com / GIZA++.html.
880 rate reductions of 12.51% and 21.30% as compared with the " Advanced Induced " method and the " Original " method.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper presented a word alignment approach for languages with scarce resources using bilingual corpora of other language pairs . To perform word alignment between languages L1 and L2, we introduce a pivot language L3 and bilingual corpora in L1-L3 and L2-L3. Based on these two corpora and with the L3 as a pivot language , we proposed an approach to estimate the parameters of the statistical word alignment model . This approach can build a word alignment model for the desired language pair even if no bilingual corpus is available in this language pair . Experimental results indicate a relative error reduction of 10.41% as compared with the method using the small bilingual corpus.
In addition , we interpolated the above model with the model trained on the small L1L2 bilingual corpus to further improve word alignment between L1 and L2. This interpolated model further improved the word alignment results by achieving a relative error rate reduction of 12.51% as compared with the method using the two corpora in L1-L3 and L3-L2, and a relative error rate reduction of 21.30% as compared with the method using the small bilingual corpus in
L1 and L2.
In future work , we will perform more evaluations . First , we will further investigate the effect of the size of corpora on the alignment results.
Second , we will investigate different parameter combination of the induced model and the original model . Third , we will also investigate how simpler IBM models 1 and 2 perform , in comparison with IBM models 3 and 4. Last , we will evaluate the word alignment results in a real machine translation system , to examine whether lower word alignment error rate will result in higher translation accuracy.
References
Yaser Al-Onaizan , Jan Curin , Michael Jahr , Kevin Knight , John Lafferty , Dan Melamed , Franz-Josef Och , David Purdy , Noah A . Smith , and David Yarowsky . 1999. Statistical Machine Translation Final Report . Johns Hopkins University Workshop.
Niraj Aswani and Robert Gaizauskas . 2005. Aligning Words in EnglishHindi Parallel Corpora . In Proc.
of the ACL 2005 Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts : Data-driven Machine Translation and Beyond , pages 115-118.
Peter F . Brown , Stephen A . Della Pietra , Vincent J.
Della Pietra , and Robert L . Mercer . 1993. The Mathematics of Statistical Machine Translation : Parameter Estimation . Computational Linguistics , 19(2): 263-311.
Colin Cherry and Dekang Lin . 2003. A Probability Model to Improve Word Alignment . In Proc . of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( ACL2003), pages 88-95.
Sue J . Ker and Jason S . Chang . 1997. A Class-based Approach to Word Alignment . Computational Linguistics , 23(2): 313-343.
Adam Lopez and Philip Resnik . 2005. Improved HMM Alignment Models for Languages with Scarce Resources . In Proc . of the ACL2005 Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts : Data-driven Machine Translation and Beyond , pages 83-86.
Joel Martin , Rada Mihalcea , and Ted Pedersen . 2005.
Word Alignment for Languages with Scarce Resources . In Proc . of the ACL2005 Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts : Data-driven Machine Translation and Beyond , pages 65-74.
Charles Schafer and David Yarowsky . 2002. Inducing Translation Lexicons via Diverse Similarity Measures and Bridge Languages . In Proc . of the 6th Conference on Natural Language Learning 2002 ( CoNLL2002), pages 17.
Dan Tufis , Radu Ion , Alexandru Ceausu , and Dan Stefanescu . 2005. Combined Word Alignments . In Proc . of the ACL2005 Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts : Data-driven Machine Translation and Beyond , pages 107-110.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney . 2000. Improved Statistical Alignment Models . In Proc . of the 38th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( ACL2000), pages 440-447.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney . 2003. A Systematic Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment Models . Computational Linguistics , 29(1):19-51.
Dekai Wu . 1997. Stochastic Inversion Transduction Grammars and Bilingual Parsing of Parallel Corpora . Computational Linguistics , 23(3):377-403.
Hua Wu , Haifeng Wang , and Zhanyi Liu . 2005.
Alignment Model Adaptation for Domain-Specific Word Alignment . In Proc . of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( ACL2005), pages 467-474.
Hao Zhang and Daniel Gildea . 2005. Stochastic Lexicalized Inversion Transduction Grammar for Alignment . In Proc . of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( ACL2005), pages 475-482.
881
