Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions , pages 555?562,
Sydney , July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Modeling Adjectives in Computational Relational Lexica

Palmira Marrafa
Department of Linguistics , Faculty of Arts,
University of Lisbon and
CLG ? Group for the Computation of Lexical
and Grammatical Knowledge,
Center of Linguistics ? University of Lisbon,
Avenida Professor Gama Pinto , 2
1649-003 Lisbon Portugal
palmira.marrafa@netcabo.pt
Sara Mendes
CLG ? Group for the Computation of Lexical
and Grammatical Knowledge
Center of Linguistics ? University of Lisbon
Avenida Professor Gama Pinto , 2
1649-003 Lisbon , Portugal
sara.mendes@clul.ul.pt

Abstract
In this paper we propose a small set of lexical conceptual relations which allow to encode adjectives in computational relational lexica in a principled and integrated way . Our main motivation comes from the fact that adjectives and certain classes of verbs , related in a way or another with adjectives , do not have a satisfactory representation in this kind of lexica . This is due to a great extent to the heterogeneity of their semantic and syntactic properties . We sustain that such properties are mostly derived from the relations holding between adjectives and other POS . Accordingly , our proposal is mainly concerned with the specification of appropriate cross-POS relations to encode adjectives in lexica of the type considered here.
1 Introduction
As well known , the experiment conducted by George Miller on the mental lexicon properties in the early 80s pointed out that lexical meaning is derived from a set of lexical and conceptual relations among concepts . Subsequently , a computational lexicon conceived as a semantic network has been built ( the Princeton WordNet ( Miller , 1990; Fellbaum , 1998)). Given its psychological plausibility and its crucial role for applications like machine translation , information retrieval and language learning systems , among many others , this relational lexicon model is being extensively adopted for machine lexical knowledge representations , playing a leading role in this field.
One of the most salient undertaking in this domain is EuroWordNet ( Vossen , 1998), a multilingual database which stores wordnets for several European languages that follow the same main lines as the Princeton WordNet ( Miller , 1990; Fellbaum , 1998) and are interrelated amongst them.
EuroWordNet wordnets follow the Princeton WordNet model , but they are richer concerning both the number and the nature of conceptual relations.
The work depicted here programmatically adopts the EuroWordNet framework.
In general terms , it deals with the specifications for an accurate modeling of lexical knowledge in a EuroWordNet wordnet-like database for Portuguese ( WordNet.PT , henceforth ), specifically focusing on the lexical semantics of adjectives.
Although WordNet.PT ( Marrafa , 2001; Marrafa , 2002) is being developed in the general EuroWordNet framework , basic research has been carried out on Portuguese in order to guarantee the WordNet.PT accuracy . This work has already led to some changes and new directions ( cf . Marrafa et al , (2006) and Amaro et al , (2006), for instance).
In this paper we propose a small set of new relations which allow a strongly empirical motivated encoding of the major POS in Word-Net.PT , despite the fact that we particularly focus on adjectives . The empirical issues at stake are described in section 2. In section 3 we discuss the strategies adopted in previous work carried out both in WordNet and EuroWordNet frameworks , in order to make their shortcomings apparent . In section 4 we present our proposal tion 5 presents some results concerning the encoding of adjectives in WordNet.PT . We conclude the paper with some final remarks.
2 Empirical Issues
Adjective semantic analysis and representation is far from being a trivial issue , as adjectives show a very particular linguistic behavior , namely in what concerns sense change depending on linguistic context . Being so , there are several different typologies and classifications of adjectives in the literature : semantic based classifications , syntactic based classifications , classifications regarding the relation holding between the adjective and the modified noun , and so on.
As our work on this issue progresses , it has become clear that only a combination of syntactic and semantic criteria can offer interesting insights concerning adjective linguistic behavior and the identification of relevant common features , which may set the basis for an accurate modeling of this POS in computational relational lexica . In this section we will briefly look at some of the main adjective classifications.
Regarding the way adjectives relate to the noun they modify , we consider two classes : property ascribing adjectives ( in (1)), which add a new restriction to the properties introduced by the modified noun ; and reference modifying adjectives ( in (2)), which behave like a semantic operator , taking the reference of the modified noun as its argument1.
(1) o livro azul ? the blue book ? (2) o diamante falso ? the fake diamond ? Adjectives like falso ( fake ), for instance , deal with concepts instead of real or referential objects , showing how a concept applies to a particular object . These adjectives constitute a closed class with very particular properties , which makes them somewhat close to semantic operators . In this work we will therefore focus on property ascribing adjectives.
1 This distinction between property ascribing adjectives and reference modifying adjectives is basically equivalent to the one used in the SIMPLE project ( Lenci et al , 2000) ( extensional vs . intensional adjectives , following Chierchia and McConnel-Ginet (1990)) to address the semantics of adjectives . This distinction is also included in the EAGLES recommendations for a semantic typology of adjectives.
Demonte (1999) classifies property ascribing adjectives based on their intrinsic meaning , a classification combining syntactic and semantic criteria to determine which adjectives belong to which class . Two main subclasses are considered : descriptive adjectives and relational adjectives . Each of these classes displays specific semantic and syntactic properties.
In languages like Portuguese , descriptive adjectives can occur both in attributive and predicative contexts , while relational adjectives occur almost exclusively in attributive contexts2. Both prenominal and postnominal positions are possible for descriptive adjectives in attributive contexts . Relational adjectives , on the contrary , can only occur in postnominal position . Finally , descriptive adjectives are gradable , i.e . they can cooccur with degree adverbs , which is not the case for relational adjectives . However , these criteria are not always sufficient to make a clearcut distinction between relational and descriptive adjectives . Demonte (1999) proposes some additional criteria in order to make a more accurate distinction between these adjectives : their occurrence in comparative structures , and the formation of polarity systems.
(3) a . O sabor desta laranja ? mais doce do que o daquela.
? this orange taste is sweeter than that one's ? b . o rapaz alto / o rapaz baixo ? the tall boy / the short boy ? (4) a . * Este sabor ? mais mineral do que aquele.
? this taste is more mineral than that one ? b . o sabor mineral / * o sabor amineral ? the mineral taste / the amineral taste ? But most of all , and besides all the syntactical contrasts we have mentioned above , there is a clear contrast in the way these two adjective classes relate to the noun they modify . Descriptive adjectives ascribe a single property , setting a value for an attribute , whereas relational adjectives introduce a set of properties.
(5) o pr?dio alto ? the high building ? 2 Predicative contexts with relational adjectives are generally ruled out in Portuguese . Nonetheless , some specific contexts , like contrastive contexts , for instance , seem to license predicative uses of relational adjectives : ( I ) As pr?ximas elei??es s?o aut?rquicas , n?o s?o presidenciais.
? next election will be autarchic , not presidential ? ? the alimentary industry ? Looking at (5) and (6), we see that , while alto ( high ) sets the value of the height attribute of pr?dio ( building ) to high , alimentar ( alimentary ) does not ascribe a single property , but a set of properties to ind?stria ( industry ). Moreover , this set of properties corresponds to the main features describing another noun ? alimento ( food ) in the example above . In fact , the way properties are ascribed to the modified nouns in (5) and in (6) are quite different . Ascribing a singular property usually corresponds to an incidence relation of this property in the nominal referent , while ascribing sets of properties usually entails more complex and diversified semantic relations.
However , despite the relevance of the descrip-tive/relational dichotomy , it cannot account for the following contrasts : (7) a . * Ele viu a Maria alta.
? He saw Mary tall ? b . Ele viu a Maria triste.
? He saw Mary sad?.

Both alta and triste are descriptive adjectives , but they do not behave in the same way regarding secondary predication.
We can refine the classification , considering , for instance , the opposition between accidental properties and permanent or inherent properties ( this distinction goes back to Milsark (1974; 1977) and Carlson (1977)). According to this distinction , the property denoted by alta ( tall ) belongs to the latter class and the property denoted by triste ( sad ) to the former one . However , as pointed out by Marrafa (2004) and previous work , the characterization of adjectives on the basis of this dichotomy is not straightforward , since certain adjectives are ambiguous with regard to those properties , as it is the case of triste ( sad ). In the example above triste ( sad ) denotes an accidental property , but in an expression like um livro triste ( a sad book ) it denotes a permanent property.
Intuitively , we can say that triste ( sad ) expresses a state of tristeza ( sadness ), but we let the discussion of the status of this relation out of the scope of this paper.
Nevertheless , this kind of adjectives is of great importance to model telic verbs . The semantics of telic verbs involves a change of state of their theme argument , i.e . the subevent that closes the whole event is an atomic event , ( a state ) that affects the theme and is different from its initial state . As argued in Marrafa (2005) and previous work , by default , verbs like lavar ( to wash ) are associated to the following Lexical-Conceptual Structure ( LCS ? in Pustejovsky (1991)): (8) [ T [ P act(x,y)and ~ Q(y )], [ eQ(y )]] T:transition , P:process , e : event , Q : atomic event When syntactically realized , the telic subevent generally corresponds to an adjectival constituent , like in the example below : (9) Ele lavou a camisa bem lavada.
' He washed the shirt well washed'
In (9) the absence of the telic expression bem lavada ( well washed ) does not induce ungrammaticality . However , in the case of verbs like tornar ( to make ), it seems impossible to assign a value to Q independently of the telic expression.
(10) a . Ele tornou a Maria triste.
? He made Mary sad ? b . * Ele tornou a Maria.
' He made Mary'
Along the lines of Marrafa (1993) and further work , verbs like tornar ( to make ) are assumed here to be LCS deficitary , the telic expression filling the gap of the LCS of the verb.
As shown below , the troponyms of these verbs incorporate the telic state : (12) a . Ele entristeceu a Maria.
' He saddened Mary ' b . * Ele entristeceu a Maria triste.
' He saddened Mary sad'
The grammaticality contrast above is due to the fact that entristecer ( to sadden ) incorporates the telic state . This justifies that this verb can be paraphrased by tornar triste ( to make sad).
In this section we have mainly focused on property ascribing adjectives . We have considered two main subclasses , descriptive and relational adjectives , briefly presenting their syntactic and semantic behavior with regard to gradability , formation of polarity systems and their occurrence in predicative and attributive ( both pronominally and postnominally ) contexts and comparative structures . We have also addressed the issue of adjective relation with the noun they modify . Different adjective behavior regarding secondary predication is also discussed and analyzed in terms of the opposition between acci-discussed in this section should be encoded in computational relational lexica such as wordnets.
3 Adjectives in WordNet and in EuroWordNet Hyponymy is the main structuring relation both in WordNet and in EuroWordNet . However , the semantic organization of adjectives is entirely different from that of other POS : nothing like the hierarchies of hyponymic ( in the semantic organization of nouns ) and troponymic relations ( in the semantic organization of verbs ) is available for adjectives . Even if it is possible to find some small local hierarchies , hypero-nymy/hyponymy is far from being the crucial semantic relation in the organization of adjectives in relational lexical databases such as wordnets.
However , some authors working within the EuroWordNet framework have reconsidered the possibility of encoding hyponymy for adjectives.
Hamp and Feldweg (1998), in the development of GermaNet , abandon the cluster organization of WordNet in favor of a hierarchical structuring of adjectives , arguing for a uniform treatment of all POS . Even though taxonomic chains of adjectives yield rather flat in comparison to those of nouns and verbs , these authors claim to derive more structural information from these small taxonomies than from clusters , as they seek to eliminate what they consider to be the ? rather fuzzy concept of indirect antonyms ?. Even though the concept of indirect antonymy is not completely clear , it is not obvious to us why this fact should entail that adjectives must show a hierarchical organization instead.
In ItalWordNet , Alonge et al (2000) also organize adjectives into classes sharing a superordinate . These classes correspond to adjectives sharing some semantic features , and are generally rather flat . These authors argue for the possibility of inferring semantic preferences and syntactic characteristics of adjectives found in the same taxonomy . The SIMPLE project addresses the semantics of adjectives in a similar way , identifying a set of common features relevant for classifying and describing adjective behavior . However , as noted by Peters and Peters (2000), even though similarities exist ? adjectives belonging to the same semantic class may differ from each other in numerous ways ?, i.e . the classes established in this way are not homogeneous.
In WordNet , descriptive and relational adjectives are distinguished , first , by being encoded in separate files , and second , by the relations holding between synsets.
Descriptive adjectives are organized in clusters of synsets , each cluster being associated by semantic similarity to a focal adjective which is linked to a contrasting cluster through an antonymy relation . Therefore , antonymy is the basic semantic relation used in WordNet to encode descriptive adjectives . As argued for in Miller (1998), this cluster organization of adjectives seems to mirror psychological principles . In fact , this organization is clearly motivated if we recognize that these adjectives main function regards the expression of attributes , and that an important number of attributes are bipolar.
Relational adjectives , on the other hand , do not have antonyms . Therefore , they cannot be organized in opposite clusters . As pointed out by Levi (1978), the intrinsic meaning of these adjectives is something along the following lines : ? of , relating/pertaining to , associated with ? some noun . The way these adjectives are encoded in WordNet mirrors this as it links relational adjectives to the nouns they relate to.
In GermaNet a distinct treatment of relational and descriptive adjectives is abandoned , as the distinction between these two classes is considered to be ? not at all clear ?. Nonetheless , the WordNet strategy for distinguishing between different adjective classes is maintained : listing lexical items in different files3.
As pointed out in the previous section , even if the distinction between these two classes is not always clearcut , testing adjectives against the set of syntactic and semantic criteria presented in section 2 allows us to distinguish descriptive from relational adjectives . We consider that this distinction can be mirrored in the database via the semantic relations expressed in the network , adjective listing in different files not being therefore necessary . In order to do this we propose several cross-POS relations , since in the EuroWordNet model , unlike what happens in WordNet where each POS forms a separate system , it is possible to relate lexical items belonging to different POS . Such an approach has the 3 GermaNet classifies the adjectives into 15 semantic classes , following the classes proposed by Hundsnurscher and Splett (1982), with some minor changes : perceptional , spatial , temporality-related , motion-related , mate-rial-related , weather-related , body-related , mood-related , spirit-related , behaviour-related , social-related , quantity-related , relational and general adjectives . One special class is added for pertainyms.
558 advantage of coping with adjective representation in lexical semantic databases without using strategies external to the lexical model , such as a priori semantic classes or separate files corresponding to different classes.
4 Relating adjectives , nouns and verbs
It is undeniable that important structural information can be extracted from the hierarchical organization of lexical items , namely of nouns and verbs . However , extending wordnets to all the main POS involves a revision of certain commonly used relations and the specification of several cross-POS relations.
We previously mentioned that adjectives show a very particular semantic organization . Thus , encoding adjectives in wordnets calls for the specification of a number of cross-POS semantic relations . Here we use these cross-POS semantic relations to mirror adjectives main features in wordnet-like databases , which allows us to make adjective classes emerge from the relations expressed in the network.
According to the strategies discussed in Mendes (2006), we present here the relations we argue are appropriate to encode adjectives and show how they conform to some complex phenomena.
4.1 Relating Adjectives and Nouns
To put it somewhat simplistically , descriptive adjectives ascribe a value of an attribute to a noun . We link each descriptive adjective to the attribute it modifies via the semantic relation characterizes with regard to/can be characterized by4. Thus , instead of linking adjectives amongst themselves by a similarity relation , following what is done in WordNet , all adjectives modifying the same attribute are linked to the noun that lexicalizes this attribute . This way , and in combination with the antonymy relation , we obtain the cluster effect argued to be the basis of the organization of adjectives ( Miller , 1998; Fellbaum et al 1993), without having to encode it directly in the database.
As shown by word association tests , antonymy is also a basic relation in the organization of descriptive adjectives . Nonetheless , this relation does not correspond to conceptual opposition , which is one of the semantic relations used for 4 This semantic relation is very close to the is a value of/attributes relation used in WordNet . We have changed its label in order to make it more straightforward to the common user.
the definition of adjective clusters . We argue that conceptual opposition does not have to be explicitly encoded in wordnets , since it is possible to infer it from the combination of synonymy and antonymy relations ( see Mendes (2006) for more details).
Concerning relational adjectives , even though they are also property ascribing adjectives , they entail more complex and diversified relations between the set of properties they introduce and the modified noun , often pointing to the denotation of another noun ( cf . section 2). We use the is related to relation to encode this.
Therefore , the characterizes with regard to/can be characterized by and the antonymy relations , for descriptive adjectives , and the is related to relation for relational adjectives , allows us to encode the basic features of these adjectives in computational relational lexica such as wordnets , while making it possible to derive membership to these classes from the relations expressed in the network.
Another issue regarding adjectives is that they have a rather sparse net of relations . We introduce a new relation to encode salient characteristics of nouns : is characteristic of/has as a characteristic to be . These characteristics are often expressed by adjectival expressions . Although in terms of lexical knowledge we can discuss the status of this relation , it regards crucial information for many wordnetbased applications , namely those using inference systems , allowing for richer and clearer synsets.
Also , it may allow for deducing semantic domains from the database , as it makes it possible to identify the typical semantic domains of application of adjectives . Research on the classes and semantic domains emerging from the relations expressed in the database is still ongoing.
Thus , the combination of these relations allows us to encode a less sparse net of adjectives.
Besides the importance of having a more dense net from the point of view of wordnetbased applications , as mentioned above , this is also crucial with regard to relational lexica such as wordnets themselves , as the meaning of each unit is determined by the set of relations it holds with other units . Thus , a denser network of relations allows for richer and clearer synsets . Fig . 1 illustrates this idea , presenting an example of the way adjectives are being encoded in Word-
Net.PT.
559
Figure 1. Fragment showing relations between adjectives and nouns5 4.2 Relating Adjectives and Verbs We also introduce new semantic relations to encode telic verbs in the database ( on this issue see also Marrafa , 2005; Amaro et al , 2006).
As shown in section 2, the facts render evident that the representation of LCS deficitary telic verbs has to include information regarding the telic expression . Obviously , it would not be adequate to overtly include in the synset al the expressions that can integrate the predicate , among other reasons , because they seem to constitute an open set . Rather , we claim that we can capture the telicity of these verbs by including a new relation in the set of internal relations of wordnets : the telic subevent relation , as exemplified below.
(13) { make } has_telic_sub-event { state } { state } is_telic_sub-event_of{make}5 ( defeasible)6 Relating make to state by means of this relation , we capture the telic properties of the verb and let the specific nature of the final state underspecified . This way , we also account for the weakness of the verb selection restrictions . As expected , we can also use this relation to encode telicity in the case of the troponyms of the class of verbs discussed in section 2.

WordNet synsets (2.1 version).
6 The relation is not obligatory in this direction.
In these cases , we use the telic subevent relation to relate the verb to the expression corresponding to the incorporated telic information : (14) { sadden } has_telic_sub-event { sad } { sad } is_telic_sub-event of { sadden } ( defeasable ) The global solution is schematically presented below : Figure 2. Relations between adjectives and verbs As shown , the telic subevent relation straightforwardly allows the encoding of lexical telicity in wordnets , in accordance with the empirical evidence.
It should be noticed that the existing subevent relation in the EuroWordNet framework is different from the relation proposed here . It only stands for lexical entailment involving temporal proper inclusion . Therefore , it does not account for the geometry of the event . On the contrary , the telic subevent relation regards the atomic subevent that is the ending point of the global event.
{make } { sadden } is hypernym of is hypernym of { state } { sad } has telic subevent is telic subevent of has telic subevent is telic subevent of is antonym of ( adj){young1} ( adj){old1} is characteristic of characterizes with regard to ( n){age1} is hypernym of ( n){kid5} ( adj){alimentary1} ( adj){caprine1} ( adj){creeping1} ( adj){biped1, two-footed1} ( adj){quadruped1, four-footed1} is characteristic of ( n){snake1} ( n){snail1} ( n){slug3} characterizes with regard to ( n){locomotion1} ( n){fare1,feeding1} characterizes with regard to characterizes with regard to is related to ( adj){herbivorous1} ( adj){carnivorous1} is near-antonym of is characteristic of ( n){ruminant1} is characteristic of ( n){goat1} is hypernym of is related to As previously mentioned , the proposal presented in this paper is mainly concerned with the specification of appropriate cross-POS relations to encode adjectives in computational relational lexica.
In order to test whether the set of relations presented here is appropriate and allows the encoding of adjectives in wordnet-like lexica , we have introduced a selection of Portuguese adjectives in WordNet.PT.
In the first phase of the WordNet.PT project mostly nouns were encoded in the database.
Thus , we have mainly focused on the encoding of relations between adjectives and nouns7. Table 1 presents the number of entries and relations specified at the present stage.
total number of adjectives 1462 synonymy relation 252 antonymy relation 134 near-antonymy relation 40 is related to relation 331 is characteristic of relation 1293 characterizes with regard to relation 261 total number of relations 2311 Table1. Statistics concerning the encoding of adjectives in WordNet.PT Besides the discussion presented above , the implemented data , being already a representative sample , show that the cross-POS relations proposed here effectively allow for a finegrained encoding of adjectives in relational lexica ( specifically in wordnet-like lexica ) through the specification of a denser network of relations.
6 Conclusion
In this paper we argue that the semantics of adjectives can be appropriately captured in word-net-like lexica by means of the implementation of a small set of new relations , which have a strong linguistic motivation and preserve the coherence of the model.
We focus on property ascribing adjectives and we distinguish between descriptive and relational adjectives . Besides the relevance of this dichotomy , we also address the opposition between accidental and permanent properties , as adjective association to certain kind of properties determines their syntactic and semantic behav-already being implemented at the current stage.
ior , namely with regard to secondary predication.
Here , we model these distinctions in Word-Net.PT via cross-POS relations : characterizes with regard to/can be characterized by to model descriptive adjectives introducing permanent properties ; has_telic_subevent/is_telic_subevent to model descriptive adjectives associated to accidental properties ; and the is related to to model relational adjectives.
Moreover , we make apparent that increasing the expressive power of the system has an important impact in precision concerning the specifications of all POS , mainly induced by the cross-
POS relations.
This way , we provide a simple and integrated solution for a complex and heterogeneous problem.
7 Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Funda??o para a Ci?ncia e Tecnologia who has partially funded the research presented in this paper ( grant SFRH/BD/8524/2002). We also have to thank Instituto Cam?es for the support it has been giving to our research in computational relational lexica.
References
A . Alonge , F . Bertagna , N . Calzolari , A . Roventini and A . Zampoli . 2000. Encoding information on adjectives in a lexical-semantic net for computational applications . Proceedings of NAACL 2000.
Seattle , pp . 42-49.
R . Amaro , R . P . Chaves , P . Marrafa and S . Mendes.
2006. Enriching wordnets with new Relations and with event and argument structures . Proceedings of CICLing 2006 ? Conferences on Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing . Mexico City , Mexico , pp . 28-40.
G . Carlson . 1977. Reference to Kinds in English , PhD dissertation , University of Massachusetts-Amherst.
G . Chierchia and S . McConnel-Ginet . 1990. Meaning and Grammar : an Introduction to Semantics,
Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press.
V . Demonte . 1999. El Adjectivo : classes y usos . La posici?n del adjectivo en el sintagma nominal . in I.
Bosque and V . Demonte ( orgs .) Gram?tica Descriptiva de la Lengua Espa?ola . volume 1. Madrid:
Espasa.
EAGLES Lexicon Interest Group . 1998. Preliminary Recommendations on Semantic Encoding Interim
Report.
C . Fellbaum , D . Gross and K . J . Millar . 1993. Adjectives in WordNet . in Miller et al , Five papers on Laboratory , Princeton University , pp . 26?39.
C . Fellbaum . 1998 A Semantic Network of English : The Mother of all WordNets . in P . Vossen ( ed .) EuroWordNet : A Multilingual Database with Lexical Semantic Networks . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers , pp . 137-148.
B . Hamp and H . Feldweg . 1997. GermaNet ? a Lexical Semantic Net for German . Proceedings of ACL workshop on Automatic Information Extraction and Building of Lexical Semantic Resources for
NLP Applications . Madrid.
A . Lenci , N . Bel , F . Busa , N . Calzolari , E . Gola , M.
Monachini , A . Ogonoski , I . Peters . W . Peters , N.
Ruimy , M . Villegas & A . Zampolli . 2000. SIMPLE - A General Framework for the Development of Multilingual Lexicons . in T . Fontenelle ( ed .) International Journal of Lexicography . volume 13. pp.
249-263. Oxford University Press.
J . N . Levi . 1978. The Syntax and Semantic of complex nominals , New York : Academic Press.
P . Marrafa . 1993. Predica??o Secund?ria e Predicados Complexos : Modeliza??o e An?lise , PhD . dissertation , Lisbon , University of Lisbon.
P . Marrafa . 2001. WordNet do Portugu?s : uma base de dados de conhecimento lingu?stico , Lisboa:
Instituto Cam?es.
P . Marrafa . 2002. Portuguese WordNet : general architecture and internal semantic relations . D.E.L.T.A ., 18.
P . Marrafa . 2004. Modelling Constituency and Predication in Portuguese . Revista PaLavra . volume 12 ( special issue : Lingu?stica Computacional ), pp.
106-118.
P . Marrafa . 2005. The Representation of Complex Telic Predicates in WordNets : the Case of Lexical-Conceptual Structure Deficitary Verbs . Research on Computing Science . volume 12, pp . 109?116.
P . Marrafa , R . Amaro , R . P . Chaves , S . Lourosa , C.
Martins and S . Mendes . 2006. WordNet.PT new directions . Proceedings of GWC?06: 3rd International Wordnet Conference . Jeju Island , Korea.
S . Mendes . 2006. Adjectives in WordNet.PT . Proceedings of the GWA 2006 ? Global WordNet Association Conference . Jeju Island , Korea.
G . A . Miller . 1990. WordNet : an online Lexical Database . Special Issue of International Journal of
Lexicography . volume 3, n ? 4.
K . J . Miller . 1998. Modifiers in WordNet . in C . Fellbaum ( ed .) WordNet : an electronic lexical database . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press , pp . 47-68.
G . Milsark . 1974. Existential Sentences in English.
PhD dissertation , MIT.
G . Milsark . 1977. Toward an Explanation of Certain Pecularities of the Existencial Construction in English . Linguistic Analysis , 3, pp . 1-29.
I . Peters and W . Peters . 2000. The Treatment of Adjectives in SIMPLE : Theoretical Observations.
Proceedings of LREC 2000.
J . Pustejovsky . 1991. The Syntax of Event Structure.
Cognition , 41, pp . 47?81.
P . Vossen . 1998. ( ed .) EuroWordNet : A Multilingual Database with Lexical Semantic Networks , Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers.
562
