Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions , pages 571?578,
Sydney , July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
ARE : Instance Splitting Strategies for Dependency Relation-based
Information Extraction
Mstislav Maslennikov Hai-Kiat Goh Tat-Seng Chua
Department of Computer Science
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
{maslenni , gohhaiki , chuats }@ comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Information Extraction ( IE ) is a fundamental technology for NLP . Previous methods for IE were relying on cooccurrence relations , soft patterns and properties of the target ( for example , syntactic role ), which result in problems of handling paraphrasing and alignment of instances . Our system ARE ( Anchor and Relation ) is based on the dependency relation model and tackles these problems by unifying entities according to their dependency relations , which we found to provide more invariant relations between entities in many cases . In order to exploit the complexity and characteristics of relation paths , we further classify the relation paths into the categories of ? easy ?, ? average ? and ? hard ?, and utilize different extraction strategies based on the characteristics of those categories . Our extraction method leads to improvement in performance by 3% and 6% for MUC4 and MUC6 respectively as compared to the state-of-art
IE systems.
1 Introduction
Information Extraction ( IE ) is one of the fundamental problems of natural language processing.
Progress in IE is important to enhance results in such tasks as Question Answering , Information Retrieval and Text Summarization . Multiple efforts in MUC series allowed IE systems to achieve near-human performance in such domains as biological ( Humphreys et al , 2000), terrorism ( Kaufmann , 1992; Kaufmann , 1993) and management succession ( Kaufmann , 1995).
The IE task is formulated for MUC series as filling of several predefined slots in a template . The terrorism template consists of slots Perpetrator , Victim and Target ; the slots in the management succession template are Org , PersonIn , PersonOut and Post . We decided to choose both terrorism and management succession domains , from MUC4 and MUC6 respectively , in order to demonstrate that our idea is applicable to multiple domains.
Paraphrasing of instances is one of the crucial problems in IE . This problem leads to data sparseness in situations when information is expressed in different ways . As an example , consider the excerpts ? Terrorists attacked victims ? and ? Victims were attacked by unidentified terrorists ?. These instances have very similar semantic meaning.
However , context-based approaches such as Autoslog-TS by Riloff (1996) and Yangarber et al (2002) may face difficulties in handling these instances effectively because the context of entity ? victims ? is located on the left context in the first instance and on the right context in the second . For these cases , we found that we are able to verify the context by performing dependency relation parsing ( Lin , 1997), which outputs the word ? victims ? as an object in both instances , with ? attacked ? as a verb and ? terrorists ? as a subject . After grouping of same syntactic roles in the above examples , we are able to unify these instances.
Another problem in IE systems is word alignment . Insertion or deletion of tokens prevents instances from being generalized effectively during learning . Therefore , the instances ? Victims were attacked by terrorists ? and ? Victims were recently attacked by terrorists ? are difficult to unify . The common approach adopted in GRID by Xiao et al (2003) is to apply more stable chunks such as noun phrases and verb phrases . Another recent approach by Cui et al (2005) utilizes soft patterns for probabilistic matching of tokens . However , a longer insertion leads to a more complicated structure , as in the instance ? Victims , living near the shop , went out for a walk and were attacked by terrorists?.
Since there may be many inserted words , both approaches may also be inefficient for this case . Similar to the paraphrasing problem , the word alignment problem may be handled with dependency relations in many cases . We found that the relation subject-verb-object for words ? victims ?, ? attacked ? and ? terrorists ? remains invariant for the above two instances.
Before IE can be performed , we need to identify sentences containing possible slots . This is which we call anchors or anchor cues . However , natural texts tend to have diverse terminologies , which require semantic features for generalization.
These features include semantic classes , Named Entities ( NE ) and support from ontology ( for example , synsets in Wordnet ). If such features are predefined , then changes in terminology ( for instance , addition of new terrorism organization ) will lead to a loss in recall . To avoid this , we exploit automatic mining techniques for anchor cues . Examples of anchors are the words ? terrorists ? or ? guerrilla ? that signify a possible candidate for the
Perpetrator slot.
From the reviewed works , we observe that the inefficient use of relations causes problems of paraphrasing and alignment and the related data sparseness problem in current IE systems . As a result , training and testing instances in the systems often lack generality . This paper aims to tackle these problems with the help of dependency rela-tion-based model for IE . Although dependency relations provide invariant structures for many instances as illustrated above , they tend to be efficient only for short sentences and make errors on long distance relations . To tackle this problem , we classify relations into ? simple ?, ? average ? and ? hard ? categories , depending on the complexity of the dependency relation paths . We then employ different strategies to perform IE in each category.
The main contributions of our work are as follows . First , we propose a dependency relation based model for IE . Second , we perform classification of instances into several categories based on the complexity of dependency relation structures , and employ the action promotion strategy to tackle the problem of long distance relations.
The remaining parts of the paper are organized as follows . Section 2 discusses related work and Section 3 introduces our approach for constructing ARE . Section 4 introduces our method for splitting instances into categories . Section 5 describes our experimental setups and results and , finally , Section 6 concludes the paper.
2 Related work
There are several research directions in Information Extraction . We highlight a few directions in IE such as case frame based modeling in PALKA by Kim and Moldovan (1995) and CRYSTAL by Soderland et al (1995); rule-based learning in Autoslog-TS by Riloff et al (1996); and classifica-tion-based learning by Chieu et al (2002). Although systems representing these directions have very different learning models , paraphrasing and alignment problems still have no reliable solution.
Case frame based IE systems incorporate do-main-dependent knowledge in the processing and learning of semantic constraints . However , concept hierarchy used in case frames is typically encoded manually and requires additional human labor for porting across domains . Moreover , the systems tend to rely on heuristics in order to match case frames . PALKA by Kim and Moldovan (1995) performs keyword-based matching of concepts , while CRYSTAL by Soderland et al (1995) relied on additional domain-specific annotation and associated lexicon for matching.
Rulebased IE models allow differentiation of rules according to their performance . Autoslog-TS by Riloff (1996) learns the context rules for extraction and ranks them according to their performance on the training corpus . Although this approach is suitable for automatic training , Xiao et al (2004) stated that hard matching techniques tend to have low recall due to data sparseness problem . To overcome this problem , ( LP)2 by Ciravegna (2002) utilizes rules with high precision in order to improve the precision of rules with average recall . However , ( LP)2 is developed for semistructured textual domain , where we can find consistent lexical patterns at surface text level . This is not the same for freetext , in which different order of words or an extra clause in a sentence may cause paraphrasing and alignment problems respectively , such as the example excerpts ? terrorists attacked peasants ? and ? peasants were attacked 2 months ago by terrorists?.
The classification-based approaches such as by Chieu and Ng (2002) tend to outperform rule-based approaches . However , Ciravegna (2001) argued that it is difficult to examine the result obtained by classifiers . Thus , interpretability of the learned knowledge is a serious bottleneck of the classification approach . Additionally , Zhou and Su (2002) trained classifiers for Named Entity extraction and reported that performance degrades rapidly if the training corpus size is below 100KB . It implies that human experts have to spend long hours to annotate a sufficiently large amount of training corpus.
Several recent researches focused on the extraction of relationships using classifiers . Roth and Yih (2002) learned the entities and relations together . The joint learning improves the performance of NE recognition in cases such as ? X killed Y ?. It also prevents the propagation of mistakes in NE extraction to the extraction of relations . However , long distance relations between entities are likely to cause mistakes in relation extraction . A possible approach for modeling relations of different complexity is the use of dependency-based kernel trees in support vector machines by Culotta and Sorensen (2004). The authors reported that non-relation instances are very heterogeneous , and ing candidate relations before classification.
3 Our approach
Differing from previous systems , the language model in ARE is based on dependency relations obtained from Minipar by Lin (1997). In the first stage , ARE tries to identify possible candidates for filling slots in a sentence . For example , words such as ? terrorist ? or ? guerrilla ? can fill the slot for Perpetrator in the terrorism domain . We refer to these candidates as anchors or anchor cues . In the second stage , ARE defines the dependency relations that connect anchor cues . We exploit dependency relations to provide more invariant structures for similar sentences with different syntactic structures.
After extracting the possible relations between anchor cues , we form several possible parsing paths and rank them . Based on the ranking , we choose the optimal filling of slots.
Ranking strategy may be unnecessary in cases when entities are represented in the SVO form.
Ranking strategy may also fail in situations of long distance relations . To handle such problems , we categorize the sentences into 3 categories of : simple , average and hard , depending on the complexity of the dependency relations . We then apply different strategies to tackle sentences in each category effectively . The following subsections discuss details of our approach.

Features Perpetrator_Cue ( A)
Action_Cue ( D)
Victim_Cue ( A)
Target_Cue ( A)
Lexical ( Head noun ) terrorists , individuals , soldiers attacked , murder , massacre mayor , general , priests bridge , house , ministry
Part-of-
Speech
Noun Verb Noun Noun
Named
Entities
Soldiers ( PERSON ) - Jesuit priests ( PERSON)
WTC ( OBJECT)
Synonyms Synset 130, 166 Synset 22 Synset 68 Synset 71
Concept
Class
ID 2, 3 ID 9 ID 22, 43 ID 61, 48
Coreferenced entity
He -> terrorist , soldier - They -> peasants - Table 1. Linguistic features for anchor extraction Every token in ARE may be represented at a different level of representations , including : Lexical , Part-of-Speech , Named Entities , Synonyms and Concept classes . The synonym set and concept classes are mainly obtained from Wordnet . We use NLProcessor from Infogistics Ltd for the extraction of part-of-speech , noun phrases and verb phrases ( we refer to them as phrases ). Named Entities are extracted with the program used in Yang et al (2003). Additionally , we employed the coreference module for the extraction of meaningful pronouns . It is used for linking entities across clauses or sentences , for example in ? John works in XYZ Corp . He was appointed as a vice-president a month ago ? and could achieve an accuracy of 62%.
After preprocessing and feature extraction , we obtain the linguistic features in Table 1.
3.1 Mining of anchor cues
In order to extract possible anchors and relations from every sentence , we need to select features to support the generalization of words . This generalization may be different for different classes of words . For example , person names may be generalized as a Named Entity PERSON , whereas for ? murder ? and ? assassinate ?, the optimal generalization would be the concept class ? kill ? in the WordNet hypernym tree . To support several generalizations , we need to store multiple representations of every word or token.
Mining of anchor cues or anchors is crucial in order to unify meaningful entities in a sentence , for example words ? terrorists ?, ? individuals ? and ? soldiers ? from Table 1. In the terrorism domain , we consider 4 types of anchor cues : Perpetrator , Action , Victim , and Target of destruction . For management succession domain , we have 6 types : Post , Person In , Person Out , Action and Organization . Each set of anchor cues may be seen as a predefined semantic type where the tokens are mined automatically . The anchor cues are further classified into two categories : general type A and action type D.
Action type anchor cues are those with verbs or verb phrases describing a particular action or movement . General type encompasses any predefined type that does not fall under the action type cues.
In the first stage , we need to extract anchor cues for every type . Let P be an input phrase , and Aj be the anchor of type j that we want to match.
The similarity score of P for Aj in sentence S is given by : Phrase_Scores(P,Aj)=?1* S_lexicalS(P,Aj+?2* S_POSS(P,Aj ) +?3* S_NES(P,Aj ) +?4 * S_SynS(P,Aj ) +?5* S_Concept-ClassS(P,Aj ) (1) where S_XXXS(P,Aj ) is a score function for the type Aj and ? i is the importance weight for Aj . In order to extract the score function , we use entities from slots in the training instances . Each S_XXXS(P,Aj ) is calculated as a ratio of occurrence in positive slots versus all the slots : )2( )(# )(# ),(_ j j jS Atypetheofslotsall
AtypetheofslotspositiveinP
APXXXS =
We classify the phrase P as belonging to an anchor cue A of type j if Phrase_ScoreS(P,Aj ) ? ?, where ? is an empirically determined threshold . The weights ( )51 ,..., ??? = are learned automatically using Expectation Maximization by Dempster et al (1977). Using anchors from training instances as ground truth , we iteratively input different sets of weights into EM to maximize the overall score.
573
Consider the excerpts ? Terrorists attacked victims ?, ? Peasants were murdered by unidentified individuals ? and ? Soldiers participated in massacre of Jesuit priests ?. Let Wi denotes the position of token i in the instances . After mining of anchors , we are able to extract meaningful anchor cues in these sentences as shown in Table 2:
W3 W2 W1 W0 W1 W2 W3 Perp_Cue Action_Cue Victim_Cue Victim_Cue were Action_Cue by
In Action_Cue Of Victim_Cue
Table 2. Instances with anchor cues 3.2 Relationship extraction and ranking
In the next stage , we need to find meaningful relations to unify instances using the anchor cues . This unification is done using dependency trees of sentences . The dependency relations for the first sentence are given in Figure 1.
From the dependency tree , we need to identify the SVO relations between anchor cues . In cases when there are multiple relations linking many potential subjects , verbs or objects , we need to select the best relations under the circumstances . Our scheme for relation ranking is as follows.
First , we rank each single relation individually based on the probability that it appears in the respective context template slot in the training data.
We use the following formula to capture the quality of a relation Rel which gives higher weight to more frequently occurring relations : )3( ||}|{|| ||},|{|| ),,( 21 ? ? ? =?=
S iii
S iii
SRR elRRRRR
AAleRQuality where S is a set of sentences containing relation Rel , anchors A1 and A2; R denotes relation path connecting A1 and A2 in a sentence Si ; || X || denotes size of the set X.
Second , we need to take into account the entity height in the dependency tree . We calculate height as a distance to the root node . Our intuition is that the nodes on the higher level of dependency tree are more important , because they may be linked to more nodes or entities . The following example in
Figure 2 illustrates it.

Figure 2. Example of entity in a dependency tree Here , the node ? terrorists ? is the most representative in the whole tree , and thus relations nearer to ? terrorists ? should have higher weight . Therefore , we give a slightly higher weight to the links that are closer to the root node as follows : Heights(Rel ) = log2(Const ? Distance(Root , Rel )) (4) where Const is set to be larger than the depth of nodes in the tree.
Third , we need to calculate the score of relation path Ri->j between each pair of anchors Ai and Aj , where Ai and Aj belong to different anchor cue types . The path score of Ri->j depends on both quality and height of participating relations : Scores(Ai , Aj)=?Ri?R { Heights(Ri)*Quality(Ri)}/Lengthij (5) where Lengthij is the length of path Ri->j . Division on Lengthij allows normalizing Score against the length of Ri->j . The formula (5) tends to give higher scores to shorter paths . Therefore , the path ending with ? terrorist ? will be preferred in the previous example to the equivalent path ending with ? MRTA?.
Finally , we need to find optimal filling of a template T . Let C = { C1, .. , CK } be the set of slot types in T and A = { A1, .., AL } be the set of extracted anchors . First , we regroup anchors A according to their respective types . Let },...,{ )()(1 )( k
L kk k
AAA = be the projection of A onto the type Ck , ? k?N , k ? K . Let F = A(1) ? A(2) ?..? A(K ) be the set of possible template fillings . The elements of F are denoted as F1, .., FM , where every Fi ? F is represented as Fi = { Ai(1),..,Ai(K )}. Our aim is to evaluate F and find the optimal filling F0 ? F.
For this purpose , we use the previously calculated scores of relation paths between every two anchors
Ai and Aj.
Based on the previously defined ScoreS(Ai , Aj ), it is possible to rank all the fillings in F . For each filling Fi?F we calculate the aggregate score for all the involved anchor pairs : )7( ),( )(_ ,1
M
AAcoreS
FScoreelationR jiSKji iS ? ??= where K is number of slot types and M denotes the number of relation paths between anchors in Fi.
After calculating Relation_ScoreS(Fi ), it is used for ranking all possible template fillings . The next step is to join entity and relation scores . We defined the entity score of Fi as an average of the scores of participating anchors : )8(/)(_)(_ We combine entity and relation scores of Fi into the overall formula for ranking.
RankS(Fi)=?*Entity_ScoreS(Fi)+(1-?)*Relation_ScoreS(Fi ) (9) The application of Subject-Verb-Object ( SVO ) relations facilitates the grouping of subjects,
Figure 1.
Dependency tree
Table 2 containing the anchor cues , the unified
SVO relations are given in Table 3.

W2 W1 W0 Instance is
Perp_Cue attacked Victim_Cue +
Perp_Cue murdered Victim_Cue +
Perp_Cue participated ? -
Table 3. Unification based on SVO relations The first 2 instances are unified correctly . The only exception is the slot in the third case , which is missing because the target is not an object of ? participated?.
4 Category Splitting
Through our experiments , we found that the combination of relations and anchors are essential for improving IE performance . However , relations alone are not applicable across all situations because of long distance relations and possible dependency relation parsing errors , especially for long sentences . Since the relations in long sentences are often complicated , parsing errors are very difficult to avoid . Furthermore , application of dependency relations on long sentences may lead to incorrect extractions and decrease the performance.
Through the analysis of instances , we noticed that dependency trees have different complexity for different sentences . Therefore , we decided to classify sentences into 3 categories based on the complexity of dependency relations between the action cues ( V ) and the likely subject ( S ) and object cues ( O ). Category 1 is when the potential SVO?s are connected directly to each other ( simple category ); Category 2 is when S or O is one link away from V in terms of nouns or verbs ( average category ); and Category 3 is when the path distances between potential S , V , and Os are more than 2 links away ( hard category).

Figure 3. Simple category Figure 4. Average category Figure 3 and Figure 4 illustrate the dependency parse trees for the simple and average categories respectively derived from the sentences : ?50 peasants of have been kidnapped by terrorists ? and ? a colonel was involved in the massacre of the Jesu-its ?. These trees represent 2 common structures in the MUC4 domain . By taking advantage of this commonality , we can further improve the performance of extraction . We notice that in the simple category , the perpetrator cue (? terrorists ?) is always a subject , action cue (? kidnapped ?) a verb , and victim cue (? peasants ?) an object . For the average category , perpetrator and victim commonly appear under 3 relations : subject , object and pcompn . The most difficult category is the hard category , since in this category relations can be distant . We thus primarily rely on anchors for extraction and have to give less importance to dependency parsing.
In order to process the different categories , we utilize the specific strategies for each category . As an example , the instance ? X murdered Y ? requires only the analysis of the context verb ? murdered ? in the simple category . It is different from the instances ? X investigated murder of Y ? and ? X conducted murder of Y ? in the average category , in which transition of word ? investigated ? into ? conducted ? makes X a perpetrator . We refer to the anchor ? murder ? in the first and second instances as promotable and non-promotable respectively . Additionally , we denote that the token ? conducted ? is the optimal node for promotion of ? murder ?, whereas the anchor ? investigate ? is not . This example illustrates the importance of support verb analysis specifically for the average category.

Figure 5. Category processing
The main steps of our algorithm for performing IE in different categories are given in Figure 5. Although some steps are common for every category , the processing strategies are different.

Simple category
For simple category , we reorder tokens according to their slot types . Based on this reordering , we fill the template.

Algorithm 1) Analyze category If(simple ) - Perform token reordering based on SVO relations Else if ( average ) ProcessAverage Else ProcessHard 2) Fill template slots
Function ProcessAverage 1) Find the nearest missing anchor in the previous sentences 2) Find the optimal linking node for action anchor in every Fi 3) Find the filling Fi(0) = argmaxi Rank(Fi ) 4) Use Fi for filling the template if Rank0 > ?2, where ?2 is an empirical threshold
Function ProcessHard 1) Perform token reordering based on anchors 2) Use linguistic + syntactic + semantic feature of the head noun . Eg . Caps , ? subj ?, etc 3) Find the optimal linking node for action anchor in every Fi 4) Find the filling Fi(0) = argmaxi Rank(Fi ) 5) Use Fi for filling the template if Rank0 > ?3, where ?3 is an empirical threshold For average category , our strategy consists of 4 steps . First , in the case of missing anchor type we try to find it in the nearest previous sentence . Consider an example from MUC6: ? Look at what happened to John Sculley , Apple Computer's former chairman . Earlier this month he abruptly resigned as chairman of troubled Spectrum Information Technologies .? In this example , a noisy cue ? he ? needs to be substituted with ? John Sculley ?, which is a strong anchor cue . Second , we need to find an optimal promotion of a support verb . For example , in ? X conducted murder of Y ?, the verb ? murder ? should be linked with X and in the excerpt ? X investigated murder of Y ?, it should not be promoted.
Thus , we need to make 2 steps for promotion : ( a ) calculate importance of every word connecting the action cue such as ? murder ? and ? distributed ? and ( b ) find the optimal promotion for the word ? murder?.
Third , using the predefined threshold ? we cutoff the instances with irrelevant support verbs ( e.g ., ? investigated ?). Fourth , we reorder the tokens in order to group them according to the anchor types.
The following algorithm in Figure 6 estimates the importance of a token W for type D in the support verb structure . The input of the algorithm consists of sentences S1?SN and two sets of tokens Vneg , Vpos cooccurring with anchor cue of type D.
Vneg and Vpos are automatically tagged as irrelevant and relevant respectively based on preliminary marked keys in the training instances . The algorithm output represents the importance value between 0 to 1.

Figure 6. Evaluation of word importance
We use the linguistic features for W and D as given in Table 1 to form the instances.

Hard category
In the hard category , we have to deal with long-distance relations : at least 2 anchors are more than 2 links away in the dependency tree . Consequently , dependency tree alone is not reliable for connecting nodes . To find an optimal connection , we primarily rely on comparison between several possible fillings of slots based on previously extracted anchor cues . Depending on the results of such comparison , we chose the filling that has the highest score . As an example , consider the hard category in the excerpt ? MRTA today distributed leaflets claiming responsibility for the murder of former defense minister Enrique Lopez Albujar ?. The dependency tree for this instance is given in Figure 7.

Although words ? MRTA ?, ? murder ? and ? minister ? might be correctly extracted as anchors , the challenging problem is to decide whether ? MRTA ? is a perpetrator . Anchors ? MRTA ? and ? minister ? are connected via the verb ? distributed ?. However , the word ? murder ? belongs to another branch of this verb.

Figure 7. Hard case
Processing of such categories is challenging.
Since relations are not reliable , we first need to rely on the anchor extraction stage . Nevertheless , the promotion strategy for the anchor cue ? murder ? is still possible , although the corresponding branch in the dependency tree is long . Henceforth , we try to replace the verb ? distributed ? by promoting the anchor ? murder ?. To do so , we need to evaluate whether the nodes in between may be eliminated.
For example , such elimination is possible in the pairs ? conducted ? -> ? murder ? and not possible in the pair ? investigated ? -> ? murder ?, since in the excerpt ? X investigated murder ? X is not a perpetrator . If the elimination is possible , we apply the promotion algorithm given on Figure 8:
Figure 8. Token promotion algorithm
The algorithm checks path Pj1->j2 that connect anchors Ai(j1) and Ai(j2) in the filling Fi ; the nodes from Pj1->j2 are added to the set Z . Finally , the top node of the set Z is chosen as an optimal node for the promotion . The example optimal node for promotion of the word ? murder ? on Figure 7 is the node ? distributed?.
Another important difference between the hard and average cases is in the calculation of RankS ( Fi ) in Equation (9). We set ? hard > ? average because long distance relations are less reliable in the hard case than in the average case.
CalculateImportance ( W , D ) 1) Select sentences that contain anchor cue D 2) Extract linguistic features of Vpos , Vneg and D 3) Train using SVM on instances ( Vpos,D ) and instances ( Vneg,D ) 4) Return Importance(W ) using SVM
FindOptimalPromotion ( Fi ) 1) Z = ? 2) For each Ai(j1), Ai(j2) ? Fi Z = Z ? Pj1->j2 End_for 3) Output Top(Z ) In order to evaluate the efficiency of our method , we conduct our experiments in 2 domains : MUC4 ( Kaufmann , 1992) and MUC6 ( Kaufmann , 1995).
The official corpus of MUC4 is released with MUC3; it covers terrorism in the Latin America region and consists of 1,700 texts . Among them , 1,300 documents belong to the training corpus.
Testing was done on 25 relevant and 25 irrelevant texts from TST3, plus 25 relevant and 25 irrelevant texts from TST4, as is done in Xiao et al (2004).
MUC6 covers news articles in Management Succession domain . Its training corpus consists of 1201 instances , whereas the testing corpus consists of 76 person-ins , 82 person-outs , 123 positions , and 79 organizations . These slots we extracted in order to fill templates on a sentence-by-sentence basis , as is done by Chieu et al (2002) and Soderland (1999).
Our experiments were designed to test the effectiveness of both case splitting and action verb promotion . The performance of ARE is compared to both the state-of-art systems and our baseline approach . We use 2 state-of-art systems for MUC4 and 1 system for MUC6. Our baseline system , Anc+rel , utilizes only anchors and relations without category splitting as described in Section 3.
For our ARE system with case splitting , we present the results on Overall corpus , as well as separate results on Simple , Average and Hard categories.
The Overall performance of ARE represents the result for all the categories combined together.
Additionally , we test the impact of the action promotion ( in the right column ) for the average and hard categories.
Without promotion With promotion
Case (%) P R F1 P R F1
GRID 58% 56% 57% - - -
Riloff?05 46% 52% 48% - - -
Anc+rel (100%) 58% 59% 58% 58% 59% 58%
Overall (100%) 57% 60% 59% 58% 61% 60%
Simple (13%) 79% 86% 82% 79% 86% 82%
Average (22%) 64% 70% 67% 67% 71% 69%
Hard (65%) 50% 52% 51% 51% 53% 52%
Table 4. Results on MUC4 with case splitting The comparative results are presented in Table 4 and Table 5 for MUC4 and MUC6, respectively.
First , we review our experimental results on MUC4 corpus without promotion ( left column ) before proceeding to the right column.
a ) From the results on Table 4 we observe that our baseline approach Anc+rel outperforms all the state-of-art systems . It demonstrates that both anchors and relations are useful . Anchors allow us to group entities according to their semantic meanings and thus to select of the most prominent candidates.
Relations allow us to capture more invariant representation of instances . However , a sentence may contain very few high-quality relations . It implies that the relations ranking step is fuzzy in nature . In addition , we noticed that some anchor cues may be missing , whereas the other anchor types may be represented by several anchor cues . All these factors lead only to moderate improvement in performance , especially in comparison with GRID system.
b ) Overall , the splitting of instances into categories turned out to be useful . Due to the application of specific strategies the performance increased by 1% over the baseline . However , the large dominance of the hard cases (65%) made this improvement modest.
c ) We notice that the amount of variations for connecting anchor cues in the Simple category is relatively small . Therefore , the overall performance for this case reaches F1=82%. The main errors here come from missing anchors resulting partly from mistakes in such component as NE detection.
d ) The performance in the Average category is F1=67%. It is lower than that for the simple category because of higher variability in relations and negative influence of support verbs . For example , for excerpt such as ? X investigated murder of Y ?, the processing tends to make mistake without the analysis of semantic value of support verb ? investigated?.
e ) Hard category achieves the lowest performance of F1=51% among all the categories . Since for this category we have to rely mostly on anchors , the problem arises if these anchors provide the wrong clues . It happens if some of them are missing or are wrongly extracted . The other cause of mistakes is when ARE finds several anchor cues which belong to the same type.
Additional usage of promotion strategies allowed us to improve the performance further.
f ) Overall , the addition of promotion strategy enables the system to further boost the performance to F1=60%. It means that the promotion strategy is useful , especially for the average case . The improvement in comparison to the state-of-art system
GRID is about 3%.
g ) It achieved an F1=69%, which is an improvement of 2%, for the Average category . It implies that the analysis of support verbs helps in revealing the differences between the instances such as ? X was involved in kidnapping of Y ? and ? X reported kidnapping of Y?.
h ) The results in the Hard category improved moderately to F1=52%. The reason for the improvement is that more anchor cues are captured after the promotion . Still , there are 2 types of common mis-same type and 2) anchors can be spread across several sentences or several clauses in the same sentence.
Without promotion With promotion
Case (%) P R F1 P R F1
Chieu et al?02 74% 49% 59% - - -
Anc+rel (100%) 78% 52% 62% 78% 52% 62%
Overall (100%) 72% 58% 64% 73% 58% 65%
Simple (45%) 85% 67% 75% 87% 68% 76%
Average (27%) 61% 55% 58% 64% 56% 60%
Hard (28%) 59% 44% 50% 59% 44% 50%
Table 5. Results on MUC6 with case splitting For the MUC6 results given in Table 5, we observe that the overall improvement in performance of ARE system over Chieu et al?02 is 6%. The trends of results for MUC6 are similar to that in MUC4. However , there are few important differences . First , 45% of instances in MUC6 fall into the Simple category , therefore this category dominates . The reason for this is that the terminologies used in Management Succession domain are more stable in comparison to the Terrorism domain . Second , there are more anchor types for this case and therefore the promotion strategy is applicable also to the simple case . Third , there is no improvement in performance for the Hard category . We believe the primary reason for it is that more stable language patterns are used in MUC6. Therefore , dependency relations are also more stable in MUC6 and the promotion strategy is not very important.
Similar to MUC4, there are problems of missing anchors and mistakes in dependency parsing.
6 Conclusion
The current state-of-art IE methods tend to use cooccurrence relations for extraction of entities . Although context may provide a meaningful clue , the use of cooccurrence relations alone has serious limitations because of alignment and paraphrasing problems . In our work , we proposed to utilize dependency relations to tackle these problems . Based on the extracted anchor cues and relations between them , we split instances into ? simple ?, ? average ? and ? hard ? categories . For each category , we applied specific strategy . This approach allowed us to outperform the existing state-of-art approaches by 3% on Terrorism domain and 6% on Management Succession domain . In our future work we plan to investigate the role of semantic relations and integrate ontology in the rule generation process . Another direction is to explore the use of bootstrapping and transduction approaches that may require less training instances.

References
H.L . Chieu and H.T . Ng . 2002. A Maximum Entropy Approach to Information Extraction from Semi-Structured and Free Text . In Proc of AAAI-2002, 786-791.
H . Cui , M.Y . Kan , and Chua T.S . 2005. Generic Soft Pattern Models for Definitional Question Answering . In
Proc of ACM SIGIR-2005.
A . Culotta and J . Sorensen J . 2004. Dependency tree kernels for relation extraction . In Proc of ACL2004.
F . Ciravegna . 2001. Adaptive Information Extraction from Text by Rule Induction and Generalization . In Proc of
IJCAI-2001.
A . Dempster , N . Laird , and D . Rubin . 1977. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM algorithm . Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B , 39(1):1?38 K . Humphreys , G . Demetriou and R . Gaizuskas . 2000. Two applications of Information Extraction to Biological Science : Enzyme interactions and Protein structures . In Proc of the Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing , 502-M . Kaufmann . 1995. MUC6. In Proc of MUC6.
J . Kim and D . Moldovan . 1995. Acquisition of linguistic patterns for knowledge-based information extraction.
IEEE Transactions on KDE , 7(5): 713-724
D . Lin . 1997. Using Syntactic Dependency as Local Context to Resolve Word Sense Ambiguity . In Proc of ACL97.
E . Riloff . 1996. Automatically Generating Extraction Patterns from Untagged Text . In Proc of AAAI-96, 1044-1049.
D . Roth and W . Yih . 2002. Probabilistic Reasoning for Entity & Relation Recognition . In Proc of COLING2002.
S . Soderland , D . Fisher , J . Aseltine and W . Lehnert . 1995.
Crystal : Inducing a Conceptual Dictionary . In Proc of
IJCAI-95, 1314-1319.
S . Soderland . 1999. Learning Information Extraction Rules for Semi-Structured and Free Text . Machine Learning 34:233-272.
J . Xiao , T.S . Chua and H . Cui . 2004. Cascading Use of Soft and Hard Matching Pattern Rules for Weakly Supervised Information Extraction . In Proc of COLING2004.
H . Yang , H . Cui , M.-Y . Kan , M . Maslennikov , L . Qiu and T.-S . Chua . 2003. QUALIFIER in TREC 12 QA Main
Task . In Proc of TREC12, 54-65.
R . Yangarber , W . Lin , R . Grishman . 2002. Unsupervised Learning of Generalized Names . In Proc of COLING2002.
G.D . Zhou and J . Su . 2002. Named entity recognition using an HMM-based chunk tagger . In Proc of ACL2002, 473-480
