Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions , pages 345?352,
Sydney , July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Collaborative Framework for Collecting Thai Unknown Words from
the Web
Choochart Haruechaiyasak , Chatchawal Sangkeettrakarn , Pornpimon Palingoon
Sarawoot Kongyoung and Chaianun Damrongrat
Information Research and Development Division ( RDI)
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center ( NECTEC)
Thailand Science Park , Klong Luang , Pathumthani 12120, Thailand
rdi5@nnet.nectec.or.th
Abstract
We propose a collaborative framework for collecting Thai unknown words found on
Web pages over the Internet . Our main goal is to design and construct a Web-based system which allows a group of interested users to participate in constructing a Thai unknownword open dictionary.
The proposed framework provides supporting algorithms and tools for automatically identifying and extracting unknown words from Web pages of given URLs.
The system yields the result of unknownword candidates which are presented to the users for verification . The approved unknown words could be combined with the set of existing words in the lexicon to improve the performance of many NLP tasks such as word segmentation , information retrieval and machine translation.
Our framework includes word segmentation and morphological analysis modules for handling the non-segmenting characteristic of Thai written language . To take advantage of large available text resource on the Web , our unknownword boundary identification approach is based on the statistical string pattern-matching algorithm.
Keywords : Unknown words , open dictionary , word segmentation , morphological analysis , word-boundary detection.
1 Introduction
The advent of the Internet and the increasing popularity of the Web have altered many aspects of natural language usage . As more people turn to the Internet as a new communicating channel , the textual information has increased tremendously and is also widely accessible . More importantly , the available information is varied largely in terms of topic difference and multilanguage characteristic.
It is not uncommon to find a Web page written in Thai lies adjacent to aWeb page written in English via a hyperlink , or a Web page containing both Thai and English languages . In order to perform well in this versatile environment , an NLP system must be adaptive enough to handle the variation in language usage . One of the problems which requires special attention is unknown words.
As with most other languages , unknown words also play an extremely important role in Thai-language NLP . Unknown words are viewed as one of the problematic sources of degrading the performance of traditional NLP applications such as MT ( Machine Translation ), IR ( Information Retrieval ) and TTS ( Text-To-Speech ). Reduction in the amount of unknown words or being able to correctly identify unknown words in these systems would help increase the overall system performance.
The problem of unknown words in Thai language is perhaps more severe than in English or other latin-based languages . As a result of the information technology revolution , Thai people have become more familiar with other foreign languages especially English . It is not uncommon to hear a few English words over a course of conversation between two Thai people . The foreign words along with other Thai named entities are among the new words which are continuously created and widely circulated . To write a foreign word , the transliterated form of Thai alphabets is often used . The Royal Institute of Thailand is the official organization in Thailand who has respon-use of new words . The process of defining a new word is manual and time-consuming as each word must be approved by a working group of linguists.
Therefore , this traditional approach of constructing the lexicon is not a suitable solution , especially for systems running on the Web environment.
Due to the inefficiency of using linguists in defining new lexicon , there must be a way to automatically or at least semiautomatically collect new unknown words . In this paper , we propose a collaborative framework for collecting unknown words from Web pages over the Internet . Our main purpose is to design and construct a system which automatically identifies and extracts unknown words found on Web pages of given URLs.
The compiled list of unknownword candidates is to be verified by a group of participants . The approved unknown words are then added to the existing lexicon along with the other related information such as meaning and POS ( part of speech).
This paper focuses on the underlying algorithms for supporting the process of identifying and extracting unknown words . The overall process is composed of two steps : unknownword detection and unknownword boundary identification . The first step is to detect the locations of unknownword occurrences from a given text . Since Thai language belongs to the class of non-segmenting language group in which words are written continuously without using any explicit delimiting character , detection of unknown words could be accomplished mainly by using a wordsegmentation algorithm with a morphological analysis . By using a dictionary-based wordsegmentation algorithm , locations of words which are not previously included in the dictionary will be easily detected . These unknown words belong to the class of explicit unknown words and often represent the transliteration of foreign words.
The other class of unknown words is hidden unknown words . This class includes new words which are created through the combination of some existing words in the lexicon . The hidden unknown words are usually named entities such as a person?s name and an organization?s name.
The hidden unknown words could be identified using the approaches such as ngram generation and phrase chunking . The scope of this paper focuses only on the extraction of the explicit unknown words . However , the design of our framework also includes the extraction of hidden unknown words.
We will continue to explore this issue in our future works.
Once the location of an unknown word is detected , the second step involves the identification of its boundary . Since we use the Web as our main resource , we could take advantage of its large availability of textual contents . We are interested in collecting unknown words which occur more than once throughout the corpus . Unknown words which occur only once in the large corpus are not considered as being significant . These words may be unusual words which are not widely accepted , or could be misspelling words . Using this assumption , our approach for identifying the unknownword boundary is based on a statistical pattern-matching algorithm . The basic idea is that the same unknown word which occurs more than once would likely to appear in different surrounding contexts . Therefore , a group of characters which form the unknown word could be extracted by analyzing the string matching patterns.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed framework , experiments using a real data set collected from the Web are performed . The experiments are designed to test each of the two main steps of the framework . Variation of morphological analysis are tested for the unknownword detection . The detection rate of unknown words were found to be as high as approximately 96%.
Three variations of string pattern-matching techniques were tested for unknownword boundary identification . The identification accuracy was found to be as high as approximately 36%. The relatively low accuracy is not the major concern since the unknownword candidates are to be verified and corrected by users before they are actually added to the dictionary . The system is implemented via the Web-browser environment which provides user-friendly interface for verification process.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows . The next section presents and discusses related works previously done in the unknownword problem . Section 3 provides an overview of unknownword problem in the relation to the wordsegmentation process . Section 4 presents the proposed framework with underlying algorithms in details . Experiments are performed in Section 5 with results and discussion . The conclusion is given in Section 6.
346 2 Previous Works
The research and study in unknownword problem have been extensively done over the past decades . Unknown words are viewed as problematic source in the NLP systems . Techniques in identifying and extracting unknown words are somewhat language-dependent . However , these techniques could be classified into two major categories , one for segmenting languages and another for non-segmenting languages . Segmenting languages , such as latin-based languages , use delimiting characters to separate written words.
Therefore , once the unknown words are detected , their boundaries could be identified relatively easily when compared to those for non-segmenting languages.
Some examples of techniques involving segmenting languages are listed as follows.
Toole (2000) used multiple decision trees to identify names and misspellings in English texts.
Features used in constructing the decision trees are , for example , POS ( Part-Of-Speech ), word length , edit distance and character sequence frequency . Similarly , a decision-tree approach was used to solve the POS disambiguation and unknown word guessing in ( Orphanos and Christodoulakis , 1999). The research in the unknownword problem for segmenting languages is also closely related to the extraction of named entities . The difference of these techniques to those in non-segmenting languages is that the approach needs to parse the written text in word-level as opposed to characterlevel.
The research in unknownword problem for non-segmenting languages is highly active for Chinese and Japanese . Many approaches have been proposed and experimented with . Asahara and Matsumoto (2004) proposed a technique of SVM-based chunking to identify unknown words from Japanese texts . Their approach used a statistical morphological analyzer to segment texts into segments . The SVM was trained by using POS tags to identify the unknownword boundary . Chen and Ma (2002) proposed a practical unknown word extraction system by considering both morphological and statistical rule sets for word segmentation . Chang and Su (1997) proposed an unsupervised iterative method for extracting unknown lexicons from Chinese text corpus . Their idea is to include the potential unknown words to the augmented dictionary in order to improve the word segmentation process . Their proposed approach also includes both contextual constraints and the joint character association metric to filter the unlikely unknown words . Other approaches to identify unknown words include statistical or corpus-based ( Chen and Bai , 1998), and the use of heuristic knowledge ( Nie et al , 1995) and contextual information ( Khoo and Loh , 2002).
Some extensions to unknownword identification have been done . An example include the determination of POS for unknown words ( Nakagawa et al . , 2001).
The research in unknown words for Thai language has not been widely done as in other languages . Kawtrakul et al (1997) used the combination of a statistical model and a set of context sensitive rules to detect unknown words . Our framework has a different goal from previous works . We consider unknownword problem as collaborative task among a group of interested users . As more textual content is provided to the system , new unknown words could be extracted with more accuracy . Thus , our framework can be viewed as collaborative and statistical or corpus-based.
3 UnknownWord Problem in Word
Segmentation Algorithms
Similar to Chinese , Japanese and Korea , Thai language belongs to the class of non-segmenting languages in which words are written continuously without using any explicit delimiting character.
To handle non-segmenting languages , the first required step is to perform word segmentation . Most word segmentation algorithms use a lexicon or dictionary to parse texts at the characterlevel . A typical word segmentation algorithm yields three types of results : known words , ambiguous segments , and unknown segments . Known words are existing words in the lexicon . Ambiguous segments are caused by the overlapping of two known words . Unknown segments are the combination of characters which are not defined in the lexicon.
In this paper , we are interested in extracting the unknown words with high precision and recall results . Three types of unknown words are hidden , explicit and mixed ( Kawtrakul et al , 1997). Hidden unknown words are composed by different words existing in the lexicon . To illustrate the idea , let us consider an unknown word ABCD where A , B , C , and D represents individual characters . Suppose that AB and CD both ex-a hidden unknown word . The explicit unknown words are newly created words by using different characters . Let us again consider an unknown word ABCD . Suppose that there is no substring of ABCD ( i.e ., AB , BC , CD , ABC , BCD ) exists in the dictionary , then ABCD is considered as explicit unknown words . The mixed unknown words are composed of both existing words in a dictionary and nonexisting substrings . From the example of unknown string ABCD , if there is at least one substring of ABCD ( i.e ., AB , BC , CD , ABC , BCD ) exists in the dictionary , then ABCD is considered as a mixed unknown word.
It can be immediately seen that the detection of the hidden unknown words are not trivial since the parser would mistakenly assume that all the fragments of the words are valid , i.e ., previously defined in the dictionary . In this paper , we limit ourself to the extraction of the explicit and mixed unknown words . This type of unknown words usually represent the transliteration of foreign words.
Detection of these unknown words could be accomplished mainly by using a wordsegmentation algorithm with a morphological analysis . By using a dictionary-based wordsegmentation algorithm , locations of words which are not previously defined in the lexicon could be easily detected.
4 The Proposed Framework
The overall framework is shown in Figure 1.
Two major components are information agent and unknownword analyzer . The details of each component are given as follows.
? Information agent : This module is composed of a Web crawler and an HTML parser.
It is responsible for collecting HTML sources from the given URLs and extracting the textual data from the pages . Our framework is designed to support multiuser and collaborative environment . The advantage of this design approach is that unknown words could be collected and verified more efficiently.
More importantly , it allows users to select the
Web pages which suit their interests.
? Unknown-word analyzer : This module is composed of many components for analyzing and extracting unknown words . Word segmentation module receives text strings from the information agent and segments them into a list of words . Ngram generation module is responsible for generating hidden unknownword candidates . Morphological analysis module is used to form initial explicit unknownword segments . String pattern matching unit performs unknownword boundary identification task . It takes the intermediate unknown segments and identifies their boundaries by analyzing string matching patterns The results are processed unknownword candidates which are presented to linguists for final postprocessing and verification . New unknown words are combined with the dictionary to iteratively improve the performance of the word segmentation module . Details of each component are given in the following subsections.
4.1 UnknownWord Detection
As previously mentioned in Section 3, applying a wordsegmentation algorithm on a text string yields three different segmented outputs : known , ambiguous , and unknown segments . Since our goal is to simply detect the unknown segments without solving or analyzing other related issues in word segmentation , using the longest-matching word segmentation algorithm previously proposed by Poowarawan (1986) is sufficient . An example to illustrate the wordsegmentation process is given as follows.
Let the following string denotes a text string written in Thai language : { a1a2...aib1b2...bjc1c2...ck }. Suppose that { a1a2...ai } and { c1c2...ck } are known words from the dictionary , and { b1b2...bj } be an unknown word . For the explicit unknownword case , applying the wordsegmentation algorithm would yield the following segments : { a1a2...ai}{b1}{b2}...{bj}{c1c2...ck }. It can be observed that the detected unknown positions for a single unknown word are individual characters in the unknown word itself . Based on the initial statistical analysis of a Thai lexicon , it was found that the averaged number of characters in a word is equal to 7. This characteristic is quite different from other non-segmenting languages such as Chinese and Japanese in which a word could be a character or a combination of only a few characters . Therefore , to reduce the complexity in unknownword boundary identification task , the unknown segments could be merged to form multiple-character segments . For exam -                                      ff fi fl ffi  ff  ! " #   $  %  ff &  ' ( ff fi ) !  ffi * + , # fi - .  / .       0  1    0   2    3  0    0  4  5 6 7 8 9 : 9 ; < = > = ? @ =
A B C D B = ; E
F 9 G G B = < = > = ? @ =
A B C D B = ; E < = > = ? @ =
H ? I G
J K = G 9 G K ; B E 0  L  0  0   
M   2     0  4    /      0 
N O P O Q R O
S T U V T O W X R YW Z [ Q O W T \ W X
Figure 1: The proposed framework for collecting Thai unknown words.
ple , a merging of two characters per segment would give the following unknown segments : { b1b2}{b3b4}...{bj?1bj }. In the following experiment section , the merging of two to five characters per segment including the merging of all unknown segments without limitation will be compared.
Morphological analysis is applied to guarantee grammatically correct word boundaries . Simple morphological rules are used in the framework . The rule set is based on two types of characters , front-dependent characters and rear-dependent characters . Front-dependent characters are characters which must be merged to the segment leading them . Rear-dependent characters are characters which must be merged to the segment following them . In Thai written language , these dependent characters are some vowels and tonal characters which have specific grammatical constraints . Applying morphological analysis will help making the unknown segments more reliable.
4.2 UnknownWord Boundary Identification Once the unknown segments are detected , they are stored into a hashtable along with their contextual information . Our unknownword boundary identification approach is based on a string pattern-matching algorithm previously proposed by Boyer and Moore (1977). Consider the unknownword boundary identification as a string pattern-matching problem , there are two possible strategies : considering the longest matching pattern and considering the most frequent matching pattern as the unknownword candidates . Both strategies could be explained more formally as follows.
Given a set of N text strings , { S1S2...SN }, where Si , is a series of leni characters denoted by { ci,1ci,2...ci,leni } and each is marked with an unknown-segment position , posi , where 1?posi?leni . Given a new string , Sj , with an unknown-segment position , posj , the longest pattern-matching strategy iterates through each string , S1 to SN and records the longest string pattern which occur in both Sj and the other string in the set . On the other hand , the most frequent pattern-matching strategy iterates through each string , S1 to SN , but records the matching pattern which occur most frequently.
The results from the unknownword boundary identification are unknownword candidates.
These candidates are presented to the users for verification . Our framework is implemented via a Web-browser interface which provides a user-friendly environment . Figure 2 shows a screen snapshot of our system . Each unknown word is listed within a text field box which allows a user to edit and correct its boundary . The contexts could be used as some editing guidelines and are also stored into the database.
349
Figure 2: Example of Web-Based Interface 5 Experiments and Results In this section , we evaluate the performance of our proposed framework . The corpus used in the experiments is composed of 8,137 newspaper articles collected from a top-selling Thai newspa-per?s Web site ( Thairath , 2003) during 2003. The corpus contains a total of 78,529 unknown words of which 14,943 are unique . This corpus was focused on unknown words which are transliterated from foreign languages , e.g ., English , Spanish , Japanese and Chinese . We use the publicly available Thai dictionary LEXiTRON , which contains approximately 30,000 words , in our framework ( Lexitron , 2006).
We first analyze the unknownword set to observe its characteristics . Figure 3 shows the plot of unknownword frequency distribution . Not surprisingly , the frequency of unknownword usage follows a Zipf-like distribution . This means there are a group of unknown words which are used very often , while some unknown words are used only a few times over a time period . Based on the frequency statistics of unknown words , only about 3% (2,375 words out of 78,529) occur only once in the corpus . Therefore , this finding supports the use of statistical pattern-matching algorithm described in previous section.
5.1 Evaluation of UnknownWord Detection
Approaches
As discussed in Section 4, multiple unknown segments could be merged to form a representative unknown segment . The merging will help reduce the complexity in the unknownword boundary identification as fewer segments will be checked for the same set of unknown words.
The following variations of merging approach are compared.
? No merging ( none ): No merging process is 0 500 1000 1500 2000
Fr eq ue nc y
Figure 3: Unknown-word frequency distribution.
applied.
? N-character Merging ( N-char ): Allow the maximum of N characters per segment.
? Merging all segments ( all ): No limit on number of characters per segment.
We measure the performance of unknownword detection task by using two metrics . The first is the detection rate ( or recall ) which is equal to the number of detected unknown words divided by the total number of previously tagged unknown words in the corpus . The second is the averaged detected positions per word . The second metric directly represents the overhead or the complexity to the unknownword boundary identification process . This is because all detected positions from a single unknown word must be checked by the process . The comparison results are shown in Figure 4. As expected , the approach none gives the maximum detection rate of 96.6%, while the approach all yields the lowest detection rate . Another interesting observation is that the approach 2-char yields comparable detection rate to the ap-i j ^ k e l ^ m ] ^ _ ^ ` _ ^ m n b o a _ a b c o n ^ k p b k m q r s r q t s u q u s q q v s q q w s r x t s y t s q w s q u w s r u w s y r w s u v z s q { c | c b } c ~  ^ l ? ^ c _ ? ^ k l a c l i ? ? k b e ` ? c b c ^ ? ~ ` ? e k ? ~ ` ? e k ? ~ ` ? e k ? ~ ` ? e k e ? ? Figure 4: Unknown-word detection results proach none , however , its averaged detected positions per word is about three times lower . Therefore to reduce the complexity during the unknownword boundary identification process , one might want to consider using the merging approach of 2-char.
none 2?char 3?char 4?char 5?char all
Unknown?Segment Merging Approach
W or d?
Bo un da ry Id en tif ica tio n
Ac cu ra cy (% ) long freq freq?morph
Figure 5: Comparison between different unknownword boundary detection approaches.
5.2 Evaluation of UnknownWord Boundary
Identification
The unknownword boundary identification is based on string pattern-matching algorithm . The following variations of string pattern-matching technique are compared.
? Longest matching pattern ( long ): Select the longest-matching unknownword candidate ? Most-frequent matching pattern ( freq ): Select the most-frequent-matching unknownword candidate ? Most-frequent matching pattern with morphological analysis ( freq-morph ): Similar the the approach freq but with additional morphological analysis to guarantee that the word boundaries are grammatically correct.
The comparison among all variations of string pattern-matching approaches are performed across all unknown-segment merging approach . The results are shown in Figure 5. The performance metric is the word-boundary identification accuracy which is equal to the number of unknown words correctly extracted divided by the total number of tested unknown segments . It can be observed that the selection of different merging approaches does not really effect the accuracy of the unknownword boundary identification process . But since the approach none generates approximately 6 positions per unknown segment on average , it would be more efficient to perform a merging approach which could reduce the number of positions down by at least 3 times.
The plot also shows the comparison among three approaches of string pattern-matching . Figure 6 summarizes the accuracy results of each string pattern-matching approach by taking the average on all different merging approaches . The approach long performed poorly with the averaged accuracy of 8.68%. This is not surprising because selection of the longest matching pattern does not mean that its boundary will be identified correctly.
The approaches freq and freq-morph yield similar accuracy of about 36%. The freq-morph improves the performance of the approach freq by less than 1%. The little improvement is due to the fact that the matching strings are mostly grammatically correct . However , the error is caused by the matching collocations of the unknownword context . If an unknown word occurs together adjacent to another word very frequently , they will likely be extracted by the algorithm . Our solution to this problem is by providing the users with a user-friendly interface so unknownword candidates could be easily filtered and corrected.
6 Conclusion
We proposed a framework for collecting Thai unknown words from the Web . Our framework ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? Figure 6: Unknown-word boundary identification results is composed of an information agent and an unknownword analyzer . The task of the information agent is to collect and extract textual data from Web pages of given URLs . The unknownword analyzer involves two processes : unknownword detection and unknownword boundary identification . Due to the non-segmenting characteristic of Thai written language , the unknownword detection is based on a wordsegmentation algorithm with a morphological analysis . To take advantage of large available text resource from the Web , the unknownword boundary identification is based on the statistical pattern-matching algorithm.
We evaluate our proposed framework on a collection of Web Pages obtained from a Thai news-paper?s Web site . The evaluation is divided to test each of the two processes underlying the framework . For the unknownword detection , the detection rate is found to be as high as 96%. In addition , by merging a few characters into a segment , the number of required unknownword extraction is reduced by at least 3 times , while the detection rate is relatively maintained . For the unknownword boundary identification , considering the highest frequent occurrence of string pattern is found to be the most effective approach . The identification accuracy was found to be as high as approximately 36%. The relatively low accuracy is not the major concern since the unknownword candidates are to be verified and corrected by users before they are actually added to the dictionary.
References
Masayuki Asahara and Yuji Matsumoto . 2004.
Japanese unknown word identification by character-based chunking . Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING2004), 459?465.
R . Boyer and S . Moore . 1977. A fast string searching algorithm . Communications of the ACM , 20:762? 772.
Jing-Shin Chang and Keh-Yih Su . 1997. An Unsupervised Iterative Method for Chinese New Lexicon Extraction . International Journal of Computational Linguistics & Chinese Language Processing , 2(2).
Keh-Jianne Chen and Ming-Hong Bai . 1998. Unknown Word Detection for Chinese by a Corpusbased Learning Method . Computational Linguistics and Chinese Language Processing , 3(1):27?44.
Keh-Jianne Chen and Wei-Yun Ma . 2002. Unknown Word Extraction for Chinese Documents . Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING2002), 169?175.
Asanee Kawtrakul , Chalatip Thumkanon , Yuen Poovorawan , Patcharee Varasrai , and Mukda Suktarachan.
1997. Automatic Thai Unknown Word Recognition . Proceedings of the Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium , 341?348.
Christopher S.G . Khoo and Teck Ee Loh . 2002. Using statistical and contextual information to identify two-and three-character words in Chinese text.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 53(5):365?377.
Lexitron Version 2.1, Thai-English Dictionary . Source available : http://lexitron.nectec.or.th , February 2006.
Tetsuji Nakagawa , Taku Kudoh and Yuji Matsumoto.
2001. Unknown Word Guessing and Part-of-Speech Tagging Using Support Vector Machines . Proceedings of the Sixth Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium ( NLPRS 2001), 325?331.
Jian-Yun Nie , Marie-Louise Hannan and Wanying Jin.
1995. Unknown Word Detection and Segmentation of Chinese Using Statistical and Heuristic Knowledge . Communications of COLIPS , 5(1&2):47?57.
Giorgos S . Orphanos and Dimitris N . Christodoulakis.
1999. POS Disambiguation and Unknown Word Guessing with Decision Trees . Proceedings of the
EACL , 134?141.
Yuen Poowarawan . 1986. Dictionary-based Thai Syllable Separation . Proceedings of the Ninth Electronics Engineering Conference.
Thairath Newspaper . Source available : http://www.thairath.com.
Janine Toole . 2000. Categorizing Unknown Words : Using Decision Trees to Identify Names and Misspellings . Proceeding of the 6th Applied Natural Language Processing Conference ( ANLP 2000), 173?179.
352
