Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation Sessions , pages 17?20,
Sydney , July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
An intelligent search engine and GUI-based efficient MEDLINE search
tool based on deep syntactic parsing
Tomoko Ohta
Yoshimasa Tsuruoka??
Jumpei Takeuchi
Jin-Dong Kim
Yusuke Miyao
Akane Yakushiji?
Kazuhiro Yoshida
Yuka Tateisi?
Department of Computer Science , University of Tokyo Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyoku , Tokyo 113-0033 JAPAN { okap , yusuke , ninomi , tsuruoka , akane , kmasuda , tj jug , kyoshida , harasan , jdkim , yucca , tsujii}@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Takashi Ninomiya?
Katsuya Masuda
Tadayoshi Hara
Jun?ichi Tsujii
Abstract
We present a practical HPSG parser for
English , an intelligent search engine to retrieve MEDLINE abstracts that represent biomedical events and an efficient MEDLINE search tool helping users to find information about biomedical entities such as genes , proteins , and the interactions between them.
1 Introduction
Recently , biomedical researchers have been facing the vast repository of research papers , e.g.
MEDLINE . These researchers are eager to search biomedical correlations such as proteinprotein or gene-disease associations . The use of natural language processing technology is expected to reduce their burden , and various attempts of information extraction using NLP has been being made ( Blaschke and Valencia , 2002; Hao et al , 2005; Chun et al , 2006). However , the framework of traditional information retrieval ( IR ) has difficulty with the accurate retrieval of such relational concepts . This is because relational concepts are essentially determined by semantic relations of words , and keyword-based IR techniques are insufficient to describe such relations precisely.
This paper proposes a practical HPSG parser for English , Enju , an intelligent search engine for the accurate retrieval of relational concepts from ? Current Affiliation : ? School of Informatics , University of Manchester ? Knowledge Research Center , Fujitsu Laboratories LTD.
?Faculty of Informatics , Kogakuin University ? Information Technology Center , University of Tokyo
FScore
GENIA treebank Penn Treebank
HPSG-PTB 85.10% 87.16%
HPSG-GENIA 86.87% 86.81%
Table 1: Performance for Penn Treebank and the
GENIA corpus
MEDLINE , MEDIE , and a GUI-based efficient
MEDLINE search tool , Info-PubMed.
2 Enju : An English HPSG Parser
We developed an English HPSG parser , Enju 1 ( Miyao and Tsujii , 2005; Hara et al , 2005; Ninomiya et al , 2005). Table 1 shows the performance . The Fscore in the table was accuracy of the predicate-argument relations output by the parser . A predicate-argument relation is defined as a tuple ??, wh , a , wa ?, where ? is the predicate type ( e.g ., adjective , intransitive verb ), wh is the head word of the predicate , a is the argument label ( MOD , ARG1, ..., ARG4), and wa is the head word of the argument . Precision/recall is the ratio of tuples correctly identified by the parser . The lexicon of the grammar was extracted from Sections 02-21 of Penn Treebank (39,832 sentences ). In the table , ? HPSG-PTB ? means that the statistical model was trained on Penn Treebank . ? HPSG-GENIA ? means that the statistical model was trained on both Penn Treebank and GENIA treebank as described in ( Hara et al , 2005).
The GENIA treebank ( Tateisi et al , 2005) consists of 500 abstracts (4,446 sentences ) extracted from
MEDLINE.
Figure 1 shows a part of the parse tree and fea-1http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/enju / ture structure for the sentence ? NASA officials vowed to land Discovery early Tuesday at one of three locations after weather conditions forced them to scrub Monday?s scheduled return .? 3 MEDIE : a search engine for
MEDLINE
Figure 2 shows the top page of the MEDIE . MEDIE is an intelligent search engine for the accurate retrieval of relational concepts from MEDLINE 2 ( Miyao et al , 2006). Prior to retrieval , all sentences are annotated with predicate argument structures and ontological identifiers by applying
Enju and a term recognizer.
3.1 Automatically Annotated Corpus
First , we applied a POS analyzer and then Enju.
The POS analyzer and HPSG parser are trained by using the GENIA corpus ( Tsuruoka et al , 2005; Hara et al , 2005), which comprises around 2,000 MEDLINE abstracts annotated with POS and Penn Treebank style syntactic parse trees ( Tateisi et al , 2005). The HPSG parser generates parse trees in a standoff format that can be converted to XML by combining it with the original text.
We also annotated technical terms of genes and diseases in our developed corpus . Technical terms are annotated simply by exact matching of dictio-2http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/medie / nary entries and the terms separated by space , tab , period , comma , hat , colon , semicolon , brackets , square brackets and slash in MEDLINE.
The entire dictionary was generated by applying the automatic generation method of name variations ( Tsuruoka and Tsujii , 2004) to the GENA dictionary for the gene names ( Koike and Takagi , 2004) and the UMLS ( Unified Medical Language System ) metathesaurus for the disease names ( Lindberg et al , 1993). It was generated by applying the name-variation generation method , and we obtained 4,467,855 entries of a gene and disease dictionary.
3.2 Functions of MEDIE
MEDIE provides three types of search , semantic search , keyword search , GCL search . GCL search provides us the most fundamental and powerful functions in which users can specify the boolean relations , linear order relation and structural relations with variables . Trained users can enjoy all functions in MEDIE by the GCL search , but it is not easy for general users to write appropriate queries for the parsed corpus . The semantic search enables us to specify an event verb with its subject and object easily . MEDIE automatically generates the GCL query from the semantic query , and runs the GCL search . Figure 3 shows the output of semantic search for the query ? What disease does dystrophin cause ??. This example will give us the most intuitive understandings of the proximal and structural retrieval with a richly annotated parsed corpus . MEDIE retrieves sentences which include event verbs of ? cause ? and noun ? dystrophin ? such that ? dystrophin ? is the subject of the event verbs . The event verb and its subject and object are highlighted with designated colors . As seen in the figure , small sentences in relative clauses , passive forms or coordination are retrieved . As the objects of the event verbs are highlighted , we can easily see what disease dystrophin caused . As the target corpus is already annotated with diseases entities , MEDIE can efficiently retrieve the disease expressions.
4 Info-PubMed : a GUI-based
MEDLINE search tool
Info-PubMed is a MEDLINE search tool with GUI , helping users to find information about biomedical entities such as genes , proteins , and Figure 3: Snapshot of MEDIE : ? What disease does dystrophin cause ?? the interactions between them 3.
Info-PubMed provides information from MEDLINE on proteinprotein interactions . Given the name of a gene or protein , it shows a list of the names of other genes/proteins which cooccur in sentences from MEDLINE , along with the frequency of cooccurrence.
Cooccurrence of two proteins/genes in the same sentence does not always imply that they interact . For more accurate extraction of sentences that indicate interactions , it is necessary to identify relations between the two substances . We adopted PASs derived by Enju and constructed extraction patterns on specific verbs and their arguments based on the derived PASs ( Yakusiji , 2006).
Figure 4: Snapshot of Info-PubMed (1)
Figure 5: Snapshot of Info-PubMed (2)
Figure 6: Snapshot of Info-PubMed (3) 4.1 Functions of Info-PubMed In the ? Gene Searcher ? window , enter the name of a gene or protein that you are interested in.
For example , if you are interested in Raf1, type ? raf1? in the ? Gene Searcher ? ( Figure 4). You will see a list of genes whose description in our dictionary contains ? raf1? ( Figure 5). Then , drag 3http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/info-pubmed / to the ? Interaction Viewer .? You will see a list of genes/proteins which cooccur in the same sentences , along with cooccurrence frequency.
The GeneBox in the leftmost column is the one you have moved to ? Interaction Viewer .? The GeneBoxes in the second column correspond to gene/proteins which cooccur in the same sentences , followed by the boxes in the third column,
InteractionBoxes.
Drag an InteractionBox to ? ContentViewer ? to see the content of the box ( Figure 6). An InteractionBox is a set of SentenceBoxes . A Sen-tenceBox corresponds to a sentence in MEDLINE in which the two gene/proteins cooccur . A Sen-tenceBox indicates whether the cooccurrence in the sentence is direct evidence of interaction or not . If it is judged as direct evidence of interaction , it is indicated as Interaction . Otherwise , it is indicated as Cooccurrence.
5 Conclusion
We presented an English HPSG parser , Enju , a search engine for relational concepts from MED-
LINE , MEDIE , and a GUI-based MEDLINE search tool , Info-PubMed.
MEDIE and Info-PubMed demonstrate how the results of deep parsing can be used for intelligent text mining and semantic information retrieval in the biomedical domain.
6 Acknowledgment
This work was partially supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority Areas ? Systems Genomics ? ( MEXT , Japan ) and Solution-Oriented Research for Science and Technology ( JST , Japan).
References
C . Blaschke and A . Valencia . 2002. The frame-based module of the SUISEKI information extraction system . IEEE Intelligent Systems , 17(2):14?20.
Y . Hao , X . Zhu , M . Huang , and M . Li . 2005. Discovering patterns to extract proteinprotein interactions from the literature : Part II . Bioinformatics , 21(15):3294?3300.
H.-W . Chun , Y . Tsuruoka , J.-D . Kim , R . Shiba , N . Nagata , T . Hishiki , and J . Tsujii . 2006. Extraction of gene-disease relations from MedLine using domain dictionaries and machine learning . In Proc.
PSB 2006, pages 4?15.
Carl Pollard and Ivan A . Sag . 1994. Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar . University of Chicago
Press.
Yusuke Miyao and Jun?ichi Tsujii . 2005. Probabilistic disambiguation models for wide-coverage HPSG parsing . In Proc . of ACL?05, pages 83?90.
Tadayoshi Hara , Yusuke Miyao , and Jun?ichi Tsujii . 2005. Adapting a probabilistic disambiguation model of an HPSG parser to a new domain . In Proc.
of IJCNLP 2005.
Takashi Ninomiya , Yoshimasa Tsuruoka , Yusuke Miyao , and Jun?ichi Tsujii . 2005. Efficacy of beam thresholding , unification filtering and hybrid parsing in probabilistic HPSG parsing . In Proc . of IWPT 2005, pages 103?114.
Yuka Tateisi , Akane Yakushiji , Tomoko Ohta , and Jun?ichi Tsujii . 2005. Syntax Annotation for the GENIA corpus . In Proc . of the IJCNLP 2005, Companion volume , pp . 222?227.
Yusuke Miyao , Tomoko Ohta , Katsuya Masuda , Yoshimasa Tsuruoka , Kazuhiro Yoshida , Takashi Ninomiya and Jun?ichi Tsujii . 2006. Semantic Retrieval for the Accurate Identification of Relational Concepts in Massive Textbases . In Proc . of ACL ?06, to appear.
Yoshimasa Tsuruoka , Yuka Tateisi , Jin-Dong Kim , Tomoko Ohta , John McNaught , Sophia Ananiadou , and Jun?ichi Tsujii . 2005. Part-of-speech tagger for biomedical text . In Proc . of the 10th Panhellenic
Conference on Informatics.
Y . Tsuruoka and J . Tsujii . 2004. Improving the performance of dictionary-based approaches in protein name recognition . Journal of Biomedical Informatics , 37(6):461?470.
Asako Koike and Toshihisa Takagi . 2004.
Gene/protein/family name recognition in biomedical literature . In Proc . of HLTNAACL 2004
Workshop : Biolink 2004, pages 9?16.
D.A . Lindberg , B.L . Humphreys , and A.T . McCray.
1993. The unified medical language system . Methods in Inf . Med ., 32(4):281?291.
Akane Yakushiji . 2006. Relation Information Extraction Using Deep Syntactic Analysis . Ph.D . Thesis,
University of Tokyo.
20
