Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics , pages 984?991,
Prague , Czech Republic , June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Sentiment Polarity Identification in Financial News:
A Cohesion-based Approach
Ann Devitt
School of Computer Science & Statistics,
Trinity College Dublin , Ireland
Ann.Devitt@cs.tcd.ie
Khurshid Ahmad
School of Computer Science & Statistics,
Trinity College Dublin , Ireland
Khurshid.Ahmad@cs.tcd.ie
Abstract
Text is not unadulterated fact . A text can make you laugh or cry but can it also make you short sell your stocks in company A and buy up options in company B ? Research in the domain of finance strongly suggests that it can . Studies have shown that both the informational and affective aspects of news text affect the markets in profound ways , impacting on volumes of trades , stock prices , volatility and even future firm earnings . This paper aims to explore a computable metric of positive or negative polarity in financial news text which is consistent with human judgments and can be used in a quantitative analysis of news sentiment impact on financial markets . Results from a preliminary evaluation are presented and discussed.
1 Introduction
Research in sentiment analysis has emerged to address the research questions : what is affect in text ? what features of text serve to convey it ? how can these features be detected and measured automatically . Sentence and phrase level sentiment analysis involves a systematic examination of texts , such as blogs , reviews and news reports , for positive , negative or neutral emotions ( Wilson et al , 2005; Grefenstette et al , 2004). The term ? sentiment analysis ? is used rather differently in financial economics where it refers to the derivation of market confidence indicators from proxies such as stock prices and trading volumes . There is a tradition going back to the Nobel Sveriges?Riksbank Laureates Herbert Simon (1978 Prize ) and Daniel Kahneman (2002 Prize ), that shows that investors and traders in such markets can behave irrationally and that this bounded rationality is inspired by what the traders and investors hear from others about the conditions that may or may not prevail in the markets.
Robert Engle (2003 Prize ) has given a mathematical description of the asymmetric and affective impact of news on prices : positive news is typically related to large changes in prices but only for a short time ; conversely the effect of negative news on prices and volumes of trading is longer lasting . The emergent domain of sociology of finance examines financial markets as social constructs and how communications , such as emails and news reports , may be loaded with sentiment which could distort market trading ( MacKenzie , 2003).
It would appear that news affects the markets in profound ways , impacting on volumes of trade , stock returns , volatility of prices and even future firm earnings . In the domain of news impact analysis in finance , in recent years the focus has expanded from informational to affective content of text in an effort to explain the relationship between text and the markets . All text , be it news , blogs , accounting reports or poetry , has a non-factual dimension conveying opinion , invoking emotion , providing a nuanced perspective of the factual content of the text.
With the increase of computational power and lexical and corpus resources it seems computationally feasible to detect some of the affective content of text automatically . The motivation for the work reported here is to identify a metric for sentiment po-and which is readily derivable from free text . This research is being carried out in the context of a study of the impact of news and its attendant biases on financial markets , formalizing earlier multilingual , corpus-based empirical work that analysed change in sentiment and volume of news in large financial news corpora ( Ahmad et al , 2006). A systematic analysis of the impact of news bias or polarity on market variables requires a numeric value for sentiment intensity , as well as a binary tag for sentiment polarity , to identify trends in the sentiment indicator as well as turning points . In this approach , the contribution to an overall sentiment polarity and intensity metric of individual lexical items which are ? affective ? by definition is determined by their connectivity and position within a representation of the text as a whole based on the principles of lexical cohesion . The contribution of each element is therefore not purely additive but rather is mitigated by its relevance and position relative to other elements.
Section 2 sets out related work in the sentiment analysis domain both in computational linguistics and in finance where these techniques have been applied with some success . Section 3 outlines the cohesion-based algorithm for sentiment polarity detection , the resources used and the benefits of using the graphbased text representation approach . This approach was evaluated relative to a small corpus of gold standard sentiment judgments . The derivation of the gold standard and details of the evaluation are outlined in section 4. The results are presented and discussed in section 5 and section 6 concludes with a look at future challenges for this research.
2 Related Work 2.1 Cognitive Theories of Emotion In order to understand how emotion can be realised in text , we must first have a notion of what emotion is and how people experience it . Current cognitive theories of what constitutes emotion are divided between two primary approaches : categorical and dimensional . The Darwinian categorical approach posits a finite set of basic emotions which are experienced universally across cultures , ( e.g . anger , fear , sadness , surprise ( Ekman and Friesen , 1971)). The second approach delineates emotions according to multiple dimensions rather than into discrete categories . The two primary dimensions in this account are a good?bad axis , the dimension of valence or evaluation , and a strong-weak axis , the dimension of activation or intensity ( Osgood et al , 1957). The work reported here aims to conflate the evaluation and activation dimensions into one metric with the size of the value indicating strength of activation and its sign , polarity on the evaluation axis.
2.2 Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment analysis in computational linguistics has focused on examining what textual features ( lexical , syntactic , punctuation , etc ) contribute to affective content of text and how these features can be detected automatically to derive a sentiment metric for a word , sentence or whole text . Wiebe and colleagues have largely focused on identifying subjectivity in texts , i.e . identifying those texts which are affectively neutral and those which are not . This work has been grounded in a strong human evaluative component . The subjectivity identification research has moved from initial work using syntactic class , punctuation and sentence position features for subjectivity classifiers to later work using more lexical features like gradation of adjectives or word frequency ( Wiebe et al , 1999; Wiebe et al , 2005). Others , such as Turney (2002), Pang and Vaithyanathan (2002), have examined the positive or negative polarity , rather than presence or absence , of affective content in text . Kim and Hovy (2004), among others , have combined the two tasks , identifying subjective text and detecting its sentiment polarity . The indicators of affective content have been drawn from lexical sources , corpora and the world wide web and combined in a variety of ways , including factor analysis and machine learning techniques , to determine when a text contains affective content and what is the polarity of that content.
2.3 Sentiment and News Impact Analysis
Niederhoffer (1971), academic and hedge fund manager , analysed 20 years of New York Times headlines classified into 19 semantic categories and on a good-bad rating scale to evaluate how the markets reacted to good and bed news : he found that markets do react to news with a tendency to overreact to bad news . Somewhat prophetically , he suggests duce more objectivity in the analysis . Engle and Ng (1993) proposed the news impact curve as a model for how news impacts on volatility in the market with bad news introducing more volatility than good news . They used the market variable , stock returns , as a proxy for news , an unexpected drop in returns for bad news and an unexpected rise for good news.
Indeed , much early work used such market variables or readily quantifiable aspects of news as a proxy for the news itself : e.g . news arrival , type , provenance and volumes ( Cutler et al , 1989; Mitchell and Mulherin , 1994). More recent studies have proceeded in a spirit of computer-aided objectivity which entails determining linguistic features to be used to automatically categorise text into positive or negative news . Davis et al(2006) investigate the effects of optimistic or pessimistic language used in financial press releases on future firm performance . They conclude that a ) readers form expectations regarding the habitual bias of writers and b ) react more strongly to reports which violate these expectations , strongly suggesting that readers , and by extension the markets , form expectations about and react to not only content but also affective aspects of text . Tetlock (2007) also investigates how a pessimism factor , automatically generated from news text through term classification and principal components analysis , may forecast market activity , in particular stock returns . He finds that high negativity in news predicts lower returns up to 4 weeks around story release . The studies establish a relationship between affective bias in text and market activity that market players and regulators may have to address.
3 Approach 3.1 Cohesion-based Text Representation The approach employed here builds on a cohesion-based text representation algorithm used in a news story comparison application described in ( Devitt , 2004). The algorithm builds a graph representation of text from part-of-speech tagged text without disambiguation using WordNet ( Fellbaum , 1998) as a real world knowledge source to reduce information loss in the transition from text to textbased structure . The representation is designed within the theoretical framework of lexical cohesion ( Halliday and Hasan , 1976). Aspects of the cohesive structure of a text are captured in a graph representation which combines information derived from the text and WordNet semantic content . The graph structure is composed of nodes representing concepts in or derived from the text connected by relations between these concepts in WordNet , such as antonymy or hypernymy , or derived from the text , such as adjacency in the text . In addition , the approach provides the facility to manipulate or control how the WordNet semantic content information is interpreted through the use of topological features of the knowledge base . In order to evaluate the relative contribution of WordNet concepts to the information content of a text as a whole , a node specificity metric was derived based on an empirical analysis of the distribution of topological features of WordNet such as inheritance , hierarchy depth , clustering coefficients and node degree and how these features map onto human judgments of concept specificity or informativity . This metric addresses the issue of the uneven population of most knowledge bases so that the local idiosyncratic characteristics of WordNet can be mitigated by some of its global features.
3.2 Sentiment Polarity Overlay
By exploiting existing lexical resources for sentiment analysis , an explicit affective dimension can be overlaid on this basic text model . Our approach to polarity measurement , like others , relies on a lexicon of tagged positive and negative sentiment terms which are used to quantify positive/negative sentiment . In this first iteration of the work , SentiWN ( Esuli and Sebastiani , 2006) was used as it provides a readily interpretable positive and negative polarity value for a set of ? affective ? terms which conflates Osgood?s (1957) evaluative and activation dimensions . Furthermore , it is based on WordNet 2.0 and can therefore be integrated into the existing text representation algorithm , where some nodes in the cohesion graph carry a SentiWN sentiment value and others do not . The contribution of individual polarity nodes to the polarity metric of the text as a whole is then determined with respect to the textual information and WN semantic and topological features encoded in the underlying graph representation of the text . Three polarity metrics were implemented to evaluate the effectiveness of exploiting different Basic Cohesion Metric is based solely on frequency of sentiment-bearing nodes in or derived from the source text , i.e . the sum of polarity values for all nodes in the graph.
Relation Type Metric modifies the basic metric with respect to the types of WordNet relations in the text-derived graph . For each node in the graph , its sentiment value is the product of its polarity value and a relation weight for each relation this node enters into in the graph structure . Unlike most lexical chaining algorithms , not all WordNet relations are treated as equal . In this sentiment overlay , the relations which are deemed most relevant are those that potentially denote a relation of the affective dimension , like antonymy , and those which constitute key organising principles of the database , such as hypernymy . Potentially affect-effecting relations have the strongest weighting while more amorphous relations , such as ? also see ?, have the lowest.
Node Specificity Metric modifies the basic metric with respect to a measure of node specificity calculated on the basis of topographical features of WordNet . The intuition behind this measure is that highly specific nodes or concepts may carry more informational and , by extension , affective content than less specific ones . We have noted the difficulty of using a knowledge base whose internal structure is not homogeneous and whose idiosyncrasies are not quantified . The specificity measure aims to factor out population sparseness or density in WordNet by evaluating the contribution of each node relative to its depth in the hierarchy , its connectivity ( branchingFactor ) and its siblings : Spc = ( depth+ln(siblings)?ln(branchingFactor))NormalizingFactor (1) The three metrics are further specialised according to the following two boolean flags : InText : the metric is calculated based on 1) only those nodes representing terms in the source text , or 2) all nodes in the graph representation derived from the text . In this way , the metrics can be calculated using information derived from the graph representation , such as node specificity , without potentially noisy contributions from nodes not in the source text but related to them , via relations such as hypernymy.
Modifiers : the metric is calculated using all open class parts of speech or modifiers alone . On a cursory inspection of SentiWN , it seems that modifiers have more reliable values than nouns or verbs . This option was included to test for possible adverse effects of the lexicon.
In total for each metric there are four outcomes combining inText true/false and modifiers true/false.
4 Evaluation
The goal of this research is to examine the relationship between financial markets and financial news , in particular the polarity of financial news . The domain of finance provides data and methods for solid quantitative analysis of the impact of sentiment polarity in news . However , in order to engage with this long tradition of analysis of the instruments and related variables of the financial markets , the quantitative measure of polarity must be not only easy to compute , it must be consistent with human judgments of polarity in this domain . This evaluation is a first step on the path to establishing reliability for a sentiment measure of news . Unfortunately , the focus on news , as opposed to other text types , has its difficulties . Much of the work in sentiment analysis in the computational linguistics domain has focused either on short segments , such as sentences ( Wilson et al , 2005), or on longer documents with an explicit polarity orientation like movie or product reviews ( Turney , 2002). Not all news items may express overt sentiment . Therefore , in order to test our hypothesis , we selected a news topic which was considered a priori to have emotive content.
4.1 Corpus
Markets react strongest to information about firms to which they have an emotional attachment ( MacGregor et al , 2000). Furthermore , takeovers and mergers are usually seen as highly emotive contexts.
To combine these two emotion-enhancing factors , a corpus of news texts was compiled on the topic of the aggressive takeover bid of a low-cost airline ( Ryanair ) for the Irish flag-carrier airline ( Aer Lingus ). Both airlines have a strong ( positive and negative ) emotional attachment for many in Ireland . Furthermore , both airlines are highly visible within the country and have vocal supporters and detractors in the public arena . The corpus is drawn from the and spans 4 months in 2006 from the flotation of the flag carrier on the stock exchange in September 2006, through the ? surprise ? takeover bid announcement by Ryanair , to the withdrawal of the bid by Ryanair in December 2006.1 4.2 Gold Standard A set of 30 texts selected from the corpus was annotated by 3 people on a 7-point scale from very positive to very negative . Given that a takeover bid has two players , the respondents were asked also to rate the semantic orientation of the texts with respect to the two players , Ryanair and Aer Lingus . Respondents were all native English speakers , 2 female and 1 male . To ensure emotional engagement in the task , they were first asked to rate their personal attitude to the two airlines . The ratings in all three cases were on the extreme ends of the 7 point scale , with very positive attitudes towards the flag carrier and very negative attitudes towards the low-cost airline . Re-spondent attitudes may impact on their text evaluations but , given the high agreement of attitudes in this study , this impact should at least be consistent across the individuals in the study . A larger study should control explicitly for this variable.
As the respondents gave ratings on a ranked scale , inter-respondent reliability was determined using Krippendorf?s alpha , a modification of the Kappa coefficient for ordinal data ( Krippendorff , 1980). On the general ranking scale , there was little agreement ( kappa = 0.1685), corroborating feedback from respondents on the difficulty of providing a general rating for text polarity distinct from a rating with respect to one of the two companies . However , there was an acceptable degree of agreement ( Grove et al , 1981) on the Ryanair and Aer Lingus polarity ratings , kappa = 0.5795 and kappa = 0.5589 respectively . Results report correlations with these ratings which are consistent and , from the financial market perspective , potentially more interesting.2 1A correlation analysis of human sentiment ratings with Ryanair and Aer Lingus stock prices for the last quarter of 2006 was conducted . The findings suggest that stock prices were correlated with ratings with respect to Aer Lingus , suggesting that , during this takeover period , investors may have been influenced by sentiment expressed in news towards Aer Lingus . However , the timeseries is too short to ensure statistical significance.
2Results in this paper are reported with respect to the 4.3 Performance Metrics The performance of the polarity algorithm was evaluated relative to a corpus of human-annotated news texts , focusing on two separate dimensions of polarity : 1. Polarity direction : the task of assigning a binary positive/negative value to a text 2. Polarity intensity : the task of assigning a value to indicate the strength of the negative/positive polarity in a text.
Performance on the former is reported using standard recall and precision metrics . The latter is reported as a correlation with average human ratings.
4.4 Baseline
For the metrics in section 3, the baseline for comparison sums the SentiWN polarity rating for only those lexical items present in the text , not exploiting any aspect of the graph representation of the text . This baseline corresponds to the Basic Cohesion Metric , with inText = true ( only lexical items in the text ) and modifiers = false ( all parts of speech).
5 Results and Discussion 5.1 Binary Polarity Assignment The baseline results for positive ratings , negative ratings and overall accuracy for the task of assigning a polarity tag are reported in table 1. The results show
Type Precision Recall FScore
Positive 0.381 0.7273 0.5
Negative 0.667 0.3158 0.4286
Overall 0.4667 0.4667 0.4667
Table 1: Baseline results that the baseline tends towards the positive end of the rating spectrum , with high recall for positive ratings but low precision . Conversely , negative ratings have high precision but low recall . Figures 1 to 3 illustrate the performance for positive , negative and overall ratings of all metric?inText?Modifier combinations , enumerated in table 2, relative to this baseline , the horizontal . Those metrics which surpass this line are deemed to outperform the baseline.
Ryanair ratings as they had the highest interrater agreement.
988 1 Cohesion 5 Relation 9 NodeSpec 2 CohesionTxt 6 RelationTxt 10 NodeSpecTxt 3 CohesionMod 7 RelationMod 11 NodeSpecMod 4 CohesionTxtMod 8 RelationTxtMod 12 NodeSpecTxtMod
Table 2: Metric types in Figures 13
Figure 1: F Score for Positive Ratings
All metrics have a bias towards positive ratings with attendant high positive recall values and improved fscore for positive polarity assignments.
The Basic Cohesion Metric marginally outperforms the baseline overall indicating that exploiting the graph structure gives some added benefit . For the Relations and Specificity metrics , system performance greatly improves on the baseline for the modifiers = true options , whereas , when all parts of speech are included ( modifier = false ), performance drops significantly . This sensitivity to inclusion of all word classes could suggest that modifiers are better indicators of text polarity than other word classes or that the metrics used are not appropriate to non-modifier parts of speech . The former hypothesis is not supported by the literature while the latter is not supported by prior successful application of these metrics in a text comparison task . In order to investigate the source of this sensitivity , we intend to examine the distribution of relation types and node specificity values for sentiment-bearing terms to determine how best to tailor these metrics to the sentiment identification task.
A further hypothesis is that the basic polarity values for non-modifiers are less reliable than for adjectives and adverbs . On a cursory inspection of polarity values of nouns and adjectives in SentiWN , it would appear that adjectives are somewhat more reliably labelled than nouns . For example , crime and
Figure 2: F Score for Negative Ratings some of its hyponyms are labelled as neutral ( e.g.
forgery ) or even positive ( e.g . assault ) whereas criminal is labelled as negative . This illustrates a key weakness in a lexical approach such as this : overreliance on lexical resources . No lexical resource is infallible . It is therefore vital to spread the associated risk by using more than one knowledge source , e.g . multiple sentiment lexica or using corpus data.
Figure 3: F Score for All Ratings 5.2 Polarity Intensity Values The results on the polarity intensity task parallel the results on polarity tag assignment . Table 3 sets out the correlation coefficients for the metrics with respect to the average human rating . Again , the best performers are the relation type and node specificity metrics using only modifiers , significant to the 0.05 level . Yet the correlation coefficients overall are not very high . This would suggest that perhaps the relationship between the human ranking scale and the automatic one is not strictly linear . Although the human ratings map approximately onto the automati-one to one mapping . The section that follows discuss this and some of the other issues which this evaluation process has brought to light.
Metric inText Modifier Correlation
Basic Cohesion No No 0.47**
Yes No 0.42*
No Yes 0.47**
Yes Yes 0.47**
Relation Type No No -0.1**
Yes No -0.13*
No Yes 0.5**
Yes Yes 0.38*
Node Specificity No No 0.00
Yes No -0.03
No Yes 0.48**
Yes Yes 0.38*
Table 3: Correlation Coefficients for human ratings.
**. Significant at the 0.01 level . *. Significant at the 0.05 level.
5.3 Issues
The Rating Scale and Thresholding
Overall the algorithm tends towards the positive end of the spectrum in direct contrast to human raters with 5570% of all ratings being negative . Furthermore , the correlation of human to algorithm ratings is significant but not strongly directional . It would appear that there are more positive lexical items in text , hence the algorithm?s positive bias . Yet much of this positivity is not having a strong impact on readers , hence the negative bias observed in these evaluators . This raises questions about the scale of human polarity judgments : are people more sensitive to negativity in text ? is there a positive baseline in text that people find unremarkable and ignore ? To investigate this issue , we will conduct a comparative corpus analysis of the distribution of positive and negative lexical items in text and their perceived strengths in text . The results of this analysis should help to locate sentiment turning points or thresholds and establish an elastic sentiment scale which allows for baseline but disregarded positivity in text.
The Impact of the Lexicon
The algorithm described here is lexicon-based , fully reliant on available lexical resources . However , we have noted that an overreliance on lexica has its disadvantages , as any handcoded or corpus-derived lexicon will have some degree of error or inconsistency . In order to address this issue , it is necessary to spread the risk associated with a single lexical resource by drawing on multiple sources , as in ( Kim and Hovy , 2005). The SentiWN lexicon used in this implementation is derived from a seed word set supplemented WordNet relations and as such it has not been psychologically validated . For this reason , it has good coverage but some inconsistency.
Whissel?s Dictionary of Affect (1989) on the other hand is based entirely on human ratings of terms.
It?s coverage may be narrower but accuracy might be more reliable . This dictionary also has the advantage of separating out Osgood?s (1957) evaluative and activation dimensions as well as an ? imaging ? rating for each term to allow a multidimensional analysis of affective content . The WN Affect lexicon ( Valitutti et al , 2004) again provides somewhat different rating types where terms are classified in terms of denoting or evoking different physical or mental affective reactions . Together , these resources could offer not only more accurate base polarity values but also more nuanced metrics that may better correspond to human notions of affect in text.
The Gold Standard
Sentiment rating evaluation is not a straightforward task . Wiebe et al(2005) note many of the difficulties associated human sentiment ratings of text . As noted above , it can be even more difficult when evaluating news where the text is intended to appear impartial . The attitude of the evaluator can be all important : their attitude to the individuals or organisations in the text , their professional viewpoint as a market player or an ordinary punter , their attitude to uncertainty and risk which can be a key factor in the world of finance . In order to address these issues for the domain of news impact in financial markets , the expertise of market professionals must be elicited to determine what they look for in text and what viewpoint they adopt when reading financial news . In econometric analysis , stock price or trading volume data constitute an alternative gold standard , representing a proxy for human reaction to news . For economic significance , the data must span a time period of several years and compilation of a text and stock 6 Conclusions and Future Work This paper presents a lexical cohesion based metric of sentiment intensity and polarity in text and an evaluation of this metric relative to human judgments of polarity in financial news . We are conducting further research on how best to capture a psychologically plausible measure of affective content of text by exploiting available resources and a broader evaluation of the measure relative to human judgments and existing metrics . This research is expected to contribute to sentiment analysis in finance.
Given a reliable metric of sentiment in text , what is the impact of changes in this value on market variables ? This involves a sociolinguistic dimension to determine what publications or texts best characterise or are most read and have the greatest influence in this domain and the economic dimension of correlation with economic indicators.
References
Khurshid Ahmad , David Cheng , and Yousif Almas . 2006.
Multi?lingual sentiment analysis in financial news streams.
In Proc . of the 1st Intl . Conf . on Grid in Finance , Italy.
David M . Cutler , James M . Poterba , and Lawrence H . Summers . 1989. What moves stock prices . Journal of Portfolio
Management , 79:223?260.
Angela K . Davis , Jeremy M . Piger , and Lisa M . Sedor . 2006.
Beyond the numbers : An analysis of optimistic and pessimistic language in earnings press releases . Technical report , Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis.
Ann Devitt . 2004. Methods for Meaningful Text Representation and Comparison . Ph.D . thesis , Trinity College Dublin.
Paul Ekman and W . V . Friesen . 1971. Constants across cultures in the face and emotion . Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology , 17:124?129.
Robert F . Engle and Victor K . Ng . 1993. Measuring and testing the impact of news on volatility . Journal of Finance , 48(5):1749?1778.
Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani . 2006. Sentiwordnet : A publicly available lexical resource for opinion mining . In
Proceedings of LREC 2006.
Christiane Fellbaum . 1998. WordNet,an electronic lexical database . MIT Press.
Gregory Grefenstette , Yan Qu , James G . Shanahan , and David A . Evans . 2004. Coupling niche browsers and affect analysis for an opinion mining application . In Proceedings of RIAO-04, pages 186?194.
William N . Grove , Nancy C . Andreasen , Patricia McDonald-Scott , Martin B . Keller , and Robert W . Shapiro . 1981. Reliability studies of psychiatric diagnosis . theory and practice.
Archives of General Psychiatry , 38:408?413.
Michael A . K . Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan . 1976. Cohesion in
English . Longman.
Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy . 2004. Determining the sentiment of opinions . In Proceedings of COLING 2004.
Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy . 2005. Automatic detection of opinion bearing words and sentences . In Proc . of IJCNLP05, Jeju Island , Korea.
Klaus Krippendorff . 1980. Content Analysis : an Introduction to its Methodology . Sage Publications , Beverly Hills , CA.
Donald G . MacGregor , Paul Slovic , David Dreman , and Michael Berry . 2000. Imagery , affect , and financial judgment . The Journal of Psychology and Financial Markets , 1(2):104?110.
Donald MacKenzie . 2003. Long-term capital management and the sociology of arbitrage . Economy and Society , 32:349? 380.
Mark L . Mitchell and J . Harold Mulherin . 1994. The impact of public information on the stock market . Journal of Finance , 49(3):923?950.
Victor Niederhoffer . 1971. The analysis of world events and stock prices . Journal of Business , 44(2):193?219.
Charles E . Osgood , George J . Suci , and Percy H . Tannenbaum.
1957. The Measurement of meaning . University of Illinois
Press , Chicago , Ill.
Bo Pang , Lillian Lee , and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan . 2002.
Thumbs up ? Sentiment classification using machine learning techniques . In Proc . of EMNLP02, pages 79?86.
Paul C . Tetlock . 2007. Giving content to investor sentiment : The role of media in the stock market . Journal of Finance.
forthcoming.
Peter D . Turney . 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down ? semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classification of reviews.
In Proceedings of ACL?02, pages 417?424.
Alessandro Valitutti , Carlo Strapparava , and Oliviero Stock.
2004. Developing affective lexical resources . PsychNology
Journal , 2(1):61?83.
Cynthia Whissell . 1989. The dictionary of affect in language.
In R . Plutchik and H . Kellerman , editors , Emotion : theory research and experience , volume 4. Acad . Press , London.
Janyce M . Wiebe , Rebecca F . Bruce , and Thomas P . O?Hara.
1999. Development and use of a goldstandard data set for subjectivity classifications . In Proceedings of ACL99.
Janyce Wiebe , Theresa Wilson , and Claire Cardie . 2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions in language.
Language Resources and Evaluation , 39:165?210.
Theresa Wilson , Janyce Wiebe , and Paul Hoffmann . 2005.
Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment analysis . In Proc . of HLT/EMNLP-2005, pages 347?354.
991
