Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions , pages 169?172,
Prague , June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
An OWL Ontology for HPSG
Graham Wilcock
University of Helsinki
PO Box 9
00014 Helsinki , Finland
graham.wilcock@helsinki.fi
Abstract
The paper presents an OWL ontology for
HPSG . The HPSG ontology is integrated with an existing OWL ontology , GOLD , as a community of practice extension . The basic ideas are illustrated by visualizations of type hierarchies for parts of speech.
1 Introduction
The paper presents an OWL ontology for HPSG ( Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar ) ( Sag et al , 2003). OWL is the W3C Web Ontology Language ( http://www.w3.org/2004/OWL ). An existing ontology is used as a starting point : GOLD ( Section 2) is a general ontology for linguistic description . As HPSG is a more specific linguistic theory , the HPSG ontology ( Section 3) is integrated inside GOLD as a subontology known as a community of practice extension ( Section 4).
2 GOLD : A General Ontology for
Linguistic Description
GOLD , a General Ontology for Linguistic Description ( http://www.linguistics-ontology.org /) ( Farrar and Langendoen , 2003) is an OWL ontology that aims to capture ? the general knowledge of the field that is usually possessed by a well trained linguist.
This includes knowledge that potentially forms the basis of any theoretical framework . In particular , GOLD captures the fundamentals of descriptive linguistics . Examples of such knowledge are ? a verb is a part of speech ?, ? gender can be semantically grounded ?, or ? linguistic expressions realize morphemes ?.? ( Farrar and Lewis , 2005).
As far as possible GOLD uses language-neutral and theory-neutral terminology . For instance , parts of speech are subclasses of gold:GrammaticalUnit as shown in Figure 1. As GOLD is language-neutral , a wide range of parts of speech are included . For example , both Preposition and Postposition are included as subclasses of Adposition . The classes in the OWLViz graphical visualization ( on the right in Figure 1) have been selected from the complete list in the Asserted Hierarchy ( on the left).
Originally GOLD was intended to be neutral where linguistic theories had divergent views , but a recent development is the idea of supporting different subcommunities as communities of practice ( Farrar and Lewis , 2005) within the GOLD framework . A community of practice may focus on developing a consensus in a specific area , for example in phonology or in Bantu languages . On the other hand , communities of practice may focus on competing theories , where each sub-community has its own distinctive terminology and divergent conceptualization . In this case , the aim is to capture explicitly the relationship between the sub-community view and the overall framework , in the form of a Community Of Practice Extension ( COPE ) ( Farrar and Lewis , 2005). A COPE is a subontology that inherits from , and extends , the overall GOLD ontology . Sub-ontology classes are distinguished from each other by different namespace prefixes , for example gold:Noun and hpsg:noun.
3 An OWL Ontology for HPSG
HPSG OWL is an OWL ontology for HPSG that is currently under development . As the aims of the first version of the ontology are clarity and acceptability , it carefully follows the standard textbook version of HPSG by Sag et al (2003). This also means that the first version is English-specific , as the core grammars presented in the textbook are English-specific.
In HPSG OWL , parts of speech are subclasses of hpsg:pos , as shown in Figure 2. As this version is English-specific , it has prepositions ( hpsg:prep ) but not postpositions . Parts of speech that have agreement features ( in English ) form a distinct subclass hpsg:agr-pos including hpsg:det ( determiner ) and hpsg:verb . Within hpsg:agr-pos , hpsg:comp ( complementizer ) and hpsg:noun form a further subclass hpsg:nominal . This particular conceptualization of the type hierarchy is specific to ( Sag et al , 2003).
The Prote?ge?-OWL ( http://protege.stanford.edu ) ontology editor supports both visual construction and visual editing of the hierarchy . For example , if hpsg:adj had agreement features , it could be moved under hpsg:agr-pos by a simple drag-and-drop ( in the Asserted Hierarchy pane on the left ). Both the visualization ( in the OWLViz pane on the right ) and the underlying OWL statements ( not shown ) are automatically generated . The grammar writer does not edit OWL statements directly.
This is a significant advantage of the new technology over current grammar development tools . For example , LKB ( Copestake , 2002) can produce a visualization of the type hierarchy from the underlying Type Definition Language ( TDL ) statements , but the hierarchy can only be modified by textually editing the TDL statements.
4 A Community of Practice Extension
HPSG COPE is a community of practice extension that integrates the HPSG ontology within GOLD.
The COPE is an OWL ontology that imports both the GOLD and the HPSG ontologies . Apart from the import statements , the COPE consists entirely of rdfs:subClassOf and rdfs:subPropertyOf statements.
HPSG COPE defines HPSG classes as subclasses of GOLD classes and HPSG properties as subproperties of GOLD properties.
In the COPE , parts of speech in HPSG are subsumed by appropriate parts of speech in GOLD , as shown in Figure 3. In some cases this is straightforward , for example hpsg:adj is mapped to gold:Adjective . In other cases , the HPSG theory-specific terminology differs significantly from the theory-neutral terminology in GOLD . Some of the mappings are based on definitions of the HPSG terms given in a glossary in ( Sag et al , 2003), for example the mapping of hpsg:conj ( conjunction ) to gold:CoordinatingConnective and the mapping of hpsg:comp ( complementizer ) to gold:SubordinatingConnective.
Properties in HPSG OWL are defined by HPSG COPE as subproperties of GOLD properties . For example , the HPSG OWL class hpsg:sign ( Sag et al , 2003) ( p . 475) properties : PHON type : list ( a sequence of word forms ) SYN type : gram-cat ( a grammatical category ) SEM type : sem-struc ( a semantic structure ) are mapped to the GOLD class gold:LinguisticSign properties : hasForm Range : PhonologicalUnit hasGrammar Range : GrammaticalUnit hasMeaning Range : SemanticUnit by the HPSG COPE rdfs:subPropertyOf definitions : hpsg:PHON subproperty of gold:hasForm hpsg:SYN subproperty of gold:hasGrammar hpsg:SEM subproperty of gold:hasMeaning 5 Conclusion The paper has described an initial version of an OWL ontology for HPSG , together with an approach to integrating it with GOLD as a community of practice extension . Perhaps a rigorous foundation of typed feature structures and a clear type hierarchy makes HPSG more amenable to expression as an ontology than other linguistic theories.
Prote?ge?-OWL supports visual development and visual editing of the ontology . This is a significant practical advantage over existing grammar development tools . OWLViz provides graphical visualizations of any part of the ontology.
OWL DL ( Description Logic ) reasoners can be run inside Prote?ge ? to check consistency and to do cross-classification . One current research topic is how to exploit reasoners to perform automatically the kind of cross-classification that is widely used in
HPSG linguistic analyses.
Another current topic is how to implement HPSG lexical rules and grammar rules in the ontology . An interesting possibility is to use the W3C Semantic Web Rule Language , SWRL ( Wilcock , 2006).
References
Ann Copestake . 2002. Implementing Typed Feature Structure Grammars . CSLI Publications , Stanford,
CA.
Scott Farrar and D . Terence Langendoen . 2003. A linguistic ontology for the semantic web . GLOT International , 7.3:97?100.
Scott Farrar and William D . Lewis . 2005. The GOLD Community of Practice : An infrastructure for linguistic data on the web . http://www.u.arizona.edu/?farrar/.
Ivan A . Sag , Thomas Wasow , and Emily Bender . 2003.
Syntactic Theory : A Formal Introduction . CSLI Publications , Stanford , CA.
Graham Wilcock . 2006. Natural language parsing with GOLD and SWRL . In RuleML-2006, Rules and Rule Markup Languages for the Semantic Web ( Online Proceedings ), Athens , GA.
172
