Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions , pages 13?16,
Prague , June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
SemTAG : a platform for specifying Tree Adjoining Grammars and
performing TAG-based Semantic Construction
Claire Gardent
CNRS / LORIA
Campus scientifique - BP 259
54 506 Vand?uvre-Le`s-Nancy CEDEX
France
Claire.Gardent@loria.fr
Yannick Parmentier
INRIA / LORIA - Nancy Universite?
Campus scientifique - BP 259
54 506 Vand?uvre-Le`s-Nancy CEDEX
France
Yannick.Parmentier@loria.fr
Abstract
In this paper , we introduce SEMTAG , a free and open software architecture for the development of Tree Adjoining Grammars integrating a compositional semantics . SEMTAG differs from XTAG in two main ways.
First , it provides an expressive grammar formalism and compiler for factorising and specifying TAGs . Second , it supports semantic construction.
1 Introduction
Over the last decade , many of the main grammatical frameworks used in computational linguistics were extended to support semantic construction ( i.e ., the computation of a meaning representation from syntax and word meanings ). Thus , the HPSG ERG grammar for English was extended to output minimal recursive structures as semantic representations for sentences ( Copestake and Flickinger , 2000); the LFG ( Lexical Functional Grammar ) grammars to output lambda terms ( Dalrymple , 1999); and Clark and Curran?s CCG ( Combinatory Categorial Grammar ) based statistical parser was linked to a semantic construction module allowing for the derivation of Discourse Representation Structures ( Bos et al , 2004).
For Tree Adjoining Grammar ( TAG ) on the other hand , there exists to date no computational framework which supports semantic construction . In this demo , we present SEMTAG , a free and open software architecture that supports TAG based semantic construction.
The structure of the paper is as follows . First , we briefly introduce the syntactic and semantic formalisms that are being handled ( section 2). Second , we situate our approach with respect to other possible ways of doing TAG based semantic construction ( section 3). Third , we show how XMG , the linguistic formalism used to specify the grammar ( section 4) differs from existing computational frameworks for specifying a TAG and in particular , how it supports the integration of semantic information . Finally , section 5 focuses on the semantic construction module and reports on the coverage of SEMFRAG , a core TAG for French including both syntactic and semantic information.
2 Linguistic formalisms
We start by briefly introducing the syntactic and semantic formalisms assumed by SEMTAG namely , Feature-Based Lexicalised Tree Adjoining Grammar and LU .
Tree Adjoining Grammars ( TAG ) TAG is a tree rewriting system ( Joshi and Schabes , 1997). A TAG is composed of ( i ) two tree sets ( a set of initial trees and a set of auxiliary trees ) and ( ii ) two rewriting operations ( substitution and adjunction ). Furthermore , in a Lexicalised TAG , each tree has at least one leaf which is a terminal.
Initial trees are trees where leafnodes are labelled either by a terminal symbol or by a nonterminal symbol marked for substitution (?). Auxiliary trees are trees where a leafnode has the same label as the root node and is marked for adjunction (?). This leafnode is called a foot node.
13
Further , substitution corresponds to the insertion of an elementary tree t1 into a tree t2 at a frontier node having the same label as the root node of t1.
Adjunction corresponds to the insertion of an auxiliary tree t1 into a tree t2 at an inner node having the same label as the root and foot nodes of t1.
In a Feature-Based TAG , the nodes of the trees are labelled with two feature structures called top and bot . Derivation leads to unification on these nodes as follows . Given a substitution , the top feature structures of the merged nodes are unified . Given an adjunction , ( i ) the top feature structure of the inner node receiving the adjunction and of the root node of the inserted tree are unified , and ( ii ) the bot feature structures of the inner node receiving the adjunction and of the foot node of the inserted tree are unified.
At the end of a derivation , the top and bot feature structures of each node in a derived tree are unified.
Semantics ( LU ). The semantic representation language we use is a unification-based extension of the PLU language ( Bos , 1995). LU is defined as follows . Let H be a set of hole constants , Lc the set of label constants , and Lv the set of label variables.
Let Ic ( resp . Iv ) be the set of individual constants ( resp . variables ), let R be a set of nary relations over Ic ? Iv?H , and let ? be a relation over H ? Lc called the scope-over relation . Given l ? Lc ? Lv , h ? H , i1, . . . , in ? Iv ? Ic ? H , and Rn ? R , we have : 1. l : Rn(i1, . . . , in ) is a LU formula.
2. h ? l is a LU formula.
3. ?,? is LU formula iff both ? and ? are LU formulas.
4. Nothing else is a LU formula.
In short , LU is a flat ( i.e ., non recursive ) version of first-order predicate logic in which scope may be underspecified and variables can be unification vari-ables1.
3 TAG based semantic construction
Semantic construction can be performed either during or after derivation of a sentence syntactic structure . In the first approach , syntactic structure and semantic representations are built simultaneously.
This is the approach sketched by Montague and 1For mode details on LU , see ( Gardent and Kallmeyer , 2003).
adopted e.g ., in the HPSG ERG and in synchronous TAG ( Nesson and Shieber , 2006). In the second approach , semantic construction proceeds from the syntactic structure of a complete sentence , from a lexicon associating each word with a semantic representation and from a set of semantic rules specifying how syntactic combinations relate to semantic composition . This is the approach adopted for instance , in the LFG glue semantic framework , in the CCG approach and in the approaches to TAG-based semantic construction that are based on the
TAG derivation tree.
SEMTAG implements a hybrid approach to semantic construction where ( i ) semantic construction proceeds after derivation and ( ii ) the semantic lexicon is extracted from a TAG which simultaneously specifies syntax and semantics . In this approach ( Gardent and Kallmeyer , 2003), the TAG used integrates syntactic and semantic information as follows . Each elementary tree is associated with a formula of LU representing its meaning . Importantly , the meaning representations of semantic functors include unification variables that are shared with specific feature values occurring in the associated elementary trees . For instance in figure 1, the variables x and y appear both in the semantic representation associated with the tree for aime ( love ) and in the tree itself.
Given such a TAG , the semantics of a tree t derived from combining the elementary trees t1, . . . , tn is the union of the semantics of t1, . . . , tn modulo the unifications that results from deriving that tree . For instance , given the sentence Jean aime vraiment Marie ( John really loves Mary ) whose TAG derivation is given in figure 1, the union of the semantics of the elementary trees used to derived the sentence tree is : l0 : jean(j ), l1 : aime(x , y ), l2 : vraiment(h0), ls ? h0, l3 : marie(m ) The unifications imposed by the derivations are : { x ? j , y ? m , ls ? l1} Hence the final semantics of the sentence Jean aime vraiment Marie is : l0 : jean(j ), l1 : aime(j,m ), l2 : vraiment(h0), l1 ? h0, l3 : marie(m ) NP[idx:j ] NP[idx:x,lab:l1] V[lab:l1] NP [ idx:y,lab:l1] V[lab:l2] NP[idx:m]
Jean aime V[lab:ls ]? Adv Marie vraiment l0 : jean(j ) l1 : aimer(x , y ) l2 : vraiment(h0), l3 : marie(m ) ls ? h0 Figure 1: Derivation of ? Jean aime vraiment Marie ? As shown in ( Gardent and Parmentier , 2005), semantic construction can be performed either during or after derivation . However , performing semantic construction after derivation preserves modularity ( changes to the semantics do not affect syntactic parsing ) and allows the grammar used to remain within TAG ( the grammar need contain neither an infinite set of variables nor recursive feature structures ). Moreover , it means that standard TAG parsers can be used ( if semantic construction was done during derivation , the parser would have to be adapted to handle the association of each elementary tree with a semantic representation ). Hence in SEMTAG , semantic construction is performed after derivation . Section 5 gives more detail about this process.
4 The XMG formalism and compiler
SEMTAG makes available to the linguist a formalism ( XMG ) designed to facilitate the specification of tree based grammars integrating a semantic dimension.
XMG differs from similar proposals ( Xia et al , 1998) in three main ways ( Duchier et al , 2004). First it supports the description of both syntax and semantics . Specifically , it permits associating each elementary tree with an LU formula . Second , XMG provides an expressive formalism in which to factorise and combine the recurring tree fragments shared by several TAG elementary trees . Third , XMG provides a sophisticated treatment of variables which inter alia , supports variable sharing between semantic representation and syntactic tree . This sharing is implemented by means of socalled interfaces i.e ., feature structures that are associated with a given ( syntactic or semantic ) fragment and whose scope is global to several fragments of the grammar specification.
To specify the syntax / semantics interface sketched in section 5, XMG is used as follows : 1. The elementary tree of a semantic functor is defined as the conjunction of its spine ( the projection of its syntactic head ) with the tree fragments describing each of its arguments . For instance , in figure 2, the tree for an intransitive verb is defined as the conjunction of the tree fragment for its spine ( Active ) with the tree fragment for ( a canonical realisation of ) its subject argument ( Subject).
2. In the tree fragments representing the different syntactic realizations ( canonical , extracted , etc .) of a given grammatical function , the node representing the argument ( e.g ., the subject ) is labelled with an idx feature whose value is shared with a GFidx feature in the interface ( where GF is the grammatical function).
3. Semantic representations are encapsulated as fragments where the semantic arguments are variables shared with the interface . For instance , the ith argument of a semantic relation is associated with the argI interface feature.
4. Finally , the mapping between grammatical functions and thematic roles is specified when conjoining an elementary tree fragment with a semantic representation . For instance , in figure 22, the interface unifies the value of arg1 ( the thematic role ) with that of subjIdx ( a grammatical function ) thereby specifying that the subject argument provides the value of the first semantic argument.
5 Semantic construction
As mentioned above , SEMTAG performs semantic construction after derivation . More specifically , semantic construction is supported by the following 3-step process : 2The interfaces are represented using gray boxes.
15
Intransitive : Subject : Active : 1-ary relation:
S
NP?[idx=X ] VP l0:Rel(X ) arg0=X subjIdx=X ?
S
NP?[idx=I ] VP subjIdx=I ?
S
VP ? l0:Rel(A ) arg0=A
Figure 2: Syntax / semantics interface within the metagrammar.
1. First , we extract from the TAG generated by XMG ( i ) a purely syntactic TAG G ?, and ( ii ) a purely semantic TAG G ?? 3 A purely syntactic ( resp . semantic ) Tag is a TAG whose features are purely syntactic ( resp . semantic ) ? in other words , G ?? is a TAG with no semantic features whilst G ?? is a TAG with only semantic features . Entries of G ? and G ?? are indexed using the same key.
2. We generate a tabular syntactic parser for G ? using the DyALog system of ( de la Clergerie , 2005).
This parser is then used to compute the derivation forest for the input sentence.
3. A semantic construction algorithm is applied to the derivation forest . In essence , this algorithm retrieves from the semantic TAG G ?? the semantic trees involved in the derivation(s ) and performs on these the unifications prescribed by the derivation.
SEMTAG has been used to specify a core TAG for French , called SemFRag . This grammar is currently under evaluation on the Test Suite for Natural Language Processing in terms of syntactic coverage , semantic coverage and semantic ambiguity . For a testsuite containing 1495 sentences , 62.88 % of the sentences are syntactically parsed , 61.27 % of the sentences are semantically parsed ( i.e ., at least one semantic representation is computed ), and the average semantic ambiguity ( number of semantic representation per sentence ) is 2.46.
SEMTAG is freely available at http://trac.
loria.fr/?semtag.
3As ( Nesson and Shieber , 2006) indicates , this extraction in fact makes the resulting system a special case of synchronous TAG where the semantic trees are isomorphic to the syntactic trees and unification variables across the syntactic and semantic components are interpreted as synchronous links.
References
J . Bos , S . Clark , M . Steedman , J . R . Curran , and J . Hockenmaier . 2004. Wide-coverage semantic representations from a ccg parser . In Proceedings of the 20th
COLING , Geneva , Switzerland.
J . Bos . 1995. Predicate Logic Unplugged . In Proceedings of the tenth Amsterdam Colloquium , Amsterdam.
A . Copestake and D . Flickinger . 2000. An opensource grammar development environment and broadcoverage english grammar using hpsg . In Proceedings of LREC , Athens , Greece.
Mary Dalrymple , editor . 1999. Semantics and Syntax in
Lexical Functional Grammar . MIT Press.
E . de la Clergerie . 2005. DyALog : a tabular logic programming based environment for NLP . In Proceedings of CSLP?05, Barcelona.
D . Duchier , J . Le Roux , and Y . Parmentier . 2004. The Metagrammar Compiler : An NLP Application with a Multi-paradigm Architecture . In Proceedings of
MOZ?2004, Charleroi.
C . Gardent and L . Kallmeyer . 2003. Semantic construction in FTAG . In Proceedings of EACL?03, Budapest.
C . Gardent and Y . Parmentier . 2005. Large scale semantic construction for tree adjoining grammars . In Proceedings of LACL05, Bordeaux , France.
A . Joshi and Y . Schabes . 1997. Tree-adjoining grammars . In G . Rozenberg and A . Salomaa , editors , Handbook of Formal Languages , volume 3, pages 69 ? 124. Springer , Berlin , New York.
Rebecca Nesson and Stuart M . Shieber . 2006. Simpler TAG semantics through synchronization . In Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Formal Grammar,
Malaga , Spain , 29?30 July.
F . Xia , M . Palmer , K . Vijay-Shanker , and J . Rosenzweig.
1998. Consistent grammar development using partial-tree descriptions for lexicalized tree adjoining grammar . Proceedings of TAG+4.
16
