Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics , pages 416?423,
Prague , Czech Republic , June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Opinion Mining Using Econometrics : A Case Study on Reputation Systems
Anindya Ghose Panagiotis G . Ipeirotis
Department of Information , Operations , and Management Sciences
Leonard N . Stern School of Business , New York University
{aghose,panos,arun}@stern.nyu.edu
Arun Sundararajan
Abstract
Deriving the polarity and strength of opinions is an important research topic , attracting significant attention over the last few years . In this work , to measure the strength and polarity of an opinion , we consider the economic context in which the opinion is evaluated , instead of using human annotators or linguistic resources . We rely on the fact that text in online systems influences the behavior of humans and this effect can be observed using some easy-to-measure economic variables , such as revenues or product prices . By reversing the logic , we infer the semantic orientation and strength of an opinion by tracing the changes in the associated economic variable . In effect , we use econometrics to identify the ? economic value of text ? and assign a ? dollar value ? to each opinion phrase , measuring sentiment effectively and without the need for manual labeling . We argue that by interpreting opinions using econometrics , we have the first objective , quantifiable , and context-sensitive evaluation of opinions . We make the discussion concrete by presenting results on the reputation system of Amazon.com . We show that user feedback affects the pricing power of merchants and by measuring their pricing power we can infer the polarity and strength of the underlying feedback postings.
1 Introduction
A significant number of websites today allow users to post articles where they express opinions about products , firms , people , and so on . For example , users on Amazom.com post reviews about products they bought and users on eBay.com post feedback describing their experiences with sellers . The goal of opinion mining systems is to identify such pieces of the text that express opinions ( Breck et al , 2007; Ko?nig and Brill , 2006) and then measure the polarity and strength of the expressed opinions . While intuitively the task seems straightforward , there are multiple challenges involved.
? What makes an opinion positive or negative ? Is there an objective measure for this task ? ? How can we rank opinions according to their strength ? Can we define an objective measure for ranking opinions ? ? How does the context change the polarity and strength of an opinion and how can we take the context into consideration ? To evaluate the polarity and strength of opinions , most of the existing approaches rely either on training from human-annotated data ( Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown , 1997), or use linguistic resources ( Hu and Liu , 2004; Kim and Hovy , 2004) like WordNet , or rely on cooccurrence statistics ( Turney , 2002) between words that are unambiguously positive ( e.g ., ? excellent ?) and unambiguously negative ( e.g ., ? horrible ?). Finally , other approaches rely on reviews with numeric ratings from websites ( Pang and Lee , 2002; Dave et al , 2003; Pang and Lee , 2004; Cui et al , 2006) and train ( semi-)supervised learning algorithms to classify reviews as positive or negative , or in more finegrained scales ( Pang and Lee , 2005; Wilson et al , 2006). Implicitly , the supervised learning techniques assume that numeric ratings fully encapsulate the sentiment of the review.
416
In this paper , we take a different approach and instead consider the economic context in which an opinion is evaluated . We observe that the text in online systems influence the behavior of the readers . This effect can be measured by observing some easy-to-measure economic variable , such as product prices.
For instance , online merchants on eBay with ? positive ? feedback can sell products for higher prices than competitors with ? negative ? evaluations . Therefore , each of these ( positive or negative ) evaluations has a ( positive or negative ) effect on the prices that the merchant can charge . For example , everything else being equal , a seller with ? speedy ? delivery may be able to charge $10 more than a seller with ? slow ? delivery . Using this information , we can conclude that ? speedy ? is better than ? slow ? when applied to ? delivery ? and their difference is $10. Thus , we can infer the semantic orientation and the strength of an evaluation from the changes in the observed economic variable.
Following this idea , we use techniques from econometrics to identify the ? economic value of text ? and assign a ? dollar value ? to each text snippet , measuring sentiment strength and polarity effectively and without the need for labeling or any other resource.
We argue that by interpreting opinions within an econometric framework , we have the first objective and context-sensitive evaluation of opinions . For example , consider the comment ? good packaging ,? posted by a buyer to evaluate a merchant . This comment would have been considered unambiguously positive by the existing opinion mining systems . We observed , though , that within electronic markets , such as eBay , a posting that contains the words ? good packaging ? has actually negative effect on the power of a merchant to charge higher prices . This surprising effect reflects the nature of the comments in online marketplaces : buyers tend to use superlatives and highly enthusiastic language to praise a good merchant , and a lukewarm ? good packaging ? is interpreted as negative . By introducing the econometric interpretation of opinions we can effortlessly capture such challenging scenarios , something that is impossible to achieve with the existing approaches.
We focus our paper on reputation systems in electronic markets and we examine the effect of opinions on the pricing power of merchants in the marketplace of Amazon.com . ( We discuss more applications in Section 7.) We demonstrate the value of our technique using a dataset with 9,500 transactions that took place over 180 days . We show that textual feedback affects the power of merchants to charge higher prices than the competition , for the same product , and still make a sale . We then reverse the logic and determine the contribution of each comment in the pricing power of a merchant . Thus , we discover the polarity and strength of each evaluation without the need for human annotation or any other form of linguistic resource.
The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows . Section 2 gives the basic background on reputation systems . Section 3 describes our methodology for constructing the data set that we use in our experiments . Section 4 shows how we combine established techniques from econometrics with text mining techniques to identify the strength and polarity of the posted feedback evaluations . Section 5 presents the experimental evaluations of our techniques . Finally , Section 6 discusses related work and Section 7 discusses further applications and concludes the paper.
2 Reputation Systems and Price Premiums
When buyers purchase products in an electronic market , they assess and pay not only for the product they wish to purchase but for a set of fulfillment characteristics as well , e.g ., packaging , delivery , and the extent to which the product description matches the actual product . Electronic markets rely on reputation systems to ensure the quality of these characteristics for each merchant , and the importance of such systems is widely recognized in the literature ( Resnick et al , 2000; Dellarocas , 2003). Typically , merchants ? reputation in electronic markets is encoded by a ? reputation profile ? that includes : ( a ) the number of past transactions for the merchant , ( b ) a summary of numeric ratings from buyers who have completed transactions with the seller , and ( c ) a chronological list of textual feedback provided by these buyers.
Studies of online reputation , thus far , base a mer-chant?s reputation on the numeric rating that characterizes the seller ( e.g ., average number of stars and number of completed transactions ) ( Melnik and Alm , 2002). The general conclusion of these studies show that merchants with higher ( numeric ) reputation can charge higher prices than the competition , for the same products , and still manage to make a sale . This price premium that the merchants can command over the competition is a measure of their reputation.
Definition 2.1 Consider a set of merchants s1, . . . , sn selling a product for prices p1, . . . , pn . If si makes417 Figure 1: A set of merchants on Amazon.com selling an identical product for different prices the sale for price pi , then si commands a price premium equal to pi ? pj over sj and a relative price premium equal to pi?pjpi . Hence , a transaction that involves n competing merchants generates n ? 1 price premiums.1 The average price premium for the transaction is ? j 6=i(pi?pj ) n?1 and the average relative price premium is ? j 6=i(pi?pj ) pi(n?1) . 2 Example 2.1 Consider the case in Figure 1 where three merchants sell the same product for $631.95, $632.26, and $637.05, respectively . If GameHog sells the product , then the price premium against XP Passport is $4.79 (= $637.05 ? $632.26) and against the merchant BuyPCsoft is $5.10. The relative price premium is 0.75% and 0.8%, respectively . Similarly , the average price premium for this transaction is $4.95 and the average relative price premium 0.78%. 2 Different sellers in these markets derive their reputation from different characteristics : some sellers have a reputation for fast delivery , while some others have a reputation of having the lowest price among their peers . Similarly , while some sellers are praised for their packaging in the feedback , others get good comments for selling high-quality goods but are criticized for being rather slow with shipping . Even though previous studies have established the positive correlation between higher ( numeric ) reputation and higher price premiums , they ignored completely the role of the textual feedback and , in turn , the multidimensional nature of reputation in electronic markets . We show that the textual feedback adds significant additional value to the numerical scores , and affects the pricing power of the merchants.
1As an alternative definition we can ignore the negative price premiums . The experimental results are similar for both versions.
3 Data
We compiled a data set using software resellers from publicly available information on software product listings at Amazon.com . Our data set includes 280 individual software titles . The sellers ? reputation matters when selling identical goods , and the price variation observed can be attributed primarily to variation in the merchant?s reputation . We collected the data using Amazon Web Services over a period of 180 days , between October 2004 and March 2005. We describe below the two categories of data that we collected.
Transaction Data : The first part of our data set contains details of the transactions that took place on the marketplace of Amazon.com for each of the software titles . The Amazon Web Services associates a unique transaction ID for each unique product listed by a seller . This transaction ID enables us to distinguish between multiple or successive listings of identical products sold by the same merchant . Keeping with the methodology in prior research ( Ghose et al , 2006), we crawl the Amazon?s XML listings every 8 hours and when a transaction ID associated with a particular listing is removed , we infer that the listed product was successfully sold in the prior 8 hour win-dow.2 For each transaction that takes place , we keep the price at which the product was sold and the mer-chant?s reputation at the time of the transaction ( more on this later ). Additionally , for each of the competing listings for identical products , we keep the listed price along with the competitors reputation . Using the collected data , we compute the price premium variables for each transaction3 using Definition 2.1. Overall , our data set contains 1,078 merchants , 9,484 unique transactions and 107,922 price premiums ( recall that each transaction generates multiple price premiums).
Reputation Data : The second part of our data set contains the reputation history of each merchant that had a ( monitored ) product for sale during our 180-day window . Each of these merchants has a feedback profile , which consists of numerical scores and textbased feedback , posted by buyers . We had an average of 4,932 postings per merchant . The numerical ratings 2Amazon indicates that their seller listings remain on the site indefinitely until they are sold and sellers can change the price of the product without altering the transaction ID.
3Ideally , we would also include the tax and shipping cost charged by each merchant in the computation of the price premiums . Unfortunately , we could not capture these costs using our methodology . Assuming that the fees for shipping and tax are independent of the merchants ? reputation , our analysis is not affected.
418 are provided on a scale of one to five stars . These ratings are averaged to provide an overall score to the seller . Note that we collect all feedback ( both numerical and textual ) associated with a seller over the entire lifetime of the seller and we reconstruct each seller?s exact feedback profile at the time of each transaction.
4 Econometrics-based Opinion Mining
In this section , we describe how we combine econometric techniques with NLP techniques to derive the semantic orientation and strength of the feedback evaluations . Section 4.1 describes how we structure the textual feedback and Section 4.2 shows how we use econometrics to estimate the polarity and strength of the evaluations.
4.1 Retrieving the Dimensions of Reputation We characterize a merchant using a vector of reputation dimensions X = ( X1, X2, ..., Xn ), representing its ability on each of n dimensions . We assume that each of these n dimensions is expressed by a noun , noun phrase , verb , or a verb phrase chosen from the set of all feedback postings , and that a merchant is evaluated on these n dimensions . For example , dimension 1 might be ? shipping ?, dimension 2 might be ? packaging ? and so on . In our model , each of these dimensions is assigned a numerical score . Of course , when posting textual feedback , buyers do not assign explicit numeric scores to any dimension . Rather , they use modifiers ( typically adjectives or adverbs ) to evaluate the seller along each of these dimensions ( we describe how we assign numeric scores to each modifier in Section 4.2). Once we have identified the set of all dimensions , we can then parse each of the feedback postings , associate a modifier with each dimension , and represent a feedback posting as an n-dimensional vector ? of modifiers.
Example 4.1 Suppose dimension 1 is ? delivery ,? dimension 2 is ? packaging ,? and dimension 3 is ? service .? The feedback posting ? I was impressed by the speedy delivery ! Great service !? is then encoded as ?1 = [ speedy , NULL , great ], while the posting ? The item arrived in awful packaging , and the delivery was slow ? is encoded as ?2 = [ slow , awful , NULL ]. 2 Let M = { NULL , ?1, ..., ? M } be the set of modifiers and consider a seller si with p postings in its reputation profile . We denote with ? ijk ? M the modifier that appears in the jth posting and is used to assess the kth reputation dimension . We then structure the merchant?s feedback as an n ? p matrix M(si ) whose rows are the p encoded vectors of modifiers associated with the seller . We construct M(si ) as follows : 1. Retrieve the postings associated with a merchant.
2. Parse the postings to identify the dimensions across which the buyer evaluates a seller , keep-ing4 the nouns , noun phrases , verbs , and verbal phrases as reputation characteristics.5.
3. Retrieve adjectives and adverbs that refer to6 dimensions ( Step 2) and construct the ? vectors.
We have implemented this algorithm on the feedback postings of each of our sellers . Our analysis yields 151 unique dimensions , and a total of 142 modifiers ( note that the same modifier can be used to evaluate multiple dimensions).
4.2 Scoring the Dimensions of Reputation As discussed above , the textual feedback profile of merchant si is encoded as a n ? p matrix M(si ); the elements of this matrix belong to the set of modifiers M . In our case , we are interested in computing the ? score ? a (?, d , j ) that a modifier ? ? M assigns to the dimension d , when it appears in the jth posting.
Since buyers tend to read only the first few pages of textbased feedback , we weight higher the influence of recent text postings . We model this by assuming that K is the number of postings that appear on each page ( K = 25 on Amazon.com ), and that c is the probability of clicking on the ? Next ? link and moving the next page of evaluations.7 This assigns a posting-specific weight rj = cb j
K c/?pq=1 cb q
K c for the jth posting , where j is the rank of the posting , K is the number of postings per page , and p is the total number of postings for the given seller . Then , we set a (?, d , j ) = rj ? a (?, d ) where a (?, d ) is the ? global ? score that modifier ? assigns to dimension d.
Finally , since each reputation dimension has potentially a different weight , we use a weight vector w to 4We eliminate all dimensions appearing in the profiles of less than 50 ( out of 1078) merchants , since we cannot extract statistically meaningful results for such sparse dimensions 5The technique as described in this paper , considers words like ? shipping ? and ? delivery ? as separate dimensions , although they refer to the same ? real-life ? dimension . We can use Latent Dirichlet Allocation ( Blei et al , 2003) to reduce the number of dimensions , but this is outside the scope of this paper.
6To associate the adjectives and adverbs with the correct dimensions , we use the Collins HeadFinder capability of the Stanford NLP Parser.
7We report only results for c = 0.5. We conducted experiments other values of c as well and the results are similar.
419 weight the contribution of each reputation dimension to the overall ? reputation score ? ?( si ) of seller si : ?( si ) = rT ? A(M(si )) ? w (1) where rT = [ r1, r2, ... rp ] is the vector of the posting-specific weights and A(M(i )) is a matrix that contains as element the score a(?j , dk ) where M(si ) contains the modifier ? j in the column of the dimension dk . If we model the buyers ? preferences as independently distributed along each dimension and each modifier score a (?, dk ) also as an independent random variable , then the random variable ?( si ) is a sum of random variables . Specifically , we have : ?( si ) =
M ? j=1 n ? k=1 ( wk ? a(?j , dk))R(?j , dk ) (2) where R(?j , dk ) is equal to the sum of the ri weights across all postings in which the modifier ? j modifies dimension dk . We can easily compute the R(?j , dk ) values by simply counting appearances and weighting each appearance using the definition of ri.
The question is , of course , how to estimate the values of wk ? a(?j , dk ), which determine the polarity and intensity of the modifier ? j modifying the dimension dk . For this , we observe that the appearance of such modifier-dimension opinion phrases has an effect on the price premiums that a merchant can charge.
Hence , there is a correlation between the reputation scores ?(?) of the merchants and the price premiums observed for each transaction . To discover the level of association , we use regression . Since we are dealing with panel data , we estimate ordinary-least-squares ( OLS ) regression with fixed effects ( Greene , 2002), where the dependent variable is the price premium variable , and the independent variables are the reputation scores ?(?) of the merchants , together with a few other control variables . Generally , we estimate models of the form:
PricePremiumij = ? ? c ? Xcij + fij + ? ij + ? t1 ??( merchant)ij + ? t2 ??( competitor)ij (3) where PricePremiumij is one of the variations of price premium as given in Definition 2.1 for a seller si and product j , ? c , ? t1, and ? t2 are the regressor coefficients , Xc are the control variables , ?(?) are the text reputation scores ( see Equation 1), fij denotes the fixed effects and ? is the error term . In Section 5, we give the details about the control variables and the regression settings.
Interestingly , if we expand the ?(?) variables according to Equation 2, we can run the regression using the modifier-dimension pairs as independent variables , whose values are equal to the R(?j , dk ) values . After running the regression , the coefficients assigned to each modifier-dimension pair correspond to the value wk ? a(?j , dk ) for each modifier-dimension pair . Therefore , we can easily estimate in economic terms the ? value ? of a particular modifier when used to evaluate a particular dimension.
5 Experimental Evaluation
In this section , we first present the experimental settings ( Section 5.1), and then we describe the results of our experimental evaluation ( Section 5.2).
5.1 Regression Settings
In Equation 3 we presented the general form of the regression for estimating the scores a(?j , dk ). Since we want to eliminate the effect of any other factors that may influence the price premiums , we also use a set of control variables . After all the control factors are taken into consideration , the modifier scores reflect the additional value of the text opinions . Specifically , we used as control variables the product?s price on Amazon , the average star rating of the merchant , the number of merchant?s past transactions , and the number of sellers for the product.
First , we ran OLS regressions with product-seller fixed effects controlling for unobserved heterogeneity across sellers and products . These fixed effects control for average product quality and differences in seller characteristics . We run multiple variations of our model , using different versions of the ? price premium ? variable as listed in Definition 2.1. We also tested variations where we include as independent variable not the individual reputation scores but the difference ?( merchant)??(competitor ). All regressions yielded qualitatively similar results , so due to space restrictions we only report results for the regressions that include all the control variables and all the text variables ; we report results using the price premium as the dependent variable . Our regressions in this setting contain 107,922 observations , and a total of 547 independent variables.
5.2 Experimental Results
Recall of Extraction : The first step of our experimental evaluation is to examine whether the opinion extraction technique of Section 4.1 indeed captures all the reputation characteristics expressed in the feed-
Product Condition 0.76 0.76
Price 0.91 0.61
Package 0.96 0.66
Overall Experience 0.65 0.55
Delivery Speed 0.96 0.92
Item Description 0.22 0.43
Product Satisfaction 0.68 0.58
Problem Response 0.30 0.37
Customer Service 0.57 0.50
Average 0.66 0.60
Table 1: The recall of our technique compared to the recall of the human annotators back ( recall ) and whether the dimensions that we capture are accurate ( precision ). To examine the recall question , we used two human annotators . The annotators read a random sample of 1,000 feedback postings , and identified the reputation dimensions mentioned in the text . Then , they examined the extracted modifier-dimension pairs for each posting and marked whether the modifier-dimension pairs captured the identified real reputation dimensions mentioned in the posting and which pairs were spurious , non-opinion phrases.
Both annotators identified nine reputation dimensions ( see Table 1). Since the annotators did not agree in all annotations , we computed the average human recall hRecd = agreeddalld for each dimension d , whereagreedd is the number of postings for which both annotators identified the reputation dimension d , and alld is the number of postings in which at least one annotator identified the dimension d . Based on the annotations , we computed the recall of our algorithm against each annotator . We report the average recall for each dimension , together with the human recall in Table 1. The recall of our technique is only slightly inferior to the performance of humans , indicating that the technique of Section 4.1 extracts the majority of the posted evaluations.8 Interestingly , precision is not an issue in our setting.
In our framework , if an particular modifier-dimension pair is just noise , then it is almost impossible to have a statistically significant correlation with the price premiums . The noisy opinion phrases are statistically guaranteed to be filtered out by the regression.
Estimating Polarity and Strength : In Table 2, 8In the case of ? Item Description ,? where the computer recall was higher than the human recall , our technique identified almost all the phrases of one annotator , but the other annotator had a more liberal interpretation of ? Item Description ? dimension and annotated significantly more postings with the dimension ? Item Description ? than the other annotator , thus decreasing the human recall.
we present the modifier-dimension pairs ( positive and negative ) that had the strongest ? dollar value ? and were statistically significant across all regressions.
(Due to space issues , we cannot list the values for all pairs .) These values reflect changes in the merchants?s pricing power after taking their average numerical score and level of experience into account , and also highlight the additional the value contained in textbased reputation . The examples that we list here illustrate that our technique generates a natural ranking of the opinion phrases , inferring the strength of each modifier within the context in which this opinion is evaluated . This holds true even for misspelled evaluations that would break existing techniques based on annotation or on resources like WordNet . Furthermore , these values reflect the context in which the opinion is evaluated . For example , the pair good packaging has a dollar value of -$0.58. Even though this seems counterintuitive , it actually reflects the nature of an online marketplace where most of the positive evaluations contain superlatives , and a mere ? good ? is actually interpreted by the buyers as a lukewarm , slightly negative evaluation . Existing techniques cannot capture such phenomena.
Price Premiums vs . Ratings : One of the natural comparisons is to examine whether we could reach similar results by just using the average star rating associated with each feedback posting to infer the score of each opinion phrase . The underlying assumption behind using the ratings is that the review is perfectly summarized by the star rating , and hence the text plays mainly an explanatory role and carries no extra information , given the star rating . For this , we examined the R2 fit of the regression , with and without the use of the text variables . Without the use of text variables , the R2 was 0.35, while when using only the textbased regressors , the R2 fit increased to 0.63.
This result clearly indicates that the actual text contains significantly more information than the ratings.
We also experimented with predicting which merchant will make a sale , if they simultaneously sell the same product , based on their listed prices and on their numeric and text reputation . Our C4.5 classifier ( Quinlan , 1992) takes a pair of merchants and decides which of the two will make a sale . We used as training set the transactions that took place in the first four months and as test set the transactions in the last two months of our data set . Table 3 summarizes the results for different sets of features used . The 55% [ wonderful experience ] $5.86 [ outstanding seller ] $5.76 [ excellant service ] $5.27 [ lightning delivery ] $4.84 [ highly recommended ] $4.15 [ best seller ] $3.80 [ perfectly packaged ] $3.74 [ excellent condition ] $3.53 [ excellent purchase ] $3.22 [ excellent seller ] $2.70 [ excellent communication ] $2.38 [ perfect item ] $1.92 [ terrific condition ] $1.87 [ top quality ] $1.67 [ awesome service ] $1.05 [ A +++ seller ] $1.03 [ great merchant ] $0.93 [ friendly service ] $0.81 [ easy service ] $0.78 [ never received ] -$7.56 [ defective product ] -$6.82 [ horible experience ] -$6.79 [ never sent ] -$6.69 [ never recieved ] -$5.29 [ bad experience ] -$5.26 [ cancelled order ] -$5.01 [ never responded ] -$4.87 [ wrong product ] -$4.39 [ not as advertised ] -$3.93 [ poor packaging ] -$2.92 [ late shipping ] -$2.89 [ wrong item ] -$2.50 [ not yet received ] -$2.35 [ still waiting ] -$2.25 [ wrong address ] -$1.54 [ never buy ] -$1.48 Table 2: The highest scoring opinion phrases , as determined by the product wk ? a(?j , dk).
accuracy when using only prices as features indicates that customers rarely choose a product based solely on price . Rather , as indicated by the 74% accuracy , they also consider the reputation of the merchants . However , the real value of the postings relies on the text and not on the numeric ratings : the accuracy is 87%-89% when using the textual reputation variables . In fact , text subsumes the numeric variables but not vice versa , as indicated by the results in Table 3.
6 Related Work
To the best of our knowledge , our work is the first to use economics for measuring the effect of opinions and deriving their polarity and strength in an econometric manner . A few papers in the past tried to combine text analysis with economics ( Das and Chen , 2006; Lewitt and Syverson , 2005), but the text analysis was limited to token counting and did not use
Features Accuracy on Test Set
Price 55%
Price + Numeric Reputation 74%
Price + Numeric Reputation 89% + Text Reputation
Price + Text Reputation 87%
Table 3: Predicting the merchant who makes the sale.
any NLP techniques . The technique of Section 4.1 is based on existing research in sentiment analysis.
For instance , ( Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown , 1997; Nigam and Hurst , 2004) use annotated data to create a supervised learning technique to identify the semantic orientation of adjectives . We follow the approach by Turney (2002), who note that the semantic orientation of an adjective depends on the noun that it modifies and suggest using adjective-noun or adverb-verb pairs to extract semantic orientation . However , we do not rely on linguistic resources ( Kamps and Marx , 2002) or on search engines ( Turney and Littman , 2003) to determine the semantic orientation , but rather rely on econometrics for this task . Hu and Liu (2004), whose study is the closest to our work , use WordNet to compute the semantic orientation of product evaluations and try to summarize user reviews by extracting the positive and negative evaluations of the different product features . Similarly , Snyder and Barzilay (2007) decompose an opinion across several dimensions and capture the sentiment across each dimension . Other work in this area includes ( Lee , 2004; Popescu and Etzioni , 2005) which uses text mining in the context product reviews , but none uses the economic context to evaluate the opinions.
7 Conclusion and Further Applications
We demonstrated the value of using econometrics for extracting a quantitative interpretation of opinions . Our technique , additionally , takes into consideration the context within which these opinions are evaluated . Our experimental results show that our techniques can capture the pragmatic meaning of the expressed opinions using simple economic variables as a form of training data . The source code with our implementation together with the data set used in this paper are available from http://economining.stern.nyu.edu.
There are many other applications beyond reputation systems . For example , using sales rank data from Amazon.com , we can examine the effect of product reviews on product sales and detect the weight that more , we can discover how customer evaluations on individual product features affect product sales and extract the pragmatic meaning of these evaluations.
Another application is the analysis of the effect of news stories on stock prices : we can examine what news topics are important for the stock market and see how the views of different opinion holders and the wording that they use can cause the market to move up or down . In a slightly different twist , we can analyze news stories and blogs in conjunction with results from prediction markets and extract the pragmatic effect of news and blogs on elections or other political events . Another research direction is to examine the effect of summarizing product descriptions on product sales : short descriptions reduce the cognitive load of consumers but increase their uncertainty about the underlying product characteristics ; a longer description has the opposite effect . The optimum description length is the one that balances both effects and maximizes product sales.
Similar approaches can improve the state of art in both economics and computational linguistics . In economics and in social sciences in general , most researchers handle textual data manually or with simplistic token counting techniques ; in the worst case they ignore text data altogether . In computational linguistics , researchers often rely on human annotators to generate training data , a laborious and error-prone task . We believe that cross-fertilization of ideas between the fields of computational linguistics and econometrics can be beneficial for both fields.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Elena Filatova for the useful discussions and the pointers to related literature . We also thank Sanjeev Dewan , Alok Gupta , Bin Gu , and seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon University , Columbia University , Microsoft Research , New York University , Polytechnic University , and University of Florida for their comments and feedback . We thank Rhong Zheng for assistance in data collection . This work was partially supported by a Microsoft Live Labs Search Award , a Microsoft Virtual Earth Award , and by NSF grants IIS-0643847 and IIS-0643846. Any opinions , findings , and conclusions expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Microsoft Corporation or of the National Science Foundation.
References
D.M . Blei , A.Y . Ng , and M.I . Jordan . 2003. Latent Dirichlet allocation . JMLR , 3:993?1022.
E . Breck , Y . Choi , and C . Cardie . 2007. Identifying expressions of opinion in context . In IJCAI-07, pages 2683?2688.
H . Cui , V . Mittal , and M . Datar . 2006. Comparative experiments on sentiment classification for online product reviews.
In AAAI-2006.
S . Ranjan Das and M . Chen . 2006. Yahoo ! for Amazon : Sentiment extraction from small talk on the web . Working Paper,
Santa Clara University.
K . Dave , S . Lawrence , and D.M . Pennock . 2003. Mining the peanut gallery : Opinion extraction and semantic classification of product reviews . In WWW12, pages 519?528.
C . Dellarocas . 2003. The digitization of word-of-mouth : Promise and challenges of online reputation mechanisms . Management
Science , 49(10):1407?1424.
A . Ghose , M.D . Smith , and R . Telang . 2006. Internet exchanges for used books : An empirical analysis for product cannibal-ization and social welfare . Information Systems Research , 17(1):3?19.
W.H . Greene . 2002. Econometric Analysis . 5th edition.
V . Hatzivassiloglou and K.R . McKeown . 1997. Predicting the semantic orientation of adjectives . In ACL?97, pages 174?181.
M . Hu and B . Liu . 2004. Mining and summarizing customer reviews . In KDD-2004, pages 168?177.
J . Kamps and M . Marx . 2002. Words with attitude . In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Global WordNet.
S.-M . Kim and E . Hovy . 2004. Determining the sentiment of opinions . In COLING 2004, pages 1367?1373.
A.C . Ko?nig and E . Brill . 2006. Reducing the human overhead in text categorization . In KDD-2006, pages 598?603.
T . Lee . 2004. Use-centric mining of customer reviews . In WITS.
S . Lewitt and C . Syverson . 2005. Market distortions when agents are better informed : The value of information in real estate transactions . Working Paper , University of Chicago.
M.I . Melnik and J . Alm . 2002. Does a seller?s reputation matter ? Evidence from eBay auctions . Journal of Industrial Economics , 50(3):337?350, September.
K . Nigam and M . Hurst . 2004. Towards a robust metric of opinion . In AAAI Spring Symposium on Exploring Attitude and
Affect in Text , pages 598?603.
B . Pang and L . Lee . 2002. Thumbs up ? Sentiment classification using machine learning techniques . In EMNLP 2002.
B . Pang and L . Lee . 2004. A sentimental education : Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization based on minimum cuts . In ACL 2004, pages 271?278.
B . Pang and L . Lee . 2005. Seeing stars : Exploiting class relationships for sentiment categorization with respect to rating scales.
In ACL 2005.
A.-M . Popescu and O . Etzioni . 2005. Extracting product features and opinions from reviews . In HLT/EMNLP 2005.
B . Snyder and R . Barzilay . 2007. Multiple aspect ranking using the good grief algorithm . In HLTNAACL 2007.
J.R . Quinlan . 1992. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc.
P . Resnick , K . Kuwabara , R . Zeckhauser , and E . Friedman . 2000.
Reputation systems . CACM , 43(12):45?48, December.
P.D . Turney and M.L . Littman . 2003. Measuring praise and criticism : Inference of semantic orientation from association.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems , 21(4):315?346.
P.D . Turney . 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down ? Semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classification of reviews . In
ACL 2002, pages 417?424.
T . Wilson , J . Wiebe , and R . Hwa . 2006. Recognizing strong and weak opinion clauses . Computational Intell ., 22(2):73?99.
423
