Proceedings of the ACL 2007 Demo and Poster Sessions , pages 85?88,
Prague , June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Poliqarp
An open source corpus indexer and search engine with syntactic extensions
Daniel Janus
Sentivision Polska Sp . z o.o.
Marynarska 19a , 02-674 Warsaw , Poland
nathell@korpus.pl
Adam Przepi?rkowski
Insitute of Computer Science
Polish Academy of Sciences
Ordona 21, 01-237 Warsaw , Poland
adamp@ipipan.waw.pl
Abstract
This paper presents recent extensions to Poliqarp , an open source tool for indexing and searching morphosyntactically annotated corpora , which turn it into a tool for indexing and searching certain kinds of treebanks , complementary to existing treebank search engines . In particular , the paper discusses the motivation for such a new tool , the extended query syntax of Poliqarp and implementation and efficiency issues.
1 Introduction
The aim of this paper is to present extensions to Poliqarp,1 an efficient open source indexer and search tool for morphosyntactically annotated XCES-encoded ( Ide et al , 2000) corpora , with query syntax based on that of CQP ( Christ , 1994), but extending it in interesting ways . Poliqarp has been in constant development since 2003 ( Przepi?rkowski et al , 2004) and it is currently employed as the search engine of the IPI PAN Corpus of Polish ( Przepi?rkowski , 2004) and the Lisbon corpus of Portuguese ( Barreto et al , 2006), as well as in other projects . Poliqarp has a typical server-client architecture , with various Poliqarp clients developed so far , including GUI clients for a variaty of operating systems ( Linux , Windows , MacOS , Solaris ) and architectures ( big-endian and little-endian ), as well as a PHP client . Since March 2006, the 1st stable version of Poliqarp ( Janus and 1Polyinterpretation Indexing Query And Retrieval
Processor
Przepi?rkowski , 2006) is available under GPL.2 A version of Poliqarp that implements various statistical extensions is at the beta-testing stage.
Although Poliqarp was designed as a tool for corpora linguistically annotated at word-level only , the extensions described in this paper turn it into an indexing and search tool for certain kinds of treebanks , complementary to existing treebank search engines.
Section 2 briefly introduces the basic query syntax of Poliqarp , section 3 presents extensions of Poliqarp aimed at the processing of treebanks , section 4 discusses implementation and efficiency issues , and section 5 concludes the paper.
2 Query Syntax
In the Poliqarp query language , just as in CQP , regular expressions may be formulated over corpus positions , e.g .: [ pos="adj "]+, where any nonempty sequence of adjectives is sought , or within values of attributes , e.g .: [ pos="a .*"], concerning forms ( henceforth : segments ) tagged with POSs whose names start with an a , e.g ., adj and adv.
Parts of speech and morphosyntactic categories may be queried separately , e.g ., the query [ gend=masc ] could be used to search for masculine segments , regardless of the POS or other categories , while the query [ pos="subst|ger"&gend!=masc ] can be used to find nominal and gerundive segments which are not masculine.
A unique feature of Poliqarp is that it may be used for searching corpora containing , in addition to disambiguated interpretations , information about all 2Cf . http://poliqarp.sourceforge.net/.
85 possible morphosyntactic interpretations given by the morphological analyser . For example , the query [ case~acc ] finds all segments with an accusative interpretation ( even if this is not the interpretation selected in a given context ), while [ case=acc ] finds segments which were disambiguated to accusative in a given context.
Moreover , Poliqarp does not make the assumption that only one interpretation must be correct for any given segment ; some examples of sentences containing an ambiguous segment which cannot be uniquely disambiguated even given unlimited context and all the linguistic and encyclopaedic knowledge are cited in ( Przepi?rkowski et al , 2004). In such cases , the = operator has the existential meaning , i.e ., [ case=acc ] finds segments with at least one accusative interpretation marked as correct in the context (? disambiguated ?). On the other hand , the operator == is universal , i.e ., [ case==acc ] finds segments whose all disambiguated interpretations are accusative : segments which were truly uniquely disambiguated to one ( accusative ) interpretation , or segments which have many interpretations correct in the context , but all of them are accusative.3 For completeness , the operator ~~ is added , which universally applies to all morphosyntactic interpretations , i.e ., [ case~~acc ] finds segments whose all interpretations as given by a morphological analyser ( before disambiguation ) are accusative.
The most detailed presentation of the original query syntax of Poliqarp is available in ( Przepi?rkowski , 2004), downloadable from http://korpus.pl/index.php?page = publications.
3 Syntactic Extensions ( Przepi?rkowski , 2007) argues for the explicit representation of both a syntactic head and a semantic head for each syntactic group identified in a ( partially parsed ) constituency-based ( as opposed to dependency-based ) treebank . For example , for the Polish syntactic group tuzin bia?ych koni , ? a dozen of white horses ?, lit . ? dozen-NOM/ACC white-GEN horses-GEN ?, the syntactic head is tuzin ? dozen ?, 3In Polish this may happen , for example , in case of some gerund forms which are homographs of true nouns , where meaning does not make it possible to decide on the nominal / gerundive interpretation of the form.
while the semantic head is koni ? horses ?. The segment koni is also both the syntactic head and the semantic head of the embedded nominal group bi-a?ych koni ? white horses ?. In general , following ( Przepi?rkowski , 2007), a given segment is a syntactic head of at most one group ( e.g ., tuzin and koni in the example above ), but it may be a semantic head of a number of groups ( e.g ., koni above is a semantic head of bia?ych koni and of tuzin bia?ych koni).
This kind of representation is problematic for general search tools for constituency-based treebanks,4 such as TIGERSearch ( Lezius , 2002),5 which usually assume that the set of edges within a syntactic representation of a sentence is a tree , in particular , that it has a single root node and that each leaf has ( at most ) one incoming edge.6 While the former assumption is not a serious problem ( an artificial single root may always be added ), the latter is fatal for representations alluded to above , as a single segment may be a semantic head of a number of syntactic groups , i.e ., it may have several incoming edges.
The extension of Poliqarp presented here makes it possible to index and search for such ( partial ) syntactic-semantic treebanks . Specifications of syntactic constructions in the extended Poliqarp query language syntax are similar to specifications of particular segments , but they use a different repertoire of attributes , nonoverlapping with the attributes used to specify single segments . Two main attributes to be used for querying for syntactic groups are : type and head . The attribute type specifies the general syntactic type of the group , so [ type=Coordination ] will find coordinated constructions , while [ type="[PN]G "] will find prepositional and nominal groups.
The syntax of values of the attribute head differs from that of the other attributes ; its values must be enclosed in a double or a single set of square brackets , as in : [ head =[...][...]] or [ head=[...]].
In the first case , the first brackets specify the syntactic head and second brackets specify the semantic 4It seems that it would also be problematic for dependency tools such as Netgraph , cf . ( Hajic ? et al , 2006) and http://quest.ms.mff.cuni.cz/netgraph/doc / netgraph_manual.html.
5Cf . http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de / projekte/TIGER/.
6In TIGER tools , there is a special mechanism for adding a second edge , e.g ., in order to represent control.
86 head , as in the following query which may be used to find elective constructions of the type najstarszy z koni ?( the ) oldest of horses ?, which are syntactically headed by the adjective and semantically by the semantic head of the dependent of that adjective : [ head=[pos=adj][pos=noun]].
In the second case , the content of the single brackets specifies both the syntactic head and the semantic head and , additionally , makes the requirement that they be the same segment . This means that the queries [ head=[case=gen][case=gen ]] and [ head=[case=gen ]] have a slightly different semantics : the first will find syntactic groups where the two heads may be different or the same , but they must be genitive ; the second will find groups with the two heads being necessarily the same genitive segment.
The usefulness of such queries may be illustrated with a query for verbs which cooccur with dative dependents denoting students ; the first approximation of such a query may look like this : [ pos=verb][head=[case=dat][base=student]].
This query will find not only dative nominal groups headed by a form of STUDENT , but also dative numeral groups whose main noun is a form of STUDENT , appropriate dative adjectival elective groups , etc.
As syntactic sugar , the constructs synh =[...] and semh =[...] can be used to enforce a constraint only on , respectively , syntactic or semantic head of a group.
It may seem that , given the possibility to specify the syntactic head of the construction , the attribute type is redundant ; in fact , we are not currently aware of cases where the specification type="PG " or type="NG " could not be replaced by an appropriate reference to the grammatical class ( part of speech ) of the syntactic head . However , the type attribute is useful for finding constructions which are not defined by their heads , for example , oratio recta constructions , and it is also useful for dealing with coordinate structures.
4 Implementation Issues
To allow for fast searching , the original Poliqarp uses its own compact binary format for corpora , described in detail in ( Janus , 2006) and briefly in ( Janus and Przepi?rkowski , 2006). Because the number of syntactic groups can easily grow very large and be on par with total number of words in a fully-tagged corpus , the representation of syntactic groups should be space-efficient , yet alow for fast decoding and random access.
The key observation to achieving this goal is that , due to the tree nature of the group set , any two groups can be either mutually disjoint or completely contained in each other . Thus , it is possible to serialize the tree into a list , sorted by the lower bound of a group,7 such that each group is immediately followed by its direct subgroups.
More precisely , the on-disk representation of a treebank is a bit vector that contains the following data for each group : 1) synchronization bit ( see below ), usually 0; 2) the difference between the lower bound of the previous group and the lower bound of the one in question , encoded in ?- code;8 3) ?- encoded length of current group in segments ; 4) ?- encoded number of type of this group ( the mapping of numbers to type names is stored in a separate on-disk dictionary in which two type numbers are reserved : 0 for coordinated groups and 1 for conjunctions ); 5) if this is a coordinated construct ( i.e ., type = 0) ? ?- encoded number of subsequent groups ( excluding the current one but including indirect subgroups ) that are part of the coordination;9 or 6) if this is not a coordinated construct ( i.e ., it is an ordinary group ) ? offset of syntactic and semantic head of this group , in that order , each represented by a binary number of log l bits , where l stands for the length of the group.
One drawback of this representation is that it does not allow for random access : the ?- code and head offsets have variable length , thus it is not possible to determine which bit one should start with to decode the group sequence for a certain segment . To mitigate this , a synchronization mechanism is employed.
7The corpus proper is represented by one large vector of fixed-size structures denoting segments ; here , the bounds of a group mean offsets into that vector.
8The ?- code is a prefix-free variable-length code that encodes arbitrary integers so that the representation of small numbers takes few bits ; see ( Witten et al , 1999) for details.
9Special treatment of coordination is caused by the fact that , as argued in ( Przepi?rkowski , 2007), coordinate structures are best treated as multi-headed constructions , with each conjunct bringing its own syntactic and semantic head.
87
For every kth segment ( k is a constant defined for the corpus , usually 1024), the bit offset of start of the description of the earliest group that intersects this segment is stored as an unsigned little-endian 32bit integer in a separate file . In the description of this group , the synchronization bit is set to 1, and the lower bound is spelled in full ( as an unsigned 32bit binary integer ) so that it is not necessary to know the previous lower bound to start decoding.
This synchronization lines up with the sparse inverted indexing mechanism used by Poliqarp for efficient searching . Poliqarp artificially splits the corpus into fixed-size chunks and remembers which segments occur in which chunks ; if the search engine makes random access to the corpus , the accessed segments ? offsets are multiplies of the chunk size . It is best , thus , to ascertain that the constant k is also equal to this chunk size.
In a typical scenario with many mostly small groups occurring close to each other , this encoding schema is capable of achieving the ratio of well under two bytes per group and does not incur a significant overhead in corpus size ( which is usually in the range of 10?12 bytes times the number of segments for a morphosyntactically but not structurally tagged corpus ). This is important , since disk access is the key factor in Poliqarp?s performance.
5 Conclusions
In this paper , we presented an extension of Poliqarp , a tool for indexing and searching morphosyntactically annotated corpora , towards the management of syntactically annotated corpora . An interesting feature of thus extended Poliqarp is its ability to deal with treebanks which do not adopt the ? at most one incoming edge ? assumption and which distinguish between syntactic heads and semantic heads . We also sketched the original and efficient method of indexing such treebanks . The implementation of the extensions currently approaches the alpha stage.
By the time of ACL 2007, we expect to release the sources of a relatively stable beta-stage version.
References
Florbela Barreto , Ant?nio Branco , Eduardo Ferreira , Am?lia Mendes , Maria Fernanda Nascimento , Filipe Nunes , and Jo?o Silva . 2006. Open resources and tools for the shallow processing of Portuguese : The TagShare project . In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation ( LREC 2006).
Oli Christ . 1994. A modular and flexible architecture for an integrated corpus query system . In COMPLEX?94,
Budapest.
Jan Hajic ?, Eva Hajic?ov ?, Jaroslava Hlav?c?ov ?, V?clav Klime ?, Jir ?? Mirovsk ?, Petr Pajas , Jan ? te?p?nek , Barbara Vidov ? Hladk ?, and Zdene?k ? abokrtsk ?, 2006.
PDT 2.0 ? Guide . Charles University , Prague . June 20, 2006.
Nancy Ide , Patrice Bonhomme , and Laurent Romary.
2000. XCES : An XML-based standard for linguistic corpora . In Proceedings of the Linguistic Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages 825?830, Athens,
Greece.
Daniel Janus and Adam Przepi?rkowski . 2006. Poliqarp 1.0: Some technical aspects of a linguistic search engine for large corpora . In Jacek Walin?ski , Krzysztof Kredens , and Stanis?aw Goz?dz?-Roszkowski , editors , The proceedings of Practical Applications of Linguistic Corpora 2005, Frankfurt am Main . Peter Lang.
Daniel Janus . 2006. Metody przeszukiwania i obrazowa-nia jego wynik?w w duz?ych korpusach tekst?w . Mas-ter?s thesis , Uniwersytet Warszawski , Wydzia ? Matem-atyki , Informatyki i Mechaniki , Warsaw.
Wolfgang Lezius . 2002. TIGERSearch ? ein Suchwerkzeug f?r Baumbanken . In Stephan Busemann , editor , Proceedings der 6. Konferenz zur Verarbeitung nat?rlicher Sprache ( KONVENS 2002), Saarbr?cken.
Adam Przepi?rkowski , Zygmunt Krynicki , ? ukasz De?bowski , Marcin Wolin?ski , Daniel Janus , and Piotr Ban?ski . 2004. A search tool for corpora with positional tagsets and ambiguities . In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation , LREC 2004, pages 1235? 1238, Lisbon . ELRA.
Adam Przepi?rkowski . 2004. The IPI PAN Corpus : Preliminary version . Institute of Computer Science , Polish Academy of Sciences , Warsaw.
Adam Przepi?rkowski . 2007. On heads and coordination in valence acquisition . In Alexander Gelbukh , editor , Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing ( CICLing 2007), Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 50?61, Berlin . Springer-Verlag.
Ian H . Witten , Alistair Moffat , and Timothy C . Bell.
1999. Managing Gigabytes : Compressing and Indexing Documents and Images . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc ., San Francisco , CA , 2nd edition.
88
