Proceedings of ACL08: HLT , Short Papers ( Companion Volume ), pages 229?232,
Columbus , Ohio , USA , June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Speakers ? Intention Prediction Using Statistics of Multilevel Features in
a Schedule Management Domain
Donghyun Kim Hyunjung Lee Choong-Nyoung Seon Diquest Research Center Computer Science & Engineering Computer Science & Engineering Diquest Inc . Sogang University Sogang University Seoul , Korea Seoul , Korea Seoul , Korea kdh2007@sogang.ac.kr juvenile@sogang.ac.kr wilowisp@gmail.com
Harksoo Kim Jungyun Seo
Computer & Communications Engineering Computer Science & Engineering Kangwon National University Sogang University
Chuncheon , Korea Seoul , Korea nlpdrkim@kangwon.ac.kr seojy@sogang.ac.kr
Abstract
Speaker?s intention prediction modules can be widely used as a preprocessor for reducing the search space of an automatic speech recognizer . They also can be used as a preprocessor for generating a proper sentence in a dialogue system . We propose a statistical model to predict speakers ? intentions by using multilevel features . Using the multilevel features ( morpheme-level features , discourse-level features , and domain knowledge-level features ), the proposed model predicts speakers ? intentions that may be implicated in next utterances . In the experiments , the proposed model showed better performances ( about 29% higher accuracies ) than the previous model . Based on the experiments , we found that the proposed multilevel features are very effective in speaker?s intention prediction.
1 Introduction
A dialogue system is a program in which a user and system communicate in natural language . To understand user?s utterance , the dialogue system should identify his/her intention . To respond his/her question , the dialogue system should generate the counterpart of his/her intention by referring to dialogue history and domain knowledge.
Most previous researches on speakers ? intentions have been focused on intention identification techniques . On the contrary , intention prediction techniques have been not studied enough although there are many practical needs , as shown in Figure 1.

When is the changed date?
Response , Timetable-update-dateAsk-ref , Timetable-update-date
It is changed into 4 May.
It is changed into 14 May.
?
Prediction of user?s intention
Identification of system?s intention
Reducing the search space of an ASR
It is changed into 12:40.
The date is changed.
Is it changed into 4 May ? ?
It is changed into 4 May.
The result of speech recognition
Example 1: Prediction of user?s intention Example 2: Prediction of system?s intention
It is 706-8954.
Ask-confirm , Timetable-insert-phonenumResponse , Timetable-insert-phonenum
Response generation
Is it 706-8954?
Identification of user?s intention
Prediction of system?s intention
Figure 1. Motivational example
In Figure 1, the first example shows that an intention prediction module can be used as a preprocessor for reducing the search space of an ASR ( automatic speech recognizer ). The second example shows that an intention prediction module can be used as a preprocessor for generating a proper sentence based on dialogue history.
There are some researches on user?s intention prediction ( Ronnie , 1995; Reithinger , 1995). Rei-thinger?s model used ngrams of speech acts as input features . Reithinger showed that his model can reduce the searching complexity of an ASR to 19~60%. However , his model did not achieve good performances because the input features were not rich enough to predict next speech acts . The researches on system?s intention prediction have been treated as a part of researches on dialogue models such as a finite-state model , a frame-based ( Litman , 1987). However , a finite-state model has a weak point that dialogue flows should be predefined . Although a plan-based model can manage complex dialogue phenomena using plan inference , a plan-based model is not easy to be applied to the real world applications because it is difficult to maintain plan recipes . In this paper , we propose a statistical model to reliably predict both user?s intention and system?s intention in a schedule management domain . The proposed model determines speakers ? intentions by using various levels of linguistic features such as clue words , previous intentions , and a current state of a domain frame.
2 Statistical prediction of speakers ? intentions 2.1 Generalization of speakers ? intentions In a goal-oriented dialogue , speaker?s intention can be represented by a semantic form that consists of a speech act and a concept sequence ( Levin , 2003).
In the semantic form , the speech act represents the general intention expressed in an utterance , and the concept sequence captures the semantic focus of the utterance.

Table 1. Speech acts and their meanings
Speech act Description
Greeting The opening greeting of a dialogue Expressive The closing greeting of a dialogue Opening Sentences for opening a goal-oriented dialogue
Ask-ref WH-questions
Ask-if YN-questions
Response Responses of questions or requesting actions Request Declarative sentences for requesting actions
Ask-confirm Questions for confirming the previous actions
Confirm Reponses of ask-confirm
Inform Declarative sentences for giving some information
Accept Agreement
Table 2. Basic concepts in a schedule management domain.
Table name Operation name Field name
Timetable Insert , Delete , Select , Update
Agent , Date , Day-of-week,
Time , Person , Place
Alarm Insert , Delete , Select , Update Date , Time Based on these assumptions , we define 11 domain-independent speech acts , as shown in Table 1, and 53 domain-dependent concept sequences according to a three-layer annotation scheme ( i.e . Fully connecting basic concepts with bar symbols ) ( Kim , 2007) based on Table 2. Then , we generalize speaker?s intention into a pair of a speech act and a concept sequence . In the remains of this paper , we call a pair of a speech act and a concept sequence ) an intention.
2.2 Intention prediction model
Given n utterances nU ,1 in a dialogue , let 1+nSI denote speaker?s intention of the n+1th utterance.
Then , the intention prediction model can be formally defined as the following equation : )|,( maxarg )|( ,111 , ,11
CSSA nn UCSSAPUSIP nn +++ ++ ? (1) In Equation (1), 1+nSA and 1+nCS are the speech act and the concept sequence of the n+1th utterance , respectively . Based on the assumption that the concept sequences are independent of the speech acts , we can rewrite Equation (1) as Equation (2).
)|()|( maxarg )|( ,11,11 , ,11
CSSA nn UCSPUSAPUSIP nn +++ ++ ? (2)
In Equation (2), it is impossible to directly compute )|( ,11 nn USAP + and )|( ,11 nn UCSP + because a speaker expresses identical contents with various surface forms of n sentences according to a personal linguistic sense in a real dialogue . To overcome this problem , we assume that n utterances in a dialogue can be generalized by a set of linguistic features containing various observations from the first utterance to the nth utterance . Therefore , we simplify Equation (2) by using a linguistic feature set 1+nFS ( a set of features that are accumulated from the first utterance to nth utterance ) for predicting the n+1th intention , as shown in Equation (3).
)|()|( maxarg )|( 1111 , ,11 ++ ? nnnn
CSSA nn FSCSPFSSAPUSIP nn (3)
All terms of the right hand side in Equation (3) are represented by conditional probabilities given a various feature values . These conditional probabilities can be effectively evaluated by CRFs ( conditional random fields ) ( Lafferty , 2001) that globally consider transition probabilities from the first ut-tion (4).
)),( exp ()( 1)|( )),( exp ()( 1)|( 1,11,1 1,11,1   + =+ ++ + =+ ++ = = n i j iijj n nnCRF n i j iijj n nnCRF
FSCSF
FSZ
FSCSP
FSSAF
FSZ
FSSAP ? ? (4)
In Equation (4), ),( iij FSSAF and ),( iij FSCSF are feature functions for predicting the speech act and the concept sequence of the ith utterance , respectively.
)(FSZ is a normalization factor . The feature functions receive binary values ( i.e . zero or one ) according to absence or existence of each feature.
2.3 Multilevel features
The proposed model uses multilevel features as input values of the feature functions in Equation (4). The followings give the details of the proposed multilevel features.
? Morpheme-level feature : Sometimes a few words in a current utterance give important clues to predict an intention of a next utterance.
We propose two types of morpheme-level features that are extracted from a current utterance : One is lexical features ( content words annotated with parts-of-speech ) and the other is POS features ( part-of-speech bigrams of all words in an utterance ). To obtain the morpheme-level features , we use a conventional morphological analyzer . Then , we remove noninformative feature values by using a wellknown 2? statistic because the previous works in document classification have shown that effective feature selection can increase precisions ( Yang , 1997).
? Discourse-level feature : An intention of a current utterance affects that dialogue participants determine intentions of next utterances because a dialogue consists of utterances that are sequentially associated with each other . We propose discourse-level features ( bigrams of speakers ? intentions ; a pair of a current intention and a next intention ) that are extracted from a sequence of utterances in a current dialogue.
? Domain knowledge-level feature : In a goal-oriented dialogue , dialogue participants accomplish a given task by using shared domain knowledge . Since a frame-based model is more flexible than a finite-state model and is more easy-implementable than a plan-based model , we adopt the frame-based model in order to describe domain knowledge . We propose two types of domain knowledge-level features ; slot-modification features and slot-retrieval features.
The slot-modification features represent which slots are filled with suitable items , and the slot-retrieval features represent which slots are looked up . The slot-modification features and the slot-retrieval features are represented by binary notation . In the slot-modification features , ?1? means that the slot is filled with a proper item , and ?0? means that the slot is empty . In the slot-retrieval features , ?1? means that the slot is looked up one or more times . To obtain domain knowledge-level features , we predefined speakers ? intentions associated with slot modification ( e.g . ? response & timetable-update-date ?) and slot retrieval ( e.g . ? request & timetable-select-date ?), respectively . Then , we automatically generated domain knowledge-level features by looking up the predefined intentions at each dialogue step.
3 Evaluation 3.1 Data sets and experimental settings We collected a Korean dialogue corpus simulated in a schedule management domain such as appointment scheduling and alarm setting . The dialogue corpus consists of 956 dialogues , 21,336 utterances (22.3 utterances per dialogue ). Each utterance in dialogues was manually annotated with speech acts and concept sequences . The manual tagging of speech acts and concept sequences was done by five graduate students with the knowledge of a dialogue analysis and postprocessed by a student in a doctoral course for consistency . To experiment the proposed model , we divided the annotated messages into the training corpus and the testing corpus by a ratio of four (764 dialogues ) to one (192 dialogues ). Then , we performed 5-fold cross validation . We used training factors of CRFs as L-BGFS and Gaussian Prior.
3.2 Experimental results
Table 3 and Table 4 show the accuracies of the proposed model in speech act prediction and concept sequence prediction , respectively.
231 Table 3. The accuracies of speech act prediction Features Accuracy-S (%) Accuracy-U (%)
Morpheme-level features 76.51 72.01
Discourse-level features 87.31 72.80
Domain know-ledge-level feature 63.44 49.03
All features 88.11 76.25
Table 4. The accuracies of concept sequence prediction Features Accuracy-S (%) Accuracy-U (%)
Morpheme-level features 66.35 59.40
Discourse-level features 86.56 62.62
Domain know-ledge-level feature 37.68 49.03
All features 87.19 64.21
In Table 3 and Table 4, Accuracy-S means the accuracy of system?s intention prediction , and Accu-racy-U means the accuracy of user?s intention prediction . Based on these experimental results , we found that multilevel features include different types of information and cooperation of the multilevel features brings synergy effect . We also found the degree of feature importance in intention prediction ( i.e . discourse level features > morpheme-level features > domain knowledge-level features).
To evaluate the proposed model , we compare the accuracies of the proposed model with those of Reithinger?s model ( Reithinger , 1995) by using the same training and test corpus , as shown in Table 5.

Table 5. The comparison of accuracies
Speaker Type Reithinger?s model
The proposed model
System
Speech act 43.37 88.11
Concept sequence 68.06 87.19
User Speech act 37.59 76.25 Concept sequence 49.48 64.21 As shown in Table 5, the proposed model outperformed Reithinger?s model in all kinds of predictions . We think that the differences between accuracies were mainly caused by input features : The proposed model showed similar accuracies to Reithinger?s model when it used only domain knowledge-level features.
4 Conclusion
We proposed a statistical prediction model of speakers ? intentions using multilevel features . The model uses three levels ( a morpheme level , a discourse level , and a domain knowledge level ) of features as input features of the statistical model based on CRFs . In the experiments , the proposed model showed better performances than the previous model . Based on the experiments , we found that the proposed multilevel features are very effective in speaker?s intention prediction.
Acknowledgments
This research ( paper ) was performed for the Intelligent Robotics Development Program , one of the 21st Century Frontier R&D Programs funded by the Ministry of Commerce , Industry and Energy of
Korea.
References
D . Goddeau , H . Meng , J . Polifroni , S . Seneff , and S.
Busayapongchai . 1996. ? A Form-Based Dialogue Manager for Spoken Language Applications ?, Proceedings of International Conference on Spoken
Language Processing , 701-704.
D . Litman and J . Allen . 1987. A Plan Recognition Model for Subdialogues in Conversations , Cognitive
Science , 11:163-200.
H . Kim . 2007. A Dialogue-based NLIDB System in a Schedule Management Domain : About the method to Find User?s Intentions , Lecture Notes in Computer
Science , 4362:869-877.
J . Lafferty , A . McCallum , and F . Pereira . 2001. ? Conditional Random Fields : Probabilistic Models for Segmenting And Labeling Sequence Data ?, Proceedings of ICML , 282-289.
L . Levin , C . Langley , A . Lavie , D . Gates , D . Wallace , and K . Peterson . 2003. ? Domain Specific Speech Acts for Spoken Language Translation ?, Proceedings of the 4th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue.
N . Reithinger and E . Maier . 1995. ? Utilizing Statistical Dialog Act Processing in VerbMobil ?, Proceedings of ACL , 116-121.
R . W . Smith and D . R . Hipp , 1995. Spoken Natural Language Dialogue Systems : A Practical Approach,
Oxford University Press.
Y . Yang and J . Pedersen . 1997. ? A Comparative Study on Feature Selection in Text Categorization ?, Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
Machine Learning.
232
