Proceedings of ACL08: HLT , pages 897?904,
Columbus , Ohio , USA , June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Cascaded Linear Model for Joint Chinese Word Segmentation and
Part-of-Speech Tagging
Wenbin Jiang ? Liang Huang ? Qun Liu ? Yajuan Lu ? ?
?Key Lab . of Intelligent Information Processing ? Department of Computer & Information Science
Institute of Computing Technology University of Pennsylvania
Chinese Academy of Sciences Levine Hall , 3330 Walnut Street
P.O . Box 2704, Beijing 100190, China Philadelphia , PA 19104, USA
jiangwenbin@ict.ac.cn lhuang3@cis.upenn.edu
Abstract
We propose a cascaded linear model for joint Chinese word segmentation and part-of-speech tagging . With a character-based perceptron as the core , combined with real-valued features such as language models , the cascaded model is able to efficiently utilize knowledge sources that are inconvenient to incorporate into the perceptron directly.
Experiments show that the cascaded model achieves improved accuracies on both segmentation only and joint segmentation and part-of-speech tagging . On the Penn Chinese Treebank 5.0, we obtain an error reduction of 18.5% on segmentation and 12% on joint segmentation and part-of-speech tagging over the perceptron-only baseline.
1 Introduction
Word segmentation and part-of-speech ( POS ) tagging are important tasks in computer processing of Chinese and other Asian languages . Several models were introduced for these problems , for example , the Hidden Markov Model ( HMM ) ( Rabiner , 1989), Maximum Entropy Model ( ME ) ( Ratnaparkhi and Adwait , 1996), and Conditional Random Fields ( CRFs ) ( Lafferty et al , 2001). CRFs have the advantage of flexibility in representing features compared to generative ones such as HMM , and usually behaves the best in the two tasks . Another widely used discriminative method is the perceptron algorithm ( Collins , 2002), which achieves comparable performance to CRFs with much faster training , so we base this work on the perceptron.
To segment and tag a character sequence , there are two strategies to choose : performing POS tagging following segmentation ; or joint segmentation and POS tagging ( Joint S&T ). Since the typical approach of discriminative models treats segmentation as a labelling problem by assigning each character a boundary tag ( Xue and Shen , 2003), Joint S&T can be conducted in a labelling fashion by expanding boundary tags to include POS information ( Ng and Low , 2004). Compared to performing segmentation and POS tagging one at a time , Joint S&T can achieve higher accuracy not only on segmentation but also on POS tagging ( Ng and Low , 2004). Besides the usual character-based features , additional features dependent on POS?s or words can also be employed to improve the performance . However , as such features are generated dynamically during the decoding procedure , two limitation arise : on the one hand , the amount of parameters increases rapidly , which is apt to overfit on training corpus ; on the other hand , exact inference by dynamic programming is intractable because the current predication relies on the results of prior predications . As a result , many theoretically useful features such as higher-order word or POS ngrams are difficult to be incorporated in the model efficiently.
To cope with this problem , we propose a cascaded linear model inspired by the loglinear model ( Och and Ney , 2004) widely used in statistical machine translation to incorporate different kinds of knowledge sources . Shown in Figure 1, the cascaded model has a two-layer architecture , with a character-based perceptron as the core combined with other real-valued features such as language models . We
Linear Model ( Perceptron ) g1 = ? i ? i ? fi ~?
Outside-layer
Linear Model
S = ? j wj ? gj ~ w f1 f2 f|R | g1
Word LM : g2 = Pwlm(W ) g2
POS LM : g3 = Ptlm(T ) g3
Labelling : g4 = P ( T | W ) g4
Generating : g5 = P ( W | T ) g5
Length : g6 = | W | g6
S
Figure 1: Structure of Cascaded Linear Model . | R | denotes the scale of the feature space of the core perceptron.
will describe it in detail in Section 4. In this architecture , knowledge sources that are intractable to incorporate into the perceptron , can be easily incorporated into the outside linear model . In addition , as these knowledge sources are regarded as separate features , we can train their corresponding models independently with each other . This is an interesting approach when the training corpus is large as it reduces the time and space consumption . Experiments show that our cascaded model can utilize different knowledge sources effectively and obtain accuracy improvements on both segmentation and Joint S&T.
2 Segmentation and POS Tagging
Given a Chinese character sequence:
C1:n = C1 C2 .. Cn the segmentation result can be depicted as:
C1:e1 Ce1+1:e2 .. Cem?1+1:em while the segmentation and POS tagging result can be depicted as:
C1:e1/t1 Ce1+1:e2/t2 .. Cem?1+1:em/tm
Here , Ci ( i = 1..n ) denotes Chinese character , ti ( i = 1..m ) denotes POS tag , and Cl:r ( l ? r ) denotes character sequence ranges from Cl to Cr.
We can see that segmentation and POS tagging task is to divide a character sequence into several subsequences and label each of them a POS tag.
It is a better idea to perform segmentation and POS tagging jointly in a uniform framework . According to Ng and Low (2004), the segmentation task can be transformed to a tagging problem by assigning each character a boundary tag of the following four types : ? b : the begin of the word ? m : the middle of the word ? e : the end of the word ? s : a single-character word We can extract segmentation result by splitting the labelled result into subsequences of pattern s or bm?e which denote single-character word and multicharacter word respectively . In order to perform POS tagging at the same time , we expand boundary tags to include POS information by attaching a POS to the tail of a boundary tag as a postfix following Ng and Low (2004). As each tag is now composed of a boundary part and a POS part , the joint S&T problem is transformed to a uniform boundary-POS labelling problem . A subsequence of boundary-POS labelling result indicates a word with POS t only if the boundary tag sequence composed of its boundary part conforms to s or bm?e style , and all POS tags in its POS part equal to t . For example , a tag sequence b NN m NN e NN represents a three-character word with POS tag NN .
3 The Perceptron
The perceptron algorithm introduced into NLP by Collins (2002), is a simple but effective discriminative training method . It has comparable performance Cn ( n = ?2..2) C?2=e , C?1=?, C0=U , C1=/, C2=? CnCn+1 ( n = ?2..1) C?2C?1=e ?, C?1C0=?U , C0C1=U /, C1C2=/?
C?1C1 C?1C1=?/
Lexical-target Instances
C0Cn ( n = ?2..2) C0C?2=Ue , C0C?1=U ?, C0C0=UU , C0C1=U /, C0C2=U ? C0CnCn+1 ( n = ?2..1) C0C?2C?1=Ue ?, C0C?1C0=U?U , C0C0C1=UU /, C0C1C2=U/?
C0C?1C1 C0C?1C1 = U?/
Table 1: Feature templates and instances . Suppose we are considering the third character ? U ? in ? e ? U /??.
to CRFs , while with much faster training . The perceptron has been used in many NLP tasks , such as POS tagging ( Collins , 2002), Chinese word segmentation ( Ng and Low , 2004; Zhang and Clark , 2007) and so on . We trained a character-based perceptron for Chinese Joint S&T , and found that the perceptron itself could achieve considerably high accuracy on segmentation and Joint S&T . In following subsections , we describe the feature templates and the perceptron training algorithm.
3.1 Feature Templates
The feature templates we adopted are selected from those of Ng and Low (2004). To compare with others conveniently , we excluded the ones forbidden by the close test regulation of SIGHAN , for example , Pu(C0), indicating whether character C0 is a punctuation.
All feature templates and their instances are shown in Table 1. C represents a Chinese character while the subscript of C indicates its position in the sentence relative to the current character ( it has the subscript 0). Templates immediately borrowed from Ng and Low (2004) are listed in the upper column named non-lexical-target . We called them non-lexical-target because predications derived from them can predicate without considering the current character C0. Templates in the column below are expanded from the upper ones . We add a field C0 to each template in the upper column , so that it can carry out predication according to not only the context but also the current character itself . As predications generated from such templates depend on the current character , we name these templates lexical-target . Note that the templates of Ng and Low (2004) have already contained some lexical-target ones . With the two kinds Algorithm 1 Perceptron training algorithm.
1: Input : Training examples ( xi , yi ) 2: ~?? 0 3: for t ? 1 .. T do 4: for i ? 1 .. N do 5: zi ? argmaxz?GEN(xi)?(xi , z ) ? ~? 6: if zi 6= yi then 7: ~?? ~? +?( xi , yi)??(xi , zi ) 8: Output : Parameters ~? of predications , the perceptron model will do exact predicating to the best of its ability , and can back off to approximately predicating if exact predicating fails.
3.2 Training Algorithm
We adopt the perceptron training algorithm of Collins (2002) to learn a discriminative model mapping from inputs x ? X to outputs y ? Y , where X is the set of sentences in the training corpus and Y is the set of corresponding labelled results . Following Collins , we use a function GEN(x ) generating all candidate results of an input x , a representation ? mapping each training example ( x , y ) ? X ? Y to a feature vector ?( x , y ) ? Rd , and a parameter vector ~? ? Rd corresponding to the feature vector.
d means the dimension of the vector space , it equals to the amount of features in the model . For an input character sequence x , we aim to find an output F ( x ) satisfying:
F ( x ) = argmax y?GEN(x ) ?( x , y ) ? ~? (1) ?( x , y ) ? ~? represents the inner product of feature vector ?( x , y ) and the parameter vector ~?. We used the algorithm depicted in Algorithm 1 to tune the parameter vector ~?.
899
To alleviate overfitting on the training examples , we use the refinement strategy called ? averaged parameters ? ( Collins , 2002) to the algorithm in Algorithm 1.
4 Cascaded Linear Model
In theory , any useful knowledge can be incorporated into the perceptron directly , besides the character-based features already adopted . Additional features most widely used are related to word or POS ngrams . However , such features are generated dynamically during the decoding procedure so that the feature space enlarges much more rapidly . Figure 2 shows the growing tendency of feature space with the introduction of these features as well as the character-based ones . We noticed that the templates related to word unigrams and bigrams bring to the feature space an enlargement much rapider than the character-base ones , not to mention the higher-order grams such as trigrams or 4grams . In addition , even though these higher grams were managed to be used , there still remains another problem : as the current predication relies on the results of prior ones , the decoding procedure has to resort to approximate inference by maintaining a list of N - best candidates at each predication position , which evokes a potential risk to depress the training.
To alleviate the drawbacks , we propose a cascaded linear model . It has a two-layer architecture , with a perceptron as the core and another linear model as the outside-layer . Instead of incorporating all features into the perceptron directly , we first trained the perceptron using character-based features , and several other submodels using additional ones such as word or POS ngrams , then trained the outside-layer linear model using the outputs of these submodels , including the perceptron . Since the perceptron is fixed during the second training step , the whole training procedure need relative small time and memory cost.
The outside-layer linear model , similar to those in SMT , can synthetically utilize different knowledge sources to conduct more accurate comparison between candidates . In this layer , each knowledge source is treated as a feature with a corresponding weight denoting its relative importance . Suppose we have n features gj ( j = 1..n ) coupled with n corre - 1.2e+006 1.5e+006 1.8e+006 2.1e+006 2.4e+006 2.7e+006 3e+006 3.3e+006 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
Fe atu re sp ac e
Introduction of features growing curve
Figure 2: Feature space growing curve . The horizontal scope X[i:j ] denotes the introduction of different templates . X[0:5]: Cn ( n = ?2..2); X[5:9]: CnCn+1 ( n = ?2..1); X[9:10]: C?1C1; X[10:15]: C0Cn ( n = ?2..2); X[15:19]: C0CnCn+1 ( n = ?2..1); X[19:20]: C0C?1C1; X[20:21]: W0; X[21:22]: W?1W0. W0 denotes the current considering word , while W?1 denotes the word in front of W0. All the data are collected from the training procedure on MSR corpus of SIGHAN bakeoff 2.
sponding weights wj ( j = 1..n ), each feature gj gives a score gj(r ) to a candidate r , then the total score of r is given by:
S(r ) = ? j=1..n wj ? gj(r ) (2)
The decoding procedure aims to find the candidate r ? with the highest score : r ? = argmax r
S(r ) (3)
While the mission of the training procedure is to tune the weights wj(j = 1..n ) to guarantee that the candidate r with the highest score happens to be the best result with a high probability.
As all the submodels , including the perceptron , are regarded as separate features of the outside-layer linear model , we can train them respectively with special algorithms . In our experiments we trained a 3gram word language model measuring the fluency of the segmentation result , a 4gram POS language model functioning as the product of state-transition probabilities in HMM , and a word-POS cooccurrence model describing how much probably a word sequence coexists with a POS sequence . As shown in Figure 1, the character-based perceptron is used as the inside-layer linear model and sends its output to the outside-layer . Besides the output of the perceptron , the outside-layer also receive the outputs model and a word count penalty which is similar to the translation length penalty in SMT.
4.1 Language Model
Language model ( LM ) provides linguistic probabilities of a word sequence . It is an important measure of fluency of the translation in SMT . Formally , an ngram word LM approximates the probability of a word sequence W = w1:m with the following product:
Pwlm(W ) = m ? i=1
Pr(wi|wmax(0,i?n+1):i?1) (4)
Similarly , the ngram POS LM of a POS sequence
T = t1:m is:
Ptlm(T ) = m ? i=1
Pr(ti|tmax(0,i?n+1):i?1) (5)
Notice that a bigram POS LM functions as the product of transition probabilities in HMM.
4.2 Word-POS Cooccurrence Model
Given a training corpus with POS tags , we can train a word-POS cooccurrence model to approximate the probability that the word sequence of the labelled result coexists with its corresponding POS sequence . Using W = w1:m to denote the word sequence , T = t1:m to denote the corresponding POS sequence , P ( T | W ) to denote the probability that W is labelled as T , and P ( W | T ) to denote the probability that T generates W , we can define the cooccurrence model as follows : Co(W,T ) = P ( T | W )? wt ? P ( W | T )? tw (6) ? wt and ? tw denote the corresponding weights of the two components.
Suppose the conditional probability Pr(t|w ) describes the probability that the word w is labelled as the POS t , while Pr(w|t ) describes the probability that the POS t generates the word w , then P ( T | W ) can be approximated by:
P ( T | W ) ? m ? k=1
Pr(tk|wk ) (7)
And P ( W | T ) can be approximated by:
P ( W | T ) ? m ? k=1
Pr(wk|tk ) (8)
Pr(w|t ) and Pr(t|w ) can be easily acquired by Maximum Likelihood Estimates ( MLE ) over the corpus . For instance , if the word w appears N times in training corpus and is labelled as POS t for n times , the probability Pr(t|w ) can be estimated by the formula below:
Pr(t|w ) ? nN (9)
The probability Pr(w|t ) could be estimated through the same approach.
To facilitate tuning the weights , we use two components of the cooccurrence model Co(W,T ) to represent the cooccurrence probability of W and T , rather than use Co(W,T ) itself . In the rest of the paper , we will call them labelling model and generating model respectively.
5 Decoder
Sequence segmentation and labelling problem can be solved through a viterbi style decoding procedure . In Chinese Joint S&T , the mission of the decoder is to find the boundary-POS labelled sequence with the highest score . Given a Chinese character sequence C1:n , the decoding procedure can proceed in a left-right fashion with a dynamic programming approach . By maintaining a stack of size N at each position i of the sequence , we can preserve the top N best candidate labelled results of subsequence C1:i during decoding . At each position i , we enumerate all possible word-POS pairs by assigning each POS to each possible word formed from the character subsequence spanning length l = 1..min(i,K ) ( K is assigned 20 in all our experiments ) and ending at position i , then we derive all candidate results by attaching each word-POS pair p ( of length l ) to the tail of each candidate result at the prior position of p ( position i ? l ), and select for position i a N - best list of candidate results from all these candidates . When we derive a candidate result from a word-POS pair p and a candidate q at prior position of p , we calculate the scores of the word LM , the POS LM , the labelling probability and the generating probability , 1: Input : character sequence C1:n 2: for i ? 1 .. n do 3: L ? ? 4: for l ? 1 .. min(i , K ) do 5: w ? Ci?l+1:i 6: for t ? POS do 7: p ? label w as t 8: for q ? V[i ? l ] do 9: append D(q , p ) to L 10: sort L 11: V[i ]? L[1 : N ] 12: Output : nbest results V[n ] as well as the score of the perceptron model . In addition , we add the score of the word count penalty as another feature to alleviate the tendency of LMs to favor shorter candidates . By equation 2, we can synthetically evaluate all these scores to perform more accurately comparing between candidates.
Algorithm 2 shows the decoding algorithm.
Lines 3 ? 11 generate a N - best list for each character position i . Line 4 scans words of all possible lengths l ( l = 1..min(i,K ), where i points to the current considering character ). Line 6 enumerates all POS?s for the word w spanning length l and ending at position i . Line 8 considers each candidate result in N - best list at prior position of the current word . Function D derives the candidate result from the word-POS pair p and the candidate q at prior position of p.
6 Experiments
We reported results from two set of experiments.
The first was conducted to test the performance of the perceptron on segmentation on the corpus from SIGHAN Bakeoff 2, including the Academia Sinica Corpus ( AS ), the Hong Kong City University Corpus ( CityU ), the Peking University Corpus ( PKU ) and the Microsoft Research Corpus ( MSR ). The second was conducted on the Penn Chinese Treebank 5.0 ( CTB5.0) to test the performance of the cascaded model on segmentation and Joint S&T . In all experiments , we use the averaged parameters for the perceptrons , and Fmeasure as the accuracy measure . With precision P and recall R , the balance Fmeasure is defined as : F = 2PR/(P + R).
0.966 0.968 0.97 0.972 0.974 0.976 0.978 0.98 0.982 0.984 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
F-me as su re number of iterations
Perceptron Learning Curve
Non-lex + avg
Lex + avg
Figure 3: Averaged perceptron learning curves with Non-lexical-target and Lexical-target feature templates.
AS CityU PKU MSR
SIGHAN best 0.952 0.943 0.950 0.964
Zhang & Clark 0.946 0.951 0.945 0.972 our model 0.954 0.958 0.940 0.975 Table 2: Fmeasure on SIGHAN bakeoff 2. SIGHAN best : best scores SIGHAN reported on the four corpus , cited from Zhang and Clark (2007).
6.1 Experiments on SIGHAN Bakeoff
For convenience of comparing with others , we focus only on the close test , which means that any extra resource is forbidden except the designated training corpus . In order to test the performance of the lexical-target templates and meanwhile determine the best iterations over the training corpus , we randomly chosen 2, 000 shorter sentences ( less than 50 words ) as the development set and the rest as the training set (84, 294 sentences ), then trained a perceptron model named NON-LEX using only non-lexical-target features and another named LEX using both the two kinds of features . Figure 3 shows their learning curves depicting the Fmeasure on the development set after 1 to 10 training iterations . We found that LEX outperforms NON-LEX with a margin of about 0.002 at each iteration , and its learning curve reaches a tableland at iteration 7. Then we trained LEX on each of the four corpora for 7 iterations . Test results listed in Table 2 shows that this model obtains higher accuracy than the best of SIGHAN Bakeoff 2 in three corpora ( AS , CityU and MSR ). On the three corpora , it also outperformed the word-based perceptron model of Zhang and Clark (2007). However , the accuracy on PKU corpus is obvious lower than the best score SIGHAN
POS - Segmentation 0.971
POS + Segmentation 0.973
POS + Joint S&T 0.925
Table 3: Fmeasure on segmentation and Joint S&T of perceptrons . POS -: perceptron trained without POS,
POS +: perceptron trained with POS.
reported , we need to conduct further research on this problem.
6.2 Experiments on CTB5.0
We turned to experiments on CTB 5.0 to test the performance of the cascaded model . According to the usual practice in syntactic analysis , we choose chapters 1? 260 (18074 sentences ) as training set , chapter 271? 300 (348 sentences ) as test set and chapter 301? 325 (350 sentences ) as development set.
At the first step , we conducted a group of contrasting experiments on the core perceptron , the first concentrated on the segmentation regardless of the POS information and reported the Fmeasure on segmentation only , while the second performed Joint S&T using POS information and reported the Fmeasure both on segmentation and on Joint S&T . Note that the accuracy of Joint S&T means that a word-POS pair is recognized only if both the boundary tags and the POS?s are correctly labelled.
The evaluation results are shown in Table 3. We find that Joint S&T can also improve the segmentation accuracy . However , the Fmeasure on Joint S&T is obvious lower , about a rate of 95% to the Fmeasure on segmentation . Similar trend appeared in experiments of Ng and Low (2004), where they conducted experiments on CTB 3.0 and achieved Fmeasure 0.919 on Joint S&T , a ratio of 96% to the
Fmeasure 0.952 on segmentation.
As the next step , a group of experiments were conducted to investigate how well the cascaded linear model performs . Here the core perceptron was just the POS + model in experiments above . Besides this perceptron , other submodels are trained and used as additional features of the outside-layer linear model . We used SRI Language Modelling Toolkit ( Stolcke and Andreas , 2002) to train a 3gram word LM with modified Kneser-Ney smoothing ( Chen and Goodman , 1998), and a 4gram POS
Features Segmentation F1 Joint S&T F1
All 0.9785 0.9341
All - PER 0.9049 0.8432
All - WLM 0.9785 0.9340
All - PLM 0.9752 0.9270
All - GPR 0.9774 0.9329
All - LPR 0.9765 0.9321
All - LEN 0.9772 0.9325
Table 4: Contribution of each feture . ALL : all features , PER : perceptron model , WLM : word language model , PLM : POS language model , GPR : generating model , LPR : labelling model , LEN : word count penalty.
LM with WittenBell smoothing , and we trained a word-POS cooccurrence model simply by MLE without smoothing . To obtain their corresponding weights , we adapted the minimum-error-rate training algorithm ( Och , 2003) to train the outside-layer model . In order to inspect how much improvement each feature brings into the cascaded model , every time we removed a feature while retaining others , then retrained the model and tested its performance on the test set.
Table 4 shows experiments results . We find that the cascaded model achieves a Fmeasure increment of about 0.5 points on segmentation and about 0.9 points on Joint S&T , over the perceptron-only model POS +. We also find that the perceptron model functions as the kernel of the outside-layer linear model.
Without the perceptron , the cascaded model ( if we can still call it ? cascaded ?) performs poorly on both segmentation and Joint S&T . Among other features , the 4gram POS LM plays the most important role , removing this feature causes Fmeasure decrement of 0.33 points on segmentation and 0.71 points on Joint S&T . Another important feature is the labelling model . Without it , the Fmeasure on segmentation and Joint S&T both suffer a decrement of 0.2 points.
The generating model , which functions as that in HMM , brings an improvement of about 0.1 points to each test item . However unlike the three features , the word LM brings very tiny improvement.
We suppose that the character-based features used in the perceptron play a similar role as the lower-order word LM , and it would be helpful if we train a higher-order word LM on a larger scale corpus.
Finally , the word count penalty gives improvement to the cascaded model , 0.13 points on segmentation In summary , the cascaded model can utilize these knowledge sources effectively , without causing the feature space of the percptron becoming even larger.
Experimental results show that , it achieves obvious improvement over the perceptron-only model , about from 0.973 to 0.978 on segmentation , and from 0.925 to 0.934 on Joint S&T , with error reductions of 18.5% and 12% respectively.
7 Conclusions
We proposed a cascaded linear model for Chinese Joint S&T . Under this model , many knowledge sources that may be intractable to be incorporated into the perceptron directly , can be utilized effectively in the outside-layer linear model . This is a substitute method to use both local and nonlocal features , and it would be especially useful when the training corpus is very large.
However , can the perceptron incorporate all the knowledge used in the outside-layer linear model ? If this cascaded linear model were chosen , could more accurate generative models ( LMs , word-POS cooccurrence model ) be obtained by training on large scale corpus even if the corpus is not correctly labelled entirely , or by self-training on raw corpus in a similar approach to that of McClosky (2006)? In addition , all knowledge sources we used in the core perceptron and the outside-layer linear model come from the training corpus , whereas many open knowledge sources ( lexicon etc .) can be used to improve performance ( Ng and Low , 2004). How can we utilize these knowledge sources effectively ? We will investigate these problems in the following work.
Acknowledgement
This work was done while L . H . was visiting CAS/ICT . The authors were supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China , Contracts 60736014 and 60573188, and 863 State Key Project No . 2006AA010108 ( W . J ., Q . L ., and Y . L .), and by NSF ITR EIA-0205456 ( L . H .). We would also like to Hwee-Tou Ng for sharing his code , and Yang Liu and Yun Huang for suggestions.
References
Stanley F . Chen and Joshua Goodman . 1998. An empirical study of smoothing techniques for language modeling . Technical Report TR-10-98, Harvard University Center for Research in Computing Technology.
Michael Collins . 2002. Discriminative training methods for hidden markov models : Theory and experiments with perceptron algorithms . In Proceedings of
EMNLP , pages 1?8, Philadelphia , USA.
John Lafferty , Andrew McCallum , and Fernando Pereira.
2001. Conditional random fields : Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data . In Proceedings of the 18th ICML , pages 282?289, Massachusetts , USA.
David McClosky , Eugene Charniak , and Mark Johnson.
2006. Reranking and self-training for parser adaptation . In Proceedings of ACL 2006.
Hwee Tou Ng and Jin Kiat Low . 2004. Chinese part-of-speech tagging : One-at-a-time or all-at-once ? word-based or character-based ? In Proceedings of EMNLP.
Franz Joseph Och and Hermann Ney . 2004. The alignment template approach to statistical machine translation . Computational Linguistics , 30:417?449.
Franz Joseph Och . 2003. Minimum error rate training in statistical machine translation . In Proceedings of ACL 2003, pages 160?167.
Lawrence . R . Rabiner . 1989. A tutorial on hidden markov models and selected applications in speech recognition . In Proceedings of IEEE , pages 257?286.
Ratnaparkhi and Adwait . 1996. A maximum entropy part-of-speech tagger . In Proceedings of the Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing Conference.
Stolcke and Andreas . 2002. Srilm - an extensible language modeling toolkit . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Spoken Language Processing , pages 311?318.
Nianwen Xue and Libin Shen . 2003. Chinese word segmentation as lmr tagging . In Proceedings of SIGHAN
Workshop.
Yue Zhang and Stephen Clark . 2007. Chinese segmentation with a word-based perceptron algorithm . In Proceedings of ACL 2007.
904
