Tutorial Abstracts of ACL08: HLT , page 4,
Columbus , Ohio , USA , June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Advanced Online Learning for Natural Language Processing
Koby Crammer
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , PA 19104
crammer@cis.upenn.edu
Introduction : Most research in machine learning has been focused on binary classification , in which the learned classifier outputs one of two possible answers . Important fundamental questions can be analyzed in terms of binary classification , but realworld natural language processing problems often involve richer output spaces . In this tutorial , we will focus on classifiers with a large number of possible outputs with interesting structure . Notable examples include information retrieval , part-of-speech tagging , NP chucking , parsing , entity extraction , and phoneme recognition.
Our algorithmic framework will be that of online learning , for several reasons . First , online algorithms are in general conceptually simple and easy to implement . In particular , online algorithms process one example at a time and thus require little working memory . Second , our example applications have all been treated successfully using online algorithms . Third , the analysis of online algorithms uses simpler mathematical tools than other types of algorithms . Fourth , the online learning framework provides a very general setting which can be applied to a broad setting of problems , where the only machinery assumed is the ability to perform exact inference , which computes a maxima over some score function.
Goals : (1) To provide the audience systematic methods to design , analyze and implement efficiently learning algorithms for their specific complex-output problems : from simple binary classification through multiclass categorization to information extraction , parsing and speech recognition . (2) To introduce new online algorithms which provide state-of-the-art performance in practice backed by interesting theoretical guarantees.
Content : The tutorial is divided into two parts . In the first half we introduce online learning and describe the Perceptron algorithm ( Rosenblatt , 1958) and the passive-aggressive framework ( Crammer et al ., 2006). We then discuss in detail an approach for deriving algorithms for complex natural language processing ( Crammer , 2004). In the second half we discuss is detail relevant applications including text classification ( Crammer and Singer , 2003), named entity recognition ( McDonald et al , 2005), parsing ( McDonald , 2006), and other tasks . We also relate the online algorithms to their batch counterparts.
References
K . Crammer and Y . Singer . 2003. A new family of online algorithms for category ranking . Jornal of Machine
Learning Research , 3:1025?1058.
K . Crammer , O . Dekel , J . Keshet , S . ShalevShwartz , and Y . Singer . 2006. Online passive-aggressive algorithms . JMLR , 7:551?585.
K . Crammer . 2004. Online Learning of Complex Categorial Problems . Ph.D . thesis , Hebrew Universtiy.
R . McDonald , K . Crammer , and F . Pereira . 2005. Flexible text segmentation with structured multilabel classification . In HLT/EMNLP.
R . McDonald . 2006. Discriminative Training and Spanning Tree Algorithms for Dependency Parsing . Ph.D.
thesis , University of Pennsylvania.
F . Rosenblatt . 1958. The perceptron : A probabilistic model for information storage and organization in the brain . Psychological Review , 65:386?407.
4
