Proceedings of ACL08: HLT , Short Papers ( Companion Volume ), pages 245?248,
Columbus , Ohio , USA , June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Efficient Processing of Underspecified Discourse Representations
Michaela Regneri ? ?
regneri@coli.uni-sb.de
? Saarland University
Markus Egg?
egg@let.rug.nl
? University of Groningen
Alexander Koller?
a.koller@ed.ac.uk
? University of Edinburgh
Abstract
Underspecification-based algorithms for processing partially disambiguated discourse structure must cope with extremely high numbers of readings . Based on previous work on dominance graphs and weighted tree grammars , we provide the first possibility for computing an underspecified discourse description and a best discourse representation efficiently enough to process even the longest discourses in the RST Discourse Treebank.
1 Introduction
Discourse processing has emerged as a highly relevant source of information for applications such as information extraction and automatic summarisation ( Taboada and Mann (2006) outline this and further applications ). But discourse structures cannot always be described completely , either due to genuine ambiguity ( Stede , 2004) or to the limitations of a discourse parser . In either case , only partial information on discourse structure is available . To handle such information , underspecification formalisms can be used . Underspecification was originally introduced in computational semantics to model structural ambiguity without disjunctively enumerating the readings , and later applied to discourse parsing ( Gardent and Webber , 1998; Schilder , 2002).
However , while the existing algorithms for underspecification processing work well for semantic structures , they were not designed for discourse structures , which can be much larger . Indeed , it has never been shown that underspecified discourse reprentations ( UDRs ) can be processed efficiently , since the general-purpose implementations are too slow for that task.
In this paper , we present a new way to implement and process discourse underspecification in terms of regular tree grammars ( RTGs ). RTGs are used as an underspecification formalism in semantics ( Koller et al , 2008). We show how to compute RTGs for discourse from dominance-based underspecified representations more efficiently ( by a typical factor of 100) than before . Furthermore , we show how weighted RTGs can be used to represent constraints and preferences on the discourse structure . Taking all these results together , we show for the first time how the globally optimal discourse representation based on some preference model can be computed efficiently from an UDR.
2 Underspecified Discourse Representation Following annotation schemes like the one of Stede (2004), we model discourse structures by binary trees . Fig . (1b-f ) represent the potential structures of (1). We write each elementary discourse unit ( EDU ) in square brackets.
(1) [ C1 I try to read a novel ] [ C2 if I feel bored ] [ C3 because the TV programs disappoint me ] [ C4 but I can?t concentrate on anything .] Underspecification formalisms such as dominance graphs ( Althaus et al , 2003) can model partial information about such trees ; see Fig . (1a ) for the underspecified discourse representation ( UDR ) of (1). These graphs consist of labelled roots and unlabelled holes ; the solid edges indicate that a node must be the parent of another , and the dashed edges indicate ( transitive ) dominance requirements.
A configuration of a dominance graph is an arrangement of the ( labelled ) graph nodes into a tree that satisfies all ( immediate and transitive ) dominance requirements . Subgraphs that are connected by solid edges are called fragments and must be tree-shaped.
Using UDRs , discourse parsing can be modu-larised into three separate steps . First , a discourse parser segments the text and generates an UDR from it . The node labels in the UDR aren?t necessarily fully specified ( Egg and Redeker , 2007; Schilder , (2)
Contrast
C (1)
Condition (1)
Condition (1)
Condition (1)
Cause (2)Cause (2)
Cause (2)
Contrast
C (1)
Cause (2)
Contrast
Contrast
Contrast
Condition (1) 3 5 (2)
Contrast
C
Figure 1: An underspecified discourse structure and its five configurations 2002); here we pretend that they are to simplify the presentation , as nothing in this paper hinges on it.
Then weights are added to the UDR that incorporate preferences for discourse structures based on linguistic cues . Finally , the weighted UDR can either be processed directly by other applications , or , if a tree structure is required , we can compute the best configuration . In this paper , we show how an UDR dominance graph can be converted into a regular tree grammar efficiently . This simplifies the specification of weights in Step 2; we also show how to efficiently compute a best tree from a weighted RTG ( Step 3). We do not discuss Step 1 in this paper.
The dominance graphs used in discourse underspecification are constrained chains . A constrained chain of length n consists of n upper fragments with two holes each and n + 1 lower fragments with no holes . There must also be a numbering 1, . . . ,2n+1 of the fragments such that for every 1? i ? n , fragment 2i is an upper fragment , fragments 2i ? 1 and 2i+1 are lower fragments , and there are dominance edges from the left hole of 2i to the root of 2i?1 and from the right hole of 2i to the root of 2i + 1 ( and possibly further dominance edges ). These numbers are shown in circles in Fig . (1a ). In discourse dominance graphs , upper fragments correspond to discourse relations , and lower fragments correspond to EDUs ; the EDUs are ordered according to their appearance in the text , and the upper fragments connect the two text spans to which they are adjacent.
3 Underspecified Processing for Discourses Recently , Koller et al (2008) showed how to process dominance graphs with regular tree grammars ( Comon et al , 2007, RTGs ). RTGs are a grammar formalism that describes sets of trees using production rules which rewrite nonterminal symbols ( NTs ) into terms consisting of tree constructors and possibly further NTs . A tree ( without NTs ) is accepted by the grammar if it can be derived by a sequence of rule applications from a given start symbol . An example RTG is shown in Fig . 2; its start symbol is {1;7}, and it describes exactly the five trees in {1;7} ? Cond({1},{3;7}) [1] {5;7} ? Contr({5},{7}) [1] {3;7} ? Contr({3;5},{7}) [1] {3;5} ? Cause({3},{5}) [1] {1;7} ? Contr({1;5},{7}) [1] {1;3} ? Cond({1},{3}) [5] {1;7} ? Cause({1;3},{5;7}) [1] {1;5} ? Cond({1},{3;5}) [3] {1;5} ? Cause({1;3},{5}) [1] {3;7} ? Cause({3},{5;7}) [1] {1} ? C1 [1] {3} ? C2 [1] {5} ? C3 [1] {7} ? C4 [1]
Figure 2: A wRTG modelling Fig . 1
Fig . (1b-f ). For example , Fig . (1e ) is derived by expanding the start symbol with the first rule in Fig . 2.
This determines that the tree root is labelled with Condition ; we then derive the left subtree from the NT {1} and the right subtree from the NT {3;7}.
The NTs in the grammar correspond to subgraphs in the dominance graph : The NT {1;7} represents the subgraph {1,2,3,4,5,6,7} ( i.e . the whole graph ); the NT {1} represents the subgraph containing only the fragment 1; and so forth . The trees that can be derived from each nonterminal correspond exactly to the configurations of the subgraph.
Koller and Thater (2005b ) presented an algorithm for generating , from a very general class of dominance graphs , an RTG that describes exactly the same trees . For each subgraph S that is to be the LHS of a rule , the algorithm determines the free fragments of S , i.e . the fragments that may serve as the root of one of its configurations , by a certain graph algorithm . For every free fragment in S with n holes and a root label f , the algorithm generates a new rule of the form S ? f ( S1, . . . , Sn ), where each Si corresponds to the remaining subgraph under the ith hole . The procedure calls itself recursively on the subgraphs until it reaches singleton subgraphs.
While this algorithm works well with underspecified semantic representations in semantics , it is too slow for the larger discourse graphs , as we will see in Section 5. However , we will now optimise it for the special case of constrained chains . First , we observe that all subgraphs ever visited by the algorithm are connected subchains . A subchain is uniquely identifiable by the positions of the first and last fragment in the left-to-right order of the chain ; we can thus read the nonterminal { i ; j } simply as a pair of integers that identifies the subchain from the ith to the if G contains rules for { i ; j } then return1 if i=j then G.add ({ { i ; j }? Label(i ) } ) else2 /* Loop over upper fragments */ for k = i+1 to j1 step 2 do3 if ?? edge=(s,t ) ? C s.t . ( i ? s < k ? t ? j ) ? ( i ? t4 ? k < s ? j ) then lSub?{i;k-1}, rSub?{k+1; j}5
G.add({i ; j }? Label(i)(lSub , rSub))6
GenerateRules(lSub , G , C)7
GenerateRules(rSub , G , C)8 jth fragment ( rather than an abbreviation for a set of fragments ). i and j will generally represent lower fragments . In the grammar in Fig . 2, { i } is an abbreviation of { i ; i}.
We can now rephrase the Koller & Thater algorithm in our terms ( Algorithm 1). The most important change is that we can now test whether an upper fragment k in a subgraph { i ; j } is free simply by checking whether there is no dominance edge from some upper fragment l to some upper fragment r such that i ? l < k ? r ? j , and no dominance edge from r to l such that i ? l ? k < r ? j . For instance , if there was a dominance edge from the right hole of 2 to the root of 6 in Fig . (1a ), then 4 and 6 would not be free , but 2 would be ; and indeed , all configurations of this graph would have to have 2 as their roots . Hence we can replace the graph algorithm for freeness by a simple comparison of integers . The general structure of the algorithm remains the same as in ( Koller and Thater , 2005b ): It takes a dominance graphC as its input , and recursively calls itself on pairs { i ; j } representing subgraphs while adding rules and NTs to an RTG G.
4 Soft Discourse Constraints
RTGs can be extended to weighted regular tree grammars ( Knight and Graehl , 2005, wRTGs ) by adding numeric weights to the rules . WRTG derivations assign weights to each tree : The weight of a tree is the product of the weights of all rules that were used in its derivation.
Egg and Regneri (2008) motivate the use of wRTGs in discourse processing . They assign rule weights based on corpus-extracted constraints which express the interdependencies between discourse relations and their surrounding tree structure . One such constraint states that the right subtree of a Con-1.00 15.65 244.95 3833.66 60000.00 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 new total utool total
Figure 3: Runtime Comparison dition node should be of minimal size , which ranks the readings of Fig . 1 ( a ): ( b ), ( d ) > ( c ) > ( e ), ( f).
In order to state this constraint in a wRTG , we annotate the grammar in Fig . 2 with the weights shown in brackets . The Condition rules get higher weights if the second NT on the RHS represents a smaller subgraph . The grammar assigns the maximum weight of 5 to ( b ) and ( d ) ( fragment 2 has a leaf as right child ), the medium weight 3 to ( c ) ( the right subgraph of fragment 2 contains two EDUs ), and the minimum weight 1 to ( e ) and ( f ). i.e . it ranks the readings as intended.
Based on our implementation of nonterminals as integer pairs , we can efficiently compute a configuration with maximal weight using a version of Knight and Graehl?s (2005) algorithm for computing the best derivation of a wRTG that is specialised to the grammars we use.
5 Evaluation
We compare our runtimes with those of Utool ( Koller and Thater , 2005a ), the fasted known solver for general dominance graphs ; it implements the Koller & Thater algorithm . Utool runs very fast for underspecified representations in semantics , but the representations for discourse parsing are considerably larger : The largest underspecified semantic representation found in the Rondane treebank analysed with the English Resource Grammar ( Copestake and Flickinger , 2000, ERG ) has 4.5? 1012 structural scope readings , but for 59% of the discourses in the RST Discourse Treebank ( Carlson et al , 2002, RSTDT ), there are more ways of configuring all EDUs into a binary tree than that.
We evaluate the efficiency of our algorithm on 364 texts from the RSTDT , by converting each discourse and one upper fragment labelled with each annotated discourse relation . We use our algorithm and Utool to generate the RTG from the chain , assign all soft constraints of Egg and Regneri (2008) to the grammar , and finally compute the best configuration according to this model . The evaluation results are shown in Fig . 3. The horizontal axis shows the chain length (= number of EDUs minus 1), rounded down to multiples of ten ; the ( logarithmic ) vertical axis shows the average runtime in milliseconds for discourses of that length . Both algorithms spend a bit over half the runtime on computing the RTGs.
As the diagram shows , our algorithm is up to 100 times faster than Utool for the same discourses . It is capable of computing the best configuration for every tested discourse ? in less than one second for 86% of the texts . Utool exceeded the OS memory limit on 77 discourses , and generally couldn?t process any text with more than 100 EDUs . The longest text in the RSTDT has 304 EDUs , so the UDR has about 2.8?10178 different configurations . Our algorithm computes the best configuration for this UDR in about three minutes.
6 Conclusion
We presented the first solver for underspecified discourse representations that is efficient enough to compute the globally best configurations of every discourse in the RST discourse treebank , by exploiting the fact that UDRs are very large but obey very strong structural restrictions . Our solver converts a dominance graph into an RTG , adds weights to the RTG to represent discourse constraints , and then computes the globally optimal configuration.
It takes about three minutes to compute a best configuration with a given probability model for the longest discourse in the treebank , out of 10178 possible configurations . For comparison , an algorithm that enumerates a billion configurations per second to find the best one could have inspected only about 1026 within the estimated age of the universe . So our algorithm is useful and necessary to process realworld underspecified discourse representations.
We have thus demonstrated that discourse processing based on underspecification is computationally feasible . Nothing in our algorithm hinges on using RST in particular ; it is compatible with any approach that uses binary trees . In future research , it would be interesting to complete our system into a full-blown discourse parser by adding a module that computes an UDR for a given text , and evaluate whether its ability to delay decisions about discourse structure would improve accuracy.
References
E . Althaus , D . Duchier , A . Koller , K . Mehlhorn , J . Niehren , and S . Thiel . 2003. An efficient graph algorithm for dominance constraints . Journal of Algorithms , 48:194?219.
L . Carlson , D . Marcu , and M . E . Okurowski . 2002. RST
Discourse Treebank . LDC.
H . Comon , M . Dauchet , R . Gilleron , C . Lo?ding , F . Jacquemard , D . Lugiez , S . Tison , and M . Tommasi . 2007. Tree Automata Techniques and Applications . Available on : http://www.grappa.
univ-lille3.fr/tata . Release 12-10-2007.
A . Copestake and D . Flickinger . 2000. An opensource grammar development environment and broadcoverage English grammar using HPSG . In Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation.
M . Egg and G . Redeker . 2007. Underspecified discourse representation . In A . Benz and P . Ku?hnlein , editors , Constraints in Discourse , Amsterdam . Benjamins.
M . Egg and M . Regneri . 2008. Underspecified Modelling of Complex Discourse Constraints . Submitted.
C . Gardent and B . Webber . 1998. Describing Discourse Semantics . In Proceedings of the 4th TAG+Workshop , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia.
K . Knight and J . Graehl . 2005. An overview of probabilistic tree transducers for natural language processing . In Computational linguistics and intelligent text processing , pages 1?24. Springer.
A . Koller and S . Thater . 2005a . Efficient solving and exploration of scope ambiguities . Proceedings of the
ACL05 Demo Session.
A . Koller and S . Thater . 2005b . The evolution of dominance constraint solvers . In Proceedings of the ACL05 Workshop on Software , Ann Arbor.
A . Koller , M . Regneri , and S . Thater . 2008. Regular tree grammars as a formalism for scope underspecification.
In Proceedings of ACL08: HLT.
F . Schilder . 2002. Robust discourse parsing via discourse markers , topicality and position . Natural Language
Engineering , 8:235?255.
M . Stede . 2004. The Potsdam Commentary Corpus . In B . Webber and D . Byron , editors , ACL04 Workshop on Discourse Annotation.
M . Taboada andW.Mann . 2006. Applications of Rhetorical Structure Theory . Discourse Studies , 8:567?588.
248
