Tutorial Abstracts of ACL08: HLT , page 5,
Columbus , Ohio , USA , June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Speech Technology:
from Research to the Industry of Human-Machine Communication

Roberto Pieraccini
SpeechCycle
26 Broadway , 11th Floor
New York , NY 10004
roberto@speechcycle.com


1 Introduction
This tutorial is about the evolution of speech technology from research to a mature industry . Today , spoken language communication with computers is becoming part of everyday life . Thousands of interactive applications using spoken language technology ? known also as ? conversational machines??are only phone calls away , allowing millions of users each day to access information , perform transactions , and get help . Speech recognition , language understanding , text-to-speech synthesis , machine learning , and dialog management enabled this revolution after more than 50 years of research . The industry of speech continues to mature with its evolving standards , platforms , architectures , and business models within different sectors of the market.
2 Content Overview
In this tutorial I will briefly trace the history of speech technology , with a special focus on speech recognition and spoken language understanding , from the early attempts to today?s commercial deployments . I will summarily describe the most successful ideas and algorithms that brought to today?s technology . I will discuss the struggle for ever increasing performance , the importance of data for training and evaluation , and the role played by government funded projects in creating effective evaluation benchmarks . I will then describe the birth of the speech industry in the mid 1990s , with the role played by the Voice User Interface and dialog engineering disciplines in bringing speech recognition from a laboratory ? accuracy challenge ? to an enabler of usable interfaces . I will describe the rising of standards ( such as VoiceXML , SRGS , SSML , etc .) and their importance in the growth of the market . I will proceed with an overview of the current architectures and processes utilized for creating commercial spoken dialog systems , and will provide several case studies of the use of speech technology . I will conclude with a discussion on the current open problems and challenges.

The tutorial duration will be of about 3 hours with a short break . Several audio and video samples will be shown during the tutorial . The tutorial is directed to a general HLT audience with no prior knowledge of speech technology.
3 Tutorial Outline - What is speech and why it is difficult to recognize it.
- The history of speech recognition from the early attempts to Hidden Markov Models - The struggle for performance and the importance of data - Spoken language understanding and dialog - The birth of the ? spoken dialog ? industry - Industrial standards and architectures - Case studies - Open issues and future research
References
Pieraccini , R . Huerta , J ., Where do we go from here ? Research and Commercial Spoken Dialog Systems , Proc . of 6th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialog , Lisbon , Portugal , 23 September , 2005. pp . 110 Pieraccini R ., Lubensky , D ., Spoken Language Communication with Machines : the Long and Winding Road from research to Business , in M . Ali and F . Esposito ( Eds ) : IEA/AIE 2005, LNAI 3533, pp 615, 2005,
Springer-Verlag..

