Tutorial Abstracts of ACL08: HLT , page 1,
Columbus , Ohio , USA , June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Introduction to Computational Advertising
Evgeniy Gabrilovich Vanja Josifovski Bo Pang
Yahoo ! Research
701 First Avenue
Sunnyvale , CA 94085, USA
{gabr,vanjaj,bopang}@yahoo-inc.com
1 Introduction
Web advertising is the primary driving force behind many Web activities , including Internet search as well as publishing of online content by third-party providers . Even though the notion of online advertising barely existed a decade ago , the topic is so complex that it attracts attention of a variety of established scientific disciplines , including computational linguistics , computer science , economics , psychology , and sociology , to name but a few . Consequently , a new discipline ? Computational Advertising ? has emerged , which studies the process of advertising on the Internet from a variety of angles . A successful advertising campaign should be relevant to the immediate user?s information need as well as more generally to user?s background and personalized interest profile , be economically worthwhile to the advertiser and the intermediaries ( e.g ., the search engine ), as well as be aesthetically pleasant and not detrimental to user experience.
2 Content Overview
In this tutorial , we focus on one important aspect of online advertising that is relevant to the ACL and HLT communities , namely , contextual relevance.
There are two main scenarios for online advertising , as advertisers might request to display their ads for a query submitted to a Web search engine , or for a Web page that the user reads online.The former scenario is called sponsored search , since ads are matched to the Web search results , and the latter ? content match , as ads are matched to a larger amount of content . It is essential to emphasize that in both cases the context of user actions is defined by a body of text , which could be quite short in the case of sponsored search or fairly long in the case of content match . Consequently , the ad matching problem lends itself to many NLP methods , but also poses numerous challenges and open research problems in text summarization , natural language generation , named entity extraction , computer-human interaction , and others.
At first approximation , the process of obtaining relevant ads can be reduced to conventional information retrieval , where we construct a query that describes the user?s context , and then execute this query against a large inverted index of ads . We show how to augment the standard information retrieval approach using query expansion and text classification techniques . First , we demonstrate how to employ a relevance feedback assumption and use Web search results produced by the query . We also go beyond the conventional bag of words indexing , and construct additional features by classifying both the input context and the ad descriptions with respect to a large external taxonomy . A third type of features is constructed from a lexicon of named entities obtained by analyzing the entire Web as a corpus.
We present a unified approach to Web advertising , which uses the same underlying infrastructure to handle both sponsored search and content match scenarios . The last part of the tutorial will be devoted to recent research results as well as open problems , such as automatically classifying cases when no ads should be shown , handling geographic names ( and more generally , location awareness ), and context modeling for vertical portals.
1
