Proceedings of ACL08: HLT , pages 870?878,
Columbus , Ohio , USA , June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Generalized Expectation Criteria for Semi-Supervised Learning of
Conditional Random Fields
Gideon S . Mann
Google Inc.
76 Ninth Avenue
New York , NY 10011
Andrew McCallum
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
140 Governors Drive
Amherst , MA 01003
Abstract
This paper presents a semisupervised training method for linear-chain conditional random fields that makes use of labeled features rather than labeled instances . This is accomplished by using generalized expectation criteria to express a preference for parameter settings in which the model?s distribution on unlabeled data matches a target distribution . We induce target conditional probability distributions of labels given features from both annotated feature occurrences in context and adhoc feature majority label assignment . The use of generalized expectation criteria allows for a dramatic reduction in annotation time by shifting from traditional instance-labeling to feature-labeling , and the methods presented outperform traditional CRF training and other semisupervised methods when limited human effort is available.
1 Introduction
A significant barrier to applying machine learning to new real world domains is the cost of obtaining the necessary training data . To address this problem , work over the past several years has explored semisupervised or unsupervised approaches to the same problems , seeking to improve accuracy with the addition of lower cost unlabeled data . Traditional approaches to semisupervised learning are applied to cases in which there is a small amount of fully labeled data and a much larger amount of unlabeled data , presumably from the same data source.
For example , EM ( Nigam et al , 1998), transductive SVMs ( Joachims , 1999), entropy regularization ( Grandvalet and Bengio , 2004), and graphbased address : * number * oak avenue rent $ ADDRESS ADDRESS ADDRESS ADDRESS ADDRESS RENT RENT
Traditional Full Instance Labeling
ADDRESS address : * number * oak avenue rent $ ....
CONTACT .. ( please include the address of this rental )
ADDRESS ... pm . address : * number * marie street sausalito ...
ADDRESS .. laundry . address : * number * macarthur blvd ....
Feature Labeling
ConditionalDistribution of LabelsGiven Word=address
ADDRESS
CONTACT
Figure 1: Top : Traditional instance-labeling in which sequences of contiguous tokens are annotated as to their correct label . Bottom : Feature-labeling in which noncontiguous feature occurrences in context are labeled for the purpose of deriving a conditional probability distribution of labels given a particular feature.
methods ( Zhu and Ghahramani , 2002; Szummer and Jaakkola , 2002) have all been applied to a limited amount of fully labeled data in conjunction with unlabeled data to improve the accuracy of a classifier.
In this paper , we explore an alternative approach in which , instead of fully labeled instances , the learner has access to labeled features . These features can often be labeled at a lower-cost to the human annotator than labeling entire instances , which may require annotating the multiple subparts of a sequence structure or tree . Features can be labeled either by specifying the majority label for a particular feature or by annotating a few occurrences of a particular feature in context with the correct label ( Figure 1).
To train models using this information we use are terms in a training objective function that assign scores to values of a model expectation . In particular we use a version of GE that prefers parameter settings in which certain model expectations are close to target distributions . Previous work has shown how to apply GE criteria to maximum entropy classifiers . In section 4, we extend GE criteria to semisupervised learning of linear-chain conditional random fields , using conditional probability distributions of labels given features.
To empirically evaluate this method we compare it with several competing methods for CRF training , including entropy regularization and expected gradient , showing that GE provides significant improvements . We achieve competitive performance in comparison to alternate model families , in particular generative models such as MRFs trained with EM ( Haghighi and Klein , 2006) and HMMs trained with soft constraints ( Chang et al , 2007). Finally , in Section 5.3 we show that feature-labeling can lead to dramatic reductions in the annotation time that is required in order to achieve the same level of accuracy as traditional instance-labeling.
2 Related Work
There has been a significant amount of work on semisupervised learning with small amounts of fully labeled data ( see Zhu (2005)). However there has been comparatively less work on learning from alternative forms of labeled resources . One example is Schapire et al (2002) who present a method in which features are annotated with their associated majority labels and this information is used to bootstrap a parameterized text classification model . Unlike the model presented in this paper , they require some labeled data in order to train their model.
This type of input information ( features + majority label ) is a powerful and flexible model for specifying alternative inputs to a classifier , and has been additionally used by Haghighi and Klein (2006). In that work , ? prototype ? features?words with their associated labels?are used to train a generative MRF sequence model . Their probability model can be formally described as : p?(x,y ) = exp ( ? k ? kFk(x,y ) ) .
Although the partition function must be computed over all ( x,y ) tuples , learning via EM in this model is possible because of approximations made in computing the partition function.
Another way to gather supervision is by means of prior label distributions . Mann and McCallum (2007) introduce a special case of GE , label regularization , and demonstrate its effectiveness for training maximum entropy classifiers . In label regularization , the model prefers parameter settings in which the model?s predicted label distribution on the unsupervised data match a target distribution . Note that supervision here consists of the the full distribution over labels ( i.e . conditioned on the maximum entropy ? default feature ?), instead of simply the majority label . Druck et al (2007) also use GE with full distributions for semisupervised learning of maximum entropy models , except here the distributions are on labels conditioned on features . In Section 4 we describe how GE criteria can be applied to CRFs given conditional probability distributions of labels given features.
Another recent method that has been proposed for training sequence models with constraints is Chang et al (2007). They use constraints for approximate EM training of an HMM , incorporating the constraints by looking only at the top K mostlikely sequences from a joint model of likelihood and the constraints . This model can be applied to the combination of labeled and unlabeled instances , but cannot be applied in situations where only labeled features are available . Additionally , our model can be easily combined with other semisupervised criteria , such as entropy regularization . Finally , their model is a generative HMM which cannot handle the rich , nonindependent feature sets that are available to a CRF.
There have been relatively few different approaches to CRF semisupervised training . One approach has been that proposed in both Miller et al (2004) and Freitag (2004), uses distributional clustering to induce features from a large corpus , and then uses these features to augment the feature space of the labeled data . Since this is an orthogonal method for improving accuracy it can be combined with many of the other methods discussed above , and indeed we have obtained positive preliminary experimental results with GE criteria ( not reported on here).
871
Another method for semisupervised CRF training is entropy regularization , initially proposed by Grandvalet and Bengio (2004) and extended to linear-chain CRFs by Jiao et al (2006). In this formulation , the traditional label likelihood ( on supervised data ) is augmented with an additional term that encourages the model to predict lowentropy label distributions on the unlabeled data:
O(?;D,U ) = ? d log p?(y ( d)|x(d ))? ? H(y|x).
This method can be quite brittle , since the minimal entropy solution assigns all of the tokens the same label.1 In general , entropy regularization is fragile , and accuracy gains can come only with precise settings of ?. High values of ? fall into the minimal entropy trap , while low values of ? have no effect on the model ( see ( Jiao et al , 2006) for an example).
When some instances have partial labelings ( i.e.
labels for some of their tokens ), it is possible to train CRFs via expected gradient methods ( Salakhutdinov et al , 2003). Here a reformulation is presented in which the gradient is computed for a probability distribution with a marginalized hidden variable , z , and observed training labels y : ? L (?) = ? ?? ? z log p(x , y , z ; ?) = ? z p(z|y , x)fk(x , y , z ) ? ? z,y ? p(z , y?|x ; ?) fk(x , y , z).
In essence , this resembles the standard gradient for the CRF , except that there is an additional marginalization in the first term over the hidden variable z.
This type of training has been applied by Quattoni et al (2007) for hidden-state conditional random fields , and can be equally applied to semisupervised conditional random fields . Note , however , that labeling variables of a structured instance ( e.g . tokens ) is different than labeling features?being both more coarse-grained and applying supervision narrowly only to the individual subpart , not to all places in the data where the feature occurs.
1In the experiments in this paper , we use ? = 0.001, which we tuned for best performance on the test set , giving an unfair advantage to our competitor.
Finally , there are some methods that use auxiliary tasks for training sequence models , though they do not train linear-chain CRFs per se . Ando and Zhang (2005) include a cluster discovery step into the supervised training . Smith and Eisner (2005) use neighborhoods of related instances to figure out what makes found instances ? good ?. Although these methods can often find good solutions , both are quite sensitive to the selection of auxiliary information , and making good selections requires significant in-sight.2 3 Conditional Random Fields Linear-chain conditional random fields ( CRFs ) are a discriminative probabilistic model over sequences x of feature vectors and label sequences y = ? y1..yn ?, where | x | = | y | = n , and each label yi has s different possible discrete values . This model is analogous to maximum entropy models for structured outputs , where expectations can be efficiently calculated by dynamic programming . For a linear-chain
CRF of Markov order one : p?(y|x ) = exp ( ? k ? kFk(x,y ) ) , where Fk(x,y ) = ? i fk(x , yi , yi+1, i ), and the partition function Z(x ) = ? y exp ( ? k ? kFk(x,y )). Given training data
D = ? ( x(1),y(1))..(x(n),y(n )) ? , the model is traditionally trained by maximizing the loglikelihood
O(?;D ) = ? d log p?(y ( d)|x(d )) by gradient ascent where the gradient of the likelihood is : ? ?? k
O(?;D ) = ? d
Fk(x ( d),y(d )) ? ? d ? y p?(y|x ( d))Fk(x ( d),y).
The second term ( the expected counts of the features given the model ) can be computed in a tractable amount of time , since according to the Markov as-2Often these are more complicated than picking informative features as proposed in this paper . One example of the kind of operator used is the transposition operator proposed by Smith and Eisner (2005).
872 sumption , the feature expectations can be rewritten : ? y p?(y|x)Fk(x,y ) = ? i ? yi,yi+1 p?(yi , yi+1|x)fk(x , yi , yi+1, i).
A dynamic program ( the forward/backward algorithm ) then computes in time O(ns2) all the needed probabilities p?(yi , yi+1), where n is the sequence length , and s is the number of labels.
4 Generalized Expectation Criteria for
Conditional Random Fields
Prior semisupervised learning methods have augmented a limited amount of fully labeled data with either unlabeled data or with constraints ( e.g . features marked with their majority label ). GE criteria can use more information than these previous methods . In particular GE criteria can take advantage of conditional probability distributions of labels given a feature ( p(y|fk(x ) = 1)). This information provides richer constraints to the model while remaining easily interpretable . People have good intuitions about the relative predictive strength of different features . For example , it is clear that the probability of label PERSON given the feature WORD=JOHN is high , perhaps around 0.95, where as for WORD=BROWN it would be lower , perhaps 0.4. These distributions need not be not estimated with great precision?it is far better to have the freedom to express shades of gray than to be force into a binary supervision signal . Another advantage of using conditional probability distributions as probabilistic constraints is that they can be easily estimated from data . For the feature INITIAL-CAPITAL , we identify all tokens with the feature , and then count the labels with which the feature cooccurs.
GE criteria attempt to match these conditional probability distributions by model expectations on unlabeled data , encouraging , for example , the model to predict that the proportion of the label PERSON given the word ? john ? should be .95 over all of the unlabeled data.
In general , a GE ( generalized expectation ) criterion ( McCallum et al , 2007) expresses a preference on the value of a model expectation . One kind of preference may be expressed by a distance function ?, a target expectation f ? , data D , a function f , and a model distribution p ?, the GE criterion objective function term is ? ( f ? , E[f(x )] ) . For the purposes of this paper , we set the functions to be conditional probability distributions and set ?( p , q ) = D(p||q ), the KL-divergence between two distributions.3 For semisupervised training of CRFs , we augment the objective function with the regularization term:
O(?;D,U ) = ? d log p?(y ( d)|x(d ))? ? k ? k 2?2 ? ? D(p?||p ??), where p ? is given as a target distribution and p ?? = p??(yj | fm(x , j ) = 1) = ? x?Um ? j ? p?(y ? j | x ), with the unnormalized potential q ?? = q??(yj | fm(x , j ) = 1) = ? x?Um ? j ? p?(y ? j | x ), where fm(x , j ) is a feature that depends only on the observation sequence x , and j ? is defined as { j : fm(x , j ) = 1}, and Um is the set of sequences where fm(x , j ) is present for some j.4
Computing the Gradient
To compute the gradient of the GE criteria , D(p?||p ??), first we drop terms that are constant with respect to the partial derivative , and we derive the gradient as follows : ? ?? k ? l p ? log q ?? = ? l p ? q ?? ? ?? k q ?? = ? l p ? q ?? ? x?U ? j ? ? ?? k p?(yj ? = l|x ) = ? l p ? q ?? ? x?U ? j ? ? y?j ? ? ?? k p?(yj ? = l,y?j ? | x ), where y?j = ? y1..(j?1)y(j+1)..n ?. The last step follows from the definition of the marginal probability 3We are actively investigating different choices of distance functions which may have different generalization properties.
4This formulation assumes binary features.
873
P ( yj | x ). Now that we have a familiar form in which we are taking the gradient of a particular label sequence , we can continue : = ? l p ? q ?? ? x?U ? j ? ? y?j ? p?(yj ? = l,y?j ? | x)Fk(x,y ) ? ? l p ? q ?? ? x?U ? j ? ? y?j ? p?(yj ? = l,y?j ? | x ) ? y ? p?(y ?| x)Fk(x,y ) = ? l p ? q ?? ? x?U ? i ? yi,yi+1 fk(x , yi , yi+1, i ) ? j ? p?(yi , yi+1, yj ? = l|x ) ? ? l p ? q ?? ? x?U ? i ? yi,yi+1 fk(x , yi , yi+1, i ) p?(yi , yi+1|x ) ? j ? p?(yj ? = l|x).
After combining terms and rearranging we arrive at the final form of the gradient : = ? x?U ? i ? yi,yi+1 fk(x , yi , yi+1, i ) ? l p ? q ?? ? ( ? j ? p?(yi , yi+1, yj ? = l|x )? p?(yi , yi+1|x ) ? j ? p?(yj ? = l|x ) ) .
Here , the second term is easily gathered from for-ward/backward , but obtaining the first term is somewhat more complicated . Computing this term naively would require multiple runs of constrained forward/backward . Here we present a more efficient method that requires only one run of for-ward/backward.5 First we decompose the probability into two parts : ? j ? p?(yi , yi+1, yj ? = l|x ) = ? i j=1 p?(yi , yi+1, yj = l|x)I(j ? j ?) + ? J j=i+1 p?(yi , yi+1, yj = l|x)I(j ? j ?). Next , we show how to compute these terms efficiently . Similar to forward/backward , we build a lattice of intermediate results that then can be used to calculate the 5(Kakade et al , 2002) propose a related method that computes p(y1..i = l1..i|yi+1 = l).
quantity of interest : i ? j=1 p?(yi , yi+1, yj = l|x)I(j ? j ?) = p(yi , yi+1|x)?(yi , l)I(i ? j ?) + i?1? j=1 p?(yi , yi+1, yj = l|x)I(j ? j ?) = p(yi , yi+1|x)?(yi , l)I(i ? j ?) + ? ? ? yi?1 i?1? j=1 p?(yi?1, yi , yj = l|x)I(j ? j ?) ? ? p?(yi+1|yi,x).
For efficiency , ? yi?1 ? i?1 j=1 p?(yi?1, yi , yj = l|x)I(j ? j ?) is saved at each stage in the lattice.
?J j=i+1 p?(yi?1, yi , yj = l|x)I(j ? j ?) can be computed in the same fashion . To compute the lattices it takes time O(ns2), and one lattice must be computed for each label so the total time is O(ns3).
5 Experimental Results
We use the CLASSIFIEDS data provided by Grenager et al (2005) and compare with results reported by HK06 ( Haghighi and Klein , 2006) and CRR07 ( Chang et al , 2007). HK06 introduced a set of 33 features along with their majority labels , these are the primary set of additional constraints ( Table 1).
As HK06 notes , these features are selected using statistics of the labeled data , and here we used similar features here in order to compare with previous results . Though in practice we have found that feature selection is often intuitive , recent work has experimented with automatic feature selection using LDA ( Druck et al , 2008). For some of the experiments we also use two sets of 33 additional features that we chose by the same method as HK06, the first 33 of which are also shown in Table 1. We use the same tokenization of the dataset as HK06, and training/test/unsupervised sets of 100 instances each . This data differs slightly from the tokenization used by CRR07. In particular it lacks the newline breaks which might be a useful piece of information.
There are three types of supervised/semi-supervised data used in the experiments . Labeled instances are the traditional or conventionally CONTACT * phone * call * time please appointment more FEATURES kitchen laundry parking room new large ROOMMATES roommate respectful drama i bit mean RESTRICTIONS pets smoking dog no sorry cats UTILITIES utilities pays electricity water garbage included AVAILABLE immediately begin cheaper * month * now * ordinal*0 SIZE * number*1*1 br sq * number*0*1 bedroom bath PHOTOS pictures image link * url*long click photos RENT * number*15*1 $ month deposit lease rent NEIGHBORHOOD close near shopping located bart downtown ADDRESS address carlmont ave san * ordinal*5 # Table 1: Features and their associated majority label.
Features for each label were chosen by the method described in HK06 ? top frequency for that label and not higher frequency for any other label.
+ SVD features
HK06 53.7% 71.5%
CRF + GE/Heuristic 66.9% 68.3%
Table 2: Accuracy of semisupervised learning methods with majority labeled features alone . GE outperforms HK06 when neither model has access to SVD features.
When SVD features are included , HK06 has an edge in accuracy.
labeled instances used for estimation in traditional CRF training . Majority labeled features are features annotated with their majority label.6 Labeled features are features m where the distribution p(yi|fm(x , i )) has been specified . In Section 5.3 we estimate these distributions from isolated labeled tokens.
We evaluate the system in two scenarios : (1) with feature constraints alone and (2) feature constraints in conjunction with a minimal amount of labeled instances . There is little prior work that demonstrates the use of both scenarios ; CRR07 can only be applied when there is some labeled data , while HK06 could be applied in both scenarios though there are no such published experiments.
5.1 Majority Labeled Features Only
When using majority labeled features alone , it can be seen in Table 2 that GE is the best performing method . This is important , as it demonstrates that GE out of the box can be used effectively , without tuning and extra modifications.
6While HK06 and CRR07 require only majority labeled features , GE criteria use conditional probability distributions of labels given features , and so in order to apply GE we must decide on a particular distribution for each feature constraint . In sections 5.1 and 5.2 we use a simple heuristic to derive distributions from majority label information : we assign .99 probability to the majority label of the feature and divide the remaining probability uniformly among the remainder of the labels.
Labeled Instances 10 25 100 supervised HMM 61.6% 70.0% 76.3% supervised CRF 64.6% 72.9% 79.4%
CRF + Entropy Reg . 67.3% 73.7% 79.5%
CRR07 70.9% 74.8% 78.6% + inference constraints 74.7% 78.5% 81.7%
CRF+GE/Heuristic 72.6% 76.3% 80.1%
Table 3: Accuracy of semisupervised learning methods with constraints and limited amounts of training data . Even though CRR07 uses more constraints and requires additional development data for estimating mixture weights , GE still outperforms CRR07 when that system is run without applying constraints during inference.
When these constraints are applied during test-time inference , CRR07 has an edge over the CRF trained with GE criteria.
In their original work , HK06 propose a method for generating additional features given a set of ? prototype ? features ( the feature constraints in Table 1), which they demonstrate to be highly effective . In their method , they collect contexts around all words in the corpus , then perform a SVD decomposition.
They take the first 50 singular values for all words , and then if a word is within a thresholded distance to a prototype feature , they assign that word a new feature which indicates close similarity to a prototype feature . When SVD features such as these are made available to the systems , HK06 has a higher accuracy.7 For the remainder of the experiments we use the SVD feature enhanced data sets.8 We ran additional experiments with expected gradient methods but found them to be ineffective , reaching around 50% accuracy on the experiments with the additional SVD features , around 20% less than the competing methods.
5.2 Majority Labeled Features and Labeled
Instances
Labeled instances are available , the technique described in CRR07 can be used . While CRR07 is run on the same data set as used by HK06, a direct comparison is problematic . First , they use additional constraints beyond those used in this paper and those 7We generated our own set of SVD features , so they might not match exactly the SVD features described in HK06.
8One further experiment HK06 performs which we do not duplicate here is postprocessing the label assignments to better handle field boundaries . With this addition they realize another 2.5% improvement.
875 used by HK06 ( e.g . each contiguous label sequence must be at least 3 labels long)?so their results cannot be directly compared . Second , they require additional training data to estimate weights for their soft constraints , and do not measure how much of this additional data is needed . Third , they use a slightly different tokenization procedure . Fourth , CRR07 uses different subsets of labeled training instances than used here . For these reasons , the comparison between the method presented here and CRR07 cannot be exact.
The technique described in CRR07 can be applied in two ways : constraints can be applied during learning , and they can also be applied during inference.
We present comparisons with both of these systems in Table 3. CRFs trained with GE criteria consistently outperform CRR07 when no constraints are applied during inference time , even though CRR07 has additional constraints . When the method in CRR07 is applied with constraints in inference time , it is able to outperform CRFs trained with GE . We tried adding the additional constraints described in CRR07 during test-time inference in our system , but found no accuracy improvement . After doing error inspection , those additional constraints weren?t frequently violated by the GE trained method , which also suggests that adding them wouldn?t have a significant effect during training either . It is possible that for GE training there are alternative inference-time constraints that would improve performance , but we didn?t pursue this line of investigation as there are benefits to operating within a formal probabilistic model , and eschewing constraints applied during inference time . Without these constraints , probabilistic models can be combined easily with one another in order to arrive at a joint model , and adding in these constraints at inference time complicates the nature of the combination.
5.3 Labeled Features vs . Labeled Instances In the previous section , the supervision signal was the majority label of each feature.9 Given a feature of interest , a human can gather a set of tokens that have this feature and label them to discover the cor-9It is not clear how these features would be tagged with majority label in a real use case . Tagging data to discover the majority label could potentially require a large number of tagged instances before the majority label was definitively identified.
Ac cur acy
Tokens 0.45 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 10 100 1000 10000 100000 Traditional Instance Labeling33 Labeled Features66 Labeled Features99 Labeled FeaturesCRR07 + inference time constraints Figure 2: Accuracy of supervised and semisupervised learning methods for fixed numbers of labeled tokens.
Training a GE model with only labeled features significantly outperforms traditional loglikelihood training with labeled instances for comparable numbers of labeled tokens . When training on less than 1500 annotated tokens , it also outperforms CRR07 + inference time constraints , which uses not only labeled tokens but additional constraints and development data for estimating mixture weights.
Labeled Instances 0 10 25 100
HK06 71.5% - - -
GE/Heuristic 68.3% 72.6% 76.3% 80.1%
GE/Sampled 73.0% 74.6% 77.2% 80.5%
Table 4: Accuracy of semisupervised learning methods comparing the effects of (1) a heuristic for setting conditional distributions of labels given features and (2) estimating this distributions via human annotation . When GE is given feature distributions are better than the simple heuristic it is able to realize considerable gains.
relation between the feature and the labels.10 While the resulting label distribution information could not be fully utilized by previous methods ( HK06 and CRR07 use only the majority label of the word ), it can , however , be integrated into the GE criteria by using the distribution from the relative proportions of labels rather than a the previous heuristic distribution . We present a series of experiments that test the advantages of this annotation paradigm.
To simulate a human labeler , we randomly sample ( without replacement ) tokens with the particular feature in question , and generate a label using the human annotations provided in the data . Then we normalize and smooth the raw counts to obtain a 10In this paper we observe a 10x speedup by using isolated labeled tokens instead of a wholly labeled instances?so even if it takes slightly longer to label isolated tokens , there will still be a substantial gain.
876 conditional probability distribution over labels given feature . We experiment with samples of 1, 2,5, 10, 100 tokens per feature , as well as with all available labeled data . We sample instances for labeling exclusively from the training and development data , not from the testing data . We train a model using GE with these estimated conditional probability distributions and compare them with corresponding numbers of tokens of traditionally labeled instances.
Training from labeled features significantly outperforms training from traditional labeled instances for equivalent numbers of labeled tokens ( Figure 2). With 1000 labeled tokens , instance-labeling achieves accuracy around 65%, while labeling 33 features reaches 72% accuracy.11 To achieve the same level of performance as traditional instance labeling , it can require as much as a factor of tenfold fewer annotations of feature occurrences . For example , the accuracy achieved after labeling 257 tokens of 33 features is 71% ? the same accuracy achieved only after labeling more than 2000 tokens in traditional instance-labeling.12 Assuming that labeling one token in isolation takes the same time as labeling one token in a sequence , these results strongly support a new paradigm of labeling in which instead of annotating entire sentences , the human instead selects some key features of interest and labels tokens that have this feature . Particularly intriguing is the flexibility our scenario provides for the selection of ? features of interest ? to be driven by error analysis.
Table 4 compares the heuristic method described above against sampled conditional probability distributions of labels given features13. Sampled distributions yield consistent improvements over the heuristic method . The accuracy with no labeled instances (73.0%) is better than HK06 (71.5%), which demonstrates that the precisely estimated feature distributions are helpful for improving accuracy.
Though accuracy begins to level off with distri-11Labeling 99 features with 1000 tokens reaches nearly 76%.
12Accuracy at one labeled token per feature is much worse than accuracy with majority label information . This due to the noise introduced by sampling , as there is the potential for a relatively rare label be sampled and labeled , and thereby train the system on a noncanonical supervision signal.
13Where the tokens labeled is the total available number in the data , roughly 2500 tokens.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Proba bility
Label 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Proba bility
Label
Figure 3: From left to right : distributions ( with standard error ) for the feature WORD=ADDRESS obtained from sampling , using 1 sample per feature and 10 samples per feature . Labels 1, 2, 3, and 9 are ( respectively ) FEATURES , CONTACT , SIZE , and ADDRESS . Instead of more precisely estimating these distributions , it is more beneficial to label a larger set of features.
butions over the original set of 33 labeled features , we ran additional experiments with 66 and 99 labeled features , whose results are also shown in Figure 2.14 The graph shows that with an increased number of labeled features , for the same numbers of labeled tokens , accuracy can be improved . The reason behind this is clear?while there is some gain from increased precision of probability estimates ( as they asymptotically approach their ? true ? values as shown in Figure 3), there is more information to be gained from rougher estimates of a larger set of features . One final point about these additional features is that their distributions are less peaked than the original feature set . Where the original feature set distribution has entropy of 8.8, the first 33 added features have an entropy of 22.95. Surprisingly , even ambiguous feature constraints are able to improve accuracy.
6 Conclusion
We have presented generalized expectation criteria for linear-chain conditional random fields , a new semisupervised training method that makes use of labeled features rather than labeled instances . Previous semisupervised methods have typically used adhoc feature majority label assignments as constraints . Our new method uses conditional probability distributions of labels given features and can dramatically reduce annotation time . When these distributions are estimated by means of annotated feature occurrences in context , there is as much as a tenfold reduction in the annotation time that is required in order to achieve the same level of accuracy over traditional instance-labeling.
14Also note that for less than 1500 tokens of labeling , the 99 labeled features outperform CRR07 with inference time constraints.
877
References
R . K . Ando and T . Zhang . 2005. A framework for learning predictive structures from multiple tasks and unlabeled data . JMLR , 6.
M.-W . Chang , L . Ratinov , and D . Roth . 2007. Guiding semisupervision with constraint-driven learning . In
ACL.
G . Druck , G . Mann , and A . McCallum . 2007. Leveraging existing resources using generalized expectation criteria . In NIPS Workshop on Learning Problem Design.
G . Druck , G . S . Mann , and A . McCallum . 2008. Learning from labeled features using generalized expectation criteria . In SIGIR.
D . Freitag . 2004. Trained named entity recognition using distributional clusters . In EMNLP.
Y . Grandvalet and Y . Bengio . 2004. Semisupervised learning by entropy minimization . In NIPS.
T . Grenager , D . Klein , and C . Manning . 2005. Unsupervised learning of field segmentation models for information extraction . In ACL.
A . Haghighi and D . Klein . 2006. Prototype-driver learning for sequence models . In NAACL.
F . Jiao , S . Wang , C.-H . Lee , R . Greiner , and D . Schuurmans . 2006. Semisupervised conditional random fields for improved sequence segmentation and labeling . In COLING/ACL.
Thorsten Joachims . 1999. Transductive inference for text classification using support vector machines . In
ICML.
S . Kakade , YW . Teg , and S.Roweis . 2002. An alternate objective function for markovian fields . In ICML.
G . Mann and A . McCallum . 2007. Simple , robust , scalable semisupervised learning via expectation regularization . In ICML.
A . McCallum , G . S . Mann , and G . Druck . 2007. Generalized expectation criteria . Computer science technical note , University of Massachusetts , Amherst , MA.
S . Miller , J . Guinness , and A . Zamanian . 2004. Name tagging with word clusters and discriminative training.
In ACL.
K . Nigam , A . McCallum , S . Thrun , and T . Mitchell.
1998. Learning to classify text from labeled and unlabeled documents . In AAAI.
A . Quattoni , S . Wang , LP . Morency , M . Collins , and T . Darrell . 2007. Hidden-state conditional random fields . In PAMI.
H . Raghavan , O . Madani , and R . Jones . 2006. Active learning with feedback on both features and instances.
JMLR.
R . Salakhutdinov , S . Roweis , and Z . Ghahramani . 2003.
Optimization with em and expectation-conjugate-gradient . In ICML.
R . Schapire , M . Rochery , M . Rahim , and N . Gupta.
2002. Incorporating prior knowledge into boosting.
In ICML.
N . Smith and J . Eisner . 2005. Contrastive estimation : Training loglinear models on unlabeled data . In ACL.
Martin Szummer and Tommi Jaakkola . 2002. Partially labeled classification with markov random walks . In
NIPS , volume 14.
X . Zhu and Z . Ghahramani . 2002. Learning from labeled and unlabeled data with label propagation . Technical
Report CMU-CALD-02-107, CMU.
X . Zhu . 2005. Semisupervised learning literature survey . Technical Report 1530, Computer Sciences , University of Wisconsin-Madison.
http://www.cs.wisc.edu/?jerryzhu/pub/ssl survey.pdf.
878
