Proceedings of the ACL08: HLT Demo Session ( Companion Volume ), pages 13?16,
Columbus , June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Demonstration of the UAM CorpusTool for text and image annotation


Mick O?Donnell
Escuela Polit?cnica Superior
Universidad Aut?noma de Madrid
28049, Cantoblanco , Madrid , Spain
michael.odonnell@uam.es






Abstract
This paper introduced the main features of the
UAM CorpusTool , software for human and
semiautomatic annotation of text and images.
The demonstration will show how to set up an annotation project , how to annotate text files at multiple annotation levels , how to automatically assign tags to segments matching lexical patterns , and how to perform cross-layer searches of the corpus.
1 Introduction
In the last 20 years , a number of tools have been developed to facilitate the human annotation of text . These have been necessary where software for automatic annotation has not been available , e.g ., for linguistic patterns which are not easily identified by machine , or for languages without sufficient linguistic resources.
The vast majority of these annotation tools have been developed for particular projects , and have thus not been readily adaptable to different annotation problems . Often , the annotation scheme has been built into the software , or the software has been limited in that they allow only certain types of annotation to take place.
A small number of systems have however been developed to be general purpose text annotation systems , e.g ., MMAX2 ( M?ller and Strube 2006), GATE ( Cunningham et al2002), WordFreak ( Morton and LaCivita 2003) and Knowtator ( Ogren 2006).
With the exception of the last of these however , these systems are generally aimed at technically advanced users . WordFreak , for instance , requires writing of Java code to adapt to a different annotation scheme . Users of MMAX2 need to edit XML by hand to provide annotation schemes . Gate allows editing of annotation schemes within the tool , but it is a very complex system , and lacks clear documentation to help the novice user become competent.
The UAM CorpusTool is a text annotation tool primarily aimed at the linguist or computational linguist who does not program , and would rather spend their time annotating text than learning how to use the system . The software is thus designed from the ground up to support typical user workflow , and everything the user needs to perform annotation tasks is included within the software.
2 The Project Window
In the majority of cases , the annotator is interested in annotating a range of texts , not just single texts.
Additionally , in most cases annotation at multiple linguistic levels is desired ( e.g ., classifying the text as a whole , tagging sections of text by function ( e.g ., abstract , introduction , etc .), tagging sen-tences/clauses , and tagging participants in clauses.
To overcome the complexity of dealing with multiple source files annotated at multiple levels , the main window of the CorpusTool is thus a window for project management ( see Figure 1).

Figure 3: An annotation window for ? Participant ? layer.
<? xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?> < document > < segments > < segment id='1' start='158' end='176' features='participant;human ' state='active '/> < segment id='2' start='207' end='214' features='participant;organisation;company ' state='active '/> ...
</ segments > </ document>
Figure 4: Annotation Storage Example tion layers to the project , and edit/extend the annotation scheme for each layer ( by clicking on the ? edit ? button shown with each layer panel ). It also allows the user to add or delete source files to the project , and to open a specific file for annotation at a specific layer ( each file has a button for each layer).
3 Tag Hierarchy Editing
Most of the current text annotation tools lack builtin facilities for creating and editing the coding scheme ( the tag set ). UAM CorpusTool uses a hie-rarchally organised tag scheme , allowing cross-classification and multiple inheritance ( both disjunctive and conjunctive ). The scheme is edited graphically , adding , renaming , moving or deleting features , adding new subdistinctions , etc . See Figure 3.
An important feature of the tool is that any change to the coding scheme is automatically propagated throughout all files annotated at this layer . For instance , if a feature is renamed in the scheme editor , it is also renamed in all annotation files.
The user can also associate a gloss with each tag , and during annotation , the gloss associated with each feature can be viewed to help the coder determine which tag to assign.
participant
PARTICIPANTS-
TYPE person country organisation ORGANISATION-TYPE company government union other-organisation political-party
FORM proper common pronominal
Figure 2: Graphical Editing of the Tag Hierarchy 4 Annotation Windows When the user clicks on the button for a given text file/layer , an annotation window opens ( see Figure 3). This window shows the text in the top panel ( with previously identified text segments indicated with underlining ). When the user creates a new segment ( by swiping text ) or selects an existing segment , the space below the text window shows controls to select the tags to assign to this segment.
Tags are drawn from the tag scheme for the current layer . Since the tag hierarchy allows cross-classification , multiple tags are assigned to the segment . CorpusTool allows for partially overlapping segments , and embedding of segments.
Annotated texts are stored using standoff XML , one file per source text and layer . See Figure 4 for a sample . The software does not currently input from or export to any of the various text encoding standards , but will be extended to do so as it becomes clear which standards users want supported.
Currently the tool only supports assigning tags to text . Annotating structural relations between text segments ( e.g ., coreference , constituency or rhetorical relations ) is not currently supported , but is planned for later releases.
5 Corpus Search
A button on the main window opens a Corpus Search interface , which allows users to retrieve lists of segments matching a query . Queries can involve multiple layers , for instance , subject in passive-clause in english would retrieve all NPs tagged as subject in clauses tagged as passive-clause in texts tagged as ? english ? ( this is thus a search over 3 annotation layers ). Searches can also retrieve segments ? containing ? segments.
One can also search for segments containing a string.
Where a lexicon is provided ( currently only English ), users can search for segments containing lexical patterns , for instance , clause containing ? be % @ participle ? would return all clause segments containing any inflection of ? be ? immediately followed by any participle verb ( i.e . most of the passive clauses ). Since dictionaries are used , the text does not need to be pretagged with a POS tagger , which may be unreliable on texts of a different nature to those on which the tagger was trained . Results are displayed in a
KWIK table format.
6 Automating Annotation
Currently , automatic segmentation into sentences is provided . I am currently working on automatic
NP segmentation.
The search facility outlined above can also be used for semiautomatic tagging of text . To auto-code segments as ? passive-clause ?, one specifies a search pattern ( i.e ., clause containing with all matches , with a checkbox next to each.
The user can then uncheck the hits which are false matches , and then click on the ? Store ? button to tag all checked segments with the ? passive-clause ? feature . A reasonable number of syntactic features can be identified in this way.
7 Statistical processing
The tool comes with a statistical analysis interface which allows for specified subsections of the corpora ( e.g ., ? finite-clause in english ? vs . ? finite-clause in spanish ?) to be described or contrasted.
Statistics can be of the text itself ( e.g ., lexical density , pronominal usage , word and segment length , etc .), or relate to the frequency of annotations.
These statistics can also be exported in tab-delimited form for processing in more general statistical packages.
8 Intercoder Reliability Testing
Where several users have annotated files at the same layers , a separate tool is provided to compare each annotation document , showing only the differences between coders , and also indicating total coder agreement . The software can also produce a ? consensus ? version of the annotations , taking the most popular coding where 3 or more coders have coded the document . In this way , each coder can be compared to the consensus ( n comparisons ), rather than comparing the n ! pairs of documents.
9 Annotating Images
The tool can also be used to annotate images instead of text files . In this context , one can swipe regions of the image to create a selection , and assign features to the selection . Since standoff annotation is used for both text and image , much of the codebase is common between the two applications . The major differences are : i ) a different annotation widget is used for text selection than for image selection ; ii ) segments in text are defined by a tuple : ( startchar , endchar ), while image segments are defined by a tuple of points ( ( startx,starty ), ( endx,endy )), and iii ) search in images is restricted to tag searching , while text can be searched for strings and lexical patterns.
10 Conclusions
UAM CorpusTool is perhaps the most user-friendly of the annotation tools available , offering easy installation , an intuitive interface , yet powerful facilities for management of multiple documents annotated at multiple levels.
The main limitation of the tool is that it currently deals only with feature tagging . Future work will add structural tagging , including coreference linking , rhetorical structuring and syntactic structuring.
The use of the tool is rapidly spreading : in the first 15 months of availability , the tool has been downloaded 1700 times , to 1100 distinct CPUs ( with only minimal advertisement ). It is being used for various text annotation projects throughout the world , but mostly by individual linguists performing linguistic studies.
UAM CorpusTool is free , available currently for Macintosh and Windows machines . It is not open source at present , delivered as a standalone executable . It is implemented in Python , using TKinter .
Acknowledgments
The development of UAM CorpusTool was partially funded by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science ( MEC ) under grant number HUM2005-01728/FILO ( the WOSLAC project).
References
C . M?ller , and M . Strube . 2006. Multi-Level Annotation of Linguistic Data with MMAX2. In S . Braun , K.
Kohn , J . Mukherjee ( eds .) Corpus Technology and Language Pedagogy . New Resources , New Tools , New Methods ( English Corpus Linguistics , Vol.3). Frankfurt : Peter Lang . 197-214.
H . Cunningham , D . Maynard , K . Bontcheva and V.
Tablan . 2002. GATE : A Framework and Graphical Development Environment for Robust NLP Tools and Applications . Proceedings of the 40th Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( ACL'02). Philadelphia , July 2002.
T.S . Morton and J . LaCivita . 2003. WordFreak : An Open Tool for Linguistic Annotation . Proceedings of HLTNAACL . 1718.
P.V . Ogren 2006. Knowtator : a plugin for creating training and evaluation data sets for biomedical natural language systems . Proceedings of the 9th International Prot?g ? Conference . 73?76.

