Proceedings of ACL08: HLT , Short Papers ( Companion Volume ), pages 33?36,
Columbus , Ohio , USA , June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Icelandic Data Driven Part of Speech Tagging
Mark Dredze
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , PA 19104
mdredze@cis.upenn.edu
Joel Wallenberg
Department of Linguistics
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , PA 19104
joelcw@babel.ling.upenn.edu
Abstract
Data driven POS tagging has achieved good performance for English , but can still lag behind linguistic rule based taggers for morphologically complex languages , such as Icelandic . We extend a statistical tagger to handle fine grained tagsets and improve over the best Icelandic POS tagger . Additionally , we develop a case tagger for nonlocal case and gender decisions . An error analysis of our system suggests future directions.
1 Introduction
While part of speech ( POS ) tagging for English is very accurate , languages with richer morphology demand complex tagsets that pose problems for data driven taggers . In this work we consider Icelandic , a language for which a linguistic rule-based method is the current state of the art , indicating the difficulty this language poses to learning systems . Like Arabic and Czech , other morphologically complex languages with large tagsets , Icelandic can overwhelm a statistical tagger with ambiguity and data sparsity.
Shen et al (2007) presented a new framework for bidirectional sequence classification that achieved the best POS score for English . In this work , we evaluate their tagger on Icelandic and improve results with extensions for fine grained annotations.
Additionally , we show that good performance can be achieved using a strictly datadriven learning approach without external linguistic resources ( morphological analyzer , lexicons , etc .). Our system achieves the best performance to date on Icelandic , with insights that may help improve other morphologically rich languages.
After some related work , we describe Icelandic morphology followed by a review of previous approaches . We then apply a bidirectional tagger and extend it for fine grained languages . A tagger for case further improves results . We conclude with an analysis of remaining errors and challenges.
2 Related Work
Previous approaches to tagging morphologically complex languages with fine grained tagsets have considered Czech and Arabic . Khoja (2001) first introduced a tagger for Arabic , which has 131 tags , but subsequent work has collapsed the tagset to simplify tagging ( Diab et al , 2004). Like previous Icelandic work ( Loftsson , 2007), morphological analyzers disambiguate words before statistical tagging in Arabic ( Habash and Rambow , 2005) and Czech ( Hajic ? and Hladk ?, 1998). This general approach has led to the serial combination of rule based and statistical taggers for efficiency and accuracy ( Hajic ? et al , 2001). While our tagger could be combined with these linguistic resources as well , as in Loftsson (2007), we show state of the art performance without these resources . Another approach to finegrained tagging captures grammatical structures with tree-based tags , such as ? supertags ? in the tree-adjoining grammar of Bangalore and Joshi (1999).
3 Icelandic Morphology
Icelandic is notable for its morphological richness.
Verbs potentially show as many as 54 different forms depending on tense , mood , voice , person and show stem vowel alternations reminiscent of Semitic verb morphology ( Arabic ). Noun morphology exhibits a robust case system ; nouns may appear in as many as 16 different forms . The four-case system of Icelandic is similar to that of the Slavic languages ( Czech ), with case morphology also appearing on elements which agree in case with nouns.
However , unlike Czech , case frequently does not convey distinct meaning in Icelandic as it is often determined by elements such as the governing verb in a clause ( nonlocal information ). Therefore , while Icelandic case looks formally like Slavic and presents similar challenges for POS tagging , it also may be syntactically-determined , as in Standard Arabic . Icelandic word-order allows a very limited form of scrambling , but does not produce the variety of permutations allowed in Slavic languages . This combination of morphological complexity and syntactic constraint makes Icelandic a good case study for statistical POS tagging techniques.
The morphology necessitates the large extended tagset developed for the Icelandic Frequency Dictionary (? slensk or?t??nib?k/IFD ), a corpus of roughly 590,000 tokens ( Pind et al , 1991). We use the 10 IFD data splits produced by Helgad?ttir (2004), where the first nine splits are used for evaluation and the tenth for model development . Tags are comprised of up to six elements , such as word class , gender , number , and case , yielding a total of 639 tags , not all of which occur in the training data.
4 Previous Approaches
Helgad?ttir (2004) evaluated several datadriven models for Icelandic , including MXPost , a maximum entropy tagger , and TnT , a trigram HMM ; both did considerably worse than on English . Icelandic poses significant challenges : data sparseness , nonlocal tag dependencies , and 136,264 observed trigram sequences make discriminative sequence models , such as CRFs , prohibitively expensive . Given these challenges , the most successful tagger is IceTagger ( Loftsson , 2007), a linguistic rule based system with several linguistic resources : a morphological analyzer , a series of local rules and heuristics for handling PPs , verbs , and forcing agreement.
Loftsson also improves TnT by integrating a morphological analyzer ( TnT*).
Despite these challenges , data driven taggers have several advantages . Learning systems can be easily applied to new corpora , tagsets , or languages and can accommodate integration of other systems ( including rule based ) or new linguistic resources , such as those used by Loftsson . Therefore , we seek a learning system that can handle these challenges.
5 Bidirectional Sequence Classification
Bidirectional POS tagging ( Shen et al , 2007), the current state of the art for English , has some properties that make it appropriate for Icelandic . For example , it can be trained quickly with online learning and does not use tag trigrams , which reduces data sparsity and the cost of learning . It can also allow long range dependencies , which we consider below.
Bidirectional classification uses a perceptron style classifier to assign potential POS tags ( hypotheses ) to each word using standard POS features and some additional local context features . On each round , the algorithm selects the highest scoring hypothesis and assigns the guessed tag . Unassigned words in the context are reevaluated with this new information.
If an incorrect hypothesis is selected during training , the algorithm promotes the score of the correct hypothesis and demotes the selected one . See Shen et al for a detailed explanation.
We begin with a direct application of the bidirectional tagger to Icelandic using a beam of one and the same parameters and features as Shen et al On the development split the tagger achieved an accuracy of 91.61%, which is competitive with the best Icelandic systems . However , test evaluation is not possible due to the prohibitive cost of training the tagger on nine splits ; training took almost 4 days on an AMD Opteron 2.8 GHz machine.
Tagset size poses a problem since the tagger must evaluate over 600 options to select the top tag for a word . The tagger rescores the local context after a tag is committed or all untagged words if the classifier is updated . This also highlights a problem with the learning model itself . The tagger uses a one vs . all multiclass strategy , requiring a correct tag to have higher score than every other tag to be selected.
While this is plausible for a small number of labels , it overly constrains an Icelandic tagger.
34
Accuracy Train
Tagger All Known Unkn . Time
Bidir 91.61 93.21 69.76 90:27
Bidir+WC 91.98 93.58 70.10 12:20
Bidir+WC+CT 92.36 93.93 70.95 14:02
Table 1: Results on development data . Accuracy is measured by exact match with the gold tag . About 7% of tokens are unknown at test time.
As with most languages , it is relatively simple to assign word class ( noun , verb , etc .) and we use this property to divide the tagset into separate learning problems . First , the tagger classifies a word according to one of the eleven word classes . Next , it selects and evaluates all tags consistent with that class.
When an incorrect selection is updated , the word class classifier is updated only if it was mistaken as well . The result is a dramatic reduction in the number of tags considered at each step . For some languages , it may make sense to consider further reductions , but not for Icelandic since case , gender , and number decisions are interdependent . Additionally , by learning word class and tag separately , a correct tag need only score higher than other tags of the same word class , not all 639. Furthermore , collapsing tags into word class groups increases training data , allowing the model to generalize features over all tags in a class instead of learning each tag separately ( a form of parameter tying).
Training time dropped to 12 hours with the bidirectional word class ( WC ) tagger and learning performance increased to 91.98% ( table 1). Word class accuracy , already quite high at 97.98%, increased to 98.34%, indicating that the tagger can quickly filter out most inappropriate tags . The reduced training cost allowed for test data evaluation , yielding 91.68%, which is a 12.97% relative reduction in error over the best pure data driven model ( TnT ) and a 1.65% reduction over the best model ( IceTagger).
6 Case Tagger
Examining tagger error reveals that most mistakes are caused by case confusion on nouns (84.61% accuracy ), adjectives (76.03%), and pronouns (90.67%); these account for 40% of the corpus . While there are 16 case-number-definiteness combinations in the noun morphology , a noun might realize several combinations with a single phonolog-ical/orthographic form ( case-syncretism ). Mistakes in noun case lead to further mistakes for categories which agree with nouns , e.g . adjectives . Assigning appropriate case for nouns is important for a number of other tagging decisions , but often the noun?s case provides little or no information about the identity of other tags . It is in this situation that the tagger makes most case-assignment errors . Therefore , while accuracy depends on correct case assignment for these nouns , other tags are mostly unaffected.
One approach to correcting these errors is to introduce long range dependencies , such as those used by IceTagger . While normally hard to add to a learning system , bidirectional learning provides a natural framework since nonlocal features can be added once a tag has been committed . To allow dependencies on all other tag assignments , and because correcting the remaining case assignments is unlikely to improve other tags , we constructed a separate bidirectional case tagger ( CT ) that retags case on nouns , adjectives and pronouns . 1 Since gender is important as it relates to case , it is retagged as well . The CT takes a fully tagged sentence from the POS tagger and retags case and gender to nouns , adjectives and pronouns . The CT uses the same features as the POS tagger , but it now has access to all predicted tags.
Additionally , we develop several nonlocal features.
Many case decisions are entirely idiosyncratic , even from the point of view of human language-learners . Some simple transitive verbs in Icelandic arbitrarily require their objects to appear in dative or genitive case , rather than the usual accusative.
This arbitrary case-assignment adds no additional meaning , and this set of idiosyncratic verbs is memorized by speakers . A statistical tagger likewise must memorize these verbs based on examples in the training data . To aid generalization , verb-forms were augmented by verb-stems features as described in Dredze and Wallenberg (2008): e.g ., the verb forms dveldi , dvaldi , dvelst , dvelur all mapped to the stem dv*l ( dvelja ? dwell ?). The tagger used nonlocal features , such as the preceding verb?s ( predicted ) tag , gender , case , stem , and nouns within the clause boundary as indicated by 1We considered adding case tagging features to and removing case decisions from the tagger ; both hurt performance.
35
Tagger All Known Unknown
MXPost 89.08 91.04 62.50
TnT 90.44 91.82 71.68
TnT * 91.18 92.53 72.75
IceTagger 91.54 92.74 75.09
Bidir+WC 91.68 93.32 69.25
Bidir+WC+CT 92.06 93.70 69.74
Table 2: Results on test data.
the tags cn ( complementizer ) or ct ( relativizer ) ( Dredze and Wallenberg , 2008).
The CT was used to correct the output of the tagger after training on the corresponding train split.
The CT improved results yielding a new best accuracy of 92.06%, a 16.95% and 12.53% reduction over the best data driven and rule systems.
7 Remaining Challenges
We have shown that a data driven approach can achieve state of the art performance on highly inflected languages by extending bidirectional learning to fine grained tagsets and designing a bidirectional nonlocal case tagger . We conclude with an error analysis to provide future direction.
The tagger is particularly weak on unknown words , a problem caused by case-syncretism and idiosyncratic case-assignment . Data driven taggers can only learn which verbs assign special object cases by observation in the training data . Some verbs and prepositions also assign case based on the meaning of the whole phrase . These are both serious challenges for datadriven methods and could be addressed with the integration of linguistic resources.
However , there is more work to be done on data driven methods . Mistakes in case-assignment due to case syncretism , especially in conjunction with idiosyncratic-case-assigning verbs , account for a large proportion of remaining errors . Verbs that take dative rather than accusative objects are a particular problem , such as mistaking accusative for dative feminine objects (10.6% of occurrences ) or dative for accusative feminine objects (11.9%). A possible learning solution lies in combining POS tagging with syntactic parsing , allowing for the identification of clause boundaries , which may help disambiguate noun cases by deducing their grammatical function from that of other clausal constituents.
Additionally , idiosyncratic case-assignment could be learned from unlabeled data by finding unambiguous dative objects to identify idiosyncratic verbs . Furthermore , our tagger learns which prepositions idiosyncratically assign a single odd case ( e.g . genitive ) since prepositions are a smaller class and appear frequently in the corpus . This indicates that further work on data driven methods may still improve the state of the art.
8 Acknowledgments
We thank Hrafn Loftsson for sharing IceTagger and the datasplits , Libin Shen for his tagger , and the ? rni Magn?sson Institute for Icelandic Studies for access to the corpus.
References
Srinivas Bangalore and Arivand K . Joshi . 1999. Supertagging : An approach to almost parsing . Computational Linguistics , 25(2).
Mona Diab , Kadri Hacioglu , and Daniel Jurafsky . 2004.
Automatic tagging of arabic text : From raw text to base phrase chunks . In NAACL/HLT.
Mark Dredze and Joel Wallenberg . 2008. Further results and analysis of icelandic part of speech tagging . Technical Report MS-CIS-08-13, CIS Dept , University of
Pennsylvania.
Nizar Habash and Owen Rambow . 2005. Arabic tokenization , part-of-speech tagging and morphological disambiguation in one fell swoop . In ACL.
Jan Hajic ? and Barbora Hladk ?. 1998. Tagging inflective languages : prediction of morphological categories for a rich , structured tagset . In COLING.
Jan Hajic ?, Pavel Krbec , Pavel Kve?ton ?, Karel Oliva , and Vladim?r Petkevic ?. 2001. Serial combination of rules and statistics : a case study in czech tagging . In ACL.
Sigrun Helgad?ttir . 2004. Testing datadriven learning algorithms for pos tagging of icelandic.
Shereen Khoja . 2001. Apt : Arabic part-of-speech tagger.
In NAACL Student Workshop.
Hrafn Loftsson . 2007. Tagging icelandic text using a linguistic and a statistical tagger . In NAACL/HLT.
J Pind , F Magn?sson , and S Briem . 1991. The icelandic frequency dictionary . Technical report , The Institute of Lexicography , University of Iceland.
Libin Shen , Giorgio Satta , and Aravind K . Joshi . 2007.
Guided learning for bidirectional sequence classification . In ACL.
36
