Tutorial Abstracts of ACL-IJCNLP 2009, page 4,
Suntec , Singapore , 2 August 2009.
c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Computational Modeling of Human Language Acquisition
Afra Alishahi
Department of Computational Linguistics and Phonetics
Saarland University , Germany
afra@coli.uni-saarland.de
1 Introduction
The nature and amount of information needed for learning a natural language , and the underlying mechanisms involved in this process , are the subject of much debate : is it possible to learn a language from usage data only , or some sort of innate knowledge and/or bias is needed to boost the process ? This is a topic of interest to ( psycho)linguists who study human language acquisition , as well as computational linguists who develop the knowledge sources necessary for largescale natural language processing systems . Children are a source of inspiration for any such study of language learnability.
They learn language with ease , and their acquired knowledge of language is flexible and robust.
Human language acquisition has been studied for centuries , but using computational modeling for such studies is a relatively recent trend . However , computational approaches to language learning have become increasing popular , mainly due to the advances in developing machine learning techniques , and the availability of vast collections of experimental data on child language learning and child-adult interaction . Many of the existing computational models attempt to study the complex task of learning a language under the cognitive plausibility criteria ( such as memory and processing limitations that humans face ), as well as to explain the developmental patterns observed in children . Such computational studies can provide insight into the plausible mechanisms involved in human language acquisition , and be a source of inspiration for developing better language models and techniques.
2 Content Overview
This tutorial will discuss the main research questions that the researchers in the field of computational language acquisition are concerned with , and will review common approaches and techniques used in developing such models . Computational modeling has been vastly applied to different domains of language acquisition , including word segmentation and phonology , morphology , syntax , semantics and discourse . However , due to time restrictions , the focus of the tutorial will be on the acquisition of word meaning , syntax , and the relationship between syntax and semantics.
The first part of the tutorial focuses on some of the fundamental issues in the study of human language acquisition , and the role of computational modeling in addressing these issues . Specifically , we discuss language modularity , i.e . the representation and acquisition of various aspects of language , and the interaction between these aspects.
We also review the major arguments on language learnability and innateness . We then give a general overview of how computational modeling is used for investigating different views on each of these topics , how the theoretical assumptions are integrated into computational models , and how such models are evaluated based on the experimental observations.
In the second part of the tutorial , we will take a closer look at some of the existing models of language learning . We discuss general trends in computational modeling over the past decades , including symbolic , connectionist , and probabilistic modeling . We review a number of more influential models of the acquisition of syntax and semantics , and the link between the two . Finally , we explore some of the available tools and resources for implementing and evaluating computational models of language acquisition.
4
