Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP , pages 701?709,
Suntec , Singapore , 27 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Mine the Easy , Classify the Hard:
A Semi-Supervised Approach to Automatic Sentiment Classification
Sajib Dasgupta and Vincent Ng
Human Language Technology Research Institute
University of Texas at Dallas
Richardson , TX 75083-0688
{sajib,vince}@hlt.utdallas.edu
Abstract
Supervised polarity classification systems are typically domain-specific . Building these systems involves the expensive process of annotating a large amount of data for each domain . A potential solution to this corpus annotation bottleneck is to build unsupervised polarity classification systems . However , unsupervised learning of polarity is difficult , owing in part to the prevalence of sentimentally ambiguous reviews , where reviewers discuss both the positive and negative aspects of a product . To address this problem , we propose a semisupervised approach to sentiment classification where we first mine the unambiguous reviews using spectral techniques and then exploit them to classify the ambiguous reviews via a novel combination of active learning , transductive learning , and ensemble learning.
1 Introduction
Sentiment analysis has recently received a lot of attention in the Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) community . Polarity classification , whose goal is to determine whether the sentiment expressed in a document is ? thumbs up ? or ? thumbs down ?, is arguably one of the most popular tasks in document-level sentiment analysis . Unlike topic-based text classification , where a high accuracy can be achieved even for datasets with a large number of classes ( e.g ., 20 Newsgroups ), polarity classification appears to be a more difficult task.
One reason topic-based text classification is easier than polarity classification is that topic clusters are typically well-separated from each other , resulting from the fact that word usage differs considerably between two topically-different documents.
On the other hand , many reviews are sentimentally ambiguous for a variety of reasons . For instance , an author of a movie review may have negative opinions of the actors but at the same time talk enthusiastically about how much she enjoyed the plot . Here , the review is ambiguous because she discussed both the positive and negative aspects of the movie , which is not uncommon in reviews . As another example , a large portion of a movie review may be devoted exclusively to the plot , with the author only briefly expressing her sentiment at the end of the review . In this case , the review is ambiguous because the objective material in the review , which bears no sentiment orientation , significantly outnumbers its subjective counterpart.
Realizing the challenges posed by ambiguous reviews , researchers have explored a number of techniques to improve supervised polarity classifiers . For instance , Pang and Lee (2004) train an independent subjectivity classifier to identify and remove objective sentences from a review prior to polarity classification . Koppel and Schler (2006) use neutral reviews to help improve the classification of positive and negative reviews . More recently , McDonald et al (2007) have investigated a model for jointly performing sentence - and document-level sentiment analysis , allowing the relationship between the two tasks to be captured and exploited . However , the increased sophistication of supervised polarity classifiers has also resulted in their increased dependence on annotated data . For instance , Koppel and Schler needed to manually identify neutral reviews to train their polarity classifier , and McDonald et al?s joint model requires that each sentence in a review be labeled with polarity information.
Given the difficulties of supervised polarity classification , it is conceivable that unsupervised polarity classification is a very challenging task.
Nevertheless , a solution to unsupervised polarity classification is of practical significance . One reason is that the vast majority of supervised polarity when given a new domain , a large amount of annotated data from the domain typically needs to be collected in order to train a high-performance polarity classification system . As Blitzer et al (2007) point out , this data collection process can be ? prohibitively expensive , especially since product features can change over time ?. Unfortunately , to our knowledge , unsupervised polarity classification is largely an under-investigated task in NLP.
Turney?s (2002) work is perhaps one of the most notable examples of unsupervised polarity classification . However , while his system learns the semantic orientation of phrases in a review in an unsupervised manner , such information is used to heuristically predict the polarity of a review.
At first glance , it may seem plausible to apply an unsupervised clustering algorithm such as kmeans to cluster the reviews according to their polarity . However , there is reason to believe that such a clustering approach is doomed to fail : in the absence of annotated data , an unsupervised learner is unable to identify which features are relevant for polarity classification . The situation is further complicated by the prevalence of ambiguous reviews , which may contain a large amount of irrelevant and/or contradictory information.
In light of the difficulties posed by ambiguous reviews , we differentiate between ambiguous and unambiguous reviews in our classification process by addressing the task of semisupervised polarity classification via a ? mine the easy , classify the hard ? approach . Specifically , we propose a novel system architecture where we first automatically identify and label the unambiguous ( i.e ., ? easy ?) reviews , then handle the ambiguous ( i.e ., ? hard ?) reviews using a discriminative learner to bootstrap from the automatically labeled unambiguous reviews and a small number of manually labeled reviews that are identified by an active learner.
It is worth noting that our system differs from existing work on unsupervised/active learning in two aspects . First , while existing unsupervised approaches typically rely on clustering or learning via a generative model , our approach distinguishes between easy and hard instances and exploits the strengths of discriminative models to classify the hard instances . Second , while existing active learners typically start with manually labeled seeds , our active learner relies only on seeds that are automatically extracted from the data . Experimental results on five sentiment classification datasets demonstrate that our system can generate high-quality labeled data from unambiguous reviews , which , together with a small number of manually labeled reviews selected by the active learner , can be used to effectively classify ambiguous reviews in a discriminative fashion.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 gives an overview of spectral clustering , which will facilitate the presentation of our approach to unsupervised sentiment classification in Section 3. We evaluate our approach in Section 4 and present our conclusions in Section 5.
2 Spectral Clustering
In this section , we give an overview of spectral clustering , which is at the core of our algorithm for identifying ambiguous reviews.
2.1 Motivation
When given a clustering task , an important question to ask is : which clustering algorithm should be used ? A popular choice is kmeans . Nevertheless , it is wellknown that kmeans has the major drawback of not being able to separate data points that are not linearly separable in the given feature space ( e.g , see Dhillon et al (2004)). Spectral clustering algorithms were developed in response to this problem with kmeans clustering . The central idea behind spectral clustering is to (1) construct a low-dimensional space from the original ( typically highdimensional ) space while retaining as much information about the original space as possible , and (2) cluster the data points in this low-dimensional space.
2.2 Algorithm
Although there are several wellknown spectral clustering algorithms in the literature ( e.g ., Weiss (1999), Meila ? and Shi (2001), Kannan et al (2004)), we adopt the one proposed by Ng et al (2002), as it is arguably the most widely used . The algorithm takes as input a similarity matrix S created by applying a user-defined similarity function to each pair of data points . Below are the main steps of the algorithm : 1. Create the diagonal matrix G whose ( i,i)-th entry is the sum of the ith row of S , and then construct the Laplacian matrix L =
G?1/2SG?1/2.
2. Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of L.
702 3. Create a new matrix from the m eigenvectors that correspond to the m largest eigenvalues.1 4. Each data point is now rank-reduced to a point in the m-dimensional space . Normalize each point to unit length ( while retaining the sign of each value).
5. Cluster the resulting data points using kmeans.
In essence , each dimension in the reduced space is defined by exactly one eigenvector . The reason why eigenvectors with large eigenvalues are retained is that they capture the largest variance in the data . Therefore , each of them can be thought of as revealing an important dimension of the data.
3 Our Approach
While spectral clustering addresses a major drawback of kmeans clustering , it still cannot be expected to accurately partition the reviews due to the presence of ambiguous reviews . Motivated by this observation , rather than attempting to cluster all the reviews at the same time , we handle them in different stages . As mentioned in the introduction , we employ a ? mine the easy , classify the hard ? approach to polarity classification , where we (1) identify and classify the ? easy ? ( i.e ., unambiguous ) reviews with the help of a spectral clustering algorithm ; (2) manually label a small number of ? hard ? ( i.e ., ambiguous ) reviews selected by an active learner ; and (3) using the reviews labeled thus far , apply a transductive learner to label the remaining ( ambiguous ) reviews . In this section , we discuss each of these steps in detail.
3.1 Identifying Unambiguous Reviews
We begin by preprocessing the reviews to be classified . Specifically , we tokenize and downcase each review and represent it as a vector of unigrams , using frequency as presence . In addition , we remove from the vector punctuation , numbers , words of length one , and words that occur in a single review only . Finally , following the common practice in the information retrieval community , we remove words with high document frequency , many of which are stopwords or domain-specific general-purpose words ( e.g ., ? movies ? in the movie domain ). A preliminary examination of our evaluation datasets reveals that these words 1For brevity , we will refer to the eigenvector with the nth largest eigenvalue simply as the nth eigenvector.
typically comprise 1?2% of a vocabulary . The decision of exactly how many terms to remove from each dataset is subjective : a large corpus typically requires more removals than a small corpus . To be consistent , we simply sort the vocabulary by document frequency and remove the top 1.5%.
Recall that in this step we use spectral clustering to identify unambiguous reviews . To make use of spectral clustering , we first create a similarity matrix , defining the similarity between two reviews as the dot product of their feature vectors , but following Ng et al (2002), we set its diagonal entries to 0. We then perform an eigendecomposition of this matrix , as described in Section 2.2. Finally , using the resulting eigenvectors , we partition the length-normalized reviews into two sets.
As Ng et al point out , ? different authors still disagree on which eigenvectors to use , and how to derive clusters from them ?. To create two clusters , the most common way is to use only the second eigenvector , as Shi and Malik (2000) proved that this eigenvector induces an intuitively ideal partition of the data ? the partition induced by the minimum normalized cut of the similarity graph2, where the nodes are the data points and the edge weights are the pairwise similarity values of the points . Clustering in a one-dimensional space is trivial : since we have a linearization of the points , all we need to do is to determine a threshold for partitioning the points . A common approach is to set the threshold to zero . In other words , all points whose value in the second eigenvector is positive are classified as positive , and the remaining points are classified as negative . However , we found that the second eigenvector does not always induce a partition of the nodes that corresponds to the minimum normalized cut . One possible reason is that Shi and Malik?s proof assumes the use of a Laplacian matrix that is different from the one used by Ng et al To address this problem , we use the first five eigenvectors : for each eigenvector , we (1) use each of its n elements as a threshold to independently generate n partitions , (2) compute the normalized cut value for each partition , and (3) find the minimum of the n cut values . We then select the eigenvector that corresponds to the smallest of the five minimum cut values.
Next , we identify the ambiguous reviews from 2Using the normalized cut ( as opposed to the usual cut ) ensures that the size of the two clusters are relatively balanced , avoiding trivial cuts where one cluster is empty and the other is full . See Shi and Malik (2000) for details.
703 the resulting partition . To see how this is done , consider the example in Figure 1, where the goal is to produce two clusters from five data points.
( 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 ) (?0.6983 0.7158 ?0.6983 0.7158 ?0.9869 ?0.1616 ?0.6224 ?0.7827 ?0.6224 ?0.7827 ) Figure 1: Sample data and the top two eigenvectors of its Laplacian In the matrix on the left , each row is the feature vector generated for Di , the ith data point . By inspection , one can identify two clusters , { D1,D2} and { D4,D5}. D3 is ambiguous , as it bears resemblance to the points in both clusters and therefore can be assigned to any of them . In the matrix on the right , the two columns correspond to the top two eigenvectors obtained via an eigendecomposition of the Laplacian matrix formed from the five data points . As we can see , the second eigenvector gives us a natural cluster assignment : all the points whose corresponding values in the second eigenvector are strongly positive will be in one cluster , and the strongly negative points will be in another cluster . Being ambiguous , D3 is weakly negative and will be assigned to the ? negative ? cluster . Before describing our algorithm for identifying ambiguous data points , we make two additional observations regarding D3.
First , if we removed D3, we could easily cluster the remaining ( unambiguous ) points , since the similarity graph becomes more disconnected as we remove more ambiguous data points . The question then is : why is it important to produce a good clustering of the unambiguous points ? Recall that the goal of this step is not only to identify the unambiguous reviews , but also to annotate them as POSITIVE or NEGATIVE , so that they can serve as seeds for semisupervised learning in a later step . If we have a good 2way clustering of the seeds , we can simply annotate each cluster ( by sampling a handful of its reviews ) rather than each seed . To reiterate , removing the ambiguous data points can help produce a good clustering of their unambiguous counterparts.
Second , as an ambiguous data point , D3 can in principle be assigned to any of the two clusters.
According to the second eigenvector , it should be assigned to the ? negative ? cluster ; but if feature #4 were irrelevant , it should be assigned to the ? positive ? cluster . In other words , the ability to determine the relevance of each feature is crucial to the accurate clustering of the ambiguous data points . However , in the absence of labeled data , it is not easy to assess feature relevance . Even if labeled data were present , the ambiguous points might be better handled by a discriminative learning system than a clustering algorithm , as discriminative learners are more sophisticated , and can handle ambiguous feature space more effectively.
Taking into account these two observations , we aim to (1) remove the ambiguous data points while clustering their unambiguous counterparts , and then (2) employ a discriminative learner to label the ambiguous points in a later step.
The question is : how can we identify the ambiguous data points ? To do this , we exploit an important observation regarding eigendecomposition . In the computation of eigenvalues , each data point factors out the orthogonal projections of each of the other data points with which they have an affinity . Ambiguous data points receive the orthogonal projections from both the positive and negative data points , and hence they have near-zero values in the pivot eigenvectors.
Given this observation , our algorithm uses the eight steps below to remove the ambiguous points in an iterative fashion and produce a clustering of the unambiguous points.
1. Create a similarity matrix S from the data points D.
2. Form the Laplacian matrix L from S.
3. Find the top five eigenvectors of L.
4. Row-normalize the five eigenvectors.
5. Pick the eigenvector e for which we get the minimum normalized cut.
6. Sort D according to e and remove ? points in the middle of D ( i.e ., the points indexed from | D | 2 ? ?2 + 1 to | D | 2 + ? 2 ).
7. If | D | = ?, goto Step 8; else goto Step 1.
8. Run 2-means on e to cluster the points in D.
This algorithm can be thought of as the opposite of self-training . In self-training , we iteratively train a classifier on the data labeled so far , use it to classify the unlabeled instances , and augment the labeled data with the most confidently labeled instances . In our algorithm , we start with an initial clustering of all of the data points , and then iteratively remove the ? most ambiguous points from the dataset and cluster the remaining points.
Given this analogy , it should not be difficult to see the advantage of removing the data points in an iterative fashion ( as opposed to removing them in a iteration are supposed to be better than those in the previous iterations , as subsequent clusterings are generated from less ambiguous points . In our experiments , we set ? to 50 and ? to 500.3 Finally , we label the two clusters . To do this , we first randomly sample 10 reviews from each cluster and manually label each of them as POSITIVE or NEGATIVE . Then , we label a cluster as POSITIVE if more than half of the 10 reviews from the cluster are POSITIVE ; otherwise , it is labeled as NEGATIVE . For each of our evaluation datasets , this labeling scheme always produces one POSITIVE cluster and one NEGATIVE cluster . In the rest of the paper , we will refer to these 500 automatically labeled reviews as seeds.
A natural question is : can this algorithm produce high-quality seeds ? To answer this question , we show in the middle column of Table 1 the labeling accuracy of the 500 reviews produced by our iterative algorithm for our five evaluation datasets ( see Section 4.1 for details on these datasets ). To better understand whether it is indeed beneficial to remove the ambiguous points in an iterative fashion , we also show the results of a version of this algorithm in which we remove all but the 500 least ambiguous points in just one iteration ( see the rightmost column ). As we can see , for three datasets ( Movie , Kitchen , and Electronics ), the accuracy is above 80%. For the remaining two ( Book and DVD ), the accuracy is not particularly good . One plausible reason is that the ambiguous reviews in Book and DVD are relatively tougher to identify . Another reason can be attributed to the failure of the chosen eigenvector to capture the sentiment dimension . Recall that each eigenvector captures an important dimension of the data , and if the eigenvector that corresponds to the minimum normalized cut ( i.e ., the eigenvector that we chose ) does not reveal the sentiment dimension , the resulting clustering ( and hence the seed accuracy ) will be poor . However , even with imperfectly labeled seeds , we will show in the next section how we exploit these seeds to learn a better classifier.
3.2 Incorporating Active Learning
Spectral clustering allows us to focus on a small number of dimensions that are relevant as far as creating well-separated clusters is concerned , but 3Additional experiments indicate that the accuracy of our approach is not sensitive to small changes to these values.
Dataset Iterative Single Step
Movie 89.3 86.5
Kitchen 87.9 87.1
Electronics 80.4 77.6
Book 68.5 70.3
DVD 66.3 65.4
Table 1: Seed accuracies on five datasets.
they are not necessarily relevant for creating polarity clusters . In fact , owing to the absence of labeled data , unsupervised clustering algorithms are unable to distinguish between useful and irrelevant features for polarity classification . Nevertheless , being able to distinguish between relevant and irrelevant information is important for polarity classification , as discussed before . Now that we have a small , high-quality seed set , we can potentially make better use of the available features by training a discriminative classifier on the seed set and having it identify the relevant and irrelevant features for polarity classification.
Despite the high quality of the seed set , the resulting classifier may not perform well when applied to the remaining ( unlabeled ) points , as there is no reason to believe that a classifier trained solely on unambiguous reviews can achieve a high accuracy when classifying ambiguous reviews . We hypothesize that a high accuracy can be achieved only if the classifier is trained on both ambiguous and unambiguous reviews.
As a result , we apply active learning ( Cohn et al , 1994) to identify the ambiguous reviews.
Specifically , we train a discriminative classifier using the support vector machine ( SVM ) learning algorithm ( Joachims , 1999) on the set of unambiguous reviews , and then apply the resulting classifier to all the reviews in the training folds4 that are not seeds . Since this classifier is trained solely on the unambiguous reviews , it is reasonable to assume that the reviews whose labels the classifier is most uncertain about ( and therefore are most informative to the classifier ) are those that are ambiguous . Following previous work on active learning for SVMs ( e.g ., Campbell et al (2000), Schohn and Cohn (2000), Tong and Koller (2002)), we define the uncertainty of a data point as its distance from the separating hyperplane . In other words , 4Following Dredze and Crammer (2008), we perform crossvalidation experiments on the 2000 labeled reviews in each evaluation dataset , choosing the active learning points from the training folds . Note that the seeds obtained in the previous step were also acquired using the training folds only.
705 points that are closer to the hyperplane are more uncertain than those that are farther away.
We perform active learning for five iterations.
In each iteration , we select the 10 most uncertain points from each side of the hyperplane for human annotation , and then retrain a classifier on all of the points annotated so far . This yields a total of 100 manually labeled reviews.
3.3 Applying Transductive Learning
Given that we now have a labeled set ( composed of 100 manually labeled points selected by active learning and 500 unambiguous points ) as well as a larger set of points that are yet to be labeled ( i.e ., the remaining unlabeled points in the training folds and those in the test fold ), we aim to train a better classifier by using a weakly supervised learner to learn from both the labeled and unlabeled data . As our weakly supervised learner , we employ a transductive SVM.
To begin with , note that the automatically acquired 500 unambiguous data points are not perfectly labeled ( see Section 3.1). Since these unambiguous points significantly outnumber the manually labeled points , they could undesirably dominate the acquisition of the hyperplane and diminish the benefits that we could have obtained from the more informative and perfectly labeled active learning points otherwise . We desire a system that can use the active learning points effectively and at the same time is noise-tolerant to the imperfectly labeled unambiguous data points . Hence , instead of training just one SVM classifier , we aim to reduce classification errors by training an ensemble of five classifiers , each of which uses all 100 manually labeled reviews and a different subset of the 500 automatically labeled reviews.
Specifically , we partition the 500 automatically labeled reviews into five equal-sized sets as follows . First , we sort the 500 reviews in ascending order of their corresponding values in the eigenvector selected in the last iteration of our algorithm for removing ambiguous points ( see Section 3.1).
We then put point i into set Li mod 5. This ensures that each set consists of not only an equal number of positive and negative points , but also a mix of very confidently labeled points and comparatively less confidently labeled points . Each classifier Ci will then be trained transductively , using the 100 manually labeled points and the points in Li as labeled data , and the remaining points ( including all points in Lj , where i 6= j ) as unlabeled data.
After training the ensemble , we classify each unlabeled point as follows : we sum the ( signed ) confidence values assigned to it by the five ensemble classifiers , labeling it as POSITIVE if the sum is greater than zero ( and NEGATIVE otherwise).
Since the points in the test fold are included in the unlabeled data , they are all classified in this step.
4 Evaluation 4.1 Experimental Setup
For evaluation , we use five sentiment classification datasets , including the widely-used movie review dataset [ MOV ] ( Pang et al , 2002) as well as four datasets that contain reviews of four different types of product from Amazon [ books ( BOO ), DVDs ( DVD ), electronics ( ELE ), and kitchen appliances ( KIT )] ( Blitzer et al , 2007). Each dataset has 2000 labeled reviews (1000 positives and 1000 negatives ). We divide the 2000 reviews into 10 equal-sized folds for crossvalidation purposes , maintaining balanced class distributions in each fold . It is important to note that while the test fold is accessible to the transductive learner ( Step 3), only the reviews in training folds ( but not their labels ) are used for the acquisition of seeds ( Step 1) and the selection of active learning points ( Step 2).
We report averaged 10-fold crossvalidation results in terms of accuracy . Following Kamvar et al (2003), we also evaluate the clusters produced by our approach against the goldstandard clusters using Adjusted Rand Index ( ARI ). ARI ranges from ?1 to 1; better clusterings have higher ARI values.
4.2 Baseline Systems
Recall that our approach uses 100 hand-labeled reviews chosen by active learning . To ensure a fair comparison , each of our three baselines has access to 100 labeled points chosen from the training folds . Owing to the randomness involved in the choice of labeled data , all baseline results are averaged over ten independent runs for each fold.
Semisupervised spectral clustering . We implemented Kamvar et al?s (2003) semisupervised spectral clustering algorithm , which incorporates labeled data into the clustering framework in the form of must-link and cannot-link constraints . Instead of computing the similarity between each pair of points , the algorithm computes the similarity between a point and its k most similar points only . Since its performance is highly sensitive to System Variation MOV KIT ELE BOO DVD MOV KIT ELE BOO DVD 1 Semisupervised spectral learning 67.3 63.7 57.7 55.8 56.2 0.12 0.08 0.01 0.02 0.02 2 Transductive SVM 68.7 65.5 62.9 58.7 57.3 0.14 0.09 0.07 0.03 0.02 3 Active learning 68.9 68.1 63.3 58.6 58.0 0.14 0.14 0.08 0.03 0.03 4 Our approach ( after 1st step ) 69.8 70.8 65.7 58.6 55.8 0.15 0.17 0.10 0.03 0.01 5 Our approach ( after 2nd step ) 73.5 73.0 69.9 60.6 59.8 0.22 0.21 0.16 0.04 0.04 6 Our approach ( after 3rd step ) 76.2 74.1 70.6 62.1 62.7 0.27 0.23 0.17 0.06 0.06 Table 2: Results in terms of accuracy and Adjusted Rand Index for the five datasets.
k , we tested values of 10, 15, . . ., 50 for k and reported in row 1 of Table 2 the best results . As we can see , accuracy ranges from 56.2% to 67.3%, whereas ARI ranges from 0.02 to 0.12.
Transductive SVM . We employ as our second baseline a transductive SVM5 trained using 100 points randomly sampled from the training folds as labeled data and the remaining 1900 points as unlabeled data . Results of this baseline are shown in row 2 of Table 3. As we can see , accuracy ranges from 57.3% to 68.7% and ARI ranges from 0.02 to 0.14, which are significantly better than those of semisupervised spectral learning.
Active learning . Our last baseline implements the active learning procedure as described in Tong and Koller (2002). Specifically , we begin by training an inductive SVM on one labeled example from each class , iteratively labeling the most uncertain unlabeled point on each side of the hyperplane and retraining the SVM until 100 points are labeled . Finally , we train a transductive SVM on the 100 labeled points and the remaining 1900 unlabeled points , obtaining the results in row 3 of Table 1. As we can see , accuracy ranges from 58% to 68.9%, whereas ARI ranges from 0.03 to 0.14.
Active learning is the best of the three baselines , presumably because it has the ability to choose the labeled data more intelligently than the other two.
4.3 Our Approach
Results of our approach are shown in rows 4?6 of Table 2. Specifically , rows 4 and 5 show the results of the SVM classifier when it is trained on the labeled data obtained after the first step ( unsupervised extraction of unambiguous reviews ) and the second step ( active learning ), respectively . After the first step , our approach can already achieve 5All the SVM classifiers in this paper are trained using the SVMlight package ( Joachims , 1999). All SVM-related learning parameters are set to their default values , except in transductive learning , where we set p ( the fraction of unlabeled examples to be classified as positive ) to 0.5 so that the system does not have any bias towards any class.
comparable results to the best baseline . Performance increases substantially after the second step , indicating the benefits of active learning.
Row 6 shows the results of transductive learning with ensemble . Comparing rows 5 and 6, we see that performance rises by 0.7%-2.9% for all five datasets after ? ensembled ? transduction.
This could be attributed to (1) the unlabeled data , which may have provided the transductive learner with useful information that are not accessible to the other learners , and (2) the ensemble , which is more noise-tolerant to the imperfect seeds.
4.4 Additional Experiments
To gain insight into how the design decisions we made in our approach impact performance , we conducted the following additional experiments.
Importance of seeds . Table 1 showed that for all but one dataset , the seeds obtained through multiple iterations are more accurate than those obtained in a single iteration . To envisage the importance of seeds , we conducted an experiment where we repeated our approach using the seeds learned in a single iteration . Results are shown in the first row of Table 3. In comparison to row 6 of Table 2, we can see that results are indeed better when we bootstrap from higher-quality seeds.
To further understand the role of seeds , we experimented with a version of our approach that bootstraps from no seeds . Specifically , we used the 500 seeds to guide the selection of active learning points , but trained a transductive SVM using only the active learning points as labeled data ( and the rest as unlabeled data ). As can be seen in row 2 of Table 3, the results are poor , suggesting that our approach yields better performance than the baselines not only because of the way the active learning points were chosen , but also because of contributions from the imperfectly labeled seeds.
We also experimented with training a transductive SVM using only the 100 least ambiguous seeds ( i.e ., the points with the largest unsigned System Variation MOV KIT ELE BOO DVD MOV KIT ELE BOO DVD 1 Single-step cluster purification 74.9 72.7 70.1 66.9 60.7 0.25 0.21 0.16 0.11 0.05 2 Using no seeds 58.3 55.6 59.7 54.0 56.1 0.04 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.01 3 Using the least ambiguous seeds 74.6 69.7 69.1 60.9 63.3 0.24 0.16 0.14 0.05 0.07 4 No Ensemble 74.1 72.7 68.8 61.5 59.9 0.23 0.21 0.14 0.05 0.04 5 Passive learning 74.1 72.4 68.0 63.7 58.6 0.23 0.20 0.13 0.07 0.03 6 Using 500 active learning points 82.5 78.4 77.5 73.5 73.4 0.42 0.32 0.30 0.22 0.22 7 Fully supervised results 86.1 81.7 79.3 77.6 80.6 0.53 0.41 0.34 0.30 0.38 Table 3: Additional results in terms of accuracy and Adjusted Rand Index for the five datasets.
second eigenvector values ) in combination with the active learning points as labeled data ( and the rest as unlabeled data ). Note that the accuracy of these 100 least ambiguous seeds is 4?5% higher than that of the 500 least ambiguous seeds shown in Table 1. Results are shown in row 3 of Table 3.
As we can see , using only 100 seeds turns out to be less beneficial than using all of them via an ensemble . One reason is that since these 100 seeds are the most unambiguous , they may also be the least informative as far as learning is concerned . Remember that SVM uses only the support vectors to acquire the hyperplane , and since an unambiguous seed is likely to be far away from the hyperplane , it is less likely to be a support vector.
Role of ensemble learning To get a better idea of the role of the ensemble in the transductive learning step , we used all 500 seeds in combination with the 100 active learning points to train a single transductive SVM . Results of this experiment ( shown in row 4 of Table 3) are worse than those in row 6 of Table 2, meaning that the ensemble has contributed positively to performance.
This should not be surprising : as noted before , since the seeds are not perfectly labeled , using all of them without an ensemble might overwhelm the more informative active learning points.
Passive learning . To better understand the role of active learning in our approach , we replaced it with passive learning , where we randomly picked 100 data points from the training folds and used them as labeled data . Results , shown in row 5 of Table 3, are averaged over ten independent runs for each fold . In comparison to row 6 of Table 2, we see that employing points chosen by an active learner yields significantly better results than employing randomly chosen points , which suggests that the way the points are chosen is important.
Using more active learning points . An interesting question is : how much improvement can we obtain if we employ more active learning points ? In row 6 of Table 3, we show the results when the experiment in row 6 of Table 2 was repeated using 500 active learning points . Perhaps not surprisingly , the 400 additional labeled points yield a 4? 11% increase in accuracy . For further comparison , we trained a fully supervised SVM classifier using all of the training data . Results are shown in row 7 of Table 3. As we can see , employing only 500 active learning points enables us to almost reach fully-supervised performance for three datasets.
5 Conclusions
We have proposed a novel semisupervised approach to polarity classification . Our key idea is to distinguish between unambiguous , easy-to-mine reviews and ambiguous , hard-to-classify reviews . Specifically , given a set of reviews , we applied (1) an unsupervised algorithm to identify and classify those that are unambiguous , (2) an active learner that is trained solely on automatically labeled unambiguous reviews to identify a small number of prototypical ambiguous reviews for manual labeling , and (3) an ensembled transductive learner to train a sophisticated classifier on the reviews labeled so far to handle the ambiguous reviews . Experimental results on five sentiment datasets demonstrate that our ? mine the easy , classify the hard ? approach , which only requires manual labeling of a small number of ambiguous reviews , can be employed to train a high-performance polarity classification system.
We plan to extend our approach by exploring two of its appealing features . First , none of the steps in our approach is designed specifically for sentiment classification . This makes it applicable to other text classification tasks . Second , our approach is easily extensible . Since the semisupervised learner is discriminative , our approach can adopt a richer representation that makes use of more sophisticated features such as bigrams or manually labeled sentiment-oriented words.
708
Acknowledgments
We thank the three anonymous reviewers for their invaluable comments on an earlier draft of the paper . This work was supported in part by NSF
Grant IIS-0812261.
References
John Blitzer , Mark Dredze , and Fernando Pereira.
2007. Biographies , bollywood , boomboxes and blenders : Domain adaptation for sentiment classification . In Proceedings of the ACL , pages 440?447.
Colin Campbell , Nello Cristianini , , and Alex J . Smola.
2000. Query learning with large margin classifiers.
In Proceedings of ICML , pages 111?118.
David Cohn , Les Atlas , and Richard Ladner . 1994.
Improving generalization with active learning . Machine Learning , 15(2):201?221.
Inderjit Dhillon , Yuqiang Guan , and Brian Kulis . 2004.
Kernel kmeans , spectral clustering and normalized cuts . In Proceedings of KDD , pages 551?556.
Mark Dredze and Koby Crammer . 2008. Active learning with confidence . In Proceedings of ACL-08:HLT Short Papers ( Companion Volume ), pages 233?236.
Thorsten Joachims . 1999. Making largescale SVM learning practical . In Bernhard Scholkopf and Alexander Smola , editors , Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector Learning , pages 44?56. MIT
Press.
Sepandar Kamvar , Dan Klein , and Chris Manning.
2003. Spectral learning . In Proceedings of IJCAI , pages 561?566.
Ravi Kannan , Santosh Vempala , and Adrian Vetta.
2004. On clusterings : Good , bad and spectral . Journal of the ACM , 51(3):497?515.
Moshe Koppel and Jonathan Schler . 2006. The importance of neutral examples for learning sentiment.
Computational Intelligence , 22(2):100?109.
Ryan McDonald , Kerry Hannan , Tyler Neylon , Mike Wells , and Jeff Reynar . 2007. Structured models for fine-to-coarse sentiment analysis . In Proceedings of the ACL , pages 432?439.
Marina Meila ? and Jianbo Shi . 2001. A random walks view of spectral segmentation . In Proceedings of
AISTATS.
Andrew Ng , Michael Jordan , and Yair Weiss . 2002.
On spectral clustering : Analysis and an algorithm.
In Advances in NIPS 14.
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee . 2004. A sentimental education : Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization based on minimum cuts . In Proceedings of the ACL , pages 271?278.
Bo Pang , Lillian Lee , and Shivakumar Vaithyanathan.
2002. Thumbs up ? Sentiment classification using machine learning techniques . In Proceedings of
EMNLP , pages 79?86.
Greg Schohn and David Cohn . 2000. Less is more : Active learning with support vector machines . In
Proceedings of ICML , pages 839?846.
Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik . 2000. Normalized cuts and image segmentation . IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 22(8):888? 905.
Simon Tong and Daphne Koller . 2002. Support vector machine active learning with applications to text classification . Journal of Machine Learning Research , 2:45?66.
Peter Turney . 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down ? Semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classification of reviews . In Proceedings of the ACL , pages 417?424.
Yair Weiss . 1999. Segmentation using eigenvectors : A unifying view . In Proceedings of ICCV , pages 975? 982.
709
