Tutorial Abstracts of ACL-IJCNLP 2009, page 3,
Suntec , Singapore , 2 August 2009.
c
?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Semantic Role Labeling : Past , Present and Future
Llu??s M
`
arquez
TALP Research Center
Software Department
Technical University of Catalonia
lluism@lsi.upc.edu
1 Introduction
Semantic Role Labeling ( SRL ) consists of , given a sentence , detecting basic event structures such as ? who ? did ? what ? to ? whom ?, ? when ? and ? where ?. From a linguistic point of view , a key component of the task corresponds to identifying the semantic arguments filling the roles of the sentence predicates . Typical predicate semantic arguments include Agent , Patient , and Instrument , but semantic roles may also be found as adjuncts ( e.g ., Locative , Temporal , Manner , and Cause ). The identification of such event frames holds potential for significant impact in many NLP applications , such as Information Extraction , Question Answering , Summarization and Machine Translation.
Recently , the compilation and manual annotation with semantic roles of several corpora has enabled the development of supervised statistical approaches to SRL , which has become a well-defined task with a substantial body of work and comparative evaluation . Significant advances in many directions have been reported over the last several years , including but not limited to : machine learning algorithms and architectures specialized for the task , feature engineering , inference to force coherent solutions , and system combinations.
However , despite all the efforts and the considerable degree of maturity of the SRL technology , the use of SRL systems in realworld applications has so far been limited and , certainly , below the initial expectations . This fact has to do with the weaknesses and limitations of current systems , which have been highlighted by many of the evaluation exercises and keep unresolved for a few years ( e.g ., poor generalization across corpora , low scalability and efficiency , knowledge poor features , too high complexity , absolute performance below 90%, etc.).
2 Content Overview and Outline
This tutorial has two differentiated parts . In the first one , the state-of-the-art on SRL will be overviewed , including : main techniques applied , existing systems , and lessons learned from the CoNLL and SemEval evaluation exercises . This part will include a critical review of current problems and the identification of the main challenges for the future . The second part is devoted to the lines of research oriented to overcome current limitations . This part will include an analysis of the relation between syntax and SRL , the development of joint systems for integrated syntactic-semantic analysis , generalization across corpora , and engineering of truly semantic features . See the outline below.
1. Introduction ? Problem definition and properties ? Importance of SRL ? Main computational resources and systems available for SRL 2. State-of-the-art SRL systems ? Architecture ? Training of different components ? Feature engineering 3. Empirical evaluation of SRL systems ? Evaluation exercises at SemEval and CoNLL conferences ? Main lessons learned 4. Current problems and challenges 5. Keys for future progress ? Relation to syntax : joint learning of syntactic and semantic dependencies ? Generalization across domains and text genres ? Use of semantic knowledge ? SRL systems in applications 6. Conclusions
