Tutorial Abstracts of ACL-IJCNLP 2009, page 1,
Suntec , Singapore , 2 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Fundamentals of Chinese Language Processing

Chu-Ren Huang
Dept . of Chinese and Bilingual Studies
Hong Kong polytechnic University
Churen.huang@inet.polyu.edu.hk
Qin Lu
Department of Computing
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
csluqin@comp.polyu.edu.hk


1 Introduction
This tutorial gives an introduction to the fundamentals of Chinese language processing for text processing . Today , more and more Chinese information are available in electronic form and over the internet . Computer processing of Chinese text requires the understanding of both the language itself and the technology to handle them . This tutorial is targeted for both Chinese linguists who are interested in computational linguistics and computer scientists who are interested in research on processing Chinese.
2 Content Overview
This tutorial consists of two parts . The first part overviews the grammar of the Chinese language from a language processing perspective based on naturally occurring data . The second part overviews Chinese specific processing issues and corresponding computational technologies.
The grammar introduced is a descriptive grammar of general-purpose , present-day standard Mandarin Chinese , which is fast becoming an internationally spoken language . Real examples of actual language use will be illustrated based on a data driven and corpus based approach so that its links to computational linguistic approaches for computer processing are naturally bridged in . A number of important Chinese NLP resources are also presented . On the technology side , the tutorial mainly covers Chinese word segmentation and Part-of-Speech tagging.
Word segmentation problem has to deal with some Chinese language unique problems such as unknown word detection and named entity recognition which are the emphasis of this tutorial.
3 Tutorial Outline
Part 1: Highlights of Chinese Grammar for NLP 1.1 Preliminaries : Orthography and writing conventions 1.2 Basic unit of processing : word or character ? a . Wordforms vs . character forms b . Word-senses vs . character-senses 1.3 Part-of-Speech : important issues in defining word classes 1.4 Word formation : from affixation to compounding 1.5 Unique constructions and challenges a . Classifier-noun agreement b . Separable compounds ( or ionization ) c . ? Verbless ? Constructions 1.6. Chinese NLP resources
Part 2: Text Processing 2.1 Lexical processing a . Segmentation b . Disambiguation c . Unknown word detection d . Named Entity Recognition 2.2 Syntactic processing a . Issues in PoS tagging b . Hidden Markov Models 2.3 NLP Applications
References
Academia Sinica Balance Corpus of Mandarin Chinese . http://www.sinica.edu.tw/SinicaCorpus / Chao , Y . R . 1968. A Grammar of Spoken Chinese.
Berkeley : University of California Press.
Huang , C.-R ., K.-j . Chen and B . K . T'sou . 1996.
Readings in Chinese Natural Language Processing.
Journal of Chinese Linguistics Monograph Series
No . 9. Berkeley : POLA.
T'sou , B . K . 2004. Chinese Language Processing at the Dawn of the 21st Century . In C.-R . Huang and W . Lenders . Eds . Computational Linguistics and Beyond . Pp . 189-206. Taipei : AcademiaSinica.
Miao , S.Q ., Wei , Z.H . 2007, Chinese Text Information Processing Principles and Applications ( In
Chinese ). Tsinghua University Press.

