Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP , pages 879?887,
Suntec , Singapore , 27 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Comparing Objective and Subjective Measures of Usability
in a Human-Robot Dialogue System
Mary Ellen Foster and Manuel Giuliani and Alois Knoll
Informatik VI : Robotics and Embedded Systems
Technische Universita?t Mu?nchen
Boltzmannstra?e 3, 85748 Garching bei Mu?nchen , Germany
{foster,giuliani,knoll}@in.tum.de
Abstract
We present a human-robot dialogue system that enables a robot to work together with a human user to build wooden construction toys . We then describe a study in which na??ve subjects interacted with this system under a range of conditions and then completed a usersatisfaction questionnaire . The results of this study provide a wide range of subjective and objective measures of the quality of the interactions . To assess which aspects of the interaction had the greatest impact on the users ? opinions of the system , we used a method based on the PARADISE evaluation framework ( Walker et al , 1997) to derive a performance function from our data.
The major contributors to user satisfaction were the number of repetition requests ( which had a negative effect on satisfaction ), the dialogue length , and the users ? recall of the system instructions ( both of which contributed positively).
1 Introduction
Evaluating the usability of a spoken language dialogue system generally requires a largescale user study , which can be a time-consuming process both for the experimenters and for the experimental subjects . In fact , it can be difficult even to define what the criteria are for evaluating such a system ( cf . Novick , 1997). In recent years , techniques have been introduced that are designed to predict user satisfaction based on more easily measured properties of an interaction such as dialogue length and speechrecognition error rate . The design of such performance methods for evaluating dialogue systems is still an area of open research.
The PARADISE framework ( PARAdigm for
DIalogue System Evaluation ; Walker et al (1997)) describes a method for using data to derive a performance function that predicts usersatisfaction scores from the results on other , more easily computed measures . PARADISE uses stepwise multiple linear regression to model user satisfaction based on measures representing the performance dimensions of task success , dialogue quality , and dialogue efficiency , and has been applied to a wide range of systems ( e.g ., Walker et al , 2000; Litman and Pan , 2002; Mo?ller et al , 2008). If the resulting performance function can be shown to predict user satisfaction as a function of other , more easily measured system properties , it will be widely applicable : in addition to making it possible to evaluate systems based on automatically available data from log files without the need for extensive experiments with users , for example , such a performance function can be used in an online , incremental manner to adapt system behaviour to avoid entering a state that is likely to reduce user satisfaction , or can be used as a reward function in a reinforcementlearning scenario ( Walker , 2000).
Automated evaluation metrics that rate system behaviour based on automatically computable properties have been developed in a number of other fields : widely used measures include BLEU ( Papineni et al , 2002) for machine translation and ROUGE ( Lin , 2004) for summarisation , for example . When employing any such metric , it is crucial to verify that the predictions of the automated evaluation process agree with human judgements of the important aspects of the system output . If not , the risk arises that the automated measures do not capture the behaviour that is actually relevant for the human users of a system . For example , Callison-Burch et al (2006) presented a number of with human judgements . Also , Foster (2008) examined a range of automated metrics for evaluation generated multimodal output and found that few agreed with the preferences expressed by human judges.
In this paper , we apply a PARADISE-style process to the results of a user study of a human-robot dialogue system . We build models to predict the results on a set of subjective usersatisfaction measures , based on objective measures that were either gathered automatically from the system logs or derived from the video recordings of the interactions.
The results indicate that the most significant contributors to user satisfaction were the number of system turns in the dialogues , the users ? ability to recall the instructions given by the robot , and the number of times that the user had to ask for instructions to be repeated . The former two measures were positively correlated with user satisfaction , while the latter had a negative impact on user satisfaction ; however the correlation in all cases was relatively low . At the end of the paper , we discuss possible reasons for these results and propose other measures that might have a larger effect on users ? judgements.
2 Task-Based Human-Robot Dialogue
This study makes use of the JAST human-robot dialogue system ( Rickert et al , 2007) which supports multimodal human-robot collaboration on a joint construction task . The user and the robot work together to assemble wooden construction toys on a common workspace , coordinating their actions through speech , gestures , and facial displays . The robot ( Figure 1) consists of a pair of manipulator arms with grippers , mounted in a position to resemble human arms , and an animatronic talking head ( van Breemen , 2005) capable of producing facial expressions , rigid head motion , and lip-synchronised synthesised speech.
The system can interact in English or German.
The robot is able to manipulate objects in the workspace and to perform simple assembly tasks.
In the system that was used in the current study , the robot instructs the user on building a particular compound object , explaining the necessary assembly steps and retrieving pieces as required , with the user performing the actual assembly actions . To make joint action necessary for success in the assembly task , the workspace is divided into
Figure 1: The JAST dialogue robot
SYSTEM First we will build a windmill . Okay?
USER Okay.
SYSTEM To make a windmill , we must make a snowman.
SYSTEM [ picking up and holding out red cube ] To make a snowman , insert the green bolt through the end of this red cube and screw it into the blue cube.
USER [ takes cube , performs action ] Okay.
SYSTEM [ picking up and holding out a small slat ] To make a windmill , insert the yellow bolt through the middle of this short slat and the middle of another short slat and screw it into the snowman.
USER [ takes slat , performs action ] Okay.
SYSTEM Very good!
Figure 2: Sample human-robot dialogue
Figure 3: The four target objects used in the experiment two areas?one belonging to the robot and one to the user?so that the robot must hand over some pieces to the user . Figure 2 shows a sample dialogue in which the system explains to the user how to build an object called a ? windmill ?, which has a subcomponent called a ? snowman?.
3 Experiment Design
The human-robot system was evaluated via a user study in which subjects interacted with the complete system ; all interactions were in German . As a between-subjects factor , we manipulated two aspects of the generated output : the strategy used by the dialogue manager to explain a plan to the user , and the type of referring expressions produced by the system . Foster et al (2009) give the details of these factors and describes the effects of each individual manipulation . In this paper , we concentrate on the relationships among the different factors that were measured during the study : the efficiency and quality of the dialogues , the users ? success at building the required objects and at learning the construction plans for new objects , and the users ? subjective reactions to the system.
3.1 Subjects 43 subjects (27 male ) took part in this experiment ; the results of one additional subject were discarded due to technical problems with the system . The mean age of the subjects was 24.5, with a minimum of 14 and a maximum of 55. Of the subjects who indicated an area of study , the two most common areas were Informatics (12 subjects ) and Mathematics (10). On a scale of 1?5, subjects gave a mean assessment of their knowledge of computers at 3.4, of speechrecognition systems at 2.3, and of human-robot systems at 2.0. The subjects were compensated for their participation in the experiment.
3.2 Scenario
In this experiment , each subject built the same three objects in collaboration with the system , always in the same order . The first target was a ? windmill ? ( Figure 3a ), which has a subcomponent called a ? snowman ? ( Figure 3b ). Once the windmill was completed , the system then walked the user through building an ? L shape ? ( Figure 3c ). Finally , the robot instructed the user to build a ? railway signal ? ( Figure 3d ), which combines an L shape with a snowman . During the construction of the railway signal , the system asked the user if they remembered how to build a snowman and an L shape . If the user did not remember , the system explained the building process again ; if they did remember , the system simply told them to build another one.
3.3 Dependent Variables
We gathered a wide range of dependent measures : objective measures derived from the system logs and video recordings , as well as subjective measures based on the users ? own ratings of their experience interacting with the system.
3.3.1 Objective Measures
We collected a range of objective measures from the log files and videos of the interactions . Like Litman and Pan (2002), we divided our objective measures into three categories based on those used in the PARADISE framework : dialogue efficiency , dialogue quality , and task success.
The dialogue efficiency measures concentrated on the timing of the interaction : the time taken to complete the three construction tasks , the number of system turns required for the complete interaction , and the mean time taken by the system to respond to the user?s requests.
We considered four measures of dialogue quality . The first two measures looked specifically for signs of problems in the interaction , using data au-times that the user asked the system to repeat its instructions , and the number of times that the user failed to take an object that the robot attempted to hand over . The other two dialogue quality measures were computed based on the video recordings : the number of times that the user looked at the robot , and the percentage of the total interaction that they spent looking at the robot . We considered these gaze-based measures to be measures of dialogue quality since it has previously been shown that , in this sort of task-based interaction where there is a visually salient object , participants tend to look at their partner more often when there is a problem in the interaction ( e.g.,
Argyle and Graham , 1976).
The task success measures addressed user success in the two main tasks undertaken in these interactions : assembling the target objects following the robot?s instructions , and learning and remembering to make a snowman and an L shape . We measured task success in two ways , corresponding to these two main tasks . The user?s success in the overall assembly task was assessed by counting the proportion of target objects that were assembled as intended ( i.e ., as in Figure 3), which was judged based on the video recordings . To test whether the subjects had learned how to build the subcomponents that were required more than once ( the snowman and the L shape ), we recorded whether they said yes or no when they were asked if they remembered each of these components during the construction of the railway signal.
3.3.2 Subjective Measures
In addition to the above objective measures , we also gathered a range of subjective measures . Before the interaction , we asked subjects to rate their current level on a set of 22 emotions ( Ortony et al , 1988) on a scale from 1 to 4; the subjects then rated their level on the same emotional scales again after the interaction . After the interaction , the subjects also filled out a usersatisfaction questionnaire , which was based on that used in the user evaluation of the COMIC dialogue system ( White et al , 2005), with modifications to address specific aspects of the current dialogue system and the experimental manipulations in this study . There were 47 items in total , each of which requested that the user choose their level of agreement with a given statement on a five-point Likert scale . The items were divided into the following categories:
Mean ( Stdev ) Min Max
Length ( sec ) 305.1 (54.0) 195.2 488.4
System turns 13.4 (1.73) 11 18
Response time ( sec ) 2.79 (1.13) 1.27 7.21
Table 1: Dialogue efficiency results
Opinion of the robot as a partner 21 items addressing the ease with which subjects were able to interact with the robot Instruction quality 6 items specifically addressing the quality of the assembly instructions given by the robot Task success 11 items asking the user to rate how well they felt they performed on the various assembly tasks Feelings of the user 9 items asking users to rate their feelings while using the system At the end of the questionnaire , subjects were also invited to give freeform comments.
4 Results
In this section , we present the results of each of the individual dependent measures ; in the following section , we examine the relationship among the different types of measures . These results are based on the data from 40 subjects : we excluded results from two subjects for whom the video data was not clear , and from one additional subject who appeared to be ? testing ? the system rather than making a serious effort to interact with it.
4.1 Objective Measures
Dialogue efficiency The results on the dialogue efficiency measures are shown in Table 1. The average subject took 305.1 seconds?that is , just over five minutes?to build all three of the objects , and an average dialogue took 13 system turns to complete . When a user made a request , the mean delay before the beginning of the system response was about three seconds , although for one user this time was more than twice as long . This response delay resulted from two factors . First , preparing long system utterances with several referring expressions ( such as the third and fourth system turns in Figure 2) takes some time ; second , if a user made a request during a system turn ( i.e ., a ? barge-in ? attempt ), the system was not able to respond until the current turn was completed.
882
Mean ( Stdev ) Min Max
Repetition requests 1.86 (1.79) 0 6
Failed handovers 1.07 (1.35) 0 6
Looks at the robot 23.55 (8.21) 14 50
Time looking at robot (%) 27 (8.6) 12 51
Table 2: Dialogue quality results
These three measures of efficiency were correlated with each other : the correlation between length and turns was 0.38; between length and response time 0.47; and between turns and response time 0.19 ( all p < 0.0001).
Dialogue quality Table 2 shows the results for the dialogue quality measures : the two indications of problems , and the two measures of the frequency with which the subjects looked at the robot?s head . On average , a subject asked for an instruction to be repeated nearly two times per interaction , while failed handovers occurred just over once per interaction ; however , as can be seen from the standard-deviation values , these measures varied widely across the data . In fact , 18 subjects never failed to take an object from the robot when it was offered , while one subject did so five times and one six times . Similarly , 11 subjects never asked for any repetitions , while five subjects asked for repetitions five or more times.1 On average , the subjects in this study spent about a quarter of the interaction looking at the robot head , and changed their gaze to the robot 23.5 times over the course of the interaction . Again , there was a wide range of results for both of these measures : 15 subjects looked at the robot fewer than 20 times during the interaction , 20 subjects looked at the robot between 20 to 30 times , while 5 subjects looked at the robot more than 30 times.
The two measures that count problems were mildly correlated with each other ( R2 = 0.26, p < 0.001), as were the two measures of looking at the robot ( R2 = 0.13, p < 0.05); there was no correlation between the two classes of measures.
Task success Table 3 shows the success rate for assembling each object in the sequence . Objects in italics represent subcomponents , as follows : the first snowman was constructed as part of the windmill , while the second formed part of the railway signal ; the first L-shape was a goal in itself , 1The requested repetition rate was significantly affected by the description strategy used by the dialogue manager ; see
Foster et al (2009) for details.
Object Rate Memory
Snowman 0.76
Windmill 0.55
L shape 0.90
L shape 0.90 0.88
Snowman 0.86 0.70
Railway signal 0.71
Overall 0.72 0.79
Table 3: Task success results while the second was also part of the process of building the railway signal . The Rate column indicates subjects ? overall success at building the relevant component?for example , 55% of the subjects built the windmill correctly , while both of the L-shapes were built with 90% accuracy . For the second occurrence of the snowman and the L-shape , the Memory column indicates the percentage of subjects who claimed to remember how to build it when asked . The Overall row at the bottom indicates subjects ? overall success rate at building the three main target objects ( windmill , L shape , railway signal ): on average , a subject built about two of the three objects correctly.
The overall correct-assembly rate was correlated with the overall rate of remembering objects : R2 = 0.20, p < 0.005. However , subjects who said that they did remember how to build a snowman or an L shape the second time around were no more likely to do it correctly than those who said that they did not remember.
4.2 Subjective Measures
Two types of subjective measures were gathered during this study : responses on the usersatisfaction questionnaire , and self-assessment of emotions . Table 4 shows the mean results for each category from the usersatisfaction questionnaire across all of the subjects , in all cases on a 5-point Likert scale . The subjects in this study gave a generally positive assessment of their interactions with the system?with a mean overall satisfaction score of 3.75?and rated their perceived task success particularly highly , with a mean score of 4.1.
To analyse the emotional data , we averaged all of the subjects ? emotional self-ratings before and after the experiment , counting negative emotions on an inverse scale , and then computed the difference between the two means . Table 5 shows the results from this analysis ; note that this value was assessed on a 1?4 scale . While the mean emotional
Robot as partner 3.63 (0.65)
Instruction quality 3.69 (0.71)
Task success 4.10 (0.68)
Feelings 3.66 (0.61)
Overall 3.75 (0.57)
Table 4: User-satisfaction questionnaire results
Mean ( Stdev ) Min Max
Before the study 2.99 (0.32) 2.32 3.68
After the study 3.05 (0.32) 2.32 3.73
Change +0.06 (0.24) ?0.55 +0.45
Table 5: Mean emotional assessments score across all of the subjects did not change over the course of the experiment , the ratings of individual subjects did show larger changes . As shown in the final row of the table , one subject?s mean rating decreased by 0.55 over the course of the interaction , while that of another subject increased by 0.45. There was a slight correlation between the subjects ? description of their emotional state after the experiment and their responses to the questionnaire items asking for feelings about the interaction : R2 = 0.14, p < 0.01.
5 Building Performance Functions
In the preceding section , we presented results on a number of objective and subjective measures , and also examined the correlation among measures of the same type . The results on the objective measures varied widely across the subjects ; also , the subjects generally rated their experience of using the system positively , but again with some variation . In this section , we examine the relationship among measures of different types in order to determine which of the objective measures had the largest effect on users ? subjective reactions to the dialogue system.
To determine the relationship among the factors , we employed the procedure used in the PARADISE evaluation framework ( Walker et al , 1997). The PARADISE model uses stepwise multiple linear regression to predict subjective user satisfaction based on measures representing the performance dimensions of task success , dialogue quality , and dialogue efficiency , resulting in a predictor function of the following form:
Satisfaction = n ? i=1 wi ? N ( mi)
The mi terms represent the value of each measure , while the N function transforms each measure into a normal distribution using z-score normalisation . Stepwise linear regression produces coefficients ( wi ) describing the relative contribution of each predictor to the user satisfaction . If a predictor does not contribute significantly , its wi value is zero after the stepwise process.
Using stepwise linear regression , we computed a predictor function for each of the subjective measures that we gathered during our study : the mean score for each of the individual usersatisfaction categories ( Table 4), the mean score across the whole questionnaire ( the last line of Table 4), as well as the difference between the users ? emotional states before and after the study ( the last line of Table 5). We included all of the objective measures from Section 4.1 as initial predictors.
The resulting predictor functions are shown in Table 6. The following abbreviations are used for the factors that occur in the table : Rep for the number of repetition requests , Turns for the number of system turns , Len for the length of the dialogue , and Mem for the subjects ? memory for the components that were built twice . The R2 column indicates the percentage of the variance that is explained by the performance function , while the Significance column gives significance values for each term in the function.
Although the R2 values for the predictor functions in Table 6 are generally quite low , indicating that the functions do not explain most of the variance in the data , the factors that remain after stepwise regression still provide an indication as to which of the objective measures had an effect on users ? opinions of the system . In general , users who had longer interactions with the system ( in terms of system turns ) and who said that they remembered the robot?s instructions tended to give the system higher scores , while users who asked for more instructions to be repeated tended to give it lower scores ; for the robot-as-partner questions , the length of the dialogue in seconds also made a slight negative contribution . None of the other objective factors contributed significantly to any of the predictor functions.
6 Discussion
That the factors included in Table 6 were the most significant contributors to user satisfaction is not surprising . If a user asks for instructions to be re-Robot as partner 3.60+0.53?N ( Turns)?0.39?N ( Rep)?0.18?N ( Len ) 0.12 Turns : p < 0.01,
Rep : p < 0.05,
Length : p ? 0.17
Instruction quality 3.66?0.22?N ( Rep ) 0.081 Rep : p < 0.05 Task success 4.07+0.20?N ( Mem ) 0.058 Mem : p ? 0.07 Feelings 3.63+0.34?N ( Turns)?0.32?N ( Rep ) 0.044 Turns : p ? 0.06, Rep : p ? 0.08 Overall 3.73?0.36?N ( Rep)+0.31?N ( Turns ) 0.062 Rep : p < 0.05,
Turns : p ? 0.06
Emotion change 0.07+0.14?N ( Turns)+0.11?N ( Mem)?0.090?N ( Rep ) 0.20 Turns : p < 0.05,
Mem : p < 0.01,
Rep : p ? 0.17
Table 6: Predictor functions peated , this is a clear indication of a problem in the dialogue ; similarly , users who remembered the system?s instructions were equally clearly having a relatively successful interaction.
In the current study , increased dialogue length had a positive contribution to user satisfaction ; this contrasts with results such as those of Litman and Pan (2002), who found that increased dialogue length was associated with decreased user satisfaction . We propose two possible explanations for this difference . First , the system analysed by Litman and Pan (2002) was an information-seeking dialogue system , in which efficient access to the information is an important criterion . The current system , on the other hand , has the goal of joint task execution , and pure efficiency is a less compelling measure of dialogue quality in this setting . Second , it is possible that the sheer novelty factor of interacting with a fully-embodied humanoid robot affected people?s subjective responses to the system , so that subjects who had longer interactions also enjoyed the experience more . Support for this explanation is provided by the fact that dialogue length was only a significant factor in the more ? subjective ? parts of the questionnaire , but did not have a significant impact on the users ? judgements about instruction quality or task success . Other studies of human-robot dialogue systems have also had similar results : for example , the subjects in the study described by Sidner et al (2005) who used a robot that moved while talking reported higher levels of engagement in the interaction , and also tended to have longer conversations with the robot.
While the predictor functions give useful insights into the relative contribution of the objective measures to the subjective user satisfaction , the R2 values are generally lower than those found in other PARADISE-style evaluations . For example , Walker et al (1998) reported an R2 value of 0.38, the values reported by Walker et al (2000) on the training sets ranged from 0.39 to 0.56, Litman and Pan (2002) reported an R2 value of 0.71, while the R2 values reported by Mo?ller et al (2008) for linear regression models similar to those presented here were between 0.22 and 0.57. The low R2 values from this analysis clearly suggest that , while the factors included in Table 6 did affect users ? opinions?particularly their opinion of the robot as a partner and the change in their reported emotional state?the users ? subjective judgements were also affected by factors other than those captured by the objective measures considered here.
In most of the previous PARADISE-style studies , measures addressing the performance of the automated speechrecognition system and other input-processing components were included in the models . For example , the factors listed by Mo?ller et al (2008) include several measures of word error rate and of parsing accuracy . However , the scenario that was used in the current study required minimal speech input from the user ( see Figure 2), so we did not include any such input-processing factors in our models.
Other objective factors that might be relevant for predicting user satisfaction in the current study include a range of nonverbal behaviour from the users . For example , the user?s reaction time to instructions from the robot , the time the users need to adapt to the robot?s movements during handover actions ( Huber et al , 2008), or the time taken for the actual assembly of the objects . Also , other measures of the user?s gaze behaviour might be the users look at the robot arms or at the objects on the table , as well as more targeted measures examining factors such as the user?s gaze and other behaviour during and after different types of system outputs . In future studies , we will also gather data on these additional nonverbal behaviours , and we expect to find higher correlations with subjective judgements.
7 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented the JAST human-robot dialogue system and described a user study in which the system instructed users to build a series of target objects out of wooden construction toys . This study resulted in a range of objective and subjective measures , which were used to derive performance functions in the style of the PARADISE evaluation framework . Three main factors were found to affect the users ? subjective ratings : longer dialogues and higher recall performance were associated with increased user satisfaction , while dialogues with more repetition requests tended to be associated with lower satisfaction scores . The explained variance of the performance functions was generally low , suggesting that factors other than those measured in this study contributed to the user satisfaction scores ; we have suggested several such factors.
The finding that longer dialogues were associated with higher user satisfaction disagrees with the results of many previous PARADISE-style evaluation studies . However , it does confirm and extend the results of previous studies specifically addressing interactions between users and embodied agents : as in the previous studies , the users in this case seem to view the agent as a social entity with whom they enjoy having a conversation.
A newer version of the JAST system is currently under development and will shortly undergo a user evaluation . This new system will support an extended set of interactions where both agents know the target assembly plan , and will will also incorporate enhanced components for vision , object recognition , and goal inference . When evaluating this new system , we will include similar measures to those described here to enable the evaluations of the two systems to be compared . We will also gather additional objective measures in order to measure their influence on the subjective results . These additional measures will include those mentioned at the end of the preceding section , as well as measures targeted at the revised scenario and the updated system capabilities?for example , an additional dialogue quality measure will assess how often the goal-inference system was able to detect and correctly respond to an error by the user.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the European Commission through the JAST2 ( IST-FP6-003747-IP ) and INDIGO3 ( IST-FP6-045388) projects . Thanks to Pawel Dacka for his help in running the experiment and analysing the data.
References
M . Argyle and J . A . Graham . 1976. The Central Europe experiment : Looking at persons and looking at objects . Environmental Psychology and Nonverbal Behavior , 1(1):6?16. doi:10.
1007/BF01115461.
A . J . N . van Breemen . 2005. iCat : Experimenting with animabotics . In Proceedings of the AISB 2005 Creative Robotics Symposium.
C . Callison-Burch , M . Osborne , and P . Koehn.
2006. Re-evaluating the role of BLEU in machine translation research . In Proceedings of
EACL 2006. ACL Anthology E06-1032.
M . E . Foster . 2008. Automated metrics that agree with human judgements on generated output for an embodied conversational agent . In Proceedings of INLG 2008. ACL Anthology W08-1113.
M . E . Foster , M . Giuliani , A . Isard , C . Matheson , J . Oberlander , and A . Knoll . 2009. Evaluating description and reference strategies in a cooperative human-robot dialogue system . In Proceedings of IJCAI 2009.
M . Huber , M . Rickert , A . Knoll , T . Brandt , and S . Glasauer . 2008. Human-robot interaction in handing-over tasks . In Proceedings of IEEE
ROMAN 2008. doi:10.1109/ROMAN.2008.
4600651.
C . Y . Lin . 2004. ROUGE : A package for automatic evaluation of summaries . In Proceedings of the ACL 2004 Workshop on Text Summarization . ACL Anthology W04-1013.
2http://www.euprojects-jast.net / 3http://www.ics.forth.gr/indigo / evaluating an adaptive spoken dialogue system . User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction , 12(2?3):111?137. doi:10.1023/A : 1015036910358.
S . Mo?ller , K.-P . Engelbrecht , and R . Schleicher.
2008. Predicting the quality and usability of spoken dialogue systems . Speech Communication , 50:730?744. doi:10.1016/j.specom.
2008.03.001.
D . G . Novick . 1997. What is effectiveness ? In Working notes , CHI ?97 Workshop on HCI Research and Practice Agenda Based on Human Needs and Social Responsibility . http://www.cs.utep.edu/novick / papers/eff.chi.html.
A . Ortony , G . L . Clore , and A . Collins . 1988. The Cognitive Structure of Emotions . Cambridge
University Press.
K . Papineni , S . Roukos , T . Ward , and W.-J . Zhu.
2002. BLEU : A method for automatic evaluation of machine translation . In Proceedings of
ACL 2002. ACL Anthology P02-1040.
M . Rickert , M . E . Foster , M . Giuliani , T . By , G . Panin , and A . Knoll . 2007. Integrating language , vision and action for human robot dialog systems . In Proceedings of HCI International 2007. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-73281-5_ 108.
C . L . Sidner , C . Lee , C . D . Kidd , N . Lesh , and C . Rich . 2005. Explorations in engagement for humans and robots . Artificial Intelligence , 166(1?2):140?164. doi:10.1016/j.artint.
2005.03.005.
M . Walker , C . Kamm , and D . Litman . 2000. Towards developing general models of usability with PARADISE . Natural Language Engineering , 6(3?4):363?377.
M . A . Walker . 2000. An application of reinforcement learning to dialogue strategy selection in a spoken dialogue system for email . Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 12:387?416.
M . A . Walker , J . Fromer , G . D . Fabbrizio , C . Mestel , and D . Hindle . 1998. What can I say ?: Evaluating a spoken language interface to email.
In Proceedings of CHI 1998. doi:10.1145/ 274644.274722.
M . A . Walker , D . J . Litman , C . A . Kamm , and A . Abella . 1997. PARADISE : A framework for evaluating spoken dialogue agents . In Proceedings of ACL/EACL 1997. ACL Anthology P97-1035.
M . White , M . E . Foster , J . Oberlander , and A . Brown . 2005. Using facial feedback to enhance turntaking in a multimodal dialogue system . In Proceedings of HCI International 2005.
887
