Proceedings of the ACL 2010 Student Research Workshop , pages 79?84,
Uppsala , Sweden , 13 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Edit Tree Distance alignments for Semantic Role Labelling
Hector-Hugo Franco-Penya
Trinity College Dublin
Dublin , Ireland.
francoph@cs.tcd.ie

Abstract
? Tree SRL system ? is a Semantic Role Labelling supervised system based on a tree-distance algorithm and a simple kNN implementation.
The novelty of the system lies in comparing the sentences as tree structures with multiple relations instead of extracting vectors of features for each relation and classifying them . The system was tested with the English CoNLL2009 shared task data set where 79% accuracy was obtained.
1 Introduction
Semantic Role Labelling ( SRL ) is a natural language processing task which deals with semantic analysis at sentence-level . SRL is the task of identifying arguments for a certain predicate and labelling them . The predicates are usually verbs.
They establish ? what happened ?. The arguments determine events such as ? who ?, ? whom ?, ? where ?, etc , with reference to one predicate.
The possible semantic roles are predefined for each predicate . The set of roles depends on the corpora.
SRL is becoming an important tool for information extraction , text summarization , machine translation and question answering ( M?rquez , et al , 2008).
2 The data
The data set I used is taken from the CoNLL2009 shared task ( Haji ? et al , 2009) and is part of Propbank . Propbank ( Palmer et al 2005) is a hand-annotated corpus . It transforms sentences into propositions . It adds a semantic layer to the Penn TreeBank ( Marcus et al 1994) and defines a set of semantic roles for each predicate.
It is difficult to define universal semantic roles for all predicates . That is why PropBank defines a set of semantic roles for each possible sense of each predicate ( frame ) [ See a sample of the frame ? raise ? on the Figure 1 caption].

The core arguments are labelled by numbers.
Adjuncts , which are common to all predicates , have their own labels , like : AM-LOC , TMP , NEG , etc . The four most frequent labels in the data set are : A1:35%, A0:20.86%, A2:7.88% and
AM-TMP : 7.72%
Propbank was originally built using constituent tree structures , but here only the dependency tree structure version was used . Note that dependency tree structures have labels on the arrows . The tree distance algorithm cannot work with these labelled arrows and so they are moved to the child node as an extra label.
The task performed by the Tree SRL system consists of labelling the relations ( predicate arguments ) which are assumed to be already identified.
3 Tree Distance
The tree distance algorithm has already been applied to text entailment ( Kouylekov & Magnini , 2005) and question answering ( Punyakanok et al 2004; Emms , 2006) with positive results.
The main contribution of this piece of work to the SRL field is the inclusion of the tree distance algorithm into an SRL system , working with tree structures in contrast to the classical ? feature extraction ? and ? classification ?. Kim et al(2009) developed a similar system for Information Extraction.

S en te n ce s p re d ic at es ar g u m en ts
P re d ic at es p er se n te n ce ar g u m en ts p er s u b - t re e
F il e si ze i n
M b
Tra 39279 179014 393699 4.55 2.20 56.2
Dev 1334 6390 13865 4.79 2.17 1.97
Evl 2399 10498 23286 4.38 2.22 3.41
Table 1: The data
The data set is divided into three files : training ( Tra ), development ( Dev ) and evaluation ( Evl).
The following table describes the number of sentences , subtrees and labels contained in them , and the ratios of subtrees per sentences and relations per subtree.
79
Tai (1979) introduced a criterion for matching nodes between tree representations ( or converting one tree into another one ) and ( Shasha & Zhang , 1990; Zhang & Shasha , 1989) developed an algorithm that finds an optimal matching tree solution for any given pair of trees . The advantage of this algorithm is that its computational cost is low . The optimal matching depends on the defined atomic cost of matching two nodes.
4 Tree SRL system architecture
For the training and testing data set , all possible subtrees were extracted . Figure 3 and Figure 5 describe the process . Then , using the tree distance algorithm , the test subtrees are labelled using the training ones . Finally , the predicted labels get assembled on the original sentence where the test subtree came from . Figure 2 describes the process.

A subtree extracted from a sentence , contains a predicate node , all its argument nodes and all the ancestors up to the first common ancestor of all nodes . ( Figure 1 shows two samples of subtree extraction . Figure 3 describes how sub trees are obtained)
Figure 1: Alignment sample
A two sentence sample , in a dependency tree representation . In each node , the word form and the position of the word in the sentence are shown . Straight arrows represent syntactic dependencies . The label of the dependency is not shown . The square node represent the predicate that is going to be analyzed , ( there can be multiple predicates in a single sentence ). Semi-dotted arrows between a square node and an ellipse node represent a semantic relation . This arrow has a semantic tag ( A1, A2, A3 and A4).

The grey shadow contains all the nodes of the sub tree for the ? rose ? predicate.
The dotted double arrows between the nodes of both sentences represent the tree distance alignment for both subtrees . In this particular case every single node is matched.

Both predicate nodes are samples of the frame ? raise ? sense 01 ( which means ? go up quantifiably ?) where the core arguments are : A0: Agent , causer of motion A1: Logical subject , patient , thing rising A2: EXT , amount raised A3: Start point A4: End point AM : Medium 5 Labelling Suppose that in Figure 1, the bottom sentence is the query , where the grey shadow contains the subtree to be labelled and the top sentence contains the subtree sample chosen to label the query . Then , an alignment between the sample subtree and the query subtree suggests labelling the query subtree with A1, A2 and A3, where the first two labels are right but the last label , A4, is predicted as A3, so it is wrong.

It is not necessary to label a whole subtree ( query ) using just a single subtree sample . However , if the whole query is labelled using a single answer sample , the prediction is guaranteed to be consistent ( no repeated argument labels).
Some possible ways to label the semantic relation using a sorted list of alignments ( with each subtree of the training data set ) is discussed ahead . Each subtree contains one predicate and several semantic relations , one for each argument node.
5.1 Treating relations independently
In this subsection , the neighbouring subtrees for one relation of a subtree T refers to the near-Input : T : tree structure labelled in post order traversal Input : L : list of nodes to be on the subtree in post order traversal
Output : T : SubTree foreach node x in the list do mark x as part of the subtree ; end while L contains more than 2 unique values do [ minValue , position]=min(L);
Value = parent(minValue);
Mark value as part of the subtree;
L[position ] = value ; end
Remove all nodes that are not marked as part of the subtree;
Figure 5: Subtree extraction
Input : A subtree to be labelled
Input : list of alignments sorted by ascending tree distance
Output : labelled subtree foreach argument(a ) in T do foreach alignment ( ali ) in the sorted list do if there is a semantic relation ( ali.function(p),ali.function(a))
Then break loop ; end end label relation pa with the label of the relation ( ali.function(p),ali.function(a )); end p is the node predicate.
a is a node argument.
ali is an alignment between the subtree that has to be labelled and a subtree in the training dataset.
The method function is explained in Figure 3.

Figure 4: Labelling a relation . ( approach
A)
Figure 3: Subtree extraction sample.
Assuming that ? p ? ( the square node ) is a predicate node and the nodes ? a1? and ? a2? are its arguments ( the arguments are defined by the semantic relations . In this case , the semi-doted arrows .), the subtree extracted from the above sentence will contain the nodes : ? a1?, ? a2?, ? p ?, all ancestors of ? a1?,?a2? and ? p ? up to the first common one , in this case node ? u ?, which is also included in the subtree.
All of the white nodes are not included in the subtree . The straight lines represent syntactic dependency relations.
Input : training data set ( labelled)
Input : testing data set ( unlabelled)
Output : testing data set ( labelled)
Load training and testing data;
Adapt the trees for the tree distance algorithm ; foreach sentence ( training & testing data ) do obtain each minimal subtree for each predicate ; end foreach subtree T from the testing data do calculate the distance and the alignment from T to each training subtree ; sort the list of alignments by ascending tree distance ; use the list to label the subtree T ; Assemble T labels on the original sentence
End
Figure 2: Tree SRL system pseudo code duces a match between two predicate nodes and two argument nodes . A label from the nearest neighbour(s ) can be transferred to T for labelling the relation.
The current implementation ( Approach A ), described in more detail in Figure 4, labels a relation using the first nearest neighbour from a list ordered by ascending tree distance . If there are several nearest neighbours , the first one on the list is used . This is a naive implementation of the kNN algorithm where in case of multiple nearest neighbours only one is used and the others get ignored.
A negative aspect of this strategy is that it can select a different subtree based on the input order . This makes the algorithm indeterministic . A way to make it deterministic can be by extending the parameter ? k ? in case of multiple cases at the same distance or a tie in the voting ( Approach
B).
5.2 Treating relations dependently
In this section , a sample refers to a subtree containing all arguments and its labels . The arguments for a certain predicate are related.
Some strategies can lead to non-consistent structures ( core argument labels cannot appear twice in the same subtree ). Approach B treats the relations independently . It does not have any mechanism to keep the consistency of the whole predicate structure.
Another way is to find a sample that contains enough information to label the whole subtree ( Approach C ). This approach always generates consistent structures . The limitation of this model is that the required sample may not exist or the tree distance may be very high , making those samples poor predictors . The implemented method ( Approach A ) indirectly attempts to find a training sample subtree which contains labels for all the arguments of the predicate.
It is expected for tree distances to be smaller than other subtrees that do not have information to label all the desired relations.
The system tries to get a consistent structure using a simple algorithm . Only in the case when using the nearest tree does not lead to labelling the whole structure , labels are predicted using multiple samples , thereby , risking the structure consistency.
Future implementations will rank possible candidate labels for each relation ( probably using multiple samples).
A ? joint scoring algorithm ?, which is commonly used ( Marquez et al 2008), can be applied for consistency checking after finding the rank probability for all the argument labels for the same predicate ( Approach D).
6 Experiments : the matching cost
The cost of matching two nodes is crucial to the performance of the system . Different atomic measures ( ways to measure the cost of matching two nodes ) that were tested are explained ahead.
Results for experiments using these atomic measures are given in Table 2.
6.1 Binary system
For Binary system , the atomic cost of matching two nodes is one if label POS or dependency relations are different , otherwise the cost is zero.
The atomic cost of inserting or deleting a node is always one . Note that the measure is totally based on the syntactic structure ( words are not used).
6.2 Ternary system
The next intuitive measure is how the system would perform in case of a ternary cost ( ternary system ). The atomic cost is half if POS or dependency relation is different , one if POS and dependency relation are different or zero in all other case . For this system , Table 2 shows a very similar accuracy to the binary one.
6.3 Hamming system
The atomic cost of matching two nodes is the sum of the following sub costs : 0.25 if POS is different.
0.25 if dependency relation is different.
0.25 if Lemma is different.
0.25 if one node is a predicate but the other is not or if both nodes are predicates but with different lemma.
The cost to create or delete nodes is one.
Note that the sum of all costs cannot be greater than one.
6.4 Predicate match system
The analysis of results for the previous systems shows that the accuracy is higher for the subtrees that are labelled using subtrees with the same predicate node . Consequently , this strategy attempts to force the predicate to be the same.
In this system , the atomic cost of matching two nodes is the sum of the following sub costs : 0.3 if dependency relation is different.
1 if one is a predicate and the other node is not or both nodes are predicates but with different lemma.
The cost to create or delete nodes is one.
6.5 Complex system
This strategy attempts to improve the accuracy by adding an extra label to the argument nodes and using it.
The atomic cost of matching two nodes is the sum of the following sub costs : 0.1 for each different label ( dependency relation or POS or lemma).
0.1 for each pair of different labels ( dependency relation or POS or lemma).
0.4 if one node is a predicate and the other is not.
0.4 if both nodes are predicates and lemma is different.
2 if one node is marked as an argument and the other is not or one node is marked as a predicate and the other is not.
The atomic cost of deleting or inserting a node is : two if the node is an argument or predicate node and one in any other case.
7 Results
Table 2 shows the accuracy of all the systems.
The validation data set is added to the training data set when the system is labelling the evaluation data set . This is a common methodology followed in CoNLL2009 ( Li et al 2009).

Accuracy is measured as the percentage of semantic labels correctly predicted.
The implementation of the Tree SRL system takes several days to run a single experiment . It makes non viable the idea of using the development data set for adjusting parameters and that is why , for the last three systems ( Hamming , Predicate Match and Complex ), the accuracy over the development data set is not measured . The same reason supports adding the development data set to the training data set without over fitting the system , because the development data set is not really used for adjusting parameters.
However , the observations of the system on the development data set shows : 1. If the complexity gets increased ( Ternary ), the number of cases having the multiple nearest subtrees gets reduced.
2. The output of the system only contains five per cent of inconsistent structures ( Binary and Ternary ), which is lower than expected.
0.5% of inconsistent subtrees were detected in the training dataset.
3. Higher accuracy for the relations where a subtree is labelled using a subtree sample which has the same predicate node . This has led to the design of the ? predicate match ? and the ? complex ? systems.
4. Some subtrees are very small ( just one node ). This resulted in low accuracy for they predicted labels due to multiple nearest neighbours.
It is surprising that the hamming measure reaches higher accuracy than the ? predicate match ?, which uses more information , and is also surprising that the accuracies for ? Hamming ?, ? Predicate Match ? and ? Complex ? systems are very similar.
The CoNLL2009 SRL shared task was evaluated on multiple languages : Catalan , Chinese , Czech , English , German , Japanese and Spanish.
Some results for those languages using ? Tree SRL System Binary ? are shown in Table 3.

Language Accuracy on evaluation
Training data set size in Mb
English 64.36% 56
Spanish 57.86% 46
Catalan 58.49% 43
Japanese 50.71% 8
German These languages had been excluded from the experiments because some of the sentences did not follow a dependency tree structure.
Czech
Chinese
Table 3: Accuracy for other languages ( Binary system ) The accuracy results for multiple languages suggest that the size of the corpora has a strong influence on the results of the system performance.
The results are not comparable with the rest of the CoNLL2009 systems because the task is different . This system does not identify arguments and does not perform predicate sense disambiguation.
System Evaluation Development Binary 64.36% 61.12%
Ternary 64.88% 61.28%
Hamming 78.01%
Predicate
Match 76.98%
Complex 78.98%
Table 2: System accuracy
The tree distance algorithm has been applied successfully to build a SRL system . Future work will focus on improving the performance of the system by : a ) trying to extend the subtrees which will contain more contextual information , b ) using different approaches to label semantic relations discussed in Section 5. Also , the system will be expanded to identify arguments using a tree distance algorithm.
Evaluating the task of identifying the arguments and labelling the relations separately will assist in determining which systems to combine to create an hybrid system with better performance.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the Science Foundation Ireland ( Grant 07/CE/I1142) as part of the Centre for Next Generation Localisation ( www.cngl.ie ) at Trinity College Dublin.
Thanks are due to Dr Martin Emms for his support on the development of this project.
References
Martin Emms . 2006. Variants of Tree Similarity in a Question Answering Task . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Linguistic Distances , held in conjunction with COLING 2006, 100?108, Sydney , Australia , Asociation for Computational Linguistics.
Jan Haji ?, Massimiliano Ciaramita , Richard Johansson , Daisuke Kawahara , Maria Antonia Mart ?, Luis M?rquez , Adam Meyers , Joakim Nivre , Sebastian Pad ?, Jan ? t?p?nek , Pavel Stravn?k , Mihai Surdeanu , Nianwen Xue and Yi Zhang . 2009. The CoNLL2009 shared task : syntactic and semantic dependencies in multiple languages . In CoNLL '09: Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning ( pp . 118). Morristown , NJ , USA : Association for Computational Linguistics.
Seokhwan Kim , Minwoo Jeong and Gary Geunbae Lee . 2009. A Local Tree Alignment-based Soft Pattern Matching Approach for Information Extraction . Proceedings of NAAACL HLT , 169-172. Boulder , Colorado , June 2009 Milen Kouylekov and Bernardo Magnini . 2005. Recognizing textual entailment with tree edit distance algorithms . In Recognizing Textual Entailment ( pp . 1720). Southampton , U.K.
Baoli Li , Martin Emms , Saturnino Luz and Carl Vogel . 2009. Exploring multilingual semantic role labeling . In CoNLL '09: Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning ( pp . 73-78). Morristown , NJ , USA : Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mitchell Marcus , Beatrice Santorini and Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz . 1994. Building a large annotated corpus of English : The Penn Treebank.
Computational linguistics , 19(2), 313?330.
Alessandro Moschitti , Daniele Pighin and Roberto Basili . 2008. Tree kernels for semantic role labeling . Computational Linguistics , 34(2), 193-224. Cambridge , MA , USA : MIT Press.
Lluis M?rquez , Xavier Carreras , Kenneth . C.
Litkowski and Suzanne Stevenson . 2008. Semantic Role Labeling : An Introduction to the Special Issue . Computational Linguistics , 34(2), 145-159.
Martha Palmer , Paul Kingsbury and Daniel Gildea.
2005. The Proposition Bank : An Annotated Corpus of Semantic Roles . Computational Linguistics , 31(1), 71-106.
Vasin Punyakanok , Dan Roth and Wentau Yih . 2004.
Mapping dependencies trees : An application to question answering . In Proceedings of
AI\&Math 2004 ( pp . 110). Ford.
Dennis Shasha and Kaizhong Zhang . 1990. Fast algorithms for the unit cost editing distance between trees . J . Algorithms , 11(4), 581-621. Duluth , MN , USA : Academic Press , Inc.
Kuo-Chung Tai . 1979. The Tree-to-Tree Correction Problem . J . ACM , 26(3), 422-433. New
York , NY , USA : ACM.
Kaizhong Zhang and Dennis Shasha . 1989. Simple fast algorithms for the editing distance between trees and related problems . SIAM J.
Comput ., 18(6), 1245-1262. Philadelphia , PA , USA : Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
84
