Proceedings of the ACL 2010 System Demonstrations , pages 72?77,
Uppsala , Sweden , 13 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Demonstration of a prototype for a Conversational Companion for reminiscing about images Yorick Wilks IHMC , Florida ywilks@ihmc.us Roberta Catizone University of Sheffield , UK r.catizone@dcs.shef.ac.uk Alexiei Dingli University of Malta , Malta alexiei.dingli@um.edu.mt Weiwei Cheng University of Sheffield , UK w.cheng@dcs.shef.ac.uk Abstract
This paper describes an initial prototype demonstrator of a Companion , designed as a platform for novel approaches to the following : 1) The use of Information Extraction ( IE ) techniques to extract the content of incoming dialogue utterances after an Automatic Speech Recognition ( ASR ) phase , 2) The conversion of the input to Resource Descriptor Format ( RDF ) to allow the generation of new facts from existing ones , under the control of a Dialogue Manger ( DM ), that also has access to stored knowledge and to open knowledge accessed in real time from the web , all in RDF form , 3) A DM implemented as a stack and network virtual machine that models mixed initiative in dialogue control , and 4) A tuned dialogue act detector based on corpus evidence . The prototype platform was evaluated , and we describe this briefly ; it is also designed to support more extensive forms of emotion detection carried by both speech and lexical content , as well as extended forms of machine learning . 1. Introduction This demonstrator Senior Companion ( SC ) was built during the initial phase of the Companions project and aims to change the way we think about the relationships of people to computers and the internet by developing a virtual conversational ' Companion that will be an agent or ' presence ' that stays with the user for long periods of time , developing a relationship and ' knowing its owners ? preferences and wishes . The Companion communicates with the user primarily through speech , but also using other technologies such as touch screens and sensors . This paper describes the functionality and system modules of the Senior Companion , one of two initial prototypes built in the first two years of the project . The SC provides a multimodal interface for eliciting , retrieving and inferring personal information from elderly users by means of conversation about their photographs . The Companion , through conversation , elicits life memo-
ries and reminiscences , often prompted by discussion of their photographs ; the aim is that the Companion should come to know a great deal about its user , their tastes , likes , dislikes , emotional reactions etc , through long periods of conversation . It is assumed that most life information will soon be stored on the internet ( as in the Memories for Life project : http://www.memoriesforlife.org /) and we have linked the SC directly to photo inventories in Facebook ( see below ). The overall aim of the SC project ( not yet achieved ) is to produce a coherent life narrative for its user from conversations about personal photos , although its shortterm goals , reported here , are to assist , amuse and entertain the user . The technical content of the project is to use a number of types of machine learning ( ML ) to achieve these ends in original ways , initially using a methodology developed in earlier research : first , by means of an Information Extraction ( IE ) approach to deriving content from user input utterances ; secondly , using a training method for attaching Dialogue Acts to these utterance and , lastly , using a specific type of dialogue manager ( DM ) that uses Dialogue Action Forms ( DAF ) to determine the context of any utterance . A stack of these DAFs is the virtual machine that models the ongoing dialogue by means of shared user and Companion initiative and generates appropriate responses . In this description of the demo , we shall : ? describe the current SC prototype?s functionality ; ? set out its architecture and modules , focusing on the Natural Language Understanding module and the Dialogue Manager . A mini-version of the demo running in real time can be seen at : URL SC : How do you know Octavia ? U : She's my daughter . SC : Aha ! I see . Octavia's sister is Zoe . SC : How old was your daughter Octavia when this photo was taken ? U : Octavia was 19 years old . SC : What was the occasion of this photo ? U : This was another family holiday . SC : Where was this photo taken ? U : This photo was taken in Tanzania . SC : have you ever been to Zanzibar ? U : Yes , I have . SC : Great place , I hope you saw the beaches . When was this photo taken ? U : last year . It is a key feature of the SC that it can make simple inferences from family relationships it already knows ( e.g . that daughters of the same parent are siblings ) and that it can access realtime information about places to show that it has some knowledge of what is being talked about , in this case the beaches on Zanzibar , and how this is done is discussed below . This real time access to unconstrained place information on the internet is an attempt to break out of classic AI systems that only know the budget of facts they have been primed with . This basic system provides the components for future development of the SC , as well as its main use as a device to generate more conversation data for machine learning research in the future . Key features of the SC are listed below followed by a description of the system architecture and modules . The SC : ? Contains a visually appealing multimodal interface with a character avatar to mediate the system?s functionality to the user . ? Interacts with the user using multiple modalities ? speech and touch . ? Includes face detection software for identifying the position of faces in the photos . ? Accepts preannotated ( XML ) photo inventories as a means for creating richer dialogues more quickly . ? Engages in conversation with the user about topics within the photo domain : when and where the photo was taken , discussion of the people in the photo including their relationships to the user . ? Reads news from three categories : politics , business and sports.
73 ? Tells jokes taken from an internet-based joke website . ? Retains all user input for reference in repeat user sessions , in addition to the knowledge base that has been updated by the Dialogue Manager on the basis of what was said . ? Contains a fully integrated Knowledge Base for maintaining user information including : o Ontological information which is exploited by the Dialogue Manager and provides domain-specific relations between fundamental concepts . o A mechanism for storing information in a triple store ( Subject-Predicate-Object ) - the RDF Semantic Web format - for handling unexpected user input that falls outside of the photo domain , e.g . arbitrary locations in which photos might have been taken . o A reasoning module for reasoning over the Knowledge Base and world knowledge obtained in RDF format from the internet ; the SC is thus a primitive Semantic Web device ( see refernce8, 2008) ? Contains basic photo management capability allowing the user , in conversation , to select photos as well as display a set of photos with a particular feature.
Figure 1: The Senior Companion Interface 3. System Architecture In this section we will review the components of the SC architecture . As can be seen from Figure 2, the architecture contains three abstract level components ? Connectors , Input Handlers and Application Services ? together with the Dialogue Manager and the Natural Language Understander ( NLU).
Figure 2: Senior Companion system architecture Connectors form a communication bridge between the core system and external applications . The external application refers to any modules or systems which provide a specific set of functionalities that might be changed in the future . There is one connector for each external application . It hides the underlying complex communication protocol details and provides a general interface for the main system to use . This abstraction decouples the connection of external and internal modules and makes changing and adding new external modules easier . At this moment , there are two connectors in the system ? Napier Interface Connector and CrazyTalk Avatar Connector . Both of them are using network sockets to send/receive messages . Input Handlers are a set of modules for processing messages according to message types . Each handler deals with a category of messages where categories are coarse-grained and could include one or more message types . The handlers separate the code handling inputs into different places and make the code easier to locate and change . Three handlers have been implemented in the Senior Companion system ? Setup Handler , Dragon Events Handler and General Handler . The Setup Handler is responsible for loading the photo annotations if any , performing face detection if no annotation file is associated with the photo and checking the Knowledge Base in case The Reasoner is used to perform inference on existing knowledge in the Knowledge Base ( see example in next section ). The Output Manager deals with sending messages to external applications . It has been implemented in a publisher/subscriber fashion . There are three different channels in the system : the text channel , the interface command channel and the avatar command channel . Those channels could be subscribed to by any connectors and handled respectively . 4. Dialogue understanding and inference Every utterance is passed through the Natural Language Understanding ( NLU ) module for processing . This module uses a set of well-established natural language processing tools such as those found in the GATE ( Cunningham , et al , 1997) system . The basic processes carried out by GATE are : tokenizing , sentence splitting , POS tagging , parsing and Named Entity Recognition . These components have been further enhanced for the SC system by adding 1) new and improved gazetteers including family relations and 2) accompanying extraction rules . The Named Entity ( NE ) recognizer is a key part of the NLU module and recognizes the significant entities required to process dialogue in the photo domain : PERSON NAMES , LOCATION NAMES , FAMILY RELATIONS and DATES . Although GATE recognizes basic entities , more complex entities are not handled . Apart from the gazetteers mentioned earlier and the hundreds of extraction rules already present in GATE , about 20 new extraction rules using the JAPE rule language were also developed for the SC module . These included rules which identify complex dates , family relationships , negations and other information related to the SC domain . The following is an example of a simple rule used to identify relationship in utterances such as ? Mary is my sister ?: Macro : RELATIONSHIP_IDENTIFIER ( ({ To-ken.category=="PRP$"}|{Token.category=="PRP"}|{Lookup.majorType=="person_first"}):person2 ({ Token.string=="is "}) ({ Token.string=="my"}):person1 ({ Lookup.minorType=="Relationship"}):relationship ) Uncle Inference Rule : (? a sisterOf ? b ), (? x sonOf ? a ), (? b gender male ) -> (? b uncleOf ? x ) Triples : ( Mary sisterOf John ) ( Tom sonOf Mary ) Triples produced automatically by ANNIE ( the semantic tagger ): ( John gender male ) Inference : ( Mary sisterOf John ) ( Tom sonOf Mary ) ( John gender male ) -> ( John uncleOf Tom ) This kind of inference is already used by the SC and we have about 50 inference rules aimed at producing new data on the relationships domain . This combination of triple store , inference engine and inference rules makes a system which is weak but powerful enough to mimic human reasoning in this domain and thus simulate basic intelligence in the SC . For our prototype , we are using the JENA Semantic Web Framework for the inference engine together with a MySQL database as the knowledge base . However , this system of family relationships is not enough to cover all the possible topics which can crop up during a conversation and , in such circumstances , the DM switches to an open-world model and instructs the NLU to seek further information online . 5. The Hybrid-world approach When the DM requests further information on a particular topic , the NLU first checks with the KB whether the topic is about something known . At this stage , we have to keep in mind that any topic requested by the DM should be already in the KB since it was preprocessed by the NLU when it was mentioned in the utterance . So , if the user informs the system that the photograph was taken in Paris , ( in response to a system question asking where the photo was taken ), the utterance is first processed by the NLU which discovers that ? Paris ? is a location using its semantic tagger ANNIE ( A Nearly New Information Extraction engine ). The semantic tagger makes use of gazetteers and IE rules in order to accomplish Again , there are established measures for the assessment of dialogue programs but they have all been developed for standard task-based dialogues and the SC is not of that type : there is no specific task either in reminiscing conversations , nor in the elicitation of the content of photos , that can be assessed in standard ways , since there is no clear point at which an informal dialogue need stop , having been completed . Conventional dialogue evaluations often use measures like ? stickiness ? to determine how much a user will stay with or stick with a dialogue system and not leave it , presumably because they are disappointed or find it lacking in some feature . But it is hard to separate that feature out from a task rapidly and effectively completed , where stickiness would be low not high . Traum ( Traum et al , 2004) has developed a methodology for dialogue evaluation based on ? appropriateness ? of responses and the Companions project has developed a model of evaluation for the SC based on that ( Benyon et al , 2008). Acknowledgement This work was funded by the Companions project (2006-2009) sponsored by the European Commission as part of the Information Society Technologies ( IST ) programme under EC grant number IST-FP6-034434. References David Benyon , Prem Hansen and Nick Webb , 2008. Evaluating HumanComputer Conversation in Companions . In : Proc.4th International Workshop on HumanComputer Conversation , Bellagio , Italy . Cem Akkaya , Jan Wiebe , and Rada Mihalcea ,. 2009. Subjectivity Word Sense Disambiguation , In : EMNLP 2009. Hamish Cunningham , Kevin Humphreys , Robert Gaizauskas , and Yorick Wilks , 1997. GATE -- a TIPSTER based General Architecture for Text Engineering . In : Proceedings of the TIPSTER Text Program ( Phase III ) 6 Month Workshop . Morgan Kaufmann , CA . David Traum , Susan Robinson , and Jens Stephan . 2004. Evaluation of multiparty virtual reality dialogue interaction , In : Proceedings of Fourth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation ( LREC 2004), pp.1699-1702 Yorick Wilks ( ed .) 2010. Artificial Companions in Society : scientific , economic , psychological and philosophical perspectives . John Benjamins : Amsterdam.
77
