Tutorial Abstracts of ACL 2010, page 2,
Uppsala , Sweden , 11 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Tree-based and Forestbased Translation
Yang Liu
Institute of Computing Technology
Chinese Academy of Sciences
yliu@ict.ac.cn
Liang Huang
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
lhuang@isi.edu
1 Introduction
The past several years have witnessed rapid advances in syntaxbased machine translation , which exploits natural language syntax to guide translation . Depending on the type of input , most of these efforts can be divided into two broad categories : ( a ) string-based systems whose input is a string , which is simultaneously parsed and translated by a synchronous grammar ( Wu , 1997; Chiang , 2005; Galley et al , 2006), and ( b ) tree-based systems whose input is already a parse tree to be directly converted into a target tree or string ( Lin , 2004; Ding and Palmer , 2005; Quirk et al , 2005; Liu et al ., 2006; Huang et al , 2006).
Compared with their string-based counterparts , tree-based systems offer many attractive features : they are much faster in decoding ( linear time vs.
cubic time ), do not require sophisticated binarization ( Zhang et al , 2006), and can use separate grammars for parsing and translation ( e.g . a contextfree grammar for the former and a tree substitution grammar for the latter).
However , despite these advantages , most tree-based systems suffer from a major drawback : they only use 1best parse trees to direct translation , which potentially introduces translation mistakes due to parsing errors ( Quirk and Corston-Oliver , 2006). This situation becomes worse for resource-poor source languages without enough Treebank data to train a high-accuracy parser.
This problem can be alleviated elegantly by using packed forests ( Huang , 2008), which encodes exponentially many parse trees in a polynomial space . Forestbased systems ( Mi et al , 2008; Mi and Huang , 2008) thus take a packed forest instead of a parse tree as an input . In addition , packed forests could also be used for translation rule extraction , which helps alleviate the propagation of parsing errors into rule set . Forestbased translation can be regarded as a compromise between the string-based and tree-based methods , while combining the advantages of both : decoding is still fast , yet does not commit to a single parse . Surprisingly , translating a forest of millions of trees is even faster than translating 30 individual trees , and offers significantly better translation quality.
This approach has since become a popular topic.
2 Content Overview
This tutorial surveys tree-based and forest-based translation methods . For each approach , we will discuss the two fundamental tasks : decoding , which performs the actual translation , and rule extraction , which learns translation rules from realworld data automatically . Finally , we will introduce some more recent developments to tree-based and forest-based translation , such as tree sequence based models , tree-to-tree models , joint parsing and translation , and faster decoding algorithms . We will conclude our talk by pointing out some directions for future work.
3 Tutorial Overview 1. Tree-based Translation ? Motivations and Overview ? Tree-to-String Model and Decoding ? Tree-to-String Rule Extraction ? Language Model-Integrated Decoding:
Cube Pruning 2. Forestbased Translation ? Packed Forest ? Forestbased Decoding ? Forestbased Rule Extraction 3. Extensions ? Tree-Sequence-to-String Models ? Tree-to-Tree Models ? Joint Parsing and Translation ? Faster Decoding Methods 4. Conclusion and Open Problems
