Tutorial Abstracts of ACL 2010, page 3,
Uppsala , Sweden , 11 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Discourse Structure : Theory , Practice and Use
Bonnie Webber ,? Markus Egg ,? Valia Kordoni?
? University of Edinburgh ? Humboldt University ? Saarland University bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk markus.egg@anglistik.hu-berlin.de kordoni@dfki.de 1 Introduction This tutorial aims to provide attendees with a clear notion of how discourse structure is relevant for language technology ( LT ), what is needed for exploiting discourse structure , what methods and resources are available to support its use , and what more could be done in the future.
2 Content Overview
This tutorial consists of four parts . Part I starts with a brief introduction to different bases for discourse structuring , properties of discourse structure that are relevant to LT , and accessible evidence for discourse structure.
For discourse structure to be useful for language technologies , one must be able to automatically recognize or generate with it . Hence , Part II surveys computational approaches to recognizing and generating discourse structure , both manually-authored approaches and ones developed through
Machine Learning.
Part III of the tutorial describes applications of discourse structure recognition and generation in LT , as well as discourse-related resources being made available in English , German , Turkish , Hindi , Czech , Arabic and Chinese . Part IV concludes with a list of future possibilities.
3 Tutorial Outline 1. PART I ? General Overview ( a ) Bases for structure in monologic , dialogic and multiparty discourse ( b ) Aspects of discourse structure relevant to Language Technology ( c ) Evidence for discource structure 2. PART II ? Computational Recognition and
Generation of discourse structure ( a ) Discourse chunking and parsing ( b ) Recognizing arguments and sense of discourse connectives ( c ) Recognizing and generating entity-based discourse structure ( d ) Dialogue parsing 3. PART III ? Applications and Resources ( a ) Applications to Language Technology ( b ) Discourse structure resources ( monolingual and multilingual ) 4. PART IV ? Future Developments 4 References ? Regina Barzilay and Lillian Lee (2004). Catching the Drift : Probabilistic Content Models , with Applications to Generation and Summarization . Proc . 2nd Human Language Technology Conference and Annual Meeting of the North American Chapter , Association for Computational Linguistics , pp.
113-120.
? Regina Barzilay and Mirella Lapata (2008). Modeling Local Coherence : An Entity-based Approach . Computational
Linguistics 34(1), pp . 134.
? Daniel Marcu (2000). The theory and practice of discourse parsing and summarization . Cambridge : MIT Press.
? Umangi Oza , Rashmi Prasad , Sudheer Kolachina , Dipti Misra Sharma and Aravind Joshi (2009). The Hindi Discourse Relation Bank . Proc . Third Linguistic Annotation
Workshop ( LAW III ). Singapore.
? Rashmi Prasad , Nikhil Dinesh , Alan Lee , Eleni Miltsakaki et al (2008). The Penn Discourse TreeBank 2.0. Proc . 6th Int?l Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation.
? Manfred Stede (2008). RST revisited : Disentangling nuclearity . In Cathrine Fabricius-Hansen and Wiebke Ramm ( eds .), Subordination versus Coordination in Sentence and
Text . Amsterdam : John Benjamins.
? Ben Wellner (2008). Sequence Models and Ranking Methods for Discourse Parsing . Brandeis University.
? Deniz Zeyrek , ? Umit Deniz Turan , Cem Bozsahin , Ruket C?akici et al (2009). Annotating Subordinators in the Turkish Discourse Bank . Proc . Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop ( LAW III ). Singapore.
3
