Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 1583?1592,
Uppsala , Sweden , 1116 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Beyond NomBank:
A Study of Implicit Arguments for Nominal Predicates
Matthew Gerber and Joyce Y . Chai
Department of Computer Science
Michigan State University
East Lansing , Michigan , USA
{gerberm2,jchai}@cse.msu.edu
Abstract
Despite its substantial coverage , Nom-
Bank does not account for all within-sentence arguments and ignores extrasentential arguments altogether . These arguments , which we call implicit , are important to semantic processing , and their recovery could potentially benefit many NLP applications . We present a study of implicit arguments for a select group of frequent nominal predicates . We show that implicit arguments are pervasive for these predicates , adding 65% to the coverage of
NomBank . We demonstrate the feasibility of recovering implicit arguments with a supervised classification model . Our results and analyses provide a baseline for future work on this emerging task.
1 Introduction
Verbal and nominal semantic role labeling ( SRL ) have been studied independently of each other ( Carreras and Ma`rquez , 2005; Gerber et al , 2009) as well as jointly ( Surdeanu et al , 2008; Hajic ? et al ., 2009). These studies have demonstrated the maturity of SRL within an evaluation setting that restricts the argument search space to the sentence containing the predicate of interest . However , as shown by the following example from the Penn TreeBank ( Marcus et al , 1993), this restriction excludes extrasentential arguments : (1) [ arg0 The two companies ] [ pred produce ] [ arg1 market pulp , containerboard and white paper ]. The goods could be manufactured closer to customers , saving [ pred shipping ] costs.
The first sentence in Example 1 includes the PropBank ( Kingsbury et al , 2002) analysis of the verbal predicate produce , where arg0 is the agentive producer and arg1 is the produced entity . The second sentence contains an instance of the nominal predicate shipping that is not associated with arguments in NomBank ( Meyers , 2007).
From the sentences in Example 1, the reader can infer that The two companies refers to the agents ( arg0) of the shipping predicate . The reader can also infer that market pulp , containerboard and white paper refers to the shipped entities ( arg1 of shipping).1 These extrasentential arguments have not been annotated for the shipping predicate and cannot be identified by a system that restricts the argument search space to the sentence containing the predicate . NomBank also ignores many within-sentence arguments . This is shown in the second sentence of Example 1, where The goods can be interpreted as the arg1 of shipping.
These examples demonstrate the presence of arguments that are not included in NomBank and cannot easily be identified by systems trained on the resource . We refer to these arguments as implicit.
This paper presents our study of implicit arguments for nominal predicates . We began our study by annotating implicit arguments for a select group of predicates . For these predicates , we found that implicit arguments add 65% to the existing role coverage of NomBank.2 This increase has implications for tasks ( e.g ., question answering , information extraction , and summarization ) that benefit from semantic analysis . Using our annotations , we constructed a feature-based model for automatic implicit argument identification that unifies standard verbal and nominal SRL . Our results indicate a 59% relative (15-point absolute ) gain in F1 over an informed baseline . Our analyses highlight strengths and weaknesses of the approach , providing insights for future work on this emerging task.
1In PropBank and NomBank , the interpretation of each role ( e.g ., arg0) is specific to a predicate sense.
2Role coverage indicates the percentage of roles filled.
1583
In the following section , we review related research , which is historically sparse but recently gaining traction . We present our annotation effort in Section 3, and follow with our implicit argument identification model in Section 4. In Section 5, we describe the evaluation setting and present our experimental results . We analyze these results in Section 6 and conclude in Section 7.
2 Related work
Palmer et al (1986) made one of the earliest attempts to automatically recover extrasentential arguments . Their approach used a finegrained domain model to assess the compatibility of candidate arguments and the slots needing to be filled.
A phenomenon similar to the implicit argument has been studied in the context of Japanese anaphora resolution , where a missing case-marked constituent is viewed as a zero-anaphoric expression whose antecedent is treated as the implicit argument of the predicate of interest . This behavior has been annotated manually by Iida et al (2007), and researchers have applied standard SRL techniques to this corpus , resulting in systems that are able to identify missing case-marked expressions in the surrounding discourse ( Imamura et al ., 2009). Sasano et al (2004) conducted similar work with Japanese indirect anaphora . The authors used automatically derived nominal case frames to identify antecedents . However , as noted by Iida et al , grammatical cases do not stand in a one-to-one relationship with semantic roles in Japanese ( the same is true for English).
Fillmore and Baker (2001) provided a detailed case study of implicit arguments ( termed null instantiations in that work ), but did not provide concrete methods to account for them automatically.
Previously , we demonstrated the importance of filtering out nominal predicates that take no local arguments ( Gerber et al , 2009); however , this work did not address the identification of implicit arguments . Burchardt et al (2005) suggested approaches to implicit argument identification based on observed coreference patterns ; however , the authors did not implement and evaluate such methods . We draw insights from all three of these studies . We show that the identification of implicit arguments for nominal predicates leads to fuller semantic interpretations when compared to traditional SRL methods . Furthermore , motivated by Burchardt et al , our model uses a quantitative analysis of naturally occurring coreference patterns to aid implicit argument identification.
Most recently , Ruppenhofer et al (2009) conducted SemEval Task 10, ? Linking Events and Their Participants in Discourse ?, which evaluated implicit argument identification systems over a common test set . The task organizers annotated implicit arguments across entire passages , resulting in data that cover many distinct predicates , each associated with a small number of annotated instances . In contrast , our study focused on a select group of nominal predicates , each associated with a large number of annotated instances.
3 Data annotation and analysis 3.1 Data annotation Implicit arguments have not been annotated within the Penn TreeBank , which is the textual and syntactic basis for NomBank . Thus , to facilitate our study , we annotated implicit arguments for instances of nominal predicates within the standard training , development , and testing sections of the TreeBank . We limited our attention to nominal predicates with unambiguous role sets ( i.e ., senses ) that are derived from verbal role sets . We then ranked this set of predicates using two pieces of information : (1) the average difference between the number of roles expressed in nominal form ( in NomBank ) versus verbal form ( in PropBank ) and (2) the frequency of the nominal form in the corpus . We assumed that the former gives an indication as to how many implicit roles an instance of the nominal predicate might have . The product of (1) and (2) thus indicates the potential prevalence of implicit arguments for a predicate . To focus our study , we ranked the predicates in NomBank according to this product and selected the top ten , shown in Table 1.
We annotated implicit arguments document-by-document , selecting all singular and plural nouns derived from the predicates in Table 1. For each missing argument position of each predicate instance , we inspected the local discourse for a suitable implicit argument . We limited our attention to the current sentence as well as all preceding sentences in the document , annotating all mentions of an implicit argument within this window.
In the remainder of this paper , we will use iargn to refer to an implicit argument position n . We will use argn to refer to an argument provided by PropBank or NomBank . We will use p to mark
Role average
Predicate # Role coverage (%) Noun Verb Role coverage (%) Noun role average price 217 42.4 1.7 1.7 55.3 2.2 sale 185 24.3 1.2 2.0 42.0 2.1 investor 160 35.0 1.1 2.0 54.6 1.6 fund 109 8.7 0.4 2.0 21.6 0.9 loss 104 33.2 1.3 2.0 46.9 1.9 plan 102 30.9 1.2 1.8 49.3 2.0 investment 102 15.7 0.5 2.0 33.3 1.0 cost 101 26.2 1.1 2.3 47.5 1.9 bid 88 26.9 0.8 2.2 72.0 2.2 loan 85 22.4 1.1 2.5 41.2 2.1
Overall 1,253 28.0 1.1 2.0 46.2 1.8
Table 1: Predicates targeted for annotation . The second column gives the number of predicate instances annotated . Pre-annotation numbers only include NomBank annotations , whereas Post-annotation numbers include NomBank and implicit argument annotations . Role coverage indicates the percentage of roles filled . Role average indicates how many roles , on average , are filled for an instance of a predicate?s noun form or verb form within the TreeBank . Verbal role averages were computed using PropBank.
predicate instances . Below , we give an example annotation for an instance of the investment predicate : (2) [ iarg0 Participants ] will be able to transfer [ iarg1 money ] to [ iarg2 other investment funds ]. The [ p investment ] choices are limited to [ iarg2 a stock fund and a money-market fund].
NomBank does not associate this instance of investment with any arguments ; however , we were able to identify the investor ( iarg0), the thing invested ( iarg1), and two mentions of the thing invested in ( iarg2).
Our data set was also independently annotated by an undergraduate linguistics student . For each missing argument position , the student was asked to identify the closest acceptable implicit argument within the current and preceding sentences.
The argument position was left unfilled if no acceptable constituent could be found . For a missing argument position , the student?s annotation agreed with our own if both identified the same constituent or both left the position unfilled . Analysis indicated an agreement of 67% using Cohen?s kappa coefficient ( Cohen , 1960).
3.2 Annotation analysis
Role coverage for a predicate instance is equal to the number of filled roles divided by the number of roles in the predicate?s lexicon entry . Role coverage for the marked predicate in Example 2 is 0/3 for NomBank-only arguments and 3/3 when the annotated implicit arguments are also considered . Returning to Table 1, the third column gives role coverage percentages for NomBank-only arguments . The sixth column gives role coverage percentages when both NomBank arguments and the annotated implicit arguments are considered.
Overall , the addition of implicit arguments created a 65% relative (18-point absolute ) gain in role coverage across the 1,253 predicate instances that we annotated.
The predicates in Table 1 are typically associated with fewer arguments on average than their corresponding verbal predicates . When considering NomBank-only arguments , this difference ( compare columns four and five ) varies from zero ( for price ) to a factor of five ( for fund ). When implicit arguments are included in the comparison , these differences are reduced and many nominal predicates express approximately the same number of arguments on average as their verbal counterparts ( compare the fifth and seventh columns).
In addition to role coverage and average count , we examined the location of implicit arguments.
Figure 1 shows that approximately 56% of the implicit arguments in our data can be resolved within the sentence containing the predicate . The remaining implicit arguments require up to forty-six sen-0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
I m p l i c i t a r g u m e n t s r e s o l v e d Figure 1: Location of implicit arguments . For missing argument positions with an implicit filler , the y-axis indicates the likelihood of the filler being found at least once in the previous x sentences.
tences for resolution ; however , a vast majority of these can be resolved within the previous few sentences . Section 6 discusses implications of this skewed distribution.
4 Implicit argument identification 4.1 Model formulation In our study , we assumed that each sentence in a document had been analyzed for PropBank and NomBank predicate-argument structure . NomBank includes a lexicon listing the possible argument positions for a predicate , allowing us to identify missing argument positions with a simple lookup . Given a nominal predicate instance p with a missing argument position iargn , the task is to search the surrounding discourse for a constituent c that fills iargn . Our model conducts this search over all constituents annotated by either PropBank or NomBank with non-adjunct labels.
A candidate constituent c will often form a coreference chain with other constituents in the discourse . Consider the following abridged sentences , which are adjacent in their Penn TreeBank document : (3) [ Mexico ] desperately needs investment.
(4) Conservative Japanese investors are put off by [ Mexico?s ] investment regulations.
(5) Japan is the fourth largest investor in [ c Mexico ], with 5% of the total [ p investments].
NomBank does not associate the labeled instance of investment with any arguments , but it is clear from the surrounding discourse that constituent c ( referring to Mexico ) is the thing being invested in ( the iarg2). When determining whether c is the iarg2 of investment , one can draw evidence from other mentions in c?s coreference chain . Example 3 states that Mexico needs investment . Example 4 states that Mexico regulates investment . These propositions , which can be derived via traditional SRL analyses , should increase our confidence that c is the iarg2 of investment in Example 5.
Thus , the unit of classification for a candidate constituent c is the three-tuple ? p , iargn , c ??, where c ? is a coreference chain comprising c and its coreferent constituents.3 We defined a binary classification function Pr (+| ? p , iargn , c ??) that predicts the probability that the entity referred to by c fills the missing argument position iargn of predicate instance p . In the remainder of this paper , we will refer to c as the primary filler , differentiating it from other mentions in the coreference chain c ?. In the following section , we present the feature set used to represent each three-tuple within the classification function.
4.2 Model features
Starting with a wide range of features , we performed floating forward feature selection ( Pudil et al , 1994) over heldout development data comprising implicit argument annotations from section 24 of the Penn TreeBank . As part of the feature selection process , we conducted a grid search for the best perclass cost within LibLinear?s logistic regression solver ( Fan et al , 2008). This was done to reduce the negative effects of data imbalance , which is severe even when selecting candidates from the current and previous few sentences . Table 2 shows the selected features , which are quite different from those used in our previous work to identify traditional semantic arguments ( Gerber et al ., 2009).4 Below , we give further explanations for some of the features.
Feature 1 models the semantic role relationship between each mention in c ? and the missing argument position iargn . To reduce data sparsity , this feature generalizes predicates and argument positions to their VerbNet ( Kipper , 2005) classes and 3We used OpenNLP for coreference identification : http://opennlp.sourceforge.net 4We have omitted many of the lowest-ranked features.
Descriptions of these features can be obtained by contacting the authors.
1586 # Feature value description 1* For every f , the VerbNet class/role of pf / argf concatenated with the class/role of p/iargn.
2* Average pointwise mutual information between ? p , iargn ? and any ? pf , argf ?.
3 Percentage of all f that are definite noun phrases.
4 Minimum absolute sentence distance from any f to p.
5* Minimum pointwise mutual information between ? p , iargn ? and any ? pf , argf ?.
6 Frequency of the nominal form of p within the document that contains it.
7 Nominal form of p concatenated with iargn.
8 Nominal form of p concatenated with the sorted integer argument indexes from all argn of p.
9 Number of mentions in c?.
10* Head word of p?s right sibling node.
11 For every f , the synset ( Fellbaum , 1998) for the head of f concatenated with p and iargn.
12 Part of speech of the head of p?s parent node.
13 Average absolute sentence distance from any f to p.
14* Discourse relation whose two discourse units cover c ( the primary filler ) and p.
15 Number of left siblings of p.
16 Whether p is the head of its parent node.
17 Number of right siblings of p.
Table 2: Features for determining whether c fills iargn of predicate p . For each mention f ( denoting a f iller ) in the coreference chain c ?, we define pf and argf to be the predicate and argument position of f .
Features are sorted in descending order of feature selection gain . Unless otherwise noted , all predicates were normalized to their verbal form and all argument positions ( e.g ., argn and iargn ) were interpreted as labels instead of word content . Features marked with an asterisk are explained in Section 4.2.
semantic roles using SemLink.5 For explanation purposes , consider again Example 1, where we are trying to fill the iarg0 of shipping . Let c ? contain a single mention , The two companies , which is the arg0 of produce . As described in Table 2, feature 1 is instantiated with a value of create.agent-send.agent , where create and send are the VerbNet classes that contain produce and ship , respectively.
In the conversion to LibLinear?s instance representation , this instantiation is converted into a single binary feature create.agent-send.agent whose value is one . Features 1 and 11 are instantiated once for each mention in c ?, allowing the model to consider information from multiple mentions of the same entity.
Features 2 and 5 are inspired by the work of Chambers and Jurafsky (2008), who investigated unsupervised learning of narrative event sequences using pointwise mutual information ( PMI ) between syntactic positions . We used a similar PMI score , but defined it with respect to semantic arguments instead of syntactic dependencies . Thus , the values for features 2 and 5 are computed as follows ( the notation is explained in 5http://verbs.colorado.edu/semlink the caption for Table 2): pmi(?p , iargn ? , ? pf , argf ?) = log
Pcoref (? p , iargn ? , ? pf , argf ?)
Pcoref (? p , iargn ? , ?) Pcoref (? pf , argf ? , ?) (6) To compute Equation 6, we first labeled a subset of the Gigaword corpus ( Graff , 2003) using the verbal SRL system of Punyakanok et al (2008) and the nominal SRL system of Gerber et al (2009).
We then identified coreferent pairs of arguments using OpenNLP . Suppose the resulting data has N coreferential pairs of argument positions . Also suppose that M of these pairs comprise ? p , argn ? and ? pf , argf ?. The numerator in Equation 6 is defined as MN . Each term in the denominator is obtained similarly , except that M is computed as the total number of coreference pairs comprising an argument position ( e.g ., ? p , argn ?) and any other argument position . Like Chambers and Jurafsky , we also used the discounting method suggested by Pantel and Ravichandran (2004) for low-frequency observations . The PMI score is somewhat noisy due to imperfect output , but it provides information that is useful for classification.
1587
Feature 10 does not depend on c ? and is specific to each predicate . Consider the following example : (7) Statistics Canada reported that its [ arg1 industrial-product ] [ p price ] index dropped 2% in September.
The ?[ p price ] index ? collocation is rarely associated with an arg0 in NomBank or with an iarg0 in our annotations ( both argument positions denote the seller ). Feature 10 accounts for this type of behavior by encoding the syntactic head of p?s right sibling . The value of feature 10 for Example 7 is price:index . Contrast this with the following : (8) [ iarg0 The company ] is trying to prevent further [ p price ] drops.
The value of feature 10 for Example 8 is price:drop . This feature captures an important distinction between the two uses of price : the former rarely takes an iarg0, whereas the latter often does . Features 12 and 1517 account for predicate-specific behaviors in a similar manner.
Feature 14 identifies the discourse relation ( if any ) that holds between the candidate constituent c and the filled predicate p . Consider the following example : (9) [ iarg0 SFE Technologies ] reported a net loss of $889,000 on sales of $23.4 million.
(10) That compared with an operating [ p loss ] of [ arg1 $1.9 million ] on sales of $27.4 million in the year-earlier period.
In this case , a comparison discourse relation ( signaled by the underlined text ) holds between the first and sentence sentence . The coherence provided by this relation encourages an inference that identifies the marked iarg0 ( the loser ). Throughout our study , we used goldstandard discourse relations provided by the Penn Discourse TreeBank ( Prasad et al , 2008).
5 Evaluation
We trained the feature-based logistic regression model over 816 annotated predicate instances associated with 650 implicitly filled argument positions ( not all predicate instances had implicit arguments ). During training , a candidate three-tuple ? p , iargn , c ?? was given a positive label if the candidate implicit argument c ( the primary filler ) was annotated as filling the missing argument position.
To factor out errors from standard SRL analyses , the model used goldstandard argument labels provided by PropBank and NomBank . As shown in Figure 1 ( Section 3.2), implicit arguments tend to be located in close proximity to the predicate . We found that using all candidate constituents cwithin the current and previous two sentences worked best on our development data.
We compared our supervised model with the simple baseline heuristic defined below:6
Fill iargn for predicate instance p with the nearest constituent in the two-sentence candidate window that fills argn for a different instance of p , where all nominal predicates are normalized to their verbal forms.
The normalization allows an existing arg0 for the verb invested to fill an iarg0 for the noun investment . We also evaluated an oracle model that made goldstandard predictions for candidates within the two-sentence prediction window.
We evaluated these models using the methodology proposed by Ruppenhofer et al (2009). For each missing argument position of a predicate instance , the models were required to either (1) identify a single constituent that fills the missing argument position or (2) make no prediction and leave the missing argument position unfilled . We scored predictions using the Dice coefficient , which is defined as follows : 2 ? | Predicted ?
True | | Predicted |+ | True | (11)
Predicted is the set of tokens subsumed by the constituent predicted by the model as filling a missing argument position . True is the set of tokens from a single annotated constituent that fills the missing argument position . The model?s prediction receives a score equal to the maximum Dice overlap across any one of the annotated fillers . Precision is equal to the summed prediction scores divided by the number of argument positions filled by the model . Recall is equal to the summed prediction scores divided by the number of argument positions filled in our annotated data.
Predictions not covering the head of a true filler were assigned a score of zero.
6This heuristic outperformed a more complicated heuristic that relied on the PMI score described in section 4.2.
1588
Baseline Discriminative Oracle # Imp . # P R F1 P R F1 p R F1 sale 64 60 50.0 28.3 36.2 47.2 41.7 44.2 0.118 80.0 88.9 price 121 53 24.0 11.3 15.4 36.0 32.6 34.2 0.008 88.7 94.0 investor 78 35 33.3 5.7 9.8 36.8 40.0 38.4 < 0.001 91.4 95.5 bid 19 26 100.0 19.2 32.3 23.8 19.2 21.3 0.280 57.7 73.2 plan 25 20 83.3 25.0 38.5 78.6 55.0 64.7 0.060 82.7 89.4 cost 25 17 66.7 23.5 34.8 61.1 64.7 62.9 0.024 94.1 97.0 loss 30 12 71.4 41.7 52.6 83.3 83.3 83.3 0.020 100.0 100.0 loan 11 9 50.0 11.1 18.2 42.9 33.3 37.5 0.277 88.9 94.1 investment 21 8 0.0 0.0 0.0 40.0 25.0 30.8 0.182 87.5 93.3 fund 43 6 0.0 0.0 0.0 14.3 16.7 15.4 0.576 50.0 66.7 Overall 437 246 48.4 18.3 26.5 44.5 40.4 42.3 < 0.001 83.1 90.7 Table 3: Evaluation results . The second column gives the number of predicate instances evaluated.
The third column gives the number of groundtruth implicitly filled argument positions for the predicate instances ( not all instances had implicit arguments ). P , R , and F1 indicate precision , recall , and Fmeasure (? = 1), respectively . p-values denote the bootstrapped significance of the difference in F1 between the baseline and discriminative models . Oracle precision ( not shown ) is 100% for all predicates.
Our evaluation data comprised 437 predicate instances associated with 246 implicitly filled argument positions . Table 3 presents the results.
Predicates with the highest number of implicit arguments - sale and price - showed F1 increases of 8 points and 18.8 points , respectively . Overall , the discriminative model increased F1 performance 15.8 points (59.6%) over the baseline.
We measured human performance on this task by running our undergraduate assistant?s annotations against the evaluation data . Our assistant achieved an overall F1 score of 58.4% using the same candidate window as the baseline and discriminative models . The difference in F1 between the discriminative and human results had an exact pvalue of less than 0.001. All significance testing was performed using a twotailed bootstrap method similar to the one described by Efron and
Tibshirani (1993).
6 Discussion 6.1 Feature ablation
We conducted an ablation study to measure the contribution of specific feature sets . Table 4 presents the ablation configurations and results.
For each configuration , we retrained and retested the discriminative model using the features described . As shown , we observed significant losses when excluding features that relate the semantic roles of mentions in c ? to the semantic role
Percent change ( pvalue)
Configuration P R F1
Remove 1,2,5 -35.3 (< 0.01) -36.1 (< 0.01) -35.7 (< 0.01)
Use 1,2,5 only -26.3 (< 0.01) -11.9 (0.05) -19.2 (< 0.01)
Remove 14 0.2 (0.95) 1.0 (0.66) 0.7 (0.73) Table 4: Feature ablation results . The first column lists the feature configurations . All changes are percentages relative to the full-featured discriminative model . p-values for the changes are indicated in parentheses.
of the missing argument position ( first configuration ). The second configuration tested the effect of using only the SRL-based features . This also resulted in significant performance losses , suggesting that the other features contribute useful information . Lastly , we tested the effect of removing discourse relations ( feature 14), which are likely to be difficult to extract reliably in a practical setting . As shown , this feature did not have a statistically significant effect on performance and could be excluded in future applications of the model.
6.2 Unclassified true implicit arguments Of all the errors made by the system , approximately 19% were caused by the system?s failure to rect implicit argument . Without such a candidate , the system stood no chance of identifying a correct implicit argument . Two factors contributed to this type of error , the first being our assumption that implicit arguments are also core ( i.e ., argn ) arguments to traditional SRL structures . Approximately 8% of the overall error was due to a failure of this assumption . In many cases , the true implicit argument filled a noncore ( i.e ., adjunct ) role within PropBank or NomBank.
More frequently , however , true implicit arguments were missed because the candidate window was too narrow . This accounts for 12% of the overall error . Oracle recall ( second-to-last column in Table 3) indicates the nominals that suffered most from windowing errors . For example , the sale predicate was associated with the highest number of true implicit arguments , but only 80% of those could be resolved within the two-sentence candidate window . Empirically , we found that extending the candidate window uniformly for all predicates did not increase performance on the development data . The oracle results suggest that predicate-specific window settings might offer some advantage.
6.3 The investment and fund predicates
In Section 4.2, we discussed the price predicate , which frequently occurs in the ?[ p price ] index ? collocation . We observed that this collocation is rarely associated with either an overt arg0 or an implicit iarg0. Similar observations can be made for the investment and fund predicates . Although these two predicates are frequent , they are rarely associated with implicit arguments : investment takes only eight implicit arguments across its 21 instances , and fund takes only six implicit arguments across its 43 instances . This behavior is due in large part to collocations such as ?[ p investment ] banker ?, ? stock [ p fund ]?, and ? mutual [ p fund ]?, which use predicate senses that are not eventive . Such collocations also violate our assumption that differences between the PropBank and NomBank argument structure for a predicate are indicative of implicit arguments ( see Section 3.1 for this assumption).
Despite their lack of implicit arguments , it is important to account for predicates such as investment and fund because incorrect prediction of implicit arguments for them can lower precision.
This is precisely what happened for the fund predicate , where the model incorrectly identified many implicit arguments for ? stock [ p fund ]? and ? mutual [ p fund ]?. The left context of fund should help the model avoid this type of error ; however , our feature selection process did not identify any overall gains from including this information.
6.4 Improvements versus the baseline
The baseline heuristic covers the simple case where identical predicates share arguments in the same position . Thus , it is interesting to examine cases where the baseline heuristic failed but the discriminative model succeeded . Consider the following sentence : (12) Mr . Rogers recommends that [ p investors ] sell [ iarg2 takeover-related stock].
Neither NomBank nor the baseline heuristic associate the marked predicate in Example 12 with any arguments ; however , the feature-based model was able to correctly identify the marked iarg2 as the entity being invested in . This inference captured a tendency of investors to sell the things they have invested in.
We conclude our discussion with an example of an extrasentential implicit argument : (13) [ iarg0 Olivetti ] has denied that it violated the rules , asserting that the shipments were properly licensed . However , the legality of these [ p sales ] is still an open question.
As shown in Example 13, the system was able to correctly identify Olivetti as the agent in the selling event of the second sentence . This inference involved two key steps . First , the system identified coreferent mentions of Olivetti that participated in exporting and supplying events ( not shown ). Second , the system identified a tendency for exporters and suppliers to also be sellers . Using this knowledge , the system extracted information that could not be extracted by the baseline heuristic or a traditional SRL system.
7 Conclusions and future work
Current SRL approaches limit the search for arguments to the sentence containing the predicate of interest . Many systems take this assumption a step further and restrict the search to the predi-cate?s local syntactic environment ; however , predicates and the sentences that contain them rarely they are usually embedded in a coherent and semantically rich discourse that must be taken into account . We have presented a preliminary study of implicit arguments for nominal predicates that focused specifically on this problem.
Our contribution is threefold . First , we have created goldstandard implicit argument annotations for a small set of pervasive nominal predi-cates.7 Our analysis shows that these annotations add 65% to the role coverage of NomBank . Second , we have demonstrated the feasibility of recovering implicit arguments for many of the predicates , thus establishing a baseline for future work on this emerging task . Third , our study suggests a few ways in which this research can be moved forward . As shown in Section 6, many errors were caused by the absence of true implicit arguments within the set of candidate constituents . More intelligent windowing strategies in addition to alternate candidate sources might offer some improvement . Although we consistently observed development gains from using automatic coreference resolution , this process creates errors that need to be studied more closely . It will also be important to study implicit argument patterns of nonverbal predicates such as the partitive percent.
These predicates are among the most frequent in the TreeBank and are likely to require approaches that differ from the ones we pursued.
Finally , any extension of this work is likely to encounter a significant knowledge acquisition bottleneck . Implicit argument annotation is difficult because it requires both argument and coreference identification ( the data produced by Ruppenhofer et al (2009) is similar ). Thus , it might be productive to focus future work on (1) the extraction of relevant knowledge from existing resources ( e.g ., our use of coreference patterns from Gigaword ) or (2) semisupervised learning of implicit argument models from a combination of labeled and unlabeled data.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful questions and comments . We would also like to thank Malcolm Doering for his annotation effort . This work was supported in part by NSF grants IIS-0347548 and IIS-0840538.
7Our annotation data can be freely downloaded at http://links.cse.msu.edu:8000/lair/projects/semanticrole.html
References
Aljoscha Burchardt , Anette Frank , and Manfred Pinkal . 2005. Building text meaning representations from contextually related frames - a case study.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Computational Semantics.
Xavier Carreras and Llu??s Ma`rquez . 2005. Introduction to the CoNLL2005 shared task : Semantic role labeling.
Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky . 2008. Unsupervised learning of narrative event chains . In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 789?797, Columbus , Ohio , June . Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jacob Cohen . 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales . Educational and Psychological
Measurement , 20(1):3746.
Bradley Efron and Robert J . Tibshirani . 1993. An Introduction to the Bootstrap . Chapman & Hall , New
York.
Rong-En Fan , Kai-Wei Chang , Cho-Jui Hsieh , Xiang-Rui Wang , and Chih-Jen Lin . 2008. LIBLINEAR : A Library for Large Linear Classification . Journal of Machine Learning Research , 9:1871?1874.
Christiane Fellbaum . 1998. WordNet : An Electronic Lexical Database ( Language , Speech , and Communication ). The MIT Press , May.
C.J . Fillmore and C.F . Baker . 2001. Frame semantics for text understanding . In Proceedings of WordNet and Other Lexical Resources Workshop , NAACL.
Matthew Gerber , Joyce Y . Chai , and Adam Meyers.
2009. The role of implicit argumentation in nominal SRL . In Proceedings of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 146?154, Boulder , Colorado , USA , June.
David Graff . 2003. English Gigaword . Linguistic
Data Consortium , Philadelphia.
Jan Hajic ?, Massimiliano Ciaramita , Richard Johansson , Daisuke Kawahara , Maria Anto`nia Mart ??, Llu??s Ma`rquez , Adam Meyers , Joakim Nivre , Sebastian Pado ?, Jan S?te?pa?nek , Pavel Stran?a?k , Mihai Surdeanu , Nianwen Xue , and Yi Zhang . 2009. The CoNLL2009 shared task : Syntactic and semantic dependencies in multiple languages . In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning ( CoNLL 2009): Shared Task , pages 1?18, Boulder , Colorado , June . Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ryu Iida , Mamoru Komachi , Kentaro Inui , and Yuji Matsumoto . 2007. Annotating a Japanese text corpus with predicate-argument and coreference relations . In Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation
Workshop in ACL2007, page 132139.
1591
Kenji Imamura , Kuniko Saito , and Tomoko Izumi.
2009. Discriminative approach to predicate-argument structure analysis with zero-anaphora resolution . In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Conference Short Papers , pages 85?88, Suntec , Singapore , August . Association for Computational Linguistics.
P . Kingsbury , M . Palmer , and M . Marcus . 2002.
Adding semantic annotation to the Penn TreeBank.
In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Conference ( HLT?02).
Karin Kipper . 2005. VerbNet : A broadcoverage , comprehensive verb lexicon . Ph.D . thesis , Department of Computer and Information Science University of
Pennsylvania.
Mitchell Marcus , Beatrice Santorini , and Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz . 1993. Building a large annotated corpus of English : the Penn TreeBank . Computational Linguistics , 19:313?330.
Adam Meyers . 2007. Annotation guidelines for NomBank - noun argument structure for PropBank.
Technical report , New York University.
Martha S . Palmer , Deborah A . Dahl , Rebecca J . Schiffman , Lynette Hirschman , Marcia Linebarger , and John Dowding . 1986. Recovering implicit information . In Proceedings of the 24th annual meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 10?19, Morristown , NJ , USA . Association for Computational Linguistics.
Patrick Pantel and Deepak Ravichandran . 2004.
Automatically labeling semantic classes . In Daniel Marcu Susan Dumais and Salim Roukos , editors , HLTNAACL 2004: Main Proceedings , pages 321?328, Boston , Massachusetts , USA , May 2 - May 7. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Rashmi Prasad , Alan Lee , Nikhil Dinesh , Eleni Miltsakaki , Geraud Campion , Aravind Joshi , and Bonnie Webber . 2008. Penn discourse treebank version 2.0.
Linguistic Data Consortium , February.
P . Pudil , J . Novovicova , and J . Kittler . 1994. Floating search methods in feature selection . Pattern Recognition Letters , 15:1119?1125.
Vasin Punyakanok , Dan Roth , and Wentau Yih . 2008.
The importance of syntactic parsing and inference in semantic role labeling . Comput . Linguist ., 34(2):257?287.
Josef Ruppenhofer , Caroline Sporleder , Roser Morante , Collin Baker , and Martha Palmer . 2009.
Semeval-2010 task 10: Linking events and their participants in discourse . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Semantic Evaluations : Recent Achievements and Future Directions ( SEW-2009), pages 106?111, Boulder , Colorado , June . Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ryohei Sasano , Daisuke Kawahara , and Sadao Kurohashi . 2004. Automatic construction of nominal case frames and its application to indirect anaphora resolution . In Proceedings of Coling 2004, pages 1201?1207, Geneva , Switzerland , Aug 23?Aug 27.
COLING.
Mihai Surdeanu , Richard Johansson , Adam Meyers , Llu??s Ma`rquez , and Joakim Nivre . 2008. The CoNLL 2008 shared task on joint parsing of syntactic and semantic dependencies . In CoNLL 2008: Proceedings of the Twelfth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning , pages 159?177, Manchester , England , August . Coling 2008 Organizing Committee.
1592
