Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 1433?1442,
Uppsala , Sweden , 1116 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Constituency to Dependency Translation with Forests
Haitao Mi and Qun Liu
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
Institute of Computing Technology
Chinese Academy of Sciences
P.O . Box 2704, Beijing 100190, China
{htmi,liuqun}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract
Tree-to-string systems ( and their forest-based extensions ) have gained steady popularity thanks to their simplicity and efficiency , but there is a major limitation : they are unable to guarantee the grammaticality of the output , which is explicitly modeled in string-to-tree systems via target-side syntax . We thus propose to combine the advantages of both , and present a novel constituency-to-dependency translation model , which uses constituency forests on the source side to direct the translation , and dependency trees on the target side ( as a language model ) to ensure grammaticality . Medium-scale experiments show an absolute and statistically significant improvement of +0.7 BLEU points over a state-of-the-art forest-based tree-to-string system even with fewer rules . This is also the first time that a tree-to-tree model can surpass tree-to-string counterparts.
1 Introduction
Linguistically syntaxbased statistical machine translation models have made promising progress in recent years . By incorporating the syntactic annotations of parse trees from both or either side(s ) of the bitext , they are believed better than phrasebased counterparts in reorderings . Depending on the type of input , these models can be broadly divided into two categories ( see Table 1): the string-based systems whose input is a string to be simultaneously parsed and translated by a synchronous grammar , and the tree-based systems whose input is already a parse tree to be directly converted into a target tree or string . When we also take into account the type of output ( tree or string ), the tree-based systems can be divided into tree-to-string and tree-to-tree efforts.
tree on examples ( partial ) fast gram . BLEU source Liu06, Huang06 + - + target Galley06, Shen08 - + + both Ding05, Liu09 + + - both our work + + + Table 1: A classification and comparison of linguistically syntaxbased SMT systems , where gram . denotes grammaticality of the output.
On one hand , tree-to-string systems ( Liu et al , 2006; Huang et al , 2006) have gained significant popularity , especially after incorporating packed forests ( Mi et al , 2008; Mi and Huang , 2008; Liu et al , 2009; Zhang et al , 2009). Compared with their string-based counterparts , tree-based systems are much faster in decoding ( linear time vs . cubic time , see ( Huang et al , 2006)), do not require a binary-branching grammar as in string-based models ( Zhang et al , 2006; Huang et al , 2009), and can have separate grammars for parsing and translation ( Huang et al , 2006). However , they have a major limitation that they do not have a principled mechanism to guarantee grammaticality on the target side , since there is no linguistic tree structure of the output.
On the other hand , string-to-tree systems explicitly model the grammaticality of the output by using target syntactic trees . Both string-to-constituency system ( e.g ., ( Galley et al , 2006; Marcu et al , 2006)) and string-to-dependency model ( Shen et al , 2008) have achieved significant improvements over the state-of-the-art formally syntaxbased system Hiero ( Chiang , 2007).
However , those systems also have some limitations that they run slowly ( in cubic time ) ( Huang et al , 2006), and do not utilize the useful syntactic information on the source side.
We thus combine the advantages of both tree-to-string and string-to-tree approaches , and propose uses constituency forests on the source side to direct translation , and dependency trees on the target side to guarantee grammaticality of the output . In contrast to conventional tree-to-tree approaches ( Ding and Palmer , 2005; Quirk et al , 2005; Xiong et al , 2007; Zhang et al , 2007; Liu et al , 2009), which only make use of a single type of trees , our model is able to combine two types of trees , outperforming both phrasebased and tree-to-string systems . Current tree-to-tree models ( Xiong et al , 2007; Zhang et al , 2007; Liu et al , 2009) still have not outperformed the phrasebased system Moses ( Koehn et al , 2007) significantly even with the help of forests.1 Our new constituency-to-dependency model ( Section 2) extracts rules from wordaligned pairs of source constituency forests and target dependency trees ( Section 3), and translates source constituency forests into target dependency trees with a set of features ( Section 4). Medium data experiments ( Section 5) show a statistically significant improvement of +0.7 BLEU points over a state-of-the-art forest-based tree-to-string system even with less translation rules , this is also the first time that a tree-to-tree model can surpass tree-to-string counterparts.
2 Model
Figure 1 shows a wordaligned source constituency forest Fc and target dependency tree De , our constituency to dependency translation model can be formalized as:
P(Fc , De ) = ?
Cc?Fc
P(Cc , De ) = ?
Cc?Fc ? o?O
P(O ) = ?
Cc?Fc ? o?O ? r?o
P(r ), (1) where Cc is a constituency tree in Fc , o is a derivation that translates Cc to De , O is the set of derivation , r is a constituency to dependency translation rule.
1According to the reports of Liu et al (2009), their forest-based constituency-to-constituency system achieves a comparable performance against Moses ( Koehn et al , 2007), but a significant improvement of +3.6 BLEU points over the 1best tree-based constituency-to-constituency system.
2.1 Constituency Forests on the Source Side A constituency forest ( in Figure 1 left ) is a compact representation of all the derivations ( i.e ., parse trees ) for a given sentence under a contextfree grammar ( Billot and Lang , 1989).
More formally , following Huang (2008), such a constituency forest is a pair Fc = Gf = ? V f , Hf ?, where V f is the set of nodes , and Hf the set of hyperedges . For a given source sentence c1:m = c1 . . . cm , each node vf ? V f is in the form of X i,j , which denotes the recognition of nonterminal X spanning the substring from positions i through j ( that is , ci+1 . . . cj ). Each hyperedge hf ? Hf is a pair ? tails(hf ), head(hf )?, where head(hf ) ? V f is the consequent node in the deductive step , and tails(hf ) ? ( V f )? is the list of antecedent nodes . For example , the hyperedge hf0 in Figure 1 for deduction (*)
NPB0,1 CC1,2 NPB2,3
NP0,3 , (*) is notated : ?( NPB0,1, CC1,2, NPB2,3), NP0,3?.
where head(hf0) = { NP0,3}, and tails(hf0) = { NPB0,1,CC1,2,NPB2,3}.
The solid line in Figure 1 shows the best parse tree , while the dashed one shows the second best tree . Note that common subderivations like those for the verb VPB3,5 are shared , which allows the forest to represent exponentially many parses in a compact structure.
We also denote IN ( vf ) to be the set of incoming hyperedges of node vf , which represents the different ways of deriving vf . Take node IP0,5 in Figure 1 for example , IN ( IP0,5) = { hf1 , h f 2}.
There is also a distinguished root node TOP in each forest , denoting the goal item in parsing , which is simply S0,m where S is the start symbol and m is the sentence length.
2.2 Dependency Trees on the Target Side
A dependency tree for a sentence represents each word and its syntactic dependents through directed arcs , as shown in the following examples . The main advantage of a dependency tree is that it can explore the long distance dependency.
1434 1: talk blank a blan blan 2: held
Bush bla blk talk a bl with b Sharon
We use the lexicon dependency grammar ( Hellwig , 2006) to express a projective dependency tree . Take the dependency trees above for example , they will be expressed : 1: ( a ) talk 2: ( Bush ) held ( ( a ) talk ) ( with ( Sharon ) ) where the lexicons in brackets represent the dependencies , while the lexicon out the brackets is the head.
More formally , a dependency tree is also a pair De = Gd = ? V d , Hd ?. For a given target sentence e1:n = e1 . . . en , each node vd ? V d is a word ei (1 6 i 6 n ), each hyperedge hd ? Hd is a directed arc ? vdi , vdj ? from node vdi to its head node vdj . Following the formalization of the constituency forest scenario , we denote a pair ? tails(hd ), head(hd )? to be a hyperedge hd , where head(hd ) is the head node , tails(hd ) is the node where hd leaves from.
We also denote Ll(vd ) and Lr(vd ) to be the left and right children sequence of node vd from the nearest to the farthest respectively . Take the node vd2 = ? held ? for example:
Ll(vd2) ={ Bush},
Lr(vd2) ={ talk , with}.
2.3 Hypergraph
Actually , both the constituency forest and the dependency tree can be formalized as a hypergraph G , a pair ? V,H ?. We use Gf and Gd to distinguish them . For simplicity , we also use Fc and De to denote a constituency forest and a dependency tree respectively . Specifically , the size of tails(hd ) of a hyperedge hd in a dependency tree is a constant one.
IP
NP x1:NPB CC yu ? x2:NPB x3:VPB ? ( x1) x3 ( with ( x2)) Figure 2: Example of the rule r1. The Chinese conjunction yu ? ? and ? is translated into English preposition ? with?.
3 Rule Extraction
We extract constituency to dependency rules from wordaligned source constituency forest and target dependency tree pairs ( Figure 1). We mainly extend the tree-to-string rule extraction algorithm of Mi and Huang (2008) to our scenario . In this section , we first formalize the constituency to string translation rule ( Section 3.1). Then we present the restrictions for dependency structures as well formed fragments ( Section 3.2). Finally , we describe our rule extraction algorithm ( Section 3.3), fractional counts computation and probabilities estimation ( Section 3.4).
3.1 Constituency to Dependency Rule
More formally , a constituency to dependency translation rule r is a tuple ? lhs(r ), rhs(r ), ?( r )?, where lhs(r ) is the source side tree fragment , whose internal nodes are labeled by nonterminal symbols ( like NP and VP ), and whose frontier nodes are labeled by source language words ci ( like ? yu ??) or variables from a set X = { x1, x2, . . .}; rhs(r ) is expressed in the target language dependency structure with words ej ( like ? with ?) and variables from the set X ; and ?( r ) is a mapping from X to nonterminals . Each variable xi ? X occurs exactly once in lhs(r ) and exactly once in rhs(r ). For example , the rule r1 in Figure 2, lhs(r1) = IP(NP(x1 CC(yu ?) x2) x3), rhs(r1) = ( x1) x3 ( with ( x2)), ?( r1) = { x1 7? NPB , x2 7? NPB , x3 7? VPB}.
3.2 Well Formed Dependency Fragment
Following Shen et al (2008), we also restrict rhs(r ) to be well formed dependency fragment.
The main difference between us is that we use more flexible restrictions . Given a dependency ?( Bush ) .. Sharon ))? hf1
NP0,3 ?( Bush ) unionsq ( with ( Sharon))?
NPB0,1 ? Bush?
Bu`sh ?? hf0
CC1,2 ? with ? yu?
VP1,5 ? held .. Sharon))?
PP1,3 ? with ( Sharon)?
P1,2 ? with?
NPB2,3 ? Sharon?
Sha?lo?ng
VPB3,5 ? held (( a ) talk)?
VV3,4 ? held (( a )*)? ju?x??ngle
NPB4,5 ? talk ? hu?`ta?n hf2
Minimal rules extracted
IP ( NP(x1:NPB x2:CC x3:NPB ) x4:VPB ) ? ( x1) x4 ( x2 ( x3) )
IP ( x1:NPB x2:VP )? ( x1) x2
VP ( x1:PP x2:VPB )? x2 ( x1)
PP ( x1:P x2:NPB )? x1 ( x2)
VPB ( VV(ju?x??ngle )) x1:NPB ) ? held (( a ) x1)
NPB ( Bu`sh ??)? Bush
NPB ( hu?`ta?n )? talk
CC ( yu ?)? with
P ( yu ?)? with
NPB ( Sha?lo?ng )? Sharon ( Bush ) held ( ( a ) talk ) ( with ( Sharon ) ) Figure 1: Forestbased constituency to dependency rule extraction.
fragment di:j composed by the words from i to j , two kinds of well formed structures are defined as follows : Fixed on one node vdone , fixed for short , if it meets the following conditions : ? the head of vdone is out of [ i , j ], i.e .: ? hd , if tails(hd ) = vdone ? head(hd ) /? ei:j .
? the heads of other nodes except vdone are in [ i , j ], i.e .: ? k ? [ i , j ] and vdk 6= vdone,?hd if tails(hd ) = vdk ? head(hd ) ? ei:j .
Floating with multi nodes M , floating for short , if it meets the following conditions : ? all nodes in M have a same head node , i.e .: ? x /? [ i , j],?hd if tails(hd ) ? M ? head(hd ) = vhx .
? the heads of other nodes not in M are in [ i , j ], i.e .: ? k ? [ i , j ] and vdk /? M , ? hd if tails(hd ) = vdk ? head(hd ) ? ei:j .
Take the ? ( Bush ) held (( a ) talk))(with ( Sharon )) ? for example : partial fixed examples are ? ( Bush ) held ? and ? held (( a ) talk )?; while the partial floating examples are ? ( talk ) ( with ( Sharon )) ? and ? (( a ) talk ) ( with ( Sharon )) ?. Please note that the floating structure ? ( talk ) ( with ( Sharon )) ? can not be allowed in Shen et al (2008)?s model.
The dependency structure ? held (( a ))? is not a well formed structure , since the head of word ? a ? is out of scope of this structure.
3.3 Rule Extraction Algorithm
The algorithm shown in this Section is mainly extended from the forest-based tree-to-string extraction algorithm ( Mi and Huang , 2008). We extract rules from wordaligned source constituency forest and target dependency tree pairs ( see Figure 1) in three steps : (1) frontier set computation , (2) fragmentation , (3) composition.
The frontier set ( Galley et al , 2004) is the potential points to ? cut ? the forest and dependency tree pair into fragments , each of which will form a minimal rule ( Galley et al , 2006).
However , not every fragment can be used for rule extraction , since it may or may not respect to the restrictions , such as word alignments and well formed dependency structures . So we say a fragment is extractable if it respects to all restrictions . The root node of every extractable tree fragment corresponds to a faithful structure on the target side , in which case there is a ? translational equivalence ? between the subtree rooted at the node and the corresponding target structure.
For example , in Figure 1, every node in the forest is annotated with its corresponding English structure . The NP0,3 node maps to a noncontiguous structure ?( Bush ) unionsq ( with ( Sharon ))?, the VV3,4 node maps to a contiguous but non-faithful structure ? held (( a ) *)?.
1436
Algorithm 1 Forestbased constituency to dependency rule extraction.
Input : Source constituency forest Fc , target dependency tree De , and alignment a
Output : Minimal rule setR 1: fs ? FRONTIER(Fc , De , a ) . compute frontier set 2: for each vf ? fs do 3: open ? {??, { vf }?} . initial queue of growing fragments 4: while open 6= ? do 5: ? hs , exps ? ? open.pop () . extract a fragment 6: if exps = ? then . nothing to expand ? 7: generate a rule r using fragment hs . generate a rule 8: R.append(r ) 9: else . incomplete : further expand 10: v ? ? exps . pop () . a non-frontier node 11: for each hf ? IN ( v ?) do 12: newexps ? exps ? ( tails(hf ) \ fs ) . expand 13: open . append(?hs ? { hf},newexps ?) Following Mi and Huang (2008), given a source target sentence pair ? c1:m , e1:n ? with an alignment a , the span of node vf on source forest is the set of target words aligned to leaf nodes under vf : span(vf ) , { ei ? e1:n | ? cj ? yield(vf ), ( cj , ei ) ? a}.
where the yield(vf ) is all the leaf nodes under vf . For each span(vf ), we also denote dep(vf ) to be its corresponding dependency structure , which represents the dependency structure of all the words in span(vf ). Take the span(PP1,3) ={ with , Sharon } for example , the corresponding dep(PP1,3) is ? with ( Sharon )?. A dep(vf ) is faithful structure to node vf if it meets the following restrictions : ? all words in span(vf ) form a continuous substring ei:j , ? every word in span(vf ) is only aligned to leaf nodes of vf , i.e .: ? ei ? span(vf ), ( cj , ei ) ? a ? cj ? yield(vf ), ? dep(vf ) is a well formed dependency structure.
For example , node VV3,4 has a non-faithful structure ( crossed out in Figure 1), since its dep(VV3,4 = ? held (( a ) *)? is not a well formed structure , where the head of word ? a ? lies in the outside of its words covered . Nodes with faithful structure form the frontier set ( shaded nodes in Figure 1) which serve as potential cut points for rule extraction.
Given the frontier set , fragmentation step is to ? cut ? the forest at all frontier nodes and form tree fragments , each of which forms a rule with variables matching the frontier descendant nodes.
For example , the forest in Figure 1 is cut into 10 pieces , each of which corresponds to a minimal rule listed on the right.
Our rule extraction algorithm is formalized in Algorithm 1. After we compute the frontier set fs ( line 1). We visit each frontier node vf ? fs on the source constituency forest Fc , and keep a queue open of growing fragments rooted at vf . We keep expanding incomplete fragments from open , and extract a rule if a complete fragment is found ( line 7). Each fragment hs in open is associated with a list of expansion sites ( exps in line 5) being the subset of leaf nodes of the current fragment that are not in the frontier set . So each fragment along hyperedge h is associated with exps = tails(hf ) \ fs.
A fragment is complete if its expansion sites is empty ( line 6), otherwise we pop one expansion node v ? to grow and spinoff new fragments by following hyperedges of v ?, adding new expansion sites ( lines 1113), until all active fragments are complete and open queue is empty ( line 4).
After we get al the minimal rules , we glue them together to form composed rules following Galley et al (2006). For example , the composed rule r1 in Figure 2 is glued by the following two minimal rules :
CC ( yu ?)? with r3 where x2:CC in r2 is replaced with r3 accordingly.
3.4 Fractional Counts and Rule Probabilities Following Mi and Huang (2008), we penalize a rule r by the posterior probability of the corresponding constituent tree fragment lhs(r ), which can be computed in an Inside-Outside fashion , being the product of the outside probability of its root node , the inside probabilities of its leaf nodes , and the probabilities of hyperedges involved in the fragment.
??(lhs(r )) =?( root(r )) ? ? hf ? lhs(r)
P(hf ) ? ? vf ? leaves(lhs(r )) ?( vf ) (2) where root(r ) is the root of the rule r , ?( v ) and ?( v ) are the outside and inside probabilities of node v , and leaves(lhs(r )) returns the leaf nodes of a tree fragment lhs(r).
We use fractional counts to compute three conditional probabilities for each rule , which will be used in the next section:
P(r | lhs(r )) = c(r )? r?:lhs(r?)=lhs(r ) c(r ?) , (3)
P(r | rhs(r )) = c(r )? r?:rhs(r?)=rhs(r ) c(r ?) , (4)
P(r | root(r )) = c(r )? r?:root(r?)=root(r ) c(r ?) . (5) 4 Decoding Given a source forest Fc , the decoder searches for the best derivation o ? among the set of all possible derivations O , each of which forms a source side constituent tree Tc(o ), a target side string e(o ), and a target side dependency tree De(o ): o ? = arg max
Tc?Fc,o?O ?1 log P(o | Tc ) +?2 log Plm(e(o )) +?3 log PDLMw(De(o )) +?4 log PDLMp(De(o )) +?5 log P(Tc(o )) +?6ill(o ) + ?7|o |+ ?8|e(o )|, (6) where the first two terms are translation and language model probabilities , e(o ) is the target string ( English sentence ) for derivation o , the third and forth items are the dependency language model probabilities on the target side computed with words and POS tags separately , De(o ) is the target dependency tree of o , the fifth one is the parsing probability of the source side tree Tc(o ) ? Fc , the ill(o ) is the penalty for the number of ill-formed dependency structures in o , and the last two terms are derivation and translation length penalties , respectively . The conditional probability P(o | Tc ) is decomposes into the product of rule probabilities:
P(o | Tc ) = ? r?o
P(r ), (7) where each P(r ) is the product of five probabilities : P(r ) = P(r | lhs(r))?9 ? P(r | rhs(r))?10 ? P(r | root(lhs(r)))?11 ? Plex(lhs(r ) | rhs(r))?12 ? Plex(rhs(r ) | lhs(r))?13 , (8) where the first three are conditional probabilities based on fractional counts of rules defined in Section 3.4, and the last two are lexical probabilities.
When computing the lexical translation probabilities described in ( Koehn et al , 2003), we only take into accout the terminals in a rule . If there is no terminal , we set the lexical probability to 1.
The decoding algorithm works in a bottom-up search fashion by traversing each node in forest Fc . We first use pattern-matching algorithm of Mi et al (2008) to convert Fc into a translation forest , each hyperedge of which is associated with a constituency to dependency translation rule . However , pattern-matching failure2 at a node vf will 2Pattern-matching failure at a node vf means there is no translation rule can be matched at vf or no translation hyperedge can be constructed at vf .
1438 cut the derivation path and lead to translation failure . To tackle this problem , we construct a pseudo translation rule for each parse hyperedge hf ? IN ( vf ) by mapping the CFG rule into a target dependency tree using the head rules of Magerman (1995). Take the hyperedge hf0 in Figure1 for example , the corresponding pseudo translation rule is:
NP(x1:NPB x2:CC x3:NPB )? ( x1) ( x2) x3, since the x3:NPB is the head word of the CFG rule : NP ? NPB CC NPB.
After the translation forest is constructed , we traverse each node in translation forest also in bottom-up fashion . For each node , we use the cube pruning technique ( Chiang , 2007; Huang and Chiang , 2007) to produce partial hypotheses and compute all the feature scores including the dependency language model score ( Section 4.1).
If all the nodes are visited , we trace back along the 1best derivation at goal item S0,m and build a target side dependency tree . For kbest search after getting 1best derivation , we use the lazy Algorithm 3 of Huang and Chiang (2005) that works backwards from the root node , incrementally computing the second , third , through the kth best alternatives.
4.1 Dependency Language Model Computing
We compute the score of a dependency language model for a dependency tree De in the same way proposed by Shen et al (2008). For each nonterminal node vdh = eh in De and its children sequences Ll = el1 , el2 ... eli and Lr = er1 , er2 ... erj , the probability of a trigram is computed as follows : P(Ll , Lr | eh ?) = P(Ll | eh ?) ? P(Lr | eh ?), (9) where the P(Ll | eh ?) is decomposed to be:
P(Ll | eh ?) = P(ell | eh ?) ? P(el2 | el1 , eh ?) ...
? P(eln | eln?1 , eln?2).
(10)
We use the suffix ??? to distinguish the head word and child words in the dependency language model.
In order to alleviate the problem of data sparse , we also compute a dependency language model for POS tages over a dependency tree . We store the POS tag information on the target side for each constituency-to-dependency rule . So we will also generate a POS taged dependency tree simultaneously at the decoding time . We calculate this dependency language model by simply replacing each ei in equation 9 with its tag t(ei).
5 Experiments 5.1 Data Preparation
Our training corpus consists of 239K sentence pairs with about 6.9M/8.9M words in Chi-nese/English , respectively . We first word-align them by GIZA ++ ( Och and Ney , 2000) with refinement option ? grow-diag-and ? ( Koehn et al , 2003), and then parse the Chinese sentences using the parser of Xiong et al (2005) into parse forests , which are pruned into relatively small forests with a pruning threshold 3. We also parse the English sentences using the parser of Charniak (2000) into 1best constituency trees , which will be converted into dependency trees using Magerman (1995)?s head rules . We also store the POS tag information for each word in dependency trees , and compute two different dependency language models for words and POS tags in dependency tree separately . Finally , we apply translation rule extraction algorithm described in Section 3. We use SRI Language Modeling Toolkit ( Stolcke , 2002) to train a 4gram language model with Kneser-Ney smoothing on the first 1/3 of the Xinhua portion of Gigaword corpus . At the decoding step , we again parse the input sentences into forests and prune them with a threshold 10, which will direct the translation ( Section 4).
We use the 2002 NIST MT Evaluation test set as our development set and the 2005 NIST MT Evaluation test set as our test set . We evaluate the translation quality using the BLEU4 metric ( Papineni et al , 2002), which is calculated by the script mteval-v11b.pl with its default setting which is case-insensitive matching of ngrams . We use the standard minimum errorrate training ( Och , 2003) to tune the feature weights to maximize the sys-tem?s BLEU score on development set.
5.2 Results
Table 2 shows the results on the test set . Our baseline system is a state-of-the-art forest-based constituency-to-string model ( Mi et al , 2008), or forest c2s for short , which translates a source forest into a target string by pattern-matching the gual phrases ( s2s ). The baseline system extracts 31.9M c2s rules , 77.9M s2s rules respectively and achieves a BLEU score of 34.17 on the test set3.
At first , we investigate the influence of different rule sets on the performance of baseline system . We first restrict the target side of translation rules to be wellformed structures , and we extract 13.8M constituency-to-dependency ( c2d ) rules , which is 43% of c2s rules . We also extract 9.0M string-to-dependency ( s2d ) rules , which is only 11.6% of s2s rules . Then we convert c2d and s2d rules to c2s and s2s rules separately by removing the target-dependency structures and feed them into the baseline system . As shown in the third line in the column of BLEU score , the performance drops 1.7 BLEU points over baseline system due to the poorer rule coverage . However , when we further use all s2s rules instead of s2d rules in our next experiment , it achieves a BLEU score of 34.03, which is very similar to the baseline system . Those results suggest that restrictions on c2s rules won?t hurt the performance , but restrictions on s2s will hurt the translation quality badly . So we should utilize all the s2s rules in order to preserve a good coverage of translation rule set.
The last two lines in Table 2 show the results of our new forest-based constituency-to-dependency model ( forest c2d for short ). When we only use c2d and s2d rules , our system achieves a BLEU score of 33.25, which is lower than the baseline system in the first line . But , with the same rule set , our model still outperform the result in the second line . This suggests that using dependency language model really improves the translation quality by less than 1 BLEU point.
In order to utilize all the s2s rules and increase the rule coverage , we parse the target strings of the s2s rules into dependency fragments , and construct the pseudo s2d rules ( s2s-dep ). Then we use c2d and s2s-dep rules to direct the translation.
With the help of the dependency language model , our new model achieves a significant improvement of +0.7 BLEU points over the forest c2s baseline system ( p < 0.05, using the sign-test suggested by 3According to the reports of Liu et al (2009), with a more larger training corpus ( FBIS plus 30K ) but no name entity translations (+1 BLEU points if it is used ), their forest-based constituency-to-constituency model achieves a BLEU score of 30.6, which is similar to Moses ( Koehn et al , 2007). So our baseline system is much better than the BLEU score (30.6+1) of the constituency-to-constituency system and Moses.
System Rule Set BLEUType # forest c2s c2s 31.9M 34.17 s2s 77.9M c2d 13.8M 32.48(?1.7) s2d 9.0M c2d 13.8M 34.03(?0.1) s2s 77.9M forest c2d c2d 13.8M 33.25(?0.9) s2d 9.0M c2d 13.8M 34.88(?0.7) s2s-dep 77.9M Table 2: Statistics of different types of rules extracted on training corpus and the BLEU scores on the test set.
Collins et al (2005)). For the first time , a tree-to-tree model can surpass tree-to-string counterparts significantly even with fewer rules.
6 Related Work
The concept of packed forest has been used in machine translation for several years . For example , Huang and Chiang (2007) use forest to characterize the search space of decoding with integrated language models . Mi et al (2008) and Mi and Huang (2008) use forest to direct translation and extract rules rather than 1best tree in order to weaken the influence of parsing errors , this is also the first time to use forest directly in machine translation . Following this direction , Liu et al (2009) and Zhang et al (2009) apply forest into tree-to-tree ( Zhang et al , 2007) and tree-sequence-to-string models(Liu et al , 2007) respectively . Different from Liu et al (2009), we apply forest into a new constituency tree to dependency tree translation model rather than constituency tree-to-tree model.
Shen et al (2008) present a string-to-dependency model . They define the wellformed dependency structures to reduce the size of translation rule set , and integrate a dependency language model in decoding step to exploit long distance word relations . This model shows a significant improvement over the state-of-the-art hierarchical phrasebased system ( Chiang , 2005).
Compared with this work , we put fewer restrictions on the definition of wellformed dependency structures in order to extract more rules ; the expressive constituency to dependency rules , since the source side of our rule can encode multilevel reordering and contain more variables being larger than two ; furthermore , our rules can be patternmatched at high level , which is more reasonable than using glue rules in Shen et al (2008)?s scenario ; finally , the most important one is that our model runs very faster.
Liu et al (2009) propose a forest-based constituency-to-constituency model , they put more emphasize on how to utilize parse forest to increase the tree-to-tree rule coverage . By contrast , we only use 1best dependency trees on the target side to explore long distance relations and extract translation rules . Theoretically , we can extract more rules since dependency tree has the best interlingual phrasal cohesion properties ( Fox , 2002).
7 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper , we presented a novel forest-based constituency-to-dependency translation model , which combines the advantages of both tree-to-string and string-to-tree systems , runs fast and guarantees grammaticality of the output . To learn the constituency-to-dependency translation rules , we first identify the frontier set for all the nodes in the constituency forest on the source side . Then we fragment them and extract minimal rules . Finally , we glue them together to be composed rules . At the decoding step , we first parse the input sentence into a constituency forest . Then we convert it into a translation forest by patter-matching the constituency to string rules . Finally , we traverse the translation forest in a bottom-up fashion and translate it into a target dependency tree by incorporating string-based and dependency-based language models . Using all constituency-to-dependency translation rules and bilingual phrases , our model achieves +0.7 points improvement in BLEU score significantly over a state-of-the-art forest-based tree-to-string system.
This is also the first time that a tree-to-tree model can surpass tree-to-string counterparts.
In the future , we will do more experiments on rule coverage to compare the constituency-to-constituency model with our model . Furthermore , we will replace 1best dependency trees on the target side with dependency forests to further increase the rule coverage.
Acknowledgement
The authors were supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China , Contracts 60736014 and 90920004, and 863 State Key Project No.
2006AA010108. We thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments . We are also grateful to Liang Huang for his valuable suggestions.
References
Sylvie Billot and Bernard Lang . 1989. The structure of shared forests in ambiguous parsing . In Proceedings of ACL ?89, pages 143?151.
Eugene Charniak . 2000. A maximum-entropy inspired parser . In Proceedings of NAACL , pages 132?139.
David Chiang . 2005. A hierarchical phrasebased model for statistical machine translation . In Proceedings of ACL , pages 263?270, Ann Arbor , Michigan , June.
David Chiang . 2007. Hierarchical phrasebased translation . Comput . Linguist ., 33(2):201?228.
Michael Collins , Philipp Koehn , and Ivona Kucerova.
2005. Clause restructuring for statistical machine translation . In Proceedings of ACL , pages 531?540.
Yuan Ding and Martha Palmer . 2005. Machine translation using probabilistic synchronous dependency insertion grammars . In Proceedings of ACL , pages 541?548, June.
Heidi J . Fox . 2002. Phrasal cohesion and statistical machine translation . In In Proceedings of EMNLP02.
Michel Galley , Mark Hopkins , Kevin Knight , and Daniel Marcu . 2004. What?s in a translation rule?
In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL.
Michel Galley , Jonathan Graehl , Kevin Knight , Daniel Marcu , Steve DeNeefe , Wei Wang , and Ignacio Thayer . 2006. Scalable inference and training of context-rich syntactic translation models . In Proceedings of COLINGACL , pages 961?968, July.
Peter Hellwig . 2006. Parsing with Dependency Grammars , volume II . An International Handbook of
Contemporary Research.
Liang Huang and David Chiang . 2005. Better kbest parsing . In Proceedings of IWPT.
Liang Huang and David Chiang . 2007. Forest rescoring : Faster decoding with integrated language models . In Proceedings of ACL , pages 144?151, June.
Liang Huang , Kevin Knight , and Aravind Joshi . 2006.
Statistical syntax-directed translation with extended domain of locality . In Proceedings of AMTA.
1441
Liang Huang , Hao Zhang , Daniel Gildea , , and Kevin Knight . 2009. Binarization of synchronous contextfree grammars . Comput . Linguist.
Liang Huang . 2008. Forest reranking : Discriminative parsing with nonlocal features . In Proceedings of
ACL.
Philipp Koehn , Franz Joseph Och , and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrasebased translation . In Proceedings of HLTNAACL , pages 127?133, Edmonton , Canada , May.
Philipp Koehn , Hieu Hoang , Alexandra Birch , Chris Callison-Burch , Marcello Federico , Nicola Bertoldi , Brooke Cowan , Wade Shen , Christine Moran , Richard Zens , Chris Dyer , Ondrej Bojar , Alexandra Constantin , and Evan Herbst . 2007. Moses : Open source toolkit for statistical machine translation . In Proceedings of ACL , pages 177?180, June.
Yang Liu , Qun Liu , and Shouxun Lin . 2006. Tree-to-string alignment template for statistical machine translation . In Proceedings of COLINGACL , pages 609?616, Sydney , Australia , July.
Yang Liu , Yun Huang , Qun Liu , and Shouxun Lin.
2007. Forest-to-string statistical translation rules . In Proceedings of ACL , pages 704?711, June.
Yang Liu , Yajuan Lu ?, and Qun Liu . 2009. Improving tree-to-tree translation with packed forests . In Proceedings of ACL/IJCNLP , August.
David M . Magerman . 1995. Statistical decision-tree models for parsing . In Proceedings of ACL , pages 276?283, June.
Daniel Marcu , Wei Wang , Abdessamad Echihabi , and Kevin Knight . 2006. Spmt : Statistical machine translation with syntactified target language phrases.
In Proceedings of EMNLP , pages 44?52, July.
Haitao Mi and Liang Huang . 2008. Forestbased translation rule extraction . In Proceedings of EMNLP 2008, pages 206?214, Honolulu , Hawaii , October.
Haitao Mi , Liang Huang , and Qun Liu . 2008. Forestbased translation . In Proceedings of ACL-08:HLT , pages 192?199, Columbus , Ohio , June.
Franz J . Och and Hermann Ney . 2000. Improved statistical alignment models . In Proceedings of ACL , pages 440?447.
Franz J . Och . 2003. Minimum error rate training in statistical machine translation . In Proceedings of
ACL , pages 160?167.
Kishore Papineni , Salim Roukos , Todd Ward , and WeiJing Zhu . 2002. BLEU : a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation . In Proceedings of ACL , pages 311?318, Philadephia , USA , July.
Chris Quirk , Arul Menezes , and Colin Cherry . 2005.
Dependency treelet translation : Syntactically informed phrasal SMT . In Proceedings of ACL , pages 271?279, June.
Libin Shen , Jinxi Xu , and Ralph Weischedel . 2008. A new string-to-dependency machine translation algorithm with a target dependency language model . In
Proceedings of ACL08: HLT , June.
Andreas Stolcke . 2002. SRILM - an extensible language modeling toolkit . In Proceedings of ICSLP , volume 30, pages 901?904.
Deyi Xiong , Shuanglong Li , Qun Liu , and Shouxun Lin . 2005. Parsing the Penn Chinese Treebank with Semantic Knowledge . In Proceedings of IJCNLP 2005, pages 70?81.
Deyi Xiong , Qun Liu , and Shouxun Lin . 2007. A dependency treelet string correspondence model for statistical machine translation . In Proceedings of
SMT , pages 40?47.
Hao Zhang , Liang Huang , Daniel Gildea , and Kevin Knight . 2006. Synchronous binarization for machine translation . In Proc . of HLTNAACL.
Min Zhang , Hongfei Jiang , Aiti Aw , Jun Sun , Sheng Li , and Chew Lim Tan . 2007. A tree-to-tree alignment-based model for statistical machine translation . In
Proceedings of MTSummit.
Hui Zhang , Min Zhang , Haizhou Li , Aiti Aw , and Chew Lim Tan . 2009. Forestbased tree sequence to string translation model . In Proceedings of the
ACL/IJCNLP 2009.
1442
