Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 575?584,
Uppsala , Sweden , 1116 July 2010. c?2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Sentence and Expression Level Annotation of Opinions in User-Generated
Discourse
Cigdem Toprak and Niklas Jakob and Iryna Gurevych
Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab
Computer Science Department , Technische Universita?t Darmstadt , Hochschulstra?e 10
D-64289 Darmstadt , Germany
www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de
Abstract
In this paper , we introduce a corpus of consumer reviews from the rateitall and the eopinions websites annotated with opinion-related information . We present a two-level annotation scheme . In the first stage , the reviews are analyzed at the sentence level for ( i ) relevancy to a given topic , and ( ii ) expressing an evaluation about the topic . In the second stage , on-topic sentences containing evaluations about the topic are further investigated at the expression level for pinpointing the properties ( semantic orientation , intensity ), and the functional components of the evaluations ( opinion terms , targets and holders ). We discuss the annotation scheme , the interannotator agreement for different subtasks and our observations.
1 Introduction
There has been a huge interest in the automatic identification and extraction of opinions from free text in recent years . Opinion mining spans a variety of subtasks including : creating opinion word lexicons ( Esuli and Sebastiani , 2006; Ding et al , 2008), identifying opinion expressions ( Riloff and Wiebe , 2003; Fahrni and Klenner , 2008), identifying polarities of opinions in context ( Breck et al ., 2007; Wilson et al , 2005), extracting opinion targets ( Hu and Liu , 2004; Zhuang et al , 2006; Cheng and Xu , 2008) and opinion holders ( Kim and Hovy , 2006; Choi et al , 2005).
Data-driven approaches for extracting opinion expressions , their holders and targets require reliably annotated data at the expression level . In previous research , expression level annotation of opinions was extensively investigated on newspaper articles ( Wiebe et al , 2005; Wilson and Wiebe , 2005; Wilson , 2008b ) and on meeting dialogs ( Somasundaran et al , 2008; Wilson , 2008a).
Compared to the newspaper and meeting dialog genres , little corpus-based work has been carried out for interpreting the opinions and evaluations in user-generated discourse . Due to the high popularity of Web 2.0 communities1, the amount of user-generated discourse and the interest in the analysis of such discourse has increased over the last years.
To the best of our knowledge , there are two corpora of user-generated discourse which are annotated for opinion related information at the expression level : The corpus of Hu & Liu (2004) consists of customer reviews about consumer electronics , and the corpus of Zhuang et al (2006) consists of movie reviews . Both corpora are tailored for application specific needs , therefore , do not contain certain related information explicitly annotated in the discourse , which we consider important ( see Section 2). Furthermore , none of these works provide interannotator agreement studies.
Our goal is to create sentence and expression level annotated corpus of customer reviews which fulfills the following requirements : (1) It filters individual sentences regarding their topic relevancy and the existence of an opinion or factual information which implies an evaluation . (2) It identifies opinion expressions including the respective opinion target , opinion holder , modifiers , and anaphoric expressions if applicable . (3) The semantic orientation of the opinion expression is identified while considering negation , and the opinion expression is linked to the respective holder and target in the discourse . Such a resource would ( i ) enable novel applications of opinion mining such as a finegrained identification of opinion properties , e.g . opinion modification detection including negation , and ( ii ) enhance opinion target extraction and the polarity assignment by linking the opinion expression with its target 1http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire / wp-content/uploads/2008/10/press_ release24.pdf We present an annotation scheme which fulfills the mentioned requirements , an interannotator agreement study , and discuss our observations.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows : Section 2 presents the related work . In Sections 3, we describe the annotation scheme . Section 4 presents the data and the annotation study , while Section 5 summarizes the main conclusions.
2 Previous Opinion Annotated Corpora 2.1 Newspaper Articles and Meeting Dialogs Most prominent work concerning the expression level annotation of opinions is the Multi-Perspective Question Answering ( MPQA ) corpus2 ( Wiebe et al , 2005). It was extended several times over the last years , either by adding new documents or annotating new types of opinion related information ( Wilson and Wiebe , 2005; Stoyanov and Cardie , 2008; Wilson , 2008b ). The MPQA annotation scheme builds upon the private state notion ( Quirk et al , 1985) which describes mental states including opinions , emotions , speculations and beliefs among others . The annotation scheme strives to represent the private states in terms of their functional components ( i.e . experiencer holding an attitude towards a target ). It consists of frames ( direct subjective , expressive subjective element , objective speech event , agent , attitude , and target frames ) with slots representing various attributes and properties ( e.g.intensity , nested source ) of the private states.
Wilson (2008a ) adapts and extends the concepts from the MPQA scheme to annotate subjective content in meetings ( AMI corpus ), and creates the AMIDA scheme . Besides subjective utterances , the AMIDA scheme contains objective polar utterances which annotates evaluations without expressing explicit opinion expressions.
Somasundaran et al (2008) proposes opinion frames for representing discourse level associations in meeting dialogs . The annotation scheme focuses on two types of opinions , sentiment and arguing . It annotates the opinion expression and target spans . The link and link type attributes associate the target with other targets in the discourse through same or alternative relations . The opinion frames are built based on the links between targets . Somasundaran et al (2008) show that opinion frames enable a coherent interpretation of the 2http://www.cs.pitt.edu/mpqa / opinions in discourse and discover implicit evaluations through link transitivity.
Similar to Somasundaran et al (2008), Asher et al (2008) performs discourse level analysis of opinions . They propose a scheme which first identifies and assigns categories to the opinion segments as reporting , judgment , advice , or sentiment ; and then links the opinion segments with each other via rhetorical relations including contrast , correction , support , result , or continuation.
However , in contrast to our scheme and other schemes , instead of marking expression boundaries without any restriction they annotate an opinion segment only if it contains an opinion word from their lexicon , or if it has a rhetorical relation to another opinion segment.
2.2 User-generated Discourse
The two annotated corpora of user-generated content and their corresponding annotation schemes are far less complex . Hu & Liu (2004) present a dataset of customer reviews for consumer electronics crawled from amazon.com . The following example shows two annotations taken from the corpus of Hu & Liu (2004): camera[+2]##This is my first digital camera and what a toy it is...
size[+2][u]##it is small enough to fit easily in a coat pocket or purse.
The corpus provides only target and polarity annotations , and do not contain opinion expression or opinion modifier annotations which lead to these polarity scores . The annotation scheme allows the annotation of implicit features ( indicated with the the attribute [ u ] ). Implicit features are not resolved to any actual product feature instances in discourse . In fact , the actual positions of the product features ( or any anaphoric references to them ) are not explicitly marked in the discourse , i.e , it is unclear to which mention of the feature the opinion refers to.
In their paper on movie review mining and summarization , Zhuang et al (2006) introduce an annotated corpus of movie reviews from the Internet Movie Database . The corpus is annotated regarding movie features and corresponding opinions.
The following example shows an annotated sentence : ? Sentence?I have never encountered a movie whose supporting cast was so perfectly realized.?FO Fword=?supporting cast ? Ftype=?PAC ? Oword=?perfect?
Otype=?PRO?/??/Sentence ? of 20 predefined categories ( Ftype ). The opinion words ( Oword ) and their semantic orientations ( Otype ) are identified . Possible negations are directly reflected by the semantic orientation , but not explicitly labeled in the sentence . ( PD ) in the following example indicates that the movie feature is referenced by anaphora : ? Sentence?It is utter nonsense and insulting to my intelligence and sense of history . ? FO Fword=?film(PD)?
Ftype=?OA ? Oword=?nonsense , insulting?
Otype=?CON?/??/Sentence?
However , similar to the corpus of Hu & Liu (2004) the referring pronouns are not explicitly marked in discourse . It is therefore neither possible to automatically determine which pronoun creates the link if there are more than one in a sentence , nor it is denoted which antecedent , i.e . the actual mention of the feature in the discourse it relates to.
3 Annotation Scheme 3.1 Opinion versus Polar Facts The goal of the annotation scheme is to capture the evaluations regarding the topics being discussed in the consumer reviews . The evaluations in consumer reviews are either explicit expressions of opinions , or facts which imply evaluations as discussed below.
Explicit expressions of opinions : Opinions are private states ( Wiebe et al , 2005; Quirk et al , 1985) which are not open to objective observation or verification . In this study , we focus on the opinions stating the quality or value of an entity , experience or a proposition from one?s perspective.
(1) illustrates an example of an explicit expression of an opinion . Similar to Wiebe et al (2005), we view opinions in terms of their functional components , as opinion holders , e.g ., the author in (1), holding attitudes ( polarity ), e.g ., negative attitude indicated with the word nightmare , towards possible targets , e.g ., Capella University.
(1) I had a nightmare with Capella University.3 Facts implying evaluations : Besides opinions , there are facts which can be objectively verified , but still imply an evaluation of the quality or value of an entity or a proposition . For instance , consider the snippet below : 3We use authentic examples from the corpus without correcting grammatical or spelling errors.
(2) In a 6-week class , I counted 3 comments from the professors directly to me and two directed to my team.
(3) I found that I spent most of my time learning from my fellow students.
(4) A standard response from my professors would be that of a sentence fragment.
The example above provides an evaluation about the professors without stating any explicit expressions of opinions . We call such objectively verifiable , but evaluative sentences polar facts . Explicit expressions of opinions typically contain specific cues , i.e . opinion words , loaded with a positive or negative connotation ( e.g ., nightmare ). Even when they are taken out of the context in which they appear , they evoke an evaluation . However , evaluations in polar facts can only be inferred within the context of the review . For instance , the targets of the implied evalution in the polar facts (2), (3) and (4) are the professors . However , (3) may have been perceived as a positive statement if the review was explaining how good the fellow students were or how the course enforced team work etc.
The annotation scheme consists of two levels.
First , the sentence level scheme analyses each sentence in terms of ( i ) its relevancy to the overall topic of the review , and ( ii ) whether it contains an evaluation ( an opinion or a polar fact ) about the topic . Once the on-topic sentences containing evaluations are identified , the expression level scheme first focuses either on marking the text spans of the opinion expressions ( if the sentence contains an explicit expression of an opinion ) or marking the targets of the polar facts ( if the sentence is a polar fact ). Upon marking an opinion expression span , the target and holder of the opinion is marked and linked to the marked opinion expression . Furthermore , the expression level scheme allows assigning polarities to the marked opinion expression spans and targets of the polar facts.
The following subsections introduce the sentence and the expression level annotation schemes in detail with examples.
3.2 Sentence Level Annotation
The sentence annotation strives to identify the sentences containing evaluations about the topic . In consumer reviews people occasionally drift off the actual topic being reviewed . For instance , as in (5) taken from a review about an online university , they tend to provide information about their background or other experiences.
(5) I am very fortunate and almost right out of high school with a very average GPA and only 20; I already make above $45,000 a year as a programmer with a large health care company for over a year and have had 3 promotions up in the first year and a half.
Such sentences do not provide information about the actual topic , but typically serve for justifying the user?s point of view or provide a better understanding about her circumstances . However , they are not valuable for an application aiming to extract opinions about a specific topic.
Reviews given to the annotators contain meta information stating the topic , for instance , the name of the university or the service being reviewed . A markable ( i.e . an annotation unit ) is created for each sentence prior to the annotation process . At this level , the annotation process is therefore a sentence labeling task . The annotators are able to see the whole review , and instructed to label sentences in the context of the whole review.
Figure 1 presents the sentence level scheme . Attribute names are marked with oval circles and the possible values are given in parenthesis . The following attributes are used : topic relevant attribute is labeled as yes if the sentence discusses the given topic itself or its aspects , properties or features as in examples (1)-(4). Other possible values for this attribute include none given which can be chosen in the absence of meta data , or no if the sentence drifted off the topic as in example (5).
opinionated attribute is labeled as yes if the sentence contains any explicit expressions of opinions about the given topic . This attribute is presented if the topic relevant attribute has been labeled as none given or yes . In other words , only the on-topic sentences are considered in this step.
Examples (6)-(8) illustrate examples labeled as topic relevant=yes and opinionated=yes.
(6) Many people are knocking Devry but I have seen them to be a very great school . [ Topic : Devry University ] (7) University of Phoenix was a surprising disappointment.
[Topic : University of Phoenix ] (8) Assignments were passed down , but when asked to clarify the assignment because the syllabus had contradicting , poorly worded , information , my professors regularly responded....?refer to the syllabus?....but wait , the syllabus IS the question . [ Topic : University of Phoenix ] polar fact attribute is labeled as yes if the sentence is a polar fact . This attribute is presented if the opinionated attribute has been labeled as no . Examples (2)-(4) demonstrate sentences labeled as topic relevant=yes , opinionated=no and polar fact=yes.
polar fact polarity attribute represents the polarity of the evaluation in a polar fact sentence.
The possible values for this attribute include positive , negative , both . The value both is intended for the polar fact sentences containing more than one evaluation with contradicting polarities . At the expression level analysis , the targets of the contradicting polar fact evaluations are identified distinctly and assigned polarities of positive or negative later on . Examples (9)-(11) demonstrate examples of polar fact sentences with different values of the attribute polar fact polarity.
(9) There are students in the first programming class and after taking this class twice they cannot write a single line of code . [ polar fact polarity=negative ] (10) The same class ( i.e . computer class ) being teach at Ivy League schools are being offered at Devry.
[polar fact polarity=positive ] (11) The lectures are interactive and recorded , but you need a consent from the instructor each time.
[polar fact polarity=both ] 3.3 Expression Level Annotation At the expression level , we focus on the topic relevant sentences containing evaluations , i.e ., sentences labeled as topic relevant=yes , opinion-ated=yes or topic relevant=yes , opinionated=no , polar fact=yes . If the sentence is a polar fact , then the aim is to mark the target and label the polarity of the evaluation . If the sentence is opinionated , then , the aim is to mark the opinion expression span , and label its polarity and strength ( i.e . intensity ), and to link it to the target and the holder.
Figure 2 presents the expression level scheme.
At this stage , annotators mark text spans , and are allowed to assign one of the five labels to the marked span : The polar target is used to label the targets of the evaluations implied by polar facts . The isReference attribute labels polar targets which are anaphoric references . The polar target polarity attribute is used to label the polarity as positive or negative . If the isReference attribute is labeled as true , then the referent attribute appears which enables the annotator to resolve the reference to its antecedent . Consider the example sentences (12) and (13) below . The polar target in (13), written bold , is labeled as isReference=true , polar target polarity=negative . To resolve the reference , annotator first creates another polar target markable for the antecedent , namely the bold text span in (12), then , links the antecedent to the referent attribute of the polar target in (13).
(12) Since classes already started , CTU told me they would extend me so that I could complete the classes and get credit once I got back.
(13) What they didn?t tell me is in order to extend , I also had to be enrolled in the next semester.
The target annotation represents what the opinion is about . Both polar targets and targets can be the topic of the review or different aspects , i.e . features of the topic . Similar to the polar targets , the isReference attribute allows the identification of the targets which are anaphoric references and the referent attribute links them to their antecedents in the discourse . Bold span in (14) shows an example of a target in an opinionated sentence.
(14) Capella U has incredible faculty in the Harold Abel
School of Psychology.
The holder type represents the holder of an opinion in the discourse and is labeled in the same manner as the targets and polar targets . In consumer reviews , holders are most of the time the authors of the reviews . To ease the annotation process , the holder is not labeled when this is the author.
The modifier annotation labels the lexical items , such as not , very , hardly etc ., which affect the strength of an opinion or shift its polarity . Upon creation of a modifier markable , annotators are asked to choose between negation , increase , decrease for identifying the influence of the modifier on the opinion . For instance , the marked span in (15) is labeled as modifier=increase as it gives the impression that the author is really offended by the negative comments about her university.
(15) I am quite honestly appauled by some of the negative comments given for Capella University on this website.
The opinionexpression annotation is used to label the opinion terms in the sentence . This markable type has five attributes , three of which , i.e ., modifier , holder , and target are pointer attributes to the previously defined markable types . The polarity attribute assesses the semantic orientation of the attitude , where the strength attribute marks the intensity of this attitude . The polarity and strength attributes focus solely on the marked opinionexpression span , not the whole evaluation implied in the sentence . For instance , the opinionexpression span in (16) is labeled as polarity=negative , strength=average . We infer the polarity of the evaluation only after considering the modifier , polarity and the strength attributes together . In (16), the evaluation about the target is strongly negative after considering all three attributes of the opinionexpression annotation . In (17), the polarity of the opinionexpression1 itself ( complaints ) is labeled as negative . It is linked to the modifier1 which is labeled as negation . Target1 ( PhD journey ) is linked to the opinionexpression1. The overall evaluation regarding the target1 is positive after applying the affect of the modifier1 to the polarity of the opinionexpression1, i.e ., after negating the negative polarity.
(16) I am quite honestly[modifier ] appauled by[opinionexpression ] some of the negative comments given for Capella University on this website[target].
(17) I have no[modifier1] complaints[opinionexpression1] about the entire PhD journey[target1] and highly[modifier2] recommend[opinionexpression2] this school[target2].
Finally , Figure 3 demonstrates all expression level markables created for an opinionated sentence and how they relate to each other.
579
Figure 3: Expression level annotation example 4 Annotation Study Each review has been annotated by two annotators independently according to the annotation scheme introduced above . We used the freely available MMAX24 annotation tool capable of standoff multilevel annotations . Annotators were native speaker linguistic students . They were trained on 15 reviews after reading the annotation manual.5 In the training stage , the annotators discussed with each other if different decisions have been made and were allowed to ask questions to clarify their understanding of the scheme . Annotators had access to the review text as a whole while making their decisions.
4.1 Data
The corpus consists of consumer reviews collected from the review portals rateitall6 and eopin-ions7. It contains reviews from two domains including online universities , e.g ., Capella University , Pheonix , University of Maryland University College etc . and online services , e.g ., PayPal , egroups , eTrade , eCircles etc . These two domains were selected with the project-relevant , domain-specific research goals in mind . We selected a specific topic , e.g . Pheonix , if there were more than 3 reviews written about it . Table 1 shows descriptive statistics regarding the data.
We used 118 reviews containing 1151 sentences from the university domain for measuring the sentence and expression level agreements . In the following subsections , we report the interannotator agreement ( IAA ) at each level.
4http://mmax2.sourceforge.net / 5http://www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de / research/data/sentiment-analysis 6http://www.rateitall.com 7http://www.epinions.com
University Service All
Reviews 240 234 474
Sentences 2786 6091 8877
Words 49624 102676 152300
Avg sent./rev . 11.6 26 18.7
Std . dev . sent./rev . 8.2 16 14.6
Avg . words/rev . 206.7 438.7 321.3
Std . dev . words/rev . 159.2 232.1 229.8
Table 1: Descriptive statistics about the corpus 4.2 Sentence Level Agreement Sentence level markables were already created automatically prior to the annotation , i.e ., the set of annotation units were the same for both annotators . We use Cohen?s kappa (?) ( Cohen , 1960) for measuring the IAA . The sentence level annotation scheme has a hierarchical structure . A new attribute is presented based on the decision made for the previous attribute , for instance , opinionated attribute is only presented if the topic relevant attribute is labeled as yes or none given ; polar fact attribute is only presented if the opinionated attribute is labeled as no etc . We calculate ? for each attribute considering only the markables which were labeled the same by both annotators in the previously required step . Table 2 shows the ? values for each attribute , the size of the markable set on which the value was calculated , and the percentage agreement.
Attribute Markables Agr . ? topic relevant 1151 0.89 0.73 opinionated 682 0.80 0.61 polar fact 258 0.77 0.56 polar fact polarity 103 0.96 0.92 Table 2: Sentence level interannotator agreement The agreement for topic relevancy shows that it is possible to label this attribute reliably . The sentences labeled as topic relevant by both annotators correspond to 59% of all sentences , suggesting that people often drift off the topic in consumer reviews . This is usually the case when they provide information about their backgrounds or alternatives to the given topic.
On the other hand , we obtain moderate agreement levels for the opinionated and polar fact attributes . 62% of the topic relevant sentences were labeled as opinionated by at least one annotator , and the rest 38% constitute the topic relevant sentences labeled as not opinionated by both annotators . Nonetheless , they still contain evaluations ( polar facts ), as 15% of the topic relevant sen-tators . When we merge the attributes opinionated and polar fact into a single category , we obtain ? of 0.75 and a percentage agreement of 87%. Thus , we conclude that opinion-relevant sentences , either in the form of an explicit expression of opinion or a polar fact , can be labeled reliably in consumer reviews . However , there is a thin border between polar facts and explicit expressions of opinions.
To the best of our knowledge , similar annotation efforts on consumer or movie reviews do not provide any agreement figures for direct comparison.
However , Wiebe et al (2005) present an annotation study where they mark textual spans for subjective expressions in a newspaper corpus . They report pairwise ? values for three annotators ranging between 0.72 - 0.84 for the sentence level sub-jective/objective judgments . Wiebe et al (2005) mark subjective spans , and do not explicitly perform the sentence level labeling task . They calculate the sentence level ? values based on the existence of a subjective expression span in the sentence . Although the task definitions , approaches and the corpora have quite disparate characteristics in both studies , we obtain comparable results when we merge opinionated and polar fact categories.
4.3 Expression Level Agreement
At the expression level , annotators focus only on the sentences which were labeled as opinionated or polar fact by both annotators . Annotators were instructed to mark text spans , and then , assign them the annotation types such as polar target , opinionexpression etc . ( see Figure 2). For calculating the text span agreement , we use the agreement metric presented by Wiebe et al (2005) and Somasundaran et al (2008). This metric corresponds to the precision ( P ) and recall ( R ) metrics in information retrieval where the decisions of one annotator are treated as the system ; the decisions of the other annotator are treated as the gold standard ; and the overlapping spans correspond to the correctly retrieved documents.
Somasundaran et al (2008) present a discourse level annotation study in which opinion and target spans are marked and linked with each other in a meeting transcript corpus . Following Somasundaran et al (2008), we compute three different measures for the text span agreement : ( i ) exact matching in which the text spans should perfectly match ; ( ii ) lenient ( relaxed ) matching in which the overlap between spans is considered as a match , and ( iii ) subset matching in which a span has to be contained in another span in order to be considered as a match.8 Agreement naturally increases as we relax the matching constraints . However , there were no differences between the lenient and the subset agreement values . Therefore , we report only the exact and lenient matching agreement results for each annotation type in Table 3. The same agreement results for the lenient and subset matching indicates that inexact matches are still very similar to each other , i.e ., at least one span is totally contained in the other.
Somasundaran et al (2008) do not report any Fmeasure . However , they report span agreement results in terms of precision and recall ranging between 0.44 - 0.87 for opinion spans and between 0.74 - 0.90 for the target spans . Wiebe et al . (2005) use the lenient matching approach for reporting text span agreements ranging between 0.59 - 0.81 for subjective expressions . We obtain higher agreement values for both opinion expression and target spans . We attribute this to the fact that the annotators look for opinion expression and target spans within the opinionated sentences which they agreed upon . Sentence level analysis indeed increases the reliability at the expression level . Compared to the high agreement on marking target spans , we obtain lower agreement values on marking polar target spans . We observe that it is easier to attribute explicit expressions of evaluations to topic relevant entities compared to attributing evaluations implied by experiences to specific topic relevant entities in the reviews.
We calculated the agreement on identifying anaphoric references using the method introduced in ( Passonneau , 2004) which utilizes Krippen-dorf?s ? ( Krippendorff , 2004) for computing reliability for coreference annotation . We considered the overlapping target and polar target spans together in this calculation , and obtained an ? value of 0.29. Compared to Passonneau (? values from 0.46 to 0.74), we obtain a much lower agreement value . This may be due to the different definitions and organizations of the annotation tasks . Passonneau requires prior marking of all noun phrases ( or instances which needs to be processed by the an-8An example of subset matching : waste of time vs . total waste of time
Exact Lenient
P R F P R F opinionexpression 0.70 0.80 0.75 0.82 0.93 0.87 modifier 0.80 0.82 0.81 0.86 0.86 0.86 target 0.80 0.81 0.80 0.91 0.90 0.91 holder 0.75 0.72 0.73 0.93 0.88 0.91 polar target 0.67 0.42 0.51 0.75 0.49 0.59 Table 3: Interannotator agreement on text spans at the expression level notator ). Annotator?s task is to identify whether an instance refers to another marked entity in the discourse , and then , to identify corefering entity chains . However , in our annotation process annotators were tasked to identify only one entity as the referent , and was free to choose it from anywhere in the discourse . In other words , our chains contain only one entity . It is possible that both annotators performed correct resolutions , but still did not overlap with each other , as they resolve to different instances of the same entity in the discourse.
We plan to further investigate reference resolution annotation discrepancies and perform corrections in the future.
Some annotation types require additional attributes to be labeled after marking the span.
For instance , upon marking a text span as a polar target or an opinionexpression , one has to label the polarity and strength . We consider the overlapping spans for each annotation type and use ? for reporting the agreement on these attributes . Table 4 shows the ? values.
Attribute Markables Agr . ? polarity 329 0.97 0.94 strength 329 0.74 0.55 modifier 136 0.88 0.77 polar target polarity 63 0.80 0.67 Table 4: Interannotator agreement at the expression level We observe that the strength of the opinionexpression and the polar target polarity cannot be labeled as reliably as the polarity of the opinionexpression . 61% of the agreed upon polar targets were labeled as negative by both annotators . On the other hand , only 35% of the agreed upon opin-ionexpressions were labeled as negative by both annotators . There were no neutral instances . This indicates that reviewers tend to report negative experiences using polar facts , probably objectively describing what has happened , but report positive experiences with explicit opinion expressions.
Distribution of the strength attribute was as follows : weak 6%, average 54%, and strong 40%.
The majority of the modifiers were annotated as intensifiers (70%), while 20% of the modifiers were labeled as negation.
4.4 Discussion
We analyzed the discrepancies in the annotations to gain insights about the challenges involved in various opinion related labeling tasks . At the sentence level , there were several trivial cases of disagreement , for instance , failing to recognize topic relevancy when the topic was not mentioned or referenced explicitly in the sentence , as in (18).
Occasionally , annotators disagreed about whether a sentence that was written as a reaction to the other reviewers , as in (19), should be considered as topic relevant or not . Another source of disagreement included sentences similar to (20) and (21). One annotator interpreted them as universally true statements regardless of the topic , while the other attributed them to the discussed topic.
(18) Go to a state university if you know whats good for you ! (19) Those with sour grapes couldnt cut it , have an ax to grind , and are devoting their time to smearing the school.
(20) As far as learning , you really have to WANT to learn the material.
(21) On an aside , this type of education is not for the undisciplined learner.
Annotators easily distinguished the evaluations at the sentence level . However , they had difficulties distinguishing between a polar fact and an opinion . For instance , both annotators agreed that the sentences (22) and (23) contain evaluations regarding the topic of the review . However , one annotator interpreted both sentences as objectively verifiable facts giving a positive impression about the school , while the other one treated them as opinions.
(22) All this work in the first 2 Years ! (23) The school has a reputation for making students work really hard.
Sentence level annotation increases the reliability of the expression level annotation in terms of marking text spans . However , annotators often had disagreements on labeling the strength attribute . For instance , one annotator labeled the other one labeled it as average . We observe that it is not easy to identify trivial causes of disagreements regarding strength as its perception by each individual is highly subjective . However , most of the disagreements occurred between weak and average cases.
(24) the experience that i have when i visit student finance is much like going to the dentist , except when i leave , nothing is ever fixed.
We did not apply any consolidation steps during our agreement studies . However , a final version of the corpus will be produced by the third judge ( one of the coauthors ) by consolidating the judgements of the two annotators.
5 Conclusions
We presented a corpus of consumer reviews from the rateitall and eopinions websites annotated with opinion related information . Existing opinion annotated user-generated corpora suffer from several limitations which result in difficulties for interpreting the experimental results and for performing error analysis . To name a few , they do not explicitly link the functional components of the opinions like targets , holders , or modifiers with the opinion expression ; some of them do not mark opinion expression spans , none of them resolves anaphoric references in discourse . Therefore , we introduced a two level annotation scheme consisting of the sentence and expression levels , which overcomes the limitations of the existing review corpora . The sentence level annotation labels sentences for ( i ) relevancy to a given topic , and ( ii ) expressing an evaluation about the topic . Similar to ( Wilson , 2008a ), our annotation scheme allows capturing evaluations made with factual ( objective ) sentences . The expression level annotation further investigates on-topic sentences containing evaluations for pinpointing the properties ( polarity , strength ), and marking the functional components of the evaluations ( opinion terms , modifiers , targets and holders ), and linking them within a discourse . We applied the annotation scheme to the consumer review genre and presented an extensive interannotator study providing insights to the challenges involved in various opinion related labeling tasks in consumer reviews . Similar to the MPQA scheme , which is successfully applied to the newspaper genre , the annotation scheme treats opinions and evaluations as a composition of functional components and it is easily extendable . Therefore , we hypothesize that the scheme can also be applied to other genres with minor extensions or as it is . Finally , the corpus and the annotation manual will be made available at http://www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de / research/data/sentiment-analysis.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded partially by the German Federal Ministry of Economy and Technology under grant 01MQ07012 and partially by the German Research Foundation ( DFG ) as part of the Research Training Group on Feedback Based Quality Management in eLearning under grant 1223. We are very grateful to Sandra Ku?bler for her help in organizing the annotators , and to Lizhen Qu for his programming support in harvesting the data.
References
Nicholas Asher , Farah Benamara , and Yvette Yannick Mathieu . 2008. Distilling opinion in discourse : A preliminary study . In Coling 2008: Companion volume : Posters , pages 7?10, Manchester , UK.
Eric Breck , Yejin Choi , and Claire Cardie . 2007.
Identifying expressions of opinion in context . In Proceedings of the Twentieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence ( IJCAI-2007), pages 2683?2688, Hyderabad , India.
Xiwen Cheng and Feiyu Xu . 2008. Fine-grained opinion topic and polarity identification . In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation , pages 2710?2714, Marrekech , Morocco.
Yejin Choi , Claire Cardie , Ellen Riloff , and Siddharth Patwardhan . 2005. Identifying sources of opinions with conditional random fields and extraction patterns . In HLT ?05: Proceedings of the conference on Human Language Technology and Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 355?362, Morristown , NJ , USA.
Jacob Cohen . 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales . Educational and Psychological
Measurement , 20(1):37?46.
Xiaowen Ding , Bing Liu , and Philip S . Yu . 2008. A holistic lexicon-based approach to opinion mining.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Web Search and Web Data Mining , WSDM 2008, pages 231?240, Palo Alto , California , USA.
Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani . 2006. SentiWordNet : A publicly available lexical resource for opinion mining . In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation , pages 417?422, Genova , Italy.
583
Angela Fahrni and Manfred Klenner . 2008. Old wine or warm beer : Target-specific sentiment analysis of adjectives . In Proceedings of the Symposium on Affective Language in Human and Machine , AISB 2008 Convention , pages 60 ? 63, Aberdeen , Scotland.
Minqing Hu and Bing Liu . 2004. Mining and summarizing customer reviews . In KDD?04: Proceedings of the Tenth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 168?177, Seattle , Washington.
Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy . 2006. Extracting opinions , opinion holders , and topics expressed in online news media text . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text at the joint COLINGACL Conference , pages 1?8, Sydney,
Australia.
Klaus Krippendorff . 2004. Content Analysis : An Introduction to Its Methology . Sage Publications,
Thousand Oaks , California.
Rebecca J . Passonneau . 2004. Computing reliability for coreference . In Proceedings of LREC , volume 4, pages 1503?1506, Lisbon.
Randolph Quirk , Sidney Greenbaum , Geoffrey Leech , and Jan Svartvik . 1985. A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language . Longman , New York.
Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe . 2003. Learning extraction patterns for subjective expressions . In EMNLP03: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 105?112.
Swapna Somasundaran , Josef Ruppenhofer , and Janyce Wiebe . 2008. Discourse level opinion relations : An annotation study . In In Proceedings of SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue , pages 129? 137, Columbus , Ohio.
Veselin Stoyanov and Claire Cardie . 2008. Topic identification for finegrained opinion analysis . In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics ( Coling 2008), pages 817?824, Manchester , UK.
Janyce Wiebe , Theresa Wilson , and Claire Cardie.
2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions in language . Language Resources and Evaluation , 39:165?210.
Theresa Wilson and Janyce Wiebe . 2005. Annotating attributions and private states . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotations II : Pie in the Sky , pages 53?60, Ann Arbor , Michigan.
Theresa Wilson , Janyce Wiebe , and Paul Hoffmann.
2005. Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment analysis . In HLT ?05: Proceedings of the conference on Human Language Technology and Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 347?354, Vancouver , British
Columbia , Canada.
Theresa Wilson . 2008a . Annotating subjective content in meetings . In Proceedings of the Sixth International Language Resources and Evaluation ( LREC?08), Marrakech , Morocco.
Theresa Ann Wilson . 2008b . Fine-grained Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis : Recognizing the Intensity , Polarity , and Attitudes of Private States . Ph.D.
thesis , University of Pittsburgh.
Li Zhuang , Feng Jing , and Xiao-Yan Zhu . 2006.
Movie review mining and summarization . In CIKM ?06: Proceedings of the 15th ACM international conference on Information and knowledge management , pages 43?50, Arlington , Virginia , USA.
584
