Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 1476?1485,
Portland , Oregon , June 1924, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Latent Semantic Word Sense Induction and Disambiguation
Tim Van de Cruys
RCEAL
University of Cambridge
United Kingdom
tv234@cam.ac.uk
Marianna Apidianaki
Alpage , INRIA & Univ Paris Diderot
Sorbonne Paris Cite ?, UMRI-001
75013 Paris , France
marianna.apidianaki@inria.fr
Abstract
In this paper , we present a unified model for the automatic induction of word senses from text , and the subsequent disambiguation of particular word instances using the automatically extracted sense inventory . The induction step and the disambiguation step are based on the same principle : words and contexts are mapped to a limited number of topical dimensions in a latent semantic word space . The intuition is that a particular sense is associated with a particular topic , so that different senses can be discriminated through their association with particular topical dimensions ; in a similar vein , a particular instance of a word can be disambiguated by determining its most important topical dimensions . The model is evaluated on the SEMEVAL-2010 word sense induction and disambiguation task , on which it reaches state-of-the-art results.
1 Introduction
Word sense induction ( WSI ) is the task of automatically identifying the senses of words in texts , without the need for handcrafted resources or manually annotated data . The manual construction of a sense inventory is a tedious and time-consuming job , and the result is highly dependent on the annotators and the domain at hand . By applying an automatic procedure , we are able to only extract the senses that are objectively present in a particular corpus , and it allows for the sense inventory to be straightforwardly adapted to a new domain.
Word sense disambiguation ( WSD ), on the other hand , is the closely related task of assigning a sense label to a particular instance of a word in context , using an existing sense inventory . The bulk of WSD algorithms up till now use predefined sense inventories ( such as WordNet ) that often contain finegrained sense distinctions , which poses serious problems for computational semantic processing ( Ide and Wilks , 2007). Moreover , most WSD algorithms take a supervised approach , which requires a significant amount of manually annotated training data.
The model presented here induces the senses of words in a fully unsupervised way , and subsequently uses the induced sense inventory for the unsupervised disambiguation of particular occurrences of words . The induction step and the disambiguation step are based on the same principle : words and contexts are mapped to a limited number of topical dimensions in a latent semantic word space . The key idea is that the model combines tight , synonym-like similarity ( based on dependency relations ) with broad , topical similarity ( based on a large ? bag of words ? context window ). The intuition in this is that the dependency features can be disambiguated by the topical dimensions identified by the broad contextual features ; in a similar vein , a particular instance of a word can be disambiguated by determining its most important topical dimensions ( based on the instance?s context words).
The paper is organized as follows . Section 2 presents some previous research on distributional similarity and word sense induction . Section 3 gives an overview of our method for word sense induction and disambiguation . Section 4 provides a quantitative evaluation and comparison to other algorithms in the framework of the SEMEVAL-2010 word sense last section draws conclusions , and lays out a number of future research directions.
2 Previous Work 2.1 Distributional similarity According to the distributional hypothesis of meaning ( Harris , 1954), words that occur in similar contexts tend to be semantically similar . In the spirit of this by now wellknown adage , numerous algorithms have sprouted up that try to capture the semantics of words by looking at their distribution in texts , and comparing those distributions in a vector space model.
One of the best known models in this respect is latent semantic analysis ? LSA ( Landauer and Dumais , 1997; Landauer et al , 1998). In LSA , a term-document matrix is created , that contains the frequency of each word in a particular document . This matrix is then decomposed into three other matrices with a mathematical factorization technique called singular value decomposition ( SVD ). The most important dimensions that come out of the SVD are said to represent latent semantic dimensions , according to which nouns and documents can be represented more efficiently . Our model also applies a factorization technique ( albeit a different one ) in order to find a reduced semantic space.
Context is a determining factor in the nature of the semantic similarity that is induced . A broad context window ( e.g . a paragraph or document ) yields broad , topical similarity , whereas a small context yields tight , synonym-like similarity . This has lead a number of researchers to use the dependency relations that a particular word takes part in as contextual features . One of the most important approaches is Lin (1998). An overview of dependency-based semantic space models is given in Pado ? and Lapata (2007).
2.2 Word sense induction
The following paragraphs provide a succinct overview of word sense induction research . A thorough survey on word sense disambiguation ( including unsupervised induction algorithms ) is presented in Navigli (2009).
Algorithms for word sense induction can roughly be divided into local and global ones . Local WSI algorithms extract the different senses of a word on a perword basis , i.e . the different senses for each word are determined separately . They can be further subdivided into context-clustering algorithms and graphbased algorithms . In the context-clustering approach , context vectors are created for the different instances of a particular word , and those contexts are grouped into a number of clusters , representing the different senses of the word . The context vectors may be represented as first or second-order cooccurrences ( i.e . the contexts of the target word are similar if the words they in turn cooccur with are similar ). The first one to propose this idea of context-group discrimination was Schu?tze (1998), and many researchers followed a similar approach to sense induction ( Purandare and Pedersen , 2004).
In the graphbased approach , on the other hand , a cooccurrence graph is created , in which nodes represent words , and edges connect words that appear in the same context ( dependency relation or context window ). The senses of a word may then be discovered using graph clustering techniques ( Widdows and Dorow , 2002), or algorithms such as HyperLex ( Ve?ronis , 2004) or Pagerank ( Agirre et al , 2006). Finally , Bordag (2006) recently proposed an approach that uses word triplets to perform word sense induction . The underlying idea is the ? one sense per collocation ? assumption , and cooccurrence triplets are clustered based on the words they have in common.
Global algorithms take an approach in which the different senses of a particular word are determined by comparing them to , and demarcating them from , the senses of other words in a full-blown word space model . The best known global approach is the one by Pantel and Lin (2002). They present a global clustering algorithm ? coined clustering by committee ( CBC ) ? that automatically discovers word senses from text . The key idea is to first discover a set of tight , unambiguous clusters , to which possibly ambiguous words can be assigned . Once a word has been assigned to a cluster , the features associated with that particular cluster are stripped off the word?s vector . This way , less frequent senses of the word may be discovered.
Van de Cruys (2008) proposes a model for sense induction based on latent semantic dimensions . Using an extension of nonnegative matrix factoriza-according to which both dependency features and broad contextual features are classified . Using the latent space , the model is able to discriminate between different word senses . The model presented below is an extension of this approach : whereas the model described in Van de Cruys (2008) is only able to perform word sense induction , our model is capable of performing both word sense induction and disambiguation.
3 Methodology 3.1 Nonnegative Matrix Factorization Our model uses nonnegative matrix factorization ? NMF ( Lee and Seung , 2000) in order to find latent dimensions . There are a number of reasons to prefer NMF over the better known singular value decomposition used in LSA . First of all , NMF allows us to minimize the KullbackLeibler divergence as an objective function , whereas SVD minimizes the Euclidean distance . The KullbackLeibler divergence is better suited for language phenomena . Minimizing the Euclidean distance requires normally distributed data , and language phenomena are typically not normally distributed . Secondly , the nonnegative nature of the factorization ensures that only additive and no subtractive relations are allowed . This proves particularly useful for the extraction of semantic dimensions , so that the NMF model is able to extract much more clearcut dimensions than an SVD model . And thirdly , the nonnegative property allows the resulting model to be interpreted probabilistically , which is not straightforward with an SVD factorization.
The key idea is that a nonnegative matrix A is factorized into two other nonnegative matrices , W and H
Ai?j ? Wi?kHk?j (1) where k is much smaller than i , j so that both instances and features are expressed in terms of a few components . Nonnegative matrix factorization enforces the constraint that all three matrices must be nonnegative , so all elements must be greater than or equal to zero.
Using the minimization of the KullbackLeibler divergence as an objective function , we want to find the matrices W and H for which the KullbackLeibler divergence between A and WH ( the multiplication of W and H ) is the smallest . This factorization is carried out through the iterative application of update rules . Matrices W and H are randomly initialized , and the rules in 2 and 3 are iteratively applied ? alternating between them . In each iteration , each vector is adequately normalized , so that all dimension values sum to 1.
Ha ? ? Ha ? ? iWia
Ai ? ( WH)i ? ? kWka (2)
Wia ? Wia ? ? Ha?
Ai ? ( WH)i ? ? vHav (3) 3.2 Word sense induction Using an extension of nonnegative matrix factorization , we are able to jointly induce latent factors for three different modes : words , their window-based (? bag of words ?) context words , and their dependency relations . Three matrices are constructed that capture the pairwise cooccurrence frequencies for the different modes . The first matrix contains cooccurrence frequencies of words cross-classified by dependency relations , the second matrix contains cooccurrence frequencies of words cross-classified by words that appear in the noun?s context window , and the third matrix contains cooccurrence frequencies of dependency relations cross-classified by cooccurring context words . NMF is then applied to the three matrices and the separate factorizations are interleaved ( i.e . the results of the former factorization are used to initialize the factorization of the next matrix ). A graphical representation of the interleaved factorization algorithm is given in figure 1.
The procedure of the algorithm goes as follows.
First , matrices W , H , G , and F are randomly initialized . We then start our first iteration , and compute the update of matrix W ( using equation 3). Matrix W is then copied to matrix V , and the update of matrix G is computed ( using equation 2). The transpose of matrix G is again copied to matrix U , and the update ofF is computed ( again using equation 2).
As a last step , matrix F is copied to matrix H , and we restart the iteration loop until a stopping criterion ( e.g . a maximum number of iterations , or no more significant change in objective function ; we used the = xV G = xU F j i s k i j kAwords xdependency relations
B words xcontext words
Ccontext words xdependency relations k k k k i j i s j s s Figure 1: A graphical representation of the interleaved
NMF algorithm former one ) is reached.1 When the factorization is finished , the three different modes ( words , window-based context words and dependency relations ) are all represented according to a limited number of latent factors.
Next , the factorization that is thus created is used for word sense induction . The intuition is that a particular , dominant dimension of an ambiguous word is ? switched off ?, in order to reveal other possible senses of the word . Formally , we proceed as follows.
Matrix H indicates the importance of each dependency relation given a topical dimension . With this knowledge , the dependency relations that are responsible for a certain dimension can be subtracted from the original noun vector . This is done by scaling down each feature of the original vector according to the load of the feature on the subtracted dimension , using equation 4.
t = v(u1 ? hk ) (4)
Equation 4 multiplies each dependency feature of the original noun vector v with a scaling factor , according to the load of the feature on the subtracted dimension ( hk ? the vector of matrix H that corresponds to the dimension we want to subtract ). u1 is a vector of ones with the same length as hk . The result is vector t , in which the dependency features rel-1Note that this is not the only possibly way of interleaving the different factorizations , but in our experiments we found that different constellations lead to similar results.
evant to the particular topical dimension have been scaled down.
In order to determine which dimension(s ) are responsible for a particular sense of the word , the method is embedded in a clustering approach . First , a specific word is assigned to its predominant sense ( i.e . the most similar cluster ). Next , the dominant semantic dimension(s ) for this cluster are subtracted from the word vector , and the resulting vector is fed to the clustering algorithm again , to see if other word senses emerge . The dominant semantic dimen-sion(s ) can be identified by folding vector c ? representing the cluster centroid ? into the factorization ( equation 5). This yields a probability vector b over latent factors for the particular centroid.
b = cHT (5)
A simple kmeans algorithm is used to compute the initial clustering , using the non-factorized dependency-based feature vectors ( matrix A ). kmeans yields a hard clustering , in which each noun is assigned to exactly one ( dominant ) cluster . In the second step , we determine for each noun whether it can be assigned to other , less dominant clusters.
First , the salient dimension(s ) of the centroid to which the noun is assigned are determined . The centroid of the cluster is computed by averaging the frequencies of all cluster elements except for the target word we want to reassign . After subtracting the salient dimensions from the noun vector , we check whether the vector is reassigned to another cluster centroid . If this is the case , ( another instance of ) the noun is assigned to the cluster , and the second step is repeated . If there is no reassignment , we continue with the next word . The target element is removed from the centroid to make sure that only the dimensions associated with the sense of the cluster are subtracted . When the algorithm is finished , each noun is assigned to a number of clusters , representing its different senses.
We use two different methods for selecting the final number of candidate senses . The first method , NMFcon , takes a conservative approach , and only selects candidate senses if ? after the subtraction of salient dimensions ? another sense is found that is more similar2 to the adapted noun vector than the 2We use the cosine measure for our similarity calculations.
1479 dominant sense . The second method , NMFlib , is more liberal , and also selects the next best cluster centroid as candidate sense until a certain similarity threshold ? is reached.3 3.3 Word sense disambiguation The sense inventory that results from the induction step can now be used for the disambiguation of individual instances as follows . For each instance of the target noun , we extract its context words , i.e . the words that cooccur in the same paragraph , and represent them as a probability vector f . Using matrix G from our factorization model ( which represents context words by semantic dimensions ), this vector can be folded into the semantic space , thus representing a probability vector over latent factors for the particular instance of the target noun ( equation 6).
d = fGT (6)
Likewise , the candidate senses of the noun ( represented as centroids ) can be folded into our semantic space using matrix H ( equation 5). This yields a probability distribution over the semantic dimensions for each centroid . As a last step , we compute the KullbackLeibler divergence between the context vector and the candidate centroids , and select the candidate centroid that yields the lowest divergence as the correct sense . The disambiguation process is represented graphically in figure 2.
3.4 Example
Let us clarify the process with an example for the noun chip . The sense induction algorithm finds the following candidate senses:4 1. cache , CPU , memory , microprocessor , processor , RAM , register 2. bread , cake , chocolate , cookie , recipe , sandwich 3. accessory , equipment , goods , item , machinery , material , product , supplies 3Experimentally ( examining the cluster output ), we set ? = 0.2 4Note that we do not use the word sense to hint at a lexicographic meaning distinction ; rather , sense in this case should be regarded as a more coarse-grained and topic-related entity.
G ' k sscontext vector k cluster centroid j cluster centroid j cluster centroid j
H ' k j k k k
Figure 2: Graphical representation of the disambiguation process Each candidate sense is associated with a centroid ( the average frequency vector of the cluster?s members ), that is folded into the semantic space , which yields a ? semantic fingerprint ?, i.e . a distribution over the semantic dimensions . For the first sense , the ? computer ? dimension will be the most important . Likewise , for the second and the third sense the ? food ? dimension and the ? manufacturing ? dimension will be the most important.5 Let us now take a particular instance of the noun chip , such as the one in (1).
(1) An N.V . Philips unit has created a computer system that processes video images 3,000 times faster than conventional systems.
Using reduced instruction - set computing , or RISC , chips made by Intergraph of Huntsville , Ala ., the system splits the image it ? sees ? into 20 digital representations , each processed by one chip.
Looking at the context of the particular instance of chip , a context vector is created which represents the semantic content words that appear in the same paragraph ( the extracted content words are printed in boldface ). This context vector is again folded into the semantic space , yielding a distribution over the semantic dimensions . By selecting the lowest 5In the majority of cases , the induced dimensions indeed contain such clearcut semantics , so that the dimensions can be rightfully labeled as above.
1480
KullbackLeibler divergence between the semantic probability distribution of the target instance and the semantic probability distributions of the candidate senses , the algorithm is able to assign the ? computer ? sense of the target noun chip.
4 Evaluation 4.1 Dataset
Our word sense induction and disambiguation model is trained and tested on the dataset of the SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD task ( Manandhar et al , 2010). The SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD task is based on a dataset of 100 target words , 50 nouns and 50 verbs . For each target word , a training set is provided from which the senses of the word have to be induced without using any other resources . The training set for a target word consists of a set of target word instances in context ( sentences or paragraphs ). The complete training set contains 879,807 instances , viz . 716,945 noun and 162,862 verb instances.
The senses induced during training are used for disambiguation in the testing phase . In this phase , the system is provided with a test set that consists of unseen instances of the target words . The test set contains 8,915 instances in total , of which 5,285 nouns and 3,630 verbs . The instances in the test set are tagged with OntoNotes senses ( Hovy et al , 2006). The system needs to disambiguate these instances using the senses acquired during training.
4.2 Implementational details
The SEMEVAL training set has been part of speech tagged and lemmatized with the Stanford Part-Of-Speech Tagger ( Toutanova and Manning , 2000; Toutanova et al , 2003) and parsed with MaltParser ( Nivre et al , 2006), trained on sections 221 of the Wall Street Journal section of the Penn Treebank extended with about 4000 questions from the QuestionBank6 in order to extract dependency triples . The SEMEVAL test set has only been tagged and lemmatized , as our disambiguation model does not use dependency triples as features ( contrary to the induction model).
6http://maltparser.org/mco/english_ parser/engmalt.html We constructed two different models ? one for nouns and one for verbs . For each model , the matrices needed for our interleaved NMF factorization are extracted from the corpus . The noun model was built using 5K nouns , 80K dependency relations , and 2K context words ( excluding stop words ) with highest frequency in the training set , which yields matrices of 5K nouns ? 80K dependency relations , 5K nouns ? 2K context words , and 80K dependency relations ? 2K context words . The model for verbs was constructed analogously , using 3K verbs , and the same number of dependency relations and context words.
For our initial kmeans clustering , we set k = 600 for nouns , and k = 400 for verbs . For the underlying interleaved NMF model , we used 50 iterations , and factored the model to 50 dimensions.
4.3 Evaluation measures
The results of the systems participating in the SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD task are evaluated both in a supervised and in an unsupervised manner.
The supervised evaluation in the SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD task follows the scheme of the SEMEVAL-2007 WSI task ( Agirre and Soroa , 2007), with some modifications . One part of the test set is used as a mapping corpus , which maps the automatically induced clusters to gold standard senses ; the other part acts as an evaluation corpus . The mapping between clusters and gold standard senses is used to tag the evaluation corpus with gold standard tags . The systems are then evaluated as in a standard WSD task , using recall.
In the unsupervised evaluation , the induced senses are evaluated as clusters of instances which are compared to the sets of instances tagged with the gold standard senses ( corresponding to classes).
Two partitions are thus created over the test set of a target word : a set of automatically generated clusters and a set of gold standard classes . A number of these instances will be members of both one gold standard class and one cluster . Consequently , the quality of the proposed clustering solution is evaluated by comparing the two groupings and measuring their similarity.
Two evaluation metrics are used during the unsupervised evaluation in order to estimate the quality of the clustering solutions , the VMeasure ( Rosenberg and Hirschberg , 2007) and the paired F-quality of a clustering by measuring its homogeneity ( h ) and its completeness ( c ). Homogeneity refers to the degree that each cluster consists of data points primarily belonging to a single gold standard class , while completeness refers to the degree that each gold standard class consists of data points primarily assigned to a single cluster . VMeasure is the harmonic mean of h and c.
VM = 2 ? h ? c h + c (7)
In the paired FScore ( Artiles et al , 2009) evaluation , the clustering problem is transformed into a classification problem ( Manandhar et al , 2010). A set of instance pairs is generated from the automatically induced clusters , which comprises pairs of the instances found in each cluster . Similarly , a set of instance pairs is created from the gold standard classes , containing pairs of the instances found in each class.
Precision is then defined as the number of common instance pairs between the two sets to the total number of pairs in the clustering solution ( cf . formula 8).
Recall is defined as the number of common instance pairs between the two sets to the total number of pairs in the gold standard ( cf . formula 9). Precision and recall are finally combined to produce the harmonic mean ( cf . formula 10).
P = | F ( K ) ? F ( S )| | F ( K )| (8)
R = | F ( K ) ? F ( S )| | F ( S )| (9)
FS = 2 ? P ? R
P + R (10)
The obtained results are also compared to two baselines . The most frequent sense ( MFS ) baseline groups all testing instances of a target word into one cluster . The Random baseline randomly assigns an instance to one of the clusters.7 This baseline is executed five times and the results are averaged.
7The number of clusters in Random was chosen to be roughly equal to the average number of senses in the gold standard.
4.4 Results 4.4.1 Unsupervised evaluation In table 1, we present the performance of a number of algorithms on the V-measure . We compare our V-measure scores with the scores of the best-ranked systems in the SEMEVAL 2010 WSI/WSD task , both for the complete data set and for nouns and verbs separately . The fourth column shows the average number of clusters induced in the test set by each algorithm . The MFS baseline has a VMeasure equal to 0, since by definition its completeness is 1 and its homogeneity is 0.
NMFcon ? our model that takes a conservative approach in the induction of candidate senses ? does not beat the random baseline . NMFlib ? our model that is more liberal in inducing senses ? reaches better results . With 11.8%, it scores similar to other algorithms that induce a similar average number of clusters , such as Duluth-WSI ( Pedersen , 2010).
Pedersen (2010) has shown that the VMeasure tends to favour systems producing a higher number of clusters than the number of gold standard senses.
This is reflected in the scores of our models as well.
VM (%) all noun verb # cl
Hermit 16.2 16.7 15.6 10.78
UoY 15.7 20.6 8.5 11.54
KSU KDD 15.7 18.0 12.4 17.50
NMFlib 11.8 13.5 9.4 4.80
Duluth-WSI 9.0 11.4 5.7 4.15
Random 4.4 4.2 4.6 4.00
NMFcon 3.9 3.9 3.9 1.58
MFS 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.00
Table 1: Unsupervised V-measure evaluation on SE-
MEVAL test set
Motivated by the large divergences in the system rankings on the different metrics used in the SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD task , Pedersen evaluated the metrics themselves . His evaluation relied on the assumption that a good measure should assign low scores to random baselines . Pedersen showed that the VMeasure continued to improve as randomness increased . We agree with Pedersen?s conclusion that the VMeasure results should be interpreted with caution , but we still report the results in order our system?s performance to the systems that participated to the SEMEVAL task.
Contrary to VMeasure , paired Fscore is a fairly reliable measure and the only one that managed to identify and expose random baselines in the above mentioned metric evaluation . This means that the random systems used for testing were ranked low when a high number of random senses was used.
In table 2, the paired FScore of a number of algorithms is given . The paired FScore penalizes systems when they produce a higher number of clusters ( low recall ) or a lower number of clusters ( low precision ) than the gold standard number of senses . We again compare our results with the scores of the best-ranked systems in the SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD
TASK.
FS (%) all noun verb # cl
MFS 63.5 57.0 72.7 1.00
Duluth-WSI-SVD-Gap 63.3 57.0 72.4 1.02
NMFcon 60.2 54.6 68.4 1.58
NMFlib 45.3 42.2 49.8 5.42
Duluth-WSI 41.1 37.1 46.7 4.15
Random 31.9 30.4 34.1 4.00
Table 2: Unsupervised paired Fscore evaluation on SE-
MEVAL testset
NMFcon reaches a score of 60.2%, which is again similar to other algorithms that induce the same average number of clusters . NMFlib scores 45.3%, indicating that the algorithm is able to retain a reasonable FScore while at the same time inducing a significant number of clusters . This especially becomes clear when comparing its score to the other algorithms.
4.4.2 Supervised evaluation
In the supervised evaluation , the automatically induced clusters are mapped to gold standard senses , using the mapping corpus ( i.e . one part of the test set ). The obtained mapping is used to tag the evaluation corpus ( i.e . the other part of the test set ) with gold standard tags , which means that the methods are evaluated in a standard WSD task.
Table 3 shows the recall of our algorithms in the supervised evaluation , again compared to other algorithms evaluated in the SEMEVAL-2010 WSI/WSD task.
SR (%) all noun verb # S
NMFlib 62.6 57.3 70.2 1.82
UoY 62.4 59.4 66.8 1.51
Duluth-WSI 60.5 54.7 68.9 1.66
NMFcon 60.3 54.5 68.8 1.21
MFS 58.7 53.2 66.6 1.00
Random 57.3 51.5 65.7 1.53
Table 3: Supervised recall for SEMEVAL testset , 80% mapping , 20% evaluation NMFlib gets 62.6%, which makes it the best scoring algorithm on the supervised evaluation . NMFcon reaches 60.3%, which again indicates that it is in the same ballpark as other algorithms that induce a similar average number of senses.
Some doubts have been cast on the representativeness of the supervised recall results as well . According to Pedersen (2010), the supervised learning algorithm that underlies this evaluation method tends to converge to the Most Frequent Sense ( MFS ) baseline , because the number of senses that the classifier assigns to the test instances is rather low . We think these shortcomings indicate the need for the development of new evaluation metrics , capable of providing a more accurate evaluation of the performance of WSI systems . Nevertheless , these metrics still constitute a useful testbed for comparing the performance of different systems.
5 Conclusion and future work
In this paper , we presented a model based on latent semantics that is able to perform word sense induction as well as disambiguation . Using latent topical dimensions , the model is able to discriminate between different senses of a word , and subsequently disambiguate particular instances of a word . The evaluation results indicate that our model reaches state-of-the-art performance compared to other systems that participated in the SEMEVAL-2010 word sense induction and disambiguation task . Moreover , our global approach is able to reach similar performance on an evaluation set that is tuned to fit the needs of local approaches . The evaluation set con-small number of target words , favouring methods that induce senses on a perword basis . A global approach like ours is likely to induce a more balanced sense inventory using an unbiased corpus , and is likely to outperform local methods when such an unbiased corpus is used as input . We therefore think that the global , unified approach to word sense induction and disambiguation presented here provides a genuine and powerful solution to the problem at hand.
We conclude with some issues for future work.
First of all , we would like to evaluate the approach presented here using a more balanced and unbiased corpus , and compare its performance on such a corpus to local approaches . Secondly , we would also like to include grammatical dependency information in the disambiguation step of the algorithm . For now , the disambiguation step only uses a word?s context words ; enriching the feature set with dependency information is likely to improve the performance of the disambiguation.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the Scribo project , funded by the French ? po?le de compe?titivite ?? System@tic , and by the French national grant EDyLex ( ANR-09-
CORD-008).
References
Eneko Agirre and Aitor Soroa . 2007. SemEval2007 Task 02: Evaluating word sense induction and discrimination systems . In Proceedings of the fourth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations ( SemEval ), ACL , pages 7?12, Prague , Czech Republic.
Eneko Agirre , David Mart??nez , Ojer Lo?pez de Lacalle , and Aitor Soroa . 2006. Two graphbased algorithms for state-of-the-art WSD . In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP06), pages 585?593, Sydney , Australia.
Marianna Apidianaki and Tim Van de Cruys . 2011. A Quantitative Evaluation of Global Word Sense Induction . In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Linguistics ( CICLing ), published in Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science ( LNCS ), volume 6608, pages 253?264, Tokyo , Japan.
Javier Artiles , Enrique Amigo ?, and Julio Gonzalo . 2009.
The role of named entities in web people search . In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP-09), pages 534?542, Singapore.
Stefan Bordag . 2006. Word sense induction : Triplet-based clustering and automatic evaluation . In Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( EACL06), pages 137?144, Trento , Italy.
Zellig S . Harris . 1954. Distributional structure . Word , 10(23):146?162.
Eduard Hovy , Mitchell Marcus , Martha Palmer , Lance Ramshaw , and Ralph Weischedel . 2006. Ontonotes : the 90% solution . In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology / North American Association of Computational Linguistics conference ( HLT-NAACL-06), pages 57?60, New York , NY.
Nancy Ide and Yorick Wilks . 2007. Making Sense About Sense . In Eneko Agirre and Philip Edmonds , editors , Word Sense Disambiguation , Algorithms and Applications , pages 47?73. Springer.
Thomas Landauer and Susan Dumais . 1997. A solution to Plato?s problem : The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of the acquisition , induction , and representation of knowledge . Psychology Review , 104:211?240.
Thomas Landauer , Peter Foltz , and Darrell Laham . 1998.
An Introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis . Discourse Processes , 25:295?284.
Daniel D . Lee and H . Sebastian Seung . 2000. Algorithms for nonnegative matrix factorization . In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 13, pages 556?562.
Dekang Lin . 1998. Automatic Retrieval and Clustering of Similar Words . In Proceedings of the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and 17th International Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING-ACL98), volume 2, pages 768?774, Montreal , Quebec , Canada.
Suresh Manandhar , Ioannis P . Klapaftis , Dmitriy Dligach , and Sameer S . Pradhan . 2010. SemEval2010 Task 14: Word Sense Induction & Disambiguation . In Proceedings of the fifth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation ( SemEval ), ACL-10, pages 63?68, Uppsala , Sweden.
Roberto Navigli . 2009. Word Sense Disambiguation : a Survey . ACM Computing Surveys , 41(2):1?69.
Joakim Nivre , Johan Hall , and Jens Nilsson . 2006. Maltparser : A datadriven parser-generator for dependency parsing . In Proceedings of the fifth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation ( LREC06), pages 2216?2219, Genoa , Italy.
1484
Sebastian Pado ? and Mirella Lapata . 2007. Dependency-based construction of semantic space models . Computational Linguistics , 33(2):161?199.
Patrick Pantel and Dekang Lin . 2002. Discovering word senses from text . In ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 613?619, Edmonton , Alberta , Canada.
Ted Pedersen . 2010. Duluth-WSI : SenseClusters Applied to the Sense Induction Task of SemEval2. In Proceedings of the fifth International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations ( SemEval2010), pages 363?366,
Uppsala , Sweden.
Amruta Purandare and Ted Pedersen . 2004. Word Sense Discrimination by Clustering Contexts in Vector and Similarity Spaces . In Proceedings of the Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning ( CoNLL ), pages 41?48, Boston , MA.
Andrew Rosenberg and Julia Hirschberg . 2007. V-measure : A conditional entropy-based external cluster evaluation measure . In Proceedings of the Joint 2007 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning ( EMNLPCoNLL ), pages 410?420,
Prague , Czech Republic.
Hinrich Schu?tze . 1998. Automatic Word Sense Discrimination . Computational Linguistics , 24(1):97?123.
Kristina Toutanova and Christopher D . Manning . 2000.
Enriching the Knowledge Sources Used in a Maximum Entropy Part-of-Speech Tagger . In Proceedings of the Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Very Large
Corpora ( EMNLP/VLC-2000), pages 63?70.
Kristina Toutanova , Dan Klein , Christopher Manning , and Yoram Singer . 2003. Feature-Rich Part-of-Speech Tagging with a Cyclic Dependency Network.
In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology / North American Association of Computational Linguistics conference ( HLT-NAACL-03, pages 252?259,
Edmonton , Canada.
Tim Van de Cruys . 2008. Using Three Way Data for Word Sense Discrimination . In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING08), pages 929?936, Manchester,
UK.
Jean Ve?ronis . 2004. Hyperlex : lexical cartography for information retrieval . Computer Speech & Language , 18(3):223?252.
Dominic Widdows and Beate Dorow . 2002. A Graph Model for Unsupervised Lexical Acquisition . In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING02), pages 1093? 1099, Taipei , Taiwan.
1485
