Proceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011 System Demonstrations , pages 38?43,
Portland , Oregon , USA , 21 June 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
An ERP-based Brain-Computer Interface for text entry
using Rapid Serial Visual Presentation and Language Modeling
K.E . Hild ?, U . Orhan ?, D . Erdogmus ?, B . Roark ?, B . Oken ?, S . Purwar ?, H . Nezamfar ?, M . Fried-Oken?
?Oregon Health and Science University ? Cognitive Systems Lab , Northeastern University
{hildk,roarkb,oken,friedm}@ohsu.edu { orhan,erdogmus,purwar,nezamfar}@ece.neu.edu
Abstract
Event related potentials ( ERP ) corresponding to stimuli in electroencephalography ( EEG ) can be used to detect the intent of a person for brain computer interfaces ( BCI ). This paradigm is widely used to build letter-by-letter text input systems using BCI . Nevertheless using a BCI-typewriter depending only on EEG responses will not be sufficiently accurate for single-trial operation in general , and existing systems utilize many-trial schemes to achieve accuracy at the cost of speed . Hence incorporation of a language model based prior or additional evidence is vital to improve accuracy and speed . In this demonstration we will present a BCI system for typing that integrates a stochastic language model with ERP classification to achieve speedups , via the rapid serial visual presentation ( RSVP ) paradigm.
1 Introduction
There exist a considerable number of people with severe motor and speech disabilities . Brain computer interfaces ( BCI ) are a potential technology to create a novel communication environment for this population , especially persons with completely paralyzed voluntary muscles ( Wolpaw , 2007; Pfurtscheller et al ., 2000). One possible application of BCI is typing systems ; specifically , those BCI systems that use electroencephalography ( EEG ) have been increasingly studied in the recent decades to enable the selection of letters for expressive language generation ( Wolpaw , 2007; Pfurtscheller et al , 2000; Treder and Blankertz , 2010). However , the use of noninvasive techniques for letter-by-letter systems lacks efficiency due to low signal to noise ratio and variability of background brain activity . Therefore current BCI-spellers suffer from low symbol rates and researchers have turned to various hierarchical symbol trees to achieve system speedups ( Serby et al , 2005; Wolpaw et al , 2002; Treder and Blankertz , 2010). Slow throughput greatly diminishes the practical usability of such systems . Incorporation of a language model , which predicts the next letter using the previous letters , into the decisionmaking process can greatly affect the performance of these systems by improving the accuracy and speed.
As opposed to the matrix layout of the popular P300-Speller ( Wolpaw , 2007), shown in Figure 1, or the hexagonal two-level hierarchy of the Berlin BCI ( Treder and Blankertz , 2010), we utilize another well-established paradigm : rapid serial visual presentation ( RSVP ), shown in Figure 2. This paradigm relies on presenting one stimulus at a time at the focal point of the screen . The sequence of stimuli are presented at relatively high speeds , each subsequent stimulus replacing the previous one , while the subject tries to perform mental target matching between the intended symbol and the presented stimuli . EEG responses corresponding to the visual stimuli are classified using regularized discriminant analysis ( RDA ) applied to stimulus-locked temporal features from multiple channels.
The RSVP interface is of particular utility for the most impaired users , including those suffering from locked-in syndrome ( LIS ). Locked-in syndrome can result from traumatic brain injury , such as a brainstem stroke1, or from neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS or Lou Gehrig?s disease ). The condition is characterized by near total paralysis , though the individuals are cognitively intact . While vision is retained , the motor control impairments extend to eye movements . Often the only reliable movement that can be made by 1Brain stem stroke was the cause of LIS for Jean-Dominique Bauby , who dictated his memoir The Diving Bell and the Butterfly via eyeblinks ( Bauby , 1997).
M
G A FEC _9765 3 4Y 1Z
XWUTS
RQON
H
B
LKI
V
J
Figure 1: Spelling grid such as that used for the P300 speller ( Farwell and Donchin , 1988). ? ? denotes space.
38
Figure 2: RSVP scanning interface.
an individual is a particular muscle twitch or single eye blink , if that . Such users have lost the voluntary motor control sufficient for such an interface . Relying on extensive visual scanning or complex gestural feedback from the user renders a typing interface difficult or impossible to use for the most impaired users . Simpler interactions via brain-computer interfaces ( BCI ) hold much promise for effective text communication for these most impaired users . Yet these simple interfaces have yet to take full advantage of language models to ease or speed typing.
In this demonstration , we will present a languagemodel enabled interface that is appropriate for the most impaired users.
In addition , the RSVP paradigm provides some useful interface flexibility relative to the grid-based paradigm . First , it allows for auditory rather than visual scanning , for use by the visually impaired or when visual access is inconvenient , such as in face-to-face communication . Auditory scanning is less straightforward when using a grid . Second , multicharacter substrings can be scanned in RSVP , whereas the kind of dynamic reorganization of a grid that would be required to support this can be very confusing . Finally , language model integration with RSVP is relatively straightforward , as we shall demonstrate . See Roark et al (2010) for methods integrating language modeling into grid scanning.
2 RSVP based BCI and ERP Classification
RSVP is an experimental psychophysics technique in which visual stimulus sequences are displayed on a screen over time on a fixed focal area and in rapid succession . The Matrix-P300-Speller used by Wadsworth and Graz groups ( especially g.tec , Austria ) opts for a spatially distributed presentation of possible symbols , highlighting them in different orders and combinations to elicit P300 responses.
Berlin BCI?s recent variation utilizes a 2-layer tree structure where the subject chooses among six units ( symbols or sets of these ) where the options are laid out on the screen while the subject focuses on a central focal area that uses an RSVP-like paradigm to elicit P300 responses . Full screen awareness is required . In contrast , our approach is to distribute the stimuli temporally and present one symbol at a time using RSVP and seek a binary response to find the desired letter , as shown in Figure 2. The latter method has the advantage of not requiring the user to look at different areas of the screen , which can be an important factor for those with LIS.
Our RSVP paradigm utilizes stimulus sequences consisting of the 26 letters in the English alphabet plus symbols for space and backspace , presented in a randomly ordered sequence . When the user sees the target symbol , the brain generates an evoked response potential ( ERP ) in the EEG ; the most prominent component of this ERP is the P300 wave , which is a positive deflection in the scalp voltage primarily in frontal areas and that generally occurs with a latency of approximately 300 ms . This natural novelty response of the brain , occurring when the user detects a rare , sought-after target , allows us to make binary decisions about the user?s intent.
The intent detection problem becomes a signal classification problem when the EEG signals are windowed in a stimulus-time-locked manner starting at stimulus onset and extending for a sufficient duration ? in this case 500ms . Consider Figure 3, which shows the trial-averaged temporal signals from various EEG channels corresponding to target and non-target ( distractor ) symbols . This graph shows a clear effect between 300 and 500 ms for the target symbols that is not present for the distractor symbols ( the latter of which clearly shows a component having a periodicity of 400 ms , which is expected in this case since a new image was presented every 400 ms ). Figure 4, on the other hand , shows the magnitude of the trial and distractor responses at channel Cz on a single-trial basis , rather than averaged over all trials . The signals acquired from each EEG channel are incorporated and classified to determine the class label : ERP or non-ERP.
Our system functions as follows . First , each channel is bandpass filtered . Second , each channel is temporally-windowed . Third , a linear dimension reduction ( using principal components analysis ) is learned using training data and is subsequently applied to the EEG data when the system is being used . Fourth , the data vectors obtained for each channel and a given stimulus are concatenated to create the data matrix corresponding to the specified stimulus . Fifth , Regularized Discriminant Analysis ( RDA ) ( Friedman , 1989), which estimates conditional probability densities for each class using response ( top ) and distractor response ( bottom ) for a 1 second window.
Kernel Density Estimation ( KDE ), is used to determine a purely EEG-based classification discriminant score for each stimulus . Sixth , the conditional probability of each letter given the typed history is obtained from the language model . Seventh , Bayesian fusion ( which assumes the EEG-based information and the language model information are statistically independent given the class label ) is used to combine the RDA discriminant score and the language model score to generate an overall score , from which we infer whether or not a given stimulus represents an intended ( target ) letter.
RDA is a modified quadratic discriminant analysis ( QDA ) model . Assuming each class has a multivariate normal distribution and assuming classification is made according to the comparison of posterior distributions of the classes , the optimal Bayes classifier resides within the QDA model family . QDA depends on the inverse of the class covariance matrices , which are to be estimated from training data . Hence , for small sample sizes and highdimensional data , singularities of these matrices are problematic . RDA applies regularization and shrinkage procedures to the class covariance matrix Figure 4: Single-trial EEG data at channel Cz corresponding to the target response ( top ) and distractor response ( bottom ) for a 1 second window.
estimates in an attempt to minimize problems associated with singularities . The shrinkage procedure makes the class covariances closer to the overall data covariance , and therefore to each other , thus making the quadratic boundary more similar to a linear boundary . Shrinkage is applied as ?? c (?) = (1? ?)?? c + ???, (1) where ? is the shrinkage parameter , ?? c is the class covariance matrix estimated for class c ? {0, 1}, c = 0 corresponds to the non-target class , c = 1 corresponds to the target class , and ?? is the weighted average of class covariance matrices . Regularization is administered as ?? c (?, ?) = (1? ?)?? c (?) + ? d tr[??c(?)]I , (2) where ? is the regularization parameter , tr [?] is the trace function , and d is the dimension of the data vector.
After carrying out the regularization and shrinkage on the estimated covariance matrices , the Bayesian classification rule ( Duda et al , 2001) is applied by comparing the loglikelihood ratio ( using the posterior probability distributions ) with a confidence threshold . The confidence threshold can be chosen so that the system incorporates the relative risks or costs of making an error for each class . The corresponding loglikelihood ratio is given by ? RDA(x ) = log fN ( x ; ??1, ??1(?, ?)) p?i1 fN ( x ; ??0, ??0(?, ?)) p?i0 , (3) where ? c and p?ic are the estimates of the class means and priors , respectively , x is the data vector to be classified , and fN ( x ;?,?) is the pdf of a multivariate normal distribution.
The set of visual stimuli ( letters plus two extra symbols , in our case ) can be shown multiple times to achieve a higher classification accuracy for the EEG-based classifier . The information obtained from showing the visual stimuli multiple times can easily be combined by assuming the trials are statistically independent , as is commonly assumed in EEG-based spellers2. Figure 5 presents a diagram of the timing of the presentation of stimuli . We define a sequence to be a randomly-ordered set of all the letters ( and the space and backspace symbols ). The letters are randomly ordered for each sequence because the magnitude of the ERP , hence the quality of the EEG-based classification , is commonly thought to depend on how surprised the user is to find the intended letter . Our system also has a user-defined parameter by which we are able to limit the maximum number of sequences shown to the user before our system makes a decision on the ( single ) intended letter . Thus we are able to operate in single-trial or multi-trial mode . We use the term epoch to denote all the sequences that are used by our system to make a decision on a single , intended let-2The typical number of repetitions of visual stimuli is on the order of 8 or 16, although g.tec claims one subject is able to achieve reliable operation with 2 trials ( verbal communication).
ter . As can be seen in the timing diagram shown in Figure 5, epoch k contains between 1 and Mk sequences . This figure shows the onset of each sequence , each fixation image ( which is shown at the beginning of each sequence ), and each letter using narrow pulses . After each sequence is shown , the cumulative ( overall ) score for all letters is computed.
The cumulative scores are nonnegative and sum to one ( summing over the 28 symbols ). If the number of sequences shown is less than the user-defined limit and if the maximum cumulative score is less than 0.9, then another randomly-ordered sequence is shown to the user . Likewise , if either the maximum number of sequences has already been shown or if the maximum cumulative score equals or exceeds 0.9, then the associated symbol ( for all symbols except the backspace ) is added to the end of the list of previously-detected symbols , the user is able to take a break of indefinite length , and then the system continues with the next epoch . If the symbol having the maximum cumulative score is the backspace symbol , then the last item in the list of previously-detected symbols is removed and , like before , the user can take a break and then the system continues with the next epoch.
3 Language Modeling
Language modeling is important for many text processing applications , e.g ., speech recognition or machine translation , as well as for the kind of typing application being investigated here ( Roark et al , 2010). Typically , the prefix string ( what has already been typed ) is used to predict the next sym-bol(s ) to be typed . The next letters to be typed become highly predictable in certain contexts , particularly word-internally . In applications where text generation/typing speed is very slow , the impact of language modeling can become much more significant . BCI-spellers , including the RSVP Keyboard paradigm presented here , can be extremely low-speed , letter-by-letter writing systems , and thus can greatly benefit from the incorporation of probabilistic letter predictions from an accurate language model.
For the current study , all language models were estimated from a one million sentence (210M character ) sample of the NY Times portion of the English Gigaword corpus . Models were character ngrams , estimated via relative frequency estimation . Corpus normalization and smoothing methods were as described in Roark et al (2010). Most importantly for this work , the corpus was case normalized , and we used WittenBell smoothing for regularization.
4 System Architecture
Figure 6 shows a block diagram of our system . We use a Quad-core , 2.53 GHz laptop , with system code written in Labview , Matlab , and C . We also use the Psychophysics Toolbox3 to preload the images into the video card and to display the images at precisely-defined temporal intervals . The type UB g.USBamp EEG-signal amplifier , which is manufactured by g.tec ( Austria ), has 24 bits of precision and has 16 channels . We use a Butterworth bandpass filter of 0.5 to 60 Hz , a 60 Hz notch filter , a sampling rate of 256 Hz , and we buffer the EEG data until we have 8 samples of 16-channel EEG data , at which point the data are transmitted to the laptop . We use either g.BUTTERfly or g.LADYbird active electrodes , a g.GAMMA cap , and the g.GAMMAsys active electrode system.
The output of the amplifier is fed to the laptop via a USB connection with a delay that is both highly variable and unknown a priori . Consequently , we are unable to rely on the laptop system clock in order to synchronize the EEG data and the onset of the visual stimuli . Instead , synchronization between the EEG data and the visual stimuli is provided by sending a parallel port trigger , via an express card-to-parallel port adaptor , to one of the digital inputs of the amplifier , which is then digitized along with the EEG data . The parallel port to g.tec cable was custom-built by Cortech Solutions , Inc . ( Wilmington , North Carolina , USA ). The parallel port trigger is sent immediately after the laptop monitor sends the vertical retrace signal . The mean and the stan-3http://psychtoolbox.org/wikka.php?wakka=HomePage dard deviation of the delay needed to trigger the parallel port has been measured to be on the order of tens of microseconds , which should be sufficiently small for our purposes.
5 Results
Here we report data collected from 2 subjects , one of whom is a LIS subject with very limited experience using our BCI system , and the other a healthy subject with extensive experience using our BCI system . The symbol duration was set to 400 ms , the duty cycle was set to 50%, and the maximum number of sequences per trial was set to 6. Before testing , the classifier of our system was trained on data obtained as each subject viewed 50 symbols with 3 sequences per epoch ( the classifier was trained once for the LIS subject and once for the healthy subject ). The healthy subject was specifically instructed to neither move nor blink their eyes , to the extent possible , while the symbols are being flashed on the screen in front of them . Instead , they were to wait until the rest period , which occurs after each epoch , to move or to blink . The subjects were free to produce whatever text they wished . The only requirement given to them concerning the chosen text was that they must not , at any point in the experiment , change what they are planning to type and they must correct all mistakes using the backspace symbol.
Figure 7 shows the results for the nonexpert , LIS subject . A total of 10 symbols were correctly typed by this subject , who had chosen to spell , ? THE STEELERS ARE GOING TO ...?. Notice that the number of sequences shown exceeds the maximum value of 6 for 3 of the symbols . This occurs when the specified letter is mistyped one or more times . For example , for each mistyped non-backspace symbol , a backspace is required to delete of se quen ces to re ach conf iden ce th resh old Mean = 144/10 = 14.4 ( seq/desired symbol)Mean = 5.1 ( seq/symbol ) Figure 7: Number of sequences to reach the confidence threshold for the nonexpert , LIS subject.
T H E _ L A K E R S _ A R E _ I N _ F I0 of se quen ces to re ach conf iden ce th resh old Mean = 28/20 = 1.4 ( seq/desired symbol)Mean = 1.4 ( seq/symbol ) Figure 8: Number of sequences to reach the confidence threshold for the expert , healthy subject.
the incorrect symbol . Likewise , if a backspace symbol is detected although it was not the symbol that the subject wished to type , then the correct symbol must be retyped . As shown in the figure , the mean number of sequences for each correctly-typed symbol is 14.4 and the mean number of sequences per symbol is 5.1 ( the latter of which has a maximum value of 6 in this case).
Figure 8 shows the result for the expert , healthy subject . A total of 20 symbols were correctly typed by this subject , who had chosen to spell , ? THE LAKERS ARE IN FIRST PLACE?.
The mean number of sequences for each correctly-typed symbol for this subject is 1.4 and the mean number of sequences per symbol is also 1.4. Notice that in 15 out of 20 epochs the classifier was able to detect the intended symbol on the first epoch , which corresponds to a single-trial presentation of the symbols , and no mistakes were made for any of the 20 symbols.
There are two obvious explanations as to why the healthy subject performed better than the LIS subject . First , it is possible that the healthy subject was using a non-neural signal , perhaps an electromyographic ( EMG ) signal stemming from an unintended muscle movement occurring synchronously with the target onset . Second , it is also possible that the LIS subject needs more training in order to learn how to control the system . We believe the second explanation is correct and are currently taking steps to make sure the LIS subject has additional time to train on our system in hopes of resolving this question quickly.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by NSF under grants
ECCS0929576, ECCS0934506, IIS0934509,
IIS0914808, BCS1027724 and by NIH under grant 1R01DC009834-01. The opinions presented here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the funding agencies.
References
J.-D . Bauby . 1997. The Diving Bell and the Butterfly.
Knopf , New York.
R.O . Duda , P.E . Hart , and D.G . Stork . 2001. Pattern classification . Citeseer.
L.A . Farwell and E . Donchin . 1988. Talking off the top of your head : toward a mental prosthesis utilizing event-related brain potentials . Electroenceph Clin.
Neurophysiol ., 70:510?523.
J.H . Friedman . 1989. Regularized discriminant analysis . Journal of the American statistical association , 84(405):165?175.
G . Pfurtscheller , C . Neuper , C . Guger , W . Harkam , H . Ramoser , A . Schlogl , B . Obermaier , and M . Pre-genzer . 2000. Current trends in Graz brain-computer interface ( BCI ) research . IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering , 8(2):216?219.
B . Roark , J . de Villiers , C . Gibbons , and M . Fried-Oken.
2010. Scanning methods and language modeling for binary switch typing . In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies , pages 28?36.
H . Serby , E . Yom-Tov , and G.F . Inbar . 2005. An improved P300-based brain-computer interface . Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering , IEEE Transactions on , 13(1):89?98.
M.S . Treder and B . Blankertz . 2010. ( C ) overt attention and visual speller design in an ERP-based brain-computer interface . Behavioral and Brain Functions , 6(1):28.
J.R . Wolpaw , N . Birbaumer , D.J . McFarland , G . Pfurtscheller , and T.M . Vaughan . 2002. Brain-computer interfaces for communication and control.
Clinical neurophysiology , 113(6):767?791.
J.R . Wolpaw . 2007. Brain?computer interfaces as new brain output pathways . The Journal of Physiology , 579(3):613.
43
