Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers , pages 48?52,
Portland , Oregon , June 1924, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semisupervised condensed nearest neighbor for part-of-speech tagging
Anders S?gaard
Center for Language Technology
University of Copenhagen
Njalsgade 142, DK-2300 Copenhagen S
soegaard@hum.ku.dk
Abstract
This paper introduces a new training set condensation technique designed for mixtures of labeled and unlabeled data . It finds a condensed set of labeled and unlabeled data points , typically smaller than what is obtained using condensed nearest neighbor on the labeled data only , and improves classification accuracy . We evaluate the algorithm on semisupervised part-of-speech tagging and present the best published result on the Wall Street
Journal data set.
1 Introduction
Labeled data for natural language processing tasks such as part-of-speech tagging is often in short supply . Semisupervised learning algorithms are designed to learn from a mixture of labeled and unlabeled data . Many different semisupervised algorithms have been applied to natural language processing tasks , but the simplest algorithm , namely self-training , is the one that has attracted most attention , together with expectation maximization ( Abney , 2008). The idea behind self-training is simply to let a model trained on the labeled data label the unlabeled data points and then to retrain the model on the mixture of the original labeled data and the newly labeled data.
The nearest neighbor algorithm ( Cover and Hart , 1967) is a memory-based or socalled lazy learning algorithm . It is one of the most extensively used nonparametric classification algorithms , simple to implement yet powerful , owing to its theoretical properties guaranteeing that for all distributions , its probability of error is bound by twice the Bayes probability of error ( Cover and Hart , 1967).
Memory-based learning has been applied to a wide range of natural language processing tasks including part-of-speech tagging ( Daelemans et al , 1996), dependency parsing ( Nivre , 2003) and word sense disambiguation ( Ku?bler and Zhekova , 2009). Memory-based learning algorithms are said to be lazy because no model is learned from the labeled data points . The labeled data points are the model . Consequently , classification time is proportional to the number of labeled data points . This is of course impractical . Many algorithms have been proposed to make memory-based learning more efficient . The intuition behind many of them is that the set of labeled data points can be reduced or condensed , since many labeled data points are more or less redundant.
The algorithms try to extract a subset of the overall training set that correctly classifies all the discarded data points through the nearest neighbor rule . Intuitively , the model finds good representatives of clusters in the data or discards the data points that are far from the decision boundaries . Such algorithms are called training set condensation algorithms.
The need for training set condensation is particularly important in semisupervised learning where we rely on a mixture of labeled and unlabeled data points . While the number of labeled data points is typically limited , the number of unlabeled data points is typically high . In this paper , we introduce a new semisupervised learning algorithm that combines self-training and condensation to produce small subsets of labeled and unlabeled data points that are highly relevant for determining good deci-2 Semisupervised condensed nearest neighbor The nearest neighbor ( NN ) algorithm ( Cover and Hart , 1967) is conceptually simple , yet very powerful . Given a set of labeled data points T , label any new data point ( feature vector ) x with y where x ? is the data point in T most similar to x and ? x ?, y?.
Similarity is usually measured in terms of Euclidean distance . The generalization of the nearest neighbor algorithm , k nearest neighbor , finds the k most similar data points Tk to x and assigns x the label y ? such that : y ? = arg max y???Y ?? x?,y???TkE(x,x ?)|| y ? = y ??|| with E (?, ?) Euclidean distance and || ? || = 1 if the argument is true ( else 0). In other words , the k most similar points take a weighted vote on the class of x.
Naive implementations of the algorithm store all the labeled data points and compare each of them to the data point that is to be classified . Several strategies have been proposed to make nearest neighbor classification more efficient ( Angiulli , 2005). In particular , training set condensation techniques have been much studied.
The condensed nearest neighbor ( CNN ) algorithm was first introduced in Hart (1968). Finding a subset of the labeled data points may lead to faster and more accurate classification , but finding the best subset is an intractable problem ( Wilfong , 1992).
CNN can be seen as a simple technique for approximating such a subset of labeled data points.
The CNN algorithm is defined in Figure 1 with T the set of labeled data points and T ( t ) is label predicted for t by a nearest neighbor classifier ? trained ? on T .
Essentially we discard all labeled data points whose label we can already predict with the current subset of labeled data points . Note that we have simplified the CNN algorithm a bit compared to Hart (1968), as suggested , for example , in Alpaydin (1997), iterating only once over data rather than waiting for convergence . This will give us a smaller set of labeled data points , and therefore classification requires less space and time . Note that while the NN rule is stable , and cannot be improved by T = {? x1, y1?, . . . , ? xn , yn ?}, C = ? for ? xi , yi ? ? T do if C(xi ) 6= yi then
C = C ? {? xi , yi ?} end if end for return C
Figure 1: CONDENSED NEAREST NEIGHBOR.
T = {? x1, y1?, . . . , ? xn , yn ?}, C = ? for ? xi , yi ? ? T do if C(xi ) 6= yi or PC(?xi , yi?|xi ) < 0.55 then
C = C ? {? xi , yi ?} end if end for return C Figure 2: WEAKENED CONDENSED NEAREST NEIGH-
BOR.
techniques such as bagging ( Breiman , 1996), CNN is unstable ( Alpaydin , 1997).
We also introduce a weakened version of the algorithm which not only includes misclassified data points in the classifier C , but also correctly classified data points which were labeled with relatively low confidence . So C includes all data points that were misclassified and those whose correct label was predicted with low confidence . The weakened condensed nearest neighbor ( WCNN ) algorithm is sketched in Figure 2.
C inspects k nearest neighbors when labeling new data points , where k is estimated by crossvalidation . CNN was first generalized to kNN in
Gates (1972).
Two related condensation techniques , namely removing typical elements and removing elements by class prediction strength , were argued not to be useful for most problems in natural language processing in Daelemans et al (1999), but our experiments showed that CNN often perform about as well as NN , and our semisupervised CNN algorithm leads to substantial improvements . The condensation techniques are also very different : While removing typical elements and removing elements by class prediction strength are methods for removing data points close to decision boundaries , CNN ide-tives in condensed training sets.
ally only removes elements close to decision boundaries when the classifier has no use of them.
Intuitively , with relatively simple problems , e.g . mixtures of Gaussians , CNN and WCNN try to find the best possible representatives for each cluster in the distribution of data , i.e . finding the points closest to the center of each cluster . Ideally , CNN returns one point for each cluster , namely the center of each cluster . However , a sample of labeled data may not include data points that are near the center of a cluster . Consequently , CNN sometimes needs several points to stabilize the representation of a cluster ; e.g . the two positives in Figure 3.
When a large number of unlabeled data points that are labeled according to nearest neighbors populates the clusters , chances increase that we find data points near the centers of our clusters , e.g . the ? good representative ? in Figure 3. Of course the centers of our clusters may move , but the positive results obtained experimentally below suggest that it is more likely that labeling unlabeled data by nearest neighbors will enable us to do better training set condensation.
This is exactly what semisupervised condensed nearest neighbor ( SCNN ) does . We first run a WCNN C and obtain a condensed set of labeled data points . To this set of labeled data points we add a large number of unlabeled data points labeled by a NN classifier T on the original data set . We use a simple selection criterion and include all data points 1: T = {? x1, y1?, . . . , ? xn , yn ?}, C = ?, C ? = ? 2: U = {? x?1?, . . . , ? x?m ?} # unlabeled data 3: for ? xi , yi ? ? T do 4: if C(xi ) 6= yi or PC(?xi , yi?|xi ) < 0.55 then 5: C = C ? {? xi , yi ?} 6: end if 7: end for 8: for ? x?i ? ? U do 9: if PT (? x?i , T ( x?i)?|wi ) > 0.90 then 10: C = C ? {? x?i , T ( x?i )?} 11: end if 12: end for 13: for ? xi , yi ? ? C do 14: if C ?( xi ) 6= yi then 15: C ? = C ? ? {? xi , yi ?} 16: end if 17: end for 18: return C ? Figure 4: SEMI-SUPERVISED CONDENSED NEAREST
NEIGHBOR.
that are labeled with confidence greater than 90%.
We then obtain a new WCNN C ? from the new data set which is a mixture of labeled and unlabeled data points . See Figure 4 for details.
3 Part-of-speech tagging
Our part-of-speech tagging data set is the standard data set from Wall Street Journal included in Penn-III ( Marcus et al , 1993). We use the standard splits and construct our data set in the following way , following S?gaard (2010): Each word in the data wi is associated with a feature vector xi = ? x1i , x2i ? where x1i is the prediction on wi of a supervised part-of-speech tagger , in our case SVMTool1 ( Gimenez and Marquez , 2004) trained on Sect . 0?18, and x2i is a prediction on wi from an unsupervised part-of-speech tagger ( a cluster label ), in our case Unsupos ( Biemann , 2006) trained on the British National Corpus.2 We train a semisupervised condensed nearest neighbor classifier on Sect . 19 of the development data and unlabeled data from the Brown corpus and apply it to Sect . 22?24. The labeled data 1http://www.lsi.upc.es/?nlp/SVMTool / 2http://wortschatz.uni-leipzig.de/?cbiemann/software / per line):
JJ JJ 17*
NNS NNS 1
IN IN 428
DT DT 425 where the first column is the class labels or the gold tags , the second column the predicted tags and the third column is the ? tags ? provided by the unsupervised tagger . Words marked by ?*? are out-of-vocabulary words , i.e . words that did not occur in the British National Corpus . The unsupervised tagger is used to cluster tokens in a meaningful way.
Intuitively , we try to learn part-of-speech tagging by learning when to rely on SVMTool.
The best reported results in the literature on Wall Street Journal Sect . 22?24 are 97.40% in Suzuki et al . (2009) and 97.44% in Spoustova et al (2009); both systems use semisupervised learning techniques . Our semisupervised condensed nearest neighbor classifier achieves an accuracy of 97.50%.
Equally importantly it condensates the available data points , from Sect . 19 and the Brown corpus , that is more than 1.2M data points , to only 2249 data points , making the classifier very fast . CNN alone is a lot worse than the input tagger , with an accuracy of 95.79%. Our approach is also significantly better than S?gaard (2010) who apply tri-training ( Li and Zhou , 2005) to the output of SVMTool and Unsupos.
acc (%) data points err.red
CNN 95.79 3,811
SCNN 97.50 2,249 40.6%
SVMTool 97.15 -
S?gaard 97.27 -
Suzuki et al 97.40 -
Spoustova et al 97.44 -
In our second experiment , where we vary the amount of unlabeled data points , we only train our ensemble on the first 5000 words in Sect . 19 and evaluate on the first 5000 words in Sect . 22?24.
The derived learning curve for the semisupervised learner is depicted in Figure 5. The immediate drop in the red scatter plot illustrates the condensation effect of semisupervised learning : when we begin to add unlabeled data , accuracy increases by more than 1.5% and the data set becomes more condensed.
Semisupervised learning means that we populate Figure 5: Normalized accuracy ( range : 92.62?94.82) and condensation ( range : 310?512 data points).
clusters in the data , making it easier to identify representative data points . Since we can easier identify representative data points , training set condensation becomes more effective.
4 Implementation
The implementation used in the experiments builds on Orange 2.0b for Mac OS X ( Python and C++).
In particular , we made use of the implementations of Euclidean distance and random sampling in their package . Our code is available at : cst.dk/anders/sccn / 5 Conclusions We have introduced a new learning algorithm that simultaneously condensates labeled data and learns from a mixture of labeled and unlabeled data . We have compared the algorithm to condensed nearest neighbor ( Hart , 1968; Alpaydin , 1997) and showed that the algorithm leads to more condensed models , and that it performs significantly better than condensed nearest neighbor . For part-of-speech tagging , the error reduction over condensed nearest neighbor is more than 40%, and our model is 40% smaller than the one induced by condensed nearest neighbor . While we have provided no theory for semisupervised condensed nearest neighbor , we believe that these results demonstrate the potential of the proposed method.
51
References
Steven Abney . 2008. Semisupervised learning for computational linguistics . Chapman & Hall.
Ethem Alpaydin . 1997. Voting over multiple condensed nearest neighbors . Artificial Intelligence Review , 11:115?132.
Fabrizio Angiulli . 2005. Fast condensed nearest neighbor rule . In Proceedings of the 22nd International
Conference on Machine Learning.
Chris Biemann . 2006. Unsupervised part-of-speech tagging employing efficient graph clustering . In
COLINGACL Student Session.
Leo Breiman . 1996. Bagging predictors . Machine
Learning , 24(2):123?140.
T . Cover and P . Hart . 1967. Nearest neighbor pattern classification . IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 13(1):21?27.
Walter Daelemans , Jakub Zavrel , Peter Berck , and Steven Gillis . 1996. MBT : a memory-based part-of-speech tagger generator . In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Very Large Corpora.
Walter Daelemans , Antal Van Den Bosch , and Jakub Zavrel . 1999. Forgetting exceptions is harmful in language learning . Machine Learning , 34(1?3):11?41.
W Gates . 1972. The reduced nearest neighbor rule.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 18(3):431? 433.
Jesus Gimenez and Lluis Marquez . 2004. SVMTool : a general POS tagger generator based on support vector machines . In LREC.
Peter Hart . 1968. The condensed nearest neighbor rule.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 14:515? 516.
Sandra Ku?bler and Desislava Zhekova . 2009. Semisupervised learning for wordsense disambiguation : quality vs . quantity . In RANLP.
Ming Li and Zhi-Hua Zhou . 2005. Tri-training : exploiting unlabeled data using three classifiers . IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 17(11):1529?1541.
Mitchell Marcus , Mary Marcinkiewicz , and Beatrice Santorini . 1993. Building a large annotated corpus of English : the Penn Treebank . Computational Linguistics , 19(2):313?330.
Joakim Nivre . 2003. An efficient algorithm for projective dependency parsing . In Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Parsing Technologies , pages 149?160.
Anders S?gaard . 2010. Simple semisupervised training of part-of-speech taggers . In ACL.
Drahomira Spoustova , Jan Hajic , Jan Raab , and Miroslav Spousta . 2009. Semisupervised training for the averaged perceptron POS tagger . In EACL.
Jun Suzuki , Hideki Isozaki , Xavier Carreras , and Michael Collins . 2009. An empirical study of semisupervised structured conditional models for dependency parsing.
In EMNLP.
G . Wilfong . 1992. Nearest neighbor problems . International Journal of Computational Geometry and Applications , 2(4):383?416.
52
