Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers , pages 514?518,
Portland , Oregon , June 1924, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Typed Graph Models for Semi-Supervised Learning of Name Ethnicity
Delip Rao
Dept . of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
delip@cs.jhu.edu
David Yarowsky
Dept . of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
yarowsky@cs.jhu.edu
Abstract
This paper presents an original approach to semisupervised learning of personal name ethnicity from typed graphs of morphophonemic features and first/last-name cooccurrence statistics . We frame this as a general solution to an inference problem over typed graphs where the edges represent labeled relations between features that are parameterized by the edge types . We propose a framework for parameter estimation on different constructions of typed graphs for this problem using a gradient-free optimization method based on grid search . Results on both indomain and out-of-domain data show significant gains over 30% accuracy improvement using the techniques presented in the paper.
1 Introduction
In the highly relational world of NLP , graphs are a natural way to represent relations and constraints among entities of interest . Even problems that are not obviously graph based can be effectively and productively encoded as a graph . Such an encoding will often be comprised of nodes , edges that represent the relation , and weights on the edges that could be a metric or a probability-based value , and type information for the nodes and edges . Typed graphs are a frequently-used formalism in natural language problems including dependency parsing ( McDonald et al , 2005), entity disambiguation ( Minkov and Cohen , 2007), and social networks to just mention a few.
In this paper , we consider the problem of identifying a personal attribute such as ethnicity from only an observed first-name/last-name pair . This has important consequences in targeted advertising and personalization in social networks , and in gathering intelligence for business and government research.
We propose a parametrized typed graph framework for this problem and perform the hidden attribute inference using random walks on typed graphs . We also propose a novel application of a gradient-free optimization technique based on grid search for parameter estimation in typed graphs . Although , we describe this in the context of person-attribute learning , the techniques are general enough to be applied to various typed graph based problems.
2 Data for Person-Ethnicity Learning
Name ethnicity detection is a particularly challenging ( and practical ) problem in Nigeria given that it has more than 250 ethnicities1 with minor variations . We constructed a dictionary of Nigerian names and their associated ethnicity by crawling baby name sites and other Nigerian diaspora websites ( e.g . onlinenigeria.com ) to compile a name dictionary of 1980 names with their ethnicity . We retained the top 4 ethnicities ? Yoruba , Igbo , Efik Ibibio , and Benin Edo2. In addition we also crawled Facebook to identify Nigerians from different communities . There are more details to this dataset that 1https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ni.html 2Although the Hausa-Fulani is a populous community from the north of Nigeria , we did not include it as our dictionary had very few Hausa-Fulani names . Further , Hausa-Fulani names are predominantly Arabic or Arabic derivatives and stand out from the rest of the ethnic groups , making their detection easier.
514 will be made available with the data itself for future research.
3 Random Walks on Typed Graphs
Consider a graph G = ( V,E ), with edge set E defined on the vertices in V . A typed graph is one where every vertex v in V has an associated type tv ? TV . Analogously , we also use edge types TE ? TV ? TV . Some examples of typed edges and vertices used in this paper are shown in Table 1.
These will be elaborated further in Section 4.
Vertices POSITIONAL BIGRAM , BIGRAM,
TRIGRAM , FIRST NAME , LAST NAME , . . .
Edges POSITION ( POSITIONAL BIGRAM ? BIGRAM ), 32BACKOFF ( TRIGRAM ? BIGRAM),
CONCURRENCE ( FIRST NAME ? LAST NAME ), . . .
Table 1: Example types for vertices and edges in the graph for name morphophonemics With every edge type te ? TE we associate a real-valued parameter ? ? [0, 1]. Thus our graph is parameterized by a set of parameters ? with |?| = | TE |. We will need to learn these parameters from the training data ; more on this in Section 5. We relax the estimation problem by forcing the graph to be undirected . This effectively reduces the number of parameters by half.
We now have a weighted graph with a weight matrix W (?). The probability transition matrix P (?) for the random walk is derived by noting P (?) = D(?)?1W (?) where D (?) is the diagonal weighted-degree matrix , i.e , dii (?) = ? j wij(?).
From this point on , we rely on standard label-propagation based semisupervised classification techniques ( Zhu et al , 2003; Baluja et al , 2008; Talukdar et al , 2008) that work by spreading probability mass across the edges in the graph . While traditional label propagation methods proceed by constructing graphs using some kernel or arbitrary similarity measures , our method estimates the appropriate weight matrix from training data using grid search.
4 Graph construction
Our graphs have two kinds of nodes ? nodes we want to classify ? called target nodes and feature nodes which correspond to different feature types . Some of the target nodes can optionally have label information , these are called seed nodes and are excluded from evaluation . Every feature instance has its own node and an edge exists between a target node and a feature node if the target node instantiates the feature . Features are not independent . For example the trigram aba also indicates the presence of the bigrams ab and ba . We encode this relationship between features by adding typed edges . For instance , in the previous case , a typed edge (32BACK-OFF ) is added between the trigram aba and the bigram ab representing the backoff relation . In the absence of these edges between features , our graph would have been bipartite . We experimented with three kinds of graphs for this task:
First name/Last name ( FN LN ) graph
As a first attempt , we only considered first and last names as features generated by a name . The name we wish to classify is treated as a target node . There are two typed relations 1) between the first and last name , called CONCURRENCE , where the first and last names occur together and 2) Where an edge , SHARED NAME , exists between two first ( last ) names if they share a last ( first ) name . Hence there are only two parameters to estimate here.
Figure 1: A part of the First name/Last name graph : Edges indicate cooccurrence or a shared name.
Character Ngram graph
The ethnicity of personal names are often indicated by morphophonemic features of the individ-ual?s given/first or family/last names . For example , the last names Polanski , Piotrowski , Soszyn-ski , Sikorski with the suffix ski indicate Polish descent . Instead of writing suffix rules , we generate character ngram features from names ranging from serve how the suffix osun contributes to the inference of adeosun as a Yoruba name even though it was never seen in training . The different colors on the edges represent edge types whose weights are estimated from the data.
bigrams to 5grams and all orders inbetween . We further distinguish ngrams that appear in the beginning ( corresponding to prefixes ), middle , and end ( corresponding to suffixes ). Thus the last name , mosun in the graph is connected to the following positional trigrams mos-BEG , osu-MID , sun-END besides positional ngrams of other orders . The positional trigram mos-BEG connected to the position-independent trigram mos using the typed edge POSITION . Further , the trigram mos is connected to the bigrams mo and os using a 32BACKOFF edge . The resulting graph has four typed relations ? 32BACKOFF , 43BACKOFF , 45BACKOFF , and POSITION ? and four corresponding parameters to be estimated.
Combined graph
Finally , we consider the union of the character ngram graph and the FirstName-LastName graph . Table 2 lists some summary statistics for the various graphs.
#Vertices # Edges Avg . degree
FN LN 22.8K 137.2K 3.6
CHAR . NGRAM 282.6K 1.2M 8.7
COMBINED 282.6K 1.3M 9.2
Table 2: Graphs for person name ethnicity classification 5 Grid Search for Parameter Estimation The typed graph we constructed in the previous section has as many parameters as the number of edge types , i.e , |?| = | TE |. We further constrain the values taken by the parameters to be in the range [0, 1].
Note that there is no loss of representation in doing so , as arbitrary real-valued weights on edges can be normalized to the range [0, 1]. Our objective is to find a set of values for ? that maximizes the classification accuracy . Towards that effect , we quantize the range [0, 1] into k equally sized bins and convert this to a discrete-valued optimization problem.
While this is an approximation , our experience finds that relative values of the various ? i ? ? are more important than the absolute values for label propagation.
Figure 3: Grid search on a unit 2-simplex with k = 4.
The complexity of this search procedure is O(kn ) for k bins and n parameters . For problems with small number of parameters , like ours ( n = 4 or n = 2 depending on the graph model ), and with fewer bins this search is still tractable although computationally expensive . We set k = 4; this results in 256 combinations to be searched at most and we evaluate each combination in parallel on a cluster.
Clearly , this exhaustive search works only for problems with few parameters . However , grid search can still be used in problems with large number of edge types using one of the following two techniques : 1) Randomly sample with replacement from a Dirichlet distribution with same order as the number of bins.
Evaluate using parameter values from each sample on the development set . Select the parameter values that result in highest accuracy on the development set from a large number of samples . 2) Perform a range [0, 1] and use that result to shrink the search range . Perform grid search again on this smaller range . We simply search exhaustively given the nature of our problem.
6 Experiments & Results
We evaluated our three different model variants under two settings : 1) When only a weak prior from the dictionary data is present ; we call this ? out-of-domain ? since we don?t use any labels from Facebook and 2) when both the dictionary prior and some labels from the Facebook data is present ; we call this ? indomain ?. The results are reported using 10-fold crossvalidation . In addition to the proposed typed graph models , we show results from a smoothed-Na??ve Bayes implementation and two standard baselines 1) where labels are assigned uniformly at random ( UNIFORM ) and 2) where labels are assigned according the empirical prior distribution ( PRIOR).
The baseline accuracies are shown in Table 3.
Out-of-domain Indomain
UNIFORM 25.0 25.0
PRIOR 42.6 42.6
Na??ve Bayes 75.1 77.2
Table 3: Ethnicity-classification accuracy from baseline classifiers.
We performed similar indomain and out-of-domain experiments for each of the graph models proposed in Section 4 and list the results in Table 4, without using grid search.
Out-of-domain Indomain
FN LN 57.6 60.2
CHAR . NGRAM 73.2 76.8 % gain over FN LN 27% 27.6%
COMBINED 77.1 78.7 % gain over CHAR . NGRAM 5.3% 2.5% Table 4: Ethnicity-classification accuracy without grid search Some points to note about the results reported in Table 4: 1) These results were obtained without using parameters from the grid search based optimization . 2) The character ngram graph model performs better than the first-name/last-name graph model by itself , as expected due to the smoothing induced by the backoff edge types . 3) The combination of first-name/last-name graph and the ngram improves accuracy by over 30%.
Table 5 reports results from using parameters estimated using grid search . The parameter estimation was done on a development set that was not used in the 10-fold crossvalidation results reported in the table . Observe that the parameters estimated via grid search always improved performance of label propagation.
Out-of-domain Indomain
FN LN 59.1 61.4
CHAR . NGRAM 76.7 78.5
COMBINED 78.6 80.1
Improvements by grid search ( c.f ., Table 4)
FN LN 2.6% 2%
CHAR . NGRAM 4.8% 2.2%
COMBINED 1.5% 1.7%
Table 5: Ethnicity-classification accuracy with grid search 7 Conclusions We considered the problem of learning a person?s ethnicity from his/her name as an inference problem over typed graphs , where the edges represent labeled relations between features that are parameterized by the edge types . We developed a framework for parameter estimation on different constructions of typed graphs for this problem using a gradient-free optimization method based on grid search . We also proposed alternatives to scale up grid search for large problem instances . Our results show a significant performance improvement over the baseline and this performance is further improved by parameter estimation resulting over 30% improvement in accuracy using the conjunction of techniques proposed for the task.
References
Shumeet Baluja , Rohan Seth , D . Sivakumar , Yushi Jing , Jay Yagnik , Shankar Kumar , Deepak Ravichandran , and Mohamed Aly . 2008. Video suggestion and discovery for youtube : taking random walks through the view graph . In Proceeding of the 17th international conference on World Wide Web.
Jonathan Chang , Itamar Rosenn , Lars Backstrom , and Cameron Marlow . 2010. epluribus : Ethnicity on so-Conference in Weblogs and Social Media ( ICWSM).
Ryan McDonald , Fernando Pereira , Kiril Ribarov , and Jan Hajic ?. 2005. Nonprojective dependency parsing using spanning tree algorithms . In Proceedings of the conference on Human Language Technology and Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Einat Minkov and William Cohen . 2007. Learning to rank typed graph walks : local and global approaches.
In Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD 2007 workshop on Web mining and social network analysis , New York , NY , USA . ACM.
Partha Pratim Talukdar , Joseph Reisinger , Marius Pas?ca , Deepak Ravichandran , Rahul Bhagat , and Fernando Pereira . 2008. Weakly-supervised acquisition of labeled class instances using graph random walks . In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing . Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Xiaojin Zhu , Zoubin Ghahramani , and John Lafferty.
2003. Semisupervised learning using gaussian fields and harmonic functions . In Proceedings of the International Conference in Machine Learning , pages 912? 919.
518
