Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:shortpapers , pages 569?574,
Portland , Oregon , June 1924, 2011. c?2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semisupervised latent variable models for sentence-level sentiment analysis
Oscar Ta?ckstro?m
SICS , Kista / Uppsala University , Uppsala
oscar@sics.se
Ryan McDonald
Google , Inc ., New York
ryanmcd@google.com
Abstract
We derive two variants of a semisupervised model for finegrained sentiment analysis.
Both models leverage abundant natural supervision in the form of review ratings , as well as a small amount of manually crafted sentence labels , to learn sentence-level sentiment classifiers . The proposed model is a fusion of a fully supervised structured conditional model and its partially supervised counterpart . This allows for highly efficient estimation and inference algorithms with rich feature definitions.
We describe the two variants as well as their component models and verify experimentally that both variants give significantly improved results for sentence-level sentiment analysis compared to all baselines.
1 Sentence-level sentiment analysis
In this paper , we demonstrate how combining coarse-grained and finegrained supervision benefits sentence-level sentiment analysis ? an important task in the field of opinion classification and retrieval ( Pang and Lee , 2008). Typical supervised learning approaches to sentence-level sentiment analysis rely on sentence-level supervision . While such finegrained supervision rarely exist naturally , and thus requires labor intensive manual annotation effort ( Wiebe et al ., 2005), coarse-grained supervision is naturally abundant in the form of online review ratings . This coarse-grained supervision is , of course , less informative compared to finegrained supervision , however , by combining a small amount of sentence-level supervision with a large amount of document-level supervision , we are able to substantially improve on the sentence-level classification task . Our work combines two strands of research : models for sentiment analysis that take document structure into account ; and models that use latent variables to learn unobserved phenomena from that which can be observed.
Exploiting document structure for sentiment analysis has attracted research attention since the early work of Pang and Lee (2004), who performed minimal cuts in a sentence graph to select subjective sentences . McDonald et al (2007) later showed that jointly learning finegrained ( sentence ) and coarse-grained ( document ) sentiment improves predictions at both levels . More recently , Yessenalina et al (2010) described how sentence-level latent variables can be used to improve document-level prediction and Nakagawa et al (2010) used latent variables over syntactic dependency trees to improve sentence-level prediction , using only labeled sentences for training.
In a similar vein , Sauper et al (2010) integrated generative content structure models with discriminative models for multi-aspect sentiment summarization and ranking . These approaches all rely on the availability of finegrained annotations , but Ta?ckstro?m and McDonald (2011) showed that latent variables can be used to learn finegrained sentiment using only coarse-grained supervision . While this model was shown to beat a set of natural baselines with quite a wide margin , it has its shortcomings . Most notably , due to the loose constraints provided by the coarse supervision , it tends to only predict the two dominant finegrained sentiment categories well for each document sentiment category , so that almost all sentences in positive documents are deemed positive or neutral , and vice versa for negative documents . As a way of overcoming these shortcomings , we propose to fuse a coarsely supervised model with a fully supervised model.
Below , we describe two ways of achieving such a combined model in the framework of structured conditional latent variable models . Contrary to ( generative ) topic models ( Mei et al , 2007; Titov and ? ? ? ysi?1 y s i y s i+1 ? ? ? ? ? ? si?1 si si+1 ? ? ? b ) yd ? ? ? ysi?1 y s i y s i+1 ? ? ? ? ? ? si?1 si si+1 ? ? ? Figure 1: a ) Factor graph of the fully observed graphical model . b ) Factor graph of the corresponding latent variable model . During training , shaded nodes are observed , while non-shaded nodes are unobserved . The input sentences si are always observed . Note that there are no factors connecting the document node , yd , with the input nodes , s , so that the sentence-level variables , ys , in effect form a bottleneck between the document sentiment and the input sentences.
McDonald , 2008; Lin and He , 2009), structured conditional models can handle rich and overlapping features and allow for exact inference and simple gradient based estimation . The former models are largely orthogonal to the one we propose in this work and combining their merits might be fruitful . As shown by Sauper et al (2010), it is possible to fuse generative document structure models and task specific structured conditional models . While we do model document structure in terms of sentiment transitions , we do not model topical structure . An interesting avenue for future work would be to extend the model of Sauper et al (2010) to take coarse-grained task-specific supervision into account , while modeling finegrained task-specific aspects with latent variables.
Note also that the proposed approach is orthogonal to semisupervised and unsupervised induction of context independent ( prior polarity ) lexicons ( Turney , 2002; Kim and Hovy , 2004; Esuli and Sebastiani , 2009; Rao and Ravichandran , 2009; Velikovich et al , 2010). The output of such models could readily be incorporated as features in the proposed model.
1.1 Preliminaries
Let d be a document consisting of n sentences , s = ( si)ni=1, with a document?sentence-sequence pair denoted d = ( d , s ). Let yd = ( yd,ys ) denote random variables1 ? the document level sentiment , yd , and the sequence of sentence level sentiment , ys = ( ysi ) n i=1.
1We are abusing notation throughout by using the same symbols to refer to random variables and their particular assignments.
In what follows , we assume that we have access to two training sets : a small set of fully labeled instances , DF = {( dj , ydj )} mf j=1, and a large set of coarsely labeled instances DC = {( dj , ydj )} mf+mc j=mf+1 .
Furthermore , we assume that yd and all ysi take values in { POS , NEG , NEU}.
We focus on structured conditional models in the exponential family , with the standard parametrization p?(y d,ys|s ) = exp { ??( yd,ys , s ), ?? ? A?(s ) } , where ? ? < n is a parameter vector , ?(?) ? < n is a vector valued feature function that factors according to the graph structure outlined in Figure 1, and A ? is the log-partition function . This class of models is known as conditional random fields ( CRFs ) ( Lafferty et al , 2001), when all variables are observed , and as hidden conditional random fields ( HCRFs ) ( Quattoni et al , 2007), when only a subset of the variables are observed.
1.2 The fully supervised fine-to-coarse model McDonald et al (2007) introduced a fully supervised model in which predictions of coarse-grained ( document ) and finegrained ( sentence ) sentiment are learned and inferred jointly . They showed that learning both levels jointly improved performance at both levels , compared to learning each level individually , as well as to using a cascaded model in which the predictions at one level are used as input to the other.
Figure 1a outlines the factor graph of the corre-?F , of this model can be estimated from the set of fully labeled data , DF , by maximizing the joint conditional likelihood function
LF (? F ) = mf ? j=1 log p?F ( y d j , y s j | sj )? ?? F ? , where ?2F is the variance of the Normal(0, ? Note that LF is a concave function and consequently its unique maximum can be found by gradient based optimization techniques.
1.3 Latent variables for coarse supervision Recently , Ta?ckstro?m and McDonald (2011) showed that finegrained sentiment can be learned from coarse-grained supervision alone . Specifically , they used a HCRF model with the same structure as that in Figure 1a , but with sentence labels treated as latent variables . The factor graph corresponding to this model is outlined in Figure 1b.
The fully supervised model might benefit from factors that directly connect the document variable , yd , with the inputs s . However , as argued by Ta?ckstro?m and McDonald (2011), when only document-level supervision is available , the document variable , yd , should be independent of the input , s , conditioned on the latent variables , ys . This prohibits the model from bypassing the latent variables , which is crucial , since we seek to improve the sentence-level predictions , rather than the document-level predictions.
The parameters , ? C , of this model can be estimated from the set of coarsely labeled data , DC , by maximizing the marginalized conditional likelihood function
LC(?C ) = mf+mc ? j=mf+1 log ? ys p?C ( y d j , y s|sj )? ?? C ? , where the marginalization is over all possible sequences of latent sentence label assignments ys.
Due to the introduction of latent variables , the marginal likelihood function is non-concave and thus there are no guarantees of global optimality , however , we can still use a gradient based optimization technique to find a local maximum.
2Figure 1a differs slightly from the model employed by McDonald et al (2007), where they had factors connecting the document label yd with each input si as well.
2 Combining coarse and full supervision
The fully supervised and the partially supervised models both have their merits . The former requires an expensive and laborious process of manual annotation , while the latter can be used with readily available document labels , such as review star ratings . The latter , however , has its shortcomings in that the coarse-grained sentiment signal is less informative compared to a finegrained signal . Thus , in order to get the best of both worlds , we would like to combine the merits of both of these models.
2.1 A cascaded model
A straightforward way of fusing the two models is by means of a cascaded model in which the predictions of the partially supervised model , trained by maximizing LC(?C ) are used to derive additional features for the fully supervised model , trained by maximizing LF (? F ).
Although more complex representations are possible , we generate meta-features for each sentence based solely on operations on the estimated distributions , p?C ( y d , ysi | s ). Specifically , we encode the following probability distributions as discrete features by uniform bucketing , with bucket width 0.1: the joint distribution , p?C ( y d , ysi | s ); the marginal document distribution , p?C ( y d|s ); and the marginal sentence distribution , p?C ( y s i | s ). We also encode the argmax of these distributions , as well as the pairwise combinations of the derived features.
The upshot of this cascaded approach is that it is very simple to implement and efficient to train . The downside is that only the partially supervised model influences the fully supervised model ; there is no reciprocal influence between the models . Given the non-concavity of LC(?C ), such influence could be beneficial.
2.2 Interpolating likelihood functions
A more flexible way of fusing the two models is to interpolate their likelihood functions , thereby allowing for both coarse and joint supervision of the same model . Such a combination can be achieved by constraining the parameters so that ? I = ? F = ? C and taking the mean of the likelihood functions LF and LC , appropriately weighted by a hyperparameter ?.
571
The result is the interpolated likelihood function
LI(?I ) = ? LF (? I ) + (1? ?) LC(?I ) .
A simple , yet efficient , way of optimizing this objective function is to use stochastic gradient ascent with learning rate ?. At each step we select a fully labeled instance , ( dj , ydj ) ? DF , with probability ? and a coarsely labeled instance , ( dj , ydj ) ? DC , with probability (1? ?). We then update the parameters , ? I , according to the gradients ? LF and ? LC , respectively . In principle we could use different learning rates ? F and ? C as well as different prior variances ?2F and ? Since we are interpolating conditional models , we need at least partial observations of each instance.
Methods for blending discriminative and generative models ( Lasserre et al , 2006; Suzuki et al , 2007; Agarwal and Daume ?, 2009; Sauper et al , 2010), would enable incorporation of completely unlabeled data as well . It is straightforward to extend the proposed model along these lines , however , in practice coarsely labeled sentiment data is so abundant on the web ( e.g ., rated consumer reviews ) that incorporating completely unlabeled data seems superfluous.
Furthermore , using conditional models with shared parameters throughout allows for rich overlapping features , while maintaining simple and efficient inference and estimation.
3 Experiments
For the following experiments , we used the same data set and a comparable experimental setup to that of Ta?ckstro?m and McDonald (2011).3 We compare the two proposed hybrid models ( Cascaded and Interpolated ) to the fully supervised model of McDonald et al . (2007) ( FineToCoarse ) as well as to the soft variant of the coarsely supervised model of Ta?ckstro?m and McDonald (2011) ( Coarse).
The learning rate was fixed to ? = 0.001, while we tuned the prior variances , ?2, and the number of epochs for each model . When sampling according to ? during optimization of LI(?I ), we cycle through DF and DC deterministically , but shuffle these sets between epochs . Due to time constraints , we fixed the interpolation factor to ? = 0.1, but tuning this could 3The annotated test data can be downloaded from http://www.sics.se/people/oscar/datasets.
potentially improve the results of the interpolated model . For the same reason we allowed a maximum of 30 epochs , for all models , while Ta?ckstro?m and McDonald (2011) report a maximum of 75 epochs.
To assess the impact of fully labeled versus coarsely labeled data , we took stratified samples without replacement , of sizes 60, 120, and 240 reviews , from the fully labeled folds and of sizes 15,000 and 143,580 reviews from the coarsely labeled data . On average each review consists of ten sentences . We performed 5-fold stratified crossvalidation over the labeled data , while using stratified samples for the coarsely labeled data . Statistical significance was assessed by a hierachical bootstrap of 95% confidence intervals , using the technique described by Davison and Hinkley (1997).
3.1 Results and analysis
Table 1 lists sentence-level accuracy along with 95% confidence interval for all tested models . We first note that the interpolated model dominates all other models in terms of accuracy . While the cascaded model requires both large amounts of fully labeled and coarsely labeled data , the interpolated model is able to take advantage of both types of data on its own and jointly . Still , by comparing the fully supervised and the coarsely supervised models , the superior impact of fully labeled over coarsely labeled data is evident . As can be seen in Figure 2, when all data is used , the cascaded model outperforms the interpolated model for some recall values , and vice versa , while both models dominate the supervised approach for the full range of recall values.
As discussed earlier , and confirmed by Table 2, the coarse-grained model only performs well on the predominant sentence-level categories for each document category . The supervised model handles negative and neutral sentences well , but performs poorly on positive sentences even in positive documents.
The interpolated model , while still better at capturing the predominant category , does a better job overall.
These results are with a maximum of 30 training iterations . Preliminary experiments with a maximum of 75 iterations indicate that all models gain from more iterations ; this seems to be especially true for the supervised model and for the cascaded model with less amount of course-grained data.
572 | DC | = 15,000 | DC | = 143,580 | DF | = 60 | DF | = 120 | DF | = 240 | DF | = 60 | DF | = 120 | DF | = 240 FineToCoarse 49.3 (-1.3, 1.4) 53.4 (-1.8, 1.7) 54.6 (-3.6, 3.8) 49.3 (-1.3, 1.4) 53.4 (-1.8, 1.7) 54.6 (-3.6, 3.8) Coarse 49.6 (-1.5, 1.8) 49.6 (-1.5, 1.8) 49.6 (-1.5, 1.8) 53.5 (-1.2, 1.4) 53.5 (-1.2, 1.4) 53.5 (-1.2, 1.4) Cascaded 39.7 (-6.8, 5.7) 45.4 (-3.1, 2.9) 42.6 (-6.5, 6.5) 55.6 (-2.9, 2.7) 55.0 (-3.2, 3.4) 56.8 (-3.8, 3.6) Interpolated 54.3 (-1.4, 1.4) 55.0 (-1.7, 1.6) 57.5 (-4.1, 5.2) 56.0 (-2.4, 2.1) 54.5 (-2.9, 2.8) 59.1 (-2.8, 3.4) Table 1: Sentence level results for varying numbers of fully labeled ( DF ) and coarsely labeled ( DC ) reviews . Bold : significantly better than the FineToCoarse model according to a hierarchical bootstrapped confidence interval , p < 0.05.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Recall ec is io n
POS sentences
FineToCoarse
Cascaded
Interpolated 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Recall ec is io n
NEG sentences
FineToCoarse
Cascaded
Interpolated
Figure 2: Interpolated POS / NEG sentence-level precisionrecall curves with | DC | = 143,580 and | DF | = 240.
POS docs . NEG docs . NEU docs.
FineToCoarse 35 / 11 / 59 33 / 76 / 42 29 / 63 / 55 Coarse 70 / 14 / 43 11 / 71 / 34 43 / 47 / 53 Cascaded 43 / 17 / 61 0 / 75 / 49 10 / 64 / 50 Interpolated 73 / 16 / 51 42 / 72 / 48 54 / 52 / 57 Table 2: POS / NEG / NEU sentence-level F1-scores per document category (| DC | = 143,580 and | DF | = 240).
4 Conclusions
Learning finegrained classification tasks in a fully supervised manner does not scale well due to the lack of naturally occurring supervision . We instead proposed to combine coarse-grained supervision , which is naturally abundant but less informative , with finegrained supervision , which is scarce but more informative.
To this end , we introduced two simple , yet effective , methods of combining fully labeled and coarsely labeled data for sentence-level sentiment analysis.
First , a cascaded approach where a coarsely supervised model is used to generate features for a fully supervised model . Second , an interpolated model that directly optimizes a combination of joint and marginal likelihood functions . Both proposed models are structured conditional models that allow for rich overlapping features , while maintaining highly efficient exact inference and robust estimation properties . Empirically , the interpolated model is superior to the other investigated models , but with sufficient amounts of coarsely labeled and fully labeled data , the cascaded approach is competitive.
Acknowledgments
The first author acknowledges the support of the Swedish National Graduate School of Language Technology ( GSLT ). The authors would also like to thank Fernando Pereira and Bob Carpenter for early discussions on using HCRFs in sentiment analysis.
573
References
Arvind Agarwal and Hal Daume ?. 2009. Exponential family hybrid semisupervised learning . In Proceedings of the International Jont conference on Artifical
Intelligence ( IJCAI).
Anthony C . Davison and David V . Hinkley . 1997. Bootstrap Methods and Their Applications . Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK.
Andrea Esuli and Fabrizio Sebastiani . 2009. SentiWordNet : A publicly available lexical resource for opinion mining . In Proceedings of the Language Resource and
Evaluation Conference ( LREC).
Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy . 2004. Determining the sentiment of opinions . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING).
John Lafferty , Andrew McCallum , and Fernando Pereira.
2001. Conditional random fields : Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
Learning ( ICML).
Julia A . Lasserre , Christopher M . Bishop , and Thomas P.
Minka . 2006. Principled hybrids of generative and discriminative models . In Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition ( CVPR).
Chenghua Lin and Yulan He . 2009. Joint sentiment/topic model for sentiment analysis . In Proceeding of the Conference on Information and Knowledge Management ( CIKM).
Ryan McDonald , Kerry Hannan , Tyler Neylon , Mike Wells , and Jeff Reynar . 2007. Structured models for fine-to-coarse sentiment analysis . In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( ACL).
Q . Mei , X . Ling , M . Wondra , H . Su , and C.X . Zhai . 2007.
Topic sentiment mixture : modeling facets and opinions in weblogs . In Proceedings of the International
Conference on World Wide Web ( WWW).
Tetsuji Nakagawa , Kentaro Inui , and Sadao Kurohashi.
2010. Dependency Tree-based Sentiment Classification using CRFs with Hidden Variables . In Proceedings of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics ( NAACL).
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee . 2004. A sentimental education : Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization based on minimum cuts . In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( ACL).
Bo Pang and Lillian Lee . 2008. Opinion mining and sentiment analysis . Now Publishers.
Ariadna Quattoni , Sybor Wang , Louis-Philippe Morency , Michael Collins , and Trevor Darrell . 2007. Hidden conditional random fields . IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence.
Delip Rao and Deepak Ravichandran . 2009. Semisupervised polarity lexicon induction . In Proceedings of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( EACL).
Christina Sauper , Aria Haghighi , and Regina Barzilay.
2010. Incorporating content structure into text analysis applications . In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP).
Jun Suzuki , Akinori Fujino , and Hideki Isozaki . 2007.
Semisupervised structured output learning based on a hybrid generative and discriminative approach . In Porceedings of the Conference on Emipirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP).
Oscar Ta?ckstro?m and Ryan McDonald . 2011. Discovering finegrained sentiment with latent variable structured prediction models . In Proceedings of the European Conference on Information Retrieval ( ECIR).
Ivan Titov and Ryan McDonald . 2008. Modeling online reviews with multi-grain topic models . In Proceedings of the Annual World Wide Web Conference ( WWW).
Peter Turney . 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down ? Sentiment orientation applied to unsupervised classification of reviews . In Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( ACL).
Leonid Velikovich , Sasha BlairGoldensohn , Kerry Hannan , and Ryan McDonald . 2010. The viability of web-derived polarity lexicons . In Proceedings of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( NAACL).
Janyce Wiebe , Theresa Wilson , and Claire Cardie . 2005.
Annotating expressions of opinions and emotions in language . In Language Resources and Evaluation ( LREC).
Ainur Yessenalina , Yisong Yue , and Claire Cardie . 2010.
Multilevel structured models for document-level sentiment classification . In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP).
574
