Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 75?79,
Jeju , Republic of Korea , 814 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Context-sensitive , Multifaceted model of Lexico-Conceptual Affect Tony Veale Web Science and Technology Division , KAIST , Daejeon , South Korea . Tony.Veale@gmail.com Abstract Since we can ? spin ? words and concepts to suit our affective needs , context is a major determinant of the perceived affect of a word or concept . We view this re-profiling as a selective emphasis or de-emphasis of the qualities that underpin our shared stereotype of a concept or a word meaning , and construct our model of the affective lexicon accordingly . We show how a large body of affective stereotypes can be acquired from the web , and also show how these are used to create and interpret affective metaphors.
1 Introduction The builders of affective lexica face the vexing task of distilling the many and varied pragmatic uses of a word or concept into an overall semantic measure of affect . The task is greatly complicated by the fact that in each context of use , speakers may implicitly agree to focus on just a subset of the salient features of a concept , and it is these features that determine contextual affect . Naturally , disagreements arise when speakers do not implicitly arrive at such a consensus , as when people disagree about hackers : advocates often focus on qualities that emphasize curiosity or technical vir-tuosity , while opponents focus on qualities that emphasize criminality and a disregard for the law . In each case , it is the same concept , Hacker , that is being described , yet speakers can focus on different qualities to arrive at different affective stances . Any gross measure of affect ( such as e.g ., that hackers are good or bad ) must thus be grounded in a nuanced model of the stereotypical properties and behaviors of the underlying word-concept . As different stereotypical qualities are highlighted or
deemphasized in a given context ? a particular metaphor , say , might describe hackers as terrorists or hackers as artists ? we need to be able to recalculate the perceived affect of the word-concept . This paper presents such a stereotype-grounded model of the affective lexicon . After reviewing the relevant background in section 2, we present the basis of the model in section 3. Here we describe how a large body of feature-rich stereotypes is acquired from the web and from local ngrams . The model is evaluated in section 4. We conclude by showing the utility of the model to that most contextual of NLP phenomena ? affective metaphor . 2 Related Work and Ideas In its simplest form , an affect lexicon assigns an affective score ? along one or more dimensions ? to each word or sense . For instance , Whissell?s (1989) Dictionary of Affect ( or DoA ) assigns a trio of scores to each of its 8000+ words to describe three psycholinguistic dimensions : pleasantness , activation and imagery . In the DoA , the lowest pleasantness score of 1.0 is assigned to words like abnormal and ugly , while the highest , 3.0, is assigned to words like wedding and winning . Though Whissell?s DoA is based on human ratings , Turney (2002) shows how affective valence can be derived from measures of word association in web texts . Human intuitions are prized in matters of lexical affect . For reliable results on a largescale , Mohammad & Turney (2010) and Mohammad & Yang (2011) thus used the Mechanical Turk to elicit human ratings of the emotional content of words . Ratings were sought along the eight dimensions identified in Plutchik (1980) as primary emotions : trust , anger , anticipation , disgust , fear , joy , sadness and surprise . Automated tests were used to exclude unsuitable raters . In all , 24,000+ wordsense pairs were annotated by five different raters.
75
Liu et al (2003) also present a multidimensional affective model that uses the six basic emotion categories of Ekman (1993) as its dimensions : happy , sad , angry , fearful , disgusted and surprised . These authors base estimates of affect on the contents of Open Mind , a commonsense knowledgebase ( Singh , 2002) harvested from contributions of web volunteers . These contents are treated as sentential objects , and a range of NLP models is used to derive affective labels for the subset of contents (~10%) that appear to convey an emotional stance . These labels are then propagated to related concepts ( e.g ., excitement is propagated from roller-coasters to amusement parks ) so that the implicit affect of many other concepts can be determined . Strapparava and Valitutti (2004) provide a set of affective annotations for a subset of WordNet?s synsets in a resource called Wordnet-affect . The annotation labels , called a-labels , focus on the cognitive dynamics of emotion , allowing one to distinguish e.g . between words that denote an emo-tion-eliciting situation and those than denote an emotional response . Esuli and Sebastiani (2006) also build directly on WordNet as their lexical platform , using a semisupervised learning algorithm to assign a trio of numbers ? positivity , negativity and neutrality ? to word senses in their newly derived resource , SentiWordNet . ( Wordnet-affect also supports these three dimensions as a-labels , and adds a fourth , ambiguous ). Esuli & Sebastiani (2007) improve on their affect scores by running a variant of the PageRank algorithm ( see also Mihalcea and Tarau , 2004) on the graph structure that tacitly connects wordsenses in WordNet to each other via the words used in their textual glosses . These lexica attempt to capture the affective profile of a word/sense when it is used in its most normative and stereotypical guise , but they do so without an explicit model of stereotypical meaning . Veale & Hao (2007) describe a webbased approach to acquiring such a model . They note that since the simile pattern ? as ADJ as DET NOUN ? presupposes that NOUN is an exemplar of ADJness , it follows that ADJ must be a highly salient property of NOUN . Veale & Hao harvested tens of thousands of instances of this pattern from the Web , to extract sets of adjectival properties for thousands of commonplace nouns . They show that if one estimates the pleasantness of a term like snake or artist as a weighted average of the pleasantness of its properties ( like sneaky or creative ) in a resource like Whissell?s DoA , then the estimated scores show a reliable correlation with the DoA?s own scores . It thus makes computational sense to calculate the affect of a word-concept as a function of the affect of its most salient properties . Veale (2011) later built on this work to show how a prop-erty-rich stereotypical representation could be used for nonliteral matching and retrieval of creative texts , such as metaphors and analogies . Both Liu et al (2003) and Veale & Hao (2010) argue for the importance of commonsense knowledge in the determination of affect . We incorporate ideas from both here , while choosing to build mainly on the latter , to construct a nuanced , two-level model of the affective lexicon . 3 An Affective Lexicon of Stereotypes We construct the stereotype-based lexicon in two stages . For the first layer , a large collection of stereotypical descriptions is harvested from the web . As in Liu et al (2003), our goal is to acquire a lightweight commonsense representation of many everyday concepts . For the second layer , we link these commonsense qualities in a support graph that captures how they mutually support each other in their co-description of a stereotypical idea . From this graph we can estimate pleasantness and unpleasantness valence scores for each property and behavior , and for the stereotypes that exhibit them . Expanding on the approach in Veale (2011), we use two kinds of query for harvesting stereotypes from the web . The first , ? as ADJ as a NOUN ?, acquires typical adjectival properties for noun concepts ; the second , ? VERB+ing like a NOUN ? and ? VERB+ed like a NOUN ?, acquires typical verb behaviors . Rather than use a wildcard * in both positions ( ADJ and NOUN , or VERB and NOUN ), which gives limited results with a search engine like Google , we generate fully instantiated similes from hypotheses generated via the Google ngrams ( Brants & Franz , 2006). Thus , from the 3gram ? a drooling zombie ? we generate the query ? drooling like a zombie ?, and from the 3gram ? a mindless zombie ? we generate ? as mindless as a zombie ?. Only those queries that retrieve one or more Web documents via the Google API indicate the most promising associations . This still gives us over 250,000 web-validated simile associations for our stereotypical model , and we filter these manually , to ensure that the lexicon is both reusable and no feedback between the nodes of N , and thus , no interdependence between adjacent affect scores : (3) pos(p ) = | N+(p )| | N+(p ) ? N-(p )| (4) neg(p ) = 1 - pos(p ) If a term S denotes a stereotypical idea and is described via a set of typical properties and behaviors typical(S ) in the lexicon , then : (5) pos(S ) = ? p?typical(S ) pos(p ) | typical(S )| (6) neg(S ) = 1 - pos(S ) Thus , (5) and (6) calculate the mean affect of the properties and behaviors of S , as represented via typical(S ). We can now use (3) and (4) to separate typical(S ) into those elements that are more negative than positive ( putting an unpleasant spin on S in context ) and those that are more positive than negative ( putting a pleasant spin on S in context ): (7) posTypical(S ) = { p | p ? typical(S ) ? pos(p ) > 0.5} (8) negTypical(S ) = { p | p ? typical(S ) ? neg(p ) > 0.5} 4 Empirical Evaluation In the process of populating + R and - R , we identify a reference set of 478 positive stereotype nouns ( such as saint and hero ) and 677 negative stereotype nouns ( such as tyrant and monster ). We can use these reference stereotypes to test the effectiveness of (5) and (6), and thus , indirectly , of (3) and (4) and of the affective lexicon itself . Thus , we find that 96.7% of the stereotypes in + R are correctly assigned a positivity score greater than 0.5 ( pos(S ) > neg(S )) by (5), while 96.2% of the stereotypes in - R are correctly assigned a negativity score greater than 0.5 ( neg(S ) > pos(S )) by (6). We can also use + R and - R as a gold standard for evaluating the separation of typical(S ) into distinct positive and negative subsets posTypical(S ) and negTypical(S ) via (7) and (8). The lexicon contains 6,230 stereotypes with at least one property in + R?-R . On average , + R?-R contains 6.51 of the properties of each of these stereotypes , where , on average , 2.95 are in + R while 3.56 are in - R . In a perfect separation , (7) should yield a positive subset that contains only those properties in 5 Re-shaping Affect in Figurative Contexts The Google ngrams are a rich source of affective metaphors of the form Target is Source , such as ? politicians are crooks ?, ? Apple is a cult ?, ? racism is a disease ? and ? Steve Jobs is a god ?. Let src(T ) denote the set of stereotypes that are commonly used to describe T , where commonality is defined as the presence of the corresponding copula metaphor in the Google ngrams . Thus , for example : src(racism ) = { problem , disease , poison , sin , crime , ideology , weapon , ?} src(Hitler ) = { monster , criminal , tyrant , idiot , madman , vegetarian , racist , ?} Let srcTypical(T ) denote the aggregation of all properties ascribable to T via metaphors in src(T ): (9) srcTypical ( T ) = M?src(T)typical(M ) We can also use the posTypical and negTypical variants in (7) and (8) to focus only on metaphors that project positive or negative qualities onto T . In effect , (9) provides a feature representation for a topic T as viewed through the prism of metaphor . This is useful when the source S in the metaphor T is S is not a known stereotype in the lexicon , as happens e.g . in Apple is Scientology . We can also estimate whether a given term S is more positive than negative by taking the average pos/neg valence of src(S ). Such estimates are 87% correct when evaluated using + R and - R examples.
The properties and behaviors that are contextually relevant to the interpretation of T is S are given by (10) salient ( T,S ) = | srcTypical(T ) ? typical(T )| ? | srcTypical(S ) ? typical(S )| In the context of T is S , the figurative perspective M ? src(S)?src(T)?{S } is deemed apt for T if : (11) apt(M , T,S ) = | salient(T,S ) ? typical(M )| > 0 and the degree to which M is apt for T is given by : (12) aptness(M,T,S ) = | salient(T , S ) ? typical(M )| | typical(M )| We can construct an interpretation for T is S by considering not just { S }, but the stereotypes in src(T ) that are apt for T in the context of T is S , as well as the stereotypes that are commonly used to describe S ? that is , src(S ) ? that are also apt for T : (13) interpretation(T , S ) = { M|M ? src(T)?src(S)?{S } ? apt(M , T , S )} The elements { Mi } of interpretation(T , S ) can now be sorted by aptness(Mi T , S ) to produce a ranked list of interpretations ( M1, M2 ? Mn ). For any interpretation M , the salient features of M are thus : (14) salient(M , T,S ) = typical(M ) ? salient ( T,S ) So interpretation(T , S ) is an expansion of the affective metaphor T is S that includes the common metaphors that are consistent with T qua S . For instance , ? Google is - Microsoft ? ( where - indicates a negative spin ) produces { monopoly , threat , bully , giant , dinosaur , demon , ?}. For each Mi in inter-pretation(T , S ), salient(Mi , T , S ) is an expansion of Mi that includes all of the qualities that are apt for T qua Mi ( e.g . threatening , sprawling , evil , etc .). 6 Concluding Remarks Metaphor is the perfect tool for influencing the perceived affect of words and concepts in context . The web application Metaphor Magnet provides a proof-of-concept demonstration of this reshaping process at work , using the stereotype lexicon of ?3, the selective highlighting of (7)?(8), and the model of metaphor in (9)?(14). It can be accessed at : http://boundinanutshell.com/metaphor-magnet ? Carlo Strapparava and Alessandro Valitutti . 2004. Wordnet-affect : an affective extension of Wordnet . Proceedings of LREC2004, the 4th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation , Lisbon , Portugal . Hiroya Takamura , Takashi Inui , and Manabu Okumura . 2005. Extracting semantic orientation of words using spin model . Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL , 133?140. Turney , P . D . Thumbs Up or Thumbs Down ? Semantic Orientation Applied to Unsupervised Classification of Reviews . In Proceedings of ACL2002, the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pp . 417?424. June 2002. Veale , T . and Hao , Y . Making Lexical Ontologies Functional and Context-Sensitive . Proceedings of ACL2007, the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics , pp . 57?64. June 2007. Veale , T . and Hao , Y . Detecting Ironic Intent in Creative Comparisons . Proceedings of ECAI?2010, the 19th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Lisbon . August 2010. Veale , T . Creative Language Retrieval : A Robust Hybrid of Information Retrieval and Linguistic Creativity . Proceedings of ACL?2011, the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics . June 2011. Whissell , C . The dictionary of affect in language . In R . Plutchik and H . Kellerman ( Eds .) Emotion : Theory and research . Harcourt Brace , pp . 113-131. 1989.
79
