Tutorial Abstracts of ACL 2012, page 1,
Jeju , Republic of Korea , 8 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Qualitative Modeling of Spatial Prepositions and Motion Expressions
Inderjeet Mani
Children?s Organization of
Southeast Asia
Thailand
inderjeet.mani@gmail.com
James Pustejovsky
Computer Science Department
Brandeis University
Waltham , MA USA
jamesp@cs.brandeis.edu
The ability to understand spatial prepositions and motion in natural language will enable a variety of new applications involving systems that can respond to verbal directions , map travel guides , display incident reports , etc ., providing for enhanced information extraction , question-answering , information retrieval , and more principled text to scene rendering . Until now , however , the semantics of spatial relations and motion verbs has been highly problematic . This tutorial presents a new approach to the semantics of spatial descriptions and motion expressions based on linguistically interpreted qualitative reasoning . Our approach allows for formal inference from spatial descriptions in natural language , while leveraging annotation schemes for time , space , and motion , along with machine learning from annotated corpora . We introduce a compositional semantics for motion expressions that integrates spatial primitives drawn from qualitative calculi.
No previous exposure to the semantics of spatial prepositions or motion verbs is assumed . The tutorial will sharpen crosslinguistic intuitions about the interpretation of spatial prepositions and motion constructions . The attendees will also learn about qualitative reasoning schemes for static and dynamic spatial information , as well as three annotation schemes : TimeML , SpatialML , and ISO-Space , for time , space , and motion , respectively.
While both cognitive and formal linguistics have examined the meaning of motion verbs and spatial prepositions , these earlier approaches do not yield precise computable representations that are expressive enough for natural languages . However , the previous literature makes it clear that communication of motion relies on imprecise and highly abstract geometric descriptions , rather than Euclidean ones that specify the coordinates and shapes of every object . This property makes these expressions a fit target for the field of qualitative spatial reasoning in AI , which has developed a rich set of geometric primitives for representing time , space ( including distance , orientation , and topological relations ), and motion . The results of such research have yielded a wide variety of spatial and temporal reasoning logics and tools . By reviewing these calculi and resources , this tutorial aims to systematically connect qualitative reasoning to natural language.
Tutorial Schedule:
I . Introduction . i . Overview of geometric idealizations underlying spatial PPs ; ii . Linguistic patterns of motion verbs across languages ; iii . A qualitative model for static spatial descriptions and for path verbs ; iv . Overview of relevant annotation schemes.
II . Calculi for Qualitative Spatial Reasoning . i.
Semantics of spatial PPs mapped to qualitative spatial reasoning ; ii . Qualitative calculi for representing topological and orientation relations ; iii . Qualitative calculi to represent motion.
III . Semantics of Motion Expressions . i . Introduction to Dynamic Interval Temporal Logic ( DITL ); ii.
DITL representations for manner-of-motion verbs and path verbs ; iii . Compositional semantics for motion expressions in DITL , with the spatial primitives drawn from qualitative calculi.
IV . Applications and Research Topics . i . Route navigation , mapping travel narratives , QA , scene rendering from text , and generating event descriptions ; ii . Open issues and further research topics.
1
