Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 208?212,
Jeju , Republic of Korea , 814 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Combining Textual Entailment and Argumentation Theory
for Supporting Online Debates Interactions
Elena Cabrio and Serena Villata
INRIA
2004 Route des Lucioles BP93
06902 Sophia-Antipolis cedex , France.
{elena.cabrio , serena.villata}@inria.fr
Abstract
Blogs and forums are widely adopted by online communities to debate about various issues . However , a user that wants to cut in on a debate may experience some difficulties in extracting the current accepted positions , and can be discouraged from interacting through these applications . In our paper , we combine textual entailment with argumentation theory to automatically extract the arguments from debates and to evaluate their acceptability.
1 Introduction
Online debate platforms , like Debatepedia1, Twitter2 and many others , are becoming more and more popular on the Web . In such applications , users are asked to provide their own opinions about selected issues . However , it may happen that the debates become rather complicated , with several arguments supporting and contradicting each others . Thus , it is difficult for potential participants to understand the way the debate is going on , i.e ., which are the current accepted arguments in a debate . In this paper , we propose to support participants of online debates with a framework combining Textual Entailment ( TE ) ( Dagan et al , 2009) and abstract argumentation theory ( Dung , 1995). In particular , TE is adopted to extract the abstract arguments from natural language debates and to provide the relations among these arguments ; argumentation theory is then used to compute the set of accepted arguments among those obtained from the TE module , 1http://debatepedia.idebate.org 2http://twitter.com / i.e ., the arguments shared by the majority of the participants without being attacked by other accepted arguments . The originality of the proposed framework lies in the combination of two existing approaches with the goal of supporting participants in their interactions with online debates , by automatically detecting the arguments in natural language text , and identifying the accepted ones . We evaluate the feasibility of our combined approach on a set of arguments extracted from a sample of Debatepedia.
2 First step : textual entailment
TE was proposed as an applied framework to capture major semantic inference needs across applications in NLP , e.g . ( Romano et al , 2006; Barzilay and McKeown , 2005; Nielsen et al , 2009). It is defined as a relation between two textual fragments , i.e ., the text ( T ) and the hypothesis ( H ). Entailment holds if the meaning of H can be inferred from the meaning of T , as interpreted by a typical language user . Consider the pairs in Example 1 and 2.
Example 1.
T1: Research shows that drivers speaking on a mobile phone have much slower reactions in braking tests than nonusers , and are worse even than if they have been drinking.
H:The use of cellphones while driving is a public hazard.
Example 2 ( Continued).
T2: Regulation could negate the safety benefits of having a phone in the car . When you?re stuck in traffic , calling to say you?ll be late can reduce stress and make you less inclined to drive aggressively to make up lost time.
H:The use of cellphones while driving is a public hazard.
208
A system aimed at recognizing TE should detect an entailment relation between T1 and H ( Example 1), and a contradiction between T2 and H ( Example 2).
As introduced before , our paper proposes an approach to support the participants in forums or debates to detect the accepted arguments among those expressed by the other participants on a certain topic . As a first step , we need to ( i ) automatically recognize a participant?s opinion on a certain topic as an argument , as well as to ( ii ) detect its relationship with the other arguments . We therefore cast the described problem as a TE problem , where the TH pair is a pair of arguments expressed by two different participants on a certain topic . For instance , given the argument ? The use of cellphones while driving is a public hazard ? ( that we consider as H as a starting point ), participants can support it expressing arguments from which H can be inferred ( Example 1), or can contradict such argument with opinions against it ( Example 2). Since in debates arguments come one after the other , we extract and compare them both with respect to the main issue , and with the other participants ? arguments ( when the new argument entails or contradicts one of the arguments previously expressed by another participant ). For instance , given the same debate as before , a new argument T3 may be expressed by a third participant with the goal of contradicting T2 ( that becomes the new H ( H1) in the pair ), as shown in Example 3.
Example 3 ( Continued).
T3: If one is late , there is little difference in apologizing while in their car over a cell phone and apologizing in front of their boss at the office . So , they should have the restraint to drive at the speed limit , arriving late , and being willing to apologize then ; an apologetic cell phone call in a car to a boss shouldn?t be the cause of one being able to then relax , slowdown , and drive the speed-limit.
T2? H1: Regulation could negate the safety benefits of having a phone in the car . When you?re stuck in [...] TE provides us with the techniques to detect both the arguments in a debate , and the kind of relation underlying each couple of arguments . The TE system returns indeed a judgment ( entailment or contradiction ) on the arguments ? pairs , that are used as input to build the argumentation framework , as described in the next Section.
3 Second step : argumentation theory
Starting from a set of arguments and the attacks ( i.e ., conflicts ) among them , a ( Dung , 1995)-style argumentation framework allows to detect which are the accepted arguments . Such arguments are considered as believable by an external evaluator who has a full knowledge of the argumentation framework , and they are determined through the acceptability semantics ( Dung , 1995). Roughly , an argument is accepted , if all the arguments attacking it are rejected , and it is rejected if it has at least an argument attacking it which is accepted . An argument which is not attacked at all is accepted.
Definition 1. An abstract argumentation framework ( AF ) is a pair ? A ,?? where A is a set of arguments and ?? A?A is a binary relation called attack.
Aim of the argumentation-based reasoning step is to provide the participant with a complete view on the arguments proposed in the debate , and to show which are the accepted ones . In our framework , we first map contradiction with the attack relation in abstract argumentation ; second , the entailment relation is viewed as a support relation among abstract arguments . The support relation ( Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex , 2011) may be represented as : (1) a relation among the arguments which does not affect their acceptability , or (2) a relation among the arguments which leads to the introduction of additional attacks.
Consider a support relation among two arguments , namely Ai and Aj . If we choose (1), an attack towards Ai or Aj does not affect the acceptability of Aj or Ai , respectively . If we choose (2), we introduce additional attacks , and we have the following two options : [ Type 1] Ai supports Aj then Ak attacks Aj , and [ Type 2] Ai supports Aj then Ak attacks Ai . The attacks of type 1 are due to inference : Ai entails Aj means that Ai is more specific of Aj , thus an attack towards Aj is an attack also towards Ai . The attacks of type 2, instead , are more rare , but they may happen in debates : an attack towards the more specific argument Ai is an attack towards the more general argument Aj . In Section 4, we will consider only the introduction of attacks of type 1.
For Examples 1, 2, and 3, the TE phase returns the following couples : T1 entails H , T2 attacks H , T3 attacks H1 ( i.e . T2). The argumentation module ? A1, T1? A2, T2? A3, and T3? A4 . The resulting AF ( Figure 1) shows that the accepted arguments are { A1, A2, A4}, meaning that the issue ? The use of cellphones while driving is a public hazard ? ( A1) is considered as accepted . Figure 2 visualizes the complete framework of the debate ? Use of cell phones while driving ? on Debatepedia . Accepted arguments are double bordered.
A1A4 A3
A2
Figure 1: The AF built from the results of the TE module for Example 1, 2 and 3, without introducing additional attacks . Plain arrows represent attacks , dashed arrows represent supports.
A1
A4 A3
A2
A5 A6
A7 A8
A9
A11
A10
Figure 2: The AF built from the results of the TE module for the entire debate . Grey attacks are of type 1. For picture clarity , we introduce type 1 attacks only fromA11.
The same attacks hold from A10 and A3.
4 Experimental setting
We experiment the combination of TE and argumentation theory to support the interaction of online debates participants on Debatepedia , an encyclopedia of pro and con arguments on critical issues.
Data set . To create the data set of arguments pairs to evaluate our task3, we randomly selected a set of topics ( reported in column Topics , Table 1) of Debatepedia debates , and for each topic we coupled all the pros and cons arguments both with the main argument ( the issue of the debate , as in Example 1 3Data available for the RTE challenges are not suitable for our goal , since the pairs are extracted from news and are not linked among each other ( they do not report opinions on a certain topic ). http://www.nist.gov/tac/2010/RTE / and 2) and/or with other arguments to which the most recent argument refers , e.g ., Example 3. Using Debatepedia as case study provides us with already annotated arguments ( pro ? entailment4, and cons ? contradiction ), and casts our task as a yes/no entailment task . As shown in Table 1, we collected 200 TH pairs , 100 used to train the TE system , and 100 to test it ( each data set is composed by 55 entailment and 45 contradiction pairs).5 Test set pairs concern completely new topics , never seen by the system.
TE system . To detect which kind of relation underlies each couple of arguments , we used the EDITS system ( Edit Distance Textual Entailment Suite ), an opensource software package for recognizing TE6 ( Kouylekov and Negri , 2010). EDITS implements a distance-based framework which assumes that the probability of an entailment relation between a given TH pair is inversely proportional to the distance between T and H . Within this framework , the system implements different approaches to distance computation , providing both edit distance algorithms and similarity algorithms.
Evaluation . To evaluate our combined approach , we carry out a two-step evaluation : we assess ( i ) the performances of the TE system to correctly assign the entailment/contradiction relations to the pairs of arguments in the Debatepedia data set ; ( ii ) how much such performances impact on the goals of the argumentation module , i.e . how much a wrong assignment of a relation between two arguments leads to an incorrect evaluation of the accepted arguments.
For the first evaluation , we run the EDITS system off-the-shelf on the Debatepedia data set , applying one of its basic configurations ( i.e . the distance entailment engine combines cosine similarity as the core distance algorithm ; distance calculated on lemmas ; stopword list included ). EDITS accuracy on the training set is 0.69, on the test set 0.67 ( a baseline applying a Word Overlap algorithm on tokenized text is also considered , and obtains an accuracy of 0.61 on the training set and 0.62 on the test set ). Even using a basic configuration of EDITS , and a small data set (100 pairs for training ) performances 4Arguments ? supporting ? another argument without inference are left for future work.
5Available at http://bit.ly/debatepedia_ds 6Version 3.0 available at http://edits.fbk.eu / Topic # argum # pairs Topic # argum # pairs
TOT . yes no TOT . yes no
Violent games boost aggressiveness 16 15 8 7 Ground zero mosque 9 8 3 5 China one-child policy 11 10 6 4 Mandatory military service 11 10 3 7 Consider coca as a narcotic 15 14 7 7 No fly zone over Libya 11 10 6 4 Child beauty contests 12 11 7 4 Airport security profiling 9 8 4 4 Arming Libyan rebels 10 9 4 5 Solar energy 16 15 11 4 Random alcohol breath tests 8 7 4 3 Natural gas vehicles 12 11 5 6 Osama death photo 11 10 5 5 Use of cell phones while driving 11 10 5 5 Privatizing social security 11 10 5 5 Marijuana legalization 17 16 10 6 Internet access as a right 15 14 9 5 Gay marriage as a right 7 6 4 2
Vegetarianism 7 6 4 2
TOTAL 109 100 55 45 TOTAL 110 100 55 45
Table 1: The Debatepedia data set.
on Debatepedia test set are promising , and in line with performances of TE systems on RTE data sets.
As a second step of the evaluation , we consider the impact of EDITS performances on arguments acceptability , i.e ., how much a wrong assignment of a relation to a pair of arguments affects the computation of the set of accepted arguments . We identify the accepted arguments both in the correct AF of each Debatepedia debate of the data set ( the goldstandard , where relations are correctly assigned ), and on the AF generated basing on the relations assigned by EDITS . Our combined approach obtained the following performances : precision 0.74, recall 0.76, accuracy 0.75, meaning that the TE system mistakes in relation assignment propagate in the AF , but results are still satisfying and foster further research in this direction.
5 Related work
DebateGraph7 is an online system for debates , but it is not grounded on argument theory to decide the accepted arguments . Chasnevar and Maguit-man?s (2004) system provides recommendations on language patterns using indices computed from Web corpora and defeasible argumentation . No NLP is used for automatic arguments detection . Carenini and Moore (2006) present a computational framework to generate evaluative arguments . Based on users ? preferences , arguments are produced following argumentation guidelines to structure evaluative arguments . Then , NL Generation techniques are applied to return the argument in natural language . Unlike them , we do not create the arguments , but we 7http://debategraph.org use TE to detect them in texts , and we use Dung?s model to identify the accepted ones . Wyner and van Engers (2010) present a policy making support tool based on forums , where NLP and argumentation are coupled to provide well structured statements . Beside the goal , several points distinguish our proposal from this one : ( i ) the user is asked to write the input text using Attempt to Controlled English , with a restricted grammar and vocabulary , while we do not support the participant in writing the text , but we automatically detect the arguments ( no language restriction ); ( ii ) a mode indicates the relations between the statements , while we infer them using TE ; ( iii ) no evaluation of their framework is provided.
6 Future challenges
Several research lines are considered to improve the proposed framework : first , the use of NLP to detect the arguments from text will make argumentation theory applicable to reason in real scenarios . We plan to use the TE module to reason on the introduction of the support relation in abstract argumentation theory . We plan to extend our model by considering also other kinds of relationships among the arguments . Moreover , given the promising results we obtained , we plan to extend the experimentation setting both increasing the size of the Debatepedia data set , and to improve the TE system performances to apply our combined approach in other real applications ( considering for instance the presence of unrelated arguments , e.g . texts that do not entail nor contradict).
211
References
Barzilay R . and McKeown K.R . 2005. Sentence fusion for multidocument news summarization . Computational Linguistics , 31(3). pp . 297-327.
Carenini G . and Moore J.D . 2006. Generating and evaluating evaluative arguments . Artificial Intelligence , volume 170, n . 11. pp . 925-952.
Cayrol C . and Lagasquie-Schiex M.C . 2011. Bipolarity in Argumentation Graphs : Towards a Better Understanding . Proceedings of SUM 2011. pp.137-148 Chesn?evar C.I . and Maguitman A.G . 2004. An Argumentative Approach to Assessing Natural Language Usage based on the Web Corpus . Proceedings of ECAI.
pp.581-585.
Dagan I . and Dolan B . and Magnini B . and Roth D.
2009. Recognizing textual entailment : Rational , evaluation and approaches . Natural Language Engineering ( JNLE ), Special Issue 04, volume 15. pp . i-xvii.
Cambridge University Press.
Dung P.M . 1995. On the Acceptability of Arguments and its Fundamental Role in Nonmonotonic Reasoning , Logic Programming and n-Person Games . Artificial Intelligence , volume 77, n.2. pp.321-358.
Kouylekov M . and Negri M . 2010. An Open-Source Package for Recognizing Textual Entailment . Proceedings of ACL 2010 System Demonstrations . pp.42-47.
Nielsen R.D . and Ward W . and Martin J.H . 2009. Recognizing entailment in intelligent tutoring systems . The Journal of Natural Language Engineering , ( JNLE ), volume 15. pp . 479-501. Cambridge University Press.
Romano L . and Kouylekov M . O . and Szpektor I . and Dagan I . and Lavelli A . 2006. Investigating a Generic Paraphrase-Based Approach for Relation Extraction.
Proceedings of EACL 2006. pp . 409-416.
Wyner A . and van Engers T . 2010. A framework for enriched , controlled online discussion forums for e-government policy-making . Proceedings of eGov 2010.
212
