Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 892?901,
Jeju , Republic of Korea , 814 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
You Had Me at Hello : How Phrasing Affects Memorability
Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil Justin Cheng Jon Kleinberg Lillian Lee
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
cristian@cs.cornell.edu , jc882@cornell.edu , kleinber@cs.cornell.edu , llee@cs.cornell.edu
Abstract
Understanding the ways in which information achieves widespread public awareness is a research question of significant interest . We consider whether , and how , the way in which the information is phrased ? the choice of words and sentence structure ? can affect this process . To this end , we develop an analysis framework and build a corpus of movie quotes , annotated with memorability information , in which we are able to control for both the speaker and the setting of the quotes . We find that there are significant differences between memorable and non-memorable quotes in several key dimensions , even after controlling for situational and contextual factors . One is lexical distinctiveness : in aggregate , memorable quotes use less common word choices , but at the same time are built upon a scaffolding of common syntactic patterns . Another is that memorable quotes tend to be more general in ways that make them easy to apply in new contexts ? that is , more portable.
We also show how the concept of ? memorable language ? can be extended across domains.
1 Hello . My name is Inigo Montoya.
Understanding what items will be retained in the public consciousness , and why , is a question of fundamental interest in many domains , including marketing , politics , entertainment , and social media ; as we all know , many items barely register , whereas others catch on and take hold in many people?s minds.
An active line of recent computational work has employed a variety of perspectives on this question.
Building on a foundation in the sociology of diffusion [27, 31], researchers have explored the ways in which network structure affects the way information spreads , with domains of interest including blogs [1, 11], email [37], online commerce [22], and social media [2, 28, 33, 38]. There has also been recent research addressing temporal aspects of how different media sources convey information [23, 30, 39] and ways in which people react differently to information on different topics [28, 36].
Beyond all these factors , however , one?s everyday experience with these domains suggests that the way in which a piece of information is expressed ? the choice of words , the way it is phrased ? might also have a fundamental effect on the extent to which it takes hold in people?s minds . Concepts that attain wide reach are often carried in messages such as political slogans , marketing phrases , or aphorisms whose language seems intuitively to be memorable , ? catchy ,? or otherwise compelling.
Our first challenge in exploring this hypothesis is to develop a notion of ? successful ? language that is precise enough to allow for quantitative evaluation.
We also face the challenge of devising an evaluation setting that separates the phrasing of a message from the conditions in which it was delivered ? highly-cited quotes tend to have been delivered under compelling circumstances or fit an existing cultural , political , or social narrative , and potentially what appeals to us about the quote is really just its invocation of these extralinguistic contexts . Is the form of the language adding an effect beyond or independent of these ( obviously very crucial ) factors ? To investigate the question , one needs a way of control-surrounding context of the language plays.
The present work ( i ): Evaluating language-based memorability Defining what makes an utterance memorable is subtle , and scholars in several domains have written about this question . There is a rough consensus that an appropriate definition involves elements of both recognition ? people should be able to retain the quote and recognize it when they hear it invoked ? and production ? people should be motivated to refer to it in relevant situations [15]. One suggested reason for why some memes succeed is their ability to provoke emotions [16]. Alternatively , memorable quotes can be good for expressing the feelings , mood , or situation of an individual , a group , or a culture ( the zeitgeist ): ? Certain quotes exquisitely capture the mood or feeling we wish to communicate to someone . We hear them ... and store them away for future use ? [10].
None of these observations , however , serve as definitions , and indeed , we believe it desirable to not pre-commit to an abstract definition , but rather to adopt an operational formulation based on external human judgments . In designing our study , we focus on a domain in which ( i ) there is rich use of language , some of which has achieved deep cultural penetration ; ( ii ) there already exist a large number of external human judgments ? perhaps implicit , but in a form we can extract ; and ( iii ) we can control for the setting in which the text was used.
Specifically , we use the complete scripts of roughly 1000 movies , representing diverse genres , eras , and levels of popularity , and consider which lines are the most ? memorable ?. To acquire memorability labels , for each sentence in each script , we determine whether it has been listed as a ? memorable quote ? by users of the widely-known IMDb ( the Internet Movie Database ), and also estimate the number of times it appears on the Web . Both of these serve as memorability metrics for our purposes.
When we evaluate properties of memorable quotes , we compare them with quotes that are not assessed as memorable , but were spoken by the same character , at approximately the same point in the same movie . This enables us to control in a fairly finegrained way for the confounding effects of context discussed above : we can observe differences that persist even after taking into account both the speaker and the setting.
In a pilot validation study , we find that human subjects are effective at recognizing the more IMDb-memorable of two quotes , even for movies they have not seen . This motivates a search for features intrinsic to the text of quotes that signal memorability . In fact , comments provided by the human subjects as part of the task suggested two basic forms that such textual signals could take : subjects felt that ( i ) memorable quotes often involve a distinctive turn of phrase ; and ( ii ) memorable quotes tend to invoke general themes that aren?t tied to the specific setting they came from , and hence can be more easily invoked for future ( out of context ) uses . We test both of these principles in our analysis of the data.
The present work ( ii ): What distinguishes memorable quotes Under the controlled-comparison setting sketched above , we find that memorable quotes exhibit significant differences from non-memorable quotes in several fundamental respects , and these differences in the data reinforce the two main principles from the human pilot study . First , we show a concrete sense in which memorable quotes are indeed distinctive : with respect to lexical language models trained on the newswire portions of the Brown corpus [21], memorable quotes have significantly lower likelihood than their non-memorable counterparts . Interestingly , this distinctiveness takes place at the level of words , but not at the level of other syntactic features : the part-of-speech composition of memorable quotes is in fact more likely with respect to newswire . Thus , we can think of memorable quotes as consisting , in an aggregate sense , of unusual word choices built on a scaffolding of common part-of-speech patterns.
We also identify a number of ways in which memorable quotes convey greater generality . In their patterns of verb tenses , personal pronouns , and determiners , memorable quotes are structured so as to be more ? freestanding ,? containing fewer markers that indicate references to nearby text.
Memorable quotes differ in other interesting aspects as well , such as sound distributions.
Our analysis of memorable movie quotes suggests a framework by which the memorability of text in a range of different domains could be investigated.
893
We provide evidence that such cross-domain properties may hold , guided by one of our motivating applications in marketing . In particular , we analyze a corpus of advertising slogans , and we show that these slogans have significantly greater likelihood at both the word level and the part-of-speech level with respect to a language model trained on memorable movie quotes , compared to a corresponding language model trained on non-memorable movie quotes . This suggests that some of the principles underlying memorable text have the potential to apply across different areas.
Roadmap ?2 lays the empirical foundations of our work : the design and creation of our movie-quotes dataset , which we make publicly available (?2.1), a pilot study with human subjects validating IMDb-based memorability labels (?2.2), and further study of incorporating searchengine counts (?2.3). ?3 details our analysis and prediction experiments , using both movie-quotes data and , as an exploration of cross-domain applicability , slogans data . ?4 surveys related work across a variety of fields . ?5 briefly summarizes and indicates some future directions.
2 I?m ready for my closeup.
2.1 Data
To study the properties of memorable movie quotes , we need a source of movie lines and a designation of memorability . Following [8], we constructed a corpus consisting of all lines from roughly 1000 movies , varying in genre , era , and popularity ; for each movie , we then extracted the list of quotes from IMDb?s Memorable Quotes page corresponding to the movie.1 A memorable quote in IMDb can appear either as an individual sentence spoken by one character , or as a multi-sentence line , or as a block of dialogue involving multiple characters . In the latter two cases , it can be hard to determine which particular portion is viewed as memorable ( some involve a buildup to a punch line ; others involve the follow-through after a well-phrased opening sentence ), and so we focus in our comparisons on those memorable quotes that 1This extraction involved some edit-distance-based alignment , since the exact form of the line in the script can exhibit minor differences from the version typed into IMDb.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10Decile0
Num ber o f mem orabl e quo tes
Figure 1: Location of memorable quotes in each decile of movie scripts ( the first 10th , the second 10th , etc .), summed over all movies . The same qualitative results hold if we discard each movie?s very first and last line , which might have privileged status.
appear as a single sentence rather than a multiline block.2 We now formulate a task that we can use to evaluate the features of memorable quotes . Recall that our goal is to identify effects based in the language of the quotes themselves , beyond any factors arising from the speaker or context . Thus , for each ( single-sentence ) memorable quote M , we identify a non-memorable quote that is as similar as possible to M in all characteristics but the choice of words . This means we want it to be spoken by the same character in the same movie . It also means that we want it to have the same length : controlling for length is important because we expect that on average , shorter quotes will be easier to remember than long quotes , and that wouldn?t be an interesting textual effect to report . Moreover , we also want to control for the fact that a quote?s position in a movie can affect memorability : certain scenes produce more memorable dialogue , and as Figure 1 demonstrates , in aggregate memorable quotes also occur disproportionately near the beginnings and especially the ends of movies . In summary , then , for each M , we pick a contrasting ( single-sentence ) quote N from the same movie that is as close in the script as possible to M ( either before or after it ), subject to the conditions that ( i ) M and N are uttered by the same speaker , ( ii ) M and N have the same number of words , and ( iii ) N does not occur in the IMDb list of memorable 2We also ran experiments relaxing the single-sentence assumption , which allows for stricter scene control and a larger dataset but complicates comparisons involving syntax . The non-syntax results were in line with those reported here.
894
Movie First Quote Second Quote
Jackie Brown Half a million dollars will always be missed . I know the type , trust me on this.
Star Trek : Nemesis I think it?s time to try some unsafe velocities . No cold feet , or any other parts of our anatomy.
Ordinary People A little advice about feelings kiddo ; don?t expect it always to tickle.
I mean there?s someone besides your mother you?ve got to forgive.
Table 1: Three example pairs of movie quotes . Each pair satisfies our criteria : the two component quotes are spoken close together in the movie by the same character , have the same length , and one is labeled memorable by the IMDb while the other is not . ( Contractions such as ? it?s ? count as two words .) quotes for the movie ( either as a single line or as part of a larger block).
Given such pairs , we formulate a pairwise comparison task : given M and N , determine which is the memorable quote . Psychological research on subjective evaluation [35], as well as initial experiments using ourselves as subjects , indicated that this pairwise setup easier to work with than simply presenting a single sentence and asking whether it is memorable or not ; the latter requires agreement on an ? absolute ? criterion for memorability that is very hard to impose consistently , whereas the former simply requires a judgment that one quote is more memorable than another.
Our main dataset , available at http://www.cs.
cornell.edu/?cristian/memorability.html,3 thus consists of approximately 2200 such ( M,N ) pairs , separated by a median of 5 same-character lines in the script . The reader can get a sense for the nature of the data from the three examples in Table 1.
We now discuss two further aspects to the formulation of the experiment : a preliminary pilot study involving human subjects , and the incorporation of search engine counts into the data.
2.2 Pilot study : Human performance
As a preliminary consideration , we did a small pilot study to see if humans can distinguish memorable from non-memorable quotes , assuming our IMDB-induced labels as gold standard . Six subjects , all native speakers of English and none an author of this paper , were presented with 11 or 12 pairs of memorable vs . non-memorable quotes ; again , we controlled for extratextual effects by ensuring that in each pair the two quotes come from the same movie , are by the same character , have the same length , and 3Also available there : other examples and factoids.
subject number of matches with
IMDb-induced annotation
A 11/11 = 100%
B 11/12 = 92%
C 9/11 = 82%
D 8/11 = 73%
E 7/11 = 64%
F 7/12 = 58% macro avg ? 78%
Table 2: Human pilot study : number of matches to IMDb-induced annotation , ordered by decreasing match percentage . For the null hypothesis of random guessing , these results are statistically significant , p < 2?6 ? .016.
appear as nearly as possible in the same scene.4 The order of quotes within pairs was randomized . Importantly , because we wanted to understand whether the language of the quotes by itself contains signals about memorability , we chose quotes from movies that the subjects said they had not seen . ( This means that each subject saw a different set of quotes .) Moreover , the subjects were requested not to consult any external sources of information.5 The reader is welcome to try a demo version of the task at http : // www.cs.cornell.edu/?cristian/memorability.html.
Table 2 shows that all the subjects performed ( sometimes much ) better than chance , and against the null hypothesis that all subjects are guessing randomly , the results are statistically significant , p < 2?6 ? .016. These preliminary findings provide evidence for the validity of our task : despite the apparent difficulty of the job , even humans who haven?t seen the movie in question can recover our IMDb-4In this pilot study , we allowed multi-sentence quotes.
5We did not use crowdsourcing because we saw no way to ensure that this condition would be obeyed by arbitrary subjects.
We do note , though , that after our research was completed and as of Apr . 26, 2012, ? 11,300 people completed the online test : average accuracy : 72%, mode number correct : 9/12.
895 induced labels with some reliability.6 2.3 Incorporating search engine counts Thus far we have discussed a dataset in which memorability is determined through an explicit labeling drawn from the IMDb . Given the ? production ? aspect of memorability discussed in ?1, we should also expect that memorable quotes will tend to appear more extensively on Web pages than non-memorable quotes ; note that incorporating this insight makes it possible to use the ( implicit ) judgments of a much larger number of people than are represented by the IMDb database . It therefore makes sense to try using searchengine result counts as a second indication of memorability.
We experimented with several ways of constructing memorability information from searchengine counts , but this proved challenging . Searching for a quote as a standalone phrase runs into the problem that a number of quotes are also sentences that people use without the movie in mind , and so high counts for such quotes do not testify to the phrase?s status as a memorable quote from the movie . On the other hand , searching for the quote in a Boolean conjunction with the movie?s title discards most of these uses , but also eliminates a large fraction of the appearances on the Web that we want to find : precisely because memorable quotes tend to have widespread cultural usage , people generally don?t feel the need to include the movie?s title when invoking them . Finally , since we are dealing with roughly 1000 movies , the result counts vary over an enormous range , from recent blockbusters to movies with relatively small fan bases.
In the end , we found that it was more effective to use the result counts in conjunction with the IMDb labels , so that the counts played the role of an additional filter rather than a freestanding numerical value . Thus , for each pair ( M,N ) produced using the IMDb methodology above , we searched for each of M and N as quoted expressions in a Boolean conjunction with the title of the movie . We then kept only those pairs for which M ( i ) produced more than five results in our ( quoted , conjoined ) search , and ( ii ) produced at least twice as many results as the cor-6The average accuracy being below 100% reinforces that context is very important , too.
responding search for N . We created a version of this filtered dataset using each of Google and Bing , and all the main findings were consistent with the results on the IMDb-only dataset . Thus , in what follows , we will focus on the main IMDb-only dataset , discussing the relationship to the dataset filtered by search engine counts where relevant ( in which case we will refer to the + Google dataset).
3 Never send a human to do a machine?s job.
We now discuss experiments that investigate the hypotheses discussed in ?1. In particular , we devise methods that can assess the distinctiveness and generality hypotheses and test whether there exists a notion of ? memorable language ? that operates across domains . In addition , we evaluate and compare the predictive power of these hypotheses.
3.1 Distinctiveness
One of the hypotheses we examine is whether the use of language in memorable quotes is to some extent unusual . In order to quantify the level of distinctiveness of a quote , we take a languagemodel approach : we model ? common language ? using the newswire sections of the Brown corpus [21]7, and evaluate how distinctive a quote is by evaluating its likelihood with respect to this model ? the lower the likelihood , the more distinctive . In order to assess different levels of lexical and syntactic distinctiveness , we employ a total of six Laplace-smoothed8 language models : 1gram , 2gram , and 3gram word LMs and 1gram , 2gram and 3gram part-of-speech9 LMs.
We find strong evidence that from a lexical perspective , memorable quotes are more distinctive than their non-memorable counterparts . As indicated in Table 3, for each of our lexical ? common language ? models , in about 60% of the quote pairs , the memorable quote is more distinctive.
Interestingly , the reverse is true when it comes to 7Results were qualitatively similar if we used the fiction portions . The age of the Brown corpus makes it less likely to contain modern movie quotes.
8We employ Laplace ( additive ) smoothing with a smoothing parameter of 0.2. The language models ? vocabulary was that of the entire training corpus.
9Throughout we obtain part-of-speech tags by using the NLTK maximum entropy tagger with default parameters.
896 ? common language ? model
IMDb-only + Google lexical 1gram 61.13%??? 59.21%??? 2gram 59.22%??? 57.03%??? 3gram 59.81%??? 58.32%??? syntactic 1gram 43.60%??? 44.77%??? 2gram 48.31% 47.84% 3gram 50.91% 50.92% Table 3: Distinctiveness : percentage of quote pairs in which the the memorable quote is more distinctive than the non-memorable one according to the respective ? common language ? model . Significance according to a twotailed sign test is indicated using *- notation (???=? p<.001?).
syntax : memorable quotes appear to follow the syntactic patterns of ? common language ? as closely as or more closely than non-memorable quotes . Together , these results suggest that memorable quotes consist of unusual word sequences built on common syntactic scaffolding.
3.2 Generality
Another of our hypotheses is that memorable quotes are easier to use outside the specific context in which they were uttered ? that is , more ? portable ? ? and therefore exhibit fewer terms that refer to those settings . We use the following syntactic properties as proxies for the generality of a quote : ? Fewer 3rd-person pronouns , since these commonly refer to a person or object that was introduced earlier in the discourse . Utterances that employ fewer such pronouns are easier to adapt to new contexts , and so will be considered more general.
? More indefinite articles like a and an , since they are more likely to refer to general concepts than definite articles . Quotes with more indefinite articles will be considered more general.
? Fewer past tense verbs and more present tense verbs , since the former are more likely to refer to specific previous events . Therefore utterances that employ fewer past tense verbs ( and more present tense verbs ) will be considered more general.
Table 4 gives the results for each of these four metrics ? in each case , we show the percentage of
Generality metric IMDb-only + Google fewer 3rd pers . pronouns 64.37%??? 62.93%??? more indef . article 57.21%??? 58.23%??? less past tense 57.91%??? 59.74%??? more present tense 54.60%??? 55.86%??? Table 4: Generality : percentage of quote pairs in which the memorable quote is more general than the non-memorable ones according to the respective metric . Pairs where the metric does not distinguish between the quotes are not considered.
quote pairs for which the memorable quote scores better on the generality metric.
Note that because the issue of generality is a complex one for which there is no straightforward single metric , our approach here is based on several proxies for generality , considered independently ; yet , as the results show , all of these point in a consistent direction . It is an interesting open question to develop richer ways of assessing whether a quote has greater generality , in the sense that people intuitively attribute to memorable quotes.
3.3 ? Memorable ? language beyond movies
One of the motivating questions in our analysis is whether there are general principles underlying ? memorable language .? The results thus far suggest potential families of such principles . A further question in this direction is whether the notion of memorability can be extended across different domains , and for this we collected ( and distribute on our website ) 431 phrases that were explicitly designed to be memorable : advertising slogans ( e.g ., ? Quality never goes out of style .?). The focus on slogans is also in keeping with one of the initial motivations in studying memorability , namely , marketing applications ? in other words , assessing whether a proposed slogan has features that are consistent with memorable text.
The fact that it?s not clear how to construct a collection of ? non-memorable ? counterparts to slogans appears to pose a technical challenge . However , we can still use a languagemodeling approach to assess whether the textual properties of the slogans are closer to the memorable movie quotes ( as one would conjecture ) or to the non-memorable movie quotes.
Specifically , we train one language model on memorable quotes and another on non-memorable quotes language models
Slogans Newswire lexical 1gram 56.15%?? 33.77%??? 2gram 51.51% 25.15%??? 3gram 52.44% 28.89%??? syntactic 1gram 73.09%??? 68.27%??? 2gram 64.04%??? 50.21% 3gram 62.88%??? 55.09%??? Table 5: Cross-domain concept of ? memorable ? language : percentage of slogans that have higher likelihood under the memorable language model than under the non-memorable one ( for each of the six language models considered ). Rightmost column : for reference , the percentage of newswire sentences that have higher likelihood under the memorable language model than under the non-memorable one.
Generality metric slogans mem . n-mem.
% 3rd pers . pronouns 2.14% 2.16% 3.41% % indefinite articles 2.68% 2.63% 2.06% % past tense 14.60% 21.13% 26.69% Table 6: Slogans are most general when compared to memorable and non-memorable quotes . (% s of 3rd pers.
pronouns and indefinite articles are relative to all tokens , % s of past tense are relative to all past and present verbs .) and compare how likely each slogan is to be produced according to these two models . As shown in the middle column of Table 5, we find that slogans are better predicted both lexically and syntactically by the former model . This result thus offers evidence for a concept of ? memorable language ? that can be applied beyond a single domain.
We also note that the higher likelihood of slogans under a ? memorable language ? model is not simply occurring for the trivial reason that this model predicts all other large bodies of text better . In particular , the newswire section of the Brown corpus is predicted better at the lexical level by the language model trained on non-memorable quotes.
Finally , Table 6 shows that slogans employ general language , in the sense that for each of our generality metrics , we see a slogans/memorable-quotes/non-memorable quotes spectrum.
3.4 Prediction task
We now show how the principles discussed above can provide features for a basic prediction task , corresponding to the task in our human pilot study : given a pair of quotes , identify the memorable one.
Our first formulation of the prediction task uses a standard bag-of-words model10. If there were no information in the textual content of a quote to determine whether it were memorable , then an SVM employing bag-of-words features should perform no better than chance . Instead , though , it obtains 59.67% (10-fold crossvalidation ) accuracy , as shown in Table 7. We then develop models using features based on the measures formulated earlier in this section : generality measures ( the four listed in Table 4); distinctiveness measures ( likelihood according to 1, 2, and 3gram ? common language ? models at the lexical and part-of-speech level for each quote in the pair , their differences , and pairwise comparisons between them ); and similarity-to-slogans measures ( likelihood according to 1, 2, and 3gram slogan-language models at the lexical and part-of-speech level for each quote in the pair , their differences , and pairwise comparisons between them).
Even a relatively small number of distinctiveness features , on their own , improve significantly over the much larger bag-of-words model . When we include additional features based on generality and languagemodel features measuring similarity to slogans , the performance improves further ( last line of Table 7).
Thus , the main conclusion from these prediction tasks is that abstracting notions such as distinctiveness and generality can produce relatively streamlined models that outperform much heavier-weight bag-of-words models , and can suggest steps toward approaching the performance of human judges who ? very much unlike our system ? have the full cultural context in which movies occur at their disposal.
3.5 Other characteristics
We also made some auxiliary observations that may be of interest . Specifically , we find differences in letter and sound distribution ( e.g ., memorable quotes ? after curse-word removal ? use significantly more ? front sounds ? ( labials or front vowels such as represented by the letter i ) and significantly fewer ? back sounds ? such as the one represented by u),11 10We discarded terms appearing fewer than 10 times.
11These findings may relate to marketing research on sound symbolism [7, 19, 40].
898
Feature set # feats Accuracy bag of words 962 59.67% distinctiveness 24 62.05%? generality 4 56.70% slogan sim . 24 58.30% all three types together 52 64.27%?? Table 7: Prediction : SVM 10-fold cross validation results using the respective feature sets . Random baseline accuracy is 50%. Accuracies statistically significantly greater than bag-of-words according to a twotailed ttest are indicated with *( p<.05) and **( p<.01).
word complexity ( e.g ., memorable quotes use words with significantly more syllables ) and phrase complexity ( e.g ., memorable quotes use fewer coordinating conjunctions ). The latter two are in line with our distinctiveness hypothesis.
4 A long time ago , in a galaxy far , far away How an item?s linguistic form affects the reaction it generates has been studied in several contexts , including evaluations of product reviews [9], political speeches [12], online posts [13], scientific papers [14], and retweeting of Twitter posts [36]. We use a different set of features , abstracting the notions of distinctiveness and generality , in order to focus on these higher-level aspects of phrasing rather than on particular lower-level features.
Related to our interest in distinctiveness , work in advertising research has studied the effect of syntactic complexity on recognition and recall of slogans [5, 6, 24]. There may also be connections to Von Restorff?s isolation effect Hunt [17], which asserts that when all but one item in a list are similar in some way , memory for the different item is enhanced.
Related to our interest in generality , Knapp et al [20] surveyed subjects regarding memorable messages or pieces of advice they had received , finding that the ability to be applied to multiple concrete situations was an important factor.
Memorability , although distinct from ? memoriz-ability ?, relates to short - and longterm recall . Thorn and Page [34] survey sublexical , lexical , and semantic attributes affecting shortterm memorability of lexical items . Studies of verbatim recall have also considered the task of distinguishing an exact quote from close paraphrases [3]. Investigations of longterm recall have included studies of culturally significant passages of text [29] and findings regarding the effect of rhetorical devices of alliterative [4], ? rhythmic , poetic , and thematic constraints ? [18, 26].
Finally , there are complex connections between humor and memory [32], which may lead to interactions with computational humor recognition [25].
5 I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship.
Motivated by the broad question of what kinds of information achieve widespread public awareness , we studied the the effect of phrasing on a quote?s memorability . A challenge is that quotes differ not only in how they are worded , but also in who said them and under what circumstances ; to deal with this difficulty , we constructed a controlled corpus of movie quotes in which lines deemed memorable are paired with non-memorable lines spoken by the same character at approximately the same point in the same movie . After controlling for context and situation , memorable quotes were still found to exhibit , on average ( there will always be individual exceptions ), significant differences from non-memorable quotes in several important respects , including measures capturing distinctiveness and generality . Our experiments with slogans show how the principles we identify can extend to a different domain.
Future work may lead to applications in marketing , advertising and education [4]. Moreover , the subtle nature of memorability , and its connection to research in psychology , suggests a range of further research directions . We believe that the framework developed here can serve as the basis for further computational studies of the process by which information takes hold in the public consciousness , and the role that language effects play in this process.
My mother thanks you . My father thanks you.
My sister thanks you . And I thank you : Rebecca Hwa , Evie Kleinberg , Diana Minculescu , Alex Niculescu-Mizil , Jennifer Smith , Benjamin Zimmer , and the anonymous reviewers for helpful discussions and comments ; our annotators Steven An , Lars Backstrom , Eric Baumer , Jeff Chadwick , Evie Kleinberg , and Myle Ott ; and the makers of Cepacol , Robitussin , and Sudafed , whose products got us through the submission deadline.
This paper is based upon work supported in part by NSF grants IIS-0910664, IIS-1016099, Google , and Yahoo ! [1] Eytan Adar , Li Zhang , Lada A . Adamic , and Rajan M . Lukose . Implicit structure and the dynamics of blogspace . In Workshop on the
Weblogging Ecosystem , 2004.
[2] Lars Backstrom , Dan Huttenlocher , Jon Kleinberg , and Xiangyang Lan . Group formation in large social networks : Membership , growth , and evolution . In Proceedings of KDD , 2006.
[3] Elizabeth Bates , Walter Kintsch , Charles R.
Fletcher , and Vittoria Giuliani . The role of pronominalization and ellipsis in texts : Some memory experiments . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and Memory , 6 (6):676?691, 1980.
[4] Frank Boers and Seth Lindstromberg . Finding ways to make phrase-learning feasible : The mnemonic effect of alliteration . System , 33(2): 225?238, 2005.
[5] Samuel D . Bradley and Robert Meeds.
Surface-structure transformations and advertising slogans : The case for moderate syntactic complexity . Psychology and Marketing , 19: 595?619, 2002.
[6] Robert Chamblee , Robert Gilmore , Gloria Thomas , and Gary Soldow . When copy complexity can help ad readership . Journal of Advertising Research , 33(3):23?23, 1993.
[7] John Colapinto . Famous names . The New
Yorker , pages 38?43, 2011.
[8] Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil and Lillian Lee . Chameleons in imagined conversations : A new approach to understanding coordination of linguistic style in dialogs . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and
Computational Linguistics , 2011.
[9] Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil , Gueorgi Kossinets , Jon Kleinberg , and Lillian Lee.
How opinions are received by online communities : A case study on Amazon.com helpfulness votes . In Proceedings of WWW , pages 141?150, 2009.
[10] Stuart Fischoff , Esmeralda Cardenas , Angela Hernandez , Korey Wyatt , Jared Young , and Rachel Gordon . Popular movie quotes : Reflections of a people and a culture . In Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association , 2000.
[11] Daniel Gruhl , R . Guha , David Liben-Nowell , and Andrew Tomkins . Information diffusion through blogspace . Proceedings of WWW , pages 491?501, 2004.
[12] Marco Guerini , Carlo Strapparava , and Oliviero Stock . Trusting politicians ? words ( for persuasive NLP ). In Proceedings of
CICLing , pages 263?274, 2008.
[13] Marco Guerini , Carlo Strapparava , and Go?zde O?zbal . Exploring text virality in social networks . In Proceedings of ICWSM ( poster ), 2011.
[14] Marco Guerini , Alberto Pepe , and Bruno Lepri . Do linguistic style and readability of scientific abstracts affect their virality ? In Proceedings of ICWSM , 2012.
[15] Richard Jackson Harris , Abigail J . Werth , Kyle E . Bures , and Chelsea M . Bartel . Social movie quoting : What , why , and how ? Ciencias
Psicologicas , 2(1):35?45, 2008.
[16] Chip Heath , Chris Bell , and Emily Steinberg.
Emotional selection in memes : The case of urban legends . Journal of Personality , 81(6): 1028?1041, 2001.
[17] R . Reed Hunt . The subtlety of distinctiveness : What von Restorff really did . Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review , 2(1):105?112, 1995.
[18] Ira E . Hyman Jr . and David C . Rubin . Mem-orabeatlia : A naturalistic study of longterm memory . Memory & Cognition , 18(2):205? 214, 1990.
[19] Richard R . Klink . Creating brand names with meaning : The use of sound symbolism . Marketing Letters , 11(1):5?20, 2000.
[20] Mark L . Knapp , Cynthia Stohl , and Kathleen K . Reardon . ? Memorable ? messages . Journal of Communication , 31(4):27? 41, 1981.
[21] Henry Kuc?era and W . Nelson Francis . Computational analysis of present-day American English . Dartmouth Publishing Group , 1967.
900 [22] Jure Leskovec , Lada Adamic , and Bernardo Huberman . The dynamics of viral marketing . ACM Transactions on the Web , 1(1), May 2007.
[23] Jure Leskovec , Lars Backstrom , and Jon Kleinberg . Meme-tracking and the dynamics of the news cycle . In Proceedings of KDD , pages 497?506, 2009.
[24] Tina M . Lowrey . The relation between script complexity and commercial memorability . Journal of Advertising , 35(3):7?15, 2006.
[25] Rada Mihalcea and Carlo Strapparava . Learning to laugh ( automatically ): Computational models for humor recognition . Computational
Intelligence , 22(2):126?142, 2006.
[26] Milman Parry and Adam Parry . The making of Homeric verse : The collected papers of Milman Parry . Clarendon Press , Oxford , 1971.
[27] Everett Rogers . Diffusion of Innovations . Free
Press , fourth edition , 1995.
[28] Daniel M . Romero , Brendan Meeder , and Jon Kleinberg . Differences in the mechanics of information diffusion across topics : Idioms , political hashtags , and complex contagion on Twitter . Proceedings of WWW , pages 695?704, 2011.
[29] David C . Rubin . Very longterm memory for prose and verse . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 16(5):611?621, 1977.
[30] Nathan Schneider , Rebecca Hwa , Philip Gianfortoni , Dipanjan Das , Michael Heilman , Alan W . Black , Frederick L . Crabbe , and Noah A . Smith . Visualizing topical quotations over time to understand news discourse . Technical Report CMU-LTI-01-103, CMU , 2010.
[31] David Strang and Sarah Soule . Diffusion in organizations and social movements : From hybrid corn to poison pills . Annual Review of Sociology , 24:265?290, 1998.
[32] Hannah Summerfelt , Louis Lippman , and Ira E . Hyman Jr . The effect of humor on memory : Constrained by the pun . The Journal of
General Psychology , 137(4), 2010.
[33] Eric Sun , Itamar Rosenn , Cameron Marlow , and Thomas M . Lento . Gesundheit ! Modeling contagion through Facebook News Feed . In
Proceedings of ICWSM , 2009.
[34] Annabel Thorn and Mike Page . Interactions Between Short-Term and Long-Term Memory in the Verbal Domain . Psychology Press , 2009.
[35] Louis L . Thurstone . A law of comparative judgment . Psychological Review , 34(4):273? 286, 1927.
[36] Oren Tsur and Ari Rappoport . What?s in a Hashtag ? Content based prediction of the spread of ideas in microblogging communities.
In Proceedings of WSDM , 2012.
[37] Fang Wu , Bernardo A . Huberman , Lada A.
Adamic , and Joshua R . Tyler . Information flow in social groups . Physica A : Statistical and Theoretical Physics , 337(1-2):327?335, 2004.
[38] Shaomei Wu , Jake M . Hofman , Winter A . Mason , and Duncan J . Watts . Who says what to whom on Twitter . In Proceedings of WWW , 2011.
[39] Jaewon Yang and Jure Leskovec . Patterns of temporal variation in online media . In Proceedings of WSDM , 2011.
[40] Eric Yorkston and Geeta Menon . A sound idea : Phonetic effects of brand names on consumer judgments . Journal of Consumer Research , 31 (1):43?51, 2004.
901
