Tutorial Abstracts of ACL 2012, page 2,
Jeju , Republic of Korea , 8 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
State-of-the-Art Kernels for Natural Language Processing
Alessandro Moschitti
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering
University of Trento
Via Sommarive 5, 38123 Povo ( TN ), Italy
moschitti@disi.unitn.it
Introduction
In recent years , machine learning ( ML ) has been used more and more to solve complex tasks in different disciplines , ranging from Data Mining to Information Retrieval or Natural Language Processing ( NLP ). These tasks often require the processing of structured input , e.g ., the ability to extract salient features from syntactic/semantic structures is critical to many NLP systems . Mapping such structured data into explicit feature vectors for ML algorithms requires large expertise , intuition and deep knowledge about the target linguistic phenomena . Kernel Methods ( KM ) are powerful ML tools ( see e.g ., ( ShaweTaylor and Cristianini , 2004)), which can alleviate the data representation problem . They substitute feature-based similarities with similarity functions , i.e ., kernels , directly defined between train-ing/test instances , e.g ., syntactic trees . Hence feature vectors are not needed any longer . Additionally , kernel engineering , i.e ., the composition or adaptation of several prototype kernels , facilitates the design of effective similarities required for new tasks , e.g ., ( Moschitti , 2004; Moschitti , 2008).
Tutorial Content
The tutorial aims at addressing the problems above : firstly , it will introduce essential and simplified theory of Support Vector Machines and KM with the only aim of motivating practical procedures and interpreting the results . Secondly , it will simply describe the current best practices for designing applications based on effective kernels . For this purpose , it will survey state-of-the-art kernels for diverse NLP applications , reconciling the different approaches with a uniform and global notation/theory.
Such survey will benefit from practical expertise acquired from directly working on many natural language applications , ranging from Text Categorization to Syntactic/Semantic Parsing . Moreover , practical demonstrations using SVM-Light-TK toolkit will nicely support the application-oriented perspective of the tutorial . The latter will lead NLP researchers with heterogeneous background to the acquisition of the KM know-how , which can be used to design any target NLP application.
Finally , the tutorial will propose interesting new best practices , e.g ., some recent methods for largescale learning with structural kernels ( Severyn and Moschitti , 2011), structural lexical similarities ( Croce et al , 2011) and reverse kernel engineering ( Pighin and Moschitti , 2009).
References
Danilo Croce , Alessandro Moschitti , and Roberto Basili.
2011. Structured Lexical Similarity via Convolution Kernels on Dependency Trees . In Proc . of EMNLP.
Alessandro Moschitti . 2004. A Study on Convolution Kernels for Shallow Semantic Parsing . In Proceedings of ACL.
Alessandro Moschitti . 2008. Kernel Methods , Syntax and Semantics for Relational Text Categorization . In
Proceedings of CIKM.
Daniele Pighin and Alessandro Moschitti . 2009. Efficient Linearization of Tree Kernel Functions . In Proceedings of CoNLL.
Aliaksei Severyn and Alessandro Moschitti . 2011. Fast Support Vector Machines for Structural Kernels . In
ECML.
John ShaweTaylor and Nello Cristianini . 2004. Kernel Methods for Pattern Analysis . Cambridge Univ . Press.
2
