Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 1?10,
Jeju , Republic of Korea , 814 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Learning to Translate with Multiple Objectives
Kevin Duh ? Katsuhito Sudoh Xianchao Wu Hajime Tsukada Masaaki Nagata
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
24 Hikaridai , Seikacho , Kyoto 619-0237, JAPAN
kevinduh@is.naist.jp , lastname.firstname@lab.ntt.co.jp
Abstract
We introduce an approach to optimize a machine translation ( MT ) system on multiple metrics simultaneously . Different metrics ( e.g . BLEU , TER ) focus on different aspects of translation quality ; our multiobjective approach leverages these diverse aspects to improve overall quality.
Our approach is based on the theory of Pareto Optimality . It is simple to implement on top of existing single-objective optimization methods ( e.g . MERT , PRO ) and outperforms ad hoc alternatives based on linear-combination of metrics . We also discuss the issue of metric tunability and show that our Pareto approach is more effective in incorporating new metrics from MT evaluation for MT optimization.
1 Introduction
Weight optimization is an important step in building machine translation ( MT ) systems . Discriminative optimization methods such as MERT ( Och , 2003), MIRA ( Crammer et al , 2006), PRO ( Hopkins and May , 2011), and Downhill-Simplex ( Nelder and Mead , 1965) have been influential in improving MT systems in recent years . These methods are effective because they tune the system to maximize an automatic evaluation metric such as BLEU , which serve as surrogate objective for translation quality.
However , we know that a single metric such as BLEU is not enough . Ideally , we want to tune towards an automatic metric that has perfect correlation with human judgments of translation quality.
?*Now at Nara Institute of Science & Technology ( NAIST ) While many alternatives have been proposed , such a perfect evaluation metric remains elusive.
As a result , many MT evaluation campaigns now report multiple evaluation metrics ( Callison-Burch et al , 2011; Paul , 2010). Different evaluation metrics focus on different aspects of translation quality.
For example , while BLEU ( Papineni et al , 2002) focuses on word-based ngram precision , METEOR ( Lavie and Agarwal , 2007) allows for stem/synonym matching and incorporates recall . TER ( Snover et al , 2006) allows arbitrary chunk movements , while permutation metrics like RIBES ( Isozaki et al ., 2010; Birch et al , 2010) measure deviation in word order . Syntax ( Owczarzak et al , 2007) and semantics ( Pado et al , 2009) also help . Arguably , all these metrics correspond to our intuitions on what is a good translation.
The current approach of optimizing MT towards a single metric runs the risk of sacrificing other metrics . Can we really claim that a system is good if it has high BLEU , but very low METEOR ? Similarly , is a high-METEOR low-BLEU system desirable ? Our goal is to propose a multiobjective optimization method that avoids ? overfitting to a single metric ?. We want to build a MT system that does well with respect to many aspects of translation quality.
In general , we cannot expect to improve multiple metrics jointly if there are some inherent tradeoffs . We therefore need to define the notion of Pareto Optimality ( Pareto , 1906), which characterizes this tradeoff in a rigorous way and distinguishes the set of equally good solutions . We will describe Pareto Optimality in detail later , but roughly speaking , a hypothesis better in all metrics . The contribution of this paper is twofold : ? We introduce PMO ( Pareto-based Multiobjective Optimization ), a general approach for learning with multiple metrics . Existing single-objective methods can be easily extended to multiobjective using PMO.
? We show that PMO outperforms the alternative ( single-objective optimization of linearly-combined metrics ) in multiobjective space , and especially obtains stronger results for metrics that may be difficult to tune individually.
In the following , we first explain the theory of Pareto Optimality ( Section 2), and then use it to build up our proposed PMO approach ( Section 3).
Experiments on NIST ChineseEnglish and PubMed English-Japanese translation using BLEU , TER , and RIBES are presented in Section 4. We conclude by discussing related work ( Section 5) and opportuni-ties/limitations ( Section 6).
2 Theory of Pareto Optimality 2.1 Definitions and Concepts The idea of Pareto optimality comes originally from economics ( Pareto , 1906), where the goal is to characterize situations when a change in allocation of goods does not make anybody worse off . Here , we will explain it in terms of MT : Let h ? L be a hypothesis from an Nbest list L.
We have a total of K different metrics Mk(h ) for evaluating the quality of h . Without loss of generality , we assume metric scores are bounded between 0 and 1, with 1 being perfect . Each hypothesis h can be mapped to a K-dimensional vector M(h ) = [ M1(h);M2(h ); ...; MK(h )]. For example , suppose K = 2, M1(h ) computes the BLEU score , and M2(h ) gives the METEOR score of h.
Figure 1 illustrates the set of vectors { M(h )} in a 10-best list.
For two hypotheses h1, h2, we write M(h1) > M(h2) if h1 is better than h2 in all metrics , and M(h1) ? M(h2) if h1 is better than or equal to h2 in all metrics . When M(h1) ? M(h2) and Mk(h1) > Mk(h2) for at least one metric k , we say that h1 dominates h2 and write M(h1) . M(h2).
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 10 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 me tric2 Figure 1: Illustration of Pareto Frontier . Ten hypotheses are plotted by their scores in two metrics . Hypotheses indicated by a circle ( o ) are pareto-optimal , while those indicated by a plus (+) are not . The line shows the convex hull , which attains only a subset of pareto-optimal points.
The triangle (4) is a point that is weakly pareto-optimal but not pareto-optimal.
Definition 1. Pareto Optimal : A hypothesis h ? ? L is pareto-optimal iff there does not exist another hypothesis h ? L such that M(h ) . M(h?).
In Figure 1, the hypotheses indicated by circle ( o ) are pareto-optimal , while those with plus (+) are not . To visualize this , take for instance the pareto-optimal point (0.4,0.7). There is no other point with either ( metric1 > 0.4 and metric2 ? 0.7), or ( metric1 ? 0.4 and metric2 > 0.7). On the other hand , the non-pareto point (0.6,0.4) is ? dominated ? by another point (0.7,0.6), because for metric1: 0.7 > 0.6 and for metric2: 0.6 > 0.4.
There is another definition of optimality , which disregards ties and may be easier to visualize : Definition 2. Weakly Pareto Optimal : A hypothesis h ? ? L is weakly pareto-optimal iff there is no other hypothesis h ? L such that M(h ) > M(h?).
Weakly pareto-optimal points are a superset of pareto-optimal points . A hypothesis is weakly pareto-optimal if there is no other hypothesis that improves all the metrics ; a hypothesis is pareto-optimal if there is no other hypothesis that improves at least one metric without detriment to other metrics . In Figure 1, point (0.1,0.8) is weakly pareto-optimal but not pareto-optimal , because of the competing point (0.3,0.8). Here we focus on pareto-optimality , but note our algorithms can be easily can introduce the key concept used in our proposed
PMO approach:
Definition 3. Pareto Frontier : Given an Nbest list L , the set of all pareto-optimal hypotheses h ? L is called the Pareto Frontier.
The Pareto Frontier has two desirable properties from the multiobjective optimization perspective : 1. Hypotheses on the Frontier are equivalently good in the Pareto sense.
2. For each hypothesis not on the Frontier , there is always a better ( pareto-optimal ) hypothesis.
This provides a principled approach to optimization : i.e . optimizing towards points on the Frontier and away from those that are not , and giving no preference to different pareto-optimal hypotheses.
2.2 Reduction to Linear Combination
Multiobjective problems can be formulated as : arg max w [ M1(h);M2(h ); . . . ; Mk(h )] (1) where h = Decode(w , f ) Here , the MT system?s Decode function , parameterized by weight vector w , takes in a foreign sentence f and returns a translated hypothesis h . The argmax operates in vector space and our goal is to find w leading to hypotheses on the Pareto Frontier.
In the study of Pareto Optimality , one central question is : To what extent can multiobjective problems be solved by single-objective methods ? Equation 1 can be reduced to a single-objective problem by scalarizing the vector [ M1(h ); . . . ; Mk(h )] with a linear combination : arg max w
K ? k=1 pkMk(h ) (2) where h = Decode(w , f ) Here , pk are positive real numbers indicating the relative importance of each metric ( without loss of generality , assume ? k pk = 1). Are the solutions to Eq . 2 also solutions to Eq . 1 ( i.e . pareto-optimal ) and viceversa ? The theory says : Theorem 1. Sufficient Condition : If w ? is solution to Eq . 2, then it is weakly pareto-optimal . Further , if w ? is unique , then it is pareto-optimal.
Theorem 2. No Necessary Condition : There may exist solutions to Eq . 1 that cannot be achieved by Eq . 2, irregardless of any setting of { pk}.
Theorem 1 is a positive result asserting that linear combination can give pareto-optimal solutions.
However , Theorem 2 states the limits : in particular , Eq . 2 attains only pareto-optimal points that are on the convex hull . This is illustrated in Figure 1: imagine sweeping all values of p1 = [0, 1] and p2 = 1? p1 and recording the set of hypotheses that maximizes ? k pkMk(h ). For 0.6 < p1 ? 1 we get h = (0.9, 0.1), for p1 = 0.6 we get (0.7, 0.6), and for 0 < p1 < 0.6 we get (0.4, 0.8). At no setting of p1 do we attain h = (0.4, 0.7) which is also pareto-optimal but not on the convex hull.1 This may have ramifications for issues like metric tunability and local optima . To summarize , linear-combination is reasonable but has limitations . Our proposed approach will instead directly solve Eq . 1.
Pareto Optimality and multiobjective optimization is a deep field with active inquiry in engineering , operations research , economics , etc . For the interested reader , we recommend the survey by Marler and Arora (2004) and books by ( Sawaragi et al , 1985; Miettinen , 1998).
3 Multiobjective Algorithms 3.1 Computing the Pareto Frontier Our PMO approach will need to compute the Pareto Frontier for potentially large sets of points , so we first describe how this can be done efficiently . Given a set of N vectors { M(h )} from an Nbest list L , our goal is extract the subset that are pareto-optimal.
Here we present an algorithm based on iterative filtering , in our opinion the simplest algorithm to understand and implement . The strategy is to loop through the list L , keeping track of any dominant points . Given a dominant point , it is easy to filter out many points that are dominated by it . After successive rounds , any remaining points that are not fil-1We note that scalarization by exponentiated-combination ? k pkMk(h ) q , for a suitable q > 0, does satisfy necessary conditions for pareto optimality . However the proper tuning of q is not known a priori . See ( Miettinen , 1998) for theorem proofs.
3
Algorithm 1 FindParetoFrontier
Input : { M(h )}, h ? L
Output : All pareto-optimal points of { M(h )} 1: F = ? 2: while L is not empty do 3: h ? = shift(L ) 4: for each h in L do 5: if ( M(h ?) . M(h )): remove h from L 6: else if ( M(h ) . M(h ?)): remove h from L ; set h ? = h 7: end for 8: Add h ? to Frontier Set F 9: for each h in L do 10: if ( M(h ?) . M(h )): remove h from L 11: end for 12: end while 13: Return F tered are necessarily pareto-optimal . Algorithm 1 shows the pseudocode . In line 3, we take a point h ? and check if it is dominating or dominated in the for-loop ( lines 48). At least one pareto-optimal point will be found by line 8. The second loop ( lines 911) further filters the list for points that are dominated by h ? but iterated before h ? in the first for-loop.
The outer while-loop stops exactly after P iterations , where P is the actual number of pareto-optimal points in L . Each inner loop costs O(KN ) so the total complexity is O(PKN ). Since P ? N with the actual value depending on the probability distribution of { M(h )}, the worst-case runtime is O(KN2). For a survey of various Pareto algorithms , refer to ( Godfrey et al , 2007). The algorithm we described here is borrowed from the database literature in what is known as skyline operators.2 3.2 PMO-PRO Algorithm We are now ready to present an algorithm for multiobjective optimization . As we will see , it can be seen as a generalization of the pairwise ranking optimization ( PRO ) of ( Hopkins and May , 2011), so we call it PMO-PRO . PMO-PRO approach works by iteratively decoding-and-optimizing on the devset , sim-2The inquisitive reader may wonder how is Pareto related to databases . The motivation is to incorporate preferences into relational queries(Bo?rzso?nyi et al , 2001). For K = 2 metrics , they also present an alternative faster O(N logN ) algorithm by first topologically sorting along the 2 dimensions . All dominated points can be filtered by one-pass by comparing with the most-recent dominating point.
ilar to many MT optimization methods . The main difference is that rather than trying to maximize a single metric , we maximize the number of pareto points , in order to expand the Pareto Frontier We will explain PMO-PRO in terms of the pseudocode shown in Algorithm 2. For each sentence pair ( f , e ) in the devset , we first generate an Nbest list L ? { h } using the current weight vector w ( line 5). In line 6, we evaluate each hypothesis h with respect to the K metrics , giving a set of K-dimensional vectors { M(h)}.
Lines 78 is the critical part : it gives a ? label ? to each hypothesis , based on whether it is in the Pareto Frontier . In particular , first we call FindParetoFrontier ( Algorithm 1), which returns a set of pareto hypotheses ; pareto-optimal hypotheses will get label 1 while non-optimal hypotheses will get label 0. This information is added to the training set T ( line 8), which is then optimized by any conventional subroutine in line 10. We will follow PRO in using a pairwise classifier in line 10, which finds w ? that separates hypotheses with labels 1 vs . 0. In essence , this is the trick we employ to directly optimize on the Pareto Frontier . If we had used BLEU scores rather than the {0, 1} labels in line 8, the entire PMO-PRO algorithm would revert to single-objective PRO.
By definition , there is no single ? best ? result for multiobjective optimization , so we collect all weights and return the Pareto-optimal set . In line 13 we evaluate each weight w on K metrics across the entire corpus and call FindParetoFrontier in line 14.3 This choice highlights an interesting change of philosophy : While setting { pk } in linear-combination forces the designer to make an a priori preference among metrics prior to optimization , the PMO strategy is to optimize first agnostically and a posteriori let the designer choose among a set of weights . Arguably it is easier to choose among solutions based on their evaluation scores rather than devising exact values for { pk}.
3.3 Discussion
Variants : In practice we find that a slight modification of line 8 in Algorithm 2 leads to more sta-3Note this is the same FindParetoFrontier algorithm as used in line 7. Both operate on sets of points in K-dimensional space , induced from either weights { w } or hypotheses { h}.
4
Algorithm 2 Proposed PMO-PRO algorithm
Input : Devset , max number of iterations I Output : A set of ( pareto-optimal ) weight vectors 1: Initialize w . LetW = ?.
2: for i = 1 to I do 3: Let T = ?.
4: for each ( f , e ) in devset do 5: { h } = DecodeNbest(w,f ) 6: { M(h)}=EvalMetricsOnSentence({h }, e ) 7: { f } = FindParetoFrontier({M(h )}) 8: foreach h ? { h }: if h ? { f }, set l=1, else l=0; Add ( l , h ) to T 9: end for 10: w?=OptimizationSubroutine(T , w ) 11: Add w ? toW ; Set w = w?.
12: end for 13: M(w ) = EvalMetricsOnCorpus(w,devset ) ? w ? W 14: Return FindParetoFrontier({M(w )}) ble results for PMO-PRO : for non-pareto hypotheses h /? { f }, we set label l = ? kMk(h)/K instead of l = 0, so the method not only learns to discriminate pareto vs . non-pareto but also also learns to discriminate among competing non-pareto points.
Also , like other MT works , in line 5 the Nbest list is concatenated to Nbest lists from previous iterations , so { h } is a set with i ? N elements.
General PMO Approach : The strategy we outlined in Section 3.2 can be easily applied to other MT optimization techniques . For example , by replacing the optimization subroutine ( line 10, Algorithm 2) with a Powell search ( Och , 2003), one can get PMO-MERT4. Alternatively , by using the large-margin optimizer in ( Chiang et al , 2009) and moving it into the foreach loop ( lines 49), one can get an online algorithm such PMO-MIRA . Virtually all MT optimization algorithms have a place where metric scores feedback into the optimization procedure ; the idea of PMO is to replace these raw scores with labels derived from Pareto optimality.
4 Experiments 4.1 Evaluation Methodology We experiment with two datasets : (1) The PubMed task is English-to-Japanese translation of scientific 4A difference with traditional MERT is the necessity of sentence-BLEU ( Liang et al , 2006) in line 6. We use sentence-BLEU for optimization but corpus-BLEU for evaluation here.
abstracts . As metrics we use BLEU and RIBES ( which demonstrated good human correlation in this language pair ( Goto et al , 2011)). (2) The NIST task is Chinese-to-English translation with OpenMT08 training data and MT06 as devset . As metrics we use BLEU and NTER.
? BLEU = BP ? (? precn)1/4. BP is brevity penality . precn is precision of ngram matches.
? RIBES = (? + 1)/2 ? prec1/41 , with Kendall?s ? computed by measuring permutation between matching words in reference and hypothesis5.
? NTER=max(1?TER , 0), which normalizes
Translation Edit Rate6 so that NTER=1 is best.
We compare two multiobjective approaches : 1. Linear-Combination of metrics ( Eq . 2), optimized with PRO . We search a range of combination settings : ( p1, p2) = {(0, 1), (0.3, 0.7), (0.5, 0.5), (0.7, 0.3), (1, 0)}.
Note (1, 0) reduces to standard single-metric optimization of e.g . BLEU.
2. Proposed Pareto approach ( PMO-PRO).
Evaluation of multiobjective problems can be tricky because there is no single figure-of-merit.
We thus adopted the following methodology : We run both methods 5 times ( i.e . using the 5 different ( p1, p2) setting each time ) and I = 20 iterations each . For each method , this generates 5x20=100 results , and we plot the Pareto Frontier of these points in a 2-dimensional metric space ( e.g . see Figure 2).
A method is deemed better if its final Pareto Frontier curve is strictly dominating the other . We report devset results here ; testset trends are similar but not included due to space constraints.7 5from www.kecl.ntt.co.jp/icl/lirg/ribes 6from www.umd.edu/?snover/tercom 7An aside : For comparing optimization methods , we believe devset comparison is preferable to testset since data mismatch may confound results . If one worries about generalization , we advocate to re-decode the devset with final weights and evaluate its 1best output ( which is done here ). This is preferable to simply reporting the achieved scores on devset Nbest ( as done in some opensource scripts ) since the learned weight may pick out good hypotheses in the Nbest but perform poorly when redecoding the same devset . The re-decode devset approach avoids being overly optimistic while accurately measuring optimization performance.
5
Train Devset # Feat Metrics
PubMed 0.2M 2k 14 BLEU , RIBES
NIST 7M 1.6k 8 BLEU , NTER
Table 1: Task characteristics : # sentences in Train/Dev , # of features , and metrics used . Our MT models are trained with standard phrasebased Moses software ( Koehn and others , 2007), with IBM M4 alignments , 4gram SRILM , lexical ordering for PubMed and distance ordering for the NIST system . The decoder generates 50-best lists each iteration . We use SVMRank ( Joachims , 2006) as optimization subroutine for PRO , which efficiently handle all pairwise samples without the need for sampling.
4.2 Results
Figures 2 and 3 show the results for PubMed and NIST , respectively . A method is better if its Pareto Frontier lies more towards the upper-right hand corner of the graph . Our observations are : 1. PMO-PRO generally outperforms Linear-Combination with any setting of ( p1, p2).
The Pareto Frontier of PMO-PRO dominates that of Linear-Combination . This implies PMO is effective in optimizing towards Pareto hypotheses.
2. For both methods , trading-off between metrics is necessary . For example in PubMed , the designer would need to make a choice between picking the best weight according to BLEU ( BLEU=.265,RIBES=.665) vs . another weight with higher RIBES but poorer BLEU , e.g . (.255,.675). Nevertheless , both the PMO and Linear-Combination with various ( p1, p2) samples this joint-objective space broadly.
3. Interestingly , a multiobjective approach can sometimes outperform a single-objective optimizer in its own metric . In Figure 2, single-objective PRO focusing on optimizing RIBES only achieves 0.68, but PMO-PRO using both
BLEU and RIBES outperforms with 0.685.
The third observation relates to the issue of metric tunability ( Liu et al , 2011). We found that RIBES can be difficult to tune directly . It is an extremely nonsmooth objective with many local optima?slight changes in word ordering causes large changes in RIBES . So the best way to improve RIBES is to 0.2 0.21 0.22 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.26 0.270.665 0.67 0.675 0.68 0.685 0.69 0.695 bleu ribe s Linear CombinationPareto ( PMO?PRO ) Figure 2: PubMed Results . The curve represents the Pareto Frontier of all results collected after multiple runs.
0.146 0.148 0.15 0.152 0.154 0.156 0.158 0.16 0.162 0.1640.694 0.695 0.696 0.697 0.698 0.699 0.7 0.701 0.702 0.703 0.704 bleu nte r Linear CombinationPareto ( PMO?PRO)
Figure 3: NIST Results not to optimize it directly , but jointly with a more tunable metric BLEU . The learning curve in Figure 4 show that single-objective optimization of RIBES quickly falls into local optimum ( at iteration 3) whereas PMO can zigzag and sacrifice RIBES in intermediate iterations ( e.g . iteration 2, 15) leading to a stronger result ultimately . The reason is the diversity of solutions provided by the Pareto Frontier . This finding suggests that multiobjective approaches may be preferred , especially when dealing with new metrics that may be difficult to tune.
4.3 Additional Analysis and Discussions
What is the training time ? The Pareto approach does not add much overhead to PMO-PRO . While FindParetoFrontier scales quadratically by size of Nbest list , Figure 5 shows that the runtime is triv-0.64 0.65 0.66 0.67 0.68 0.69 iteration ribe s
Single?Objective RIBES
Pareto ( PMO?PRO)
Figure 4: Learning Curve on RIBES : comparing single-objective optimization and PMO.
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 10000 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35
Set size | L|
Run time ( sec onds )
Algorithm 1
TopologicalSort ( footnote 2)
Figure 5: Avg . runtime per sentence of FindPareto ial (0.3 seconds for 1000-best ). Table 2 shows the time usage breakdown in different iterations for PubMed . We see it is mostly dominated by decoding time ( constant per iteration at 40 minutes on single 3.33GHz processor ). At later iterations , Opt takes more time due to larger file I/O in SVMRank.
Note Decode and Pareto can be ? embarrasingly parallelized.?
Iter Time Decode Pareto Opt Misc.
(line 5) ( line 7) ( line 10) ( line 6,8) 1 47m 85% 1% 1% 13% 10 62m 67% 6% 8% 19% 20 91m 47% 15% 22% 16% Table 2: Training time usage in PMO-PRO ( Algo 2).
How many Pareto points ? The number of pareto 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 185
Iterations
Num ber of P aret o P oint s
NIST
PubMed
Figure 6: Average number of Pareto points hypotheses gives a rough indication of the diversity of hypotheses that can be exploited by PMO . Figure 6 shows that this number increases gradually per iteration . This perhaps gives PMO-PRO more directions for optimizing around potential local optimal.
Nevertheless , we note that tens of Pareto points is far few compared to the large size of Nbest lists used at later iterations of PMO-PRO . This may explain why the differences between methods in Figure 3 are not more substantial . Theoretically , the number will eventually level off as it gets increasingly harder to generate new Pareto points in a crowded space ( Bentley et al , 1978).
Practical recommendation : We present the Pareto approach as a way to agnostically optimize multiple metrics jointly . However , in practice , one may have intuitions about metric tradeoffs even if one cannot specify { pk }. For example , we might believe that approximately 1-point BLEU degradation is acceptable only if RIBES improves by at least 3-points . In this case , we recommend the following trick : Set up a multiobjective problem where one metric is BLEU and the other is 3/4BLEU+1/4RIBES . This encourages PMO to explore the joint metric space but avoid solutions that sacrifice too much BLEU , and should also outperform Linear Combination that searches only on the (3/4,1/4) direction.
5 Related Work
Multiobjective optimization for MT is a relatively new area . Linear-combination of BLEU/TER is times achieving good results in evaluation campaigns ( Dyer et al , 2009). As far as we known , the only work that directly proposes a multiobjective technique is ( He and Way , 2009), which modifies MERT to optimize a single metric subject to the constraint that it does not degrade others . These approaches all require some setting of constraint strength or combination weights { pk }. Recent work in MT evaluation has examined combining metrics using machine learning for better correlation with human judgments ( Liu and Gildea , 2007; Albrecht and Hwa , 2007; Gimnez and Ma`rquez , 2008) and may give insights for setting { pk }. We view our Pareto-based approach as orthogonal to these efforts.
The tunability of metrics is a problem that is gaining recognition ( Liu et al , 2011). If a good evaluation metric could not be used for tuning , it would be a pity . The Tunable Metrics task at WMT2011 concluded that BLEU is still the easiest to tune ( Callison-Burch et al , 2011). ( Mauser et al , 2008; Cer et al , 2010) report similar observations , in addition citing WER being difficult and BLEU-TER being amenable . One unsolved question is whether metric tunability is a problem inherent to the metric only , or depends also on the underlying optimization algorithm . Our positive results with PMO suggest that the choice of optimization algorithm can help.
Multiobjective ideas are being explored in other NLP areas . ( Spitkovsky et al , 2011) describe a technique that alternates between hard and soft EM objectives in order to achieve better local optimum in grammar induction . ( Hall et al , 2011) investigates joint optimization of a supervised parsing objective and some extrinsic objectives based on downstream applications . ( Agarwal et al , 2011) considers using multiple signals ( of varying quality ) from online users to train recommendation models . ( Eisner and Daume ? III , 2011) trades off speed and accuracy of a parser with reinforcement learning . None of the techniques in NLP use Pareto concepts , however.
6 Opportunities and Limitations
We introduce a new approach ( PMO ) for training MT systems on multiple metrics . Leveraging the diverse perspectives of different evaluation metrics has the potential to improve overall quality . Based on Pareto Optimality , PMO is easy to implement and achieves better solutions compared to linear-combination baselines , for any setting of combination weights . Further we observe that multiobjective approaches can be helpful for optimizing difficult-to-tune metrics ; this is beneficial for quickly introducing new metrics developed in MT evaluation into MT optimization , especially when good { pk } are not yet known . We conclude by drawing attention to some limitations and opportunities raised by this work : Limitations : (1) The performance of PMO is limited by the size of the Pareto set . Small Nbest lists lead to sparsely-sampled Pareto Frontiers , and a much better approach would be to enlarge the hypothesis space using lattices ( Macherey et al , 2008).
How to compute Pareto points directly from lattices is an interesting open research question . (2) The binary distinction between pareto vs . non-pareto points ignores the fact that 2nd-place non-pareto points may also lead to good practical solutions . A better approach may be to adopt a graded definition of Pareto optimality as done in some multiobjective works ( Deb et al , 2002). (3) A robust evaluation methodology that enables significance testing for multiobjective problems is sorely needed . This will make it possible to compare multiobjective methods on more than 2 metrics . We also need to follow up with human evaluation.
Opportunities : (1) There is still much we do not understand about metric tunability ; we can learn much by looking at joint metric-spaces and examining how new metrics correlate with established ones . (2) Pareto is just one approach among many in multiobjective optimization . A wealth of methods are available ( Marler and Arora , 2004) and more experimentation in this space will definitely lead to new insights . (3) Finally , it would be interesting to explore other creative uses of multiple-objectives in MT beyond multiple metrics . For example : Can we learn to translate faster while sacrificing little on accuracy ? Can we learn to jointly optimize cascaded systems , such as as speech translation or pivot translation ? Life is full of multiple competing objectives.
Acknowledgments
We thank the reviewers for insightful feedback.
8
References
Deepak Agarwal , Bee-Chung Chen , Pradheep Elango , and Xuanhui Wang . 2011. Click shaping to optimize multiple objectives . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , KDD ?11, pages 132?140,
New York , NY , USA . ACM.
J . Albrecht and R . Hwa . 2007. A reexamination of machine learning approaches for sentence-level mt evaluation . In ACL.
J . L . Bentley , H . T . Kung , M . Schkolnick , and C . D.
Thompson . 1978. On the average number of maxima in a set of vectors and applications . Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery ( JACM ), 25(4).
Alexandra Birch , Phil Blunsom , and Miles Osborne.
2010. Metrics for MT evaluation : Evaluating reordering . Machine Translation , 24(1).
S . Bo?rzso?nyi , D . Kossmann , and K . Stocker . 2001. The skyline operator . In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Data Engineering ( ICDE).
Chris Callison-Burch , Philipp Koehn , Christof Monz , and Omar Zaidan . 2011. Findings of the 2011 workshop on statistical machine translation . In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation , pages 22?64, Edinburgh , Scotland , July . Association for Computational Linguistics.
Daniel Cer , Christopher Manning , and Daniel Jurafsky.
2010. The best lexical metric for phrasebased statistical MT system optimization . In NAACL HLT.
David Chiang , Wei Wang , and Kevin Knight . 2009.
11,001 new features for statistical machine translation.
In NAACL.
Koby Crammer , Ofer Dekel , Joseph Keshet , Shai ShalevShwartz , and Yoram Singer . 2006. Online passiveag-gressive algorithms . Journal of Machine Learning Research , 7.
Kalyanmoy Deb , Amrit Pratap , Sammer Agarwal , and T . Meyarivan . 2002. A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm : NSGA-II . IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation , 6(2).
Chris Dyer , Hendra Setiawan , Yuval Marton , and Philip Resnik . 2009. The university of maryland statistical machine translation system for the fourth workshop on machine translation . In Proc . of the Fourth Workshop on Machine Translation.
Jason Eisner and Hal Daume ? III . 2011. Learning speed-accuracy tradeoffs in nondeterministic inference algorithms . In COST : NIPS 2011 Workshop on Computational Tradeoffs in Statistical Learning.
Jesu?s Gimnez and Llu??s Ma`rquez . 2008. Heterogeneous automatic mt evaluation through nonparametric metric combinations . In ICJNLP.
Parke Godfrey , Ryan Shipley , and Jarek Gyrz . 2007. Algorithms and analyses for maximal vector computation . VLDB Journal , 16.
Isao Goto , Bin Lu , Ka Po Chow , Eiichiro Sumita , and Benjamin K . Tsou . 2011. Overview of the patent machine translation task at the ntcir-9 workshop . In Proceedings of the NTCIR-9 Workshop Meeting.
Keith Hall , Ryan McDonald , Jason Katz-Brown , and Michael Ringgaard . 2011. Training dependency parsers by jointly optimizing multiple objectives.
In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1489?1499, Edinburgh , Scotland , UK ., July . Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yifan He and Andy Way . 2009. Improving the objective function in minimum error rate training . In MT
Summit.
Mark Hopkins and Jonathan May . 2011. Tuning as ranking . In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1352?1362, Edinburgh , Scotland , UK ., July . Association for Computational Linguistics.
H . Isozaki , T . Hirao , K . Duh , K . Sudoh , and H . Tsukada.
2010. Automatic evaluation of translation quality for distant language pairs . In EMNLP.
T . Joachims . 2006. Training linear SVMs in linear time.
In KDD.
P . Koehn et al 2007. Moses : open source toolkit for statistical machine translation . In ACL.
A . Lavie and A . Agarwal . 2007. METEOR : An automatic metric for mt evaluation with high levels of correlation with human judgments . In Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation.
P . Liang , A . Bouchard-Cote , D . Klein , and B . Taskar.
2006. An end-to-end discriminative approach to machine translation . In ACL.
Ding Liu and Daniel Gildea . 2007. Sourcelanguage features and maximum correlation training for machine translation evaluation . In NAACL.
Chang Liu , Daniel Dahlmeier , and Hwee Tou Ng . 2011.
Better evaluation metrics lead to better machine translation . In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Wolfgang Macherey , Franz Och , Ignacio Thayer , and Jakob Uszkoreit . 2008. Lattice-based minimum error rate training for statistical machine translation . In
EMNLP.
R . T . Marler and J . S . Arora . 2004. Survey of multiobjective optimization methods for engineering.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization , 26.
Arne Mauser , Sas?a Hasan , and Hermann Ney . 2008.
Automatic evaluation measures for statistical machine ference on Language Resources and Evaluation , Marrakech , Morocco , May.
Kaisa Miettinen . 1998. Nonlinear Multiobjective Optimization . Springer.
J.A . Nelder and R . Mead . 1965. The downhill simplex method . Computer Journal , 7(308).
Franz Och . 2003. Minimum error rate training in statistical machine translation . In ACL.
Karolina Owczarzak , Josef van Genabith , and Andy Way.
2007. Labelled dependencies in machine translation evaluation . In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation.
Sebastian Pado , Daniel Cer , Michel Galley , Dan Jurafsky , and Christopher D . Manning . 2009. Measuring machine translation quality as semantic equivalence : A metric based on entailment features . Machine Translation , 23(2-3).
Kishore Papineni , Salim Roukos , Todd Ward , and WeiJing Zhu . 2002. BLEU : A method for automatic evaluation of machine translation . In ACL.
Vilfredo Pareto . 1906. Manuale di Economica Politica , ( Translated into English by A.S . Schwier as Manual of Political Economy , 1971). Societa Editrice Libraria,
Milan.
Michael Paul . 2010. Overview of the iwslt 2010 evaluation campaign . In IWSLT.
Yoshikazu Sawaragi , Hirotaka Nakayama , and Tetsuzo Tanino , editors . 1985. Theory of Multiobjective Optimization . Academic Press.
M . Snover , B . Dorr , R . Schwartz , L . Micciulla , and J . Makhoul . 2006. A study of translation edit rate with targeted human annotation . In AMTA.
Valentin I . Spitkovsky , Hiyan Alshawi , and Daniel Jurafsky . 2011. Lateen em : Unsupervised training with multiple objectives , applied to dependency grammar induction . In Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1269?1280, Edinburgh , Scotland , UK ., July . Association for Computational Linguistics.
Omar Zaidan . 2009. ZMERT : A fully configurable open source tool for minimum error rate training of machine translation systems . In The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics.
10
