Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 79?84,
Jeju , Republic of Korea , 814 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Entailment-based Text Exploration
with Application to the Healthcare Domain
Meni Adler
Bar Ilan University
Ramat Gan , Israel
adlerm@cs.bgu.ac.il
Jonathan Berant
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv , Israel
jonatha6@post.tau.ac.il
Ido Dagan
Bar Ilan University
Ramat Gan , Israel
dagan@cs.biu.ac.il
Abstract
We present a novel text exploration model , which extends the scope of state-of-the-art technologies by moving from standard con-cept-based exploration to statement-based exploration . The proposed scheme utilizes the textual entailment relation between statements as the basis of the exploration process . A user of our system can explore the result space of a query by drilling down/up from one statement to another , according to entailment relations specified by an entailment graph and an optional concept taxonomy . As a prominent use case , we apply our exploration system and illustrate its benefit on the healthcare domain . To the best of our knowledge this is the first implementation of an exploration system at the statement level that is based on the textual entailment relation.
1 Introduction
Finding information in a large body of text is becoming increasingly more difficult . Standard search engines output a set of documents for a given query , but do not allow any exploration of the thematic structure in the retrieved information . Thus , the need for tools that allow to effectively sift through a target set of documents is becoming ever more important.
Faceted search ( Stoica and Hearst , 2007; Ka?ki , 2005) supports a better understanding of a target domain , by allowing exploration of data according to multiple views or facets . For example , given a set of documents on Nobel Prize laureates we might have different facets corresponding to the laureate?s nationality , the year when the prize was awarded , the field in which it was awarded , etc . However , this type of exploration is still severely limited insofar that it only allows exploration by topic rather than content . Put differently , we can only explore according to what a document is about rather than what a document actually says . For instance , the facets for the query ? asthma ? in the faceted search engine Yippy include the concepts allergy and children , but do not specify what are the exact relations between these concepts and the query ( e.g ., allergy causes asthma , and children suffer from asthma).
Berant et al (2010) proposed an exploration scheme that focuses on relations between concepts , which are derived from a graph describing textual entailment relations between propositions . In their setting a proposition consists of a predicate with two arguments that are possibly replaced by variables , such as ? X control asthma ?. A graph that specifies an entailment relation ? X control asthma ? X affect asthma ? can help a user , who is browsing documents dealing with substances that affect asthma , drill down and explore only substances that control asthma . This type of exploration can be viewed as an extension of faceted search , where the new facet concentrates on the actual statements expressed in the texts.
In this paper we follow Berant et al?s proposal , and present a novel entailment-based text exploration system , which we applied to the healthcare domain . A user of this system can explore the result space of her query , by drilling down/up from one proposition to another , according to a set of entailment relations described by an entailment graph.
In Figure 1, for example , the user looks for ? things ? that affect asthma . She invokes an ? asthma ? query and starts drilling down the entailment graph to ? X control asthma ? ( left column ). In order to examine the arguments of a selected proposition , the user may drill down/up a concept taxonomy that classifies terms that occur as arguments . The user in Figure 1, for instance , drills down the concept taxonomy ( middle column ), in order to focus on Hormones that control asthma , such as ? prednisone ? ( right column ). Each drill down/up induces a subset of the documents that correspond to the aforementioned selections . The retrieved document in Figure 1 ( bottom ) is highlighted by the relevant proposition , which clearly states that prednisone is often given to treat asthma ( and indeed in the entailment graph ? X treat asthma ? entails ? X control asthma?).
Our system is built over a corpus of documents , a set of propositions extracted from the documents , an entailment graph describing entailment relations between propositions , and , optionally , a concept hierarchy . The system implementation for the healthcare domain , for instance , is based on a web-crawled healthcare corpus , the propositions automatically extracted from the corpus , entailment graphs borrowed from Berant et al (2010), and the UMLS1 taxonomy . To the best of our knowledge this is the first implementation of an exploration system , at the proposition level , based on the textual entailment relation.
2 Background 2.1 Exploratory Search
Exploratory search addresses the need of users to quickly identify the important pieces of information in a target set of documents . In exploratory search , users are presented with a result set and a set of exploratory facets , which are proposals for refinements of the query that can lead to more focused sets of documents . Each facet corresponds to a clustering of the current result set , focused on a more specific topic than the current query . The user proceeds in the exploration of the document set by selecting specific documents ( to read them ) or by selecting specific facets , to refine the result set.
1http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls / single hierarchical conceptual clustering of information ( Hofmann , 1999), enabling the user to drill up and down the concept hierarchies . Hierarchical faceted metadata ( Stoica and Hearst , 2007), or faceted search , proposed more sophisticated exploration possibilities by providing multiple facets and a hierarchy per facet or dimension of the domain.
These types of exploration techniques were found to be useful for effective access of information ( Ka?ki , 2005).
In this work , we suggest proposition-based exploration as an extension to concept-based exploration . Our intuition is that text exploration can profit greatly from representing information not only at the level of individual concepts , but also at the propositional level , where the relations that link concepts to one another are represented effectively in a hierarchical entailment graph.
2.2 Entailment Graph
Recognizing Textual Entailment ( RTE ) is the task of deciding , given two text fragments , whether the meaning of one text can be inferred from another ( Dagan et al , 2009). For example , ? Levalbuterol is used to control various kinds of asthma ? entails ? Levalbuterol affects asthma ?. In this paper , we use the notion of proposition to denote a specific type of text fragments , composed of a predicate with two arguments ( e.g ., Levalbuterol control asthma).
Textual entailment systems are often based on entailment rules which specify a directional inference relation between two fragments . In this work , we focus on leveraging a common type of entailment rules , in which the left-hand-side of the rule ( LHS ) and the right-hand-side of the rule ( RHS ) are propositional templates - a proposition , where one or both of the arguments are replaced by a variable , e.g ., ? X control asthma ? X affect asthma?.
The entailment relation between propositional templates of a given corpus can be represented by an entailment graph ( Berant et al , 2010) ( see Figure 2, top ). The nodes of an entailment graph correspond to propositional templates , and its edges correspond to entailment relations ( rules ) between them . Entailment graph representation is somewhat analogous to the formation of ontological relations between concepts of a given domain , where in our case the nodes correspond to propositional templates rather than to concepts.
3 Exploration Model
In this section we extend the scope of state-of-the-art exploration technologies by moving from standard concept-based exploration to proposition-based exploration , or equivalently , statement-based exploration . In our model , it is the entailment relation between propositional templates which determines the granularity of the viewed information space . We first describe the inputs to the system and then detail our proposed exploration scheme.
3.1 System Inputs
Corpus A collection of documents , which form the search space of the system.
Extracted Propositions A set of propositions , extracted from the corpus document . The propositions are usually produced by an extraction method , such as TextRunner ( Banko et al , 2007) or ReVerb ( Fader et al , 2011). In order to support the exploration process , the documents are indexed by the propositional templates and argument terms of the extracted propositions.
Entailment graph for predicates The nodes of the entailment graph are propositional templates , where edges indicate entailment relations between templates ( Section 2.2). In order to avoid circularity in the exploration process , the graph is transformed into a DAG , by merging ? equivalent ? nodes that are in the same strong connectivity component ( as suggested by Berant et al (2010)). In addition , for clarity and simplicity , edges that can be inferred by transitivity are omitted from the DAG . Figure 2 illustrates the result of applying this procedure to a fragment of the entailment graph for ? asthma ? ( i.e ., for propositional templates with ? asthma ? as one of the arguments).
Taxonomy for arguments The optional concept taxonomy maps terms to one or more predefined concepts , arranged in a hierarchical structure . These terms may appear in the corpus as arguments of predicates . Figure 3, for instance , illustrates a simple medical taxonomy , composed of three concepts ( medical , diseases , drugs ) and four terms ( cancer , asthma , aspirin , flexeril).
81
Figure 2: Fragment of the entailment graph for ? asthma ? ( top ), and its conversion to a DAG ( bottom).
3.2 Exploration Scheme
The objective of the exploration scheme is to support querying and offer facets for result exploration , in a visual manner . The following components cover the various aspects of this objective , given the above system inputs : Querying The user enters a search term as a query , e.g ., ? asthma ?. The given term induces a subgraph of the entailment graph that contains all propositional templates ( graph nodes ) with which this term appears as an argument in the extracted propositions ( see Figure 2). This subgraph is represented as a DAG , as explained in Section 3.1, where all nodes that have no parent are defined as the roots of the DAG . As a starting point , only the roots of the DAG are displayed to the user . Figure 4 shows the five roots for the ? asthma ? query.
Exploration process The user selects one of the entailment graph nodes ( e.g ., ? associate X with asthma ?). At each exploration step , the user can drill down to a more specific template or drill up to a Figure 3: Partial medical taxonomy . Ellipses denote concepts , while rectangles denote terms.
Figure 4: The roots of the entailment graph for the ? asthma ? query.
more general template , by moving along the entailment hierarchy . For example , the user in Figure 5, expands the root ? associate X with asthma ?, in order to drill down through ? X affect asthma ? to ? X control
Asthma?.
Selecting a propositional template ( Figure 1, left column ) displays a concept taxonomy for the arguments that correspond to the variable in the selected template ( Figure 1, middle column ). The user can explore these argument concepts by drilling up and down the concept taxonomy . For example , in Figure 1 the user , who selected ? X control Asthma ?, explores the arguments of this template by drilling down the taxonomy to the concept ? Hormone?.
Selecting a concept opens a third column , which lists the terms mapped to this concept that occurred as arguments of the selected template . For example , in Figure 1, the user is examining the list of arguments for the template ? X control Asthma ?, which are mapped to the concept ? Hormone ?, focusing on the argument ? prednisone?.
82
Figure 5: Part of the entailment graph for the ? asthma ? query , after two exploration steps . This corresponds to the left column in Figure 1.
Document retrieval At any stage , the list of documents induced by the current selected template , concept and argument is presented to the user , where in each document snippet the relevant proposition components are highlighted . Figure 1 ( bottom ) shows such a retrieved document . The highlighted extraction in the snippet , ? prednisone treat asthma ?, entails the proposition selected during exploration , ? prednisone control asthma?.
4 System Architecture
In this section we briefly describe system components , as illustrated in the block diagram ( Figure 6).
The search service implements fulltext and faceted search , and document indexing . The data service handles data ( e.g ., documents ) replication for clients . The entailment service handles the logic of the entailment relations ( for both the entailment graph and the taxonomy).
The index server applies periodic indexing of new texts , and the exploration server serves the exploration application on querying , exploration , and data Figure 6: Block diagram of the exploration system.
access . The exploration application is the frontend user application for the whole exploration process described above ( Section 3.2).
5 Application to the Healthcare Domain
As a prominent use case , we applied our exploration system to the healthcare domain . With the advent of the internet and social media , patients now have access to new sources of medical information : consumer health articles , forums , and social networks ( Boulos and Wheeler , 2007). A typical nonexpert health information searcher is uncertain about her exact questions and is unfamiliar with medical terminology ( Trivedi , 2009). Exploring relevant information about a given medical issue can be essential and time-critical.
System implementation For the search service , we used SolR servlet , where the data service is built over FTP . The exploration application is implemented as a web application.
Input resources We collected a healthcare corpus from the web , which contains more than 2M sentences and about 50M word tokens . The texts deal with various aspects of the health care domain : answers to questions , surveys on diseases , articles on lifestyle , etc . We extracted propositions from the healthcare corpus , by applying the method described by Berant et al (2010). The corpus was parsed , and propositions were extracted from dependency trees according to the method suggested by Lin and Pantel (2001), where propositions are dependency paths between two arguments of a predi-the arguments is not a term mapped to a medical concept in the UMLS taxonomy.
For the entailment graph we used the 23 entailment graphs published by Berant et al2. For the argument taxonomy we employed UMLS ? a database that maps natural language phrases to over one million unique concept identifiers ( CUIs ) in the healthcare domain . The CUIs are also mapped in UMLS to a concept taxonomy for the healthcare domain.
The web application of our system is available at : http://132.70.6.148: 8080/exploration 6 Conclusion and Future Work We presented a novel exploration model , which extends the scope of state-of-the-art exploration technologies by moving from standard concept-based exploration to proposition-based exploration . Our model combines the textual entailment paradigm within the exploration process , with application to the healthcare domain . According to our model , it is the entailment relation between propositions , encoded by the entailment graph and the taxonomy , which leads the user between more specific and more general statements throughout the search result space . We believe that employing the entailment relation between propositions , which focuses on the statements expressed in the documents , can contribute to the exploration field and improve information access.
Our current application to the healthcare domain relies on a small set of entailment graphs for 23 medical concepts . Our ongoing research focuses on the challenging task of learning a larger entailment graph for the healthcare domain . We are also investigating methods for evaluating the exploration process ( Borlund and Ingwersen , 1997). As noted by Qu and Furnas (2008), the success of an exploratory search system does not depend simply on how many relevant documents will be retrieved for a given query , but more broadly on how well the system helps the user with the exploratory process.
2http://www.cs.tau.ac.il/?jonatha6/ homepage_files/resources/HealthcareGraphs.
rar
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the Israel Ministry of Science and Technology , the PASCAL2 Network of Excellence of the European Community FP7-ICT-2007-1-216886, and the European Communitys Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no . 287923 ( EXCITEMENT).
References
Michele Banko , Michael J Cafarella , Stephen Soderl , Matt Broadhead , and Oren Etzioni . 2007. Open information extraction from the web . In Proceedings of
IJCAI , pages 2670?2676.
Jonathan Berant , Ido Dagan , and Jacob Goldberger.
2010. Global learning of focused entailment graphs.
In Proceedings of ACL , Uppsala , Sweden.
Pia Borlund and Peter Ingwersen . 1997. The development of a method for the evaluation of interactive information retrieval systems . Journal of Documentation , 53:225?250.
Maged N . Kamel Boulos and Steve Wheeler . 2007. The emerging web 2.0 social software : an enabling suite of sociable technologies in health and health care education . Health Information & Libraries , 24:2?23.
Ido Dagan , Bill Dolan , Bernardo Magnini , and Dan Roth.
2009. Recognizing textual entailment : Rational , evaluation and approaches . Natural Language Engineering , 15(Special Issue 04):i?xvii.
Anthony Fader , Stephen Soderland , and Oren Etzioni.
2011. Identifying relations for open information extraction . In EMNLP , pages 1535?1545. ACL.
Thomas Hofmann . 1999. The cluster-abstraction model : Unsupervised learning of topic hierarchies from text data . In Proceedings of IJCAI , pages 682?687.
Mika Ka?ki . 2005. Findex : search result categories help users when document ranking fails . In Proceedings of SIGCHI , CHI ?05, pages 131?140, New York , NY,
USA . ACM.
Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel . 2001. Discovery of inference rules for question answering . Natural Language
Engineering , 7:343?360.
Yan Qu and George W . Furnas . 2008. Model-driven formative evaluation of exploratory search : A study under a sensemaking framework . Inf . Process . Manage ., 44:534?555.
Emilia Stoica and Marti A . Hearst . 2007. Automating creation of hierarchical faceted metadata structures . In
Proceedings of NAACL HLT.
Mayank Trivedi . 2009. A study of search engines for health sciences . International Journal of Library and
Information Science , 1(5):69?73.
84
