Tutorial Abstracts of ACL 2012, page 6,
Jeju , Republic of Korea , 8 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics Graphbased Semi-Supervised Learning Algorithms for NLP
Amar Subramanya
Google Research asubram@google.com
Partha Pratim Talukdar
Carnegie Mellon University ppt@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
While labeled data is expensive to prepare , ever increasing amounts of unlabeled linguistic data are becoming widely available . In order to adapt to this phenomenon , several semisupervised learning ( SSL ) algorithms , which learn from labeled as well as unlabeled data , have been developed . In a separate line of work , researchers have started to realize that graphs provide a natural way to represent data in a variety of domains . Graphbased SSL algorithms , which bring together these two lines of work , have been shown to outperform the state-of-the-art in many applications in speech processing , computer vision and NLP . In particular , recent NLP research has successfully used graphbased SSL algorithms for PoS tagging ( Subramanya et al , 2010), semantic parsing ( Das and Smith , 2011), knowledge acquisition ( Talukdar et al , 2008), sentiment analysis ( Goldberg and Zhu , 2006) and text categorization ( Subramanya and Bilmes , 2008).
Recognizing this promising and emerging area of research , this tutorial focuses on graphbased SSL algorithms ( e.g ., label propagation methods ). The tutorial is intended to be a sequel to the ACL 2008 SSL tutorial , focusing exclusively on graphbased SSL methods and recent advances in this area , which were beyond the scope of the previous tutorial.
The tutorial is divided in two parts . In the first part , we will motivate the need for graphbased SSL methods , introduce some standard graphbased SSL algorithms , and discuss connections between these approaches . We will also discuss how linguistic data can be encoded as graphs and show how graphbased algorithms can be scaled to large amounts of data ( e.g ., web-scale data).
Part 2 of the tutorial will focus on how graphbased methods can be used to solve several critical NLP tasks , including basic problems such as PoS tagging , semantic parsing , and more downstream tasks such as text categorization , information acquisition , and sentiment analysis . We will conclude the tutorial with some exciting avenues for future work.
Familiarity with semisupervised learning and graphbased methods will not be assumed , and the necessary background will be provided . Examples from NLP tasks will be used throughout the tutorial to convey the necessary concepts . At the end of this tutorial , the attendee will walk away with the following : ? An indepth knowledge of the current state-of-the-art in graphbased SSL algorithms , and the ability to implement them.
? The ability to decide on the suitability of graphbased SSL methods for a problem.
? Familiarity with different NLP tasks where graphbased SSL methods have been successfully applied.
In addition to the above goals , we hope that this tutorial will better prepare the attendee to conduct exciting research at the intersection of NLP and other emerging areas with natural graph-structured data ( e.g ., Computation Social Science).
Please visit http://graph-ssl.wikidot.com / for details.
References
Dipanjan Das and Noah A . Smith . 2011. Semisupervised frame-semantic parsing for unknown predicates . In Proceedings of the ACL : Human Language Technologies.
Andrew B . Goldberg and Xiaojin Zhu . 2006. Seeing stars when there aren?t many stars : graphbased semisupervised learning for sentiment categorization . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Graph Based Methods for NLP.
Amarnag Subramanya and Jeff Bilmes . 2008. Soft-supervised text classification . In EMNLP.
Amarnag Subramanya , Slav Petrov , and Fernando Pereira.
2010. Graphbased semisupervised learning of structured tagging models . In EMNLP.
Partha Pratim Talukdar , Joseph Reisinger , Marius Pasca , Deepak Ravichandran , Rahul Bhagat , and Fernando Pereira.
2008. Weakly supervised acquisition of labeled class instances using graph random walks . In EMNLP.
6
