Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 120?124,
Jeju , Republic of Korea , 814 July 2012. c?2012 Association for Computational Linguistics
Detecting Semantic Equivalence and Information Disparity
in Crosslingual Documents
Yashar Mehdad Matteo Negri Marcello Federico
Fondazione Bruno Kessler , FBK-irst
Trento , Italy
{mehdad|negri|federico}@fbk.eu
Abstract
We address a core aspect of the multilingual content synchronization task : the identification of novel , more informative or semantically equivalent pieces of information in two documents about the same topic . This can be seen as an application-oriented variant of textual entailment recognition where : i ) T and H are in different languages , and ii ) entailment relations between T and H have to be checked in both directions . Using a combination of lexical , syntactic , and semantic features to train a crosslingual textual entailment system , we report promising results on different datasets.
1 Introduction
Given two documents about the same topic written in different languages ( e.g . Wiki pages ), content synchronization deals with the problem of automatically detecting and resolving differences in the information they provide , in order to produce aligned , mutually enriched versions . A roadmap towards the solution of this problem has to take into account , among the many subtasks , the identification of information in one page that is semantically equivalent , novel , or more informative with respect to the content of the other page . In this paper we set such problem as an application-oriented , crosslingual variant of the Textual Entailment ( TE ) recognition task ( Dagan and Glickman , 2004). Along this direction , we make two main contributions : ( a ) Experiments with multidirectional crosslingual textual entailment . So far , crosslingual textual entailment ( CLTE ) has been only applied to : i ) available TE datasets ( unidirectional relations between monolingual pairs ) transformed into their crosslingual counterpart by translating the hypotheses into other languages ( Negri and Mehdad , 2010), and ii ) machine translation ( MT ) evaluation datasets ( Mehdad et al , 2012). Instead , we experiment with the only corpus representative of the multilingual content synchronization scenario , and the richer inventory of phenomena arising from it ( multidirectional entailment relations).
(b ) Improvement of current CLTE methods . The CLTE methods proposed so far adopt either a ? pivoting approach ? based on the translation of the two input texts into the same language ( Mehdad et al , 2010), or an ? integrated solution ? that exploits bilingual phrase tables to capture lexical relations and contextual information ( Mehdad et al , 2011). The promising results achieved with the integrated approach , however , still rely on phrasal matching techniques that disregard relevant semantic aspects of the problem . By filling this gap integrating linguistically motivated features , we propose a novel approach that improves the state-of-the-art in CLTE.
2 CLTE-based content synchronization
CLTE has been proposed by ( Mehdad et al , 2010) as an extension of textual entailment which consists of deciding , given a text T and an hypothesis H in different languages , if the meaning of H can be inferred from the meaning of T . The adoption of entailment-based techniques to address content synchronization looks promising , as several issues inherent to such task can be formalized as entailment-related prob-include identifying , and properly managing : (1) Text portions in P1 and P2 that express the same meaning ( bidirectional entailment ). In such cases no information has to migrate across P1 and P2, and the two text portions will remain the same ; (2) Text portions in P1 that are more informative than portions in P2 ( forward entailment ). In such cases , the entailing ( more informative ) portions from P1 have to be translated and migrated to P2 in order to replace or complement the entailed ( less informative ) fragments ; (3) Text portions in P2 that are more informative than portions in P1 ( backward entailment ), and should be translated to replace or complement them ; (4) Text portions in P1 describing facts that are not present in P2, and viceversa ( the ? unknown ? cases in RTE parlance ). In such cases , the novel information from both sides has to be translated and migrated in order to mutually enrich the two pages ; (5) Meaning discrepancies between text portions in the two pages (? contradictions ? in RTE parlance).
CLTE has been previously modeled as a phrase matching problem that exploits dictionaries and phrase tables extracted from bilingual parallel corpora to determine the number of word sequences in H that can be mapped to word sequences in T . In this way a semantic judgement about entailment is made exclusively on the basis of lexical evidence.
When only unidirectional entailment relations from T to H have to be determined ( RTE-like setting ), the full mapping of the hypothesis into the text usually provides enough evidence for a positive entailment judgement . Unfortunately , when dealing with multidirectional entailment , the correlation between the proportion of matching terms and the correct entailment decisions is less strong . In such framework , for instance , the full mapping of the hypothesis into the text is per se not sufficient to discriminate between forward entailment and semantic equivalence . To cope with these issues , we explore the contribution of syntactic and semantic features as a complement to lexical ones in a supervised learning framework.
3 Beyond lexical CLTE
In order to enrich the feature space beyond pure lexical match through phrase table entries , our model builds on two additional feature sets , derived from i ) semantic phrase tables , and ii ) dependency relations.
Semantic Phrase Table ( SPT ) matching represents a novel way to leverage the integration of semantics and MT-derived techniques . SPT matching extends CLTE methods based on pure lexical match by means of ? generalized ? phrase tables annotated with shallow semantic labels . SPTs , with entries in the form ?[ LABEL ] word1...wordn [ LABEL ]?, are used as a recall-oriented complement to the phrase tables used in MT . A motivation for this augmentation is that semantic tags allow to match tokens that do not occur in the original bilingual parallel corpora used for phrase table extraction . Our hypothesis is that the increase in recall obtained from relaxed matches through semantic tags in place of ? out of vocabulary ? terms ( e.g . unseen person names ) is an effective way to improve CLTE performance , even at the cost of some loss in precision.
Like lexical phrase tables , SPTs are extracted from parallel corpora . As a first step we annotate the parallel corpora with named-entity taggers for the source and target languages , replacing named entities with general semantic labels chosen from a coarse-grained taxonomy ( person , location , organization , date and numeric expression ). Then , we combine the sequences of unique labels into one single token of the same label , and we run Giza ++ ( Och and Ney , 2000) to align the resulting semantically augmented corpora . Finally , we extract the semantic phrase table from the augmented aligned corpora using the Moses toolkit ( Koehn et al , 2007). For the matching phase , we first annotate T and H in the same way we labeled our parallel corpora . Then , for each ngram order ( n=1 to 5) we use the SPT to calculate a matching score as the number of ngrams in H that match with phrases in T divided by the number of ngrams in H.1 Dependency Relation ( DR ) matching targets the increase of CLTE precision . Adding syntactic constraints to the matching process , DR features aim to reduce the amount of wrong matches often occurring with bag-of-words methods ( both at the lexical level and with recall-oriented SPTs ). For instance , the contradiction between ? Yahoo acquired 1When checking for entailment from H to T , the normalization is carried out dividing by the number of ngrams in T.
121
Overture ? and ? Overture compro ? Yahoo ?, which is evident when syntax is taken into account , can not be caught by shallow methods . We define a dependency relation as a triple that connects pairs of words through a grammatical relation . DR matching captures similarities between dependency relations , combining the syntactic and lexical level . In a valid match , while the relation has to be the same , the connected words can be either the same , or semantically equivalent terms in the two languages ( e.g . according to a bilingual dictionary ). Given the dependency tree representations of T and H , for each grammatical relation ( r ) we calculate a DR matching score as the number of matching occurrences of r in T and H , divided by the number of occurrences of r in H.
Separate DR matching scores are calculated for each relation r appearing both in T and H.
4 Experiments and results 4.1 Content synchronization scenario In our first experiment we used the EnglishGerman portion of the CLTE corpus described in ( Negri et al ., 2011), consisting of 500 multidirectional entailment pairs which we equally divided into training and test sets . Each pair in the dataset is annotated with ? Bidirectional ?, ? Forward ?, or ? Backward ? entailment judgements . Although highly relevant for the content synchronization task , ? Contradiction ? and ? Unknown ? cases ( i.e . ? NO ? entailment in both directions ) are not present in the annotation . However , this is the only available dataset suitable to gather insights about the viability of our approach to multidirectional CLTE recognition.2 We chose the ENG-GER portion of the dataset since for such language pair MT systems performance is often lower , making the adoption of simpler solutions based on pivoting more vulnerable.
To build the EnglishGerman phrase tables we combined the Europarl , News Commentary and ? de-news?3 parallel corpora . After tokenization , Giza ++ and Moses were respectively used to align the corpora and extract a lexical phrase table ( PT ). Similarly , the semantic phrase table ( SPT ) has been ex-2Recently , a new dataset including ? Unknown ? pairs has been used in the ? CrossLingual Textual Entailment for Content Synchronization ? task at SemEval2012 ( Negri et al , 2012).
3http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/pkoehn / tracted from the same corpora annotated with the Stanford NE tagger ( Faruqui and Pado ?, 2010; Finkel et al , 2005). Dependency relations ( DR ) have been extracted running the Stanford parser ( Rafferty and Manning , 2008; De Marneffe et al , 2006). The dictionary created during the alignment of the parallel corpora provided the lexical knowledge to perform matches when the connected words are different , but semantically equivalent in the two languages . To combine and weight features at different levels we used SVMlight ( Joachims , 1999) with default parameters.
In order to experiment under testing conditions of increasing complexity , we set the CLTE problem both as a two-way and as a three-way classification task . Two-way classification casts multidirectional entailment as a unidirectional problem , where each pair is analyzed checking for entailment both from left to right and from right to left . In this condition , each original test example is correctly classified if both pairs originated from it are correctly judged (? YES-YES ? for bidirectional , ? YESNO ? for forward , and ? NO-YES ? for backward entailment ). Two-way classification represents an intuitive solution to capture multidirectional entailment relations but , at the same time , a suboptimal approach in terms of efficiency since two checks are performed for each pair . Three-way classification is more efficient , but at the same time more challenging due to the higher difficulty of multiclass learning , especially with small datasets.
Results are compared with two pivoting approaches , checking for entailment between the original English texts and the translated German hy-potheses.4 The first ( Pivot-EDITS ), uses an optimized distance-based model implemented in the open source RTE system EDITS ( Kouylekov and Negri , 2010; Kouylekov et al , 2011). The second ( Pivot-PPT ) exploits paraphrase tables for phrase matching , and represents the best monolingual model presented in ( Mehdad et al , 2011). Table 1 demonstrates the success of our results in proving the two main claims of this paper . ( a ) In both settings all the feature sets used outperform the approaches taken as terms of comparison . The 61.6% accuracy achieved in the most challenging setting 4Using Google Translate.
122
PT PT+DR PT+SPT PT+SPT+DR Pivot-EDITS Pivot-PPT Cont . Synch . (2way ) 57.8 58.6 62.4 63.3 27.4 57.0 Cont . Synch . (3way ) 57.4 57.8 58.7 61.6 25.3 56.1
RTE3 AVG Pivot PPT
RTE3-derived 62.6 63.6 63.5 64.5 62.4 63.5 Table 1: CLTE accuracy results over content synchronization and RTE3-derived datasets.
(3way ) demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach to capture meaning equivalence and information disparity in crosslingual texts.
(b ) In both settings the combination of lexical , syntactic and semantic features ( PT+SPT+DR ) significantly improves5 the state-of-the-art CLTE model ( PT ). Such improvement is motivated by the joint contribution of SPTs ( matching more and longer ngrams , with a consequent recall improvement ), and DR matching ( adding constraints , with a consequent gain in precision ). However , the performance increase brought by DR features over PT is minimal . This might be due to the fact that both PT and DR features are precision-oriented , and their effectiveness becomes evident only in combination with recall-oriented features ( SPT).
Crosslingual models also significantly outperform pivoting methods . This suggests that the noise introduced by incorrect translations makes the pivoting approach less attractive in comparison with the more robust crosslingual models.
4.2 RTE-like CLTE scenario
Our second experiment aims at verifying the effectiveness of the improved model over RTE-derived CLTE data . To this aim , we compare the results obtained by the new CLTE model with those reported in ( Mehdad et al , 2011), calculated over an EnglishSpanish entailment corpus derived from the RTE3 dataset ( Negri and Mehdad , 2010).
In order to build the EnglishSpanish lexical phrase table ( PT ), we used the Europarl , News Commentary and United Nations parallel corpora . The semantic phrase table ( SPT ) was extracted from the same corpora annotated with FreeLing ( Carreras et al ., 2004). Dependency relations ( DR ) have been extracted parsing English texts and Spanish hypotheses with DepPattern ( Gamallo and Gonzalez , 2011).
5p < 0.05, calculated using the approximate randomization test implemented in ( Pado ?, 2006).
Accuracy results have been calculated over 800 test pairs of the CLTE corpus , after training the SVM binary classifier over the 800 development pairs.
Our new features have been compared with : i ) the state-of-the-art CLTE model ( PT ), ii ) the best monolingual model ( Pivot-PPT ) presented in ( Mehdad et al ., 2011), and iii ) the average result achieved by participants in the monolingual English RTE3 evaluation campaign ( RTE3 AVG ). As shown in Table 1, the combined feature set ( PT+SPT+DR ) sig-nificantly5 outperforms the lexical model (64.5% vs 62.6%), while SPT and DR features separately added to PT ( PT+SPT , and PT+DR ) lead to marginal improvements over the results achieved by the PT model alone ( about 1%). This confirms the conclusions drawn from the previous experiment , that precision-oriented and recall-oriented features lead to a larger improvement when they are used in combination.
5 Conclusion
We addressed the identification of semantic equivalence and information disparity in two documents about the same topic , written in different languages.
This is a core aspect of the multilingual content synchronization task , which represents a challenging application scenario for a variety of NLP technologies , and a shared research framework for the integration of semantics and MT technology . Casting the problem as a CLTE task , we extended previous lexical models with syntactic and semantic features.
Our results in different crosslingual settings prove the feasibility of the approach , with significant state-of-the-art improvements also on RTE-derived data.
Acknowledgments
This work has been partially supported by the EU-funded project CoSyne ( FP7-ICT-4-248531).
123
References
X . Carreras , I . Chao , L . Padro ?, and M . Padro ?. 2004.
FreeLing : An Open-Source Suite of Language Analyzers . In Proceedings of the 4th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference ( LREC 2004), volume 4.
I . Dagan and O . Glickman . 2004. Probabilistic Textual Entailment : Generic Applied Modeling of Language Variability . In Proceedings of the PASCAL Workshop of Learning Methods for Text Understanding and Mining.
M.C . De Marneffe , B . MacCartney , and C.D . Manning . 2006. Generating Typed Dependency Parses from Phrase Structure Parses . In Proceedings of the 5th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference ( LREC 2006), volume 6, pages 449?454.
M . Faruqui and S . Pado ?. 2010. Training and Evaluating a German Named Entity Recognizer with Semantic Generalization . In Proceedings of the 10th Conference on Natural Language Processing ( KONVENS 2010), Saarbru?cken , Germany.
J.R . Finkel , T . Grenager , and C . Manning . 2005. Incorporating Nonlocal Information into Information Extraction Systems by Gibbs Sampling . In Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics ( ACL 2005).
P . Gamallo and I . Gonzalez . 2011. A grammatical formalism based on patterns of part of speech tags . International Journal of Corpus Linguistics , 16(1):45?71.
T . Joachims . 1999. Advances in kernel methods . chapter Making largescale support vector machine learning practical , pages 169?184. MIT Press , Cambridge,
MA , USA.
P . Koehn , H . Hoang , A . Birch , C . Callison-Burch , M . Federico , N . Bertoldi , B . Cowan , W . Shen , C . Moran , R . Zens , C . Dyer , O . Bojar , A . Constantin , and E . Herbst . 2007. Moses : Open Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation . In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics , Demonstration Session ( ACL 2007).
M . Kouylekov and M . Negri . 2010. An Open-Source Package for Recognizing Textual Entailment . In Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , system demonstrations ( ACL 2010).
M . Kouylekov , Y . Mehdad , and M . Negri . 2011. Is it Worth Submitting this Run ? Assess your RTE System with a Good Sparring Partner . Proceedings of the EMNLP TextInfer 2011 Workshop on Textual Entailment.
Y . Mehdad , M . Negri , and M . Federico . 2010. Towards CrossLingual Textual Entailment . In Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( NAACL HLT 2010).
Y . Mehdad , M . Negri , and M . Federico . 2011. Using Bilingual Parallel Corpora for CrossLingual Textual Entailment . In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Human Language Technologies ( ACL HLT 2011).
Y . Mehdad , M . Negri , and M . Federico . 2012. Match without a Referee : Evaluating MT Adequacy without Reference Translations . In Proceedings of the Machine Translation Workshop ( WMT2012).
M . Negri and Y . Mehdad . 2010. Creating a Bilingual Entailment Corpus through Translations with Mechanical Turk : $100 for a 10-day Rush . In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazons ? Mechanical Turk.
M . Negri , L . Bentivogli , Y . Mehdad , D . Giampiccolo , and A . Marchetti . 2011. Divide and Conquer : Crowdsourcing the Creation of CrossLingual Textual Entailment Corpora . Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP 2011).
M . Negri , A . Marchetti , Y . Mehdad , L . Bentivogli , and D . Giampiccolo . 2012. Semeval2012 Task 8: Crosslingual Textual Entailment for Content Synchronization . In Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation ( SemEval 2012).
F.J . Och and H . Ney . 2000. Improved Statistical Alignment Models . In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( ACL 2000).
S . Pado ?, 2006. User?s guide to sigf : Significance testing by approximate randomisation.
A.N . Rafferty and C.D . Manning . 2008. Parsing Three German Treebanks : Lexicalized and Unlexicalized Baselines . In In Proceedings of the ACL 2008 Workshop on Parsing German.
124
