DISCOURSE : CODESANDCLUESINCONTEXTS
Jane J . Robinson
Artificial Intelligence Center
SRI International , Menlo Park , California
Some of the meaning of a discourse is encoded in its linguistic forms  . Thls is the truth conditional meaning of the propositions those forms express and entail  . Some of the meaning is suggested ( or ' implicated ' , as Grice would say ) by the fact that the encooer expresses just those propositions in just those linguistic forms in just the given contexts \  [2\]   . The first k lnd of meaning is usually labeled ' semantics '  ; it is decoded . The second Is usually labeled'pragmatlcs' ; it is inferred from clues provided by code and context  . Both kinds of meaning are related to syntax in ways that we are coming to understand better as work continues in analyzing language and constructing processing models for communl catlon  . We are also coming to a better understanding of the relationship between the perceptual and conceptual structures that organize human experience and make it encoda blain words  . ( Cf . \[ I\],\[4\] . ) I see thls progress in understanding not as the result of a revolution in the paradigm of computational linguistics in which one approach to natural language processing is abandoned fo ran other  , but rather as an expansion of our ideas of what both language and computers can do  . We have been able to incorporate what we learned earlier in the game in a broader approach to more significant tasks  . 
Certalnly within the last twenty years , the discipline of computational linguistics has expanded its view of its object of concern  . Twenty years ago , that v lew was focussed on a central aspect of language  , language as code\[3\] . The paradigmatic task of our dlsclpll nethen was to transform a message encoded in one language into the same message encoded In another  , using dictionaries and syntactic rules . ( Originally , the task was not to translate but to transform the input as an ald to human translators  . ) Colncldentally , those were the days of batch processing and the typical inputs were scientific texts--written monologues that existed as completed  , static discourses before process lnK began . Then came interactive processing , brlnglng with It the opportunity for what is now called ' dialogue ' between user and machine  . At the same time , and perhaps not wholly colnoldentally , another aspect of language be came salient for computational linguistics -- the aspect of language as behavior  , with two or more people using the code to engage in purposeful ~ communication  . The inputs now include discourse in which the amount of code to be interpreted continues to grow as participants in dialogue interact  , and their interactions become part of the contexts for on-golng  , dynamic interpretation . 
The paradigmatic task now Is to simulate in non-t rivial ways the procedures by which people reach conclusions about what is in each other's minds  . 
Performing this task still requires processing language as code  , but it also requires analyzing the code in a context  , to identify clues to the pragmatic meaning of its use  . One way of representing thls enlarged task to conceive of it as requiring three concentric klnds of knowledge : a intrall ngulatl c knowledge  , or knowledge of the code ? interllngulst lc knowledge  , or knowledge of linguistic behavior ? extrnll ngulst lcknowledge  , or knowledge of the perceptual and conceptual structures that language users have  , the things they attend to and the goals they pursue The papers we will hear today range over techniques for identify lr ~  , representing and applying the various kinds of knowledge for the processing of discourse  . 
McKeown exploits intralln gulstic knowledge for extralingulstic purposes  . When the goal of a request for new information is not uniquely identlfiabte  , she proposes to use syntactic transformations of the code of the request to clarify its ambiguities and ensure that its goal is subsequently understood  . Shanon is also concerned with appropriateness of answers  , and reports an investigation of the extralinguistic conceptual structuring of space that affects the pragmatic rules people follow in furnishing appropriate information in response to questions about where things are  . 
Sidner identifies various kinds of intrallnguistic clues a discourse provides that indicate what entities occupy the focus of attention of discourse patic lpants as discourse proceeds  , and the use of focusing ( an extrall ngul stlcprc ~ ess ) tq control the inferences made in identifying the referents of pronominal anaphora  . 
Levin and Hutchlns on analyze the clues in reports of spatial reasoning that lead to identification of the point of vlew of the speaker towards the entities talke O about  . Llke Sldner , they use syntactic clues and tlke Shanon , they seek to identify the conceptual structures that underlie behavior  . 
Code and behavior interact with intentions in ways that are still mysterious but clearly important  . The last two papers stress the fact that using language is intentional behavior and that understanding the purposes a discourse serves is a necessary part of understanding the discourse itself  . Mann claims that dialogues are comprehensible only because participants provide clues to each other that make available knowledge of the goals being pursued  . Alien and Perrault note that intention per vades all three layers of discourse  , pointing out that , in order to be successful , a speaker must intend that the hearer recognize his intentions and infer his goals  , but that these intentions are not signaled in any simple way in the code  . 
In all of these papers , language is viewed as providing both codes for and clues to meaning  , so that when it is used in discourse , Its forms can be decoded and their import can be grasped  . As language users , we know that we can know , to a surprising extent , what someone else means for us to know . ~ e also sometimes know that we don't know what someone else means rotus to know  . As computational linguists , we are ~ rying to figure out precisely how we know such things  . 
REFERENCE3\[I\]Chafe , W . L .  1977 . Creativity in Verbalization and Its Implications for the Nature of Stored Knowledge  . 
In : Freedle , R . O . ( ed ) . , << Discourse Production alld Comprehension > , Voi . I , pp .  41-55 . Ablex : Nor , wood , New
Jersay.
\[2\] Grlce , P . H .  1975 . Logic and Conversation . In : Davldson , D . and Har~n , G . ( eds . ), << The Logic of Gr-mmAr > . Dlcker ~ on : Enclno , California \ [3\] Halit day , M . A . K .  1977 . Languoras Code and Language as Rahavlour . In : Lamb , S . and Makkai , A . 
( eds .), < ? Semlotlcs of Culture and Lan~p~age>.
\[~\] Mlller , G . A . and Johnson-Lalrd , P . N .  1976 . 
<< Lang1 ~ e and Perception > . Harvard University Press:
Cambridge , Massachusetts
