WHEREqUESTIONS
Benny Shanon
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Consider question ( i ) , and the answers to it , (2)-( h ) ~
( i ) Where is the Empire State Building ?
(2) In New York.
(3) In the U.S.A.
( h ) On 3hth Street and 3rd Avenue.
When ( i ) is posed in California ( 2 ) is the appropriate answer to it . This is the case even though ( 3 ) and ( h ) are also true characterizations of the location of the Empire State Building  . The pattern of appropriateness alters , however , when the locale where the question presented changes  . Thus , when ( i ) is asked in Israel , (3) is the appropriate answer , whereas when it is asked in Manhattan , ( I ~) is the answer that should be given . 
The foregoing observations , originally made by Rumelhart ( 197 h ) and by Norman ( 1973 )  , suggest the following . 
First , it is not enough for answers to questions to be ( semantically ) true , they have to be ( pragmatically ) appropriate as well . Second , appropriateness is not solely determined by the content of the particular prop-ositions in question  , but also by the identity of the participants in the particular conversational situation and their locale  . In other words , for a person--or for a machine , for that matter--to answer questions , it is not enough to survey one's memory and retrieve information pertaining to the query posed  , rather--a selection algorithm has to be used so that an appropriate response would be given  . The specification of such a selection algorithm is the topic of the present invest-igation  . 
The following discussion is based on what is known as the Room Theory : the original  , albeit preliminary , model proposed by Rumelhart ( 197~ ) in order to account for his insightful observations  . It ry to examine the psychological validity of this model  , and to propose amendments and extensions to it on the basis of empirical data  . 
Theory . '\[~le correspondence between the data and the Theory is on two counts  . First , there is the seemingly trivial observation that answer stO different questions are given on diff  , : rent levels . Specifically , there is a correlation between the level of the object which is queried and the room on which the respective answer is given  . Second , and less trivial , is the observation that answers vary not only with the questions  , but also with the spatial relationship which holds between the object of the question and the participants in the conversation  . Several loci in the data are indicative of this last pattern  . First none of the Americans indicated that the Empire State Building was " in the U  . S . " , bu ~ a third of the Israelis didso ; further , some of the Americans , but none of the Israelis , indicated that the building was " in Manhattan " . Second , asked about New York City , almost all Israelis , but none of the Americans , answered on the country level . Further , the distribution of the answer patterns furnished by the members of each group changed according to whether the queried city was their own  , or close/distant from it . Finally , children's answers to questions about objects also vary with how distant the object is  . 
Above , however , I have qualified the correspondence between the data and the theory  ; this qualification should now be clarified . I don't think it is meaningful to Judge the validity of a modelllke the Room Theory by examining the percentage of cases in which its predictions hold  . Such a percentage may reflect the structure of the domain  ( questions ) under investigation , and it need not be indicative of the adequacy of the model as such  . The term " by and large " is , however , of qualit-ative significance . It indicates that unless other factors or reasons are operative  , answers to where questions do , indeed , follow the RoomA/gorithm . The detection of these " other factors and reasons "  , their classification and the characterization of the answer types that correspond to them is the main theme of this discussion  . Following , then , are the answer patterns which do not conform with the Room Theory  . 
The Room Theory " posits the existence of a psychologic-alroom relative to which distances are reckoned  . The room corresponds to the smallest geographical region that encompasses both the reference location of the conversants and the location of the places in question "  . 
When answering where-questions " the rule is to find the smallest room which Just includes the reference location and the answer location  . The appropriate answer is the next smallest geographical unit which contains the loc-ation in question  , but axcludes the reference location " . 
( Rumelhart , 1975) . The answers generated by this algorithm , note , constitute the placing of the item questioned in a room which is larger than it  ; henceforth answers of this type will be called vertical  . 
In order to examine the Room Theory , questions regarding places in the world as well as objects in a  ( concrete ) room were presented to several subject populations : college students in Israel and the U  . S . , American children of three age groups , and aphasic patients . 
The present report concentrates on the adult data , and only cursory remarks will be made on the answers furn-is hed by the other populations  . First , I will discuss answers so licited by an open questionnaire  , in which subjects were asked to give one answer to the questions posel to them  ; later , answers solicited by closed questionnaires will be discussed  . 
First , it should be noted that by and large the answers given by subjects were the ones predicted by the Room First  , consider questions about l and m-~ks in the towns in which the conversation took place  . Most of the answers which involved vertical placement were given on the level of the town itself  , i . e . on a level which is higher than the one predicted by the Room Theory  . The other answers were not vertical , but rather horizontal : the object questioned was related to another object similar to it  . In other words , either the level specified by the Room Theory was changed  , or the type of answer ( i . e . 
the generation algorithm itself ) was altered . These deviant answers are viewed as two 81ternative solutions to the problem of the floor effect . Specifically , as one goes down the place hierarchy , the specification of rooms between the target and the least common room is cumber some  ; indeed , there might not be simple names by which reference to these rooms may be made  . Subjects solve this problem either by staying on the level of the least common room or by shifting to the horizontal strate ~  ,   . 
The same problem is noted with the ceil in ~ effect  , namely , with questions regarding objects which are very high on the place hierarchy : continents for adults  , countries for children and aphasic patients . The answers in these cases were varied , a feature which attests the algOr--ithm/c difficulty associated with them  . Only a minority of the answers conformed with the Room Theory and most answers were horizontal  . Other answer types were : vacuous , in which a vertical answer was given on too high a level  ( e . g . " in the world ") , featural , in which was given ( e . g . " it is a continent ") , or t autological ( e . g . " Japan is in Japan ") . The di~'ferent answer types , we shall say , are the product so ~ different alternat ive answer generation algorithms  . The numerical distribu-tion of these answers suggest that the order of prefer-ence for the application of the algorithms as the one noted above  . 
There were also cases in which subjects gave answers on a level lower than the one predicted by the Room Theory  . 
Thus , half the Israelis placed the Empire State Building T in New York "  , and not " in the U . S . " Similarly , all the Americans asked about the Eiffel Tower answered " in Paris "  , and not " in France " . These patterns are attributed to promlnence . Prominent objects are ones which gain a higher ra - ~ in the placeh/erarchy than would be attributed to them on semantic classificatory grounds alone  . As a consequence , these objects are placed in a room which is more specific then the one predicted by the Room Theory  . For instance , New York City is not conceived of by non -Americans as Just another American city  ; it gains an autonomy of its own and is conceived of as independent of the country in which it is located  . 
The prominence effect suggests that rather than interpreting the room-hierarchy in a concrete fashion  ( i . e . 
as isomorphic to the spatial relations which hold in the physical world  )  , one should view it as an abstract conceptual representation  . In this representation , ob-Jects ere associated with ta~s : usually , objects which are actually contained in objects of order n are assign-ed a tag of order n ? l  , but prominent objects are assign-ed tags of the same order as the objects which actually contain them  . Thus , if the Empire State Building is tagged n?l both New York and the U  . S . are tngged n , for the Israel is the least com-~n room ( order n-l ) is the northern hemisphere , and the answer is given on the lev-el of the t ~ o rooms of order n  . Thus , the seemingly unexpected answers associated with prominent objects are due to the modified abst ract representations  , not to a change in the ( vertical ) algorithm proper . 
The salience effect is similar , but distinct . Objects which are close to ones which standia a particular rel-ation to the respondent  ( i . e . physically close , emotionally dear , or belonging to the subject ) are not placed in a room but receive horizontal answers instead  . For example , all the Israel is answered that Lebanon was " north of Israel "  , and not that it was " in the Mid-East " . Similarly , all the Americans ( and half of the Israells ) placed Canada in relation to the U . S . Unlike the prominence effect , the salience effect does affect the answer generation algorithm itself  , and it bears on individual or cultural differences  , not on general sem-antic com-lder at lons . 4 Specifically , items whicher especial to the speaker are tagged in the representation as marked  , and this triggers a shift from the vertical to the horizontal algorlthm  . 
All questions considered so far involved one configuration : the two conversants and the target were physically distinct  , and together they could he contained in one COmmOnroom  . This , however , is not the only possible con?iguratlon . Other confi & ~ a ratious , are possible as well : ( a ) The conversants and the target may coincide in place  , as in the question ' ~ here are we now ?" . 
( b ) The conversants ~ ay be contained in the target , as in the question " Where is Israel ? " when Posed in Jerus-alem  . (c ) The conversants may be in different places , as in phone conversations . 
Strictly speaklng , the Room Algorithm does not apply to these configuratlons  . Thus , in ( b ) the least common room is one level above that of the target  , but on what level would the answer be ? The Room Algorithm would either return the respondent to the place queried or else require detailed and perhaps cumbers om D classific-atlons  , neither option is taken . All the answers to the questions noted were given on the room immediately above the target  . In ( a ) aleast common room may not be circumscribed in the manner outlined by the Room Algorithm  , whereas in ( c ) a distinction between the speaker and the hearer has to be introduced  . All these cases suggest that the different confi ~ J rations do invoke different generation algorithms  . Hence , an appraisal of the con-Flguration is necessary prior to the application of the answer-generation algorithm proper  . 
So far , the discussion was topological , considering only the spatial configuration holding between the conversants and the object questioned  . The respondent's knowledge of the world was not taken into account  . In order to prove the psychological validi ty of an answer generation algorithm it is crucial to demonstrate that the answer given is chosen from a class of several feasible answers  , and is not the only one possible due to a limited database  . This was the purpose of the closed questionnaires . 
Two such questionnaires were administered : first , sub-Jests were asked to choose the best of several answers given to them  ; then they were asked to mark all the answers they deemed true  . Three points were of interest . 
First , the answers given in the first two conditions were not necessarily the most specified ones marked in the third  . Second , there were answers in the multiple option condition which were evidently true and commonly known but which were nonetheless not marked by subjects  . 
These answers included reversed prominence ( i . e . the relation of a prominent object to a less prominent one  )  , featural answers and ones which were too high on the place hierarchy  . Third , an " ~ don't know " answer on the open question ns /redid not necessarily imply a no-answer in the other conditions  . In other words , this answer does not signify complete ignorance , but rather an appreciation on the part of the subject that he cannot f~u'nish the answer he deemmap propriate  . Together , the three points indicate that there is indeed a psy-chological process of answer- generation which does not amount to the specification Of the most detailed information one has regarding the object in question  . 
Still another aspect which has to be considered is the speaker's intention when heposes a question  . A study ~ this aspect is just on its way now and at this point  , I have to limit myself only to a methodological discuss-ion  . Evidently , the process of question-answering requires an appraisal of intention  ( of . Lehnert ,  !978) , one which involves the evaluation of various contertual  , personal and sociological factors . In order to make research feasible , as well as constructive , a factor-izatlon of the domain of question -answering  , I believe , is needed . In this regard the topological , knowledge and intention aspects were noted . The original Room Theory is an attempt to define the topological aspect  . 
The present study shows that even for this 8spect this Theory is not sufficient . The present discussion sugg-ests that an extended topological theory should consist of the following components : I  . Semantic and episodic representations , which are not isomorphic to the physically ( logically ) defined room-hierarchy . 
2 . Determinants of confi ~ I rations and problematic cases  ( floor , ceiling ) . 
3 . A set of ordered answer-generation algorithms : vertical place ~ nent  ( the algorithm proposed by the Room Theory )  , horizontal relation , featural des-crlption and non-informatlve ( vacuous , tautolog-
Ical )?
Definitely , the topological consideration is not suffic-ient for the characterization of how people answer where questions  . Future investigations should ex~cend the research and also include considerations of k ~ owledge and intention  . At this Juncture , however , we can no~e knowledge alone , and that some formal selection algorithms have to be postulated  . The formal study of such al ~ or ithms is of relevance to the study of both natural and artificial intelligence  . 

Lehnert , W.G . The process of question answering.
Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates , Hillsdale , N . J .  ? 1978 . 
Norman , D . Memory , knowledge and the answering of questions . In R . Solso ( Ed . ) Contemporar ~ Issues in Cognitive Psycholo ~ s ' , Washington , D . C . : E . Winston , 1973 . 
Rumelhart , D . The Room Theory . Unpublished manuscript , The University of California at San Diego , 197 h . 

