PI~OSI'ECTSFORCOMI ' UTER-
ASSISTEDDIALECTA1) APTION
David J . Weber
UCI , A and Summer Institute of Linguistics
William C . Mann
USC Information Sciences Institute
When a document is to appear ill several dialects or closely related langu-Res  , there are many practical reasons for adapting It from one to another rather than preparing separate translations  . I Iowever , manual adaptlon can be tedious , errorful , and requires a bidialectal adaptor ( often unavailable ) and/or qualified linguist ( if available , very expensive ) . Computer-aided adaption might be an alternat ive  , but Is it feasible to write a computer program which contributes enough to be worth the bother and cost ? For the source dialect  ( $ D ) is provided a root dictionary and a suffix dictionary  ; each entry contains the string of characters by which that morpheme is recognized  , morphological category , morphophonemic properties . . . . and for roots , the "0 for,n . For each target dialect ( TD ) is provided a suffix dictionary , a list of the regular sound changes ( RSC's ) which when applied to a " Oroot will yield the correct TI reflex  , and a list of pairs of roots not cognate in the SD and TD  , This paper describes an experiment in comput attonally assisting tile adapt  ; on of text from one dialect of central Peruvian Quechua  ( a polysynthetic , al : glutinative . American Indian language ) to ~ everal others . The overall results are extremely encouraging : computer-aided dialect adapt to n is feasible and has important advantages over entirely manual methods  . 
Bolow we describe the dialect situation , the data and processes of the experimental program  , and a field test of text produced by the program . 
Six dialects differing phonologically , lexically , and l ; rannatl cally were involved . The richdlv crsity of differences are dominated by a few kinds of systematic diffe rence  . The program treats these classes of difference separately rather than by a single method  ( such as string substitution ) : this requires a detailed analysis of the source dialect text  . 
Examples of the kinds of dlfferences involved : Phonolog  . i cah the reflexes of four proto-Ouechua ( ' O ) phonemes ( '/~ /' l ~ /' fMf/fl/ ) -- in the government-mandated orthography--are : Panao:trch IIJi  . Huallaga : chch\]I if . 
Dos-de-Mayo : cht ~ In . l , lata : chsIn . Yanahuanca:t , xrtssIn . 
and Junln : trchIn.
I , -xlcah'to~et well/recover from an illnes ~' i ~ expressed with the root al lchaka:-in Iiu allaga  , aliya : - inl , lata , and kachaka:-In Junin . 
Granmatl cah 1 ) Morphologica ha suffix may be present In one dialect and absent in another  ; the forms or properties of corresponding suff ixes may difier across dialects  ; there are different syMems of lndt cat lnf ' , plurality within the verb . , in some dialects there are 35 distinct plurallzers occurring in diffe rent " slots " and conditioned by what other suf fixes occur in the word  ; In others there is only one pluralizor wh ich has a fixed posit/on  ;  ~- ) Syntactic : the complements of p has alverbs ( ' begin ' , ' finish ' . . . ) are subordlnatod as adverbial clauses in some dialects but as infinitival  ( object ) clauses in others . 
ATD root dictionary Is computatlonally der ived by I  ) applying the RSC's to the " Q form of each $ D root and ~-  ) substituting the TD root for non-cognate root pairs  . 
T c , x t is adapted word by word , first analyzing SD words and then synthesiz ingTI  ) words . ( An early penct l-and-lmper ,   , xperi ; nentsul % ~ , ested that for Oue chua , word-by-word methods could effect approx imately  95% of the require de hange , ~ . ) After orthographic adjustments , a simple . 
recursiv c , exhaustive search attempts to decompose each word Into a root and zero or more suffixes by match ing the word's characters to the strings of characters of dictionary entries subject to constraints of a built-in morphology  . Tests are applied 1 ) during the search to teat the suitability of a matching suffix as the immediate succe ~ or to what precedes  , and 2 ) after all the word is matched to morphemes to test the  . overall suitability of that sequence of morphemes  . 
Th-sctests constrain possible decompositions to within managable ltnlits  . Word decomposltioq is complicated by various morphophonemic processes  . 
Pluralization differences are accommodated by  1  ) tagging as plural each decomposition which contains a plural morpheme  , 2) deleting that plural morpheme , and 3 ) inserting the appropriate pluralize ! for the TD word  . 
,Synthesis of a TD word proceeds by 1 ) substituting the SD root by the corresponding TD root from the  ( : oiu putationaily derived TI root dict imary  , Z ) selecting for each morpheme the correctal lo morph  , 3) concatenation of the allomorphs , and 4) orthographic adjustment . Examples are shown in Figure 1 . 
Many words have multiple decompositions butth is is tolerable because synthesis of al ternative decompositions of one  5D word usually yield identical TD words . Nonidentical alternatives for one SD word are left to the choice of the human editor / checker  . 
About 40 pages of text were adapted into each of 5 target dialects for use in the field test . Sampling indicates that the computer correctly changed about  760 morphemes per 1000 words of text ; in the worst case native speakers The word analyzer produces  , in succession : length converted : ( 2 ) a y warkay kan$egment at lon: ( 3 ) aywa-rka-yka-n morphophone micform : ( 4 ) say wa-RKA-YKA:-3DlurJ dify handled: ( 5 )   ( taywa-YKA:-3 )  . t4 = L The word synthesizer produces , in succession : re-plu , alizalion : ( 6 ) IIywi-YKA:-YA:-3 allomorph selection : ( 7 ) aywa-yka :- ye-nTD or ' thoQf'aphic form : ( 8 ) aywaykasyan ' lhey are joins "
Figure I suggested about 190 additional changes per 000 words . The computer converted text which otherwise would have been at best only marginally lntell it ~lble to a speaker of another dialect into--wi thafe w exceptions -- fully comprehensible text  . Thus the program brings a text being adapted close enough to the TD that it can be edited /corrected by a native speaker of the TD without much coaching or reference to the  3D text . 
Since Inevitably there is a non-trivial residue of changes Infeasible for the computer  , its output requires subsequent manual correcting /editing  . Therefore , rather than strive to make the program do everything imaginable  , it is wise to do the overwhelming number of systemic  , " low level " changing and not unduly complicate the prol~ram to accommodate oo much  . The test identified many relatively infrequent changes not handled by the present program  . For most of them , computational daptlon is not feasible . These are discus . sod in a version of this paper which has been published by Note ~~  . Linguistics . $ IL . It is available from The International Linguistics Center  , 7500 Camp Wisdom Road , Dallas TX 75236 for $ . 75  , as Special Publication 1 , Prospects for Compttter-Assistod Dialect Adeption  . 
Conclusion : A computer can contribute sign if icantly to adaption between dialects or closely related languages  . 
(9 ) ly wirkar in an pq ( 10 ) lywirks : rinnpsa ( li ) ly Wl-rka-:ri-na-n-pCl ( l2 ) saywi-RKU-: RI-NA-3P-PAQ ( 13 )   ( eaywa-RKU-NA-3P-PAO )  . ( . PL (  4 ) eaywa-RKU-YA:-NA-3P-PAO ( 15 ) ly ws-rku-ya:-nl-n-paq ( i6 ) sywsrkuya ananpa Q ' in order that they 8o '
