DIKSIGNFORI ) IALOGUE COMPREHENSION
William C . Mann
USC Information Sciences Institute
Marina del Rey , CA
April , 1979
This paper describes aspects of the design of a dialogue comprehension system  , DCS , currently being Implemented . It concentrates on a few design innovations rather than the description of the whole system  . The three areas of innovation discussed are : 1 . The relation of the DCS design to SpeechAct theory and Dialogue Game theory  , Z . Design assumptions about how to identify the " best " interpretation among several alternatives  , and a method , called Preeminence Scheduling , for implementing those assumptions ,  3 . A now control structure , tlear say-3 , that extends the control structure of l learsay-l \[ and makes Preeminence Scheduling fairly straightforward  . 
I . Dialogue Games , Speech Acts and DCS--Examination of actual human dialogue reveals structur extending over ? ~ overalturns and corresponding to part lcular issues that the participants raise and resolve  . Our past work on dialogue has led to an account of this structure  , Dialogue Game theory fLor in & Moore 1978; Moore , l , evlu & Mann 1977\] . This theory claims that dialogues ( and other language uses as well ) are comprehensible only because the participants are making available to each other the knowledge of the goals they are pursuing  , at ~ hep ~ om cnt , Patterns of these goals recur , representing language conventions : their theoretical representations are called Dialogue Games  . 
If a speaker employs a particular Dialogue Game , that fact must be recognized by the hearer if the speaker is to achieve the desired effect  . In other words , Dialogue Game recognition is an essential part of dialogue comprehension  . 
Invoking a game is an act , and terminating the ongoing use of a game is also an act  . 
Dialogue game theory has recently boon extended \ [ Mann  1079\] in a way makes these game-related acts explici t Acts of Bidding a game  , Accepting abid , and Bidding termination are formally defined as speech acts  , comparable to others In speech act theory . So , for example , in the dialogue fragment below , 
Ct " Morn , l'm hungry."
M . "" Did you do a good Jobon your Geography homework ?" the first turn bids a game called the Permission Seeking game  , and the second turn refuses that bid and bids the
Information 5 caking game.
DCS is designed to recognize people's use of dia logue / ~  . ames in transcripts . For each utterance , it builds a hierarchlal structure representing how the utterance performs certa in acts  , the goals that the acts serve , endthngo alstructure that makes the combination of acts coherent  . 
(The data structure holding this information is described holow in the discussion of l  learsay-3  . ) II . Preeminence Scheduling -- It seems inevitable that any system capable of forming the " correct " interpretation of most natural langua ~  , e usage will usually be able to find sever a lother interpretations  , given enough opportunity . It is also inevitable that choices bomade , implicitly or explicitly , among interpretations . The choices will correspond to some Internal notion of quality  , also possibly implicit . The notion of quality may vary . but the necessity of makin /' , such choices does not rest on the particular notion of quality we use  . Clearly , it is also important o avoid choosing a single interpretation when there are several nearly equally attractive ones  . 
What methods do we have for making such choices ?
Consider three approaches.
I . First-find . . The f i rst Interpretat ion discovered wh ich satisfies well-form cdnessi chosen  . The effectiveness of first-find depends on having well-informed  , selective processes at every choice point , and is only reasonable if one's expectations about what might be said are very good  . Even then , this method will select incorrect interpretations  . 
Z . Bounded search and ranked choice . Interpretations are generated by a bounded -effort search  , each is assigned an individual quality . score of some sort , and the best is chosen . While this will not miss good but unexpected interpretations missed by first-find  , it is wrong in at least two ways : a ) it selects an interpretation ( and discards others ) when the quality difference between interpretations i in significant  , and b ) it expends unnecessary resources making absolute quality Judgments where only relative Judgments are needed  . These defect suggest an lmprovemenh3 . Preeminence selection = perform a bounded-effort search for interpretations  , and then select as beat the one ( if any ) having a certain threshold amount of demonstrable preferability over its competitors  . 
The key to corre::t choice is determination that such a threshold difference in quality exists  . DCS is designed to identify preeminent interpretations  . 
Consider the information content in the fact that the best two interpretations have a quali ty differenc exceeding a fixed threshold  . This fact is sufficient to choose an in terp retation  , and yet it carries less information than is carried in a set of quality scores for the same set of interpretations  . C~omputa Uonal efficiencies are available because the work of creating the excess in format ion can be avoided by proper design  . 

Given stentative quality scoring of one's alternatives  , several kinds of computations can be avoided . For the highestranked interpretation , it is pointless to perform computations whose only effect is to confirm or supporthe interpretation  ,   ( even thong h we expect that for correct interpretations the ways to show confirmation will be numerous  )  , since these will only drive its score higher . 
For interpretations with inferior ranks , it is likewise pointless to perform computations that refute them  ( although we expect hat refutations of poor interpretations will be numerous  )  , since these will only drive their scores lower . Neither of these is relevant to demonstrating preeminence  . 
Given effective controls , computation can concentrate on refuting good interpretation ? and supporting weak ones  . 
( Of " course , such computations will sometimes move 8 new interpretation i to the role of highe?t -renked  . They may also destroy an eppsrent preeminence . ) If the gap in quality rat ing between the highest ranked interpretation end the next one rams/no significant  , then proem/nonce has been demonstrated . 
Further efficlencles are possible provided that the maximum qualityr?ting improvement front untr/ed support computation ? can be predicted  , since it is then posst blo to find case ? for wh ich them ? ximum support of ? low-ranked interpretation would not eliminate an existing preeminence  . 
Similar efficlencies can arise from predicting the max/mum loss  6f quality available from untr/ed refuter/one . This approach ls being implemented in DCS , IIL Control Structure --? new AI programming environment called  Hearsey-3 is being implemented at ISI for use in development of several systems  . It is an augmentation and major revision of some of the control and data structure ideas found in He?rsey-ll\[Lesser & Erman  19773  , but it is independent of the speech-understandlng task  .   Hecruy-3 retains lnter precess communice tion by means of global " blackboards  , " end it represents its process knowledge in many specialized " knowledge source "  ( KS ) processes , which nominate themselves at appropriate t/rues bY looking at the blackboard  , and then are opportunistically scheduled for execution  . Blackbcerds are divided into " levels " that typically contain distinct kinds of state knowledge  , the distinctions being ~ jed as a gross fi lter on which future KS computation ? ere considered  . 
Hearsay-3retsi , s the idea of a domain-knowledge blackboard ( BB )  , and it adds a knowledge source scheduling blackboard  ( SBB ) as well . Items on the SBB are opportunities to exercise particular scheduling specls lists celled 
Schedulln ~ Knowledge Sources ( SKS).
The SBBIs ? nideal data structure For implement in ~ Prominence scheduling  . In DCS the SBB has four levels , called Refutation , Support , Evaluation and Ordinary-consequence . These correspond to a factoring of the domain K5 into four groups according to their effects . 
Knowledge sources in each of these groups nominata themselves onto a different level of the SBB  . The scheduling-knowledge sources ( SKS ) perform preeminence scheduling ( when a suitable range of alternatives ls available  ) by selecting available Refutation level opportunities for the highestranked interpretation and Support level opportunities for inferior ones  .   ( The SBB and SKS Features of HearMy-3 ? reonly two of its many innovation ? . ) The DCSB8 has 6 levels , named Text . Word-sense ? , Syntax , Proposition ? , Speech-acts ? nd Goals . Goals and goal structures , which ? rerequired in any successful analysis , only arise as explanations of speech acts . The KS used for deriving speech acts from utterances ? reseperete from those deriving goals from speech acts  . The hierarchic data structure representing an interpretation of ? nutterance consists of units at vsr tou ~ level ? on the  He?rsey-3 blackboard . 
USING DCS
These Innovations and sever ? lothers will be tested in DCS in ? ttempts to comprehend human dialogue ~ athered from non-laboratory situ?tton  ?  .   ( One of these L5 A polloastron autoground communication . ) Transertpis of actual interpersonal dialogue ? ? rep?rtlcularly advantageous as study materiel  , because they show the effects of ongo in ~ communication?d because they are free of the bieses and narrow view ? inev/table in made-up example ?  . 

The work reported here was supported by NSF Grant

REFERENCES
Lessor , V . R . , and L . D . Erms n , "A Retrospective View of the HEARSAY-II Architecture  , " Fl\[t ~ Int ~ n ~ lovt ~ Joint Con\[trtncton Arti \[ icl ~ In tctlif ~ ct  . Cambridge , MA , 1977 . 
Lenin , J . A . , and J . A . Moore , " Dialogue Gamosz Meta-communication Structures for Natural Language Interaction  , " Coenitive Science .  1,4, 1978 . 
Moore , J . A . , J . A . Levin , ? ndW . C . Mann , " A Goal-oriented Model of Human IN a lot ~ ue , " flmerl can Journal of Computational Lin?uistics . microfiche #67, 1977 . 
Mann , W . C . , " Dialogue Games , " in MODEL SOF pI4qLOGUE . 
K . Hlntlkka , st ~!( ads . ) North Holland Press , 1979 . 

