Plans , Inference , and Indirect Speech Acts I
James F . Allen
Computer Science Department
University of Rochester
Rochester , NY Iq 627
C . Raymond Perrault
Computer Science Department
University of Toronto
Toronto , Canada MSSIA7

One of the central concerns of a theory of pra~at ics is to explain what actions language users perform by making utterances  . This concern is also relevant to the des igners of conversational language understand ing systems  , especially those intended to cooperate with a user in the execution of some task  ( e . g .   , the Computer Consultant task discussed in Walker  \[1978\]  )  . 
All actions have effects on the world , and may have preconditions which must obtain for them to be successfully executed  . For actions whose execution causes the generation of linguistic utterances  ( or s~eeq hacts )  , the preconditions may include the speaker/w rlter holding certain beliefs about the world  , and having certain intentions as to how it should change  ( \[Austin ,  1962\] , \ [ Searle ,  1969\]) . 
In Cohen \[1978\] and Cohen and Perrault \ [1979\] it is suggested that speech acts a ? be defined in the context of a plannln~s~stam  ( e . g . , STRIPS of Fikes and Nllsson\[1971\])i . e . , as a class of parameterlzed procedures called operators  , whose execution can modify the world . 
Each operator is labelled with formulas stating its preconditions and effects  . 
The major problem of a theory of speech acts is relating the form of utterances to the acts which are performed by uttering them  . Several syntactic devices can be used to indicate the speech act being performed : the most obvious are explicit performative verbs  , mood , and intonation . But no combination of these provides a clear , single-valued function from form to illocutionary force  . For example , (1 . a)-(1 . e ) and even (1 . f ) can be requests to pass the salt . 
1.a ) I want you to pass the salt.
1 . b ) Do you have the salt ?1 . c ) Is the salt near you ? 1 . d ) I want the salt . 
1 . e ) Can you pass the salt ?1 . f ) John asked me to ask you to pass the salt . 
Furthermore , all these utterances can also be intended literally in some contexts  . For example , a parent leaving a child at the trainst at ion may ask " Do you know when the train leaves ?" expecting a yes/no answer as a confirm at ion  . 
? This research was supported in part by the National Research Council of Canada under Operating Grant  A9285  . 
ee Unless otherwise indicated , we take " speech act " to be synon~nnous with " illocutionary act  . " The object of this paper is to discuss , at an intuitive level , an extension to the work in Cohen \[1978\] to account for indirect speech acts . Because of space constraints , we will need to depend explicitly on the intuitive meanings of various terms such as p lan  , action , believe , and goal . Those interested in a more rigorous present at ion should see\[Allen  , 1979\] or\[Perrault and Allen , forthcoming \] . The solution proposed here is based on the following slmple and independently motivated hypotheses :  ( 2 . a ) Language users are rational agents and thus speech acts are purposeful  . In particular , they are a means by which one agent can alter the beliefs and goals of another  . 
(2  . b ) Rational agents are frequently capable of identifying actions being performed by o thers and goals being sought  . An essential part of helpful behavior is the adoption by one agent of a goal of another  , followed by an attempt to achieve it . For example , for as to recler k to reply " How many do you want ?" to a customer who has asked " Where are the steaks ? e  , the clerk must have inferred that the customer wants steaks  , and then he must have decided to get them himself  . This might have occurred even if the clerk knew that the custamer had intended to get the steaks himself  . Cooperative behavior must be accounted for independently of speech acts  , for it often occurs without the use of language . 
(2 . c ) In order for a speaker to successfully perform a speech act  , he must intend that the hearer recognize his intention to achieve certain  ( per locutionary ) effects , and must believe it is likely that the hearer will be able to do so  . 
This is the foundation the account of ill ooutionary acts proposed by Straws on \  [196q \] and Searle\ [1969\  ]  , based on Grice\[1957\] . 
(2  . d ) Language users know that others are capable of achieving goals  , of recognizing actions , and of cooperative behavior . Furthermore , they know that others know they know , etc . Thus , a speaker may intend not only that his act ions be recognized but also that his goals be in/erred  , and that the hearer be cooperative . 
(2 . e ) Thus a speaker can perform one speech act A by performing another speech act B if he intends that the hearer recognize not only that B was performed but also that through cooperative behavior by the hearer  , intended by the speaker , the effects of A should be achieved . 

Th__~e Speech Act Model
In the spirit of Searle\[1975\] ; Gordon and Lakoff \[1975\] , and Horgan \[1978\] . we propose an account of speech acts with the following constituents :  (  \ ]  . a ) For each language user S . a model of the beliefs and plans of other language users A with which s/he is coen unicat ing  . Including a model of A's model of S's bel iefs and plans  , etc ,  (3  . b ) Two sets of operators for speech acts : ase to fsurface level operators which are realized by utterances having specific syntactic and semantic features  ( e . g . . mood ) , and a set of lllocutionary level operators whlch are performed by perfoming surface level ones  . The tllocutionary acts model the intent of the speaker Independent of the form of the ut terance  . 
(3  . c ) A set of plausible Inference rules with which language users construct and reco~nlze plans  . 
It Is convenient to view the rules as either simple or augmented : A couple of examples of simple plan recognition rules are : fAction -Effect Znference \] " If agent S believes that agent A wants to do action ACT then it is plaus ible that  3 believes that A wants to achieve the effects of ACT  . "\[ Know-Positive Znferenoe \]" ZfS believes A wants to know whether a proposition P is true  . then it is plausible that S believes that A wants to achieve P  . "Of course , given the conditions in the second inference above  . Smight also infer that A hamagoal of achieving not P  . This is another possible inference . Which applies in a given setting is detemlned by the rating heuristics  ( see 3 . d below ) . 
Simple rules can be augmented by adding the cond it ion that the recognizer believes that the other agent intended him to perfom the infe rence  . An example of an augmented recognition rule i s : " If S believes that A wants S to re  . = ognize A's intention to do ACT . then it is plausible that S believes that A wants S to recognize A's intention to achieve the effects of ACT  . " Notice that the augmented rule is obtained by intrc~uclng " S believes A wants " In the antecedent and consequent of the simple rule  . 
and by interpreting " S recognizes A's intent ion " as " Scomes to believe that A wants  . " Theme rules can be constructed from the simple ones by assuming that language users share a model of the construction and recognition processes  . 
(3 . d ) A set of heuristics to guide plan recogni tion by rating the plausibility of the outcomes  . One of the heuristics iS : " Decrease the plausibility of an outcome in which an agent Is believed to be executing an action whose ef fects he already believes to be true  . " Soripl ~- derived expectations also provide s ~ e of the control of the recognition process  . 
(3 . e ) A set of heuristics to identify the obstacles in the recognized plan  . These are the goals that the speaker cannot easi ly achieve without assistance  . If we assume that the hearer is cooperating with the speaker  , the hearer will usually attempt to help achieve these goals in his response  . 
With these constituents , we have a model of helpful behavior : an agent Shears an utterance from some other agent A  . and then Identifies the surface speech act . 
From this . S applies the inference rules to reconst ructA's plan that produced the utterance  . S can then examine this plan for obstanles and gives helpful response based on them  . However , some of the inference rules may have been augmented by the recognition of intention condition  . Thus . some obstacles may have been intended to be communicated by the speaker  . These specify whettllooutionary act the speaker performed  . 
an Example
This may become clearer if we consider an example  . 
Consider the plan that must be deduced In order to answer  ( 4  . e ) with ( .   . b ) : (~ . a ) A : Do you know when the Winds or train leaves ?   ( 4 . b)S:Yes,at3:15 . 
The seal deduced from the literal Interpret at ion is that  ( 4  . o ) A wants to know whether Sk nows the departure time  . 
From this goal . 3 may infer that A in fact wants (4 . d ) by the Know-Positive Znference : ( .   . d ) A wants S to know the departure time from which Smay infer that  ( q . e ) A wants $ to inform Aot the departure time by the precondition-action Inference  ( not shown )  . Scan then infer , using the action-effect inference , that (4 . f ) A wants to know the departure time . 
S'S response(~ . b ) indicates that habelieved that both (~ . c ) and (4 . f ) were obstacles that S could overcome In this response  . 
However . a sentence such as (4 . a ) could often be uttered in a context where the literal goal is not an obstacle  . For instance . A might already know that $ knows the departure time  . Met still utter (4 . a ) . Xn such cases . A's goals are the same as If hahad uttered the request  ( 4 . g ) When does the Winds or train leave ? Hence(~ . a ) is often referred to as an indirect request . 
Thus we have described two different in terp retations of  ( q . a ) : a ) A said ( q . a ) merely expecting a yes/no answer , but $ answered wlth the extra information in order to be helpful  ; b ) A said (4 . a ) Intending that Sdeduce his plan and realize that A really wants to ~ now the departure t ime  . 

Theoretically , these are very different : ( a ) describes a yes/no question , while ( b ) describes an ( indirect ) request for the departure time . But the distinction is also IM portant for practical reasons  . For instance , assume S is not able to tell A the departure time for some reason  . With interpretation ( a ) , Scan simply answer the question , whereas with interpretation ( b ) , S is obliged to glve a reason for not answering with the departure time  . 
The distinction between these two cases is simply that in the latter  , S believes that A intended S to make the inferences above and deduce the goal  ( q , f ) . Thus the inferences applied above were actual ly augmented inferences as described previous ly  . In the former interpretation , S does not believe A intended S to make the in ferences  , but did anyway in order to be helpful . 
Concludln ~ Remarks
This speech act model was implemented as part of a program which plays the role of a cler kata train station information booth \[ Allen  ,  1979\] . The main results are the following : (5 . a ) (5 . b ) It accounts for a wide class of indirect forms of requests  , assertions , and questions , including the examples in ( I ) . This includes idiomatic forms such as (1 . a ) and non-idlomatl cones such as (1 . f ) . It does so using only a few independently necessary mechanisms  . 
It maintains a distinction between tllocut to nary and per locutionary acts  . In particular , it accounts for how a given response by one par ticipant B to an utterance by A may be the result of different chains of inferences made by B : either B believed the response given was intended by A  , or 8 believed that the response was helpful ( i . e . , non-intended ) . It also shows some ways in which the convers at ional context can favor some interpretations over others  . 
The main objective of our work is to simplify the syntactic and semantic components as much as possible by restricting their domain to literal meanings  . The indirect meanings are then handled at the plan level  . 
There remain several open problems In a theory of speech acts which we believe to be largely independent of the issue of indirection  , notably identifying the features of a text which determine literal tllo cutlonary force  , as well as constructing representations adequate to express the relation between several lllocutionary force indicators which may be present in one sentence  ( see\[Lakoff , 197 q\]and\[Morgan ,  1973\]) . 

Allen , J . F . A Plan-Based Approach to Speech Ac_tt Recognit ion  . Ph . D . thesis , Computer Science Department , University of Toronto ,  1979 . 
Austin , J . L . How To Do Thln~s With Words . New York,
Oxford University Press , 1962.
Brown , G . P . An Approach to Processing Task-Oriented
Dialogue , unpublishedms , MIT , 1978.
Cohen , P . R . On Znowin 6 What to Say : Plannin ~ Speech Acts , TR 118 , Computer Science Department , University of Toronto , January 1978 . 
Cohen , P . R . and Perrault , C . N . Elements of a PlanBased Theory of Speech Acts , forthcoming . 
Cole , P . and Morgan , J . L . Syntax and Semantics , Vol 3: Speech Acts . New York , Academic Press , 1975 . 
Flkes , R . E . and Nllsson , N . J . STRIPS : A New Approach to the Application o f Theorem Proving to Problem Solving  . Artificial Intelli~ence 2 ,  189-205 ,  1971 . 
Gordon , D . and Lakoff , G . Conversational Postulates , in Cole and Morgan ( ads ) ,  1975 . 
Grice , H . H . Meaning . Phil . Rev .  66, 377-388, 1957 . 
Lakoff , O . Syntactic Amalgams . CL__SS 10, 321-3qU , 197 q . 
Morgan , J . L . Sentence Fra~ents and the Notion ' Sentence , ' in B . B . Kachru et al . ( ads ), Issues in Lln~uistics . Urbana , University of Illinois
Press , 1973.
Morgan , J . L . Towards a Rational Model of Discourse Comprehension  , in Proceed in ~ s__2nd Conf . 
Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Procesa in  6  , 
Champaign-Urbana , 1978.
Perrault , C . R . and Allen , J . F . A'Plan-Based Analysis of Indirect Speech Acts  , in preparation . 
Searle , J.R . Speech Acts . New York , Cambridge
University Press , 1969.
Searle , J . R . Indirect Speech Acts , in Cole and Morgan ( eda ) ,  1975 . 
Strawson , P . F . Intention and Convention in Speech Acts . 
Phil . Rev . 73, q39-~60, 196~.
Walker , D . E . Understand in ~ Spoken Language . New York,
North Holland , 1978.

