
DAVIDG , HAYS

Truth , like beauty , is in the eye of the beholder , Z
offer a few remarks for the use of those who seek a point of view from which to see truth in the six papers assigned to this session  . 
Linguistic computation is the fundamental and primitive branch of the art of cumputatlon ~ as I have remarked off and on  . The insight of y on Neumann ~ that operations and data can be represented in the same storage device  , is the linguistic insight that anything can have a name in any language  .   ( Whether anything can have a definition is a different question  . ) I recall surprising a couple of colleagues with this r ~ ark early in the  1960s   , when I had to point out the obvious fact that compillng and interpreting are linguistic procedures and therefore that only in rare instances does a computer spend more time on mathematics than on linguistics  . By now we all take the central position of our subject matter for granted  . I express this overly familiar truth only for the pragmatic reason that some familiar truths are more helpful than others in preparing for a given discourse  . 
Syntax needs semantic Justification , but semantics has the inherent Justification that knowledge is power  . The semantic Justification of syntaxis easy : Who would try to represent knowledge without a go odgr ~--  , -r ? I have not yet found a better illustration than the tlmstable ~ an example that I have used for some years now  . Without rules of arrangement and interpretation , the time table collapses into a llst of places , the digits 0 ,  . .9, a~d a few speclal symbols . Almost all of the information in a time table i sconveyed by the syntax  , and one suspects that the same is true of the languages of brains  , minds , and computers . 
Syntax needs more than semantic Justification , and pra8-m-tlcs is ready to serve . Without pragmatic Justifica-tion , the difference between cognitive and syntactic structures is ridiculous  . We may find more Justifiers later , but there discovery of pragmatlce is a boon to those who growtired of hearing language maligned  , It is easy to make fun of Engllsh , the language of Shakess pears , Bertr and Russell , and modern science . But the humor sometimes depends on the ignorance of the Joker  . 
We find first semantic , then prasmatic , and perhaps later other kinds of Justification for the quirkiness of English and other languages  , and the Jokes loss their point . 
Form , not content , admits of calculation . Since Aristo-tle proceeded in accordance with this rule  , If indit surprising that John Locke omitted mention of the simple ideas in reflect lon  .   ( One may recall that Lockeknew of simple ideas in percept lon ~- ~ ellow  , warm  #amoot ~ nd considered knowledge to derive from perception and reflection  . ) Listing the s id le ideas in reflection selml in fact to be a task for our century  , anticipated in part in the L9th century . Predication , Ins~an ~ is Clonp membership , component , g , deno Cation ~ localization , morali-zation are some candidates that presently show strength  . 
Content , not form , dlsamblguates , A more precise statement is that specific and not general knowledge fixes our interpretations of what we encounter  , certainly in language and probably also in other channels of peroep-tlon  . Thus the great body of knowledge of our culture I of the individual mind  , or of the ~ asslve database makes lends an appearance of fixedness and stability to the world that simpler minds  , cultures , and co~uters cannot get . The general rules of syntax , semantics , and prag-matl cs define the thinkable , allowing ambiguity wheQ some specific issue comes up  . In a hash house or a conversation , understanding and trust come with complete and exact information  . 
Conversation is a social activity . The thinking computer ( Raphael's title ) may be an artificial mind , but the conversing computer ( William D . Orr's cltle ) is an artificial person and must accept the obligations of social converse  . Those obligations are massive : " to do justice and love mercy *'  , " to do unto others as you would have them do unto you "  , to act only a sic would be well for all to act , to expressfully and concisely what is relevant , " to tell the truth , the whole truth , and nothing hut the truth " . 
Trust precedes learning . Lest anyone suppose chat I have listed the precepts of our greatest masters in a spirit of fun  , I hasten to add this obvious truth from study of our species  . Whether the sciences be called social , behavioral , or human , they tell us that one accepts knowledge for one's own store only from sources that can be trusted  . Nor could wisdom dictate the opposite , since internalized knowledge is inaccessible to test and correction  . 
Is the computer worthy of trust ?
I have asked this question of students , grading the context from simple arithmetic trust  ( they trust their poc-ket calculators to g ive accurate sums and products  ) cocomplex personal trust ( they would not accept the compu-ter as a fr i end  )   . We have , I chink , no experience with computers that are functionally worthy of crust in any but simple matters  . We may be learning to make computers follow the masters ' precepts in conversation  . Whether their users willever accept them for what they are worth is hard to predict  . If computers grow trustworthy and are assigned important tasks  , then when crisis occurs the issue of trust may determine such outcomes as war or peace  . Thus the issue is not frivolous . 
Trustarises from knowledge of origin as well as from knowledge of functional capacity  . Genetic and cultural history provide enormous confirmation that a neighbor can be trusted  , beyond even broad experience . We can gain only a little knowledge about a friend in the course of a friendship  , but we can bring to bear all of our own inherent mechanisms of trust for those that look and smell llke us when crisis occurs  . 
The six papers in this session , written by human beings and selected by persons of authority ~ deserve sufficient true ~ that the reader may learn from them  . The systems that they describe may grow into knowledgeable  , semanti-cally and pragmatically effective , syntactically wellformed conversents . Their contributions are to that end , and have the advantage that , by seeking to apply knowledge they can detect its limits  . 
Science needs application , since contact with reallt 7 tends to realn dusscientists that there are more things out the rethanared reamed of in our theories  . 

