TOWARDSASELF-EXTENDING PARSER
Jaime G . Carbonell
Department Of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh , PA 15213
Abstract
This paper discusses an approach to incremental learning in natural language processing  . The technique of projecting and integrating semantic constraints to learn word definitions is analyzed as Implemented in the POLITICS system  . 
Extensions and improvements of this technique are developed  . The problem of generalizing existing word meanings and understanding metaphorical uses of words Is addressed In terms of semantic constraint Integration  . 
1. Introduction
Natural language analysis , like most other subfields of Artificial Intell igence and Computational Linguistics  , suffers from the fact that computer systems are unable to automatically better themselves  . Automated learning ia considered a very difficult problem  , especially when applied to natural language understanding  . Consequently , little effortha8 been focused on this problem . Some pioneering work in Artificial in tell igence  , such as AM\[I\] and Winston's learning system  1"2\] strove to learn or discover concept descriptions in well-defined domains  . Although their efforts produced interesting Ideas and techniques  , these techniques do not fully extend to ? domain as complex as natural language analysis  . 
Rather than attempting the formidable task of creating a language learning system  , I will discuss techniques for Incrementally Increasing the abilities of a flexible language analyzer  . There are many tasks that can be considered " Incremental language learning "  . Initially the learning domain Is restricted to learning the meaning of new words and generaliz ing existing word definitions  . There erea number of A . I . techniques , and combinations of these techniques capable of exhibiting incremental learning behavior  . If irst discuss FOULUP and POLITICS , two programs that exhibit a limited capabili ty for Incremental word learning  . Secondly , the technique of semantic constraint projection end Integration  , as Implemented in POLITICS , Is analyzed in some detail . 
Finally , I discuss the application of some general learning techniques to the problem of generalizing word definitions end understanding metaphors  . 
2  . Learning From Script Expectations Learning word definitions In semantically-rich contexts Is perhaps one of the simpler tasks of incremental learning  . 
Initially I confine my discussion to situations where the meaning of a word can be learned from the Immediately surrounding context  . Later I relax this criterion to see how global context and multiple examples can help to learn the meaning of unknown words  . 
The FOULUP program \ [3 \] learned the meaning of some unknown words in the context of applyings script to understand a story  . Scripts\[4 ,   5\] are framelike knowledge representations abstracting the important features and causal structure of mundane events  . Scripts have general expectations of the actions and objects that will be encountered in processing a story  . For Instance , the restaurant script expects to seemen us , waitresses , and customers ordering and eating food ( at different pre-specifled times In the story  )  . 
FOULUP took advantage of these script expectations to conclude that Items referenced in the story  , which were part of expected actions , were Indeed names of objects that the script expected to see  . These expectations were used to form definitions of new words  . For instance , FOULUP induced the meaning of " Rabbit " in , " A Rabbit veered off the road and struck a tree , " to be a self-propelled vehicle . The system used information about the automobile accident script to match the unknown word with the script-role " VEHICLE "  , because the script knows that the only objects that veer of froads to smash Intoroad-side obstructions ereself propelled vehicles  . 
3  . Constraint Projection In POLITICS The POLITICS system  E6  ,   7\] induces the meanings of unknown words by a one * pass syntactic and semantic constraint projection followed by conceptual enrichment from planning and world-knowledge inferences  . Consider how POLITICS proceeds when Iten counters the unknown word " MPLA " In analyzing the sentence : " Russia sent massive arms shipments to the MPLA In Angola  . "Since " MPLA " follows the article '* the Nit must be a noun  , adjective or adverb . After the word " MPLA " , the preposition " in " Is encountered , thus terminating the current prepositional phrase begun with " to "  . Hence , since all well-formed prepositional phrases require a head noun  , and the " to " phrase has no other noun , "MPLA " must be the head noun . Thus , by projecting the syntactic constraints necessary for the sentence to be wellformed  , one learn8 the syntactic category of an unknown word . it Is not always possible to narrow the categorization of a word to a single syntactic category from one example  . In such cases , I propose Intersecting the sets of possible syntactic categories from more then one sample use of the unknown word until the Intersection has a single element  . 
POLITICS learns the meaning of the unknown word by a similar  , but substantially more complex , application of the same principle of projecting constraints from other parts of the sentence and subsequently Integrating these constraints to o one truot a meaning representation  . In the example above , POLITICS analyzes the verb " to send " as either in ATRANS or s PTRAflS  .   ( Schank \ [8 \] discusses the Conceptual Dependency case frames  . Briefly , a PTRANSISs physical transfer of location , and an ATRANS Is an abstract transfer of ownership  , possession or control . ) The reason why POLITICS cannot decide on the type of TRANSfer is that it does not know whether the destination of the transfer  ( i . e . , the MPLA ) Is slocation or an agent . Physical objects , such as weapons , are PTRANSed to locations but ATRANSed to agents . The conceptual analysis of the sentence , with MPLA as yet unresolved , Is diagrammed below : * SUSSIA * <-~\[ CIPS l < is > LOC vii ~ qNGOL Aetlmlq  . R)
RTRRNS ? dIN , iq\[CIPill
IIN <, , ffi/$SIRi,

J ~ ERPONe < ls ~ NWISER vii ( , ll OMI)
What has the analyzer learned about " MPLA " ass result of formulating the CD case frame ? Clearly the MPLA can only be an actor  ( I . e . , s person , an Institution or spolitical entity in the POLITICS domain  ) or slocation . Anything else would violate the constraints for the recipient case In both ATRANS end PTRANS  . Furthermore , the analyzer knows that the location of the MPLA Is Inside Angola  . This Item of Information is integrated with the case constraints to form a partial definition of " MPLA "  . Unfortunately both Ioc at lcms and actors can be located inside countries  ; thus , the identity of the MPLA is still not uniquely resolved  . POLITICS assigns the name RECIP01 to the partial definition of " MPLA " and proceeds to apply Its Inference rules tO understand the political Implications of the event  . Here Idiscuss only the Inferences relevant for further specifying the meaning of-MPLAm  . 
4  . Uncertain Inference in Learning POLITICS Is a goal-driven tnferencer  . It must explainell actions In terms of the goals of the actors and recipients  . 
The emphasis on inducing the goals of actors and relating their actions to means of achieving these goals is Integral to the theory of subject ive understanding embodied in POLITICS  . ( See\[7\] for a detailed discussion . ) Thus , POLITICS tries to determine how the action of sending weapons can be related to the goals of the Soviet Union or any other possible actors involved in the situation  . POLITICSk~s that Angola was Jna state of civ to war  ; that Is , a state where political factions were . ' xerclstng their goals of taking military and , therefore , political control of a country . Since po6ssssing weapons Is a precondition to military actions , POLITICS infers that the recipient of the weapons may have been one of the poliUcal factions  .   ( We aponseres means to fulf Ullng the goal of ? political faction  , therefore POLITICSIs able to explain why the faction wants to receive weapons  . ) Thus , MPLAIs Inferred to be a political faction . This Inference is Integrated with the existing partial definition and found to be consistent  . Finally , the original action Is refined to be an ATRANS , as transfer of possession of the weapons ( not merely their k : mation ) helps the political faction to achieve
Its military goal.
Next , POLITICS tries to determine howsending weapons to smilitary faction can further the goals of the Soviet Union  . 
Communist countries have the goal of spreading their ' Ideology  . POLITICS concludes that this goal can be fulfilled only if the government of Angola becomes communist  . Military aid to spolitical faction has the standard goal of military take over of the government  . Putting these two facts together , POLITICS concludes that the Russian goal can be fulfilled if the MPLA  , which may become the new Angeles government , is Communist . The definition formed for MPLAIsae follows :
QI ~' Ii ~ a1"~t ntrvI ( OPS flPLA ( POSNOUN ( TYPE PROgI\[R ) ) )   ( TOKefllq . A . )) ( PARTOF . luRN6OLR . ) ( oE OLOGY . ~? Oiltl UNS Te )   ( GORLSt ( ( ACTOR ( * flPLA * ) iS ( SCONTO?JI\[CT ( dN6OL Re ) 
Vm . ( IR ))))) P
The reason why memory entries are distinct from dictionary definitions is that there is no one -to-one mapping between the two  . For Instance , " Russia " and " Soviet Union " are two separate dictionary entries that refer to the same concept in memory  . Similarly , the concept of SCONT ( social or political control ) abstracts Information useful for the goal-driven inferences  , but has no corresponding entry in the lexicon , as I found no example where such concept was explicitly mentioned In newspaper headlines of political conflicts  ( i . e . ,
POLITICS ' domain).
Some of the Inferences that POLITICS made are much more prone to error than others  . More specifically , the syntactic constraint projections and the CD case frame projections erequite certain  , but the goal-driven Inferences are only reasonable guesses  . For Instance , the MPLA coW d have been ? plateau where Russia de Posited Its weapons for later delivery  . 
5  . A Strategy for Dealing with Uncertainty Given such possibilities for error  , two possible strategies to deei with the problem of uncertain inference come to mind  . 
First , the system could be restricted to making only the more certain constraint projection and integration inferences  . This does not usually produces complete definition  , but the process may be Iterated for other exemplars where the unknown word Is used in different semantic contexts  . Each time the new word Isen countered , the semantic constraints are integrated with the previous partial definition until a complete definition is formulated  . The problem with this process Is that it may require a substantial number of iterations to converge upons meaning representation  , end when it eventually does , this representation wtll not be as rich as the representation resulting from the less certain goal-driven inferences  . For Instance , it would be impossible to conclude that the MPLA was Communist and wanted to take over Angola only by projecting semantic constraints  . 
The second method is based on the system's ability to recover from inaccurate inferences  . This is the methodi implemented in POLITICS . The first step requires the deteot lon of contradictions between the Inferred Information end new Incoming information  . The next step is to assign blame to the appropriate culprit  , i . e . , the inference rule that asser ted the incorrect conclusion  . Subsequently , the system must delete the inaccurate assertion and later inferences that depended upon it  . ( See\[9\] for a model of truth maintenance . ) The final step is to use the new information to correct the memory entry  . The optimal system within my paradigm would use a combination of both strategies - It would use Its maximal Inference capability  , recover when Inconsistencies arise , and iterate over many exemplars to refine and confirm the meaning of the new word  . The first two criteria are present in the POLITICS implementation  , but the systems to ~ s building a new definition after processing a single exemplar unless it detects a contradiction  . 
Let us briefly trace through an example where PC ~ . ITICS latold that the MPLA is indeed a pisteau after it inferred the meaning to be a political faction  . 
IPOLITICS Pun-- 2/06/76 !?: INTERPRETUS-CONSERVRTIVE ) INPUTSTORY , Russia sent massive arms ship . eats to the flPL . A in Re , gels . 
PARSING . . .   ( UNKNOUNUOR OIMPLA ) : SYNTACTICEX PECTATION ! NOUN )   ( SERRNTICEX PECTATION ; ( FRANC:(ATRONSPTRONS ) SLOTIRECIP
REQ , ILOCROTOR ))) COflPLETEO.
CREATINGN(uMEMORYENTRY,*flPLRo
INFERENCE , ~, MPLRoMIAY BEAPOLXTICI : n . FACTION OFm ARG Ot . fiGNFEfl(NCE , eflUSSIA eRTRRNS eRRMSoTOtAPLR o INFERENCE ; * MPLA e ISP NOOR OLY a CO fl MUNXS Te IN FERENCE , GOAL OF a MPLR a ISTOTAK(OVEN eANO Ol . Ae
INSTANTIATING SCAIPTJSRIONF
INFERENCE ; GOALO FeRUSSIA aI$toNGOLf loTOBE ? comflNl$Te
I Question-salem-dialog )   441hst does the MPLA~ent the arms foP ? TNER PLR MAN Ta TOTAKE OVERRNGOLRUSING THENEIMONS  . 
I ~ he ( might the ether faction S in An ( iolllde?THEOTHERFACTIONSN AYASKSOREOTHER COUNTRY FOR RR flS  . 
Reading furthcPInput\]
INPUTSTORY ; + The Zunqabl factionoleo Patlngf Poethe I~PLA plateau received the $ ovistue al Nme  . 
PARSNO ... CONPLETEO ?
GREATNONEWN(NORYENTRY : a ZUNGROa
ACTIVE CONTEXTRPPLJCRItLE,~IONF
C1ISR CONFLICT , eMPLR eISR(eFRCTION os PI . RTERUe ) ( ACTIVATE'(NFCN(CKC )) R(OUEST(O
C2 SCRIPTROLE CONFLICT ,   ( &R\[O-RECXPNSRIOMF ) ? a MPL ReRNO a ZUNG ABI e ( ACTIVATE ( INFCHECKC2 ) ) RE~JEST\[O ( INF CHECKC 1C2 ) INVOKE OtRTTERPT TO MERGE MEMORYENTRIES , (* M ~ . AeaZON~Ia ) . . . FAIUJRE'INFER(lICERULE CHECK(O(RULEJFI . SRIOMF ) . . . OKINFERENCERUt . ECHECKED ( flULEIGO) . . . CONFLICT!
OELETING RESULTOFRULE/GO
C2RESOt . VEDt~f'~'LRe\]SA*PLRTEIqJeIN eRNGOLRs C2 flESOLVEO ; UlAI ?- RECIPINSRIOMF ) ?e ZONGRO IoRE DEFINING en PLReASe ZUNG ReO . . . COMPI . IrTEO . 
CREATINGHEM orl PLR of l(NORY(NTNY ... CORPLET(O.
POLITICS realizes that there is an Inconsistency In Its Interpretation when It tries to integrate " the MPLA plateau " with its previous definition of " MPLA "  . Political factions and plateause redifferent conceptual classes  . Furthermore , the new Input states that the Zungs bl received the weapons  , not the MPLA . Assuming that the Input Its correct , POLITICS searches for an Inference rule to assign blame for the present contradiction  . This Is done simply by temporarily deleting the result of each inference rule that was activated in the original interpretation until the contradiction no longer exists  . The rule that concluded that the MPLA was a political faction Is found to resolve both contradictions If deleted  . 
Since recipients of military aid must be political entitles  , the MPLA beings geographical location no longer qualifies as a military aid recipient  . 
Finally , POLITICS must check whether the inference rules that depended upon the result of the deleted rule are no longer applicable  . Rules , such as the one that concluded that the polit icalf action was communist  , depended upon there being a political faction receiving military aid from Russia  . 
The Zungabi now fulfll : s this role ; therefore , the inferences about the MPLA are transfered to the Zungabl  , and th ~ MPLAIs redefined to be a plateau .   ( Note : the word " Zungabl " was constructed for this example  . The MPLA is the present ruling body of Angola . ) 6  . Extending the Project and Integrate Method The POL  ) TICS Implementation of the project-and-integrate techniquets by no means complete  . POLITICS can only Induce the meaning of concrete or proper nouns when there Issufficient contextual information In a single exemplar  . 
Furthermore , POLITICS assumes that each unknown word will have only one meaning  . In general It is useful to realize when a word Is used to mean something other than Its definition  , and subsequently formulate an alternative definition  . 
IIllustrate the case where many examples are required to narrow down the meaning of sword with the following example : " Johnnytold Mary that If she didn't give him the to y  , he would < unknown word ) her . "One can induce that the unknown word Is a verb , but its meaning can only be guessed at , In general terms , to be something unfavorable to Mary . 
For Instance , the unknown word could mean " take the object from "  , or " cause injury to " . One needs more then one example of the unknown word used to mean the same thing In different contexts  . Then one hass much richer , combined context from which the meaning can be projected with greater precision  . 
Figure 1 diagrams the general project-and-integrate algorithm  . This extended version of POLITICS ' word-learning technique addresses the problems of iterating over many examples  , multiple word definitions , and does not restrict its
Input to certain classes of nouns.
7. Generalizing Word Definitions.
Words can have many senses , some more n " neral than others . Let us look at the problem of genlizlng the semantic definition of a word  . Consider the case where " barrier " is defined to be a physical object that dlsenables at ransfer of location  . ( e . g . " The barrier on the road Is blocking my way . ") Now , let us interpret the sentence , " Import quot as form a barrier to International trade  . " Clearly , an Import quota Is not ? physical object . Thus , one can minimally generalize " barrier " to mean " anything that disc  . shiess physical transfer of location . "Letus substitute " tariff " for " quota " In our example  . This suggests that our meaning for " barrier " is insufficiently general  . At ariff cannot disensble physical transfer ; tariffs dime . able willingness to buy or sell goods . Thus , one can further generalize the meaning of barrier to be : " anything that dlaenable e any type of transfer "  , Yet , Urea trace of the FIght1: The prijeat-a . d-lnt sgPeteNthedfarIndu@l ~ Re . ue P4 and : oe ~ ept det lnit leml contaln l . ? h i
URK ~ O~?lard
PROJECT the s~ntae tie Imd semantic ? onstrai . tl!fPo a eft Imelvslt of the othere ow Donints\] N~qRTE ?  1! Oh ?? ont trilntltQtM , imlite ? wddeflflltl(m
INTEGRRTE91 ob?l Cento?t to ( mrlch 4Qt lnitiqm
ICO n?cut " air

Jmlgoil , .d Piwm

NOemcm ~ intM , Imee ~.
u?IngaI ? eet-q:m"?also-!IP ?
NO\[111101
Postul?te?mm . erd same aml build a Iterl qlte defiflitie ~
Delete culpell
Inf?r ~ emid ~ . J generalization process must be remembered because the original meaning is often preferred  , or metaphorically referenced . Consider : " The tradebarriers were lifted . ? and " The new legislation bull dozed existing tradebarriers  . ? rheas sentences can only be understood metaphorically  . 
rhat is , one needs to refer to the original meaning of ~ barrier " as a physical object  , In order for ? lifting " or ' bull dozing " to make sense  . After understanding the literal leaning of a " bull dozed barrier "  , the next step Is to infer he consequence of such aftaction  , namely , the barrier no ) nger exists . Finally , one can refer to the generalized leaning of " barrier " to interpret the proPoaltion that ? The ew legislation caused the tradebarriers to be no longer Inxietence  . " propose the * ollowing rules to generalize word definitions ld understand metaphorical references to their ortgl nol  , mmel definition : 1 ) If the definition of a word violates the semantic constraints projected from an interpretation of the rest of the sentence  , create a new word sense definition that copies the old defl nltiml minimally relaxing  ( I . e . , generalizing ) the violated constraint . 
2 ) In Interpreting new sentences always prefer the mast specific definition if applicable  . 
3 ) If the generalized definition Is encountered again in Interpreting text  , make It part of the permanent dictionary . 
4 ) If ? word definition requires further generalization  , choose the existing most general definition and minimally relaxIts violated semantic constraints until a new  , yet more general definition
Is formed.
5 ) If the case frame formulated in interpreting a sentence projects more specific semantic constraints onto the word meaning than those consistent with rite entire sentence  , Interpret the word us ln ( ! the most specific definition conslste . t with the case frame . If the resultant meaning of the case frame Is inconsistent with the interpretation of the whole sentence  , Infer the most likely consequence of the pM tlally-build Conceptual Dependency case frame  , and use this consequence In Interpreting the rest of the sentence  . 
The process described by rule 5 enables one to Interpret the metaphorical uses of words like " lifted " and " bull dozed " In our earlier examples  . The literal meaning of each word i8 applied to the object case , ( i . e . , " barrier ?), and the Inferred consequence ( i . e . , destruction of the barrier ) i8 used to
Interpret the full sentence.
8. Coral . cling Remarks
There are a multitude of ways to incrementally Improve the language understanding capabilities of a system  . In this paper I discussed in some detail the process of learning new w~rde  . In lesser detail I presented some ideason how to generalize word meanings and Interpret metaphorical uses of individual words  . There are many more aspects to learning language and understanding metaphors that I have not touched upon  , For Instance , many metaphors transcend Individual words and phrases  . Their Interpretation may require detailed cultural knowledge\  [10\]   . 
In order to place some perspective on project-and -integrate learning method  , consider throe general learning mechanisms capable of implementing different aspects of Incremental language learning  . 
Learning hy example . This Isperhaps the most general learning strategy  . From several exemplars , one can intersect the common concept by , If necessary , minimally generalizing the meaning of the known part of each example until a common aubpart Is found by Intersection  . This common eubpart Is likely to be the meaning of the unknown section of each exemplar  . 
Learning by near-miss analysis . Winston \ [2 \] takes full advantage of this technique , it may be usefully applied to a natural language system that can Interactlve iy generate utterances using the words it learned  , and later be told whether It used those words correctly  , whether Iterred seriously , or whether It came close but failed to understand a subtle nuance In meaning  . 
Learning by contextual expectation . Easan Ually
FOULUP and POLITICS use the method of projecting contextual expectations to the linguistic element whose meaning Is to be Induced  . 
Much more mileage can be got ten from this method , especially If one uses strong syntactic constraints and expectations from other knowledge sources  , such as s discourse model , snarrative model , knowledge about who is providing the information , and why the information Is being provided . 
9. References










Lenet , 0 . A Mz Discovery In Mathematics as Heuristic Search . Ph . D . Th . , Stanford University , 1977 . 
Winston , P . Learning Structural Descriptions from
Examples . Ph.D . Th ., MIT , 1970.
Granger , R . FOUL-UPtA Program that Figures Out Meanings of Worcls from Context  . IJCAI-77, 1977 . 
Schank , R . C . and Abelson , R . P . Scripts , Goals , Plans and Unclerstancling . Hillside , NJ : Lawrence
Erlbaum , 1977.
Cullingford , R . Script Appll cationt Computer Uncler at and lng of Newspaper Stories  . Ph . D . Th . ,
Yale University , 1977.
Carbonell , J . G . POLITICS : Automated Ideological Reasoning . Cognitive Science 2, 1(1978), 27-51 . 
Carbonell , J . G . Subjective Unclerstancllng : Computer Mo<lels of Belief Systems  . . Ph . D . Th . , Yale
University , 1979.
Sohsnk , R.C . Conceptual Information Processing.
Amsterdam : North-Holland , 1975.
Doyle , J . Truth Malntenanoe Systems for Problem
Solving . Master Th ., M.I.T ., 1978.
Lakoff , G . and Johnson , M . Towards an
Experimentalist Philosopher : The Case From Literal Metaphor  . In preparation for publication , 1979 . 

