KNOI~LEDGEORGANIZATION AND APPLICATION : BRIEF COMIIENTS ONPAPERSINTHESESSION 
Aravind K . Joshi
Department of Computer and Information Science
The Moore School
University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 191 O4

My brief comments on the papers in this session are based on the abstracts available to me and not on the complete papers  . Hence , it is quite possible that some of the comments may turn out to be inappropriate or else they have already been taken care of in the full texts  . In a couple of cases ~ I had the benefit of reading some earlier longer related reports  , which were very helpful . 
All the papers ( except by Sangster ) deal with either knowledge representation , particular types of knowledge to be represented , or how certain types of knowledge are to be used . 
Brackman describes a lattice-like structured inheritance network  ( KLONE ) as a language for explicit representation of natural language conceptual information  . Multiple descriptions can be represented . How does the facility differ from a similar one in KRL ? Belief representations appear to be only implicit  . Quantification is handled through a set of " structural descriptions  . " It is not clear how negation is handled . The main application is for the command and control of advanced graphics manioulators through natural language  . Is there an implicit claim here that the KLONE representations are suitable for both natural language concepts as well as for those in the visual domain ? Sowa also presents a network l ike representation  ( conceptual graphs )  . It is a representation that is apparently based on some ideas of H in tikka on incomplete but extensible models called surface models  . Sowa also uses some ideas of graph grammars . It is not clear how multiple descriptions and beliefs can be represented in this framework  . Perhaps the detailed paper will clarify some of these issues  . This paper does not describe any application . 
Sangster's paper is not concerned , directly with knowledge representation . It is concerned with complete and partial matching procedures  , especially for determining whether a particular instance satisfies the criteria for membership in a particular class  . Matching procedures , especially partial matching procedures , are highly relevant to the use of any knowledge representation  . Partial matching procedures have received considerable attention in the rule-based systems  . This does not appear to be the case for other representations  . 
Moore and Mann do not deal with knowledge representation per se  , but rather with the generation of natural language texts from a given knowledge representation  . They are more concerned with the problem of generating a text  ( which includes questions of ordering among sentences  , their scopes , etc . ) which satisfies a goal held by the system , describing a ( cognitive ) state of the reader . 
The need for resorting to multi-sentence structures arises from the fact that for achieving a desired state of the reader  , a single sentence may not be adequate . 
~cDonald's work on generation appears to be relevant  , but it is not mentioned by the authors . 
Burnstein is primarily concerned with knowledge about  ( physical ) objects and its role in the comprehension process  . The interest here is the need for a particular type of knowledge rather than the representation scheme itself  , which he takes to be that of Schank . Knowledge about objects , their normal uses , and the kinds of actions they are normally involved in is necessary for interjretation of sentences dealing with objects  . In sentence ( 1 ) John opened the bottle and poured the wine , Burnstein's analysis indicates that the inference is driven largely by our knowledge about open bottles  . In this instance , this need not be the case . We have the same situation in John took the bottle out of the refrioerator and poured the--w -Tne  . The inference here is dependent on knowing something about wine bottles and their normal uses  ; knowledge of the fact that the bottle was open is not necessary  . 
Given the normal reading of (1) ,   ( l ' ) John opened the bottle and ~ ured the wine out of it will be judged as re~u'n-~an--t~-  , be-Te't'~o'n'~f--redundant material in ( l ' ) gives ( 1 )  . Deletion of redundant and recoverable material is a device that language x ploits  . The recoverability here , however , is dependent on the knowledge about the objects and their normal uses  . lf a nonnormal reading of (1) is intended ( e . g . , the wine bein 0 poured into the bottle ) then ( l " ) John opened the bottle and poured the wine into i t is not felt redundant  . This suggests that a prediction that a normal reading is intended can be made  ( not , of course , with complete certainty ) by recognizing that we are dealing with reduced forms  . ( Of course , context can always over ride such a prediction . ) Some further questions are : Knowledge about objects is essential for comprehension  . The paper does not discuss , however , how this knowledge and its particular representation helps in controlling the inferences in a uniform manner  . Is there any relationship of this work to the common sense algorithms of Rieger ? Lebowitz is also concerned with a particular type of knowledge rather than a representation scheme  . Knowledge about the reader's purpose is essential for comprehension  . 
The role played by the " interest " of the reader is also explored  . The application is for the comprehension of newspaper stories  . There is considerable work beyond the indicated references in the analysis of goal-directed discourse p but this has not been mentioned ~ Finally  , there are other issues which are important for knowledge representation but which have been either left out or only peripherally mentioned by some of the authors  . 
Some of these are as follows.
( i ) A representation has to be adequate to support the desired inference  . But this is not enough . It is also important ok now how inferences are made  ( e . g . , with what ease or difficulty ) . The interaction of the nature of a representation and the structure of the sentence or discourse will make certain inferences go through more easily than others  . 
( ii ) Knowledge has to be updated . Again the nature of the representation would make certain kinds of updates or modifications easy and others difficult  . 
( iii ) The previous issue also has a bearing on the relationship between knowledge representation and knowledge acquisition  . At some level , these two aspects have to be viewed together . 

