SHOULD COMPUTERS WRITE SPOKENLANGUAGE ?
Wallace L . Chafe
University of California , Berkeley
Recently there has developed a great deal of interest in 
the differences between written and spoken language  . I joined this trend a little more than a year ago  , and have been exploring not only what the specific differences are  , but also the reasons why they might exist . The approach I have taken has been to look for differences between the situations and processes involved in speaking on the one hand and writing on the other  , and to speculate on how those differences might be responsible for the observable differences in the output  , ~at happens when we write and what happens when we speak are different things  , both psychologically and socially , and I have been trying to see how what we do in the two situations leads to the specific things that we find in writing and speaking  . 
Ioccasionally interact with the UNIX computer system at Berkeley  , for various purposes . In the context of my concern about differences between writing and speaking  , I have begun to wonder whether the kind of corm ~unication we are used to receiving from computers is more like writing or speaking  . You may think that computers obviously write to us  . They sendus messages that we can read off of a cathoderay tube  , or that get printed out for us on a piece of paper  . In that respect what computers produce is written language  . But it comes at us in a way that is very different from the way written language usually does  . 
Usually we are faced with a printed page on which the writing is all there  , and has been there for a long time . 
The temporal process by which the writing was put there has absolutely no relevance to us as we per use the page at our leisure  . The timing of our reading is innoway control led by the timing by which the words were entered on the page  . My computer terminal , on the other hand , is steadily chugging away , producing language before my eyes at the rate of 30 characters a second . Under some circumstances I could wait until it had produced a whole page before Ibegan to read  . But I don't usually do that . I eagerly follow the steady flow of letters as they appear  , Just as I would eagerly listen to the spoken sounds of someone who was telling me something I wanted to know  . This processing in realtime seems in that respect more like spoken language  , although what is being produced is written . Furthermore , the computer system and I often , indeed characteristically , engage in quick exchanges , much like conversations , which is not what I am accustomed to doing with written language  . So I want to suggest that when it is looked at from the point of view of the dichotomy between written and spoken language  , the computer language we normally deal with is neither fish nor foul  . It is produced in written form , but on the other hand it is produced in real time  , and we are able to respond and interact as we are not able to do with a printed page  . 
Recent work seems to have shown that there are a number of features which are characteristic of spoken language  , and a number of other features characteristic of written  . 
It is not that spoken language never contains any of the features of writtenness  , or that written language never contains any of the features of spokenness  . It is only that certain features tend to be associated with one or the other medium  , and that the features become more polarized as one approaches the extremes of colloquial-ness on the one hand  , or of literariness on the other . 
In between one finds various mixtures of literary talk and conversational writing  . 
In looking for reasons why these distinguishing features exist  , I have found it useful to attribute some of them to the temporal differences between writing and speaking  , and some of them to the interactional differences . 
Temporally , writing as an activity is much slower than speaking  . Speaking seems to be produced one " idea unit " at a time  , each idea unit having a mean length of about 2 seconds , or 6 words . Every so often a sequence of idea unit sends in a falling pitch intonation of the sort we identify with the ending of a sentence  . Pauses usually occur between idea units , and longer pauses between sentences . The idea units within a spoken sentence tend to best rung together in a coordinate fashion  , typically with the word " and " appearing as a link ~ There is little of the fancy syntax we find in written language  , by which some idea units are subordinated to and embedded within others  . It has been hypothesized that speakers ' attention capacities are not great enough to al low them to engage in much elaborate syntax  . The flow of idea units is enough to keep them occupied  . 
Writing , on the other hand , is peculiar in that the pro-eess of writing itself occupies an inordinate amount of time  , even though , once we get past the first grade , it doesn't require a great deal of attention . Thus , writers have a lot of extra time and attention available to them  , and apparently they often use it to construct elaborate sentences  . As a result , whereas the sentences of spoken language have a distinctly fragmented quality  , those of written language tend to be more integrated  , with much more attention paid to subordinating idea units within others in complex ways  . This integration vs . fragmentation dimension seems to be at the root of a number of the features which distinguish writing from speaking  . 
The other dimension I have been interested in seems to result from the different relation writers and speakers have to their respective audiences  . Whereas speakers can interact directly with their listeners  , obtaining ongoing confirmation , contradiction , and feedback , wri-ters cannot normally do so , but are constrained to pay more attention to producing something that will stand on its own feet when it is read by someone later on in a dif ferent place  . We can speak of the greater involvement of speakers  , as contrasted with the greater detachment of writers  . Many of the specific features distin-guishing speaking and writing can be lined upon this involvement vs  . detachment dimension . 
How can a computer produce language that is maximally congenial to us humans  , given the familiarity we already have with the characteristics of spoken and written language ? ~ hatkind of human language should a computer simulate  , in order that we can process it most easily ? And to what ext is a computerable to produce such a simulation ? Let's play with the assumption that we human users would feel most at home with a computer terminal with which we could converse in something resembling human conversation  , as close as this can be approximated by a machine which  ( I ) can't yet make satisfactory sounds , but has to write what it says ; and ( 2 ) doesn't know how to experience involvement with a human being  . Let's consider what this machine would need to do to make us feel that we were interacting in something like the way we interact when we use spoken language  . 
Timing is one of the important factors . Instead of steadily producing letters at the rate of  30 a second , this machine might try producing language as spoken language is produced in realtime  . That would mean doing it at half the speed , for one thing : 15 characters a second would be about normal for the way we assimilate spoken language  , and perhaps the rate at not want its pitting out one letter at a time a tasteady rate  , as it does now . That has little to do with the way we take in language  , either spoken or written , undernormal circumstances . Perhaps it should give us one word at a time , but I think it more likely that we would feel most comfortable with syllables : syllables timed to simulate the timing of syllables in normal English speech  . Roughly speaking , stressed syllables would be longer and unstressed syllables shorter  . A careful study of the timing of natural speech could introduce more sophistication here  . At the end of each idea unit--on the average after every  6 words -- there would be at lease a brief pause , signaling the boundary of the idea unit and allowing time for processing  . At the end of a sentence -- on the average after every  3 ides units -- the pause would be longer , and paragraph boundaries would be signaled by lonBer pauses  . Idea units would be relatively fragented . Many of them would be connected by " end , " and there would be little of the elaborate syntax one tends to find in written lenguage  . 
As for involvement , the computer would need to learn that humans are imperfect recipients of information  , end that redundancy end requests for confirmation are among the important devices to be used frequently in c~uni-catlng with them  . Frequent direct reference to the addressee is another feature of involvement that the computer could easily learn to use  . 
My terminal recently told me the following , at 30 steady characters per second " The " netlpr " co- - - - - d  , when executed between computer center machines , now sets the ownership of net queue files correctly so that " net rm " will remove themend they are listed by the " net q " comm " ud  . 
While this is reasonably good written language , and comprehensible as such , I a masking whether meaningful linguistic interaction in realtime might not better proceed somethin B as follows  , where you can imagine syllable soeing timed as they are timed in spoken English  , brief pauses at the ends of llne ~ end longer pauses where I have double-spaced  ( T is the terminal end U the user ) : T : Want to know about the " netlpr " command , where you type in " net lpr "?
U : Sure.
T : You can just use it between computer center machines  , 

Only if you ' reuphere.
U : Yeah,
I know.
T : OK .
It ' ll show you who owns net queue files , if you went to know that . 
Youten use " nets " to get rid of the ~ , and you can get them listed with " net q " . 
That clear ?
U : Yeah.
One problem with this is that the user has to type a this or her normal typing rate  , which will inevitably be much slower than speaking  . But even so , the fragmentation and involvement which make this machine's output more like spoken language might significantly increase the user's comfort end comprehension  . To know whether that is really true calls for further detailed research on the features which distinguish spoken from written language  , and tests of whether the introduction of such features into computer lenguege indeed makes a difference  . Such research ought in any case to be rewarding beyond the bounds of this particular application  . 

