Chronometric Studies of Lexical Ambiguity Resolution 
Mark S . Seidenberg
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Bolt , Beranek and Newman , Inc.
Michaelg . Tanenhaus
Wayne State University
Languages such as English contain a large number of words with multiple meanings  . These words are commonly termed " lexl cal ambiguities "  , although it is probably more accurate to speak of them as potentially ambiguous  . 
Determining how the contextually appropriate reading of a word is identified presents an important and unavoidable problem for persons developing theories of natural language processing  . A large body of psycholingulstl cresearch on ambiguity resolution has failed to yield a consistent set of findings or a general  , non-controvers laltheory . In this paper , we review the results of six experiments which form the basis of a model of ambiguity resolution in context  , and at the same account for some of the contradictions in the existing literature  . 
This work has three foci . The first is that we consider the lexlcal structure of words with multiple meanings  , that is , relations among the meanings which presumably govern their representation in memory  , and their access in context . Second , we attempt to characterize the structure and content of the llngulst lccontext in which an ambiguous word occurs  . It is clear that the llstener/reader uses context to compute the correct reading of a word  ; however , contexts provide different types of information which may be utillzed in different ways  . Third , we consider realtime aspects of ambiguity resolution as it occurs in people  , using a methodology that permits us to evaluate successive stages in processing  . 
Relations among the meanings of ambiguous words vary along several dimensions  . The component readings may be semantl cally related  ( the senses of GRASP in " to grasp a baseball " and " to graspanidea "  ) or semantically unrelated ( e . g . , the meanings of TIRE related to " sleeplng " and " wheel "  )  . This dimension underlies the traditional distinction between polysemy and homonymy \ [ Lyons  ,  1978\] . ( I ) The number of component readings also varies . The readings of a word can fall into different grammatical classes  ( e . g . , the " sleep " reading of TIRE is a verb , the " wheel " reading a noun ) or the same class ( the meanings of STRAW related to " sipping " and " hay " are both nouns  )  . The readings may be used approximately equally often in the language  ( e . g . , WATCH ) or they may be of unequal frequency ( e . g . , PEN , COUNT ) . Our research is concerned with homonymous words with two common readings of approximately equal frequency  . 
Contexts provide several different types of information which are utilized in resolving amblgulty  . (2) In example\[I\] , the context provides syntactic information that i  . John began to tire . 
favors the verb reading of the ambiguous word TIRE  , and blocks the alternate noun reading . Syntax can function in this way only for ambiguous words with readings that fall into different gr-m  . mtical classes . In \[2\], syntax2 . A doctor removed Henry * sdamaged organ . 
is neutral with respect to the alternate readings of ORGAN  ( because both are nouns )  , but a word in the context ( " doctor " ) is highly semantically related to one reading , and thus favors it ; the alternate reading is not blocked , but merely implausible in the absence of any further information  . The appropriate reading of DECK in\[3\] is 3 . John walked on the deck . 
indicated by a different means , whicheLight be termed pragmatic . The perceiver knows that a person is much more likely to walk on the surface of a ship than on the surface of a pack of playing cards  . 
Other types of contextual information can be brought to bear on ambiguity resolution as well  . For example ,   \[4\] is disamblguated by exploiting ~ ass noun/count noun information  ;   \[5\] might be disamblguated by applying knowledge of a stereotyplc situation  ( a scriptor frame ; Schank & Abelson , 1977; Minsky ,  1975) . 
4. Henry wanted a straw.
5. John avoided the check.
Extended contexts frequently contain multiple sources of d lsamblguatlng information  . 
Leaving aside vague or misleading cases , it is clear that all of these types of information yield the same outcome  , assignment of the contextually-approprlate reading of a word  . We sought to determine whether they produced this effect by the same means  . Broadly speaking , there are two alternative mechanisms by which the correct reading could be assigned  . The perceiver could access all of the common readings of the word in parallel  , and use contextual information to perform a subsequent selection  . This alternative -- traditionally termed " multiple access'--holds that while the perceiver usually is aware of only a single reading  , there is transient subconscious activation of others as well  . The other posslbillty --" selectlve access "-- is that contexts restrict lexlcal access to the single appropriate reading  . Both of these alternatives have been supported by experimental evidence  . 
The time course of processing events is evaluated by using a variable stlmulus on set a synchrony  ( SOA ) priming methodology\[Warren ,  1977\] . The subject bears a sentence that is followed by the presentation of a single word on a screen  . Latency to read the word aloud is used to diagnose the availability of alternate word senses  . For example , sentence \[1\] above favors the verb reading of TIRE . If subjects access that meaning , they should be faster to read the semantically -related target word SLEEP than when it follows an unambiguous  , unrelated control sentence ( e . g . , " John began to leave ") . However , if subjects also access the contextually inappropriate reading of TIRE  , faster naming latencles will be observed for a word related to it  ( e . g . WHEEL ) as well . 
Similar considerations hold for\[6\] , in which the context favors the noun reading of TIRE  . 
6. John bought the tire.
Changes in the availability of alternate readings over time can be tracked by presenting targets at a variable time interval following the ambiguous word or its control  . In our experiments , targets appeared at a delay of either 0 or 200 msec . 
The first experiment ( Tanenhaus , Leiman and Seldenberg ,  1979 ) examlned the resolution of noun-verb ( NV ) ambiguities such as TIRE in syntactic frames such as those in \[ i \] and  \[6\]  . The results were clear : ar0msecSOA , targets related to both the appropriate and inappropriate readings showed faster naming latencles than controls  . With a 200 msec delay interposed between ambiguous word and target  , however , only targets related to the contextually appropriate reading showed facilitation  . The results indicated that syntactic information in the context did not restrict lexl cal selection between alternatives  . Thls occurred despite the fact that the context made it impossible to derive a coherent interpretation of the utterance using the alternate readlng  . (3) Seidenber 8 , Tanenhaus and Leiman \[1980\] found largely the same pattern of results wlth noun-noun  ( N - ~ ) ambiguities such as ORGAN or STRAw and contexts such as  \[7\]  , which were neutral 7 . John removed the organ . 
with respect to alternate readings of the ambiguous word  . At0msec $ OA , targets related to both readings showed facilitation  , as might be expected since the context did not favor either one  . At 200 nsec $ OA , however , facilitation occurred on approximately half the trials  , which would result if listeners had retained only one reading of the ambiguous word on each trial  . (& ) The pattern of results was similar to that in the Tanenhaus et al  ( 1979 ) study of syntactic contexts : multiple access , followed by a vilabillty of only one reading 200 mseclater . However , the underlying processes were quits different . In the syntactic frames study , listeners accessed multiple readings and used the context to select the appropriate one  . In the Seldenberge ~ al . (1980) study , listeners accessed multiple readings but the context could not be used to perform a selection  . 
They nonetheless assigned a default value within 200 msec . The results suggest that ambiguity resolution is subject not only to constraints imposed by the nature of the context  , but also tollmit at lons of time . Subjects avoid carrying multiple readings longer than  200 msec even when contexts do not unambiguously isolate one  . The experiment was designed so that at the moment the ambiguous word occurred  , they had no reason to believe that di sambtguating information would not be for thcoming  . 
Under this circumstance , they might have been expected to retain mult iple meanings  . Instead , subjects assigned their best guess , risking the possibility that subsequent re -processlng would be necessary  . It appears that reprocessing imposes less of a burden on the processing system than that assoc iated with retaining multiple readings over time  . 
In another experiment , Seidenberg et al .   ( 1980 ) examined the effects of biasing semantic in formation on NN ambiguities in contexts such as  \[8\]  . 
8. The farmer removed the straw.
As in \[2\] , the context contains a word semantically-re lated to one meaning of the ambiguous word  ; syntactic information is neutral . These contexts produced selective access : fo reach item  , only the target related to the contextually -appropriate reading of the ambiguous word showed facilitation  ; the target related to the inappropriate read ing showed naming latencles comparable to those in the unrelated control  . These outcomes held at both SOAs . Although NN amblgu/tles produced multiple access in the previous experiment with neutral contexts  , the biasing contextual information in thls experiment affected the initial access of meaning  . 
Ne suggested such contexts R rlme one reading of the ambiguous word  , in the sense of Collins and Loftus (1975) , Meyer and Schvaneveldt (1975) , Warren (1977) and others . The readings of an ambiguous word are assumed to becoded in memory in terms of relative act ivation levels which reflect frequency and recency of use  . A word or phrase semantically-related to one reading produces a transient increase in its activation level  , possibly through a spreading activation process  ( Collins & Loftus ,  1975) . The readings are accessed in order of relative actlvatlon  ; the primed reading is accessed first , and assigned on-llne . (5) As noted above , NN ambiguities can be resolved by using o ther types of information  , e . g . pragmatic , mass noun/count noun , etc . These differ from the priming contexts used in the previous experiment because they do not contain any words or phrases semantically or assoct attvely related to a reading of the ambiguous word  . 
In this way they are comparable cothe syntact ic contexts of the first experiment  . The fourth experiment compared the use of non -priming contextual information in the reso lution of NN and N--V ambiguities  . Again the variable S0A methodology was used , with targets appearing at 0 and 200 msec delays . The results in both the NN and NV cond it ions replicated those of our first exper iment  , showllng multiple access at 0 msec , followed by availability of only as ingle readlng  200 mseclater . 
The experiments to this point can be summarized as follows  . There appear to be two classes of contexts that have very different effects on ambiguity resolution  . 
Priming contexts contain words or phrases semant ically or assoclatively related to one reading of an ambiguous word  . They increase the activation level of the reading before It is encountered through a non-directed  , automatic process . In this way , they can alter the order in which readings are evaluated  . These effects are lntra-lexical ( Forster ,  1979)  , solely due to tnter connect to ns among nodes in semantic memory  . 
Non-priming contexts include various types of information -- syntactic  , pragmatic , and other s--which require access of gr- m-mtt cal knowledge and knowledge of the world  . The word recognition process yields one or more readings of the ambiguous word to be eva luated against the demands imposed by these contexts  . The number of readings accessed and the order in which they are evaluated depends upon their re lative activation levels  , which any be altered by priming . 
In experiment five , we tested an implication of the priming hypothesis  . Recall that NV ambiguities yleld multiple access , as do NN ambiguities , except when the latter occur in priming contexts . Clearly , thls suggests that NV ambiguities might also produce selective access If the context contained a priming word or phrase  , as in \[9\] . 
9. The near sighted time keeper dropped his watch.
Thus , we compared the processing of ~- N and NV ambiguities in priming contexts  . The NN results replicated those of the Seldenberg et al  ( 1980 ) experiment , selective access . The noun-verb conditions , however , continued to show ~ ulglple access . Because the result was unexpected , we under took a replication ; it too showed thls pattern . 
The results of this series of experiments are summarized in Table I  . We found no evidence that listeuers could use their knowledge of a language and knowledge of the world to restrict access to a single reading  , at least for the class of ambiguous words with two common readings  . Although these types of Information can facilitate the immediate pronesslng of a word  ( as demonstrated by Marslen-Wilson and Tyler ,  1980) , they do not influence the activation of word senses  . It w~s suggested that the latter could be affected only by p~lming  ; however , the status of thls hypothesis is In doubt . Twice we observed selective access for N'N ambiguities in priming contexts  ; twice w-falle ~ to obtain selective access with NV ambiguities in similar contexts  . Thlsforces us to conclude that priming affects nouns differently than verbs  , and strongly suggests that theories of lexlcal memory and recognition must begin to take into account the syntacElc functions of worr  . 

Table I
Type of Context Type of Ambiguous Word 1, 3 . syntactic NV2 . neutral NN3,5 . priming NN 4 . norr-primlng bias NN 5, 6 . prlmlng NV
Outcome multlple ---> selectlon multlple --- > select lonselective access multlple ---> selectlon multlple -= -> selectlon 

Collins , A . M . and Loftus , E . F . A spreadlng-actlvatl on theory of semantic processing  . Psychological
Review , 1975, 82, 407-428.
Forster , g . I . Levels of processing and the structure of the language processor  . In W . E . Cooper and E . C . T . Walker ( eds . ), Se . .__nntence pr_oc__ . eeessln ~: Studles presented to Merrill Garrett . LEA , 1979 . 
Lyons , J . Semantics . Cambridge University Press , 1978 . 
Marslen-Wilson , W . D . and Tyler , L . K . The temporal structure of spoken language understanding  . 
Co~nltion , 1980, 8, 1-71.
Meyer , D . and Schvaneveldt , R . Meaning , memory , structure , and mental processes . In C . N . Cofer ( ed . ), The structure of human memory . Freeman , 1975 . 
M/risky , M . A framework for representing knowledge . 
In P . Winston ( ed . ), The psychology of computer vision . McGraw Hill , 1975 . 
Schank , R . and Abelson , R . Scripts , plans , goals and understanding . LEA , 1977 . 
Seldenberg , H . , Tanenhaus , M . and Leiman , J . The time course of lexlcal ambiguity resolution in context  . Center for the Study of Reading Tech
Report #164, 1980.
Tanenhaus ~ M . , Lelman , J . and Seldenberg , M . Evidence for multiple stages in the processing of ambiguous words in syntactic contexts  . J . Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior ,  1979 ,  18 ,  " ~  . 
Warren , R . Time and the spread of activation in memory . J . Experimental Psychology : Human Learnln ~ and Memory  ,  1977 ,  ~ ,  458-466 . 

This research was supported by the National Institute of Education under Contract No  . 
U S-NIE-C-400-76-OII6 to the Center for the Study of Reading , and by a Wayne State U . 
research development award.
i . Of course , a word can have semantl cally-dlstlnct readings that are themselves polysemous  . 
2 . These distinctions among types of context are not intended to prejudge any theoretical issues  , only to facilitate exploratory research . 
3 . It should be noted Chata large number of sentences were utilized  , and that precautions were taken to ensure that the experimental procedure itself would not induce subjects to access meanings they would otherwise ignore  . 
4 . For details , see the cited reference . Essentially , the experiment included control conditions which provided estimates of the amount of facilitation that would occur if either both readings or no readings were accessed on every trial  . At 200 msec SOA , the amount of facilitation was almost exactly halfway between these two figures  , suggesting that only one reading was available . 
5 . The data are unclear as to whether activation of the alternate reading is entirely suppressed  , or merely delayed . 

