The Parameters of Conversational Style
Deborah Tannen
Georgetown University
There are several dimensions along which verbalization 
responds to context , resulting in individual and social differences in conversational style  . Style , as I use the term , is not something extra added on , like decora-tion . Anything that is said must be said in some way ; cooccurrence expectations of that " way " constitute style  . The dimensions of style I will discuss are :
I . Fixity vs . novelty 2 . Cohesiveness vs . expressiveness 3 . Focus on content vs . interpersonal involvement . 
Fixity vs . novelty
Any utterance or sequence must be identified ( rightly or wrongly , in terms of interlocuter's intentions ) with a recognizable frame , as it conforms more or less to a familiar pattern  . Every utterance and interaction is formulaic , or conventionalized , to some degree . There is a continuum of formulaicness from utterly fixed strings of words  ( situational formulas : " Happy birthday , " " Welcome home , "" Gezundheit " ) and strings of events ( rituals )  , to new ideas and acts put together in a new way . Of course , the latter does not exist except as an idealization  . Even the most novel utterance is to some extent formulaic  , as it must use familiar words ( witness the absurdity of Humpty Dumpty's assertion that when he uses a word it means whatever he wants it to mean  , and notice that he chooses to exercise this li- cense with only one word  )  ; syntax ( again Lewis Carrollis instructive : the " comprehensibility " of Jabber wocky  )  ; intonation ; coherence principles ( cfAlt on Becker ) ; and content ( Mills ' " vocabularies of motives , " e . g . ) . All these are limited by social convention . Familiarity with the patterns is necessary for the signalling of meaning both as prescribed and agreed upon  , and ascued by departure from the pattern ( cf Hymes )  . 
For example , a situational formula is a handy way to signal familiar meaning  , but if the formula is not known the meaning may be lost entirely  , as when a Greek says to an American cook , " Health to your hands . " If meaning is not entirely lost , at least a level of resonance is lost , when reference is implicit to a fixed pattern which is unfamiliar to the interlocutor  . For example , when living in Greece and discussing the merits of buying a nice box with a Greek Friend  , I asked , "Doesn't the icemancometh ? " After giggling alone in the face of his puzzled look  , I ended up feeling I hadn't communicated at al l  . Indeed I hadn't . 
Cohesiveness vs . expressiveness
This is the basic linguistic concept of markedness and is in a sense another facet of the above distinction  . 
What is prescribed by the pattern for a given context  , and what is furnished by the speaker for this instance ? To what extis language being used to signal " business as usual  , " as opposed to signalling , " Hey , look at this ! " This distinction shows upon every level of verbalization too : lexical choice  , pitch and amplitude , prosody , content , genre , and so on . For example , if someone uses an expletive , is this a sign of intense anger or is it her/his usual way of talking ? If they reveal a personal experience or feeling  , is that evidence that you are a special friend , or do they talk that way to every body ? Is overlap a way of trying to take the floor away from you or is it their way of showing interest in what you ' resaying ? Of course  , ways of signalling special meaning -- expressiveness -- are also prescribed by cultural convention  , as the work of John Gumperz shows . The need to distinguish between individual and social differences is thus intertwined with the need to distinguish between cohesive and expressive intentions  . One more example will be presented , based on spontaneous conversation taped during Thanks-?giving dinner  , among native speakers of English from different ethnic and geographic backgrounds  . 
In responding to stories and comments told by speakers from Los Angeles of Anglican/Irish background  , speakers of New York Jewish background often uttered paralinguis-tically gross sounds and phrases  ( " WHAT !? . . . . How INTer-esting ! .   .   .   . You ' reKID ding ! . . . . Ewwwwww !") . In this context , these " exaggerated " responses had the effect of stopping conversational flow  . In contrast , when similar responses were uttered while listening to stories and comments by speakers of similar background  , they had the effect of greasing the conversational wheels  , encouraging conversation . Based on the rhythm and content of the speakers ' talk  , as well as their discussion during playback ( i . e . listening to the tape afterwards ) , I could hypothesize that for the New Yorkers such " expressive " responses are considered business as usual  ; an enthusiasm constraint is operating , whereby a certain amount of expressiveness is expected to show interest  . 
It is a cohesive device , a conventionally accepted way of having conversation  . In contrast , such responses were unexpected to the Californians and therefore were taken by them to signal  , " Hold it ! There's something wrong here . " Consequently , they stopped and waited to find out what was wrong  . Of course such differences have interesting implications for the ongoing interaction  , but what is at issue here is the contrast between the cohesive and expressive use of the feature  . 
Focus on content vs . interpersonal involvement Any utterance is at the same time a statement of content  ( Bates on's ' message ' ) and a statement about the relationship between interlocutors  ( ' metamessage ' )  . In other words , there is what I am saying , but also what it means that I am saying this in this way to this person at this time  . In interaction , talk can recognize , more or less explicitly and more or less emphatically  ( these are different )  , the involvement between interlocutors . 
It has been suggested that the notion that meaning can standalone  , that only content is going on , is associa-ted with literacy , with printed text . But certainly relative focus on content or on interpersonal involvement can be found in either written or spoken Form  . I suspect , for example , that one of the reasons many people find interaction at scholarly conferences difficu lt and stressful is the conventional recognition of only the content level  , whereas in fact there is a lot of involve-merit among people and between the people and the content  . 
Whereas the asking of a question following a paper is conventionally a matter of exchange of information  , in fact it is also a matter of presentation of self  , as Goffman has demonstrated for all forms of behavior  . 
A reverse , phenomenon has been articulated by Gall Drey -fuss  . The reason many people feel uncomfortable , if nots cornful , about encounter group talk and " psychobabble " is that it makes explicit information about relationships which people are used to signalling on the metalevel  . 
Relative focus on content gives rise to what Kay ( 1977 ) calls " autonomous " language , wherein maximal meaning is encoded lexically , as opposed to signalling it through use of paralinguistic and nonlinguistic channels  , and where in maximal background information is furnished  , as opposed to assuming it is already known as a consequence of shared experience  . Of course this is an idealization as well , as no meaning at all could be communicated if amply demonstrates  . It~s crucial , then , to know the operative conventions . As much of my own early work shows , a hinti . e . indirect communication ) can be miss-edifal is tener is unaware that the speaker defines the context as one in which hints are appropriate  . What is intended as relatively direct communication can be ta-ken to mean fr more  , or simply other , than what is mean S if the listener is unaware that the speaker defines the context as one ' in which hints are inappropriate  . A common example seems to be communication between intimates in which one partner  , typically the female , assumes , " We know each other so well that you will know what I mean without my saying it outright  ; all I need do is hint " ; while the other partner , typically the male , assumes , " We know each other so well that you will tell me what you want  . " Furthermore , there are various ways of honoring inter-~ersonal involvement  , as service of two overriding human goals . These have been called , by Brown and Levinson (1978 , positive and negative politeness , building on R . Lakoff's stylistic continuum from camara derieto distance  ( 1973 ) and Goffman's presentational and avoidance rituals  ( 1967 )  . These and other schemata recognize the universal human needs to l  ) be connected to other people and 2 ) be left alone . Put another way , there are universal , simultaneous , and conflicting human needs for community and independence  . 
Linguistic choices reflect service of one or the other of these needs in various ways  . The paralinguistically gross listener responses mentioned above are features in an array of devices which I have hypothesized place the signalling load  ( Gumperz'term ) on the need for community . Other features cooccurring in the speech of many speakers of this style include fast rate of speech  ; fast turntaking ; preference for simultaneous speech ; tendency to introduce new topics without testing the conversational waters through hesitation and other signals  ; persistence in introducing topics not picked up by others  ; story telling ; preference for stories told about personal experience and revealing emotional reaction of teller  ; ' talk about personal matters ; over statement for effect .   ( All of these features surfaced in the setting of a casual conversation at dinner  ; it would be premature to generalize for other settings  )  . These and other features of the speech of the New Yorkers sometimes struck the Californians present as imposing  , hence failing to honor their need for independence  . The use of contrasting devices by the Californians led to the impression on some of the New Yorkers that they were deficient in honoring the need for community  . Of course the underlying goals were not conceptualized by participants at the time  . What was perceived was sensed as personality characteristics : " They're dominating  , " and " They're cold . " Conversely , when style was shared , the conclusion was , " They'renice . " Perhaps many of these stylistic differences come down to differing attitudes toward silence  . I suggest that the fast-talking style I have characterized above grows out of a desire to avoid silence  , which has a negative value . 
Put another way , the unmarked meaning of silence , in this system , is evidence of lack of rapport . To other speakers -- for example , Athabaskan Indians , according to Basso ( 1972 ) and Scollon ( 1980 ) -- the unmarked meaning of silence is positive . 
Individual and social differences
All of these parameters are intended to suggest processes that operate in signalling meaning in conversation  . Analys'is of cross-cultural differences is useful to make apparent processes that go unnoticed when signalling systems are shared  . 
An obvious question , one that has been indirectly addressed throughout the present discussion  , confronts the distinction between individual and cultural differences  . We need to know , for the understanding of our own lives as much as for our theoretical understanding of discourse  , how much of any speaker's style--the linguistic and paralinguistic devices signal  ) ing meaning -- are prescribed by the culture , and which are chosen freely . The answer to this seems to resemble , one level further removed , the distinction between cohesive vs . 
expressive features . The answer , furthermore , must lie somewhere between fixity and novelty-- a matter of choices among alternatives offered by cultural convention  . 

Basso , K .  1972 . To give upon words : Silence in Western Apache culture  , in P . P . Giglioli , ed . , Language in social context . Penguin . 
Brown , P . & S . Levinson .  1978 . Universals in language usage : Politeness phenomena  , in E . Goody , ed . , Questions and politeness . Cambridge . 
Fillmore , C .  1979 . Innocence : A second idealization for linguist ics  , Proceedings of the fifth annual meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society  . 
Goffmen , E .  1967 . Interaction rttual . Doubleday . 
Kay , P .  1977 . Language evolution and speech style , in B . 
Blount & M . Sanches , eds . , Sociocultural dimensions of language change . NY : Academic . 
Lakoff , R .  1973 . The logic of politeness , or minding your p's and q's . Papers from the ninth regional meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society  . 
Scollon , R .  1980 . The machine stops : Silence in the metaphor of malfunction  . Paper prepared for the A~er-i can Anthropological Association annual meeting  . 

