Interactive Discourse : Looking to the Future
Panel Chair's Introduction
Bonnie Lynn Webber
University of Pennsylvania
In any technological field , both shortterm and longterm research can be aided by considering where that technology might be ten  , twenty , fifty years down the pike . In the field of natural language interactive systems  , a 21 year vision is particularly apt to consider , since it brings us to the year 2001 . One wellknown vision\[I\]of 2001 includes the famous computer named Hal-one offspring  , so to speak , of the major theoretical and engineering breakthrough in computers that Clarke records as having occurred in the early  1980's   . This computer Halisable to understand and converse in perfect idiomatic English  ( written and spoken ) with the crew of the spacecraft Discovery . And not just task-oriented dialogues , mind you ! Hal is a farcry from today's prototype natural language query systems  , intelligent CAl-systems , diagnostic assistance systems , and Kurzweil machines . For one thing , Halis not Just responsive : he takes the initiative  . 
His first documented utterance on board the spacecraft Discovery comes at a time when the crewmen Bowman and Poole are engrossed in a fading vision screen image of Poole's family on Earth  , on the occasion of Poole's birthday . 
" So rrv to interrupt the festivities , " said Hal ~" but we have a problem . " Not only can Hal converse in perfect idiomatic English  , but he is a master of problem context ( Panel I ) and social context ( Panel 2 ) as well ! Now Halis clearly where we currently are not at  , and 2001 is clearly only one man's vision ( albeit a very special man )  . Yet Clarke's depiction of Halraises several issues  , which along with other ones , provide a cue for the current panel discussion . The issues include : I . Where is it that we want to have , must have , can expect to have , or conversely , should not have ~ o have , 
Natural Language Interactive Systems ? 2 . Barring Clarke's reliance on the triumph of automatic neural network generation  , what are the major hurdles that still need to be overcome before Natural Language 
Interactive Systems become practical ?3 . What effects can we expect , deriving from the availability of , what tome seem , almost magical developments in hardware ? 4 . Are the repractical ( and acceptable ) alternatives to interacting with machines in natural language in the various situations that provide a positive answer to question i ?  5  . Should we be shooting for spoken Natural Language interaction s-either input or output or both- or should we not  , like Clarke , go the whole way and expect our machines to read lips as well  . 
REFERENCES\[ . Clarke , Arthur C . , 2001: A Space Odyssey , New American Library ,  1968 . 

