PROBLEM SOLVING APPLIED TO LANGUAGE

Douglas I ~: Appelt
Stanford University , Stanfo , d , Califorlda
SRI International 111 enloPark . California This research was supported at SRI htternational by the Defense Advanced Reseat ~ ch Projects Agency under contract  N00039-79-C-0118 ~? ith the Naval Electronic Systems Commawt The views and conchtsions contained in this document are those of the author and should not be interpreted as representative of the official policiex either expressed or bnplied  , of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency , or the U . S . Goverttment . The author is gratefid to Barbara Grosz , Garyttendrix and Terry Winograd for comments on an earlier draa of this paper  . 
I . Introduction
Previous approaches to designing language understanding systems have considered language generation to be tile activity of a highly specialized linguistic facility that is largely ind cpend cnt of other cognitive capabilities  . 
All the requisite knowlcdge for gencration is embodicdina " gcneration module " which  , with appropriate modifications to the lexicon , is transportable bct ween different domains and applications  . Application programs construct " messages " in some internal representation  , such as first order predicate calculus or scmantic nct works  , and hand them to the generation module to be translated into a at or a language  . The application program decides what to say ; the gencration module decides how to say it . 
In contrast with this previous work . this papcr proposes an approach to designing a language generation syst cm that builds on the view of language as action which has cvolv cd from speech act theory  ( see Austin\[2l and Scarle\[11\] )  . According to this vicw , linguistic actions are actions planncd to satisfy particular goals of the spcakcr  , similar to other actions like moving and looking . Language production is integrated with asp cak cr 's problcm solving processes  . This approach is fi~unded on the hypothesis that planning and pcr forming linguistic  , actions is an activity that is not substantially different from planning and pcr forming othcr kinds of physical actions  . The process of pro/lucing an utt crance involves , planning actions to satisfy a numbcr of diffcrent kinds of goals  , and the nel ~ cicntly coordinating the actions that satisfy these goals  . In the resulting framework , dlere is no distinction between deciding what to say and deciding how to say it  . 
This rcsearch has procceded through a simultaneous  , intcgrated effort in two areas . The first area of re . arch is the thcore tieal problcm of identifying the goals and actions that occur in human communication and then characterizing them in planning terms  . The ~ cond is the more applied task of developing machine--based planning methods that are adequate to form plans based on thc characterization dcveloped as part of the work in the first area  . The eventual goal is to merge the results of the two areas of effort into a planning system that is capable of producing 
English sentences.
Rather than relying on a specialized generation module  , language generation is performed by a general problcm-  . -solving system that has a great deal of knowlcdge about language  . A planning system , named K^MI'(Knowlcdge and Modalitics Planncr) , is currently under development that can take a high-lcvelgoal-and plan to achieve it through both linguistic and nonlinguistic actions  . Means for satisfying multple goals can be integrated into a single utterance  . 
Thi . ~ paper examines the goals that arise in a dialog , and what actions satisfy those goals . It then discusses an example of a sentcnee which satisfies several goals simultaneously  , and how K^MP will be able to produce this and similar utterances  . This system represents an extension to Cohen's work on planning speech acts  \[3\]  . However , unlikcCohen's system which plans actions on thc level of informing and requesting  , but does not actually generate natural anguage sentences  , KAMP applies general problcm-solving techniqucs to th centire language gencration process  , including the constructiun of the utt crance . 
1I . Goa Ls and Actions used in Task Oriented Dialogues The participants in a dialogue have four different major types of goals which may be satisfied  , either directly or indirectly , through utterances . 
Physical goals , involve the physical state of the world . The physical state can only be altered by actions that have physical effects  , and so speech acts do not serve directly to achieve these goals  . But since physical goals give rise to other types of goals as subgoals  , which may in turn be satisfied by speech acts , they are important to a language planning system . Goals that bear directly on the utterances themselves are knowledges late goals  . 
discourse goals , and social goal x
Any goal of a speaker can fit into one of these four categories  . However , each category has many sob--categories , with the goals in each sub--category being satisfied by actions related to but different from those satisfying the goals of other sub- -categories  . Delineating the primary categorizations of goals and actions is one objective of this research  . 
Knowledge state goals involve changes in tile beliefs and wants held by the speaker or the hearer  . Th cy may be satisfied by several different kinds of actions  . Physical actions affect knowledge , since , as a minimum the agent knows he has performed the action  . There are also actions that affect only knowledge and do not change the state o ? the world--for example  . 
reading , looking and speech acts . Speech acts are a special case of knowledge -producing actions because they do not produce knowledge directly  , like looking at a clock . Instead , the effects of speech acts manifest thcmselves through the recognition of intention  . The effect of a speech act , according to Searle . is that the hearer recognizes the speaker's intention to perform the act  . The hcarer then knows which spceehact has been perform cd  , and because of rules governing the communication processes  , such as the Gricean maxims\[4\] . the hearer makes inferences about thcspeaker's beliefs  . Th cse inferences all affect the heater's own beliefs  . 
Discourse goals are goals dial involve maintaining or changing the sthte of the discourse  . For example , a goal of focusing on a different concept is a type of discourse goal  \[5  ,  9 ,  12\] . The utterance Take John . for instance serves to move the participants ' focusing from a general subject to a specific example  . Utterances of this nature seem to be explainable only in terms of the effects they have  , and not in terms of a formal specification of their propositional content Concept activation goals are a particular category of discourse goals  . These are goals of bringing a concept of some object  , state , or event into the heater's immediate coneiousness so that he understands its role in the utterance  . Concept activation is a general goal that subsumes different kinds of speake reference  . It is a low-level goal that is not considered until the later stages of the planning process  , but it is interesting because of the large number of interactions between it and higher-level goals and the large number of options available by which concept activations can be performed  . 

Social goals also play an important part in the planning of utterances  . 
Thc , : e goals are fimdamentally different from other goals in that freqnently they are not effeCts to be achieved ~ a ~ much as constraiots on the possible behavior that is acceptable in a given situation  . Social goals relate to politeness , and arc reflected in the surface form and content of tile utterance  . However , there is no simple " formula " that one can follow to construct polite utterances  . Do you know what time it Ls ? may ~ apoliteway to ask the time  , but Do you know your phone number ? is not very polite in most situations  , but Could you tell me your phone number ? is . 
What is important in this example is the exact propositional content of the utterance  . People are expected to know phone numbers , but not necessarily what time it is . Using an indirect speech act is not a sufficient condition for politen ? ~  . This example illustrates how a social goal can mtluence what is said  , as well as how it is expressed . 
Quite often the knowledge state goals have been ssragned a special priviliged status among all these goals  . Conveying a propsition was viewed as the primary reason for planning an utterance  , and the task of a language generator was to somehow construct an utterance that would be appropriate in the current context  . In contrast , this rosen : oh attempts to take Halliday's claim \[7\] seriously in the design of a computer system : " We do not  . in ' fact , first decide what we want to say independ cndy of the setting a  , ld then dress it up in a garb that is appropriate to it in the context  .   .   .   . The ' content ' is part of the total planning that takes place  . "lhere is no clear line between the " what ' and the ' how '  .   .   . " The complexity that arises from the interactions of these differentypes of goals leads to situations where the content of an utterance is dictated by the requirement that it t it into the current context  . For example , a speaker may plan to inform a bearer of a particular fact  . Tbc context of the discou~may make it impossible for the speaker to make an abrupt transition from the curren topic to the topic that includes that proposition  , To make this transition according to the communicative rules may require planning another utterance  , Planning this utterance will in turn generate other goals of inforoting  , concept activation and focusing . The actions used to satisfy these goals may affect the planning of the utterance that gave rise to the subgoal  . In this situation , there is no clear dividing line between " what to say " and " how to say it "  . 
Il LAn Integrated Approach to Planning Speech Acts A probem--solving system that plans utterances must havelheability to describe actions at different levels of abstraction  , the ability to speCify a partial ordering among sequences of actions  , and the ability to consider a plan globally to discover interactions and constraints among the actions already planned  . It must have an intelligent method for maintaining alternatives  , and evaluating them comparatively . Since reasoning about belief is very important in planning utterance  , the planning system must have a knowledge representation that is adequate for representing facts about belief  , and a deduction system that is capable of using that represent a u on efficiently  . IAchieve(P ) /' KAMI ' is a planning system , which is currently beiug implemented , th : K builds on the NOAII planning system of Saccrdoti  \[10\]  . \] t uses a possible-worlds semantics approach to reasoning about belief " and the effects that various actions have on belief  \[8\] and represents actions in a data structure called a procedural network  . The procedural network consists of nt~es representing actions at somclevel of abstraction  , along with split nodes , which specify several parually urder cd sequences of actions that can be performed in any order  , or perhaps even in parallel , and choice nodes which specify alternate actions , any one of which would achieve the goal . 
Figure 1 is an exampl c of a simple procedural network that represents the following plan : The top--level goal is to achieve P  . The downward link from that node m the net points to an expansion of actions and subgoals  , which when perform cd or achieved , will make P true in the resulting world . The plan consists of a choice betw cen two alternatives  . Intile first the agent A does actions At and A2 . and no commitment has been made to the ordering of these two parts of th cplan  . After both of those parts havc been complct cly planned and executed  , th cn action A \] is performed in th cr ~ sulting world  . The other alternative is for agent B to perform action  A4  . 
It is an important feature of KAMP that it can represent actions at several levels of abstraction  . An INFORM action can be considered as a high level action  , which is expanded at a lower level of abstraction into concept activation and focusing actions  . After each expansion to a lower level of abstraction  ,  ~ . ^MP invokes a set of procedures called critics that cxa  , ninctile plan globally , considering the interactions bct wccn its parts , resolving conflicts , making the best choice among availab ; e alternatives , and noticing redundant a cuonsor actions that could bc subsumed by minor alterations in another part of the plan  . Tile control structure could bc described as a loop that makes a plan  , expands it . criticizes thc result , and expands it again , until th centir c plan consists of c x ccutabl c actions  . 
The following is an example of the type of problem that KAMP has been tested on : A robot namcd Rob and a mannam cd John arc in a room that is adjacentoa hallway containing a clock  . Both Rob and John are capable of moving , reading clocks , and talking to each other , and they each know that the other is capable of performing these actions  . They both know that they are in the room , and they both know where tile hallway is . 
Neither Robnor John knows what time it is . Suppose that Rob knows that the clock is in the I ' tall  , but John does not . Suppose further that John wants to know what time it is  . and Robk now she does . Furthermore , Rubishelpful , and wants to do what he can to insure that John achieves his goal  . Rob's planning system must come up with a plan , perhaps involving actions by both Rob and John . that will result in John knowing what time it is . 
Rob can devise a plan using KAMP that consists of a choice between two alternalives  , First , if John could find out where the clock is . he could go to the clock and read it , and in the resulting state would know the time . 
So . Rob can tell John where the clock is , " asoning that this information is sufficient for John to form and execute a plan that would achieve his goal  . 
' ~" DO(AtAt )
DO(AtA2
DO(B,A4) J
Figure 1
A Simple Procedural Network
Do(A , A3) I
Actlieve ( Oetached ( Bracel , Como))
IActtievel Loo.se(BoltlIIij
Achieve ( Know WhaOs ( Aoor . E\]oltl )) ciaieve(KnowWhalls(AI)l~r . Loosen ( Bolt I . Wfl ))) chieve(t(nowWhatlsL--~'Achieve(Has . =, . =,\[ A cllieve(Know(Ap , r . On(Tat,le . Wrl ))) ' ~ Oo(Aoor . Get(Wrl . Tattle ;)
Figure 2
A Plan to Remove a Bolt
The second alternative is t ' or Rob to mov c into the hall and read the clock himself  , move back into the room . and tcUJohn the time . 
As of the time of this writing . KAMP has been implemented and tested on problems involving the planning of high level speech act descriptions  , and pcrfonns tasks comparable to the planner implcmcntcd by Cohen  . A more complete description of this planner , and the motivation for its design can be found in  \[\]  , \] . The following example is intended to give the reader a feeling for how the planner will prncced in a typical situation involving linguistic planning  , but is not a description of a currently working system  . 
An expert and an apprentice are cooperating in the task of repairing an air compressor  . The expert is assumed to be a computer system that has complete knowledge of all aspects of the task  , but has no means of manipulating the world except by requesting the apprentice to do things  . 
and furnish it ~ ghimor her with the knowledge necd cd to complete the task  . 
Figure 2 shows a partially completed procedural network . The node at the highest level indicates the planner's toplevel goal  . which in this case is

Loosen ( Bolt 1. Wrll)
Assume that the apprentice knows that rite part is to be removed  , and wants to do the removal , but does not know of a procedure \[' or doing it . 
This situation would hold if the goal marked with an asterisk in figure  2 were unsatisfied . The expert must plan an action to inform ri~e apprentice of what the desired action is  . This goal expands into an INFOR Maction . 
The expert also be iicv ~ that the apprentice does not know where the wrench is  , and plans another \[ NI : ORM action to tell him where it is located  . 
The planner tests d~cACIIIt : , VE goals to see if it b clicves d~at any of them arc  , already true in die current state of the world . In the case we arc considering Y . A MFS model of the hearer should indicate that he ktlows what the bolt is  . and what the wrench is , but doesn't know what the action is . i . e . that he should use that particular wrench to loosen that bolt  , and he doesn't know the location of the wrench . \[ finforming actions ~ e planned to satisfy those goals that are not already satisfied  ; then that part of the plan looks like Figure 3 . 
Each of the INFORM actions is a high-level action that can be expanded  . 
The planner has a set of standard expansions for actions of this type  . In removing a particular object ( BRACEI ) from an air compressor , \[ tknows that this goal can be achieved by the apprentic executing a particular unfastening operation involving a specific wrench and a specific bolt  , " ll~e expert knows that the apprentice can do the action if he knows what the objects involved in the cask are  . and knows what the action is ( i . e . that he knows how to do the , action ) . This is reflected in the second goal in the split path in the procedural network  . Since the plan also requires obtaining a wrench and using it  , a goal is also established that tile apprentice knows where the wrench is : hence the goal ^ CIllEvE  ( Know ( Apprentice . On ( Table . 

NOAII , these actions were written in SOUP code . In this planner , they are represented in situation-action rules . The conditional of the rule involves tests on the type of action to be performed  , the hearer's knowledge , and social goals . The action is to select a particular strategy for expanding the action  . In this case , a rule such as /\[ you are expanding an inform of what an action involving the hearer as agent is  . then use an IMPERATIVE syntactic construct to describe the action  . The planner then inserts the expansion shown in Figure  4 into the plan . 
~ ~ Achilve ( Know Whatls ( Al ~ Dr . Lo~m ~( Bolt 1. Wrl)))

DO ( Exoert . lnform val(A130 r . L0 osen(Bo~tI , Wr 1)))"% ~ A cilieve ( KnowWhatis ~ Achieve ( Hgs
II
I ./
JAchieve(Kn?w('~pot'On(Table'WrI)))


IO ~( Exp . lntorm ( A ~ pr . Onl Tahle . Wr Ill II
Figure 3
Planning to Inform
Do ( Agtor . Get ( WeI )) I)
DolExpert ., ~ V (" Loo~n " l)
Do(Expert , CACT(AgDf . Wfl )) IN ~ f
Figure 4
Expanding the INFORMA ct
This sub-plan is marked by a tag indicating that it is to be realized by an Unpcrative  . The split specifics which h ) wer level a cuonsarc performed by the utterance of the imperative  . At some point , a critic will choose an ordering for the actions . Without further information the scntcnc could be realiz cd in any of the following ways  , some of which sound strange when spoken in is lolation: 
Loosen Boltl with Wrl.
With Wrlloose nBOltl.
Boltlloosen with Wrl.
The first sentence above sounds natural in isolation  . \]' heother two might be chosen if a critic notic ~ a need to realize a focns mg action that has been plaun cd  . For example , the second sentence shiftSth c focus to the wrench instead of the bolt ` and would be useful in organizing a series of instructions around what tools to use  . The third would be used in a discourse organized around what object to manipulate aexLUp to this point ` the phmning processil as been quite :  ; traighd or ward , since none of the critics have come in topiny . However , since there arc two INFORM actions on two branches of the same split  , thc COMBINE-CONCE PT-ACTIVATION critic is invoked . This critic is invoked whenever a plan contains a concept activation on one branch of the split  , and an inform of some property of the activated object on the other branch  . Sometimes the planner can combine the two informing actions into one by including the property description of one of the int brmm gact S into the description that is being used for the concept activation  . 
In this particular example , ~ critic would av . , ' ~ h to the Do ( Expe ~ CACT ( Appr . . Wri ) ) action the copetraint that one of the realizing descriptors must be ON  ( Wri . Table ) . and the goal that the apprentice knows the wrench is on the table is marked as already satisfied  . 
Another critic , the REDUNDANT-PATII critic , notices when portions of two brances of a split contain identical actions  , and collapses the two branches into one . This critic , when applied to utterance plans will oRen result in a sentence with an and conjunction  . The critic is not restricted to apply only m linguistic actions  , and may apply to other types of actions as well . 
Or . her critics know about a cuon subsumption , and what kinds of focusing actions can be realized in terms of which linguistic choices  . One of these action subsumption critics can make a decision about the ordering of the concept activations  , and can mark discourse goals as pha ,  . ") ms . in U is example , there are no spccific discourse goal S , so it is pussibt c to chose the default verb -object ? instrument ordering  . 
On the next next expansion cycle , the concept activations must be expanded into utt crances  . This means planning descriptors for the objects . 
Planning the risht description requires reasoning about what the hearer believes about the object ` describing it as economically as possible  , and then adding the additional descriptors recommended by the action subsumption critic  . The final step is realizing the descriptors in natural language  . Some descriptors have straightforward realizations  , as lexical items . Otbers may require planning a prepositional phrnscora relative clause  . 
IV . Formally dcfi , ingH ) ; guistic actions If actions are to be planned by a planning system  , th cy must be defined formally so they can bcused by the system  . This means explicitly stating the preconditions and effects of each action  . Physical actions havc received attention in the literature on planning  , but one ~ pect of physical actions L hat has been ignored arc th circff ccts on kuow lcdgc  . Moorc\[8\] suggest San approach to formalizing , the km ) wicd gccffccL '; of physEalactions , so \[ will not pursue L hat further at this time . 
A fairly large amount of work has been done on the formal specification of speech acts un the level of informing and requesting  , etc . Most of this work has bccn done by Scarictill , and has been in corpora tcd into a planning system by Cohen  \[3\]  . 
Not much has been done to formally specify the actions of focusing and concept activation  . Sidncr \[12\] has developed a set of formal rules for detecting focus movement in a discourse  , and has suggested that these rules could be translated into an appropriate set of actions that a generation system could use  . Since there are a number of well defined strategies that speakers use to focus on different topics  . I suggest that the preconditions and effect S of these strategies could be defined precisely and they can bc incorporated as operators in a planning syst cm  . Reichmann \[9J describes a number of focusing strategies and the situations in which they are applicable  . The focusing mechanism is driven by the spcakcr's goal that the bearer know what is currently being focused on  . Tb is particular type of knowledge state goal is satisfied by a varicty of different actions  . These actions have preconditions which depend on what the current state of the discourse is  , and what type of shift is taking place . 
Consider the problem of moving the focus back to the previous topic of discussion after a brief digression onto a diEerent hut related topic  . 
Reichma on point Sout that several actions arc available  . Oncsochaction is the utterance of " anyway '* which signals a more or tcs sexpected focus ~ hffL  . She claims that the utterance of " but " can achieve a similar effect  , but is used where the speaker believes that the hearer believes that a discu ~ ion on the current topic will continue  , and L hat presupposition needs to be countered . Each of these two actions will be defincd in the planning system as operator  . The ?' but " operator will have as an additional precondition that the hearer believes that the speaker's next uttorance will be part of the current context  . Both operators will hay = the effect that the hearer believes that the speaker is focusing on the prc vious topic of discussion  . 
Other operators that are available includ c cxplicity labeled shifts  . This operator exp . ~ dsrata planning an INFORM of a fOCUS shill The previous example of Take John  . for instance , is an example of such an action . 
The prccLs clogical axiomiuzation of focusing and the prccisc definitions of each of these actions is a topic of curre  . .t research . The point being made here is that these focusing actions can bcs pccificd formally  , One goal of this research is to formally describe linguistic actions and other knowledge producing actions adequately enough to demonstrate the f casibility of a language plmming system  . 
V . Current Status
The K^MP planner described in this paper is in the early stages of implementation  . It can solve interesting problems in finding multiple agent plans  , and plans involving acquiring and using knowlcge . It has not bee . 
applied directly to language yet ` but this is the next stcp in research  . 

Focusing actions need to be described formally , and critics have to be defined precisely and implemented  . This work is currendy in progress . 
Although still in its early stages , this approach shows a great deal of promise for developing a computer system that is capable of producing utterances that approach the richness that is apparent in even the simplest human communication  . 
REFERENCES\[1\]Appelt , Douglas , A Planner for Reasoning about Knowledgemid Belief  , Proceedings of the First Conference of the American Association for 
Artificial Intelligence , 1980.
\[2\] Austin , J . , Howto Do Things with Words , J . O . Urmson ( ed . ), Oxford
University Pre ~1962\[3\] Cohen , Philip , On Knowing What to Say : Planning Spech Acts , Technical Report #118 . University of Toronto .  1 . 978\[4\] Gricc , H . P . , Logic and Coversation , in Davidson , cd . , The Logic of Grammar . , Dickenson Publishing Co . , Encino , California , \[975 . 
\[5\] Grosz , Barbara J . , Focusing and Description in Natural Language Dialogs  , in Elements of Discoursc Understanding : Proccedings of a Workshop on Computational Aspects of Linguistic Structure and Discourse Setting  , A . K . Joshi et aleds . , Cambridge University Press . Cambridge . 
Ealgland . 1980.
\[6\] Halliday , M . A . K . , Language Structure and Language Ftmctiol ~ in Lyons  , c d . , Ncw Horizons in Linguistics . 
\[7\] Halliday , M . A . K . , Language as Social Semiotic , University Park Press , 
Baltimore , Md ., 1978.
\[8\] Moore . Robert C . , Reasoning about Knowledge and Action . Ph . D . 
thesis , Massachusetts Institute of Technology . 1979\[9\] Reichman . Rachel . Conversational Coherency . Center for Research in Computing Technology To chnical Rcport  TR-17-78  . Harvard University . 

\[10\] Sacer dod , Earl , A Structure for Plans and Behavior . Elsevier North-Holland , Inc . . Amsterdam , The Nedlcriands , 1 . 977\[' l_l \] Searte , John , Speech Acts , Cambridge Univ crsiy Press , 1969\[12\] Sidner , Candace L . Toward a Computational Theory of Definite Anaphora Comprehensioni English Discourse  . Massichusetts Institute of Technology Aritificial Intelligence Laboratory technical note  TR-537  ,  1979 . 

