WHATTY PEOFINTER ACTIONISITTOBE
Emanuel A . Schegloff
Department of Sociology , U.C.L.A.
For one , like myself , who knows something about human
interaction , but next to nothing about computers and human /machine interaction  , the most useful role at a meeting such as this is to listen  , to hear the troubles of those who work actively in the area  , and to respond when some problem comes up for whose solution the practices of human interactant seems relevant  . Here , therefore , I will merely mention some areas in which such exchanges may be useful  . 
There appear to be two sorts of status for machine /tech-no logy under consideration here  . In one , the interac-tants themselves are humans , but the interaction between them is carried by some technology  . We have had the tel-ephone for about lO0 years now , and letter writing much longer , so there is a history here ; to it are to be added video technology , as in some of the work reported by John Carey , or computers , as in the " computer conferencing " work reported by Hiltz and her colleagues  , among others . In the other sort of concern , one or more of the participants in an interaction is to be a computer  . 
Here the issues seem to be : should this participant be designed to approximate a human interact ant ? What is required to do this ? Is what is required possible ? l  ) If we take a satentative starting point that person person interaction should tell us what machine-person interaction should be like  ( as Jerry Hobbs suggests in a useful orienting set of question she circulated to us  )  , we still need to determine what type of person person interaction we should consult  . It is common to suppose that ordinary conversation is  , or should be , the model . 
But that is but one of a number of " speech -exchange systems " persons use to organize interaction  , or to be organized by in it . " t ~ eetings , "" debates, . . . . interviews , " and " ceremonies " a revernacular names for other technically specifiable  , speech-exchange systems orgain zing person person interaction  . Different types of turn-tak-ing organization are involved in each  , and differences in turntaking organization can have extensive ramifications for the conduct of the interaction  , and the sorts of capacities required of the interactants  . In the design Qf computer interactants , and in the introduction of technological intermediaries in human-human interaction  , the issue remains which type of person person interaction is aimed for or achieved  . For example , in the Penn sylvania videolink-up of senior citizen homes  , John C are y asks whether the results look more like conversation or like commercial television  . But many of details he reports suggests that the form of technological intervention has made what resulted most like a " meeting " speech exchange system  . 
2 ) The term " interactive " in " interactive program " or in " person/machine interaction " seems to refer to no more than that provision is made for participation by more than one participant  . " Interactive " in this sense is not necessarily " interactional  , " i . e .   , the determination of at least some aspects of each party's participation by collaboration of the parties  . For the " talk " part of person person interaction  , a / the major vehicle for this " interactionality " is the sequential organization of the talk  ; that is , the construction of units of participation with specific respect to the details of what has preceded  , and thereby the sequential position in which a current bit of talk is being done  . Included among the relevant aspects of " what has preceded " and " current sequential position " is " temporality  , " or " realtime , " though not necessarily measured by conventional chronometry  . What are , by common sense standards , quite tiny bits of silence--two tenths of a second  , or less ( what we call micro-pauses ) -- can , and regularly do , have substantial sequential and interactional consequences  . The character of the talk after them is regular ly different  , or is subject to different analysis , interpretation or inference . 
Although the telephone deprives interactants of visual access to each other  , it leaves this " realtime " tempo-rality largely unaffected  , and with it the integrity of sequential organization  . Nearly all the technological interventions I have heard about -- whether replacing an interactant  , or inserted as a medium between interact ants -- impacts on this aspect of the exchange of talk  . It is one reason for wondering whether retention of ordinary conversation as the target of this enterprise is appropriate  . For some of the contemplated innovations , like computer conferencing , exchanges of letters may be a more appropriate past model to study  , for there too more than one may " speak " at a time  , long lapses may intervene between messages , sequential ordering may be puzzling ( as in " Did the letters cross in the mail ?" ) etc . 
3 ) Sequential organization has a direct bearing on an issue which must be of continuing concern to workers in this area -- that of understanding and misunderstanding  . 
It is the sequential ( including temporal ) organization of the talk which , in ordinary conversation , provides running evidence to participants that , and how , they have been understood . The devices by which troubles of understanding are addressed  ( what we call " repair , " discussed for computers by Phil Hayes in a recent paper  ) -- requests for repetition or clarification and the like--are only one part of the machinery which is at work  . 
Regularly , in ordinary conversation , a speaker can detect from the produced-to-be -responsiven xt turn of another s/he has or has been  , misunderstood , and can immediately intervene to set matters right  . This is a major safe-guard of " intersubjectivity  , " are tention of a sense that the " sa ~ thing " is being understood as what is being spoken of  . The requirements on interactants to make this work are substantial  , but in ordinary conversation , much of the work is carried as a byproduct of ordinary sequential organization  . The ane codotes I have heard about misunderstanding sgoing undetected for long stretches when computers are the medium  , and leading to , or past , the verge of nastiness , suggest that these are real problems to be faced . 
4 ) In all the business of person person interaction there operates what we call " recipient-design " -- the design of the participation by each party by reference to the features  ( personal and idiosyncratic , or categorial ) of the recipient or co-participant . The formal mach in-eries of turntaking , sequential organization , repair , etc . are always conditioned in their realization on particular occasions and moments by this consideration  . I don't know how this enters into plans for computerized interactants  , and it remains to be seen how it will enter into the participation of humans dealing with computers  . 
Persons make all sorts of allowances for children , nonnative speakers , animals , the handicapped , etc . But there are other allowances they do not make , indeed that don't present themselves as allowances or allowables  . 
What is involved here is a determination of where the robustness is and where the brittleness  , in interacting with persons by computers , for in the areas of robustness it may be that many of the issues I've mentioned may be safely ignored  ; the people " will understand . "

Throughout these notes , we are at a very general tevel of discourse . The real pay offs , however , will come from discussing specifics . For that , interaction will be needed , rather than position papers . 

