THE PROCESS OF COMMUNICATION INFACE TO FACEVS . COMPUTERIZED CONFERENCES;
ACONTROTT . ~nEXPERIMENTUSINGBALES INTERACTION PROCESS ANALYSIS 
Start Roxanne Kiltz , Kenneth Johnson , and Ann Marie Rabke
Upsala College

A computerized conference ( CC ) is a form of co~znunica-tion in which participants type into and read frc ~ a computer terminal  . The participants may be online at the same time- -termeda " synchrononous " conference  , or may interact any n chronous ~ . The conversation is stored and mediated by the computer  . 
How does this form of communication change the process and outcome of group discussions  , as compared to the " normal " face to face ( FtF ) medium of group discussion , where participants communicate by talking , listening and observing nonverbal behavior , and where there is no lag between the sending and receipt of communication signals ? This paper briefly ~* mmarizes theres UltS of a controlled laboratory experiment designed to quant if ~ the manner in which conversation and group decision making varies between FtF and CC  . Those who wish more detail are referred to the literature review which served as the basis for the design of the experiment  ( Hiltz ,  1975 ) and to the full technical report on the results ( Hiltz , Johnson , Aronovitch , and Turoff ,  1980) . 
This paper is excerpted from a longer paper on the analysis of communications process in the two media and their correlates  ( Hiltz , Johnson and Rabke , 198Q) . 
0 v~vIEwOFmmz~na~T
The chief independent variable of interest is the impact of computerized conferencing a nac~un ications mode upon the process and outcome of group decision making  , as compared to face-to-face discussions . Two different types of tasks were chosen , and group size was set at five persons . The subjects were Upsala College undergraduate , graduate and continuing education students . The communications processor profile was quantified using Bales Interaction process Analysis  ( see Bales ,  1950) . 
In computerized conferenclng , each participant is physically alone with a c ~mputer terminal attached to a telephone  . In order to communicate , he or she types entries into the terminal and reads entries sent by the other participants  , rather than speaking and listening . 
Entering input and res ~ ttug output may be done totally at the pace end time chosen b ~ each individual  . Con-ceivably , for instance , all group members could be entering comments simultaneously  . Receipt of messages from others is at the terminal print speed of  30 characters per second . 
Even when all five participants are online at the s ~ me time  , there is considerable lagin a computer conference between the time a discussant types in a co~ent  , and when a response to that comment is received . 
First , each of the other participants must finish what they are typing at the time  ; then they read the waiting item ; then they may type in a response ; then the author of the original cou~ent must finish his or her typing of a subsequent item and print and read the response  . There is thus a definite " a synchronous " quality even to " synchronous " computer conferences  . 
As a result , computer conferences often develop several simultaneous threads of discussion that are being discussed concurrently  , whereas face to face discussions tend to focus oD one single topic at a time and then move on to subsequent topics  . ( See Hiltz and Turoff ,  1978 , for a complete description of CC as a mode of cummunicatlon  )  . 
A variable of secondary Interest is problem type . Much experimental literature indicates that the nature Of the problem has a great deal to do with grou ~ performance  . One type of problem that we used is the human re lations case as developed by Bales  . These are medium complex , unsettled problems that have no speci-fic " correct " answer  . The second type was a " scienti-fic " ~- anklng problem  ( requiring no specific expertise )  , which has a single correct solution plus measurable degrees of bown early correct a groupts answer may be  . 
The ranking problem , " Lost in the Arctic " , was adapted for ~-~ etration over a conferencing system by permission of its originators  ( See Eady and Lafferty )  . 
The experiments thus had a 2x2 factorial design ( see figure one )  . The factors were mode of communication ( face-to-face vs . camputerlzed conference ) and problem type ( human relations vs . a more " scientific " ranking problem with a correct answer  )  . These factors constituted the " independent variables  . " Each problem-mode condition included a total of eight groups  . 
Figure 1
Design of the Experiment
Two by Two Factorial with Repeated Measures :
Blocks of Four
Task Task
Type A Type B

Face-to-Face 4 h

Conference ~
BACKGROUND:THEBALESEX PERIMENTS ANDIN Ter ACTION
PROCESSANALYSIS
Working at the Laboratory of Social Relations at Harvard  , Bales and his colleagues developed a set of categories and procedures for coding the interaction in small face-to-face decision making groups which became very widely utilized and generated a great deal of data about the nature of co~unicmtion and social processes within such groups  . 
Coding of the co~nunications interaction by Interaction Process Analysis involves noting who makes a statement or nonverbal participation  ( such as nodding agreement )  ; to whom the action was addressed ; and into which of twelve categories the action best fits  . These cate-gorles are listed in subsequent tables and explained below  . The distribution of co~z~unications units among the twelve categories constituted one of the main dependent variables for this experiment  . We expected significant differences associated with mode of communication  . We also expected some differences associated with task type  . We did not feel that we had enough information to predict the directions of these differences  . For almost every category , we could think of some arguments that would lead to a prediction that the category would be " higher " in CC  , and some reasons why it might be lower . 


The number of Bales units perface to face group was much greater than the number for acc group  . There-for e , each individual and group was transformed to a percentage distribution among the ~ velve categories  . 
Then statistical zests were performed to determine if there were any significant differences in IPA distributions associated with mode of communication  , prob-blem , order of problem , and the interaction among these variables in relation to the percentage distribution for each of the Bales categories  . 
There are many different ways in which the percentages could be computed  . To take full advantage of the design , we cumputed the percentage distribution for each individtu ~ l  , in each condition . Thus , we actu ~ S-ly have the Bales distributions for each of  80 individuals in a face to face conference , and in a computerized conference . 
The mode of analysis was a two by two factorial nested design  . If there was no significant group effect , then the error terms could be " pooled " , meaning we could use the 80 observations as independent observations for statistical test purposes  . We also performed a nonparametric test on the dat ~ for each Bales category  , which gave us similar results . 
DIFFERENCES ASSOCIATED WITH COmmUNICATION MODE Two of the detailed analysis of variance tables on which the st~mary here is based are included as an Appendix  . Note that the analyses were first performed separately for the two problems  , using c ~ unication mode as ~ he independent variable  . For each problem , we tested the significance of mode of c~unicat ion  , order ( whether it was the first or second problem solved by the group  )  , and the interaction between mode and order ? Listed in figures two and three is a su~nary of the statistical results of the  24 analyses of variance which examined observed differences between communication modes for each of the two rases  . The first two colu ~ us show the mean percentage of co~nunications in each category  . For example , in the first table , results for Forest Ranger , the first column shows that on the average less than  1% of an individual's communications were verbally " showing solidarity "  , but in CC ,  3 . 22% fell into this category . The third column shows that the results for the 16 groups in the nested factor-ial design were significant at ~ he  . 005 level , meaning that the probability of tae observed differences occuring by chance in a sample this size is one in  200  . 
The fourth column shows the level of significance if the group was not a significant variable and the observations could be pooled  , with the 80 individuals treated as independent observations . In this case , group was significant , so the pooled analysis could not be done . 
In looking at these data , there is an apparent coding problem . Even for the Forest Ranger problem , face to face , we obtained a somewhat different distribution of coding than did persons coding problem discussions such as this who were directly trained by Bales  . ( See Bales and Borgatta , 1955, p . 400 for the complete ~ qtribu-tions ) . Our coding has 20% more of the statements clss sified as " giving opinions " than Bales and Borgatta code  , and correspondingly lower percentages in all of the other categories  . This means that our results cannot be directly compared to those of other investigators  , since apparently ~ he training for coding interpreted many more statements as representing some sort of analysis or opinion than " should " be there  , according to the distributions obtained for similar studies by Bales and his colleagues  .   ( Other possible explana-tions are that Upsala College has produced an ~ nusually op in ionated and analytic set of students or that the effect of pre-experimental tra ining inccraises opinion giving even in subsequent FtF discussions  .   ) It does not affect the comparisons among problems and modes for this stu ~  , since all of the coders were coding the data with the same guidelines and inter-pre tations  . In ~ he majority of cases , the same pair of coders coded both the CC and FtF condition for the same group  . In any case , the seven individuals who did the coding had been trained to an acceptable level of rel iability  . 
Figure 2
Summary of IPA Results for
Forest Rangerby
Mode of C~.-unica ~ ion and Order
Bales Category Average PSi ~ mificance
FTF CC By Group Pooled

Solidarity .793 .22 .005 G3
Tension Release 3.9 8.8 3.000 5.0005
Agreement 13.19 4.79 .0005 .0005

Suggestions 4.70 9.2 1.i0.i0
Opinion 54.21 53.92 X X
Orientation 12.81 16.10.i 0.02
Asks for:
Orientation 3.27 1.5 8.05 GS
Opinion 2.88 5.3 6.0 1.01
Su@gestions .30 .62 .25 .20

Disagreement 4.85 2.39 .05 .05
Tension : .812 .16 .05 .01
ProblemIst .281 .68
Problem 2nd 1.33 2.64
Antagoni ~: .751 .67 X X
GS ? Group significant cannot pool by ind/vid ~
Figure 3
Suwmary of IPA Results for
Arctic by
Mode of Ct~m . unication and Order
Bales Category AvermgeP Significance
FTF CC By Group Pooled

Solidarity 1.66 2.h ~. I 0.05
Tension " ~ lease 7.70 1.60.000 5.0005
Agreement 13.35 6.8 2.01 GS

Suggestions 3.56 4.8 9.2 0.i O
Problemist 2.95 6.1/
Problem 2nd 4.17 3.61
Opinion 42.99 57.8 0.005 G3
Orientation 14.58 11.8 1.25 GS
Asks for:
Orientation 3.72 1.62
Opinion 5.15 7.~6
Suggestions l .lh .58 ?02 5.20
X ? O0 O5
GS ~ S
Disagreement 3.5 12. h6 XGS
Tension : 1.5 2.6 4.0 25.00 5
Antagonism : l.ll 1.86 XGS
Problemlet ? 77.73
Problem 2nd 1.45 3.00
GS = Group significant cannot pool by individual
DISCUSSION OF THERESULTS
The twelve categories in Bales Interaction Process Analysis can be combined into four main zhlnctional areas  . Categories 13 and 1012 are the " social-emo-tlonal " functions , oriented towards internal group process . The first three are called " social-emotional positive "  , while 1012 are " negative " . Categories 79 are " Task oriented " , giving answers or contributions to solving the problem faced by the group  , and categories h-6 are varieties of " asking questions " in the task oriented area  . 
It will be noted , by wa ~- of further introduction , that there are some very strong differences in the profiles  , even In the same medium , depending upon the type of task faced by the group  , and that there is some interaction between task type and medium  . For example , more tension was shown in the arctic problem in the CC condition  ; more in the Forest Ranger problem in the FTF condition  . 
We will take each of the categories , describing more fully what is included in them , and then discuss the extent to which there appear to be significant differences between the media in the relative prevalence of communications of that type  . We will also try to explain the possible reasons for or implications of significant d/fferences that are discovered  . 
1 . "Shows solidarity , raises other's status , gives help , reward " Included in this category are initial and responsive acts of active solidarity sad affection  , such as saying " hello " and making friendly or congenial remarks to " break the ice "  ; praising or encouraging the other(s ) ; giving support or sympath yor offers of assistance  ; urging harmony and cooperation . These are all overt attempts to improve the solidarity of the group  . 
Note that there is a significantly greater amount of " showing solidarity " in computerized conferencing  . 
This is probably because much of the behavior of this type in a face to face situation is nonverbal  , such as smiling in a friendly manner while nodding encouragement  . Nonverbal acts in this category are note odable from the tapes of the discussions  . In the CC condition , however , the participants realize that they must put such things into words  . 
Another possible explanation is that the greater tendency towards over t  , explicit showing of solidarity is an attempt to compensate for the perceived coldness and impersonality of the medium  . 
2 . "Shows Tension Release , Jokes , laughs , shows satisfaction " This includes expressions of pleasure or happiness  , making friendly Jokes or kidding remarks , laughing . 
There was significantly more tension release overtly expressed in the face to face groups  . Much of this was waves of laughter , particularly in the arctic problem . The participants did not put this into words in the conference when typing  . Observing them , however , there was much private laughter and verbal expressions showing " tension release "  , but these do not appear in the transcript . It is part of the private " letting down of face " that occurs but is not communicated thro-ugh the computer  . 
3 . " Agrees , shows passive acceptance , understands , con-curs , complies " This occurs as concurrence in a proposed course of action or carrying out of any activity which has been requested by others  . There is significantly more agreement overtly expressed in face to face conferences than in computerized conferences  . We suspect that this is related to the pressure to conform created by nonverbal behavior and the physical presence of the other group members  . In any case , it is undoubtedly related to the greater difficulty of CC groups in reaching total consensus  . 
h . " Gives SUggestion , direction , implying autonom ~ for other " Includes giving suggestions about the task or sUgges-ting concrete actions in the near term to attain a group goal  . There is a tendency for more suggestions to be given by more people Incomputerized conferencing  . This is part of the equalitarian tendency for more members to actively participate in the task behavior of a group in CC  . In one of the problems , the d/fference was statistically significant at the  . 05 level ; whereas in the other , it was sizable but did not reach statistical significance  . 
5 . " Gives opinion , evaluation , analysis , expresses feeling , wish " Includes all reasoning or expressions of evaluation or interpretation  . 
This is the most frequent type of co- , ~ unication for both problems and Both modes . For the Bales problem , there was no difference in its prevalence associated with mode of co~nuaication  . For the Arctic problem , however , there ~& s a large and statistica J_ly significant difference  , with more opinion giving in the CC condition . 
6 . " Gives Orientation , information , repeats , clarifies , confirms t , This includes statements that are meant to secure the attention of the other  ,   ( such as " There are two points I'd like to make . . . ") , restating or reporting the essential content of what the group has read or said  ; non-inferential , descriptive generalizations or summaries of the sit % latlon facing the group  . There are no clear differences here . Whereas there is a statistically significant difference in the direction of giving more orientation in CC for Forest Ranger  , for the other problem , the difference is reversed ,  7 . " Asks for orientation , information , repetition and
COni ~ Irmation ''
There is a significant tendency for this to occur more often in face to face discussions  . This is probably because of the frequency with which a group member does no the aror understand the pronunciation of a sentence or partial utterance  . In CC , people are usually more careful to state their thoughts clearly  , and the recipient can read it several times rather than asking for repetition if it is not understood the first time or is later forgotten  . We have noticed many CC participants going back and looking at co~nents a second or third tim ~ in a face to face discussion  , they would probably ask something like : " What was it you said before about x ? "  . 
8 . " Asks for opinion , evaluation , analysis , expression of feeling " ?7 This occurs more frequently in ccmpu Zerized confer-enc in ~  . For one of the problems , the difference reached statisticals ignificance  , whereas it did not for the other . ~histendency to more frequent-ly and expl icitly ask for the opinions of all the other group members  , as well as to more spontaneously offer ones own opinions and analyses in  C0  , does seem to qualitatively be characteristic of theme ~ i ~  . 
9 . " Asks fors ~ estion , direction , possible ways of action " This includes all over  ~  , explicit requests , such as " What shall we do now ?" . It is not very prevalent in either medi , ~ , and there are no significant differences . 
i0 . " Disagrees , shows passive rejection , formality , with olds resources " This includes all the milder forms of disagreement or refusal to c caply or reciprocate  . This is also an infrequent form of communicn tion , but it occurs more in face to face discussions than in CC  . 
ii . " Showstension , asks for help , with draws out of field " Includes indications that the subject feels-nYious or frustrated  , with no particular other group member as the focus of these negative feelings  . The results on this are rather puzzling . We end up with a statistically significant tendency for there to be more tensions when in CC for the ForestRan-ger problem  , hut in FTF for the Arctic problem . 
Substantively , the proportion of these communications is very ~ m ~ llinnny c ~ e  , and therefore , the small differences are not import as z . 
12 . " Showsantagonism , deflates other's s~atus , de-fends or asserts self " This includes autocratic attempts to control or direct others  , rejection or refusal of a request , de-riding or criticizing others . 
This is infrequent in both media and there are no significant differences  . 
EFFECTSOFORDER
For the most par ~ , it did not matter whether the CO or the FtF discussion was held first  . However , more saggestions were offered on the arctic problem if it was discussed in CC as ~ e first problem  , but more in FTF discussion if the FTF was preceeded by a CC condition  . This is consistent with the tendency for CC to promote more giving of sug Eestions  ; apparently , the tendency carries over to a subsequent f~ce ~ of a ceconversation  . This raises the interesting possibi'It "/ that the group process and structure can be permanently changed by the experience of interacting through CC  , a change that will carry over even to communications in other modes  . Other pieces of evidence from others ~ u dies , including self reports of participants in long term field trials  , indicate the same poasibillty . 

Our investigation confirms the hypothesia that there are some sign if l can ~ differences in the group communication process between face to face and compu-termediated discussions  . Such differences seem ~ obe associated with other characteristics of the medium  , such as the greater tendency for minor lt ? opinions to be maintained  , rather than a total group consensus emerg in K , in a fuller analysis ( Hiltz , Johnson , Arono ~? ch and Turoff ,  1980 ) we show that the observed differences in interaction profiles are highly correlated w~h the abillty of a group to reach consensus and wirer the quali~y of group decision reached  . 

Analyses of Variance
Bales Categories by Mode and Problem 9Y~h Hested Factorial

Individual % Data
Bales Category 1-Shows Solidarity

Mode of Crm--unicn tion
FT FCC
Orderist 1.6893 2.4348 2.0620 of
Problem 2 rid 1.6228 2.4437 2.0333 1.6561 2.4392
Nested Design
Source SS ~ fMSF
A 12.26731 12.2673 3.9004
B .0166 1.016 6.0053
AxB .0285 i .0285 .0091
C/AB 37.74 1412 3.1451 1.3745
S/ABC i 46.~4306 42.2881
Tot.i ~6.496779
Pooled ANOVA
Table Val~es Eor Fi and 12a-e = 4 . 7512 and 64 df-1 . 90
Source SS df MSF
A 12.26731 12.267 35.06 18e
B .0166 1.016 6.0068
AxB .0285 i .0285 .01, 17
WG 184.18~476 2.4234
Tot . 196.496779
Table Value for F1 and 76 df = 3.97* Significant
A = mode
B = order
C/A Ba error term for AB , and AxB
S/A BC merror term for C/AR
WG = Pooled error term
The pooled design yields a significant difference he-  , teen the FTF and CC conditions . The CC conditions show a greater percent . of their cn-~ents in ~ he cate-gory of shows solidarity  . 
Order of
Problem 9 v ~ v h Nested Factorial
Forest Ranger
Individual % Data
Bales Catego I'y 3-Agrees

Mode of Co?mmu ~ icntion
FTFCO lat 14 . 1900 5 . 461, 5 2nd 12 . 1921 4 . 1183 9 . 8273 8 . 1552 13 . 1910 4 . 7914






SS 14 11 . 0740 55 . 9134 2 . 1232 515 . 1580 4056 . 144960 hO . 4135 df
Iii 141 1.0740 55.913 42.12 3242.9 2986 3.3772
Nested Design
F3 2.8693* 1.302 4.0h 95.677 ~
Table Values for F1 and 12 df = 4 . 7512 and 64 df = l . 90* Significant
Pooled ANOVA
The following pooled design is not really necessary since one finds the variables significant as above  . 
Source SS df MSF
AIhli .07401 ihli .074023. h598"
B 55.91 34i 55.91 3h .9296
AxB 2.1232 i 2.123 2.0353
WG~57 1.302 9766 0.1487
Tot . 60 ~0.413579


C/AB = error term for A , B , AxB
S/ABC = error term for C/AB
WG = Pooled error term
Table Value for F1 and 76 df = 3 . 9 7 * Significant The nested design yields a significant difference between the FTF and CC Conditions  . The FTF conditions show a greater percent of their comments in category  3- 


Bales , Robert 1950 Interaction Process Analysis ; A Method for the Study of Small Groups . Reading , Mass ; Addison

Bales , Robert F . and Edgar F . Borgatta 1955 " Size of Group as a Factor in the Interaction Profile  . " In A . P . Hare , E . F . Borgatta and R . F . 
Bales , eds . , Small Groups : Studies in Social Interaction , pp .  396-413 . New York : Knopf . 
Eady , Patrick M . and J . Clayton Laffer Zy 1975 " The Subarctic Survival Situation . " Plymouth , Michigan : Experiential Learning Methods . 
Hiltz , Starr Roxanne 1975 " Communications and Group Decision Making " ; Experimental Evidence on the Potential Impact of Compu-ter Conferencing  . Newark , N . J . , Computerized Confer-enclng and Communications Center  , New Jersey Institute of Technology , Research Report No .  2 . 
Hiltz , Starr Roxanne , Kenneth Johnson , Charles Arono-vitch and Murray Turoff 1980 Face to FaceVs . Computerized Conferences : A Controlled Experiment  . 
Hiltz , Starr Roxanne , Kenneth Johnson , and Ann Marie
Rabke 1980 Communications Process and Outcome in Faceto
Face Vs . Computerized Conferences.
Hiltz , Starr Roxam . ne and Murray Turoff 1978 The Network Nation : Human Commanication via Computer  . Reading , Mass , : Add/s on Wesley Advanced Book


The research reported here is supported by a grant from the Division of Mathematical and Computer Sciences  ( MCS78-00519 )  . The findings and opinions reported are solely those of the authors  , and do not necessarily represent those of the National Science Fo ~ u % dation  . 
Murray Turoff and Charles Aronovitch played a large part in the design and analysis for this project  . We are also grateful to Julian Scber and Peter and Trudy John-son-Lenz for their contributions to the design of the experiments  ; to John Howell and James Whitescarver for their software design and programming support  ; and to our research assistants for their dedicated efforts in carrying out the experiments and coding questionnaires : Joanne Garofalo  , Keith Anderson , Christine Naegle , NedO'Donnell , Dorothy Preston , Stacy Simon and Karen Win-ters . 
We would also like to thank Robert Bales and Experimental Learning Methods for their cooperation in providing documentation and permission to use adaptations of problem solving tasks which they originally developed  . 

