NATURALI . ~ IGUAGE INTERACTION WITH MACHINES :
APA~SINGFAD ?

THE WAY OF THE FU ~" JRE ?
A . Michael Noll
American Telephone and Telegraph Company
Basking Ridge , New Jersey 07920
People communicate primarily by two medea : acoustic--the spoken word  ; and visual N the written word . 
It is therefore natural chacpeople would expect their com --  , nications with machines Colikewise use
Chess two modes.
To a considerable extent , speech is probably the most natural of the natural-language modes  . ~ ence , a fascination exists with machines thac respond to spoken commands with synthetic speech responses to create a natural language interactive discourse  . 
However , although vast amounts of research and development effort have been expended in the search for systems that understand human speech and respond with synthetic speech  , the goal of the perfect system remains a ~ e lusive as ever  . Systems for producing natural-sounding speech for large vocabularies with unrestr ictedgr--w  . -tical structures and for recognizing spoken speech for large vocabularies with unlimited gr-~-Cical structures and any humber of talkers are still beyond the scats of linguistics and computer science and technology  . 
Given the problems in the speech domain , ic is not surprising Chatmost interactions between people and machines are in the visual mode frequently using alphanumeric keyboards as input and textual display as output  . Such visual terminals are already in fairly widespread use in industry and are used for a variety of applications including computer progr - n ~ ing  , text editing , and database access . 
The telephone allows speech celecoa ~ nications over distance between people  . Future visual terminals for the home and businesses will allow textual celecom- -   , nicacions between people . These visual terminals could also be used cotele communicate with machines in a way Chat is presently difficult using the telephone and speech  . 
Viewda Ca , or videocex , systems are promised soon for the home and wil lallow data-base access and transactions with machines and textual messages between people  . Some view data systems use elaborate tree searches Coreach the desired frame of information  . Some people believe that tree searches will be " unnatural " for many users and some other mere -natural language will be ueeded to search and access these data-bases ys Ceme  . 
One conclusion is Chac the future will see mere choices in mode for teleco ~ manicacions between people and with machines  . The choice of which alternate made will probably be dependent upon the specific application  . For example , textual messages might be both easier to enter by keyboard and Coreadona CRT screenthan speaking to a recording machine and listening Co a recorded message  . However , social chatting might be best over the telephone . However , arranging a dace with a stranger might be less revealing if done in the textual mode  . Considerable opportunities exist for basic research to explore the suitability of these alternate modes for different co~nicacions applications  . 
The fascination of technologists with speech -syuchesis chips is about to result in a variety of standalone appliances Chat speak  . Ovenschats care when the roast is done , washing machines thac call for the addition of fabrics of teners  , automobiles chat inform the driver thaC the door is open  , and many ocher applications will so on a bound in the marketplace  . In most of chess applications , synthetic speech will substitute for a lamp or ocher form of visual display  . The environment will be polluted with the noise of buzzy synthetic speech  . Many of these applications will undoubtedly be little mere than passing fads  . 
BuC in some circumstance synthetic speech wil l become the way of the future  . One example would be synthetic-speech announcements of floors in an elevator thereby eliminat in Scrooked necks ~ Most of the preceding examples are very restricted in terms of the language used for the interaction with machines  . The problem with unrestricted natural language for cor-unica cion with machines i schaCno automatic way has yec beeu discovered Coextract meaning in either the speech or textual mode  . The textual mode does eliminate the ueed for acoustic analysis and hence has been more extensively used in most systems for restricted  , specialized applications . However , even if either mode were equally near perfect , questions would still arise about user pre ference for one mode over the other  . 
Thus , in the end the future will be decided by the votes of consumers in the marketplace as they choose from the many options presented by techno logy  . The shrew den Cerpreneur will use consumer pre ference and needs Cohel pilluminate in advance the desires and needs of the market p lace  . Basic research in linguistics , human behaviour , natural language , and ocher ancillary fields will have an important role in developing solutions and in unders tanding people's needs and behaviour  . 

