Expanding the Horizons of Natural Language Interfaces 
Phil Hayes
Computer Science Department , Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh , PA 15213, USA
Abstract
Current natural language interfaces have concentrated largely on determining the literal " meaning " of input from their users  . While such decoding is an essential underpinning , much recent work suggests that natural language interlaces will never appear cooperative or graceful unless they also incorporate numerous nonliteral aspects of communication  , such as robust communication procedures . 
This to a per defends that view . but claims that directimitation of human performance=s not the best way to = mplement many of these nonliteral aspects of communication  ; that the new technology of powerful personal computers with integral graphics displays offers techniques superior to those of humans for these aspects  , while still satistying human communication needs . The paper proposes interfaces based on a judicious mixture of these techniques and the still valuable methods of more traditional natural language interfaces  . 
1. Introduction
Most work so far on natural language communication between man and machine has dealt with its literal aspects  . That is . natural language interlaces have implicitly adopted the position that their user's input encodes a request for intormation of  ; action , and that their jobist O decode the request , retrieve the information , or perform the action , and provide appropriate output back to the user . This is essentially what Thomas \[24J cnlls the Encoding - Decoding model of conversation . 
While literal interpretation is a basic underpinning of communication  , much recent work in artificial intelligence , linguistics , and related fields has shown that it is tar from the whole story in human communication  . For example , appropriate interpretation of an utterance depends on assumptions about the speaker's intentions  , and conversely , the sl . )eaker's goals influence what is said ( Hobbs\[13 J , Thomas\[24\]) . People often make mistakes in speaking and listening  , and so have evolvod conventions for affecting regalrs -  ( Scheglolletel . \[20J ) . There must also be a way of regulating the turns of participants in a conversation  ( Sacksetel . \[10t ) . This is just a sampling of what we will collectively call nonliteral ~ lspect sol communication  . 
The primary reason for using natural language in man-machine communication is to allow the user to express himsellmt turally o and without hawng to learn a special language  . However , it is becoming clear that providing for n , ' ttural expression means dealing will1 tile nonliteral well as the literal aspect sol communication  ; float the ability to interpret natural language litera Uy does not in itself give a man-machine interlace the ability to communicate naturally  . Some work on incorporating these nonliteral aspects of communication into man-machine interfaces has already begun  ( \[6 ,  8 ,  9 ,  15 ,  21 ,  25\]) . 
The position I wish to stress in this paper is that natural language interfaces will never perform acceptably unless they deal with the nonliteral as well as the literal aspects of communication : that without the nonliteral aspects  , they will always appear uncooperative , inflexible , unfriendly , and generally stupid to their users , leading to irritation , frustration , and an unwillingness to continue to be a user . 
This pos = tion is coming to be held fairly widely . However , I wish to go further and suggest that , in building nonliteral aspects of communication into natural language interfaces  , we should aim for the most effective type of communication rather than insisting that the interface model human performance as exactly as possible  . I believe that these two aims are not necessarily the same  . especially given certain new technological trends  (  . lis(Jti , ' ~ s ? ~ l below . 
Most attempts to incorporate nonliteral aspects of communication into natural language interlaces have attempted to model human performance as closely as possible  . The typical mode of communication in such an interface  , in which system and user type alternately on a single scroll of pager  ( or scrolled displays creen )  , has been used as an analogy to normal spoken human conversation in Wlllcll contmunical lon takes place over a similar half-dup lexchannel  , i . e . a channel that only one party at a time can use witllout danger of confusion  . 
Technology is outdating this model . Tl~en ascent generation of powerful personal computers  ( e . g . the ALTO~23 or PERQ\[18 J ) equipped with high-resolution bit-map graphics displays creens and pointing devices allow the rapid display of large quantities of information and the maintenance of several independent communication channels for both output  ( division ol the screen into independent windows , highlighting , and other graphics techniques ) , and input ( direction of keyboard input to different windows , poinling , ~ put ) . I believe that this new technology can provide highly effective  , natural language-based , communication between man and machine , but only il the half-duplex style of interaction described above is dropped  . Rall~erthantrying to imitate human convets ~ mon d = rectty  , it will be more fruitful to use the capabilities of this new technology  , whicl ~ in some respects exceed those possessed by humans  , to achieve the snme ends as the nonliteral aspects of normal human conversation  . Work by . for instance , Carey \[31 and Hiltz 1121 shows how adaptable people arot one w communications it u ~  . ~ tlons , and there is every reason Io believe that people will adapt well to an interaction in which their communication ne ~  , ds are satisfied , even if they are satislied in a dilterent way than in ordinary human conversation  . 
In the remainder of the paper I will sketch some human communication needs  , and go onto suggest how they can be satisfied using the technology outlined above  . 
2 . Non-Literal Aspects of Communication In this section we will discuss four human communication needs and tile nonliteral aspects of communication they have given rise to : ? non -grammatical utterance recognition ? contextually determined interpretation ? robust communication procedures ? channel sharing The account here is based in part on work reported more fully in  \[8  ,  9\] . 
Humans must deal with non-grammatical utterances in conversation simply because De Pute produce them all the time  . They arise from various sources : people may leave out or swallow words  ; they may start to say one thing , stop in the middle , and substitute something else ; they may interrupt themselves to correct something they have just said  ; or they may simply make errors of tense , agreement , or vocabulary . 
For a combination of these and other reasons , it is very rare to see three consecutive grammatical sentences in ordinary conversation  . 
Despite the ubiquity of ungrammaticality , it has received very little attention in the literature or from the implementers of natural language interfaces  . Exceptions include PARRY 17\] . COOP\[14\] , and interfaces produced by the LIFER \[11\] system . Additional work on parsing ungrammatical input has been done by Weischedel and Black  \[25\]  , and interfaces \[1\] , we ( Hayes and Mouradian \[7\] ) have also developed a parser capable of dealing flexibly with many forms of ungrammaticality  . 
Perhaps part of the reason that flexibility in Darsmg has received so little attent * on in work on natural language interlaces is thai the input is typed  , and so the parsers used have been derived from those used to parse written prose  . Speech parsers ( see for example I101 or 126 i ) have always been much more I lexible . Prose is normally quite grammatical simply because the writer has had time to make it grammatical  . The typed input to a computer system is . produced in " realtime " and is therefore much more likely to contain errors or other ungrammaticalities  . 
The listeneral any given turn in a conversation does not merely decode or extract the inherent " meaning " from what the speaker said  . Instead . lie = nterprets the speaker's utterance in the light at the total avnilable context  ( see for example . Hoblo ~\[13\], Thomas\[24J , or Wynn\[27\]) . In cooperative dialogues , and computer interfaces normally operate in a cooperative situation  , this contextually determined interpretation allows the participants considerable economies in what they say  , substituting pronouns or other anaphon c forms for more complete descriptions  , not explicitly requesting actions or information that they really desire  , omitting part = cipants from descriphons of events , and leaving unsaid other information that will be " obvious " to the listener because of the Context shared by speaker and listener  . In less cooperative situations , the listener's interpretations may be other than the speaker intends  , and speakers may compensate for such distortions in the way they construct their utterances  . 
While these problems have been studied extensively in more abstract natural language research  ( for just a few examples see\[4 ,  5 ,  16\]) . little attention has been paid to them in more applied language wOrk  . The work of Grosz \[6J and Sidner \[21\] on focus of attention and its relation tO anaphora and ellipsis stand outher e  . along with work done in the COOP \[14\] system on checking the presuppositions of questions with  8 negative answer , in general , contextual interpretation covers most of the work in natural language proces~ng  , and subsumes numerous currently intractable problems  . It is only tractable in natural language interface S because at the tight constraints provided by the highly restricted worlds in which they operate  . 
Just as in any other communication across a noisy channel  , there is always a basic question in human conversstion of whether the listener has received the speaker's t ltterance correctly  . Humans have evolved robust communication conventions for performing such checks with considerable  , though not complete , reliability , and for correcting errors when they Occur ( see Schegloff 20i )  . Such conventions include : the speaker assuming an utterance has been heard correctly unless the reply contradicts this assumbtion or there is no reply at all : the speaker trying to correct his own errors himself : the listener incorporating h =s assumptions about a doubtful utterance into his reply  ; the listener asking explicitly for clarification when he is sufficiently unsure  . 
This area of robust conimunl catlon IS porhaps II~e nonliteral aspect of commum cat ~ on mOSt neglected in natural language work  . Just a few systems such as LIFE PlItlJ and COOP  \[141 have paid even minimal attenhon Ioit , Intereshngiy , it ~ Sperhaps the area in which I he new technology mentioned above has the most to oiler as we shall see  . 
Fill\[lily . the SllOken Dart of a huml in conversation takes place over what is essenllully as = ngle shared channel  . In oilier words , if more than one person talks at once . no one can understand anything anyone else is saying  . There are marginal exceptions to this . bulby and large reasonable conversation can only be conducted if iust one person speaks at a time  . Thus people have evolved conventions for channel sharing  \[19\]  , so that people can take turns to speak . Int ~ .  = . stmgly , if people are put in new communication situations in which the standard turntaking conventions do not work well  . they appear quite able to evolve new conventions \[3i  . 
A Snoted earlier , computer interfaces have sidestepped this problem by making the interaction take place over a half -duplex channel somewhat analogous to the half -duplex channel inherent ms Peech  , i . e . alternate turns at typing on a scrollel paper ( or scrolled displays creen )  . However , rather than prowding flexible conventions for changing turns  , such = ntertaces typically brook no interrupt = arts while they are typing  , and then when they are finished in s = st that the user type a complete input with no feedback  ( apart from character echoing )  , at which point the system then takes over the channel again  . 
in the next Section we will examine how the new generation of interface technology can help with some of the problems we have raised  . 
3. Incorporating Non-Literal Aspects of
Communication into User Interfaces
If computer interfaces are ever to become cooperative and natural to use  , they must incorporate no no iiteral aspects of communication  . My mumpoint in t in this section is that there=s no reason they should incorporate them in a way directly im = tative of humans : so long as they are incorporated maway that humans are comfortable with  . directimitation is not necessary , indeed , directimitation iS unlikely to produce satislactorymterachon  . Given the present state of natural language processing endartificial intelligence in general  , there iSno prospect in the for seeable future that interlaces will be able to emulate human performance  , since this depends so much on bringing to bear larger quantities of knowledge than current AI techm ques are able to handle  . Partial success in such emulation zs only likely to ra = selalse expectations in the mind of the user  , and when these expectations are inevitably crushed  , frustration will result . 
However , I believe that by making use of some of the new technologyment=oned earlier  , interfaces can provide very adequate substitutes for human techniques for nonliteral aspects of commumcation  ; substitutes that capital zzeon capabilities of computers that are not possessed by humans  , bul that nevertheless will result m interaction that feels very natural to a human  . 
Before giving some examples , lett is review the kind of hardware I am assuming  . The key item is a bit-map graphics display capable of being tilled with information very quickly  . The screen conbedivided into independent windows to which the system can direct difterent streams of OUt put independently  . Windows can be moved around on the screen , overlapped , and PODDed out from under a pile of other windoWs  . The user has a pointing device with which he can posit = on a cursor to arbitrary points on the SC reen  , plus , of course , a traditional keyboard . Such hard w are ex = s ts now and will be come increasingly available as powerful personal computers such as the PERO  \[18J or LISP machine \[2\] come onto the market and start to decrease in price  . The exam Dlas of the use of such hardware which follow are drawn in part from our current experiments muser interface research  1  . 7\] on similar hardware . 
Perhaps the aspect of communication I halcan receive the most benefit from this type of hardware is robust communication  . Suppose the user types a non . grammatical input to the system which the system's flexible parser is able to recognize if  . say , it inserts a word and makes a spelling correction  . Going by human convention the system would either have to ask the user to confirmex Dlicdly if its correction was correct  , tO cleverly in cor Doram~t S assumption into its next output  , or just tOa a aume the correction without comment . Our hypothetical system has another option : it Can alter what the user just typed  ( possibly highlighting the words that it changed )  . This achieves the same effect as the second optiert above  , but subst=tutes a technological trick for huma intelligencf ' Again  . if the user names a person , say " Smith " , in a context where the system knows about several Smiths with different first names  , the humanoot = ons are either to incorporate a list of the names into a sentence  ( which becomes unwmldy when there are many more than three alternatives  ) or to ask I or the first name without giving alternatives  . A third alternative , possible only in this new technology , is to setup 8 window on the screen handled quite naturally this way  )  . The user is then free to point at the alternative he intends  , a much simpler and more natural alternative than typing the name  . although there is no reason why this input mode should not be available as well in case the user prefers it  . 
As mentioned in the previous section , contextually based interpretation is important in human conversation because at the economies of expression it allows  . There is no need for such economy in an interface 's output  , but the human tendency to economy in this matter is somelhing that technology cannot change  . The general problem of keeping track of focus of attention in a conversation is a dillicult one  ( see , for example , Grosz 161 and Sidner\[221) , but the type ol interface we are discussing can at least provide a helpful framework in which the current locus ol attention can be made explicit  . Different loci at attention can be associated with different windows on tilescreen  , and the system can indicate what it thinksiSI he current lOCUS of  . nttention by , say , making the border of the corresponding window dilferent from niltherest  . Suppose in the previous example II lat at the time the system displays the alternative Smiths  . the user decides that he needs some other information before he can make a selection  . He might ask I or this information in a typed request  , at which point the system would set up a new window  , make it the focused window , and display the requested information in it . At this point , the user could input requests to refine the new information  , and any anaphora or ellipsishe used would be handled in the appropriate context  . 
Representing . contexts explicitly with an indication of what the system thinks is the current one can also prevent confusion  . The system should try to follow a user's shifts of focus automatically  , as in the above example . However , we cannot expect a system of limited understanding always to track focus shifts correctly  , and so it is necessary for the system to give explicit feedback on what it thinks the shift was  . Naturally , this implies that the user should be able to change focus explicitly as well as implicitly  ( probably by pointing to the appropriate window )  . 
Explicit representation of locican also be used to bolster a human's limited ability to keep track of several independent contexts  . In the example above , it would not have been hard lot the user to remember why heasked for the additional information and to return and make the selection alterhe had received that information  . With many more than two contexts , however , people quickly lose track of where they are and what they are doing  . Explicit representation of all the possibly active tasks or contexts can help a user keep things straight  . 
All the examples of how sophisticated interface hardware can help provide nonliteral aspects of communication have depended on the ability of the underlying system to produce pos ~ bly large volumes of output rapidly at arbitrary points on the screen  . In effect , this allows the system multiple output channels independent of the user's typed input  , which can still be echoed even while the system is producing other output  , Potentially , this frees interaction over such an interface from any turntaking discipline  . In practice , some will probably be needed to avoid confusing the user with too many thingsgoing on at once  , but it can probably be looser than that found in human conversations  . 
As a final point , I should stress that natural language capability is still extremely valuable for such an interface  . While pointing input is extremely fast and natural when the object or operation that the user wishest O identify is on the screen  , it obviously cannot be used when the information is not there  . Hierarchical menu systems , in which the selection of one item in a menu results in the display of another more detailed menu  , can deal with this problem to some extent , but the descriptive power and conceptual operator solnal ural language  ( or an artificial language with s = milar characteristics  ) provide greater flex it ) ility and range of expression . 
II the range oI option s = . ~larg ~; , t ) ulw , dl(tiscr , nm ; de(I , i l = s(llh . ~leasier to specify a selection by description than by pointing  , no matter howcteved ytile options are organized . 
4. Conclusion
In this paper ,   1 have taken the position that natural language interfaces to computer systems will never be truly natural until they include nonliteral as web as literal aspects of communication  . Further , I claimed that in the light of the new technology of powerful personal computers with integral graphics displays  , the best way to incorporate these nonliteral aspects was nol to imitate human conversational patterns as closely as possible  , but to use the technology in innovative ways to perform the same function as the nonliteral aspects of communication found in human conversation  . 
In any case , I believe the old-style natural language interfaces in which the user and system take turns to type on a single scroll of paper  ( or scrolled displays creen ) are doomed . The new technology can be used , in ways similar to those outlined above , to provide very convenient and attractive interfaces that do not deal with natural language  . The advantages of this type ol interface will so dominate those associated with the old-style natural language interfaces that continued work in that are a will become ol academic interest only  . 
That is the challenge posed by the new technology for natural language interfaces  , but it also holds a promise . The promise is that a combination of natural language techniques with the new technology will result in interfaces that will be truly natural  , flexible , and graceful in their interaction . The multiple channels of information flow provided by the new technology can be used to circumvent many of the areas where it is very hard to give computers the intelligence and knowledge to perform as well as humans  . In short , the way forward for natural language interfaces is not to strive for closer  , but still highly imperfect , imitation of human behaviour , buttOcombine the strengths of the new technology with the great human ability to adapt to communication environments which are novel but adequate for their needs  . 
References 1 . Ball , J . E . and Hayes , P . J . Representation of Task-independent Knowledge in a Gracefully Interacting User Interface  , Tech . Rept . , CarnegieMellon UniverSity Computer Science Department  ,  1980 . 
2 . Bawden . A , et al Lisp Machine Project Report . AIM 444, MITAILab,
Cambridge , Mass ., August , 1977.
3 . Carey , J . " A Primer on Interactive Television . " J . University Film
Assoc . X X X , 2(1978), 35-39.
4 . Charniak , E . C . Toward a Model of Children's Story Comprehension . 
TR-266, MITAILab , Cambridge , Mass ., 1972.
5 . Culling for d . R . Script Application : Computer Understanding of Newspaper Stories  . Ph . D . Th . , Computer Science Dept . , Yale University , 1978 . 
6 . Grosz , B . J . The Representation and Use of Focus in a System for Understanding Dialogues  . Proc . Fifth Int . Jr . Conf . on Artificial
Intelligence , MIT , 1977, pp . 67-76.
7 . Hayes , P . J . and Mouradian , G . V . Flexible Parsing . Proc . of 18th Annual Meeting of the ASSOC . for Comput . Ling . , Philadelphia , June , 1980 . 
8 . Hayes , P . J . , and Reddy , R . Graceful Interaction in Man-Machine Communication  . Proc . Sixth Int . Jr . Conf . on Artificial Intelligence , Tokyo , 1979, pp .  372-374 . 
9 . Hayes , P . J . , and Reddy , R . An Anatomy of Graceful Interaction in Man-Machine Communication  . Tech . report , Computer Science Department , Carnegie Mellon University ,  1979 . 
73 10 . Hayes-Roth , F . , Erman , L . D . . Fox . M . , and Mostow , D . J . Syntactic Processing in HEARSAY-HS peech Understanding Systems  . SummaryOfResults at the Five-Year Research Effortat Carnegie Mellon University  , Carnegie Mellon Univers dy Computer Science Department  ,  1976 . 
11 . Hendr=x , G . G . Human Engineering for Applied Natural Language Processing Proc  . Fifth IntJr . Conl . on Artificial Intelligence , MIT , 1977,
DD . 183-191.
1 2 . Hiltz , S . R . Johnson . K . . Aronovitch , C . , and Turoft . M . Face to Face vs . Computerized Conterences : A Controlled Experiment  . 
unpublished mss.
13 . Hobbs . J . R . Conversuh Onas Planned Behavior . Technical Note 203 . Artificial Intelligence Center , SRi International , Menlo Park , Ca . .

14 . Ka Dlan . S . J . Cooperative Responses Irorna Porta Die Natural Language Data Base Query System  . Ph . D . Th . . Dept . of Computer and . 
Inlormation Science . Univers , tyo ! Pennsylvania . Philadelphia .  1979 . 
15 . Kwasny . S . C . and Sondheimer . N . K . Ungrammaticatity and Extra-Grammat Jcality in Natural Language Understanding Systems  . Pro ? . 
of 17th Annual Meeting of the Assoc . to tComgut . Ling . . La Jolla . Ca . .
August . 1979. I~P . 1923.
16 . Levin . J . A . . and Moore . J . A . " Dialogue Games : Meta-Commun=cation Structures for Natural Language Understanding  . "
Cognitive Scmnce 1.4(1977).395-420.
17 . Parkison . R . C . . Colby . K . M . . and Faught . W . S . " Conversational Language Comprehension Using Integrated Pattern-Matching and Parsing  . " Art  #icaal Intelligence 9 (1977) .  111-134 . 
18 . PERQ . Three Rivers Computer Corl ~ . . 160 N . Craig St . . Pittsburgh . 
PA 15213..
19 . Sacks . H . . Schegloff . E . A . . and Jefferson . G . " A Siml~t Semantics for the Organization of Turn-Taking tar Conversation  . "
Language 50.4(1974).696-735.
20 . Schegloff . E . A . . Jefferson . G . . and Sacks . H . " The Preference for Self-Correction in the Organization of Repair in Conversation  . " Language 53 . 2 (1977) .  361-382 . 
21 . Sidner . C . L . A Progre SS Report on the Discourse and Reference Components of PAL  . A . I . Memo .  468 . MITA . I . Lab . . 1978 . 
22 . Sidner . C . L . Towards a Computational Theory of Definite Anaphore Comprehension in English Discourse  . TR 537 . MITAILab . Cambridge . 
Mass . . 1979.
23 . Thacker ~ C . P . . McCreight . E . M . Lamgson . B . W . . Sproull . R . F . . and Boggs . D . R . Alto : A Dersonal computer , in Computer Structures : Readings an cf Examples . McGraw Hill .  1980 . Edited by D . S ~ e w i o r e k . C . GoBell . and A . Newell . second edition , in press . 
24 . Thomas , J . C . " A Design-Interpretation of Natural English with Applications to Man-Computer Inerection  . " Int . J . Man . Machine Studiest 0(1978) .  651-668 . 
25 . Welschedel . RM . and Black . J . Responding Io Potentially Unparseable Sentences . TechRapt .  79/3 . Dept . of Computer and Intormatlon Sciences . Universatyo ! Delaware .  1979 . 
26 . Woods . W . A . . Bates . M . . Brown . G . . Bruce . B . . Cook . C . . Klovsted . 
J . , Makhoul . J . . Nash-Webber , B . . Schwartz . R . . Wall , J . . and Zue , V . 
Speech Understanding Systems-Final Technical Report  . Tech . Rept . 
3438. Bolt , Beranek . and Newman , Inc ., 1976.

