REQUIREMENTS OFTEXT PROCESSINGLEXICONS
Kenneth C . Litkoweki
16729 Shea Lane , Gaithersburg , Md . 20760
Five years ago , D wight Bolinger\[1\] wrote
that efforts to represent meaning had not yet made use of the insights of lexico-graphy  . The few substantial efforts , such as those spear headed by Olney\[2 , 3 \ ]  , MelOCuk\[4\] , Smith\[5\] , and Simmons\[6 , 7 \ ]  , made some progress , but never camet of ruition . Today , lexicography and its products , the diction-aries , remain an untapped resource of uncer-tain va lue  . Indeed , many who have analyzed the contents of a dict ionary have concluded that it is of little value to linguistics or artificial intelligence  . Because of the size and complexity of a dic tionary  , perhaps such a conclusion is inevitable , but I believe it is wrong . To avoid becoming irretrievably lost in the minutiae of a dictionary and to view the real potential of this resource  , it is necessary to develop a comprehensive model within which a dictionary Os det ai l can be tied together  . When this is done , I believe one can identify the requirements for a se-mantic representation of an entry in the lex-icon to be used in naturall anguage processing systems  . I describe here in what I have learned from th is type of effort  . 
I began with the objective of identifying primitive words or concepts by following de finitional paths within a dictionary  . To search for these , I developed a model of a dictionary using the theory of labeled di-rected graphs  . In this model , a point or node is taken to represent a defin ition and a line or arc is taken to represent a derivational relationship between defin itions  . With such a model , I could use theorems of graph theory top red ict the existence and form of primi-ti ves within the dictionary  . This justified continued effort to at tempt to find such primitives  . 
The model showed that the big problem to be overcome in trying to find the primitives is the apparent rampant circularity of def ining relationships  . To eliminate these apparent vicious circ les  , it is necessary to make a precise identifi cation of derivational re-lationships  , specifically , to find the spe-cific definition that p rovides the sense in which its definiendum is used in defining an-other word  . When this is done , the spurious cycles are broken and precise derivational relationships are ident if ied  . Although this can be done manually , the sheer bulk of a dictionary requires that it be done with well-defined procedures  , i . e . with a syn-tactic and semantic parser . It is in the attempt to layout the elements of such a parser that the requirements of semantic rep-resentations have emerged  . 
The parser must first be capable of handl ing the syntactic complexity of the defini tions within a dictionary  . This can be done by modifying and adding to existing ATN parsers  , based on syntactic patterns present within a dictionary  . Incidentally , a dictionary is an excellent large corpus upon which to base such a parser  . 
The parser must go beyond syntactics , i . e .   , it must be capable of identifying which sense of a word is being used  . Rieger\[8 , 9\] has a rgued fo r the necess i ty of sense se lec t ion or d i s - c r iminat ion nets  . To develop such a net for each word in the lex icon  , I suggest the poss-ibility of using a parser to analyze the def-initions of a word and thereby to create a net which will be capable of discriminating among all definitions of a word  . 
The following requirements must be satisf ied by such a parser and its resulting nets  . 
Diagnostic or differentiating components are needed for each definition  . Each definition must have a different semantic re~resent-ation  , even though there may be a core meaning for al l the definitions of a word  . Since the ability to traver seanet success fully depends on the context in which a word is used  , each definition , i . e . each semantic representation , must include slots to be filled b ~ that context  . The slots will pro-vide a unique context for each sense of a word  . Context is what permits disambiguation . 
Since the search through an et is inherently complex  , a definition must drive the parser in the search for context which will fill its slots  . These notions are consistent with R ieger Os  ; however , they were identified in-dependently based on my analysis of dictionary definit ions  . Their viability depends on the ability to describe procedures for developing a parser of this type to generate the desired semantic representations  . 
AS mentioned before , observation of syntactic patterns will l ead to an enhancement of syn-tactic parsing l to a limited extent  , the syn-tactic parser will permit some d is crimination  , e . g . of transitive and intransitive verbs or verbs which use particles  . Further procedures for developing semantic representations are described using the int ransitive senses of the verb m change " as examples  . Procedures are de-scribed for ( I ) using definitions of preposi-tions fo r identifying semantic cases which will operate as slots in the semantic repre- sentation  ,   ( 2 ) showing how selectional re-strictions on what can fill such slots are derived f rom the definitional matter  , and ( 3 ) identifying semantic components that are present within a definition  . It is pointed out how it will eventually be necessary that these representations beg iven in terms of primitives  . Procedures are described for building di scrimination nets from the results of pars ing the definitions and for adding to these net show the parser should be driven  . 
The emphasis of this paper is in describing procedures that have been developed thus far  . 
Finally , it is shown how these procedures are used to identify explicit derivational rela- tionships present within a dictionary in order to move toward identification of pr imitives  . 
Such relationships are very similar to the lexical functions used by NelOCuk  , except that in this case both the function and the argument are elements of the lexicon  , rather than the argument alone . 

It has become clear that semantic represent-a tions of definitions in the form descr ibed must ultimately constitute the e lements out of which semantic rapresent at lons of multi-sentence texts must be created  , perhaps with twO fool: ( I ) describing entities ( cantered around nouns ) and ( 2 ) describing events ( centered around verbs )   . If multisentence texts can then be studied empirically  , the structure of ordinary discourse will then be based on observations rather than theory  . 
Although this paradigm may seem to be incred ibly complex  , I believe that it is nothing more than what the lexicons of pre-sent AI systems are becoming  . I believe that more rapid progress can be made with an explicit effort to exploit and not to duplicate ~ he efforts of lex icographers  . 

I . Solinger , D ?, Aspects of Language , 2 rided . , Ear?our t Brace Jovanov ich , Znco , New York ,  1975 , p . 224 . 
2 . Olney , J . , C . Revard , and P . Z iff , Toward the Developmen ~ of Computational Aids for Obtaining a Formal Semantic Description of English  , SP-2766/001/00 , System Development Corpora ~ ion , Santa Monica , California , 1 October 1968 . 
3  . Olney , J . and D . Rameey , QFrom machine-readable dictionaries to s lexicon taster : Progress  , plans , and an offer , " Computer Studies in the Humanities and Verbal Behavior  , Vol . 3, NO . 4, November 1972, pp . 

4 . Nele Cuk , I . A ? , tA new kind of dictionary and its role as a core component of auto-matl c text processing systems  , " T . A . 
Znformatlone , 1978, No . 2, pp . 3-8.
5 . Smith , Ra N ? , " Znter active lexicon updating , " Computers and the Humanities , vol ? 6 , No . 3,
January 1972, pp . 137-145.
6 . Simmone , R . F . and R?AoAmeler , Modelln ~ Dictionary Data , Computer Science Depart-ment , University of Texas , Austin , April 1975 . 
7 . S?mmone , R . F . and w . P . Lehmann , A Proposal to Develop a Computational Methodology for Deriving Natural Language Semantic Struc-tures via Analysis of Machine-Readable Dictionaries  , University of Texas , Austin ,  1976  ( Research proposal submitted to the National Science Foundation  , Sept . 28 ,1976)  . 
8 . Ringer , Co , Viewing pars in ~ as Ward Sense Discriminat ion  , TR-511 , Department of Computer Science , University of Maryland , College Park , Maryland , January 1977 . 
9 . Rieger , C . and S . Small , Word Expert Parsing , TR-734 , Department of Computer Science , University of Maryland , College Park , 
Maryland , March 1979.

