STPJ kTEGX ?. SELECTION FOR ANATNSTN TACT~CPARSER
Giacomo Ferrari and Oliviero Stock
Istitutodltingulstica Computazionale-C~TR , Plsa
Performance evaluation in the field of natural language processing is 
generally recognised as being extremely complex . There are , so far , no pre-established criteria to deal x~th this problem  . 
I . It is impossible to measure the merits of a grammar  , seen as the component of an analyser , in absolute terms . An " adhoc " grammar , constructed for a limited set of sentences is , without doubt , more efficient in dealing with those particular sentences than a zrammer constructed for a larger set  . 
Therefore , the first rudimentary criterion , when evaluating the relation ~ hlp between a grammar and a set of sentences  , should be to establish whether this grammar is capable of analysing these sentences  . This is the determination of linguistic coverage , and necessitates the definition of the linguistic phenomena  , independently of the linguistic theory which has been adopted to recognise these phenomena  . 
2 . In addition to its ability to recognise and coherently describe linguistic phenomena  , a grammar should be Judged by its capacity to resolve ambiguity  , to bypassir relevant errors in the text being analysed  , and so on . 
This aspect of a grammar could be regarded as its " robustness "\[ P  . Nayes , R . Reddy 1979\] . 
3 . Examining other aspects of the problem , in the analysis chat we propose we will assume a grammar which is capable of dealing with the texts which we will submit to it  . 
Let an ATN grammar tl , vlthn nodes , be of this type . N will be maintained constant for the following discussion  . 
BY text we intend a series of sentences , or of utterances by one of the speakers in a dialogue  . When analysing such a text , once a constant N has been assumed , it is likely that , in addition to the content ( the arglm~ent of the discourse ) indications will appear on the grammatical choices made by the author of the text  ( or the speaker ) when expressing himself on that argument ( how the argument is expressed )   . 
When these indications have been adequately quantified  , they can be used to correctly select the perceptive strategies  ( as defined in \[ Kaplan 72\] ) to be adopted in order to achieve greater efficiency in the analysis of the following part of the text  . 
4 . For our experiments we have used ATNSYS\[Stock 76\]  , and an Italian grammar with n-50 ( 127 arcs ) \[ C appellist at . 77\] . In this system , search is depth-first and the parser Interacts with a heuristic mechanism which orders the arcs according to a probability evaluat ion  . This probability evaluation is dependent on the path which led to the current node and is also a function of the statistical data accumulated during previous analyses of a " coherent " text  . 
The mechanism can be divided into two stages . The first stage consists of the acquisition of statistical data  ; i . e , the frequency , for each arc exiting from a node , of the passages across that arc , in relation to the arc of arrival : for each arriving arc there are as many counters as there are exiting arcs  . 
f e ) -* x.f(b : y~f , ): w.f(b ),*
Fig . 1
In this way , in Fig . I arc 1 has been crossed x times coming from a and y t imes coming from b  . In the second stage , during parsing , in state S , if coming from a and w > x , arc2 is cried first . 
113 4 . 1 Thus , a first evaluation of the linguistic choices made is provided by the set of probability values assocla ~ ed to each arc  . These figures can to some extent describe the " style " of any " coherent " text analysed  .   ( For this one should also take into account the different lin ~ uist lcsignificance of each arc  . 
In fact a CAT or PUSH arc directly corresponds to a certain linguistic component  , while a JUMP or VIRT arc occurs in relation to the technique by which the network has been built  , the linguistic theory adopted , and other variables . ) 4 . 2 The second part of the mechanism , ~ he dynamic reordering of the arcs , coincides with a reordering of the co~prehension strategies  . In this way , a matrix can be associated to each node , giving the order of the strategies for each arc in arrival  . 
For each text T , there is a set of strategies ~ ordered as describod above  . 
While the analysis of the probability values for distinct texts T and T " can give global indications of their lln~ulst lc characteristics  , if we focus on ~ he comprehension of the sentence  , it is more meaningful to given valuatlons in relation to the sets of strategies  , ~ T and ~ , which are selected . 
Fig . 2 shows , for some nodes , a comparison between the orders of the arcs for the first I i sentences from two texts  , a science fiction n nvel(SFN , upper boxes ) and a handbook of food chemistry ( FC , lower boxes ) . The arc numbers are referred ~ othe order in the original network  . The figures which appear after the-in the heading indicate the number of parses for each sentence  . Anec~cybox indicates the same order as that shown in the previous box  . 
Sb /, S21 ~1~521 345 2134
S/~3~"l 51 23 45 12 . 14; V/R ~' I4 1235 4512 3412 3543 125
G ~/ Y 41 2 3 4 2 1 3 2 4 1 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 Y ~4 ~ I , 1 heuristics , will increase the efficiency of the system used for the linguistic analysis  . The results of our experiments so far confirm this  . This ir ~ rove defficiency can be measured in three ways : a  ) locally , in terms of the computational load , due to nondeterminism , ~ ich is saved in each node . In fact , by some experiments , it is possible to quantify the computational load of each type of arc  . The computational load of a node is then a linear combination of these values and one can comg are it with the actual load determined by the sequence of arcs attempted in that point after the reordering  . 
b ) in terms of an overall reduction in computing t ime  ; C ) in terms of penetrance , i . e . the ratio between the number of choices wh ich actually lead to a solution and the total number of choices wade  . 
5 . 2 If T is a text containing r sentences , the average penetrance will be : o . = . .' , where ~ stands for each of the sentences in T . 
If T is analysed using the set of strateg ies chosen for a different text  , T ? , then the penetrance is , on average , no greeter than with ~ T ? ( SFN ) parsed with its own strategies ( ~ s  ) is ~ ed , SFN ) = 0 . 52 , while parsed with the strategies of the second text  ( Sty ) is ~ ( 5~ , SFN ) = 0 . 39 . 
We have attempted to evaluate experlment all v the relationship between the difference of the average penetrances  , which we call dlscrepanc7 and the distance between two sets of strategies . However we think we need more experimentation before formalizing this relationship  . 
Returning to our science fiction novel , the discrenanc-using its set of strategies and the one inferred by the food chemistry text is  6  . In addition to the definition of a heuristic mechanism which is capable of in ~ rovinE the efficiency of natural language processing  , and which can be evaluated as described above , our research aims at providing a means to chsracterise a text by evaluating the ~ ramr ~atical choices made by the author while expressing his argument  . 
We are also attempt in ~ to tako into account the expectations of the listener  . 
In our opinion , the listener's expectations are not limited to the argument of the discourse but are also related to the way in which the argument is expressed  ; this is the equivalent of the choice of as db -grammar \ [ Kittredge  7~\] We intend to verify the existence of such expectations not only in literature or x~hen listening to long speeches  , but also in dialogue . 

I . Cappelll A . , Ferrsri G . , Horetti L . , Prodan of I . , S~ock 0 . = " An Experimental ATN Parser for Italian Texts " Technical Report  . LLC-CNR . Pisa 1977 . 
2 . Kaplsn R . -" Augmented Transition Networks as Psychological t*~dels of Sentence Comprehension " Artific ial Intelligence  3   1972  . Amsterdam-flew York-Oxford . 
3 . 8 a yes P . , Reddy R . -" An anatomy of Graceful Interaction in Spoken and written ~ n ~ chine Communication '  , C~-CS-79-144 , Pittsburgh PA ,  1979 . 
4 . Kittredgeg . -* Textual Cohesion Within Sublanguage . s : Implications for Automatic Analysis and Synthesis *  , COLIN ~78 , ~ ergen ,  1978 . 
5 . Stevens A . , Rumelhart D . -" Errors in ReadlnR : An Analysis Using an Augmented Transition Network Hodel of Grammar " in Horman D  . , Rumelhart D . eds . , Explorations in Cognition , Freeman . S . Francisco , 1975, pp .  136-155 . 
6 . Stocko . -" ATN~YS : Unsisteme perl * analisi grammaticale automatics dellelingue naturali '  , NI-R76-29 , IEI , Pisa ,  1976 . 

