An Experiment in Machine Translation

Although funding for Machine Translation ( MT ) research
virtua 11 yended in the U . S . with the release of the
ALPAC report \[1\] in 1966 , there has been a continuing interest in this fie ld  . Rapid evolution of science and technology , coupled with increased world-wl de exposure of their products  , demands more and more speed in translation ( e . g . , in the case of operation and maintenance manuals  )  . Unfortunately , this rapid evolution has made translation an even more difficult and time-consuming task  . The large surplus of ( presumably qualified ) translators cited by the ALPAC report simply does not exist in many technical areas  ; the current state of affairs Finds instead a critical shortage  . In addition , the proportion of scientific and technica l literature ? published in English is d iminishing  . As qualified human translators become more scarce and costs of human trans-lation ri sewhile costs of purchase and operation of powerful computer systems fall  , there must come a time when , if MT is feasible at all , it will be cost-effec-tive . It is appropriate , then , to investigate the state-of-the-art in MT with respect to two central questions : is high -quality MTF easlble  ( and in what sense )  ; and iff easible , is it cost-effect lve ? Thlspaper reports the results of an experiment in hlghly automat ic  , high-quality machine translation . The LRC's MT system , METAL ( for Mechanical Translation and Analysis of Languages  )  , is an advanced , ' third genera-tion'system incorporating proven Natural Language Processing  ( NLP ) techniques , both syntactic and semantic , and stands at the forefront of the MT research Frontier  . 
In the experiment , METAL was employed in the translation of a 50-page taxtFrom German into Engilsh in order to determine whether the system as it exists can be effec-tively applied to current t ransiatlon needs  , effective-ness to be determined by some ob jective measure of the quality and cost of machine  ( i . e . , METAL ) vs . human translation . 
EARLIER MTE FFORTS
Since Bruderer \[2\] has recently published a complete survey of MT projects  , and Hutchins \[3\] reviews the most important developments through 1977  , we will mention only a few of the major efforts  . The first popular demonstration of the possibilities in MT was provided by IBM and the Georgetown University group in  19S4   \[4\]  . 
With a vocabulary of about 250 words and a grammar comprising some six rules in what was called an " operation - al syntax "  , the system demonstrated some rudimentary capability in Russian to English translation  . This in-stlgated a massive government funding ef for t over the next decade  , and some 20 million dollars was invested in 17 different projects . By 1965 the MarkII Russian English system \[5\] had been installed at the Foreign Technology Division of the U  . S . Air Force at Wright-Patters on AFB , and the Georgetown system had been deli-vered to the Atomic Energy Commission at Oak Ridge Na -tlonal Laboratory and to EURATOM in Ispra  , Italy . Re-viewing MT systems such as these at the request of the National Science Foundation  , the Automatic Language Processing Advisory Committee  ( ALPAC ) reported in 1966 that MT was slower , less accurate , and more expensive than human translation ; further , that there was no predlcta-ble prospect of improvement in MT capability  . Though strongly and perhaps justifiably crit icized  \[6\]  , this report so on resulted in the virtual elimination of MT funding in the U  . S . , and a sizeable reduction in fo~ign efforts as well  . 
Jonathan Slocum
I . inguistics Research Center
The University of Texas
Peter Toma , who was responsible for the installations at Oak Ridge and Ispracited above  , so on began private ef-forts at improving the Georgetown system  . This culmina-ted in SYSTRAN\[7\] , which replaced MarkII at WPAFB in 1970 and the Georgetown system at EURATOM in 1976  . 
SYSTRAN was also used by NASA during the Apol lo-Soyuz mission  . In 1976 the Commission of European Communities adopted SYSTRAN for English to French translat ion  ; however , an evaluation of its translations by the EEC post-editors in Brussels found the resu lts to be far from sat-is factory : " all the revisors had exhausted their patience before the end "\  [8  \ ]  . Despite its generally low transla-tion quality  , SYSTRAN is the most widely used MT system to date  . its chief commercial competitor , LOGOS\[9\] , is another example of a " direct " MT system . As in SYSTRAN , the analysis and synthesis components are separated but the linguistic procedures are designed for a specific source-language  ( SL ) and target-language ( TL ) pair . In an evaluation by Slnaiko and Klare \ [10  \ ]  , LOGOS dld not fare well .   8ruderer   \[2\] reports further development for translat ion into Russian  , and experiments on French , German and Spanish , but provides few details . 
In an effort to correct the obvious inadequacies of these and other ' first generation ' systems  , which essen-tialiy translate word-for- word with no attempt at a uni-fied analys is at the sentence level  , and which were developed a binitio for a spec if ic SL-TL pair  , researchers began to investigate methods of an a lyzing sentences into structures from which in theory any TL could be generated  . There are two broad types of such'second genera -tion'systems  . One type produces analyses in a " neutral " st ructure  , or ' interlingua ~ ; the other produces SL syn-tactic structures which are transformed via a process called ' transfer ' into a syntactic structure for the TL sentence  . One example of the former approach is the system produced by the Centred ' ~ tudes pour la Traduc -tlon Automatique  ( CETA ) at the University of Grenoble\[11\] . During the period from 1961 to 1971 this group developed a Russian to French MT system  . An evaluation at the end of that period revealed that only  42~ of the sentences were being correctly trans lated  . Some fail-ures were due to errors in the input  , but the majority were due to programminger rors  , failure to produce a lexical analysis of a word or a syntactic analysis of a sentence  , inefficiencies in the parser causing it to apply too many rules  , etc . The Traduction Automatique del ' Universit ~ de MontrEal  ( TAUM ) project \[12\] is an example of the transfer approach . There are flve grammars called " q-systems " to effect morphological and syntactic analysis of English  , then transfer , then syntactic and morphological synthesis of French  . Each such stage consists of a series of generalized tree structure transfoPmations  . The significance of TAUM is that , of the sec-ond-generation systems , it is the nearest to operational implementation : it is to be applied to the translation of ai rcraft maintenance manuals  . 
in 1978 the European project EUROTRA was initiated , apparently adopting the newer Grenoble system ARIANE  , in order to produce an advanced , second generation MT system for the eventual replacement of the first generation system  ( SYSTRAN ) currently in use\[8\] . The Greno-ble group , now tit\]ed Grouped ' Etudes pour la Traduction Automatlque  ( GETA )  , abando'ed their earlier approach in light of its deficiencies and produced a system to translate in six passes : morphological analysis  , multilevel ( syntactic and semantic ) analysis , lexical transfer , structural transfer , syntactic generation , and morphological generation . Multilevel analysis , structural transfer , and syntactic generation are all effec-ted ~ . a a general tree-to-tree transducer program , some-systems transducer in TAUM ; the other components have Special programs suited to their function  . The emphasis in this project is apparently twofold : increased efficiency and reliabili tythrough adoption of components with the minimum necessary power  , and decreased sensitivity to fai ) ure in individual stages through the expedient of in-suring that every component has some output  , even if such output is nothing more than the or iginal input  . If we have interpreted the Vau Quois mimeo \[8\] properly , this must be ~ elargest and most comprehensive MT project yet undertaken  . 
DESCRIPTION OF METAL
There are two different classifications of " generations " in MT systems  . The first posits three generations ( currently ) according to the following criteria : ( I ) translation is word-for-word , with no significant syntactic analysis ;   ( 2 ) translation proceeds after obtaining a complete syntactic analysis of an input  , with no signifi-cant semantic analysis ;   ( 3 ) translation proceeds after obtaining a complete semantic analysis of an input  . The definition of ' third generation'says nothing about ex-tra-sential information  , and one might posita ' fourth generation ' which employs such information  . The other classification proceeds according to the following criteria :  ( l ) translation proceeds " directly " from the SL to the TL  , and the SL is analyzed only to the minimum extent necessary to generate TL equivalents  ;   ( 2 ) translation proceeds " indirectly " by deriving a more-or-less standard analysis of the input  , independent of the TL involved ( but not necessarily of the SL )  , and then genera-ting TL output based on the standard analysis  . Within this definition of ' second generation ' , as noted above , there are the ' transfer ' vs . ' interlingua ' approaches . 
We prefer to characterize METAL as a ' third generation ' system according to the first c lassification given above because this makes it clear that METAL derives a sub-stant ial semantic analysis  , whereas the second definition of ' second generation ' does not necessarily imply that semantic analysis of any kind is performed  . 
METAL comprises two distinct components : the linguistic and the computational  . The linguistic component con-sists of lexicons  , phrase-structure grammar rules , case frames and transformations . SL and TL lexical entries include feature- value pairs encoding syntactic and sem-antic information such as grammatical category  , inflec-tional class , semantic type , and case information ( see Figure \]) . Transfer lexical entries indicate how and under what conditions words or idioms in one language translate into words or idioms in another  ( see Figure 2 )  . The phrase-structure rules may be augmented wi th procedures to determine their applicat ionvia feature/value tests  , to add or copy features and values in the in terp retation being constructed  , to invoke case frameroutines , and to invoke specific or general transform a - tions  . Case frameroutines determine semantic case rela tionships between verbs and nouns on the basis of syn-tactic and semantic features  , and produce their output in the form of propos itional trees  . Transformatio ' - are pattern-pairs that specify old and new tree structures  ; when invoked , a transformation attempts to match its " old "side against the current structural descrip to r  , and if successful converts it into one matching its " new " side  . In the process , features and values may be tested and set arbit rariy  . This provides the grammar . 
with virtually unlimite ~- on text sensitiv ity  , but since no interpretation can affect the operation of the parser it still enjoys the advantages of contextfree operation  . Finally , there is a method for scoring , or rating , interpretations ; this allows the system to determine the " best " interpretation for translation  , and also provides another mechanism for rejecting the application of any rule  , viz , a score below cutoff . Figure 3 illustrates a typical gramma rule . 
~ CAT ( PREP)
ALO(!n)(i )
GC(AD~(0)
CNS)(M )
PLC(WI ) ( WINF ) %
RO(TMPTOPLOCDSTTAREQU))
INCAT ( PREP)
ALO(in )
RO(DSTLOC )
PO ( PRE)
ON(VO ))
INTOCAT ( PREP)
ALO ( into )
RO(OSTLOC )
PO ( PRE)
ON(VO ))
Figure 1
German Preposition " in " and Two
Corresponding English Prepositions
CAT-grammatical category
PREP-preposition
ALO-allomorph ' in ' - the string " in "' i '  ( as in the string " im " ) 
GC-grammatical case
A-accusative
D-dative
CN-contracted\[with\]
S-(asin " in s ")
M-(asin " im ")
PLC-placement
WI-word-initial
WF-word-final
RO-semantic role
TMP-temporal
TOP-topic
LOC-locative
DST-destination
TAR-target
EQU-equative
PO-position
PRE-preposed
ON-onset Sound
VO-vocalic ( INTO ( IN ) PREP ( GCA ) )  ( IN ( IN ) PREP ( GCO ) )
Figure 2
Transfer Entries for the German Preposition " in " The German PRE Position " in "  ( in parentheses ) may translate into the English PRE Position " into " if the Gramma-tical Case of the German PP is ' Accusative '  ; it may tran-slate into the English PRE Position " in " if the Grammatical Case of the German PP is ' Dative '  . Arbitrary numbers and types of conditions may be specified in transfer entries  . 
The computational component , written in LISP , consists of the parser , the case frameroutines , the transformation pattern-marcher , the transfer program , the generator , and other procedures needed to drive and support the translation process  . The parser is a highly effi-cient implementation of the Cocke-Kasami-Youngera lgo- 
