PARASESSION ONTOPICSININY EZRACIXVEDIS COURSE
INFLUENCE OF THE PROBLEM CONTEXT *
Ar , avind K . Joshi
Department of Computer and Infornmtion Science
Room 268 Moore School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , PA 19104
My consents are organized within the framework suggested by the Panel Chair  , Barbara Grosz , which I find very appropriate . All of my conlnents pertain to the various issues raised by her  ; however , wherever possible I will discuss these issues more in the context of the " information seeking " interaction and the database doma/n  . 
The primary question is how the purpose of the interaction or " the problem context " affects what is said and how it is interpreted  . The ~ separate aspects of this question that must be considered are the function and the domain of the discourse  . 
I . Types of interactions ( functions ): i .   1 We are concerned here about a computer system participating in a restricted kind of dialogue with a person  . A partial classification of some existing interactive systems  , as suggested by Grosz , is as follows . I have r ~_ named the third type in a somewhat more general fashion  . 
Paz-ticipant Pl Participant P2 ( Computer system )   ( Person ) 
Type A Expert Ap prentice
Type B Tutor Student
Type C Information Information provider seeker ( somes or ~ c of large and con~lex database or knowledge base  ) Each type subsumes a variety of subtypes . For example , in type C , subtypes arise depending on the kind of infoz ~ationava ~ l~hle and the type of the user  . 
(More on this later when we discuss the interaction of constraints on function and domain  )  . 
I .   2 It should be noted also that these differ ~_nt types are not r~ally completely independent  ; inf ~ tion seeking ( Type C ) is often done by the ap~tice ( Type A ) and student ( Type B )  , and some of the expla/ning done by t-utor ~ ( Type B ) is also involved in the TypeC interaction , for exa~le , when P1 is trying to explain to P2 the st-ruc %% u~e of the database . 
1 . 3 The roles of the two par~cicipants are_ also not fixed completely  . In the type C interaction , sometimes P2 paz ~ lyplays the role of an ex ~ ( or at least appears to do so ) believing that his/herex ~ advice may help the system answer the question more ' easily ' or ' efficiently '  . For example l , in a pollution database P1 may ask : Has company A dumped any , ~ Bsteslast week ? and follow up with advice : arsenic first  . In ~ expert-apprentice interact lon , the exper ~ c's advice is assumed to be useful by the apprentice  . In the database domain it is not clear whether the ' expert ' advice provided by the user is always useful  . It does however provide infor ~ ration about the user which can be helpful in presenting the response in an appropriate manner  ; for example , if arse nic indeed was one of the wastes dumped , - ~ hen , perhaps , it should belis:ed first . 
1 . 4 The interactions of the type we are concerned about here are all meant to aid a person in some fashion  . 
Hence , a general characterization of all the set ~/ pesis a helping function  . However , it is useful to distinguish the types depending on whether an information or information shar in ~ interaction zs involved  . 
C--interaction is przmarily information seeking , although some sharing interaction is involved also  . 
This is so because information sharing facilitates information seeking  , for example 2 , when Pl explains the structure of the database to  P2  , so that P2 can engage in infor ~ nation seeking more effectively  . Type A and B are more information sharing than infornmtion seeking interactions  . 
i . S Another useful distinction is that type C interaction has more of a service function than types A and B which have more of ~ ining function  . Training involves more of information sharing , while service involves more of providing infornmtion requested by the user  . 
2 . Information about the user : 2 . iBy user we usually mean user type and nor a specific user  . User in for r~ation is essential in deter-minJ_ng expectations on the par ~ of the user and the needs of the user  . Within each type of interaction there can be many user types and the same infoz ~ nation may be needed by these different types of users for different reasons  . For exan ~ le , int-/peC interaction , pr ~_ r ~ gist-rationi Il for ~ ation about a course scheduledfox " the foz ~ chcoming t ~ may be of interest to an in-st-cuctor because he/she wants to find out how popular his/her course is  . On the other hand , the same data is useful to the regisrrer for deciding on a suitable r~x  ) massigr ~ nent . The database system will often provide different views of the same data to different user types  . 
2 . 2 In general , knowledge about the user is necessar ~ , at leas ~ in the type C interaction in order to decide  ( i ) how to present the requested information , ( ii ) what additional information , beyond that explicitly requested , might be usefully pr~esented ( this aspect is not independent of ( i ) above )  ,   ( iii ) what kind of responses the system should provide when the user's misconceptions about the domain * This work was par~ially supported by the NSF grant 

I , ~Bnt to thank Eric Mays , Kathy McKeown , and Bonnie Webber for their valuable conments on an earlier draft of this paper  . 
31 ( i . e . , both The ~ crure and content of the data base , in short , what can be talked about ) are detected . 
(More about this in Section 5).
3 . Conversational style:3 . 1 In the type C interaction , The user utterances ( more precisely , user's Type written input ) are a series of questions separated by the system 's responses  . By and large , the system responds to the current question . 
However , knowledge about the preceding interaction i . e . , discourse context ( besides , of course , the information about the user ) is essential for tracking the " topic " and thereby deter ~ nining the " focus " in the current question  . This is especially importa ~ nz for derer ~ Iining how to present the answer as well as how to provide appropriate responses  , when user's misconceptions are detected . 
Type A and B interactions perhaps involve a much more structured dialogue where the sZru : rure has its scope over much wider stretches of discourse as co~d to the ai@\]ogues in the Type C interactions  , which appear to be less strucru ~ . 
3 . 2 The type of interaction involved certainly affects the conversational style  ; however , li % - tleisknown about conversational style in interactive man/machine communication  . Folklore has it that users adapt very rapidly to the system's capabilities  . It might be useful to compare this situation to that of a person talking to a foreigner  . It has been claimed that natives talking to foreigners deliberately change their conversational style =  ( for example , slowing down their speech , using single words , repeating certain words , end even occasionally adopting some of the foreigner's style  , etc .  ) . It may be that users rr ~- at the computer system as an expert with respect to the knowledge of the domain but lacking in some communicative skills  , much like a native talking to a foreigner . 
Perhaps it is misleading to Treatman/machine interact-ive discourse as just  ( hopefully better and better ) approximations to h~conversational interactions . 
No matter how sophisticated these systems become , they will at the ve . ~yleast lack the face to face interaction . It may be That there are certain aspects of these interactions that are peculiar to This modaliry and will always rema/mso  . We seem to know so little about these aspects . These remarks , perhaps , belong . more to the scope of the pane lonsocial context than to the scope of this panel on the problem context  . 
4 . Relation of expectations and functions : ~ . iIn the information seeking interaction , us , ~11 y , the imperative force of the user's questions is to have the system bring it about that The use ~- comes to know whatever he/she is asking foP  . Thus in asking the question Who is r~istered in CIS  591? the user is interested in knowing who is registered in CIS  591  . The user is normally not interested in how the syst~ngot the answer  . Ln the Type A and Bin--actions the imperative force of a question from the user  ( apprentice or student ) can either be the same as before or it can have the imperative force of making the system show the user how the answer was obtained by the system  . 
4 . 2 ~ . n the database domain , although , primarily the user is interested in what the answer is and no ~ in how it wa obtained  , this need not be the case always . 
Somet . .~s the user would like to have the answer accompanied by how it was obtained  , the ' access paths ' through the --~ tabase , for example . 
4 . 3 Even when only the what answer is expected , often the presentation of the answer has to be accompanied by some ' supportive ' information to make the response useful to the user  4   . For exa~le , along with the student name , his/her department or whether he/she is a Eradua1~ or under ~ duate student would have to be stated . If telephone numbers of students are requested then along with the telephone numbers  , the corre_sponding names of students will have to be provided  . 
S . Shared knowledge and beliefs : 5 . ! The shared beliefs and goals are embodied in the system's knowledge of the user  ( i . e . , a user model) . 
It is important to assume that not only the system has the knowledge of the user but that the user assumes that the system has this knowledge  . This is very necessary to generate appropriate cooperative responses and their being correctly understood as such by the user  . In or ~ in a_-y conversations this type of knowiec ~ e could lead to an infinite regmess and hence  , the need to require the shared knowledge to be ' , u / rual knowle ~ e ' . 
However , in the current da ~ a base systems ( and even in the expert-epvrentice and tutor -student interactions  ) I am not aware of situations that truly lead to some of the wellkrK ~ anprDblems about ' mutual knowledge '  5  . 2 As regards the knowledge of the data base itself  ( both structure and content )  , the system , of course , has this knowledge . However , it is not necessary that the user has this knowledge  . In fact very often the user's view of The data base will be different from the system's view  . For large and complex databases this is more likely to be the case  . The system has to be able to discern the user's view and present the answers  , keeping in mind the user's view , ~ Tuile insuring that his/her view is consistent with the system's view  . 
S .   3 When the system recognizes some disparity between its view and the user's view  , it has to provide appropriate corrective responses  . Users ' misconceptions could be either extensional  ( i . e . , about the content of the data base ) or intensional ( i . e . , about the structure of the database ) ~ . Note that the ex-tensional/in Tensional distinction is from the point of view of the system  . The user may not have made the distinction in that way  . Some simple examples of corrective r~_sponses are as follows  . A user's question : Who took CIS 591 in Fall 19797 presumes that CIS 591 was offered in Fall 1979  . If ~ his ~ as not the case then a response None by the system would be misleading  ; rather the response should be that CIS 591 was not offered in Fall 1979  . This is an instance of an extensional failure . An example of intensional failure is as follows . A user's question : Howman 7 under ~ a duates taught courses in F all 19797 pr~su~es ( among other things ) that undergraduates do teach courses . This is an intensional presumption . If it is false the nonce again an answer None would be misleading  ; rather the response should--~that under ~ graduates are nor perm ~ Ted to teach coUrSes  , faculty members teach courses , and graduate students teach courses . The exact nature of this response depends on the s ~: rucrure of the database  . 
5 . Co~lexir ~ of The domain : 6 . i I u each type of interaction the complexity of the interaction depends both on the nature of the interaction  ( i . e . , function ) as well as the domain . In many ways the complexity of the interaction ultimately seems to depend on the cc~nplexity of the domain  . If the task itself is not very complex ( for example , boiling water for tea instead of assembling a pump  ) the task oriented expert-apprentice interaction cannot be very complex  . On the other hand database interaction which appear to be simple at first sight become increasingly complex when we begin to consider  ( i ) dyna-mic databases ( i . e . , they can be updated ) and the associated problems of monitoring events ( ii ) databases with n ~ i tiple views of data ,   ( iii ) questions whose answers z ~ equiz ~ the system to make fairly deep inferences and involve computations on the database i  . e . , the answers are not obtained by a straigbtfor%mz ~ retrieval process  , etc . 
NOTES : i . As in the PLIDIS system described by Genevieve 2 . As in Kathy McKeown's current work on gene_~ating descriptions and explanations about databases t- ~ucrure  . 
3 . For exa~le , by R . Rammurri in hemtalkon ' Strategies involved in talking to a foreigner ' at the Penn Linguistics Forth  1980   ( published in Penn Review of Linguistics , Vol .  4, 1980) . 
~ . Many of my comments about supportive information and corrective responses when misconceptions about the ccntent and the stTuc rure of the data base are detected are based on the work of Jerry 
Kaplan and Eric Mays.

