ONTHESPATIALUSES OF PREPOSITIONS
Annette Herskovlts
Linguistics Department , Stanford University
At first glance , the spatial uses of prepositions seem
to constitute a good semantic domain for a computational approach  . One expects such uses will refer more or less strictly to a closed  , explicit , and precise chunk of world knowledge . Such an attitude Is expressed in the fol lowing statement : " Given descriptions of the shape of two objects  , given their location ( for example , by means ox coordinates in Some system of reference  )  , and , In some cases , the location of an observer , one can select an appropriate preposition . " This paper shows the fallacy of this claim . It addresses the problem of interpreting and generating " locative predications "  ( expressions made up of two noun phrases governed by a preposition used spatially  )   . 
It identifies and describes a number of ob ject characteristics beyond shape  ( section I ) and contextual factors ( section 2 ) which bear on these processes . 
Drawing on these descriptions , the third section propose score meanings for two categories of prepositions  , and describes some of the transfor ~ ttonsthese core meanings are subject to in context  . The last section outlines the main direct ions of Inquiry suggested by the examples and observations in the paper  . 
1. ~ BJECT CHAR ACTERISTIC ~
Throughout the paper , I use the term " object ~ , meaning , strictly speaking , the object together with some lext callabel . In effect , the choice of preposition depends on the lex ical category associated with the object by the noun phrase used to refer to It  . And such a category is not uniquely defined . There are different levels In the categori zation hierarchy  ( e . g . " end table " , " table " , " piece of furniture ') , but also different perspectives on the object  . Consider the picture below . 

That patch of grass could be referred to al ternately as a front  . yard , alarun , grass , a patch of pass , etc .   ( to assume that these phrases refer to the sane object  , one must see the grass as a metonym lcsubstitu te for tMs patcA of grass  , and the front . yard as some " area " rather than a " slice " lncludln ~ air above and ground under  ; neither view is unreasonable ) . The permissible prepositions , and their interpretation , vary with each referring phrase : compare in /on the ~ ass  , ~niontA ~ patcA of ~ as ~ , in K * on ) tan front . ~: rd , onl(*~n ) the/reran\[Fill more 1971\] . With this warning , I will go on speaking of " object character i stics '  , " object identity " , etc . 
Some of the object characteristics used in production and interpretation can be computed from the shape of the objects -- the axes of symmetry  ( needed for a crosstan road and along tan ro~d )  , the " top surface " ( ont & elabel ) , the ~ outllne "( tA ,  #irdint ~ tree ) , etc .   ( for a description of some of these characteristics  , and of their role Incomprehension , see\[Boggess 1979\]) . 
Other characteristics are not deducible from shape  . 
These include : 1 .  1 , ALTERNATEGEOM~'I'RICDESCRIPTIONS Objects ident ical in shape may be " conceived m diffe rently  , for instance as surface or as enclosure . 
This may be a choice available to the speaker to emphasize certain aspects  ( in lont ~$ erug )  , or It may be determined for the category of the reference object  ( on tAe football field )  . 
In undert/tea Jater , the water stands for tAeup perfree surface of tAnruater  ; in in the water , it . is conceived as a volume . A whole category of objects follows this rule : see  ( undtrlln ) tan ( snowllake loce an lsan 41 . ) . Such objects tend to be viewed only as volumes with " underneath ': und crn ~ A fat lake is genera lly interpreted as meaning " under the lower surface of that body of water '  . 
Intancrack Intan6 ~ wl , the crack Is In the volume defined by the normal surface of the bowlin Its uncracked state  . Intan milk in tatbowl , the milkIs In the volume enclosed by the bowl and limited upward by a plone through the rim  . 
1.2. FUNCTION
One says in randisk and on the tray though these objects uy be essentially Identical in shape  . One will not ordinarily say tan cat Is in : Att ~ e  , but un~rtant ~ e , even with the cage-like table below . 
/o Aniset X Often means that John Is using I as one normally uses it  ( JoAnisathis desk )  . If normal use implies being on or mX , then at Is not used ( John is in or on the bed , but not at ) . And to the right of the chadr Is defined by reference to a typical user of the chair  . 
1 . 3 . TYPICA l , PHYSICA l , ORGEOMETRICAL CONTEXT When using in with areas , it Is not sufficient that the reference object be two-dimensional  ; that object must be part of a surface divided into cells  . One does not draw a line in a blackboard ; but in tatn largin is acceptable , because the margin is a subdivision of a page . In the same fashion , ' geographical areas ( England , tatcounty , etc . ) a resections of a divided surface . Some objects are exclusively conceptualized as parts of a " cell structure " and cannot then follow at  ( * at his room , * at England ) . Other objects can be conceptualized both as elements of a cell structure  ( in the village )  , or as one of a set of separate places ( attat ~ illage )  . Or consider ~ ard : when 1~ is a part of the grounds of a house , one is restricted to In . But of somebody working In a Junkyard , one could say he is at the ) ? rd , reflecting a view of they ard as one of a set of separate locations  . 
If a door is in its typical context , i . e . part of a wall , then interpretation of mtk ~ right of Med~r must be based on the door's own axes  . Otherwise ( In a hardware store for example ) an observer's line of sightmy override the door's cross-axis  . 
1.4. RELATIVE MOBILITY
The mobility of the reference object relat ive to the located object influences the order of the nominals around the preposition : the more mobile object normally precedes the preposition  . One will not sayt/ur ~& , n ~ bot~ti~t amone in a cap , but tkeone ~ dka ~ ponit . Following Tally (1978a\] , I will call the located object the " Figure " , and the reference object the " Ground " , when discussing the order of the nominals . 
Human being stend to play havoc with the relat ivemobility rule  , either because they are the preferred topic ( fleemani ~ a Nu ~ coat )  , or -- as center of the universe -- prefer red reference object  ( tke EmpOe3t ~ e building i ~ in front of me )  . 
Typicality plays an il portant role in deterllnlng an appropriate locative pred ication  ( and no doubt other types of expressions )   . The choice of expression tends to depend not on particular  ( nonprototypicaI ) attributes of the objects considered , but rather on typical attributes of the category to which they are assigned by thel inguistic expression  . If typical conditions do not obtain , they tend to be ignored , unless one has sole special reason to bring a ttention to the a typical conditions  . If for Instance the cap of a bottle were glued to the wall  , one would still say tk ~ bo~t it wLt k a cap on it  . Even If atray has very high sides , one will say on the tr ? 7 . Consider also the table pictured above . Imagine the space under it progressively more solidly enclosed  ; there Isspoint at which one might be struck by this and say in tatt < d~le  . But this point is rather far along ; even with a table with a solid she Ztatf loor level  , people consistently describe objects on that shelf as unde ~ tkt ta ~ e  . 
2. ~ QHTEXTUAL FACTORS
The choice of an appropriate locative pred ication  41st depends on various aspects of the context . Someo ~ these contextual characteristics are discussed In this section as  . if they were neatly separable ; in fact , all are interdependent in complex ways , and these lnterr relations must become c lear before we can design models of comprehension and production  . 
2. I . CONTEXTDEPENDENT PARAME TERS.
These Include the location of an observer , for the deictic uses of some preposlt lons ~ n fro ~ to J ' lkt try  )   , and an implicit ( fuzzy ) distance threshold for the prepositions in d icating proximity  ( Denofsgy 1975\] . 
\] n the gas-sfat ~~ satfatfreta ~ rJ , an implicit cross-path is assumed . To say that " freeway " occurs a saletony li c substitute for " at the intersection of a cross-rood with the freeway " is not very useful  , since no general rule of metonymy will pred ict this one  ( as natural as such a substitution may sound to English speakers  , it is not acceptable in French : see ~ tposte ~ es~tct~t ~ laroute  )  . 
2.2. FGURE/GROUNDAS 1GNM ~ T
The assignment of the roles of Figure and Ground depends pri ~ rily on which of the two objects ' locationIsatissue  . The object whose location is at issue precedes the preposition : compare the tenuent ~ zrtam cku~k and fA  , ? kurcAn~rtatkou Jt . BUt the assigment must also respect the relat ivemobility  . rule . TAtkou Jen~rfar ~ urck is reversible because both house and church are equally immobile  ; buttam ~ cyclenear tam ? ku ~ hIs not . When one wishest olocate a less mobile object with respect to a more mobile one  , : there are a number of periphrastic devices -- one " being the use of " with ~ as in the earlier example  ( t at bott l t with ? ~ pon~t )  ; " with " , not being basically locative , Is not subject to this relative mobility rule  . See also t/~/~seisn ~ rwk ~ ttat~?~tIs ( but * tatko ~ eisne?r the ~?' ) cie ~ almy 1978aj )  ; this turns b~j c/e Into an immovable entity , namely a piece . 
The mobility rule Is In fact a consequence of the principle that the object whose locat ion is at Issue should precede the preposit ion  . The Ground is typically bigger and less mobile than the Figure  , since those objects whose location is most commonly at issue are those which move around  , and a good reference object is one whose locat ion can be Inferred from Its name  , and thus had better be thesase over some time . 
What Is at issue in turn depends on the speaker 's purpose in constructing the locative pred ication  , and how It fits Into his/her overall d is course plan  . 
2.3. VARYING VEWPO\[NTONTHEOBJECT
Mainly this Involves the contrast between a close up and a remote view of the objects  . Most often , this is not a Batter of actual distance , but sway of viewing an object for a given purpose : one Jay choose to ignore one or more dimensions  , or lnternal characteristics of the objec t  . For example , aroaduy be seen as a strip ( a truck Ont kero ? d )  , or a line ( ao Ulate on Mrro ~ L~don ) . 
Normally be Mndtark ou Jt vii ibe based on the house's own axes  . But when looking from some distance , one My use one's line of sight as axis . 
Another aspect of viewpoint , is the bounded/unbounded distinction . Compare w~ngf ~ rougk versus across the ~ at ~\[ Talmy  1978b \]: in the former the boundaries of the body of water are Ignored  , but in the latter , the extension of the body of water from one end to another is involved  . 
2.4. RELE VANCE
Give = the pictures below , one will say t / ~ ~ , ~ dun ~ rtatbomt , but rht bulb in Mts~k ~ . 
The socket is still functioning as a socget when facing down  , the bowl not as a bowl . If function is the relevant aspect , it Is of no Interest to distinguish between situations where bulb and socket are as above  , and their upsided own versions . With the bowl , this distinction matters . 
Similarly , the pear in 6 is mt k e ~ I . It is not normally useful to distinguish between situation A and 
AE
For the two examples Just described , one could contrive Contexts in which the dist inctions nors ally ignored would be impor tant  . And certainly adequate lO dels of language should account for this possibility  . 
A locative expression may describe the general in tention of a per on over some time  , rather than his precise location at the tlme of speaking  . I could say L ~ n n is . at . t ~ estore even if l k new . Lynn might still be on her way . But this may not be appropriate ( e . g . if I know the addressee is at the store ) . 
Relevance is important for Grlce an inferences . For instance , from/on is near his desk , one can generally inferion t ~ not a this desk . If however I asked a friend on the phone " are you near your desk ? could you lookup the address  .   .   .  "  , an appropriate answer is " yes " , even if my friend is a this/her desk . In ~ hls context proximity is the relevant aspect  , and " near " becomes appropriate . 
2.5. SALIENCE
The book below left is on the table , the lid(right ) is not , because the intervening relation between the l id and the jaris salient  . Such salience Is not primarily aumtter of the size of some intervening object  . 
~#. book ~5' l~lid
One generally says that Xist neke field and in the ~ mi  , whenever field or bowl contain X . One ~ ay however say the dust on the ~ ml , and the fertilizer on the ~ eid . An adhering thln lamina brings attention to contact rather than inclusion  . 
2 . 6 . HIGHLIGHTING SOMEBACKGROUN DELEMENT The choice between expressions is often a matter of bring ing attention to some  . background element rather than signalling di fferences of fact  . Thus to tkeright , as contrasted with on the rigM , tends to highlight the distance between the two objects  , and to evoke travel away from the reference object  ; the contrast cannot always be described in terms of objective differences in the situations  ( it sometimes is : thus if a third object of the same kind Is between the two considered  , only to the right is appropriate ) . And on the right side of the bu~lW~ng as contrasted with on the rigkt ~ the b~l~ng brings attention to the wall  . Consider also Bogota is melon the equator ; " at " will be preferred If one wishes to signal the presence of some transverse line  ( e . g . a travel traJectory ~ . 
2.7. INDETERMINACY
Most spatial relations are true given a certa intolerance  . The tolerance has a lower limit defined by the nature of the objects  ; its effective value depends on one's purpose  , and the precision of one's knowledge . 
Thus , the angular precision with which ~ r ~ tly to the ~ gM is defined varies with silver ware on the table  , chess pieces on a board , or houses on a block . 
2 . 8 . CONTRAST " Polar concepts ", i . e . terms like to the ngkG may behavellke implic it comparatives  . In some sense , to the right is better realized the closer the located object is to the " right axis "  . Thus , if I said put the ckair to the righ ! of tke desk  , I would expect you to put it more or less on the rlght axis of the desk  . And , in the figure below , Alst ot A eright of B only in the absence of C . The location of A must be contrasted with that of similar objects in the relevant part of space  . 
(One could however say here : A ls to the right and behind B  , or A is ~ agonally to the right of B . This suggests that even in the presence of C , A is to the algae of B is true , but " uncooperative "\[ Grice 1974\] . However , It is " uncooperative " precisely because of some intrinsic property of the concept to the right- - l  . e . because " . closer to the axis " is in some sense a better wayt O realize to the right  . Even If one grants some usefulness to the semantic/pragmatic distinction  , it does not neatly apply here . ) A similar use of contrast can be seen with the ch  . , ~ r is In the corner in the figure below . It is not appropriate unless the arm chair be removed  . 
, @.-. chair
The concept of a " corner " has built In that In the corner becomes less appropriate as one gets further from the vertex itself  ,  2 .  9 .   ( ~ THERS Many uses of the prepositions cannot be explained in terms of any of the above factors  . One then needs a description of the context of use at a rather specific level  . Consider for example the contexts in which one will say Suzy is at the playground versus in the playp ' ound  . In would be ( i ) preferred if the speaker can see Suzy ,   ( i l ) required If the addressee expects Suzy to be Just outside the play ground  ,   ( t i t ) required if the speaker her/himself Is in the play ground  ( an analogous contrast exists between at the be ~k and on the beach  )  . These conditions " suggest " a close up view , and that the speaker's knowledge is precise ; by contrast , " at " suggests are mote view , and imprecise knowledge . But " to suggest " is not to imply : one cannot infer these conditions of use from the ideas of a remote versus a close-up view  . 
3. COR~MEANIN ~
With most of the examples given , the explanation suggested for the choice of a preposition assumes the existence of a " core meaning "  . This core meaning is basically a geometrical relationship between geometrical entities  . Thus , in a given context , " geometrical descriptions " ( say a point , line , surface , volume , lamina , etc .   ) are mapped onto the subject and object of the preposition  . Strictly speaking , the core meanings are -- at best--true only of these geometric descriptions  . In fact , they may not even hold for any such geometric description -- see the pear in ?~ ml example above  , assuming the natural core meaning for " lne , i . e . " inclusion " . Yet , the core meaning is then present as " prototype " . 
Here are informal definitions of the core meanings for two categories of prepositions  , designated as " topological " ( at . on . in ) , and " projective " ( to the right , be ~ nd , etc .  )  . 
Topological prepositions : in : partial inclusion of a geometrical construct in avo lume  , an area , or a line . 
on : contiguity , adjacency of a geometrical construct with a surface  , or a line . 
~: coincidence of a point with a point in space  . 
In actual context , inclusion , contiguity , and coincidence need not be true . Thus the book on top of a pile of books on the table can be said ontie ta ~ e  , and Mar~tseJ the gate when very close to It . But the relations represent the " ideal " around which particular instances gravl ' tate  . Thus at Implies the closest reasonable relat ionship between two objects  , and coincidence where sensible ( tiecent ~ of tkedrclems attkeint~s~t ~ on oftke axe )  . Of course , the core meanings are not sufficient to determine the conditions of use of a given preposition : one must also know precisely which deviations from the ideal are permit ted  . One principal process Jedlattng between core meanings and actual conditions of use Is the mapping of objects onto points  , surfaces , and volumes . 
I am not saying that the core meanings presented here are the only possible ones  . Only when core meanings are Incorporated in a global explanatory system will It be possib le to make rigorous arguments for alternate choices  . Those proposed here represent a good starting point  . 
Projective prepositions :
Each of these prepositions involves -- through fact  , supposition , or metaphor--a " point of observation ' , k point of observation consists of two vectors  , one Indicating the intrinsic vertical of the observer  ( it will not be the gravitational verti cal If the observer Islying down  , or not In the gravitational field ) , and the other orthogonal to the first along the line of sight  . These two vectors completely specify four cop lanar or tho $ on a lhalf-lineaxes associated with the point of observation : the " front "   , " right " , " back " , and " left " axes , in clockwise order . 
In the core meaning definition of these prepositions  , reference and located objects are points . Given a point of observation , one can specify axes a SSOCiated with there ference object--the " base axes "  ( right , left , front , and back ) by reference to which to the ri ~ w , k t , be ~ nd , etc . , will be defined . These axes originate at the reference ob ject  . If the point of observation ( PObs ) coincides with the reference object ( P Ref )   ( figure A below )   , the base axes are Identical to those of the po int of observation  . If the point of observation Is away from the reference object  ( figure B )  , the base axes are a mirroriMge of those of the point of observation -- themtzror plane being the bisector of the segment joining point of observation to reference object  . 
from/pRef ! ef t4=' il ~' ~ right bmCk ~ pot~s ba ~ // P "" f
Deft@right fr?nt

There are thus two possible orders of the base axes  , as shown In A and B . 
I wlll define the core meaning of each projec tive preposition as follows : given a punctual reference object  ( P Ref )  , punctual located object ( PLoc ) , and a point of observation , base axes can be constructed according to the procedure outlined above : PL oc Is to tie left  . of PRefiff it is located on the left base axis  . 
Analogous d ~ finitions for the other preposit ions are easy to formulate  . 
A few examples will help understand how these co're meanings are manifest in the actual uses of the prepositions  . 
In infrem to far ~ lingst ~ me , the point of observation Is " vlrtual " -- l . e . It Is an hypothetical locatlon and direction for vlewlng : the location is coincident with the stone  , , and the direction Is the direction of movement . One must of course assume--as with the objec ts In tit = examples that follow -- that the stone 
Is aslmilated to a point.
In to tie~gk toftle char , the base axes may be specified as those intr in sicto the chair-oI  . e . by reference to a typical user . The point of observation is then coincident wi th the reference object o-namely the chair  . Coincidence may be the case when the base axes are not Intrinsic to the reference object : for Instance on the ri\[M of the  sto0/ lay be defined with respect to somebodys itt ing on it  , given arounds tool with no intrinsic front axis  . 
Reference object and point of observation are separated In the moon ~ kind the clou ~\[  . They can also be separated when the base axes are intrinsic to the reference object : wlth on t ~ ri\[kt side of tle closet  , the point of observation Is defined by a typ ical user facing the close t  . 
Again , one might define the core meanings different ly  . 
In . particular one could define the core meaning of " to the right " say  , a simplying location In the whole right-hand half-space instead of on the axis  . The choice adopted here reflects the fact noted In earlier examples that the " ideal " realization of to the ngkt is with the located object on the right base axis  . 
Processes other than the mapping of objects onto points may mediate between core meanings and actual conditions of use  . The reference object a myrotate : where is on t ~ erightnd  , r of the ~ nting when the painting is tllted7 Tietree to tieri@kt of tiero ( ~ actually means " at sobpoint of the road " - -think of a curving road  )   , end the ~~ nd tatbar bedwire fence assumes " in tegration " along the length of the fence  ( note one cannot sayt / ~ ty to tient k to ftkef ~ce to the Same effect--that is referring In thls way to the whole city  . The line of sight Is a favored axis , as compared to right , left , and hack axes ) . 
4. SOMECONCLUS (.' S
Here are the main problels and directions of inquiry suggested by the examples in this paper  . 
One cannot fully explain the use of a locat ive predication in a given situation in terms of the core meanings together with some inferences from general principles involv ing object knowledge  , salience , relevance , the precision desired , etc . There w111 always remain uses involving some degree of arbitrariness  ( most uses are " motivated " , If not " compositional "\[ Flll more Ig?9\]--i . e . the morphemes composing the appropriate expression are normally selected from " reasonable " candidates  )  . Even where such principles are at play , they may operate not at the comprehension /production level  , but rather at the phylogenetic level . To sort principled aspects of use from arbit rary ones  , and to understand exactly where such princip les operate  , one must of course first establish their existence and nature  . 
In terms of knowledge of the physical world , I believe one importan ~ step . toward adequate representations is to put the experiencer back into the picture  . That is , It is not enough--or even always necessary - -to know where what objects are  ; one must also consider how much fits into one field of view  , how things " appear " as opposed , to how the y " are " , how this changes with viewing distance , visibility , obstruction , etc . 
General principles of salience shouldue studied : how some object parts or relations are selected as most important--either in a l l i maginable contexts  , or in some contexts . Salience underlies many Instances of metonymy ( in att ~ e front of tAet ~ at re , " theat re " actually refers to the part occupied by the audience  )  . 
Many ' questions revolve around the issue of " relevance "-- of " what matters  , to whom , in what circumstances " rather than the tradi tional concern with what is true  . 
All existing artificial Intell igence programs have ignored this problem by using a limited vocabulary In a limited domain  , so that the question of selecting relevant utterances never arises  . 
Relevance is linked to the speaker's purpose , a suny of the contextual factors described in this paper--indeterminacy  , Grice an inferences , highlighting of background elements , determination of the Figure/Ground relations h ip  , etc . The set of " expressible " 8oals is constrained by the " potential " of the language  , i . e . by a semantic system with finitely many options  . One can only want to say what can be said , and said in a reasonable amount of time . Clearly , " planning " for natural language processing is a very Important problem  . 
Purpose however , will not explain everything one says . 
Simple associative mechanisms must sometimes be responsible for what one says  . For instance , some background element may be highlighted -- provided Some linguistic means to do so exists -- only because some passive associative link has brought it to attention  . 
Once general principles are better understood , It Is an open question whether they are used by speakers  , or whether their explanatory power Is at the phyiogenett clevel  ( and will thus be only Implicit in the structure of the knowledge representation  )  . For instance , although there is a general princiole that the located object should be more mobile than the reference object  , production may not proceed by inferences from this general principle together with scenarios Involving the two objects  . The linguistic expression ( or pattern for expressions ) may be attached to some representation of a " si tuation type " involving the two objects  ( or two superordinate objects )   . And although " at " generally implies the c losest reasonable relationship between two ob jects  , such a definition may never be used by a speaker--or used only In the creation or understanding of novel types of expressions  , metaphors , witticisms , etc . 
What speakers do , and what conputer models of comprehension and production processes should be made to do  , are two different things : the latter depends on the constructer's goals  , which should be subjected to some scrutiny . 
A computational treatment of the use of prepositions will require much greater sophist ication than naive representation theory would lead us to expect  . 

Boggess , Lois C .  1979 . Computational interpretation of English spatia l prepositions  . PHO thesis , University of
Illinois , Urbana.
Denofsky , Murray E .  1976 . How near is near : a near specialist . M . ~ . T . Artificial I~telltgence Lab . memono . 344, Cambrldge , Mass . 
Fillmore , Charles J .  1971 . Santa Cruzlectures on detxls , presented at the University of California , Santa Cruz . Mimeographed , Indlan ~ University
Linguistics Club , Bloomington.
, 1979 . Innocence : a second idealization for lingu istics  . Pr~ecdings . FlftA Annual Mitring , Btrkel ~ Llnguls ~3 oci ? ~ ,  63-76 . University of California,
Berkeley.
Grice , H . Paul .  1974 . Logic and conversation . 3 ~ ntaz and Semantic : ~ pe ~ Ao~ts , vol . 3, ed . by Peter Cole and Jerry L . Morgan , 41-$8 . New York : Academic Press . 
Talmy , beonard ~1978a . Figure and ground in complex sentences . Unluttsals of Human Language , vol . 4, ed . by Joseph H . Greenberget'al , 625-649 . " Stanford , Col:
Stanford Univ . . Press.
1978b . The Relation ot ' gramur to cognition -- a synopsis  . T ~ rtt ~ alls suts In Natur ~ Language Pr~s in ~2 . 
1424 . Coordinated Science Lab . , University of illinois , Urbana-Champatgn . 

