Signalling the Interpretation of Indirec tSpeechActs 
Philip R . Cohen
Center for the Study of Reading
University of Illinois , &
Bolt , Beranek and Newman , Inc.
Cambridge , Mass.
This panel was asked to consider how various " problem contexts "  ( e . g .   , cooperatively assembling a pump , or Socratically teaching law ) influence the use of language . 
As a starting point , I shall regard the problem context as establ is hing a set of expectations and assumptions about the shared beliefs  , goals , and social roles of those participants . Just how people negotiate that they are in ag iven problem context and what they know about those contexts are interesting questions  , but not ones I shall address here . Rather , I shall outline a theory of language use that is sensitive ? othose beliefs  , goals , and expectations . 
The theory is being applied to characterize actual dialogues occurring in the Familia r task-or lented slt-uation ~ O  . 1 , in which an expert instructs a novice Codo something  , in our case to assemble a toy water pump . In such circumstances , the dialogue participants can be viewed as performing speech acts planned  , prlmarl \] y , to achieve goals set by the task . Other contexts undoubted-lyemphasize the inst rumental uses of language  ( e . g .   , ~ ) but those problem contexts will not be cons idered here  . 
The application of a model of speech act use to actual dialogue stresses the need For sources of evidence to substantiate predict ions  . The purpose of this paper is to point to one such source--speaker-reference  ~9\] -The natural candidate for a theory of inst rumental use of speech acts is an account of rational action ~-- what is typically termed " planning "  . However , contrary to the assumption of most planning systems  , we are in-terested in the planning of ( usually ) cooperative agents who attempt to recognize and facilitate the plans of their partners  ~  , h , 5  ,  \ ]6  , 20 \ ]  . Such helpful behavior is independent of the use of language  , but is the source of much conversational coherence  . 
A plan based theory of speech acts specifies that plan recognition is the basis for infe rring the illocu Cionary force  ( s ) of an utterance . The goal of such a theory is to formalize the set of possible plans underlying the use of particular speech acts Coachieve a given set of goals  . 
In light of the independent motivation for p langeneration and recognition  , such a Formalism should treat commun-icative and non-communl catlveacts uniformly  , by stating the communicative nature of an il locutlonary act as part of chatact's def inition  . A reasoning system , be it human or computer , would then not have to employ special knowledge about communicative acts  ; it would simply at-tempt Coachieve or recognize goals  . 
The components of speech act p\]annlng and recognition systems developed so far include : a Formal language for describing mental sta tes and states of the physical and social worlds  , operators for describing changes of state , associations of utterance features ( e . g .   , mood ) with cer-taln operators , and a set of plan construction and re-cognit ion inferences  . Illocution ar'y acts are defined as operators that primarily affect the mental states of speakers and hearers  L3   , 8  , 13  , I7J . 
To be more specific , in the mostfully developed at-tempt at such a theory  , Perraul c and Allen ~ show how plan recognit ioncan " reason out " a class of indirect speech acts  . Briefly , they define " surface =' speech act operators , which depend on an utterance's mood , and op-erators For illocutionary acts such as requesting  . Plan recognition involves inferences of the form " the agent intended to perform action X because he intended to a ch-i eveits effect in order to enable him to do some other action Y "  . Such inferences are applied to surface speech act operators  ( characterizing , for instance , " Is the salt near you ?" ) to yieldiilocutionary operators such as * For this brief paper  , I shall have Co curtail discussion of the planning/plan recognition liter a ture  . 
requests to pass the salt.
The remainder of this paper attempts to il lust rate the kinds of predict lons made by the theory  ,  . and the use of anaphora to support one such prediction  . " Consider the following dialogue fragment ( transmitted over teletype ) in the water pump context described earlier : Expert : l  )   . ' ~ eneed a clear bent tube For the bottom hole . "
Novice : 2)."OK , it's done."
Expert : 3). " OK , now , start pumping "
The example is constructed to illustrate my point  , but it does not " feel " artificial . Experiments we are conducting show analogous phenomena in telephone and teletype modes  . 
The theory predicts two inference paths For utterance I - - " helpful " and " intended "  . In the Former case , the novice observes the surface-lnform speech act indicated by a declarative utterance  , and interprets it simply as an informact that communicates a joint need  . Then , because the novice is helpful , she continues to recognize the plan behind the expert's utterance and attempts to further it by performing the action of putting the spout over the hole  . The novice , therefore , is acting on her own , evaluating the reasonableness of the plan inferred for the expert using private beliefs about the expert's beliefs and intentions  . Alternatively , she could infer that the expert intended for it to be mutually believed that he intended her to put on the tube  . Thus , the novice would be acting because she thinks the expert intended for her ? o do so  . Later , she could summarize the expert's utterance and intentions as a request  ~7\]  . Perrault and Alien supply heuristics that would pred lct - ~" the preferred inference route to be the " intended " path since it is mutually believed that putting the tubeon is the relevant act  , and his intending that sheper form pump-re lated acts is an expected goal in this problem context  . To use Perrault and Alien's model For an a lyzing conversation  , such predictions must be validated against evidence of the novice's interpretation o f the expert's intent  . 
Signalling Interpretation of Intent
For this problem context and communication mod a lity  , the novice and expert shared knowledge that the exoert will attempt to get the novice to achieve each subgoal of the physical task  , and the novice must indicate successful completion of those subtasks  . However , not all communicative acts achieving the goal of indicating successful completion prov ide evidence of the novice's in-terpret at ion of intent  . For instance , the nov lce might say " I've put the bent tube on " simply to keep the expert informed of the situatlon  . Such an informative act could arise if the problem context and prior conversation dld not make the salience of putting the tube on mutually known  . To supply evidence of the novice's in terp retation of intent  , her response must pragmatically presuppose that interpretation  . 
In our example , the novice has used " it " to refer to the actions he has performed  . It has been proposed that definite and pronomlnal/pro-verbal reference requires mutual belief chat the object in question_--is in Focus  O0  , ,s \] and satisfies the " descr ip t , on'lt6 , l . Assuming that the , _inferring of mutually believed goals places them in focus U ~  , the shared knowledge needed to refer using " it " is supplied by only one of the above interpretations - - the one summarizable as an indirect request  . 
Robinson ~! ~ has identified this problem of reference to actions and has implemented a system to resolve them  . 
Inchlspaper , I stress the importance of that work to the or ies of speech act use  . 

Other signals of the interpretation of intent need to be identified to explain how the expert is " OK  , now start pumping " communicates that he thinks she has inter-preted him correctly -- mutual signalling of intent and its in ter pretation is central to conversational 

A formal theory that could capture the belief , intention , and focus conditions for speaker-reference is thus clearly needed to validate models of speech act use  . 
A plan-based theory might accomodate such an analysis via a decomposition of currently pr imitive surface speech acts to include reference acts  \[2  , 18 J . By planning ref-erence acts to facilitate the hearers ' plans  ( of .  ~43) , a system could perhaps also answer questions coopera-tively without resorting to Gricean maxims or " room theories "  \[19  . ~ . 
I have given a barebones outline of how a descr ip-tion of speaker-reference canser ~ e as a source of em-pirical support to a theory of speech acts  . However , much more research must take place to flesh out the theoretical connections  . I have also deliberately avoided problems of computation here  , but hope the panel will discuss these issues , especially the utility of computational mode is to ethnographers of conversation  . 

I would llke to thank Chip Bruce , Scott Fertig , and Sharon 0v latt for comments on an earlier draft . 
References : 1 . Allen , J . A plan-based approach to speech act~eco~-nit lon  ( Tech . Pep . No .  131/79) . Toronto : Universi .   , or Toronto , Department of Computer Science , January 1979o2 . Appelt , 0 . Problem-solving applied to language gen-er at ion  . ( This volume ) . 
3-Bruce , B . Belief systems and language understand ln ~ ( BBN Report NO . Z973) . Cambridge , Hess . : Bolt , Beranek and Newman , January 1975 . 
4 . Bruce , B . , & Newman , 0 . Interacting plans . Cocjnl-tire Science , 1978, ~, 195-233 . 
5 . Carbonell , J . G . Jr . POLITICS : Automated ideologi-cal reasoning . Co~nitlve Science , 1978, ~, 27-51 . 
6 . Clark , N . H . , & hsrshell , C . Oe flnite reference and mutual knowledge . In A . K . Joshl , I . A . Sag , & B . L . 
Webber ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the Workshop on Computa-tional Aspects of Linguistic Structure and Discourse Setting  . Ne , York : Cambridge University Press , in press . 
7 . Cohen , P . R . , & Levesque , H . L . Speech acts and the recognition of shared plans . In Proceedlngs : Annual meet in ~ of the Canadian Societ ~ for the Computational Study of Intei  , li~ence , Victoria , B . C . , 19 B 0 . 
B . Cohen , P . R . , & Perrauit , C . R . Elements of a plan-based theory of speech acts . Co~nittve Science , 1979, ~, 177-212 . 
9 . Donnell 4m , K . Speaker references , descriptions , and anaphora . In P . Cole ( Ed . ), Syntax and semantics ( Vol . 
~): Pra~matics . New York : Academic Press , 1978.
10 . Grosz , B . The representation and use of focus in dialo ~ ue understand in ~  ( Technical Note 151 )  . Reflio Park , Calif . : Stanford Research Institute , Artificial Intelli-gence Center , July 1977 . 
I1 . Hobbs , J . R . , 8Evans , D . E . Conversation as planned behavior ( Technical Note 203 )  . ~ enloPark , Callf . : Stanford Research Institute , Artificial Intelligence
Center , 1979.
12 . Norgan , J . L . Toward a rational model of discourse com rehension  , in O . Waltz ( Ed . ) , Proceedings : Theoret-cal Issues in Natural Language Understand in q  . Urbane : University of Illinois , Coordinated Science Laboratory ,  1978 . 
13 . Perrault , C . R . , & Allen , J . F . A plan-based analysis of indirect speech acts . In submission . 
14 . Perrauit , C . R . , & Cohen P . R . In accurate refer-ence . In A . K . Joshi , I . A . tjg , & B . L . Webber ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Aspects of Linguistic Structure and  0iscourse Setting . New York : Cambridge University Press , in press . 
15 . Robinson , A . E . The interpretation of verb ~ hrases india lo9s   ( Technical Note 206 )  . Henio Park , Calif . : Stanford Research Institute , Artificial Intelligence
Center , 1980.
16 . Schank , R . , SAbelson , R . Scripts , plansr ~ oals , and understand ln ~ . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum , 1977 . 
17 . Solidi , C . F . Understanding human action , in Proceedings of the conference on Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Processing  . Cambridge , ~ ass . , 1975 . 
18 . Seerte , J . R . Speech acts : An essay in the philos-ophy of language  . Cambridge : Cambridge University
Press , 1969.
19 . Shannon , B . ~/ here-questions . In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual P~et in ~ of the ACL  , San Diego ,  1979 . 
Pp . 7375.
20 . Wllensky , R . Understand in ~9 Dei-based stories ( Research Rap . No .  140) . New Haven , Conn . : Yale Univer-sity , 0 apartment of Computer Science , September 1978 . 

