ONTHEINDEPENDENCE OF DISCOURSEST RUCTURE
AND SEMANTICDOMAIN
Charlotte Linde ~ J.A . Goguen +*
I . THESTATUSOFDISCOURSESTRUCTURE
Traditionally , linguistics has been concerned with units at the level of the sentence or below  , but recently , a body of research has emerged which demonstrates the existence and organization of linguistic units larger than the sentence  . ( Chafe , 1974; Goguen , Linde , and Weiner , to appear ; Grosz , 1977; Halliday and Hasan , 1976; Labov , 1972; Linde ,  1974 ,  1979 , 1980a , 198 Cb ; Linde and Goguen , 1978; Linde and Labov , 1975; Folanyi , 1978; Weiner ,  1979 . ) Each such study raises a question about whether the structure discovered is a property of the organization of Language or whether it is entirely a property of the semantic domain  . That is , are we discovering general facts about the structure of language at a level beyond the sentence  , or are we discovering particular facts about apartment layouts  , water pump repair , Watergate politics , etc ? Such a crude question does not arise with regard to sentences  . Although much of the last twenty years of research in sentential syntax and semantics has been devoted to the investigat-ion of the degree to which syntactic structure can be described independently of semantics  , to our knowledge , no one has attempted to argue that all observable regularities of sentential structure are attr ibutable to the structure of the realworld plus general cognitive abilities  . Yet this claim is often made about regularities of linguistic structure at the discourse level  . 
In order = o demonstrate that at leas = some of the structure found at the discourse level is independent of the structure of the semantic domain  , we may show that there are discourse regular it ies across semantic domains  . As primary data , we will use a partment layout description , small group planning , and explanation . 
These have all been found to be discourse units , that is , bounded linguistic units one level higher than the sentential level  , and have all been described within the same formal theory  . It should be noted that we do not claim that the structures found in these discourse units is entirely independent of structure of the semantic domain  , because of course the structure of the domain has some effect  . 
2 . TREETRANS FOR MATION SINDISCOURS EPRODUCTION The discourse units mentioned above have all been found to be tree structured  . This is a claim that any such discourse can be divided into parts such that there are sign if icant relations of dominance among these parts  . 
These trees can be viewed as being constructed by a sequence of transformations on an initial empty tree  , with each transformation corresponding to an utterance by participants  , which may add , delete , or move nodes of the tree . The sequence of transformations encodes the construction of the discourse as it actually proceeds in time  . 
We now turn to a discussion of the discourse units which have been analysed according to this model  . 
* Structural Semantics , P.O . Box 707, Palo Alto,
California 94302.
+SRI International , 333 Ravenswood Ave . , Menlo Park,
California 94025.
2.1 SPATIAL DESCRIPTIONS ASTOURS
In an investigation of the description of spatial networks  , speakers were asked to describe the layout of their apartment  . The vast majority of speakers used a " tour strategy  , " which takes the hearer on an imaginary tour of the apartment  , building up the description of the layout by successive mention of each room and its position  . This tourforms a tree composed of the entry to the apartment as root with the rooms and their locations as nodes  , and with an associated pointer indicating the current focus of attention  , expressed by unstressed you . 
It might be argued that the tree structure of these descriptions is a consequence of the structure of apartments rather than of the structure of discourse  . 
However , there are apartments which are not tree structured  , because some rooms have more than one entrance , thus allowing multiple routes to the same point  ; but in their descriptions , speakers traverse only one route ; that is , loops in the apartment are always cut in the descriptions  . \[ Thus , although some of the tree structure may be attr ibutable to the physical structure being described  , some of it is a consequence of the ease of expressing tree structures in language  , and the difficulty of expressing graph structures  . 
The tree structure of apartment descriptions is construc-ted using only addition transformations  , and pointer movement transformations ( called " pops " in tinde and Goguen ( 1978 ) ) which bring the focus of attention back from a branch which has been traversed to the point of branching  . The construction of the tree is entirely depth first  . 
2.2 SPATIAL DESCRIPTION SAS MAPS
In describing apartment layouts , there is a minority strategy , used by 4% of the speakers ( 3 out of 72 cases of the data of Linde ( 1974 ) ) describing the layout in the form of a map . The speaker first describes the outside shape , then sketches the internal spatial divisions , and finally labels each internal division . 
This strategy can also be described as a tree construction  , in this case , a breadth first traversal with the root being the outside shape  , the internal divisions the next layer of nodes , and the names of these divisions the terminal nodes  . Because there are so few example , it is not possible to give a detailed descript ion of the rules for construction  . 
2.3 PLANNING
We have argued that the structure of apartment layout descriptions is not entirely due to the structure of the semantic domain  ; however , a question remains as to whether it is the restriction to a limited domain which permits precise description  . To investigate this , let us consider the Watergate transcripts , which offer aspect a cularly unrestricted semantic domain  , specifically those portions in which the president and his advisors engage in the activity of planning  . ( Linde and Goguen , 1978) . Planning sessions for madiscourse unit with "\[ In more mathematical language  , the linear sequence of rooms is the depth first traversal of a minimal spanning tree of the apartment graph  . 
3 5 discernable boundaries and a very precisely describable internal structure  . Although we cannot furnish any detailed description of the semantic domain  , we can be extremely precise about the social activity of plan construction  . 
Because the cases we have examined involve planning by a small group  , the tree is not constructed exclusively by addition  , as are the types discussed above . Deletion , substitution , and movement also occur , as a planiscriticised and altered by all members of the group  . 
Z .4 EXPLANATION
A discourse unit similar to planning is explanation  . 
( Weiner , 1979; Goguen , Linde and Weiner to appear . )  ( By explanation we here include only the discourse unit of the form described below  ; we exclude discourse units such as narratives or question-response pairs which may socially serve the function of explanation  . ) Informally , explanation is that discourse unit which consists of a proposition to be demonstrated  , and a structure of reasons , often multiply embedded reasons , which support it . The data of this study are accounts given of the choice to use the long or short income tax form  , explanations of career choices , and material from the Watergate transcripts in which an evaluation is given of how likely a plan is to succeed  , with complex reasons for this evaluation . 
Like apartment descriptions and small group planning  , explanation can be described as the transformational construction of a tree structure  . Since in the cases exau Lined , a single person builds the explanation , there are no reconstructive transformations such as deletion or movement of subtrees  ; the transformations found are addition and pointer movement  . Pointer movement is particularly com~lex in this discourse unit since explanation permits embedded alternate worlds  , which require multiple pointers to be maintained . 
Explanation structure appears to be the same in the three different semantic domains  , suggesting that the discourse structure is due to genral rules plus a particular social context  , rather than being due to the structure of the semantic domain  . 
3 . CRITERIAFOREV ALUATING DISCOURSESTRUC % ~/ RES The criticism might be made of these tree structures that an analyst can impose a tree structure on any discourse  , without any proof that it is related to what the speaker himself was doing  . We would claim that although we have , of course , no direct access to the cognitive processes of speakers  , there are two related criteria for evaluating a proposed discourse structure  . 
3. ITEXTMARKING
One criterion for Judging the relative naturalness of a particular analysis is the degree to which the text being analysed contains markers of the structure being postula ted  . Thus , we have some confid P-ce that the speaker h imself is proceeding in terms of a branch ing structure when we find markers like " Rowasyou ' recoming into the front of the apartment  , if yougo straight rather than goright or left  , you come into a large living room area , " or " On the one hand , we could try .   .   . " The opposite case would be a text in which the division postulated by an analyst on the basis of some a priori theory had no semantic or syntactic marking in the text  . 
3.2 FRUIT FULNESS OF THE ANALY SIS
A second criterion is whether some postulated structure is fruitful in generating further suggestions for how to explore the text  . Thus , the tree analyses of apartment layout descriptions  , planning , and explanation , give rise to questions such as how various physical layouts are turned into trees  , how trees are ~ raversed , the social consequences of particular transfoz ~ l ~ ions  , the apparent psychological ease or difficulty of various transformations  , the relation of discourse structure to syntactic structure  , etc . ( see Linde and Goguen , 1978) By contrast , an unfruitful analysis will give rise to few or no interesting research questions  , and will not permit the analyst to investigate questions about the discourse unit which he or she has reason to believe are in  , cresting . 
4 . GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF DISCOURSEST RUCTURE Given that ~ hese postulated structures are useful models of what speakers do  , we may ask how it is that speakers produce texts with these structures  . It is known that children must learn to produce wellformed narratives  . 
It might be hypothesized that each discourse unit must be separately learned  , and that each has its own unrelated set of rules . However , there is evidence that there are verT general rules for discourse construction  , which hold across discourse units , and which can be used ~ o construct novel discourse units  . The test case for such a hynuthesls is the production of a discourse unltwhlch is not a part of speakers ' ordinary repetolre  , but rather , is made up for the occasion of the experiment . 
Such an experiment was performed by asking people to describe the process of getting thema elves and their husbands and children off to work in the morning  . ( Linde , in preparation ) These " morning routines " are typically well -structured and regular  ; everyone appears to do them the same way . We know that the speakers had never produced such discourses before  , since we never in ordinary discourse hear such extended discussions of the details of daily llfe  . ( Even bores have their limits . ) Therefore , the regularities must be the product of the intersection of a particular realworld domain  , in this case , multiple parallel activities , with very general rules for discourse construction  .  2 4 . 1 META-RULES OF DISCOURSE STRUCTURE We are by no means ready to offer a single general theory of discourse structure  ; that must wait until a sufficiently large number of discourse types has been investigated in detail  . However , the following rules have been observed in two or more discourse units  , and it is rules of this type that we would llke to investl-gate in other discourse units  . 
\ [  . The most frequent subordinator for a given discourse unit will have the most minimal marking in the text  , most frequently being marked with lexical and . Moreover , it will not be necessary to establish this node before beginning the first branch  , but only when the return to the branch point is effected  . 
2 . All other node types which subordinate two or more branches  , such as exclusive or or conditional , must be indicated by markers in the text before the first branch is begun  . 
3 . Depth-first traversal is the most usual strategy . 
4 . Popmarkers are available to indicate return to a branch point or higher node  ; it is never necessary to recapitulate in reverse the entire traversal of a branch  . 
Z This is interesting for the light which it sheds on natural structures for the description of concurrent activities  . 
365. CONCLUSIONS
The reason for being interested in regularities of ? discourse structure  , particularly regularities which hold across a number of discourse types  , is that they suggest universals of what is often called " mind  , " and , more practically , they also suggest features which might be part of systems for language understanding and production  . 
Indeed Welner ( to appear ) has constructed a system for the production of explanations of U  . S . income tax law based on the transformational theory of explanation discussed in section  2  . 4 . There is , moreover , the possibility of designing meta-systems , which might be programmed to handle a variety of discourse types  . 

We would like to thank R . M . Burst all and James Weiner for their help throughout much of the work reported in this paper  . We owe our approach to discourse analysis to the work of William Labor  , and our basic orientation to Chogyam Trungpa , Rinp ~ che . 

Chafe , Wallace , 1974 . Language and Consciousness . 
Language . Vol . 50, 111-133.
Goguen , J . A . , Charlotte Linde , and James Weiner . to appear . The Structure of Natural Explanation . 
Grosz , Barbara J .  1977 . The Representation and Use 9f Focus in Dialogue Understanding . SRI Technical Note 151 . 
Haljiday , M . A . K . and Ruqaiya N . Hasan , 1976 . Cohesion in English , Longman , London . 
Labor , William , 1972 . The Transformation of Experience into Narrative Syntax  , in Language in the Inner City , Philadelphia , University of Pennsylvania Press . 
Linde , Charlotte , 1974 . The Linguistic Encoding of Spatial Information . Columbia University , Department of
Linguistics dissertation.
Linde , Charlotte , 1979 . Focus of Attention and the Choice of Pronouns in Discourse  , in Syntax and Sem~ntlcs , Vol . 12 Discourse and Syntax~ed . Talmy Givon , Academic Press,
New York.
Li ~ de , Charlotte , 1980 a . The Organization of Discourse , in The English Language in its Social and Historical Contexted  . Timothy Shopen , Ann Zwlcky and Peg Griffen , Winthrop Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts . 
Linde Charlotte , 1980b . The LifeStory : A Temporally Discontinuous Discourse Type  , in Papers From the Kassel Workshop on Psycholingulstic Models of Production  . 
Linde , Charlotte , in preparation . The Discourse Structure of the Description of Concurrent Activity  . 
Linde , Charlotte and J . A . Goguen , 1978 . The Structure of Planning Discourse , Journal of Social and Biological
Structures , Vol .\[, 219-251.
Linde , Charlotte and William Labor , 1975 . Spatial Networks as a Site for the Study of Language and Thought  , 
Language , Vol . 51, 924-939.
Polanyi , Livia , 1978 . The American Story . University of Michigan Department of Linguistics dissertation  . 
Weiner , James , 1979 . The Str ~ cture of Natural Explanation : Theory and Application  . System
Development Corporation , SP-4035.
Welner , J . BLAH : A System Which Explains its Reasoning , tO appear in Artificial Intelli~ence . 

