Metaphor Comprehension-Aspecial mode of language processing ? 
( Extended Abstract )
Jon M . Slack
Open University , U.K.
The paper addresses the question of whether a complete language understanding system requires special procedures in order to comprehend metaphorical language  . To answer this question it is necessary to del in eate the processes involved in metaphor comprehension and to det-ermine the uniqueness of such processes in the context of existing language understanding systems  . 
I . DEFINING THE PROBLEM
For the purposes of this paper a metaphor is def ined as a linguistic input containing e lements which result in a mismatch at the semantic level which the language understand ing system attempts to interpret  . For example , the sentence Billboards are warts on the landscape  .   1 results in a semantic mismatch represented by the sentence 
Billboards are not a member of the category warts  . . . .  2 which is encountered when the underlying concep-tual  . structure is built for the sentence . 
However , the mismatch need not be restricted to e lements of the sa/ne sentence  . Even though the elements of a particular sentence may not result in a semantic mismatch  , the whole sent-ence itself can be metaphorica l with respect to its linguistic context  . In this case the semantic mismatch is encountered when the interpret-er has difficulty connecting the conceptual representation of the sentence to the existing structure representing the context  . 
Metaphor comprehension is defined as the process of mapping input metaphors onto connected conceptual representations  . 
A model of metaphor comprehension is defined as the set of processes required to interprete lements of linguistic input which semantic a lly mismatch their linguistic context  . The mismatching elements are referred to as the vehicle of the metaphor  , while the linguistic context is known as the topic of the metaphor  . 
2 . BUILDING A MODEL OF METAPHOR COMPREHENSION For the purposes of describing the model only sentences which contain both the vehicle and topic elements of the metaphor are considered  . 
However , the comprehension processes described should apply to all classes of metaphor  , includ-ing copula form ( e . g . The world is a chessboard ~ and verb-based metaphors  ( e . g . His words were dried by the sun ) . The model to be outlined is based on the ana lysis of a large sample of paraphrases produced by twenty subjects for a collection of over f if tymetaphors  . 
It is necessary to distinguish between d if fer-ent types of comprehension task  . Although the comprehension processes are generally applic-able  , whether the metaphorical input is in isolat ion or part of a larger linguistic input g reatly influences the choice of comprehens ion strategy  . 
In llne with most language comprehension systems  , the goal of metaphor comprehension is to build an integrated conceptual structure but from mismatching components  . The model is based on the notion that the exis tence of the semantic mismatch makes it necessary to build a conceptual structure which embodies all the salient knowledges t ructures associated with the vehicle element  . This process is referred to as vehicle expansion  . 
Briefly , the comprehension process proceeds as follows : The elements of the sentence are mapped onto the ir dictionary entries and in attempting to build a conceptual structure a semantic restriction violation  ( semantic mismatch ) is encountered-the subject , or object , or both do not conform to the semantic restri c tions associated with the verb  . The decision of which element represents the topic and which the vehicle of the metaphor is usually deter-mined by the extra-sentent ial context  . However , for isolated metaphors the vehicle is usual ly the element which has the minimal match with the other elements  . The knowledge structures which constitute the vehicle element concept are temporarily built into the conceptual structure representing the meaning of the sentence  . This generated conceptual structure ( C ~ S ) is also connected to the topic knowledges t ructures  ( TKS )  . Comprehension is complete when the GCS and TKS are integrated into a single conceptual structure  . Vehicle expansion generates a relatively large conceptual struct-ure which is pruned by means of the processes which integrate the GCS and TKS  . For example , those knowledge structures which gave rise to the semantic mismatch are deleted from the conceptual structure because they contradic t what is known about the topic  . Metaphor comprehension involves interpreting the GCS in terms of the TKS  . This is achieved by means of a matching process and the comprehension strategies described below  . " The matching process searches for matching knowledge structures in the GCS and TKS  . Various forms of the process are considered- fuzzy matching procedures  , a spreading activation process . The outcome of the process is typic-ally ,   ( a ) an element of the GCS matches a low-saliency TKS element  ,   ( b ) an element of the GCS contradicts a TKS element  , or ( c ) a GCS element matches nor contradicts any TKS element  . Out-come ( b ) prunes the GCS ; outcomes ( a ) and ( c ) connect it to the TKS . 

In addition , certain input metaphors require other comprehension strategies to be invoked  , such as context construction or recursive metaphor interpretation  . 
Context construction-in some cases , although the matching procedure has constructed a number of important connections between the GCS and the TKS  , it is necessary to search for additional knowledge structures which represent context information which was missing in the original input  . The goal of the context construction procedure is to provide a context information in which the GCS -TKS connections are fully interpreted  , that is , more fully integrated . 
The paper discusses the conditions necessary for the strategy to be employed  . 
Recursive metaphor interpretation-many of the elements of the GCS are themselves metap~s in that they contain implicit semantic mismatches  . These metaphoric elements are interpreted as metaphor inputs thereby making the comprehension process recursive  . 
Due to the limited processing capacity and memory constraints of language understanding systems  , the metaphor comprehension process requires a complex control structure  . This control structure governs the use of the comp-rehension strategies and orders the vehicle expansion and matching processes  . 
3. COMPARISON WITHOTHERTHE?RIES
The paper compares the model of metaphor comp -rehension with established theories of metaphor within linguistics and psychology  . 
4. CONCLUSIONS
The final part of the paper examines the relationship between metaphor comprehension and existing language comprehension systems  . 
The processes which constitute the model of metaphor comprehension are common to many language understanding systems  ( Schank , Wilks , L ) IR group , etc . ) . The comprehension of metaphor does not require a special set of processes to be developed  , although the comprehension strategies may be specific to the comprehension task  . Rather , a metaphor input forces the comprehension system to invoke a complex control structure to cope with the larger and richer knowledge domains which have to be handled  . The main conclusion of the paper is that the notions of processing capacity  , memory constraints and control structure are the most salient constructs in sLmulation metaphor comprehension  . 

