WHATDISCOURSEFEATURESAREN'TNEEDEDINON-LINE DIAL OGUE 
Eleanor Wynn
Xerox Office Products Division
Palo Alto , California
It is very interesting as a social observer to track the development of computer scientists involved in AI and natural language-related research in theoretical issues of mutual concern to computer science and the social study of language use  . The necessity of writing programs that demonstrate the validity or invalidity of conceptualizations and assumptions has caused computer scientists to cover a lot of theoretical ground in a very short time  , or at least to arrive at a problem area , and to see the problem fairly clearly , that is very contemporary in social theory . There is in fact a discrepancy between the level of sophistication exhibited in locating the problem area  ( forced by the specific constraints of programming work  ) and in the theorizations concocted to solve the problem  . Thus we find computer scientists and students of language use from several disciplines converging in their interest in the mechanics and metaphysics of social interaction and specifically its linguistic realization  . Attempts to write natural language programs delivered the realization that evens obasic a feature as nominal reference is no simple thing  . In order to give an " understander " the where with al~o answer simple questions about a text  , one had to provide it with an organized world in which assumptions are inferred  , in which exchanges are treated as part of a coherent and minim-fly redundant text  , in which things allow for certain actions and relations and not others  , and for which it is unclear how to store the information about the world in such a way that it is accessible for all its possible purposes and delivered up in an appropriate way  . Some of these were providahle and some weren't . Some AI workers have already moved into the phenomenological perspective  , Just from confronting these problems -- along way to go from the assumptions of m~thematics  , science , and engineering that they originally brought to the task  . 
Others , in their attempts to deal with issues of representation and motivation in discourse  , have started recreating segments of the history of social theory  . 
This is the history and perspective that students of social interaction bring with them to the problem  . They arrive at the problem area either through a theoretical evolutionary process in which they reject the previous stage of theory  , and interaction is a good demonstration of the limitations of that theory  , or because they are simply intrigued by observing the wealth of social action with which they can identify as members  , that the study of naturally-occuring discourse provides  . 
In social theory , the eth no methodological perspective arose as a response to the : i  ) political implications 2 ) reifications 3 ) unexamined assumptions ~ ) narrow filter on observation presented by structural-function a list theory  , 
This theory:
I ) limits and constructs observation fairly strictly  2  ) Justifies the status quo ( whatever exists serves a survival function )  3 ) posits a macro-organization ( well-defined institutions and roles )  ~ ) uses platonic idealizations of the social order 5 ) is normative 6 ) doesn't explain change very well a general positivist-scien % is ticorientation in which there was a motivation to treat the social world as a scientific  . object and hence to structure the descript-ion of it in such a way as to make the social world amenable to prediction  , testing and control . The eth no methodological or phenomenological perspective does not give up the scientific pretension but it does drop the engineering motivation  . A world whose modus oper and i ( to avoid saying rules ) or practices are constantly beir ~ created on the spot and which  , though following along recognizable tracks , is in a constant state of invention and confirmation  , lends itself far less to prediction . In fact it is clearly unpredictable . 
Language itself provides an analogy , though it is partly the character of language that allows for the constant state of invention in the social world  . Language changes constantly by means of several mechanisms  , among which are phonological drift , usage requirements , meta-phorization , and social emulation based on values and fashions  . For theoretical purposes , one of the most valuable findings in Labor's landmark quantitative studies of phonological variation  , was that social values drive the distribution of optional variants from one speech occasion to another accorcling to the perceived formality of the occasion  . In this manner , values -- what individuals at different social levels consider to be prestigious articulations  , drive phonological change in general . Linguistic fashions themselves also change in response to what is currently used  , and change with or ngainst the majority according to the kind of identification desired to be made  . They cannot be predicted in advance as such changes in value are typically discovered not planned  . Very often changes in language use are derivative  , based on a secondary or marginal meaning or usnge  , or discovered analogy or metaphor of some existing locution  . Thus a dynamic of social contrasts and identifications  , as well as social mobility and a ~ p ~ rations there to  , as well as socially situated invention , are deeply connected to linguistic issues , including language change and the concept of distribution rules  , in an empirically observable and countable way . These and other social dynamics operate no less for more complex discourse phenomena  , and account for large portions of observed discourse strategies  . 
Generally , when a sociolinguist , sociologist , or an thro-pg logist looks at language use , what they attend to are the disclosed social practices  . Being aware of , and focussing on social context , with a history of social theor2 or an historically developed set of concepts for social action in mind  , ale L~s one to many attributes of the occasion for interaction : the possible social identities and relationships of the participants  , the perceived outcomes and the social significance of meanings generated in the course of the interaction  , as well as to structural and habitual features that reflect social requirements  ( viz . the " recognition " requirement as a prerequisite to interaction * staking place at all or in the particular form  , as discussed by Schegloff ) . 
The fact that a background of shared knowledge about the world is assumed emerges from an examination of what is explicitly stated and from the observation that what is explici ? is in some way " incomplete "  , partial , not a full itemization of what is communicated and understood  . 
It is also the case that to spell out all the assumptions would be unbearably time-consumi hg  , redundant to the purpose , boring , and possibly an infinite regress ; and this practice wotLd more over fail to accomplish all those conversational _urposes which require negotiation  , building up to a point of mutual orientation and accord  , or the " use " of one person by another for a real or imaginary gain  . ( cfSi~nel ) The messiness , potential ambiguity , implicitness , etc . 
of natural conversation serve many of the purposes that actors have  , including the one of intimacy and mutual-ity by less and less explicit surface discourse  . 
Here in lies an important distinction , one that is not well perceived by workers in AI . Purposes can be , and typically are discovered in the course of interaction rather than planned  . Purposes are thus emergent from interaction rather than a priori organizing principles of it  . 
Attempting to code , catalogue , regulate , formalize , make explicit in advance those purposes is reminiscent of structuralist  , positivist social theory . To this extent , computer scientists are recreating social theory , starting from the point that is most amenable to their hopes and needs  , and so far lacking the dialectic that con -textualizes other developments in social theory  . 
Ontogeny has not yet fully recapitulated phylogeny . 
Extending the plans , goals , frames notion into the wider social world ( wider than a story understander )  , constitutes a platonic idealization and the ensuing problem of locating those idealizations somewhere  , as if there were large programs running in our heads  ( some of which need debugging )  , or as if there were some accessible pool of norms from which we draw each time we act  . It posits that we act out these idealizations in our everyday behavior  , that our behavior constitutes realized instances of this structure  . This conflicts with a " process " notion of interaction  , which careful discourse analysis reveals , whereby participants are continually trying out and signalling their participation in a mutual world  , presumably because this is not from one instance to the next pregiven  . The great revelation of discourse analysis in general  , if I may heso sweeping , is the ability to observe the process of social action  , whereby the social world is essentially built up a new for the purpose at hand  , and interactants can be seen sorting out the agreed-on premises from those that need to be established between them  . 
There are two kinds of concerns here that bear upon online dialogue research  . One is the notion of person , social identity , etc . The other is the notion of interaction as a reality testing mechanism that grounds the individual in a chosen point of view frem among the many interpretations available to him for any given " event '  . Both of these notions differentiate the computer from a person as an interactant  . Sorting out dialogue issues that embody these notions  , narrows down the field of concerns that are relevant for building " robust " online dialogue systems  . 
All social systems , including nonhuman ones , display social differentiation . This is a central notion that the AI path of evolution does not bring to the study  , of discourse . On the contrary , discourse problems are treated as if there were a universality among potential interactants  . This fits very nicely w / thap latonic perspective  . K_ling and Scacchi have referred to this as the ration a list perspective  , and they c?te claims made for simulation and modelling as their illustration of how exponents of this perspective fail to make even gross social distinctions : " Neglecting the obiter dict a claim that modelling and simulation ~- e ' applicable to essentially all problem-solving and d ~: ision-m&xing  , ' presumably including ethical decisions , one is left with an odd account of the problem of modelling  . Models are ' far from ubiquitous ' and ' the trouble is ' they are difficult and costly to develop and use  . But the appropriateness of modell-ing is not linked by  ( rational perspectivists ) to any discernible social setting or the interests of its participants  .   ( Their ) claims are not aimed at policy-making in particular  . They could include simulations costs of newurban development  . However , their co- , ,ents typify the rational perspective when it is applied to information systems in policy-making  ; the presumption is that differences in socia l settings make no difference  . " Work in sociolinguistics , on the other hand , has focussed on how speech varies by situation , by relationship , by purpose and by many other constraints that depend upon both a typification of the other from a complex set of loose attributes and the discovery of his unique behavior ~ n the situation  . The notion of a linguistic " repertoire " expresses people's demonstrated ability and propensity to adjust their speech at almost every analytic level  , down to the phonology , to their perception of the situation and the audience  . There are variations in people's skill at this , but all do it . To the extent that they don't do it , they risk being inappropriate and not getting rewards from interaction  . 
( see F . Ericks on for a study of the outcomes of interactive strategies in ethnically mixed interactions  . ) The structuralist perspective again may be an appealing way for computer scientists to approach the problem of differentiation of persons  , as it posits an essentially limited set of " roles " of fairly fixed attributes  , and posits as well an ordered hierarchical arrangement of those roles  . With this framework in mind it is relatively easier to imagine a computer as a viable participant in a social interaction  , as it should be possible to construct an identifiable role for it  . With this rather flat view of human social perception it is also possible to imagine a person requiring of a computer that it behave appropriately in a conversation  , without regard for the fact that a computer 6an only satisfy a very limited set of purposes for that person in interaction  . In fact people know perfectly well many of the things computers can't do for them or to them  , things which other people can do and hence which need to be taken into account in dealing with other people  . And they are able to differentiate for the purpose of interaction among infinitely many people  , and states of mind or situation those people can be in  . 
The other feature of interaction between people , reality-testing , is less well understood than differentiation , which is a veritable solid ground of social understanding  . However , it can be seen in interactions , even very simple task-oriented ones such as I described in my thesis  , that people are also always accessing each other for a view of the world  , for agreement , disagreement , and a framework for interpreting . Diffuse explanation mechanisms ( Wynn ,  1979 ) also exhibit the tendency of speaker to nail down the audience's perception of himself to the framework of interpretation desired by him  , as an implicit acknowledgement of possible variance  . 
What is often uncertain in an actor's " model " or pro-Jection  , or understanding of the other participants or observers  , is their view of the actor himself . To this end , he fills in and guides the interpretation with additional context anytime heperceives an occasion form is interpretation  , sometimes to the point of logical absurdity ( but ~ ractical appropriateness if not necessity )  . 
since a computer is not an actor in the social world  , its interpretations , both of oneself and of " events " perceived social phenomena--don't really count  . A computer can provide facts about the world within a well-understood framework  , but it cannot provide the kind of context that comes from being a participant in social life  , nor a validation of another's perception , except to the extent that matters of " fact " or true-false distinctions allow this  . And in these cases , the person supplies this validation himself from the information  . 
This may be a mootpoint , but I maintain that the search for agreement , confirmation , etc . , and the related search for common ground or reality are basic motives for interaction  , along with confirmations of membership and solidarity etc  . , as described in the work of Schegloff and of much earlier writers like Malinowski and Si~nnel  . 
Rather than working from careful and detailed observations of the real world  , excepting such innovators as Grosz and Robinson , many computer scientists exhibit a tendency to develop their "' models " of interaction by conceptualizing from the perspective of the machine and its capabilities or possible capabilities  . Discourse features may be selected for attention and speculation because they offer either a machine analog or a machine contrast  . Thus we people are attributed information structures  , search procedures and other constructs which are handy metaphors from the realm of computer dom  ; and it would be especially handy if we were in fact constructed according to these clean notions  , so that our thinking and behavior could he modelled  . ( In all fairness , I know computers have " guys " running around inside them  , " going " places , " looking for " stuff , trying out things , getting excited or upset , going nuts , giving up , etc . ) Working from the machine perspective can lead to some gross observational oversights  , and the authors of the oversight I've picked as an example will hopefully in dulgeme  . The implicit confirmation hypothesis ( Hayes and Reddy ) could never have been hypothesized by anyone who studies language behavior from a social perspective  , as one of the oldest conversational observations around is the explicit confirmation observation  . The phatic communion notion is over 30 years old , and is perhaps the first attention given to those features of interaction which were initially considered to carry little or no observable propositional content or information  . 
Included in these he haviors are those discourse " fillers " that signal to the speaker he is being received with no problem  , that the listener is still paying attention ( even more basic than confirming )  , and that the listener is a participant in the rhythm of the interaction even though'he is producing little speech at the moment  . The " rights " and " ~ e h h e h h e h ' s " of the current natural conversation transcription conventions are absolutely pervasive and omnipresent  . Nods , " hm's " , gaze , prompt questions , frowns , smiles , exclamations of wonder , are all explicit confirmation devices constantly used in conversation  , and occur especially when new propositions or details essential to building a story are presented  . 
Speakers are also oftentative and reformulate at any evidence of with held confirmation  , like a " blank stare " or a frown from the audience  . 
Therefore it is by no means ungraceful to explicitly confirm  , and on the other hand , it takes very little to do so . But the point is this : even if the implicit confirmation hypothesis were true  ( and I pick it because it is an available ex-mple and very easy to reject--other notions would do a ~ well but require a more detailed attack  )  , it would be no reason to exclude this feature from a com ~ uter dialogue nor to suppose that it would pose people any difficulty in handling ad /alogue with a machine  . The discourse supporting activities of natural conversation always address practical concerns  , If a new concern should 8/'isebecause of new constraints -- e . g . that the interactant is a machine--these will be incorporated in the ongoing details of communication  . 
For instance ~ when it is obvious someone is having difficulty speak in - and understanding English  , we unhesit a-tingly drop all ellipsis and give full articulation of every sound  , even though this produces great redundancy in the message for purposes of communicating with another native speaker  , and is moreover extremely unhabitual . 

In fact , the social role of the computer is perhaps most like that of a foreigner  . We assume a foreign individual w~ose English is poor to have an ability to communicate  , perhaps a rudimentary ~ Ta- . .a ~ and vocahuis/'y of our language , and a set of customs , some of which overlap with ours . But we can't take the specifics of any of these things for granted  . 
There is very little in the way of a background of practices or assumptions to work with  . But here the analogy ends . 
Presumably , we won't begoing to on-linedia ) ogue programs to chitch at . The purposes will be fairly well-defined and circumscribed  . People will interact with a computer : i ) because there is no person available 2 ) because there is lim/ted social confront in accessing expert information from a computer  , so it is available in a metaphorical sense 3 ) because the computer has specialized abilities and resources not found in a single individual  4  ) because it coordinates non-local information and  5  ) is maximally up-to-date--changes in status and the news of this are concurrently available and  6  ) the outcome of one's own interaction with the system may be an im ~ ediately registered action  , like reserving a space and hence making one less space available to subsequent users  7  ) because actual searching ( as opposed to the metaphoric kind attributed to our minds by cognitive scientists  ) of a large database may be required and the computer is much better and faster at this than we are  . 
In other words , our reasons , certainly our most solid and fulfil ! able reasons  , for conSUlting compu~ers and engaging in discourse with them will be to find out things relating to a framework we already have  . The computer needs to know a few things about us and especially our language  , and especially needs to know how to ask us to clarify what we said  , even to present menus of in ~ entions for us to choose from as a response to something unexecutable by it  . But more than anything , it needs to be able to make its structure of information clear to us  . In this sense it will satisfy certain " person- properties -- we have working notions of at least the parameters and starting points for negotiation with people  . Whereas with computers we have at best an entry strategy for an unfamiliar system  , but very little to go on in common knowledge for assessing its informedness or even consistency  . 
So online dialogue should not be like person-to -person dialogue in many respects  . For instance , being overly explicit with a person is an indication of a Jud~aent we have made about their competence  , This Judgment is quite likely to be offensive if it's wrong  .   ( Sehegloff ) This is not likely to be a problem with a computer from an experiential social action point of view  . Who cares if the computer cannot perceive that we are competent members of some social category defined by a more or less common body of knowledge : We will have no proble ~ intelling it what level to address in dealing with us  , if it has any such levels of explicitness , no ringear-ing our own remarks to the appropriate level once we find out what it can digest  . Online dialogue systems therefore have an ongoing task of representing th~-selves  , not the whole interactive world ; and designers need not concern themselves so much with providing their systems with models of users  , but rather providing users with Flear models of the system they are interacting with  . These are the major concerns , obviously . 
I wish I could now deliver the par ~ of the paper that you  , d be of most interest : what a dialogues ys tem should contain and how it can m~ke available those contents in order to realize the purposes Just stated  . 
Instead I have addressed myself to what look like common fallacies that I see in attempting to incorpor-porate natural language dialogue issues into computer dialogue issues without access to the social under-stand/rigs embedded in social interaction research  . 

