SOME COMPUTATION ALASPECTS OFSITUATION S~21 ANTICS
Jon Barwise
Philosophy Department
Stanford Unlverslty ~ Stanford , California
Departments of Mathematics and Computer Science University of Wisconsin  , Madison , Wiscons in Can area list model theory of natural language be computationally plausible ? Or  , to put it another way , is the view of linguistic meaning as a relation between expressions of a natural language and things  ( objects , properties , etc . ) in the world , as opposed to a relation between expressions and procedures in the head  . 
consistent with a computational approach to understanding natural language ? The model theorist must either claim that the answer is yes  , or be willing to admit that humans transcend the computatlonally feasible in their use of language ? Until recently the only model theory of natural language that was at all well developed was Montague Grammar  . 
Unfortunately , it was based on the primitive notion of " possible world " and so was not area list theory  , unless you are prepared to grant that all possible worlds are real  . Montague Grammar is also computatlonally intractable  , for reasons to be discussed below . 
John Perry and I have developed a somewhat di fferent approach to the model theory of natura l language  , a theor ~ we call " Situation Semantics " . Since one of my own motivations in the early days of this project was to use the insights of generalized racurslon theory to find a e omput at lonally plausible alternative to Montague Grammar  , it seems fitting to give a progress report here . 
I . MODEL-THEORETICSEMANTICS " VERSUS "
PROCEDURAL SEMANTICS
First , however , l can't resist putting my two cents worth into this continuing discussion  . Procedural semantics starts from the observation that there is something computational about our understanding of natural language  . This is obviously correct . Where some go astray , though , is in trying to identify the meaning of an expression with some sort of program run in the head  . But programs are the sorts of things to HAVE meanings  , not to BE meanings . A meaningful program sets up some sort of relationship between things-perhaps a function from numbers to numbers  , perhaps something much more sophisticated . But it is that relation which is its meaning , not some other program . 
The situation is analogous in the case of natural language  . It is the relationships between things in the world that a language allows us to express that make a language meaningful  . It is these relationships that are identified with the meanings of the expressions in model theory  . The meaningful expressions are procedures that define these relations that are their meanings ? At least this is the view that Perry and I take in situation semantics  . 
With its emphasis on situations and events , situation semantics shares some perspectives with work in artificial intelligence on representing knowledge and action  ( e . g . , McCarthy and Hayes ,  1969) , but it differs in some crucial respects . It is a mathematical theory of linguist i cmeaning  , one that replaces the view of the connection between language and the world at the hear to f Tarski-style model theory with one much more like that found in J  . L . A-stln's " Truth " . For another , it takes seriously the syntactics t ructures of natural language  , directly interpreting them without assuming an intermediary level of " logical form "  . 
2 . A COMPUTATION OBSTRUCTION ATTHECOREOF~IRST -ORDERLOGIC The standard model-theory for first -order logic  , and with it the derivative model-theory of indices  ( " possible worlds " ) used in Montague GrA~r is based on Frege'a supposition that the reference of a sentence could only be taken as a truth value  ; that all else specific to the sentence i slost at the level of reference  . As Quine has seen most clearly , the resulting view of semantics is one where to speak of a part of the world  , as in (1) . is to speak of the whole world and of all th ings in the world  . 
( I ) The dog with the red collar belongs to my son . 
There is a philosophical position that grows out of this view of logic  , but it is not a pract lc ~ lone for those who would implement the resulting model-theory as a theory of natural language  . Any treatment of ( I ) that involves a universal quantification over all objects in the domain of discourse is doom " d by facts of ordinary discourse  , e . g . , the fact that I can make a statement llke ( I ) in a situation to describe another situation without making any statement at all about other dogs that come up later in a conversation  , let alne about the dogs of Tibet . 
Logicians have been all too ready to dismiss such philosophicals cruples as irrelevant to our task- -especially short sighted since the same problem is wellknown to have been an obstacle in developing recurslon theory  , both ordinary recursion theory and the genera lizations to other domains like the funct ions of finite type  . 
We forget that only in 1938 , several years after his initial work in recurslon theory  , did K/eene introduce the class of PARTIAL recurslve functions in order to prove the famous Zecurslon Theorem  . We tend to overlook the significance of th is move  , from total to partial functions , until its importance is brought into focus in other contexts  . This is Just what happened when Kleene deve loped his recurslon theory for functions of finite type  . H is initial formulation restricted a ttention to total funct lons  , total functions of total funct lons , etc . Two very important principles fail in the resulting theory - the Substitution Theorem and the 
First Recurslon Theorem.
This theory has been raworked by Platek (1963) , Moschovakls (1975) , and by Kleene (1978 , 1980) using functions , etc . , as the objects over which computations take place  , imposing ( in one way or another ) the following constraint on all objects F of the theory : 
Persistence of Computations : Ifs is a partial function and F  ( s ) is defined then F ( s ' ) mF ( s ) for every extensions " of a . 
In other words , it should not be possible to invalidates computation that F  ( s ) -aby simply adding further information to s . To put it yet another way , computations involving partial functionss should only be able to use positive information about s  , not information of the form that s is undefined at this or that argument  . To put it yet another way , F should be continuous in the topology of partial information  . 
Computatlonally , we are always dealing with partial information and must insure per sistence  ( continuity ) of computations from it . But thls is just what blocks a straightforward implementation of the standard model-theory--the whollstic view of the world which it is committed to  , based on Frege's initial supposition . 
When one shifts from flrst-order model-theory to the index or " possible world " se ~ antics used in ~ ionta~e's semantics for natural language  , the wholl stlc view must be carried to heroic lengths  . For index semantics must embrace ( as David Lewis does ) the claim that talk about a particular actual situation talks indirectly not Just about everything which actually exists  , but about all possible objects and all possible worlds  . And It is just thlspoint that raises serious difficulties for Joyce Friedman and her coworkers in their attempt to implement ~ iontague Grammar in a working system  ( Friedman and Warren ,  1978)  . 
The problem is that the basic formalization of possible world semantics is incompatible wlth the limitations imposed on us by partial information  . Let me illustrate the problem the carises in a very simple instance  . In possible world semantics , the meaning of a word llke " talk ' is a total function from the set I of ALL possible worlds to the set of ALLTOTAL functions from the set A of ALL possible individuals to the truth values  0  , i . The intuition is that b talks in ' world " i if meaning  ( 'talk' ) (1 ) ( d ) - i . 
It is built into the formalism that each world contains TOTAL information about the extensions of all words and expressions of the language  . The meaning of an adverbllke " rapidly " is a total function from such functions  ( from I into Fun ( A , 2)) to other such functions . Simple arithmetic shows that even if there are only  I0 individuals and 5 possible worlds , there are ( i exp SO ) exp ( i exp SO ) such functions and the specification of even one is completely out of the question  . 
The same sorts of problems come up when one wants Costudy the actual model-theory that goes wlth Monta Eue Semantics  , as in Gallin's book . When one specifies the notion of a Henkln model of intenslonal logic  , it must be done in a totally " impred l cat lve " way  , since what constitutes an object at anyone type depends on what the objects are of o ther types  . 
For sometime I to yed with the idea of giving a semantics for Hontasue's logic via part ial functions but attempts convinced me that the basic intuition behind possible worlds is really inconsistent wlth the constraints placed on us by partial information  . At the same tlme work on the semantics of perception statements led meaway from possible worlds  , while reinforcing my conviction that it was crucial to represent partial information about the world around us  , information present in the perception of the scenes before us and of the situations in which we find ourselves all the time  . 
3 . ACTUALsITUATIONS ANDSITUATION-TYPES The world we perceive a-~ talk about consists not just of objects  , nor even of just objects , properties and relations , hut of objects having properties and stand ing in various relations to one another  ; that is , we perceive and talk about various types of situations from the perspective of other situations  . 
In situation semantics the meanlng of a sentence is a relation between various types of situations  , types of discourse situations on the one har ~ and types of " subject matter " sltuatio ~ son the other  . We represent various types of situations abstractly as PARTIAL functions from relations and objects to  0 and I . For example , the types ( belong , Jackie , Jonny ) = 1s(dog , Jackie ) " ls(smart , Jackle )  =  0 represents a number of true facts about my son , Jonny , and his dog .   ( It is important to realize that s is taken to be a function from objects  , properties and relations to 0 , I , not from words to 0 , Io ) A typical sltuatlon--type representing a discourse situation might be given by d  ( speak , Bill ) = Id(father , Bill , Alfred)-id(dog , Jackle ) " I representing the type of discourse situation where Bill  , the father of Alfred , is speaking and where there is a single dog , Jackie , present . The meaning of ( 2 ) The dog belongs to my son is a relation ( or , -tlti-valued function ) R between various types of discourse situations a ~dother types of situations  . Applied to the d above R will have various values R  ( d ) including s " given below , but not including the s from above : s ' ( belong , Jackie , Alfred ) m1 s'(tall , Alfred ) = i . 
Thus if Bill were to use this sentence in a situation of typed  , and if s , not s ' , represents the true state of affairs , then what Bill said would be false . Lfs " represents the true state of affairs , then what he said would be true . 
Expressions of a language heve a fixed llngulst lc meanlng  , Indepe-~en C of the discourse situation . The same sentence ( 2 ) can be used in different types of discourse situations to express different propositions  . 
Thus , we can treat the linguistic meaning of an expression as a function from discourse si~uatlon types to other complexes of objects a-a properties  . 
Application of thlS function to a partioular discourse situation type we call the interpretation of the expression  . In particular , the interpretation of a sentence llke ( 2 ) in a discourse situation typellkedi Saset of various situation types  , including s * shove , but not includings . This set of types is called the proposition expressed by  ( 2  )   . 
Various syntactic categories of natural language will have various sorts of interpretations  . Verb phrases , e . g .   , will be interpreted by relations between objects and situation types  . Definite descriptions will he interpreted as functions from situation types to indiv iduals  . The difference between referential and at tributive uses of definite descript ions will correspond to different way so f using such a function  , evaluation at s particular accessible situat ion  , or to constrain other types within its domain . 
ii04 . AFRAGMENTOFENGLISH IN VOLVING DEFINITE AND
IN DEFINITE DESCRIPTIONS
At my talk I will illustrate the ideas discussed above by presenting a grammar and formal semantics for a fragment of English that embodies definite and indefinite descriptions  , restrictive and nonrestrictive relative clauses , and indexl calsllke " I " , " you " , " this " and " that " . The aim is to have a semantic account that does not go through any sort of flrst-order " logical form "  , but operates off of the syntactic rules of English  . The fragment incorporates both referential and attributive uses of descriptions  . 
The basic idea is that descriptions are interpreted as functions from situation types to individuals  , restrictive relative clauses are interpreted as functions from situation types to subtypes  , and the interpretation of the whole is to be the composition of the functions interpreting the parts  . Thus , the interpretations of " the " , " dog " , and " that talks " are given by the following three functions  , respectively : f ( X ) = the unique element of X if there is one , -undefined , otherwise . 
g(s ) - the set of a such that s(do s , a ) -Ih ( s ) -the " restriction ' of s to the set of a such that s  ( talk , a)-l . 
The interpretation of " the dog that talks " i sJust the composition of these three funct ions  . 
From a logical point of view , this is quite interesting . 
In first-order logic , the meaning of " the dog that talks ' has to be built up from the meanings of ' the ' and ' dog that talks '  , not from the meanings of " the dog * and ' that talks '  . However , in situation semantics , since composition of functions is associative , we can combine the meanings of these expressions either way : f  . (g . h)-(f . g) . h . Thus , our semantic analysis is compatible with both of the syntactic structures argued for in the linguistic literature  , the Det-Nomanalysis and the NP-R analysis . One point that comes up in Situation Semantics that might interest peoplest this meeting Is the reinter pretaclon of composlt lonality that it forces on one  , more of a topdown than a bottom-up composltionallty  . This makes it much more computatlonally tractible  , since it allows us to work with much smaller amount of information  . Unfortunately , a full discussion of this point is beyond the scope of such a small paper  . 
Another important point not discussed is the constraint placed by the requirement of persistence discussed in section  2  . It forces us to introduce space-time locations for the analysis of attrl butive uses of definlte descriptions  , locations that are also needed for the semantics of tense  , aspect and noun phrases like " every man ' , " neither dog ' , and the Ilk ,  . 
5. CONCLUSION
The main point of this paper has been to alert the readers to a perspective in the model theory of natural language which they might well find interesting and useful  . Indeed , they may well find that it is one that they have in many ways adopted already for other reasons  . 

I . J . L . Austin , " Truth " , Philosophical Papers , Oxford ,  1961 ,  117-134 . 
2 . J . Barvise , " Scenes and other situations ", J . of
Philosophy , to appear , 1981.
3 . J . Barwise end J . Perry , " Semantic innocence and uncoaprom/st ~ , situations " , Midwest Studies in
Philosophy V~I , to appear 1981.
4 . J . Barvise and J . Perry , Situation Se . ~ , ntics : A Mathematical Theory of L in6u istic Meaning , book in preparation . 
5 . J . Friedman and V . S . Warren , " A pars ln 8 , us , hod for Hontague Grammars , " I Ansulstlcs and Philosophy ,  2 (1978) ,  347-372 . 
6 . S . C . Kleene , " Recurslve functionals and quantlflers of finite type revisited I "  , Generalized gecurslon Theory 1__I , North Holland ,  1978 , 185-222; and part II in The Kleene S~nposium , North Holland ,  1980 ,  131 . 
7 . J . McCarthy , " Programs with common sense " . Semantic Inforwa . tlon Processing , ( Minsky , ed . ), M . I . T .  , 1968, 403-418 . 
8 . R . Moo , ague , "Universal Grammar " , Theorla ,  36 (1970) ,  373-398 . 
9 . Y . N . Moschovakls , " On the basic notions in the theory of induction  "  , Logic , Foundations of Methe , aatice and Co~utabllit ~" Theory , ( Butts and Hintikka , ed ) , Reid , l ,  1976 ,  207-236 . 
I0 . J . Perry , " Perception , action and the structure of bellevlng " , to appear . 
II . R . Platek , " Foundations of Recursloo Theory " , Ph . D . 
Thesis , Stanford University , 1963.

