PER FOR MANCE COMPARISON OF COMPONEN TALGORITHMS
FOR THE PHONE MICIZATION OF ORTHOGRAPHY
Jared Bernstein Larry Nessly
Telesensory Speech Systems University of North Carolina 
Palo Alto , CA 94304 Chapel Hill , NC27514
A system for converting English text
into synthetic speech can be divided into two
processes that operate in series :
I ) a text-to-phoneme converter , and
2) a phonemic-input speech synthesizer.
The conversion of orthographic text into a phonemic form may itself comprise several processes in series  , for instance , formatting text to expand abbreviations and non-alphabetic expressions  , parsing and word class determination , segmental phonemicization of words , word and clause level stress assignment , word internal and word boundary all ophonic adjustments  , and duration and fundamental frequency settings for phonological units  . 
Comparing the accuracy of different algorithms for text-to-phoneme conversion is often difficult because authors measure and report system performance in incommensurable ways  . Furthermore , comparison of the output speech from two complete systems may not always provide a good test of the performance of the corresponding component algorithms in the two systems  , because radical performance differences in other components can obscure small differences in the components of interest  . The only reported direct comparison of two complete text-to-speech systems  ( MITALK and TSI's TTS-X ) was conducted by Bernsteln and Pisonl ( 1980 )   . This paper reports one study that compared two algorithms for automatic segmental phoneml cization of words  , and a second study that compared two algorithms for automatic assignment of lexical stress  . 
Only three systems for text-to-phoneme conversion have been reported in detail : McIlroy's  ( 197~ ) Votrax driver , Hunnicutt , s(1976) rules for the MITALK system , and the NRL rules developed by Elovitz and associates  ( 1976 )  . Liberman (1979) , Hertz (1981) , and Hunnicutt ( 1980 ) have described more recent systems , but have not published rule sets . 
One fairly standard approach to automatic phonemic zation of words has the following component parts : input : " whoever " 




ILETTER
TOSOUND


STRESS l
ALLOPHONICS output:/huw~v3/~"
Several research systems are of this general design  , including Allen's MITALK system , the TTS-X prototype at Telesensory Systems , and Llberman , sproper name phonemicizer . 
The most popular text-to-phoneme desi@n is the NRL approach  , which has only two components , of which only the first is presented in detail and evaluated by Elovitz  . 
The original NRL system is : input : " word "

TOSOUND including somewhole morphemes


STRESS output : lw3d/d approach , is the unified treatment of letter sequences  , affixes , and whole words . There is exactly one pass through a word , left to right , in which the maximum string starting with the leftmost unphonemicized character is matched  . These strings are sometimes whole words , sometimes affixes , and sometimes consonant or vowel sequences or word fragments like " BUIL "  . The main constraint of the system is its greatest attraction : the unity and simplicity of the code that scans the word and accesses a single table of letter strings  . 
In contrast to this , the MITALK system , for instance , has one module and associated table structure for lexlcal decomposition of whole words  , another module for stripping common affixes , and a third module for translating consonant and vowel sequences that remain in the pseudo-root of the word  . 
STUDYONE
Study One reports a comparison of two routines for translating orthographic letters into segment a lphonemes : Hunnicutt@TSI and 

Hunnicutt@TSI is the affix stripper and letter to sound rules as dlacribed in AJCL Microfiche  57  , and implemented in MACRO-11 in
Telesensory Systems ' TTS-X prototype text-to -speech system  . Hunnl cutt's system was modified only slightly in translation  , and about 20 rules were added . The system starts from the right end of the word and identifies as many suffixes as it can from a table of about  140 suffixes , proceeding toward the beginning of the word until either the remainder  ( pseudo-root ) of the word has no vowel or fewer than threele tters  , or no more suffixes can be matched . Next , a similar proceedure works from the beginn ing of the word  , matching as many prefixes as it can from ? at ab leofabout  40 prefixes . Finally , the pseudo-root of the word is scanned left to right twice  , once translating the consonants , and next translating the vowels . 
NRL@DEC is a system implemented by
Martin Minnow at Digital Equtptment Corp . The whole system is somewhat more elaborate that the original NRL system  , but the letter to sound module and its mode of operation are basically as described by Elovitz et ala  , with 20 or 30 rules added . The NRL rules include about 60 very common whole words , as well as about 25 rules that handle various environments for three prefixes and fifteen suffixes  . 
A set of 865 words was processed both by the Hunnl cutt@TSI affix stripper and letter to sound rules  , and by the NRL@DEC letter to sound rules including the affix rules and the word fragments  . The 865 words comprised approximately every fiftieth word of the Brown Corpus  ( Kucera & Francis , 1967) in frequency order , starting from about the 400th most frequent word : " position . " The lexicon of the TSI system was disabled , and none of the whole words in the NRL rules was in the set of  865  . 
Since the output from both subsystems was tapped before stress assignment  , vowel reduction , and any allophonics were performed , the criterion of correctness was " doesth is phoneml cization represent any acceptable pronunciation of the spelled word  , assuming one can assign stress correctly and then reduce vowels ~ p propriately  . " Thus , a phoneml cization consistent wlth any possible word class for that spelling  , or any ' regular ' regional pronunciation was to be accepted  . 
Three judges ( two phonetlcians and a phonologist ) were given printed copies of the two resul ting phonemic transcriptions  ; both were in fairly transparent broad phonemic form  . The judges chose among three possible responses to each word :  1 = correct ;   . 5= close or questionable ; and 0= wrong . Cross judge consistency can be seen from the bimodal distribution of summed scores in Figure I  . 
FlaIEt
Fll4~C,~fm,~,.?o , .?, LJm7 bb7os-t.
6OIz .,/?
I !
Another , more diagnostic way to view the results is to present the number of words that fall into each cell of a  2X2 grid formed by the Hunnl cutt@TSl rating vs . the NRL@DEC rating , as shown in Figure 2 . Figure 2 omits the 26 words that had a summed score of 1  . 5 for either of the two letter to sound systems . 
FIGURE2 <1.5
Hunnicutt@TSI > 1.5
HRL@DEC < 1.5 > 1.5\[a\]b 127I90l69) 553
If the rule sets were equivalent , the grid would have zeroes in cells b and c . If one rule set were a superset of the other , you would get a zero in cell borcell c , but not both . Most of the 553 words in celldare regular , or else are common exceptions ( like " built ") . Most of the 127 word sincella are obviously exceptional ( e . g . " minute , honor , one , two ") . 
Examination of the 159 words distributed between cells b and c yields the pay off  . Of the 69 words that Hunni cutt@TSI gotright and NRL@DEC missed  , nearly half are correct by virtue of the extensive affix stripping in Hunnicutt's algorithm  . Among these 69 word sincell care " mobile , naval , wallace , likened , coworkers , & reen acted . " Of the 90 words that NRL@DEC gotright and Hunnicutt@TSl got wrong  , only about 15 are definitely due to NRL's word fragment rules . 
Six of the 90 words are in celld just because NRL does not Strip suffixes the way that Hunnicutt's rules do  . These six words are " november , visited , preferably , presidency , september , & oven . "
In general , both algorithms get about 25% wrong on this lexically flat sample of 865 word types . About 15~ of the words are incorectly phonemicized by both subsystems  . 
This might suggest that 15~ wrong may be a state of the art performance level for segmental phonemicization of word types by sets of  400 rules . 
STUDY TWO
Study Two compared the performance of two algorithms for assignment of lexical stress to words  . Both of the algorithms were coded in MACRO-It and ran in different versions of TSl's TTS-X prototype text-to-speech system  . The first algorithm is Hunnl cutt's lexical stresser  , which is described in detail in AjCL Microfiche 57  . 
Hunnicutt's algorithm is an adaptation of Halle's cyclic stress rules for English  . The adaptations include adjustments for the less specified input to the rules  ( e . g . the part of speech of the root is unknown ) , and the number of stress levels specified in the output is reduced  , presumably because the Klatt synthesizer it was designed to drive only used two stress levels  . Hunnicutt also added stress rules that depended on the occurance of certain classes of suffixes  . Hunnicutt's rules require several pointers and a suffix table  , they sometimes pass through a word several times in the manner of Chomsky & Halle's  ( 1968 ) rules , and they occupy about 3K bytes of executable code in their TSI version . 
The second algorithm is a simplified version of a stress rule proposed in Hill & Nessly  ( 1973 )  . We will refer to this rule as Nessly's default , since it is the default case of Nessly's full stress algorithm  . Nessly's default stress is quite similar to Latin stress and to the " first approximation " stress rule discussed two ard the beginning of Chomsky & Halle's chapter three  ( 1968 , pp . 69-77) . The main differences between Nessly's default rule and Chomsky & Halle's " first approximation " are:  ( I ) No word class information is used in Nessly's default  , so verbs are stressed as nouns . 
and ( 2 ) What constitutes a " strong cluster " ( which contains a tense vowel or a closed syllable end  ) is different . Nessly's default is in different to vowel length or tensity  . 
Nessly's default rule can be outlined as follows :
If ( number of syllables : I ) stress it.
if ( number of syllables : 2) stress left syllable.
else skip the last syllable.
? if ( next-last is closed ) stress it.
else stress third from last.
(place alternating 2nd stresses on syllables to the left . ) The MACRO-It version of this rule requires about  150 bytes of executable code , and accepts one pointer to the last vowel in the word  . It passes through the word once , right to left , and it does very well assigning correct stresses ( in caps ) to " LU minant " vs . 
"maLIG nant , " for example.
For testing the stress algorithms , a sample of 430 words was selected . These 430 words were all the items of five or more characters that had frequencies of  40 ppm through 34 ppm ( inclusive ) in the Brown corpus . The segmental phonemicization was done by Hunnicutt's rules in TSI's TTS-X prototype  . 
The automatically produced segmental phonemicizations that the stress algorithms operated on were rejected only if they did not have the correct number of syllables  . 
Thirteen of the 430 words were phonemicized with the wrong number of syllables  . Another 54 , or 13 ~ , of the 430 were one syllable words , which were all ways assigned correct first author . The results on the remaining 417 words of the sample were:
Correct Wrong
Hunnicutt/Halle 308 109
Nessly default 303 114
So , on these words , the two algorithms perform at about the same level of accuracy  , which is about 252 wrong on a lexl cal sample . 

In both studies , very simple algorithms performed about as well as algorithms of vastly greater complexity  . In the case of the letter-to-sound algorithms ( Hunnl cutt@TSI and MRL@DEC )  , the difference in complexity is primarily in the procedure for checklnK the rules against the word  . 
Hunnicutt's rules themselves are only a little more complicated than the NRL rules  . 
Presumably , with some modification , most of Hunnicutt's rules could be modified to run within a one-pass NRL procedure  . 
The stress algorithms tested in Study
Two present a very great contrast in both number of rules and procedure for rule application  . If Nessly's default rule is llke a simplified version of Chomsky & Halle's " first approx imation " stress rule  , and l\[Hunnl cutt's algorithm is fairly close to Chomsky & Halle's full lexical stress rules  ( with noun-root assumed )  , then our data suggest that the epicy clic accretion that produced Chomsky & Halle's fu ll set of stress rules from their " first approximation " has gained almost nothing in lexical coverage  . 
We have reported performance in terms of percent wrong on samples of word types from the Brown corpus  . It seems that an appropriate measure of performance that reflects what people feel when they hear a text-to-speech system is AVERAGE WORDSBET WEENERRORS  ( AWBE )  . We would like to end this paper by giving AWBE for a simple text-to-phoneme system with a  25~ error rate in both letter-to-sound conversion and lexlcaistressing  , and a lexicon with 1500 words . 
If the lexicon is in parallel with the le tter to sound and stress rules  , and the performance of the letter to sound rules and the stress rules are independant  , an overall error rate of about 7% can be expected . This would translate into an AWBE of 13 . 3  . 

J . Bernstein & D . Pisoni ( 1980 ) " Unlimited text-to-speech system : Descr iption and evaluation of a microprocessor based device  ,  "
IEEE ICASSP-80 Proceedings.
N . Chomsky & M . Halle (1968) THESOUND PATTERN
OFENGLISH , Harper-Row , New York.
H?Elovltz , R . Johnson , A . McHuKh , & J . Shore ( 1976 ) " Letter-to-sound rules for automatic translat ion of English text to phonetics  , " IEEE Trans . on Acoustics , Speech , and Signal Processing , vol . ASSP-24, no .  6 . 
S . Hertz (1981) " SRS letter to sound rules , "
IEEE ICASSP-80 Proceedings.
S . Hunnicutt ( 1976 ) "Phonological rules for a text-to- speech system " AJCL Microfiche  57  . 
$  . Hunnicutt ( 1980 ) "Grapheme to phoneme rules : a review " KTH SLT-QPSR  2   -3   /1980  , Stockholm . 
H . Kucera & W . Francls ( 1967 ) COMPUTATIONAL ANALY SISO FPRESENT DAY AMERICAN ENGLISH  , 
Brown U . Press , Providence.
M . Llberman ( 1979 ) " Text-to-speech conversion " by rule and a practical application  , " Proceedings of the Ninth International Congress of Phonetic Sciences  , Copenhagen . 
M . McIlroy ( 197~ ) " Synthetic English speech by rule , " Bell Telephone Laboratories Memo . 
K . Hlll & L . Nessly ( 1973 ) " Review of The Sound Patten of English , "LINGUISTICS 106:57-101 . 

The authors gratefully acknowlege valuable he lp from Martin Minow  , Peter MaKEs , Margaret Kahn , and oulie Lovin = . 

