Core presentational Grammar and Parsing English Comparatives 
Karen P  #an
University of ) linnesota
SEC . 1 INTRODUCTIONSEC . 3 COREPRENTATIONAL GRAMMAR ( CORG)
Marcus \[3\] notes that the syntax of English comparative constructions is highly complex  , and claims that both syntactic end semantic information must be available for them to be parsed  . This paper argues that comparatives can be structurally analyzed on the basis of syntactic information alone via a strictly surface-based grammar  . 
Such a grammar is given in Ryan\[5\] , based on the co-representational model of KacIl l  . While the grammar does not define a parsing algorithm per se  , it nonetheless expresses regularities of surface organization and its relationship to semantic interpretation that an adequate parser would be expected to incorporate  . This paper will discuss four problem areas in the description of comparatives and will outline the sections of the grammar of  \[5\] that apply to them . 
The central problem in parsing comparatives involves identifying the arguments of comparative predicates  , and the relations borne by these arguments to such predicates  . A core presentational grammar is explicitly designed to assign predicate-argument sructure to sentences on the basis of their surface syntactic organization  . 
SEC . 2 COMPARATIVE PREDICATES
An initial assumption underlying the proposed analysis of  , comparatives is that the comparative lements such as ~ r ~' faster  , more spacious , are syntactically akin to i cat - ~ , and thus that the principles applying to predicate-arguments ructure extend to them  . Each comparative element will accordingly have arguments  ( Subject and Object ) assigned to it , and comparative predications will also be analyzed as being in relations of subordin-ation or superordination with other predications in the sentences in which they appear  . For example , in ( l ) below , the comparative predicate richer will have both a simple NP Subject and a simple NP~t :  ( 1 ) John knows doctors richer than Tom
SUBJ ~" OBJ
The referent of OBJ(richer ), i . e . Tom , is to be interpreted as the standar--d-o-~ -compariso-n-against which the referen ~ of doctors is Judged  . The entire predication forms a term ~ ion ( ' T ' ) acting as OBJ ( kn  ~ ow )  , so that the whole relational analysis is as shown In  ( 2 )  . 
(2) John knows doctors richer than Tom
ITsuBJT0~JPr/richer(Tsu~J0~J
Because Pr/richer is included in an argument of another predicate  ( ~ the former is in a relation subordinate to the latter  . 
This analysis assumes three types of comparative predicates : adverbial  , adjectival , and quantifier . Illustra-tions are given below : ( 3 ) A lice builds planes faster than robots fly them ( 4 ) Johnmet people taller than Bob ( 5 ) Aliced rank more beer than Helen The adverbial predicates are subcategorized as taking predicational arguments in both relations  , and only such arguments ; the other types can take nonpredicational arguments  , though in some cases their Objects may be predicational  . 
The grammar itself consists of two sets of principles  . 
The first set consists of general constraints on sentence structure and applies as well to non -comparative constructions  . These principles are discussed in detail in \[ l \] and  \[2\] and will be presented here without justifi- cation  . In addition there are a number of principles applying only to comparative constructions but nonadhoc in the sense that each can be applied toward the solution of a number of distinct problems of analysis  . 
These principles are as follows: ( 6 ) Law of Correspondence Every N Portermina sentence must be assigned a relational role  . Ill ( 7 ) L~w of Uniqueness No two elements in a sentence may bear the same relation to a sinnle predicate unless they are coordinate or coreferential  . Ill ( 8 ) Object Rule ( OR ) If P is an active transitive predicate ~ OBJ ( P ) must be identified in such a way as to guarantee that as many segments thereof as possible occur to the right of P  . Ill ( g ) ? ~ ulti-Predicate Constraint Every predicate in a sentence which contains more than one predicate must be in an ordination relation with some other predicate in that sentence  . \[4\]( lO ) Term Identification Principles a . Any predication with the internal structure OBJ -SUB-PREO may be analyzed as T  . Any UP is a T . Any T satisfying either of these conditions is a SIMPLETE~I  . 
b . Any predication consisting solely of a comparative predicate with simple ~! P's as arguments is a T  ; such expressions will be called SIMPLECO ? IPARATIVETE ~  . IS . All others will be COtlPLEX
COMPARATIVE TE~IS.
c . Any predication whose Subject occurs to the right of than  , and whose predicate either occurs to t--E~-eleft of than or occurs as SUBJ  ( do ) where do itself occurs to the right of than , is a T ; s ~ h expressions will be called PRE-'DTCATE-
CONTAIN ~ IGTERMS or PCT's.
( ll ) Comparative Object Rule The object of a comparative predicate is any term or predication satisfying the subcategorization of the predicate and which includes some element occur in  0 immediately to the right of than . 
(12 ) Comparative-e-~ubject Rule The Subject of a comparative predicate must occur to the left of than  . 
(13 ) Comparative Object Restriction The Object--o-?a nonadverbial comparative predicate must be a simple term unless the tiP occuring immediately to the right of than is SUBJ of a PCT  ; in that case , the OBJ of the non-adverbial comparative predicate must be a PC-term  . 
These principles do not define a parsing algorithm per se  ; rather , they express certain surface true restrictions which taken together and in concert with the general principles from KacZl\]and  \[2  \] , define exactly the set of predicate argument structures as signable to a comparative construction  . Since no particular analyt-ic procedure is associated with CORG  , the assignment of particular analyses may be thought of either as a comparison of complete potential relational analyses with the principles  , whereby all potential analyses of the string not consistent with the grammar are discarded  , or as a process of sequential assignments of partial analyses where each step is checked against the principles  . 
The sequential method of analysis will be used here to present the operation of these principles  ; however , it is not a necessary adjunct to the grammar . 

SEC .  4 . 0 STRUCTURE TYPES AND DESCRIPTIVE PROBLEMS There are three types of comparative predicates  , already noted in section 2: adjectival , quantifier and adverbial . 
The differing subcategorization of these predicates does affect the possible analyses for a given sentence  . Several other factors which influence the interpretation of the sentence are the position of the comparative predicate in the sentence  , the degree of ellipsis in the than-phrase , and the subcategorization of surrounding p-~- ~dicates  . The effect of the type of predicate and the effect of the position of the predicate  ( in particular relative to than ) will be considered separately in the following sect~o---"-ns  . The effects of the degree of ellipsis in the ~ than phrase and the subcategorization of surrounding predl cates will be considered together in section  4  . 3 . It should be kept in mind however that all of these variables may act together in any combination to affect the type and number of interpretations a given sentence may have  . 
SEC .  4 . ISUBCATEGORI ~ . ATION ANDPREDICATETYPES The . effects of the type of comparative predicate on the interpretation can be noted in  ( 3 ) and ( 4 )  . The adverb-ial predicate faster in ( 3 ) takes predicational arguments only ( ignoring f-T6"r"now the problem of lexical ambiguity ) while the adjectival predicate taller takes non -predica-tional  (  . gP or Term ) arguments . 
To see how these differences interact with the possible analyses which may be assigned  , consider a complete analysis of (4) . This analysis may begin with any element in the sentence  . In most cases the assignment of the object of the comparative predicate  , as the first step , will result in a more direct path to a complete analysis  . Assume then , that Bob has been analyzed as O~(taller ) . This assignment-~atisfies the Comparative ObjecT ~ -uT e and is also consistent with the OR  . 
(14) John met people taller than Bob.

Since neither metnortaller is a reflexive predicate  , the Law of Unique '--' ness guarantees that Bob cannot be analyzed as OBJ  ( P )  , where P is any pr ~-' T cate ( other than taller ) as long as it is analyzed as OBJ ( taller )  . 
Slncet-TE e'F ' ~ are two nonreflexive predicates in this sentence  ( taller and me_~ . t ) , there are four remain in q relation alass-~g ~ ents whlch must be made before the analysis is complete  . These are SUBJ(me_~ . t ) , OBJ(met ) , SUBJ ( taller ) and some ordination relatlon betwee--n-the predicates met and taller  . 
John or Either ~ people may be analyzed as SUBJ ( taller ) at this point since both satisfy the Comparative ~-~ tRule by occuring to the left of than  . If John were assigned the relation SUBJ ( taller- ) -- The analysis would violate some principles . A ~ for purposes of demonstration , that John = SUBJ(taller) . The relational analysis at this point would th- - enbe:  ( 15 ) Johnmet people taller than Bob
SRBJTo~J
The remaining relational assignments would be OBJ ( met )  , SUBJ ( met ) and some ordination relation for the two pred-i cate ~ The next apparently logical step would be to analyze people as O~j  ( me_~t )  . However , this will violate the OR , since it is possible to include mere than just the  ; ( P people as part of the OBJ(met) . The OR requires that as many segments as possible -Eccuring to the rioht of a predicate be included in OBJ  ( P )  . The way to satisfy this condition would be to analyze ~ as part of PR/taller  . Then the OR would be satisfied by the maximum number of elements  ( consistent with the grammar ) which occur to the right of met . The only possible relation that people could bear totaller would be SUBJ  ( taller ) s in ~ occurs to the l ~ than ( see Comparative Subject Rule )  . If it is analyzed as SUBJ(tal-?ler ) , then John can no longer be analyzed as SUBJ ( talLler )  . These steps would wive the following partial relational representation :  ( 16 ) Johnmet people taller than Bob
TSUBJ ~ OBJ


At this point in the analysis , the only relation which needs to be assigned sti ll is SUBJ  ( met )  . The assignment of this relation to John is the only possible choice which violates no principle of the grammar and this assignment would give a complete analysis  . 
The analysis of ( 3 ) procedes along somewhat different lines due to the subcategorization of the adverbial comparative predicate faster  , which requires predica-tional arguments . The an~s is can begin as before by attempting to assign arguments to the comparative predicate faster  . However , the first NP after than cannot be assigned to faster as OBJ since it is not a predicational arnument  . The subcategorization of faster requires complete predications to be available b ~ arguments for it may be identified  . Thus consider the other predicates , build and fly . Both are transitive predicates taking on--~ simple HP's as arguments  . The ~ IP them must be analyzed as OBJ ( fly ) because of the OR . Th~mpar-ative OBJ Rule and ~ OR together will require robots to be analyzed as part of the PR /fly  . Since robots occurs immediately to the right of than  , it mus-Et-6"~in-cluded as part of the OBJ ( faster ) by -- ~ Te Comparative OBJ Rule . The OR requires the " O-~J-~f any predicate to include as many elements to the right of that predicate as possible  . Therefore , if possible , fly and them must also be included as elements of OBJ ~-? aster  )  . - - - - ~ ince faster is an adverbial predicate , it wl-'~TTT-allow a com-pe-l-eEe-predication ( in fact requires ) to be its object . 
Thus , all three of these aspects of the grammar work together to force the string robots  . .fly . .them to be anal-yzed as a predication PR/fly as shown below  , with PR/fly analyzed as OBJ ( faster ) (as allowed by the Comparative
OBJ Rule).
(17 ) A lice builds planes faster than robots fly them
TSUBJOBjI "
PR/flv OBJ
At this point the arguments of build still need to be assigned and build and faster must be assigned some or-dination rela ~ Sln~ter requires a complete predication for its subjec ~ predication build must be built first  . If any rip's other than Alice T planes are used as arguments for builds  , the anay--T'~scou~be completed . For example ~ obots were analyzed as OBJ ( bullds )   ( as well as SUBJ ( fly-\]~-T , then either Alice or SlCOUld be analyzed as SUBJ ( builds ) completing d . 
(18 ) A lice builds planes faster than rgbo~s fly them
SU~JI""FOBaS ~ BJ q " ~ Bj
PR/build PR/flyOBj
PR/build could then be analyzed as SUBJ ( faster ) and all the necessary relations between arguments and predicates  , and between predicates themselves ( i . e , ordination relations ) would be assigned . However , the analysis would be ill-formed since one element  , in this case lap_~ , would be left unanalyzed in violation of the Law o ? ~ or respon-dence  . The only way this situation can be avoided , while at the same time not violating the OR or the Comparative Object Rule as discussed above for the OBJ  ( faster )  , would be to use only Alice and planes as arguments for builds  . 
The OR would requlr ~ that ~ . ~ be analyzed as OB ~ ( builds ) leaving Alice to be analyzed as SUBJ ( builds )  . 
This resulting pred--dT~'ationPr/builds can then be a nal-yzed as SUBJ  ( faster ) completing the analysis with all rules in the grammar satisfied  . 
(Ig ) A lice bu~ds planes faster than robots fly them
SU~VTOBj ~ SHR,/"r'onj
PR/builds SUBJIP~/fIYOBJ and ( 4 ) is in the types of arguments which the comparative predicates take and the ordination relations between the predicates and the order in which the different predications were " built up  "  . For (3) , the arguments for the non-comparative predicates must be assigned first  , before the arguments for the comparative predicate  . This is required by the subcategorization of the adverbial predicate  , which takes predicational arguments only . In this sentence , the non-comparative predicates are analyzed as subordinate to the comparative predicate  . 
This too is a conseqence of the subcategorization of faster  . For (4) , the most efficient procedure for as--~ing relations  ( i . e . the one requiring the least backtracking ) requires the arguments of the comparative predicate taller to be assigned first  . In addition since the ~ egorization of this predicate allows only for non-predicational arguments  , the comparative predicate is analyzed as subordinate to the non-compar-ative predicate in the sentence  . Thus the type of comparative predicate and its subcategorization affects the type of analysis provided by the grammar  , and also the " optimal " order of relational assignments  , when procedural aspects of the analysis are considered  . 
SEC .  4 . 2 POSITION OF THE COMPARATIVE PREDICATE There are two aspects to the problem of the position of the comparative predicate : one involves the position of the SUBJ  ( COMPP ) relative to than ; the other involves the position of the entire comparative predication relative to any other predicate in the string  . 
SEC .  4 . 2 . 1 COORDI~IATE AND NON-COORDIN A TEAD VERBIAL
COMPARATIVE CONSTRUCTIONS
In some cases , the arguments of comparative predicates may be coordinate  . This will always be the case for adverbial comparative predicates for which there is some ellipsis in the string as in  ( 20 ) John builds planes faster than robots Here robots can be considered to be coordinate with either E -' ~ es or John  , that is it can be interpreted as either t--h-e ~ -O'BJ  ( b~s ) or as the OBd ( builds )  . In non-adverbial comparative constructions , it will not always be the case that a single riP after than will be interpreted as coordinate with somenother-"r-~TP  . Consider the differences in possible interpretations between  ( 4 ) and ( 21 )   ( 21 ) Johnmettaller people than Bob ( 4 ) John metpeople taller than Bob For ( 4 )  , there is only one possible interpretation , while there are two possible interpretations for ( 21 )  . That is , in ( 21 ) Bob may simply be interpreted as OBJ ( taller ) correspond--dTng to the meaning of the sentence ( 22 ) John met people who are taller than Bob However ,   ( 21 ) has another interpretation in which Bob is interpreted as SUBJ  ( met )  . This case corresponds t ~ he interpretation of (23) . 
(23 ) Johnmettaller people than Bob did For this second interpretation  , there are two subjects for me . __tt , i . e . , John and Bob . This means that John and Bob must be for ma---aITy def~d as coordinate arguments  . 
l ~-~' s formal definition is necessary since the Law of Uniquenes states that no two NP's may bear the same relation to a predicate  ( i . e . both be SUBJ ( Pi ) unless they are coordinate or coreferentia 1 . Such a definition for rlP's such as John and Bob in  ( 23 ) is not unreasonable since they bo--Eh--meet ~ basic requirements for coordinate elements  . They are both interpretable as bearing the same relation to some Predicate Pi  . 
The Comparative Object Restriction and a definition of coordinate comparative lements are required to precise-ly define the conditions under which two elements may be construed as coordinate in a comparative construction  . 
The essence of the Coordinate Comparative Definition  ( not included here due to space considerations ) is that any two elements may be coordinated by than if no non-adverbial comparative predicate occurs immediately to the left of than  . The ultimate consequence of this condition is that only one interpretation is  a11owed for constructions like ( 4 ) and this interpretation does not include any arguments coordinated by than  . This means that in ( 4 ) for example there is no possl-'--%le analysis in which Bob can be SUBJ  ( met )  . 
In the coordinate interpretation of (22), ( i . e .   , where John is coordinate with Bob ) the final analysis of the s-ErT ng will include the ~  r6Tlowing predicational structure : ( 24 ) John ~ ttaller pe?ple OBJ thans ~

It is this term , then , which is assigned to the relation OBJ ( taller ) , ~ being SUBJ ( taller )   ( note that people plays two distlnct roles in this sentence  )  . 
(25 ) John mettaller peopl ~ than B qb " I ~ ~ OBQ SOBJ ? F "" Pr/met  ( PCT ) 
LSUBJOBJ
This particular assignment ( of pr/met as OBJ ( taller ~ is allowed by the Comparative Object Restriction  . That is , taller , being non-adverbial comparative predicate , is ~ b categorized for predicational arguments . But in ( 25 ) OBJ ( taller ) contains a predicate as one of its arguments . 
This particular predicational structure is defined as a Predicate Containing Term or PCT by the Term Definition ~ The Comparative Object Restriction has the effect of allowing the OBJ  ( CO~PP ) to be a PCT . Since the particular substring of (22), met . .people . .Bob need not be analyzed as a PCT , an altern ~ ive analysis for (22) is also possible . The alternative analysis would be like that for ( 4 )  , where only Beb = SUBJ(taller ) . That is , the Comparative Object Restriction does not necessarily require an analysis for  ( 22 ) like ( 25 )  ; it merely allows it if cer-tai:n conditions set out in the Term Definition are met  . 
The Comparative Object Restriction is quite important  , then , in distinguishing the possible analysis for non -adverbial comparative constructions  . It is equally Im-plant in obtaining the correct analysis for the sentence types to be discussed in the next section  . 
SEC . 4.2.2 SUBJECT COMPARATIVES
The position of the entire comparative predication  , relative to other predicates in the string is also quite important in determining the possible types of analysis  . 
Sentence ( 25 ) exhibits a subject comparative where the comparative predication occurs to the left of another predicate  . It is useful to compare this sentence with the object comparative in  ( 22 ) repeated here . 
(26 ) Taller people than Bobmet John ( 22 ) John n~t taller people than Bob As has already been discussed in  4  . 2 . 1, (22) has two possible interpretations . Sentence (26) , however , has only one possible interpretation . Therefore there should be only one possible analysis  . The analysis which needs to be avoided is ( 27 ) Taller people than s ~ ~ m ~ John To ~ JIpr/m@t
SUBJOBJ
This case must be disallowed while at the same time allowing the structure in  ( 24 ) to be analyzed as OBJ ( tal-ler )  . The Comparative Object Rule and the Term Pr/met shown in  ( 28 ) does not meet the requirements set out for a PC -Term and the subcategorization of taller  ( i . e . non-predicational arguments only ) will not allow Pr/met to be analyzed as an argument of taller unless it is analyzable as a PC-Term  . Thus , the subcategorization of taller and the Comparative Object Restriction will both prevent he assignment of Pr/met as OBJ  ( taller ) in ( 27 )  . Since an analysis which includes ( 27 ) is not possible , the only way the analysis can procede is as follows  . The Comparative Subject Rule will require people =SUBJ  ( taller ) since it is the only tip to the left of than . Since Bob is the element occuring immediately to t -' h-e-right of ~ n  , it is the only ~ IP which can be analyzed as objec-'t--~ftaller  . The resulting predication Pr/taller is defined as a term by  ( IOb )  . 
(28) Taller peqple than Bbmet John?s .. J

The MP John must be analyzed as OBJ ( met ) to satisfy the OR , leav-~Pr/taller to be analyzed as SUBJ(met) . This will also satisfy the ) lultiPredicate Constraints in cetaller and met will be in some ordlnatlon relation as a res-'~  . 
(2g ) TalerL prxtaler(T ) su ) dpeqple ~ uB , \] than ~ j BbmitJofnOB d

No other analysis is possible since no non -comparative predicate occurs to the left of than  ( which would allow for possible coordinate interpret at l----~ ons  )  . 
SEC . 4.2.3 COMCLUSIONS
The important points in this section are that for Subject Comparatives such as  ( 26 )  , only one interpretation is possible , while for Object Comparatives such as 21) , two interpretations are possible . Position of the comparative predication relative to the rest of the string is thus an important factor in determining the number of possible interpretations  . Position of individual NP's relative to than is also an important factor in determining the number of possible interpretations a sentence may have  ; Sentences like (4) , where not IP occurs between than and the comparative predicate  , have only one interpretation , ~lhile sentences like ( ZIP , where an PIP does occur in the position , have two possible interpretations . 
The Comparative Object Restriction and the Term Definitions figure crucially in all these cases in the determination of the correct number and type of possible analyses  . 
SEC .  4 . 3 DEGREE OF ELLIPSIS AND SUBCATEGORIZATIONO . ~F
SURROUtlDIr ~ GPREDICATES
The degree of ellipsis following than in comparative structures is quite important in ~ rmining the number of possible interpretations a structure may have  . For example , in the first sentence of each pair below , where only a single predicate occurs before than , more than one interpretation is possible per str -~  , while in the second sentence in each pair , where an PIP followed by some predicate occurs , only one interpretation is possible . 
(30 ) Alice builds planes faster than robots ( 31 ) A lice builds planes faster than robots do ( 32 ) John knows richer doctors than Alice ( 33 ) John knows richer doctors than Alice does The actual analysis of these sentences will not be presented here  . Such sentences are discussed in detail in Ryan \[5\]  . 
SEC .  4 . 3 . 1 DEGREE OF ELLIPSIS AND SUBCATEGORIZATION OF
SURRDUMDING PREDICATES.
The problem of degree of ellipsis interacts crucially with another factor  , the subcateqorization of surrounding predicates , in a very interesting way . Consider , the following sets of sentences . 
(34 ) John knows more doctors than lawyers debate ( 35 ) John knows more doctors than lawyers debate psychiatrists  ( 36 ) John knows more doctors than lawyers run ( 37 ) John knows more doctors than lawyers spoke to ( 38 ) John hired more doctors than lawyers debate ( 39 ) * John hired more doctors than lawyers debate psychiatrists  ( 40 ) * John hired more doctors than lawyers run ( 41 ) John hired more doctors than lawyers spoke to ( 42 ) John thinks more doctors than lawyers debate ( 43 ) John thinks more doctors than lawyers debate psychiatrists  ( 44 ) John thinks more doctors than lawyers run ( 45 ) * John thinks more doctors than lawyers spoke to These sentences contain different combinations of comparative predicates with either transitive or in trans-itive verbs following them and preceding verbs which take : either complement or NP objects  ( 34~- ( 37 )  ; NP objects only (38-41) ; and complement objects only (42-45) . The type and number of interpretations depends on the subcategorlzation of these verbs and the verbs following the comparative predicate  . The flrst sentence in each group contains a transitive verb  , debate , with no overt object . The second sentence in eac~group contains debate with an overt object  . This results in ( 39 ) in an ungrammatical sentence , as compared with (38) , and in ( 35 ) in a sentence with only one possible interpret at ion as compared with  ( 34 )  , which has two possible interpretations . The third sentence in each group contains an in t ransitive verb  , run . This also results in an ungrammatical sentence for--T40  ) in the second group and in a sentence with only one interpretation  , (36) in the first group . The last sentence in each group contains another transitive verb  , spoke to , without an overt object . The difference between this ~ erb and debate is that debate is a socalled ' object deletable ' ve-~ ' eF~-whilespo\]E~"~o-is not  . Mote that in ( 45 ) this results in an ungra ~ at-l cal sentence ( compare to 42 ) while in ( 37 ) the sentence is grammatical . However , in ( 37 ) the structure of the phrase more doctors than lawyers differs from its structure in  ( 35 ) and ( 36 )  , in which more doctors than ~ etS the subject of the third verb  . That is not in (37) , where only la~ers is the subject of the third verb  . It can be seen from this that the subcategorization of the preceding the following predicates Is very Inq ~ ortant to the structure of the comparative predication  . In add lt lo ~ as the first two sentences in each group show  , the degree of ellipsis also affects the structure . 
In all cases , the structure of the phrase more doctors than lawyers shifts in structure  . The most important aspect of this data is the type of arguments which the comparative predicates must take  . In these particular cases it is a change in the object of the comparative predicate which corresponds to a shift in the structure of the sentence  . This is accounted for most directly by the rules in  ( lOp , ( ll ) and (13) . 
For example , in ( 36 ) the OBJ ( more ) is lawyers and the co~qlete predication Pr/more ~ he Surfrun  . 
This partial analysis is ~ wn in (46).
(46 ) John knows more doqtors than lawxers r4n suBJo ~ jTPr/more ( T ) SUBJIn ( 38 )  , the object of more is the sequence doctors . .
lawyers .. debate , a term according to ( lOa).
shown in the partial analysis in (47).
(47 ) John hired more doct prs than lawyers debate T ) OBJ SUBJI"Pr/debate ( T ) SqBJ ~ qjSentence ( 36 ) could not be analyzed as in ( 47 ) because run , the third verb in (36) , is intransitive while de-e~ate , the third verb in (38) , is transitive . Thus run cannot be included in any structure satisfying the Te~Identification Principles  ( lO )  , while debate can be so analyze @ . This means that run cannot be T~cluded as part of the OBJ  ( more )  . This is ~ ranteed by the Comparative
ObjectRestrl ct-'---ion(13).
Both of the analyses shown in ( 46 ) and ( 47 ) are possible for sentence ( 34 ) since knows may take predicational objects ( in this case , more doctors than lawyers run ) or it may taken on predicatlonal objects such as the Complex comparative term in  ( 47 )  . 
Sentences ( 39 ) and ( 40 ) do not have possible analyses since hired cannot take predicational objects  ( such as that sho--o-wn-in ( 46 ) ) , and the presence of either an intransitive verb ( run ) or a transitive verb with an overt object ( debate '- psychiatrists ) after the comparative predicate , forces such a structure because of rules ( lO ) and ( 13 )  . Sentence ( 41 ) would have a structure similar to ( 47 )  . 
Sentences ( 42 )  -  ( 44 ) v ~ uld all have structures similar to the partial analysis in  ( 46 )  . This is forced by the subcategorization of thinks  , which takes only predica-tional objects . The re--iT-no possible analysis for ( 45 ) since the subcateqorization of so_~to , unlike debate , requires the presence of an overt object . Butia ?- a-n--object is assigned to spoke to , the result will ulti-mately be a structure Ti-Ee'-tlTat shown in  ( 47 )  . But the structure shown in ( 47 ) is a term and therefore nonpred-icational . This means it could not be analyzed as OBJ ( thinks )  , while requires a predicational ( complement ) structure . 
Finally , it is precisely because a sentence with sooke to as the third verb must have a structure like  ( ~ TF--TT . e . nonpredicational ) that sentence ( 41 ) has a possible analysis in contrast to ( 45 )  . That is , the structure of the string more doctors than lawyers spoke to in  ( 49 ) has a nonpredicational ( comparative term ) structure . 
Since it is a term and not a predication , any verb taking it as an argument must be subcategorized for nonpred-icational arguments  . Thinkin ( 45 ) takes only predica-tional arguments in the --- ~ ect relation  , while hired in ( 41 ) takes only nonpredicational arguments in th-'-e-~'6ject relation . Thus , only the sentence with hired may take the comparative term as an argument  . But sooke to does not allow the string more doctors than lawyers to simply be analyzed as its subject  , since no possible object would then be available for spoke to  , However , if the string more doctors than lawyers is--not analyzed as SUBJ  ( spoke to )  , it will not be possible to analyze the string as a predication Pr/spoke to  , thus blocking the analysis of the string as OBJ ( think )  . 
SEC . 4.3.2 CONCLUSION
The degree of ellipsis and the subcategorization of the surrounding predicates interact to affect the possible number and type of interpretations for each of the sentences in this section  . That interaction can be most clearly seen in a comparison of  ( 34 ) and ( 35 ) and ( 36 )  . 
The verb know is subcategorized for either predicational or nonpred-i-E ~ tional arguments  . This allows the string more doctors than lawyers debate to have two possible structures corresponding to the structures shown in  ( 46 ) and ( 47 )  . The . structure in ( 46 ) is a predicational structure while the structure in  ( 47 ) is a nonpredica-tional structure . The subcategorization of knows allows either of those as possible interpretations of the OBJ  ( knows )  . Verbs subcategorized for only one type of argument  , say predicational , will allow only one of those possible structures of more doctors than lawyers  . debate , in this case the predica'tional one shown in (46) , to be analyzed as the object of that verb . This is one way in which the subcategorization of surrounding predicates affects the type and number of possible interpretations a sentence may have  . 
The effect of the subcategorization of the following predicate parallels the effect of no el lips is after than  . 
Thus sentences ( 36 ) and ( 36 ) each have only one possib--bT~interpretation and the relation of the string more doctors than lawyers is the same in each case  ; that is , it is the same as the predicational structure shown in  ( 46 )  , being the subject of the following predicate . Thus , the presence of an intransitive verb or the presence of a transitive verb plus an overt object to its right as in  ( 35 ) and ( 36 ) forces a predicational structure of the type shown in  ( 46 )  . Since knows takes predicational objects , these sentences are still grammatical . If hired is substituted for knows . as in (39) and (40) , the sentences are no longer grammatical , since the subcategorization of hired does not allow predication argument ~ The last type of effect of the predicate following than is in some cases to force a nonpredicational structure like that shown in  ( 47 )  . The verbs ~ oke to is not an object deletable verb  , while the verb debate does allow unspecified objects  . For this reason , ~ erb sooke to cannot be part of a structure like that shown  in-~6  )  ,   . . . .
since it would require the object of spoke to to be analyzed as " unspecified "  . Thus , the presence of a verb like spoke to after than forces the nonpredicational structure o?-the type -- s-hown in  ( 47 )  , since in this structure the object of ~ to would be overt  . Since the presence of spoke to force's a nonpredicational structure for the string more- -doctors than lawyers spoke to  , it can only occur as part of an object of a verb which allows nonpredicational objects  , like know or hired . 
It follows from this that if the string more doctors than lawyers spoke to occured after a verb which took predication a'l arguments only  , such as thinks , the result would be an ungrammatical sentence . This is in fact the case , as can be seen from sentence (45) . 
SEC .5 CONCLUSIONS
The rules presented here provide an axiom system which allows only one possible analysis for each interpretation of a sentence  , and no possible analysis for sentences which are ungrammatical  . The rules specifically proposed for comparatives have been shown to apply to a wide variety of construction types  ; for example , the Comparative Object Restriction and the Term Definitions figure crucially in the analysis of sentences in all the subsections of section  4  . In addition , these rules are based on observations about characteristics of the sentences which are either directly observable in the string  ( e . g . left to right relative order ) or which are a necessary ~ art of any grammatical description  ( e . g . 
subclassification and subcategorization of verbs ) . Such a grammar can provide useful and accessible information for the problem of parsing as well as grammatical description  . 


I . Kac , Michael ( 1978 ) Corepr ~ sentation of Grammatical Structure . Hpls : Uni ~ rsity of Hlnnesota Press . 
2., (1980) " Corep~sent at lonal Grammar ".
In Syntax & Semantics 13, E.A . Mora vcsik &
J . R . Wirth ( eds .). Academic Press.
3 . Marcus , Mitchell ( 1980 ) A Theory of Syntactic Recognitio ~ for Natural Languaqe  . Cambridge , MA : ~ T Press . 
4 . Rtndflesch , Tom ( 1978 ) " The General Structure of Hulti-Predl cat lonal Sentences in Engllsh " in Mlnnesota Papers  5  , G . A . Sanders and ) l .  8 . Kac , eds . 
5 . Ryan , Karen L . (1981) A Surface Based . Analysis of En 91 tsh Comparative Constructions . H . A . 
Thesis , University of Minnesota.

