SOMEI 33UE3 IHP & RSING AHDNATUR ALLING UAGE UNDERST ANDING
Robert J . Bobrow
Bolt Beranek and ~ ewman Inc.
Bonnie L . Webber
Department of Computer & Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Lan & ua ~ e is a system for an codln ~ and
trans ~ t t t l n K ideas . A theory that seeks to explainll nKul stlc phenomena in terme of this fact is a  fun~t~1 theory . One that does not ?? sses the point .  \[10\]

Our response to the questions posed to this panel is influenced by a number of beliefs  ( or biases l ) which we have developed in the course of bui lding and analyzin ~ the operation of several natural language understanding  ( NLU ) systems . \[ I ,  2 ,  3 ,   12\] While the emphasis of the paneli ~ on pars lnK , we feel that the recovery of the syntactic structure of a naturallan ~ unKe utterance must be viewed as part of a larger process of ree over lnK the meaning  , intentions and goals underlying its generation . Hence it is inappropriate to consider designing or evaluatln ~ natural language parsers or Erem  , ~ ra without taking into account the architecture of the whole ~ LU system of which they'rea part  . I This is the premise from which Our beliefs arise  , beliefs which concern two thinks : othe distribution of various types of knowledge  , in particular syntactic knowledge , amon K the modules of an NLU system othein formation and control Flowem on K those modules  . 
As to the first belief , in the HLU systems we have worked on , most syntactic information is localized in a " syntactic module "  , although that module does not produce a rallied data structure representing the syntact lo description of an utterance  . Thus , if " parslnK " is taken as requlr ln ~ the production of such a rallied structure  , then we do not believe in its necessity . However we do believe in the existence of a module which provides syntactic information to those other parts of the system whose decisions ride on it  . 
As to the second belief , we feel that syntax , semantics and prattles effectively constitute parallel but interacting processors  , and that information such as local syntactic relations is determined by Joint decisions-monk them  . Our experience shows that with mlnir " alloss of efficiency  , one can design these processors to interface cleanly with one another  , so as to allow independent design , implement at lon and modification . We spell out these beliefs in slightly more detail below  , and at greater length in \[~\] . 
1We are not c la iming that the on ly fac tors shap ing a parser or a gr~-mar  , beyond syntaotlo conslder at lofls , are thlr LK sllke mean lng , intention , etc . There are clearly mechanical and memory factors , aawellanlaziness-aspeoXer'spenchant for trylnK to get away with the mdniEal level of effort needed to accomplish the task f The fir st set of question ~ to this panel concern the computational perspective  , and the useful purposes served by distingu is hing parsing from interpretation  . 
We believe that syntactic knowledge plays an important role in NLU  . In particular , we believe that there is a significant type of utterance description that can be determined on purely syntactic grounds  2  , albeit not necessarily uniquely . This description can be used to guide semant ic and discourse level structure recovery processes such as interpretation  , anaphoric resolution , focus tracking , given/new distinctions , ellipsis resolution , etc . in a manner that is independent of the lexica l and conceptual content of the utterance  . There are several advantages to factoring out such knowledge from there  , ~- ~ nder of the NLU system and prowlding a ? syntactic module " whose interactions with the rest of the system provide information on the syntactic structure of an utterance  . The first advantage is to simplify system building  , an we knowfl-om experience\[I ,  2 ,  3 ,  4 ,  5 ,  12\] . Once the pattern of communication between processors is settled  , it is easier to attach a new semnntlcs to the hooks already provided in the Kr ~  , marthant obuild a new semantic processor . In addition , because each module ban only to consider a portion of the constraints implicit in the data  ( e . g . syntactic constraints , semantic constraints and discourse context ) , each module can be designed to optimize its own processing and provide an efficient system  . 
The panel has also been charged wlth_~oslder lngpaa ' allel processing as a challenge to its views on parsing  . Thlstouches on our beliefs about the Interaction among the modules that comprise the HLU system  . To respond to this issue , we first want to dlstlngulsh between two types of parallelism : one  , in which many instances of the same thin6 are done at once ~ ( an in an array of parallel adders - ) and another , in which the many thinks done slmul ~ an eously can be different  . Supporting this latter type of parallelism doesn * t change our view of parsing  , but rather under lies it . We believe that the Interconnected processes involved in NLU must support a banjoo ~ eratin Kpr i ~ iple that Herman and Bobrow  \[14\] have called " The Principle of Continually Available Output ":  , ( CAO ) . This states that the Interactlng processes muat ~ ben into provide output over a wide range of resource allocations  , even before their analyses are complete , and even before all input data is available . We take this position for two rensons : one , it facilitates computational efficiency , and two , it seems to be closer to human parsing ~ rocesses  ( a point which we will get to in answer lnK the next question  )  . 
The requirement that syntactic analysis , semantic interpretation and discourse processlng must be able to operate in  ( pseudo- ) parallel , obeying the CAO2 that is , solely on the baa?s of syntactic categories /features and ordering Information principle  , hassparked our interest in the design of calrs of processes which can pass forward and backward unet ~ Ll In/ormatlon/advlce/quest lons as soon as possible  . The added potential for interaction of such processors can increase the capability and efficiency of the overall HLU process  . Thus , for example , if the syntactic module makes its intermediate decisions available to semantics and ~ or pragmatlcs  , then those processors can evaluate those decisions  , guide syntax's future behavior and , in addition , develop in parallel their own analyses . Having sent on its latest assert lon/adv lce /question  , whether syntax then decides to continue on with something else or walt for a response will depend on the particular kind of message sent  . Thus , the parsers and grammars that concern us are ones able to work with other appropriately designed compoconts to support CAO  . While the equipment we are USing to implement and test our ideas is serial  , we take very seriously the notion of parallelism . 
Finally under the heading of " Computational Perspective "  , we are anked about what might motivate our try ing to make parsing procedures simulate what we suspect human parsing processes to be like  . One motivation for us is the belief that natural language is so tuned to the part extraordinary  , part banal cognitive capabilities of human beings that only by simulating human parsing processes can we cover all and only the language phenomena that we are called upon to process  . A particular ( extraordinary ) aspect of hu ~ an cognitive ( and hence , parsing ) behavior that we want to explore and eventually simulate is people's ability to respond even under degraded data or resource limit at ions  . There are examples of listeners initiat ing reasonable responses to an utterance even before the utterance is complete  , and in some case even before a complete syntactic unit has been heard  . 
Simultaneous translation is odenotable example \[8\]  , and another is provided by the performance o f subjects in a verbally guided assembly task reported by P  . Cohen\[6\] . Such an ability to produce output before al l input data is available  ( or before enough processing resources have been made available to produce the best possible response  ) is whatled Norman and Bobrow to formulate the ir CAO Principle  . Our interest is in architectures for NLU systems which support CAO and in ? search strategies through such architectures for an opti ~" linter pretation  . 
The LimnLiStl C~rs ~ et lve
We have been asked to comment on legitimate inferences about human linsulstic competence and performance that we can draw from our experiences with mechanical parsing of formal grammar  . Our response is that whatever parsing is for natural languages  , it is still only part of a larger process . Just because we know what parsing is informal language systems  , we do not secss sarily know what role it plays is in the context Of total communication  . Simply put , formal notions of parsing under constraln the goals of the syntactic component of an NLU system  . Efficiency meanures , based on the resources required for generation of one or all complete parses for s sentence  , without semantic or pra~e~-tl cIntera ~ tlon , do not secessarily specify desirable properties o fanatural language syntactic analysis component  . 
As for whether the efficiency of parsing algorlthm ~ for CF or regular grammars suggest that the core of NL ig remmars la CF or regular  , we want to dlstlngulsh that part of perception ( and hence , syntactic analysis ) which groups the stimulus into recognizable units from that part which fills in gaps in in /ormatlon  ( inferentially ) on the baals of such groups . Results in CF grammar theory says that grouping is not best dose purely bottom-up  , that there are advantages to t ~ uslng predictive mechanlsms a ~ well  \[9  ,  7\] . Thlss nggests two things for parsing natural language : I  . There is a level of evidence and a process for using it that is worEing to suggest groups  . 
2 . There is another filtering , inferenclng mechanism that maEes predictions and diagnoses on the basis of those groups  . 
It is possible that the grouping mechanism may make use of strategies applicable to CF parsing  , such as wellformed substrlng tables or charts , without requiring the overall language specification be CF  . In our current RUS/PSI-ELONE system , grouping is a function of the syntactic module : its output consists of suggested groupings  . These snggest lons may be at abstract , specific or disjunctive . For example , an abstract description m~ht be " this is the head of an NP  , everything to its left is a pre-modif ler "  . Here there is cocomment about exactly how these pre-modlflers group  . A disjunctive description would consist of an explicit enumeration of all the possibilities at some point  ( e . g .   , " this is either a time prepositional phrase  ( PP ) or an agentive PP or a locative PP , etc .  " )  . 
Disjunctive descriptions allow us to prune.
possibilities via canea ~ alys ls.
In short , we believe in using as much evidence from formal system na ~ seems understandable and reasonable  , to constrain what the system should be doing . 
The Interaetlons
Finally , we have been asked about the nature of the rela tionship between a gr~mar and a procedure for applying it  . On the systems building side , curfeeling is that while one should be able to take a grammar and convert it to a recognition or generation procedure \ [  I0\]  , it is likely that such procedures will embody a whole set of principles that are control structure related  , and not part of the grammar . For example , agr ' , -mr seed not specify in what order to look for thln~s or in what order decisions should be made  . Thus , one may not be able to reconstruct the grammar unl cuelv from a procedure for applying it  . 
On the other hand , on the b , m-parsing side , we definitely feel that natural language is strongly tuned to both people's means of production and their means of recognition  , and that principles llke MnDonalds'Zndelibl lltyPr " I noiple  \[13\] or Marcus ' Determinism Hypothesis \[11\] shape what are ( and are not ) seen an sentences of the language . 

I . Bobrow , R . J . The RUS System . BEN Report 3878,
Bolt Beranek and Rewman Inc ., 1978.
2 . Bobrow , R . J . & Webber , B . L . PSI-ELONE-Parsing and Semantic Interpretation in the BBN Natural Language Understanding System  . CSCSI/C ~ EI0 Annual Conference,
CSC3I/CSEIO , 1980.
3 . Bobrow , R . J . & Webber , B . L . Knowledge Representation for Syntactic / Semantic Processing  . 
Proceedings of The First Annual National Conference on Artiticial Intell igence  , American Association for
Artificial Intelligence , 1980.
98 ~ . Bobrow , R . J . & Webber , B . L . Parsing and Semantic Interpretation as an Incremental Recognition Process  . 
Proceedings of a Symposium on Modelling Human Parsing Strategies  , Center for Cognitive Science , University o\[
Texas , Austin TZ , 1981.
5 . Bobrow , R . J . & Webber , B . L . Systems Considerations for Search by Cooperating Processes : Providing Continually Ava/lable Output  . Proceedings of the Sixth IJCAI , International Joint Conference on Artifi cial 
Intelligenoe , 1981.
6 . Cohen , P . personal communication , videotape of experimental task 7 . Eau-ley , J . An efficient context-fl ' ee parsing algorithm  . ~ of the ACM/~(February 1970), 9~',-102 . 
8 . Gold~an-Eisler , F . Psyohologloal Heohanisms of Speech Produot lonas S Sudled through the Analysis of Simultaneous Translation  . In B . Butterworth , Ed . , Lan~rn~e Production , Aoademlc Press , 1980 . 
9 . Graham , S . , Harrison , M . and Ruzzo , W . An Improved
ContextFree Recognizer . ACM ~ on
Pnom , -mm4 , ~Lana ~ es and Systems ( July 1980) ,  "16-@63 . 
10 . Kay , M . An Algorithm for Compiling Parsing Tables f~om a Grammar  . Prooeedings of a Symposium on Modelling Human Parsing Strate ~ Les  , Center for Cognitive Science , University of Texas , Austin TX ,  1981 . 
11. MaPcus , M . A Theory of . qvntactic ~ for
Mat~al Lan~e . MIT Press , 1980.
12 . Mark , W . S . & Barton , G . E . The RUS Grammar Parsing System . GMR 32"3, General Motors Research
Laboratories , 1980.
13. MoDonald , D . ???. Ph.D . Th ., Massachusetts
Institute o ? Technology , 1980.
I , . ~ orman , D . & Bobrow , D . On Data-ii~ted and Resource-llmlted Prooes Ses . CSL7,-2, Xerox PARC , Msy , 197, . 

