PERSPECTIVES ONPARSINGISSUES
Jane J . Robinson , Chair
Artificial Intelligence Center
SRZ International
No where is the tension between the two areas of our field--computatlon and llnguistlcs--more apparent than in the issues that arise in connection with parsing natural language input  . This panel addresses those issues from both computational and linguisric perspectives  . Each panelist has submitted a position paper on some of the questions that appear below  . The questions are loosely grouped in three sections  . The first concentrates on the computational aspect  , the second on the linguistic aspect , and the third on their interactions . 
A preliminary definition :
For purposes of providing common ground or possibly a common point of departure at the outset  , I will define pars ln ~ as the assigning of labelled syntactic structure to an input by applying a grammar that defines syntactically wellformed sentences and phrases  . Note that the question of whether the grammar does other things as well is left open  . In this sense , parsing is distinguished from interpretation , which may take many forms , such as assigning representations in an unambiguous formal language and integrating those representations into a database or into a hearer 's belief system  . 
The questions :
I . Th_.__ee Computational Perspective:
What useful purposes , if any , are served by distinguishing parsing from interpretation ? Is computational efficiency increased ? Is system building made easier ? Or is an insistence on parsing a hindrance ?  ( Can we compute an interpretation better without assigning l&belled syntactic structures ?  ) Computational linguists , using available computational equipment that is almost exclusively serial in design  , have devised parsing algorithms that involve serial search  . Yet it is obvious that many parts of the parsing process could be done in parallel  . How might notions of parallel processing , VLSI , and the llke change our views on parsing ? What might motivate our trying to make parsing procedures simulate human behavior  , e . g . , by intermixing syntactic with semantic and pragmatic processing ? And for that matter  , how do we know what human processing is like ? Do our intuitions agree and are they to be trusted  ?   2  . The Lin~uistlc Perspective : Have our tools ( computers and formal grammars ) warped our views of what human languages and human language processing may be like ? What legitimate inferences about human linguistic competence and performance can we draw from our experiences with mechanical parsing of formal grammars ? Our most efficient parsing algorithms are for contextfree  ( and even regular ) grammars . Does this suggest that the core of grammars for natural languages is contextfree or even regular  ?   3  . The Interactions : Why do we usually have one grammar and procedure for sentence recognition and another grammar and procedure for sentence generation ? Do we need a different pair for each direction ? What is the nature of the relationship between a grammar and a procedure for applying it ? Are we influenced in the way we devise computational grammars by the algorithms we expect to apply to them ? Canagrammar be psychologically valid  ( validated ) independently of the parsing algorithm that works with it ? Canaparsing algorithm be psychologically valid  ( validated ) independently of ~ he grammar ?
The discussion to follow:
The position papers will serve to focus the discussion  . 
That discussion may take the form of a debate about the best methods for language processing  , botit can also be viewed as gathering of diverse experiences with processing n : tural language  . 

