ASITUATION SEMANTICS APPROACH TO
THEANALY SISO FSPEECHACTS 1
David Andreoff Evans
Stanford University
1. INTRODUCTION
During thc past two decades , much work in linguistics has focused on sentences as minimal units of communication  , and the project of rigorously characterizing the structure of sentences in natural anguage has met with some succcss  . Not surprisingly , however , sent cncegrammars have contributed little to the analysis of discourse  , Human discourse consists not just of words in sequences  , hut of words in sequences directed by a speaker to an addressee  , used to represent situations and to reveal intentions  . Only when the addressee has appreh cndcd both these aspects of the message communicated can the message be interprete cL The analysis of discourse that emerges from Austin  ( 1962 )  , grounded in a theory of action , takes this view as c cntral , and thcconcept of thc speech act follows naturally  . An utterance may have a conventional meaning , but the interpretation of the actual meaning of the utterance as it is used in discourse depends on evaluating th cutterance in the context of the set of intentions which represcnt the illocutionary mode of its presentation  . Put another way ( paraphrasing Searle (1975:3)) , the speaker's intention is to produce understanding  , consisting of the knowledge of conditions on the speech act being pcr formed  . 
If we are to takes crionsly Scarle's ( 1969:16 ) assertion that " the unit of linguistic communication is not  . . . the symbol , word , or sentence, . . . but rather thc production or the issuance of thc symbol  , word or sentence in the performance of the spcech act  . "then wc should be able to find some formal method of characterizing speech acts in discourse  . Unfortunately , linguists have too often employed speech acts as taxonomic on vonicnces  , as in Dora (1977) . Labor and Fanshel (1977) , and elsc wh cre , without attempting to give anything more than a descriptive definition  . Only in the atl Jficial intelligenccliterature , notably in the work of Allcn , Bruce , Cohcn , and Pcrrauh ( e . g . Allen (1979), Bruce and Newman (1978) . Cohen and Perrault (1979), Cohen (1978) . Perrault , Allen , and Cohcn (1978)) , does on c find an attemptod cfinc spce chacts in terms of more gcncral processes  , here specifically , opcrations on planning networks . 
2. TYPES OF SPEECHACTS
A great problem for the computational linguist attempting to find a formal representation for speech acts is that thcset of speech acts does not map uniformly onto the set of sentences  . In terms of " guodncss off it " with sentences , evcraltypes of speech acts can be described . One type , the socalled pcr formatives , including ASSERT , DECLARE , etc . . can be ? ffected in a single utterance . But even some of these can und crgo further decomposition  . For example , assuming . that the usual felicity conditions hold ( of . Searte (1969:54 f0) , both (1) and (2) below can count as an apology , though neither sentence in ( 2 ) alone has the effect which their combination achieves  . 
(1) 1 apologize for what I did.
(2) Ididaterrible thing.I'mverysorry.
In (2) , the first sentence contributes to the effect of anapology only to the extent hat an addressee can infer that it is intended as part of an apology  . 
The second sentence , which makes overt the expression of contrition , also exp~sses the sinc crity which is prerequisite for a felicitou Sapology  . But its success , too . depends on an int'crence by tile add ressec that it is intended as part of anapology  . If the addressee cannot make that inference -- because  , for cxampl c , the address ? chctieves that the speak cr is speakings arc astically -- the effect of the apology is lost not only for the second sentence  , but for the first as well . In this case , the illocutionary effect APOI , OGIZE can be regarded as supra-scmcntial , though , as in (1) . 
appropriate single scntences can be used to achieve its effect  . 
There are other types of speech acts , however , that cannot bcperformed in single utterances , but require several or even many utterances . For example . DEFEND ( as in a lawyer's action on ~ half of his client )  , REFUTE ( as in polemical argumentation ) and PROVE ( as in demonstraunge ffccm from specific causcs ) cannot be cffected as pcrfnrmatives : one cannot make a refutation by uttering the words  . I refute , V , as one might make an assertion by uttering thc words  , I a . ~ ertX . 
One might wonder whether these supra-utterance modes should count as speech acts  . Certainly . the term " spcechact '" hasffaditionally been used in reference to single sentences or to certain classes of non-scntencia J expressions which have single utterance in dcpcndcncc in discourse  ( e . g . 
Hello ) . But consider again the traditional definition , paraphrasing Scarle (1969:4gff ) , a speech act is the use of an utterance directed at an addreasce in the scrvicc of a set of intentions  , namely ,  1 . ) thc intention to producc a certain illocutionary effect in the addressee  ,  2 . ) the intention to produce this effect by getting the addressee to recognize the intention to produce the effect  , and 3 . ) thc retention to produce this recognition by means of the addrcs aee's knowicdge of the rules governing the utterance  . 
There is nothing in this characterization that requires that utterance be understood as scntencc  . " ll ~ e crucial point is that the utterance ( of whatever length ) serve the set of intentions represented by 1 . ) - 3 . ) . A valid speech act can bcregarded as defining an illocntionary mode which is gov crnod by conventions which constraint hcsorts of interpretations that can be givcn to utterances which occur within that mode  ( including our judgmcnts untheir appropriateness )  . ThcscconvcnUons also dcfinc the conditions that must be met for thctarg ct cffect to bc achieved  , Thus for the utterance/will be home by no onto count as a promise  ( and not . say . as a prediction ) , it must bc viewed as an utterance ia sucd in the illocutionary mode of promising  , wllich not only define Sc crtain well-form cdncss conditions on the utterance itself  ( making state mcnt , s in the past tense--e . g . ! war home by no on . -impossible as direct speech act promises 2) , but also givcs the criteria which determine whether the act is successful  ( including the felicity conditions , e ? . ) . 
Similarly , for a series of utterances to count as a refutation  , they must be seen as operating in the illocutionary mode of rcfutation  , as for example , in thc text below: ( 3 ) You have stated that 2+2 = 3 . But take any two individual objects and any other two individual object x and place them in a row  . Then count them . say . from left to righ LW hat do youget ? Not 3 but 4 . Therefore ; 2+2 cannot equal 3 . 
We cannot interpret any of these utterances accurately unless we recognize that each contributes to the achievement of a focused goal  , viz . are fiJtadon . 
Once that intention is recognized , appropriate nc-ss and well-for modness conditions can be applied to the text  ; and the success of the act can he measured against the set of criteria which are relevant to refutations  , including the usual felicity conditions , but also specific conditions on the production of factual evidence and the demonstration of contradiction  . 
Following this new characterization fspeech acts , yet another type can be described , operating not at the utt crancclevel , or the supra-utterancclevel , but at the sub-utt crancclevel . As an illustration of the phcnom cn on involvcd , consider thcfollowing uncxc cp tionable utterance :   ( 4 ) 1 tom the guy at the door to watch out , but he wouldn't listen . 
The sccond refcrence to the guy of the first clause is made via the anaphoric pronoun he  . But suppose , instead , a definite referring expression w creused . Consider thc following: ( 5 ) I told the guy at the door to watch out , but the person wouldn't listen . 
The person is a distinctly odd corefcrent , and seems inappropriate 3 . An examination of this context reveals that the only definite  4 referring expressions which caterer felicitously are pronomin  ; depithets , such as the idiot , the fool ? etc . ; descriptions which can be given an interpretation as derogatives  , such as thesaphomore ; and expressions whose literal interpretation contributes some sense of explanation to the situation being represented--viz  . thaL though warned , the guY at the do or didn'theed the warning--as in the deafmute  . 

It can be shown that the principle involved is a speech act-like phenomenon  . First . it can be noted that the choice nn_ . ~ to use the unmarked corefer cnt , he . signals that the speaker has some special intention in mind  . Second . following a suggestion in Balinger (1977:7ff ) . it can be argued that a repeate definite description functions not only to refei " but also to characterize the referent as having the sense of the definite description  . Finatly . it can be shown that all the acceptable definite descriptions in this context can be interpreted uniformly as offering an explanation  5 for the failure to listen expressed by the second clause  . 
Note that the choice of coreferent in the case of the use of a definite referring expre ~ on is not  . stricdyspeaking , lexically governed . 
Furffic rmorc . the use ot`selectional features , as in Chomsky (1965) and more recent work , on generative grammar , cannot consWaln the context for such a choice . In short , the problem is one of interpretation , and appropriateness is governed by the intention being served by the choice of the referring expression  . 
Consider . then , an utterance such as the following : ( 6 ) \[ told the guy althe door to watch out . but the idiot wouldn't listen . 
The difference between ( 4 ) and ( 6 ) is not me ~ ly one of different lexical items ( he and the idiot )  . Rather . the use of 1 he idiot makes ( 6 ) a more complex utterance than ( 4 )  , involving an embedded speuch act . namely , a characterization whose purpose is to express an attitude and thereby  ( indirectly ) offer explanation . 
3. SITUATION SEMANTICS AND DISCOURSE
If speech acts or speech act-h " k e phenomena are found at many levels of discourse  , and if it is not possible to give a syntactic definition of a speech act  , how can the notion of speech acts be integrated into a formal  , and in particular , a computational nalysis of discou ~? The natural alternative to a syntactic definition is a semantic one  6  . and the approach tose , manties which offers the greatest promise in treating discourse is the situation semantics being developed at Stanford by JonBarwise and John Perry  ( c?Bat'wise ( forthcoming )  . P , arwise and Perry (1980) , Barwise and Perry ( forthcoming a ) . and Barwise and Perry ( forthcoming , b)) . 
Briefly , this new semantics is informed by the notion that the actual world can be thought of as cunsisting of situations  , which in turn consist of objects having properties and standing in relationships  . Any actual situation is far to orich in detail to be captured by any finite process  , so in practice , , perceptions of situations , beliefs about situations , natural language descriptions-of situations , cte . . are actually situation-typeS , which arc partial functions characterizing various types of situattons  . ( Cf . Barwise ( 198 I ) for a more complete discussion of this point . )\[ n situation semantics , scntences do not map directly to troth-values , but rather are understood as designating situation-types  . Totally understanding a statement would entail that one t : able to derive a situation-type which includes all the objects  , properties , and relationships represented in the statement . 
A series of statements in discourse can be viewed as creating  , modifying , embellishing , or manipulating sots of situation-types . Some utterances invoke situation-types : some ac ~ as functions taking whole situation-types as argumcnLs  . Fur example , an initial act of reference coupled with some proposition about the referent can be seen as initiating the construction of a situation-type around the referent : an act of coreference ` with some promotion  , can be seen as adding a new property or relationship to an individual in an existing situation-type  . 
The discourse situation , too , can be represented as a set of situation-types . 
initially containing at least the speaker , the addressee , and the mutual knowledge of speaker and addressee that they arc in a discourse situation  . 
Any utterance which occurs exploits this dia couzs e situation and cannot be ' interpreted independently of it  . The utterance itself , however , effects acl ~ angein the discourse ~ ituation . as its interpretation is added . It is in representing the effect of the utterance that the theory of speech acts has application  . 
The dynamic proecss of dise our ~? can bcmodelled as a step by sCepmodification of the discourse situation  , with each step taking the set of situation-types of the discourse situation  , coupled with the interpretation of the utterance , to a new set of situation-types of the dise ours ? situation  . 
There are many interesting details to this model which must be ignored in a paper of this scope  , but several ob~rvations relevant ospeech acts can be made  , First . this model accommodates the distinction made by most speech act th ? orist  . s between what a speaker says-the locutionary act--and what a speaker intends to communicate  ( or means ) -the illocutionary act -/ . This distinction is rcpeated and coptt ) red h crein the treatment of the actual discourse as a oair of sets of situation-types  . One gives the set of situation-types of the text ( written or spoken ) --st - and can be regarded as representing the Iocutionary aspect of the act  . The other gives the set of situation-types of the diseours c situation  ( including author and reader or speaker and addressee  ) -- sd - and can be regarded as representing the state of knowledge about the discourse -- including the information revealed by infcrring the intentions of the speaker-at the time the utterance is produced  . The interpretation ot`st relative to sd , f(<st . Sd >) , giver a new set of situation-types of the diseourse situatiun  . S d ' . The illocutionary act can be thought of as difference between sd ' and sd  . 
Second . this characterization of an illocutionary act is consonant with psychological features of actual discourse  , in actual interaction , what the speaker says -- the Iocutionary act-is highly volatile : the exact words of an utterance more than a few seconds pay be lost for ever  . What remains is the effect of those words , in particular , as composed in longer-term memory . What is remembered represents the state achieved by the discourse  , and that reflects directly what the add r~r , ee has inferrred about " the speaker's intentions  . Put another way . what become stored as memory represents what the addressee inferred about what the speaker meant by his utterance  . 8 Third . one conregard the problem of interpreting the current status of the diseuurse as similar to the problem of deriving the current state in a S'l ' RIPS-like system  ( ct ' . I-'ikes and Nilsson ( 1971 ) ): the correct version must be the result of the application of a series of operations  , incorrect order , to all previous states . The current set of situation-types of the discourse situation can be seen as representing the accumulation of the effects that have resulted from a series of discrete operations  . 
4. OPERATIONS ONSITUATION-TYPES
There are various ways that a word or phrase can count as an operation on a situation-type  . For example , an utterance or part of an utterance could ( a ) take a whole situation-type as an argument , or ( b ) introduce an object and a property , or ( c ) intrb duectwo or more objects and a relationship , or ( d ) introd = ~- can object or a property or a relationship into an existing situation-type  . 
( a ) would apply to phrases like by the way , anyway , etc . , which have the effect of shifung focus or " clearing the slate " for a new text fragment  . 
Cases ( b ) and ( c ) ensure that the utterance or part of utterance , it " text initial , conuLins enough information to enable a situation -type to be derived  . 
Case ( d ) accounts for those instances where a situation -type is clearly established and a single word or reference can effect a change in the situation -type  . 
For example , the name John ( used constative iy ) at the beginning of an interaction cannot count as a operation on a situation-type  , as no situation-type of the diseoum : text then exists  , and the name John alone cannot create one . However . the name . / ok , at'ter a question , such as Who took my book ~ can count as a operation  , since it . together with the interpretation of the question , serves to introduce a new object and proposes into an existing situation-type  . 
Returning to a sentence like ( 6 )   ( rcpeated below )  , it is possible to see that , in fact . a series of operations . are involved in deriving the final situation-type of the text  . 
(6 ) ! told the guy at the door to watch ou L but the idiot would n '! listen  . 
The utterance corresponding to the first grammatical clause creates the situation-type in which tllcre is the guy at the door and the speaker and the relationship of the speaker having told the guy at the door to watch out  . 
The word but can be viewed as function mapping situation-types into situatiun-types where a relationship or property somehow implicated in the first situation-type is " shown explicitly not to hold in the derived situation-type  . ' llmbalance of the second clause modifies the situation-type so that the guy at the door now has the property both of having been told by the of supposed normative behavior  . " rhc fact that the guy at the door has been referred to as the idiot has added a further property  , or characterization . 
The situation-type of the text at the end of the utterance of the second clause includcs the speaker with die property of having told the guy at the door to watch out and having judged himas an idiot for not listening  , and the guy at the door who I lad bc cn told to watch out by the speaker but who did not list cn  , and who has been judged to have behaved idiotically  . ( There actually are othcr relationships here . but a more e omplc to description adds nothing to the general point being illustrated  . ) In this case , then , there are at least three steps in thc " semantic " parsing of the utterance : thc initial creation of the situation-type  ( the first clause )  , the interpretation of but . and the modification of the initial situation -type to accommodate the information in the second clause  . 
5 . SPEECHACTSASOPERATION SONSFI'IJATION-TYPF ~ S Thus far the relationship between situation-types and speech acts has not been made expliciL Recall that speech acts can be characterized acs having both an intentional component and some representation of the conditions which must be met for the speech act to have been suecessfully performed  . 
But more import and y , a speech act is not successfully performed until the addressee recognizes that its performance was attempted : and that recognition effects a change in the relationship between the speaker and the addressee  . This change in relationship can be regarded as an effect of an operation on the set of situation -types of the discourse situation  ( not of the text )  . But a speech act . even if clearly understood as intended , is not successful unless it effects specific changes in the set of situation-types of the text  , as well . Therefore . speech acts can be thought of as the effects of the application of one or more inference nabling functions to the pair of sets of situation-types giving the model of the discourse  ( f ( < st . Sd >)) . 
It is possible to use situation-type S as the basis of a definition of speech acts by requin  . ng that speech acts be the result of the application of an inference enabling function to an utterance in a discourse situation such that the derived situation-typcconfi  ) rms to one of a ( finite ) number of speech act-types . In othcr words , furan utterance or a series of utteranccs to count as a speech act  . the utterance or utterances must minimally ( i ) perform an operation on a situation-type , and ( ii ) derive a situation-type which is defined ( for speaker and addressee ) as the legitimate end state of a speech act , This means that the rules governing the form of speech acts are actually rules specifying the relationships that must obtain in the situation -type which would result from the successful performance of the speech act  . In short , this allows us to view speech acts as being driven by certain situation-types as goals  . 
Simpler spcechact-types , such as performativ cs , correspond neatly to various unary operations on situation-types  . An asscrtion operates on the situation-type of the text by introducing objects and properties or relationships that correspond to the proposition of the assertion  . But it also ' introduces the speaker in an ASSERT relationship to the proposition  . And given the constrain L sont ruly felicitous assertions  , this would also introduce the implicature that the speaker believes the proposition  . In particular . 
following the taxonomy and characterization f illocotionary acts in II~h and Hamish  ( 1979:39 ff )  . an assertion has the effect , for any speaker . S . and any propositiun , P , of cre ; , ting the following situation-type:s ( believe . S . P ) = IBy accepting tile assertion -- different from accepting the truth of the assertion--th c addressee acknowledges that the above situation -type is added to the set of situation-types giving the discourse situation  . 
A complete deseription of the speech act-type ASSERT would consist of the fullowing set of situation-types : 
ASSERTP
Sl : ss(t ~, S . P ) = Is 2: s(believe . S . P ) = Is 1 , s 2 arc in sd ' Sub-utterance speech acts can be accounted for  , now . by vicwing the situation-types of the text which th cy achieve as being dependent on or coincident with the situation-types achicved by the whole of the utterance in which they are cmbed dcd  . Of course , there must be an accompanying operation on the situation-type of the discourse situation rc presenting the effect of the perceived intention to achieve the sub-uterane espeech act -- as in the marked choice of a definite referring expression instead of a simple pronoun  , as in (6) . 
Supra-utterance speech acts can also be captured in this framework  . A speech act like REFUTE , for example , cannot be defined in terms of any specifiable number of steps  , or any specifiable ordering of operations . Its only possible definition is in terms of a final state in which all the conditions on refutation have been satisfied  . In terms of situation semantics , this corresponds to a set of situation-types -- albeit very complex -- in which all the nec~sary relationships hold  . Since such complex sets of situation-types represent the accumulated effects of all the operations which have occurred  , without representing the order of application of those operations  , there is nothing in the definition of REFUTE that requires that a specific order of operations be carded our Some one might refi~te an argument very efficiently : someone lse  . only after a series of false starts or after the introduction of numerous irrelevancies  . 
The end result would be , and should be . the same . from a speech act-theoretic point of view . 
This characterization fspeech acts , as the end states of a derivation on a sequence of situation type S  , explains naturally some of the culture-relative characteristics of supra-utterance speech acts  . To take but one example , it has been noted in Taylor ( 1971 ) that in a grarian Japane Sesociety there is no notion that corresponds to NEGOTIATE  . Clearly . given the manifest successo furban Japaneseu obtain lucrative foreign contracts  , the absence of such as pcechact-type among rural Japanese cannot be attributed to facts of the Japanese language  . What we could say , given the approach ere . is that the set of situation-types which is the cnd-stata of NEGOTIATE is not  . 
par of the inventory of distinguished speech act -types in the rural Japanese " diseour scdialecL "   6  . SOME EXAMPI , F . SOF SPEECHACT-TYPES The full nwing sets of situatinn-types can serve as examples of thes ~tes achieved by several simple  , e on stativ c speech act-types . As before , the taxonomic features are based on Bach and Harnish  ( 1979 )  , with speaker , S , addressee(s ) , A , and proposition , P . 
INFORMP
Sl : s~( . ~ . ~ , S , P ) = 1 s2 : s(believe , S , P ) = 1 s3 : s(believe , A , P ) = 1 s1 , s2 , s3 are in sd '
REFRACTP
Sl : s~(_~t , S , P ) = Is 2: s(believe , S , NOTP ) = 1 s3 : s(belier . c,S,P ) = 1 s2 is in sdsI . s3 are in sd '
CONTRADICTPsl : s~( . ~? , S , NOTP ) = 1 s2 : s(belicy c , S , NOTP ) = 1 s3 : s(believe , A , P ) = 1 s3 is in sd and sd's1 , s 2 are in sd ' The characterization of speech acts present od here focuses on end state conditions  , hut clearly the starting statcs ( specifically . the set of situation-types of the discourse situation and of the text from which an end state is to be achieved  ) also affect speech act performance . A more complete specification of the initial and final states of the discourse pair of sets of situation-types for a variety of speech act -types  , involving an elaboration of the role of inference cnahling functions and other constraints on the interpretation of u Rerances ~ is given in L : vans  ( in progress )  . 


I . Work on this pap cr was s , ,pportcd in part by a fellowship from the Stanford Cognitive Scicnce Grou ~  . I am deeply indebted to JonBar ) vise for long and patient discussions of the ideas presented here  . and to D wight Bolinger . Jerry Hobbs . John Perry . lvar Tunisson . Tom Wasow , and " Ferry Winogradfi ) rvaluable comments and suggestions .   1 have a Jso profited from conversauons with Ray Pcrrault and the SRIT\[NLUNCH discussion group on matters in dircctly r clatcd coth osed i  , ~usscd here . Of course . \[ alone remain respo , siblc for crrors , omissions , and other def?icn cies . 
2 . It has been pointed outmme by D wight Bolinger that some utterances in Spanish in the past tense can count as direct speech act promises  ( e . g . Unmome moy a cab ~ . ) . "\[' his sort of promise is similar to the English exclamation  . Do , eL which can be used insufficiently constrained contexts to effect a promise or commitment  . 
3 . This particular exampl c was first broughtomy ' attention by Terry 

4 . it is clear that strongly demonstrativ cd finite referring expressions using this or that do not manifest this sort of inappropriatene SS  . 
5 . The observation that this context seems to be servicing an explanation was first mad c by John Perry in a discussion of these data  . 
6 . Thcnotion of semantics I am employing shemld be understood as including certain features usually segregated under praEmatics  . 
7 . l\[would be outsid cth crealm of speech acts proper to consider the third horse in this scmiotictroika : what a speak cractually achieves by his utt crancc  , i . e . bowhis utterance aft L'cts the addressee-the perlncud on ary effect  . "\[' his three-way contrast was first articulated by Austin  ( cf . Austin (1% 2: lOOfl)) . 
g . Attempts to incorporate this aspect of actual discourse into models of discourse process cs are certainly not new  . in artificial intelligence applications , episodicm cmoq , has been used m maintain representations of the discourse situation  , as , for example , in Grosz (1977) . Hobbs (1976) . 
Mann . elal . (1977). and elscwbere.

Allen . J .  (1979)  . 4 plan-based approach to speech act recogntion . Technical Report No .  131/79 . DcpL of Computer Science . University of Toronto . 
Austin . J . L . (1962) How to " do things with vmrd ~ Cambridge . Mass . : Harvard Univ crsity Press . and London : Clar~tdon Pres ~ Bach . Kent . and Robert M . Hamish ( 1979 ) Linguistic communication and speech acts , Cambridge , Mass . : The M . I . T . Press . 
Barwise , Jon ( 1981 ) Some computational aspects of situation semantics  , in this volume . 
Barwise , Jon ( forthcoming ) Scenes and other situations , in The Journal of

Barwise , Jon and John Perry ( 1980 ) The situation under ground , in Working Papers in $ emamies . Vol . 1, Stanford University . 
Barwise . Jon and John Perry ( forthcoming , a ) Semantic innocence and uncompromising situations , in Midwest Studies in Philosophy , -& P , arwise . Jon and John Perry ( forthcoming , b ) Situation semantic ~ Bolinger , D wight (1977) Pronouns and repeated nouns , Bloomington , Ind . :
Indiana Univ crsity Lin~mistics Club.
Bruce . B . and l ) . Newman (1978) Interacting plans , in Cognitive Scienee ~2 ,  \[95-233 . 
Cohen . P . R .   ( 1978 ) On knowing what to say : planning speech Technical Report No  . liB . Dept . of Computer Science . University of

Cohen , P . R . and C . R . Perrault ( 1979 ) Elements of a plan based theory of ~ hac ~ in Cognitive Scienc ~  3  ,  177-212 . 
Chomsky , Noam (1965) Aspects of the theory of synta . x , Cambridge . Mass . :
The M.I.T.Press,
Dore . John (1977) Children's illncutionary acts , in R . O . Freedlc(Ext . ) Discourse Production mid Comprehension . Norwood . N . J . : Ablex
Publishing Corporation . 227-244.
Evans , David A . ( in progress ) Situations and speech acts . " toward a formal semantics of . discourse , Stanford University Ph . D . dissertation . 
Fikes . R . and N . J . Nilsson ( 1971 ) STRIPS : A new approach to the application of theorem proving to problem solving  , in Artificial lntelligenc ? 2 .  189-208 . 
Grosz . Barbara ( 1977 ) The representation and use of focus in dialogue understanding  . Stanford Research Institute Technical Note 151 . Stanford Research lnsititum , Menlo P~rL California . 
Hobbs . Jerry R ,   ( 1976 ) A computational pproach to discourse analysis . 
Research Raporz No 76-2 . Department of Computer Scienc , e ~ City
College . City University of New York.
Labov , William and David Fanshcl ( 1977 ) Therapeutic discourse . New
York : Academic Pre~.
Mann . W . . J . Moore , and J . Levin ( 1977 ) A comprehension model for human dialogue , in Proceedings of the international joint conference on artificial intelligence  . Cambridge . Mass . . 77-g7 . 
Perrault . R . C . . J . Allen . and P . R . Cohen 0978 ) Speech acts as a basis for und cr standing dialogue cohcnmce  , in Proceedings of the second conference ml theoretical issues m natural language proce~ng  . Champaign-Urbana . Il LS carle . John ( 1%9 ) Speech acts an essay in the philosophy of languag ~ Cambridge : Cambridge University Press  . 
Scarle , John (1975) Meaning , communication and representation " unpublished manuscript  . 
Taylor . C .   ( 1971 ) Interpretation and ~ sciences of nv~n " in The Revkn ~ of 
Metaphy~cs . Yo L25. No . 1.3-$1.

