What's Necessary to Hide ?:
Modeling Action Verbs
James F . Alien
Compurer Science 1) epartment
University of Rochester
Rochester , NY 14627

This paper considers what types of knowledge one must possess in order to reason about actions  . Rather than concentrating on how actions are performed  , as is done in the problem-solving literature , it examines the set of conditions under which an action can be said to have occurred  . In other words , if one is told that action A occurred , what can be inferred about the state of the world ? In particular  , if the representation can define such conditions , it must have good models of time , belief , and intention . This paper discusses these issues and suggests a formalism in which general actions and events can be defined  . Throughout , the action of hiding a book from someone is used as a motivating example  . 
I . Introductio,
This paper suggests a formulation of events and actions that seems powerful enough to define a wide range of event and action verbs in English  . This problem is interesting for two reasons ? The first is that such a model is necessary to express the meaning of many sentences  . The second is to analyze the language production and comprehension processes themselves as purposeful action  . 
This was suggested some time a goby Bruce \[1975\] and Schmidt \[1975\]  . Detailed proposals have been implemented recently for some aspects of language production \[ Cohen  , 1978\] and comprehension\[Alien . 
1979\] . As interest in these methods grows ( e . g . , see\[Grosz , 1979; Brachman , 1979\]) . the inadequacy of existing action models becomes increasingly obvious  . 
The formalism for actions used in most natural language understanding systems is based on case grammar  . 
Each action is represented by a set of assertions about the ? semantic roles the noun phrases play with respect o the verb  . Such at brmalism is a start , but does not explain how to represent what an action actually signifies  . If one is told that a certain action occurred , what does one know about how the world changed ( or didn't change ! )  . This paper attempts to answer this question by oudining a temporal logic in which the occurrence of actions can be tied to descriptions of the world over time  . 
One possibility for such a mechanism is found in the work on problem-solving systems  ( e . g . \[I : ikes and Nilsson , 197\]; Sacerdoti ,  1975\]) , which suggests one common formulation of action . An acuon is a function from one world state to a succeeding world state and is described by a set of prerequisites and effects  , or by decomposition i to more primitive actions . While this model is extremely useful for modeling physical actions by a single actor  , it does not cover a large class of actions describable in I-ngiish  . \[: or instance , many actions seemingly describenml-activity ( e . g . standing still ) , or acting in some non-specified manner to preserve a state  ( e . g . preventing your televismnset from beings to len ) . Furthermore , many action descriptions appear to be a composition of simpler actions that are simultaneously executed  . For instance , " Walking to the store while juggling three bails " seems to be composed of the actions of " walking to the store and " juggling three bails  . " It is not clear how such an action could be defined from the two simpler actions if we view actions as functions from one state to another  . 
The approach suggested here models event simply as partial descriptions of the world over some Lime interval  . 
Actions are then defined as a subclass of events that involve agents  . Thus , it is simple to combine two actions into a new action  , The new description simply consists of the two simpler descriptions hglding over the same interval The notions of prerequisite  , result , and methods of performing actions will not arise in this study  . While they are iraportant for reasoning about how to attain goals  , they don't play an explicit role in defining when an action can be said to have occurred  . To make this point clear , consider the simple action of turning on a light . 
There are few physical activities that are a necessary part of performing this action  , Depending on the context , vastly different patterns or " behavior can be classified as the same action  , l ; or example , turning on a light usually involves Hipping a light switch  , but in some circumstances it may involve tightening the light bulb  ( in the basement )  . 
or hitting the wail ( manold house ) . Although we have knowledge about how the action can be pertbrmed  , this does nol define what the action is . The key fining characteristic of turning on the light seems to be that the agent is performing some activity which will cause the light  , which is off when the action starts , to become on when the action ends . The importance of this observation is that we could recognize an observed pattern of activity as " turning on the light " even if we had never seen or thought about that pattern previously  . 
The model described here is in many ways similar to that of Jackendoff  \[1976\]  . He provides a classification of event verbs that includes verbs of change  ( GO verbs ) and verbs that assert a state remaining constant over an interval of time  ( STAY verbs )  , and defines a representation faction verbs of both types by introducing the notion of agentive causality and permission  . However , Jackendoff does not consider in detail how specific actions might be precisely defined with respectoa world model  . 
The next two sections of this paper will introduce the temporal logic and then define the framework for defining events and actions  . To be as precise as possible , I have remained within the notation of the first order predicate calculus ? Once the various concepts are precisely defined  , the next necessary step in this work is to define a computa Uonally feasible representation and inference process  , Some of this work has already been done . For example , a computational model of the temporal logic can be found in Allen  \[198  . 1\] ? Other are as axe currently under investigation . 

The final section demonstrates the generality of the approach by analyzing the action of hiding a book from someone  . In this study , various other important conceptual entities such as belief  , intention , and causality are briefly discussed . Finally , a definition of . what it means to hide something is presented using these tools  . 
2. A Temporall , ogie
Before we can characterize events and actions , we need to specify a temporalogic . The logic described here is based on temporal intervals  . Events that appear to refer to a point in time ( i . e . , finishing a race ) are considered to be implicitly referring to another event's beginning or ending  . 
Thus the only time points we will see will be the endpoints of intervals  . 
The logic is a typed first order predicate calculus  , in which the terms fall into the following three broad categories : - terms of type TIME-INTERVAL denodng time intervals  ; terms of type PROPERTY , denoting descriptions that can hold or not hold during a particular time  ; and terms corresponding to objects in the domain . 
There are a small number of predicates . One of the most important is HOLDS , which asserts that a property holds ( i . e . , is true ) during a time interval . .Thus
HOLDS(# , O is true only if proper typholds during t . As a subsequent axiom will state , this is intended to mean that pholds at every subinter valoft as well  . 
There is no need to investigate the behavior of HOLDS fully here  . but in Allen\[forthcoming J various functional forms are defined that can be used within the scope of a HOLDS predicate that correspond to logical connectives and quantifiers outside the scope of the 
HOLDS predicate.
There is a basic set of mutually exclusive relations that can hold between temporal intervals  . - Each of these is represented by a predicate in the logic  . .The most important are : DURING(tl , t2 ) -- time intervaltlisfully contained within 12 , although they may coincide on their endpoints . 
BEFORE(tl , t2) -- time intervalt \] is before interval 12 , and they do not overlap in anyway : OVERLAP(tl , t2) -- intervaltl starts before t2 , and they overlap ; MEETS(tl , t2) -- intervaltlis before interval 12 , but there is no interval between them , i . e . , tlends where t2 . starts . 
Given these predicates , there is a set of axioms defining their interrelations  . For example , there are axioms dealing with the transitivity of the temporal relationships  . Also , there is the axiom mentioned previously when the HOI  , I ) S predicate wa ~ introduced : namely ( A . \]) If OLDS(p . t ) & DURING(tl . t ) --) HOI , DS(p . tl ) This gives us enough tools to define the notion of action in the next section  . 
3. Events and Actions
In order to define the role that events and actions play in the logic  , the logical form of sentences asserting that an event has occurred must be discussed  . Once even ~ have been defined , actions will be defined in terms of them . 
One suggestion for the logical form is to define for each c\[  , ,~ of events a property such that the property HOI . I ) Sonly if the event occurred . This can be discarded immediately as axiom ( A . \]) is inappropriate for events . If an event occurred over some time interval "\[' . it does not mean that the event also occurred overall subintervals of T  . So we introduce a new type of object in the logic  , namely events , and a new predicate OCC Ult . l ) , y representing events as objects in the logic , we have avoided the difficulties described in Davidson  \[1967\]  . 
Simply giving the logical form of an event is only a small part of the analysis  . We must also define for each event the set of conditions that constitute its occurrence  . 
As mentioned in the introduction , there seems to be no restriction on what kind of conditions can he used to define an event except that they must partially describe the world over sometime interval  . 
For example , the event " the ball moving from x to y " could be modeled by a predicate MOVE with four arguments : the object  , the source , the go allocation , and the move event itself . Thus,
MOVI'(IlalLx . y . m ) asserts that m is an event consisting of the ball moving from x to y  . We asser that this event occurred over time t by adding the assertion 
OCCUR(,~t).
With these details out of the way . we can now define necessary and sufficient conditions for the event's occurrence  . For this simple class of move events , we need an axiom such as : ( for all object , source , go a Lt , e ) MOV l'(object . source . goal . e ) & OCCUR(~t ) (--) ( exist stl . t2)
OVERLAPS(tl,t ) & OVERLAPS(t.t2)&
BF . FORE(tl.t2)&
HOLDS(at(object.source).tl)&
HOLDS(at(object , goal ), t2)
A simple class of events consists of those that occur only if some property remains constant over a particular interval  ( c ? Jackendoffs STAY verbs )  . For example , we may assert in l'nglish " The ball was in the room during T  . '"" The ball remained in the room during T . "While these appear to be logically equivalent , they may have very different consequences in a conversation  . This formalism supports this difference . The former sentence asserts a proposition , and hence is of the form
HOLDS ( in ( Bal I , Room ) , T ) while the latter sentence describes an event , and hence is of the form REMAIN-IN ( Bail , Room , e ) & OCCURS ( eT ) . 
We may capture the logical equivalence of the two with the axiom : 
O'orallb.r , e , O
REMAIN-IN(b , r , e ) & OCCUR(nO (=) HOL1)S ( in(b . r) , O , The problem remains as to how the differences between these logically equivalent formulas arise in context  . One possible difference is that the second may lead the reader to believe that it easily might not have been the case  . 
Actions are events that involve an agent in one of two ways  . The agent may cause the event or may allow the event  ( cf . \[Jackendoff , 1976\]) . Corresponding to these two types of agency , there are two predicates , ACAUSE and ALLOW , that take an agent , an event , and an action as arguments . Thus the assertion corresponding to " John moved 13 from S to G " is MOVE ( B , G , S , el ) & ACAUSE ( Joh~el . a1) &

The axiomadzation for ACAUSE and ALLO Wistricky , but Jackendoff provides a reasonable starting set  . In this paper , I shall only consider agency by causation further  . The most important axiom about causality is ( A . 2) ( for all a , e , act . O
ACAUSE(a,e . acO&OCCUR(act , t ) => OCCUR ( cOF or our purposes , one of the most important facts about the ACAUSE relation is that it suggests the possibility of intentionality on the part of the agent  . This will be discussed in the next section . 
Note that in this formalism composition of events and actions is trivial  . For example , we can define an action composition function together which produces an action or event that consists of two actions or events occuring simultaneously as follows:  ( A . 3) ( for all a , b . t)
OCCURS(together(o , b).t ) (=)
OCCURS(c ~ O&OCCURS(b . t ) 4 . What's Necessary to Hide ? The remainder of this paper applies the above formalism to the analysis of the action of hiding a book from someone  . Along the way , we shall need to introduce some new representational tools for the notions of belief  , intention , and causality , The definition of hiding a book should be independent of any method by which the action was performed  , for , depending on the context , the actor could hide a book in many different ways  . For instance , the actor could-put the book behind a desk , -st and between the book and the other agent while they are in the same room  , or-call afriend Y and get her or him to do one of the above  . 
Furthermore , the actor might hide ) . he book by simply not doing somethings/he intended to do  . I : or example , assume Samis planning to go to lunch with Ca role after picking Caroleup at Carole's office  , if , on the way out of Sam's office , Sam decides not to take his coat because he does n ' twant Ca role to see it  , then Sam has hidden the coat from Ca role . Of course , it is crucial here that Sambelieved that he normally would have taken the coat  . Sam couldn't have hidden his coat by forgetting to bring it  . 
This example brings up a few key points that may not be noticed from the first three examples  . First'Sam must have intended to hide the coat . Without this intention ( i . e . , in the forgetting case ), no such action occurs . Second , Sammust have believed that it was likely that Carole would see the coat in the future course of events  . Finally , Sammust have acted in such a way that he then believed that Carole would not see the coat in the future course of events  . Of course , in this case , the action Samper formed was " not bringing the coat  , " which would normally not be considered an action unless it was intentionally not done  . 
I claim that these three conditions provide a reasonably accurate definition of what it means to hide something  . They certainly cover the four examples presented above  . As stated previously , however , the definition is rather unsatisfactory , as many extremely difficult concepts , such as belief and intention , were thrown about casually . 
There is much recent work on models of belief ( e . g . , \[ Cohen , 1978; Moore , 1979; Perils , 1981 " Haas ,  1981\]) . l have little to add to these efforts , so the reader may assume his or her favorite model  . I will assume that belief is a modal operator and is described by a set of axioms along the \[ iu ~ of Hintikka \ [  I962\]  . The one important thing to notice , though , is that there are two relevantime indices to each belief  ; namely , the time over which the belief is held , and the time over which the proposition that is believed holds  . For example . I might believe ~ od a . v that it rained last weekend . This point wiil be crucial in modeling the action of hiding  . To introduce some notation , let " A believes ( during To ) that p holds ( during Tp ) " be expressed as HOLDS ( believes ( A . holde(p . T p )), T b ) . 

The notion of intention is much less understood than the notion of belief  . However , let us approximate the statement " A intends ( during Ti ) that action a happen ( during
Ta ) " by and " A believes ( during Ti ) that a happen ( during Ta ) "" A wants ( during Ti ) that a happen ( during Ta ) " This is obviously not a philosophically adequate definiu on  ( e . g . , see \[ Searle ,  1980\]) , but seem sufficient for our present purposes . The notion of wanting indicates that the actor finds the action desirable given the alternatives  . 
This notion appears impossible to axiomatize as wants do not appear to be rational  ( e . g . Hare\[\]97\]\]) . However , by adding the belief that the action will occur into the notion of intention  , we ensure that intentions must be at least as consistent as beliefs  . 
Actions may be performed intentionally or unintentionally  . For example , consider the action of breaking a window . Inferring intentionality from observed action is a crucial ability needed in order to communicate and cooperate with other agents  . While it is difficult to express a logical connection between action and intention  , one can identify pragmatic or plausible inferences that can be used in a computational model  ( see\[Allen ,  1979\]) . 
With these tools , we can attempt a more precise definition of hiding  . The time intervals that will be required are :
Th -- the time of the hiding event;
Ts--the time that Y is expected to see the book ; Tbl - - the time when X believes Y will see the book during " l's  , which must be BEFORE " l'h ;   Tb3--the time when X believes Y will not see the book during Ts  , which must be BEI " ORE or
DURINGT h and AI"I'I'~RT bl.
We will now define the predicate
HIDI . '( agent , observer , object , a ~ t ) which asserts that act is an action of hiding . Since it describes an action , we have the simple axiom capturing agency : ( for all agent , observer , obJect , act HIDl :' ( agent , observer , object , act ) =) ( Exist seACAUSE(agent , e , act ))) l . et us also introduce an event predicate
SE l :'( agent , object , e ) which asserts that e is an event consisting of agent seeing the object  . 
Now we can define HIDE as follows : ( for all ag , obs , o . a . 77 z ,
HIDl' . '(ag . obs , oa ) & OCCUR(aTh ) =) ( ExtstsTs . Tbl,Tb3,e ) 1) HOLDS(intends(a&occur(a . Th )) . Th ) 2) HOLDS ( believes ( ag , occur ( e . Ts)) , Tbl ) 3) HOLDS ( betieve Ka&~occur(e , Ts )) , 7" b3) where 4) SEE ( obs , o , e ) and the intervals Th , Ts , Tb \] , Tb3 are related as discussed above . Condition (4) defines e as a seeing event , and might also need to be withinag's beliefs . 
This definition is lacking part of our analysis ; namely that there is no mention that the agent's beliefs changed because of somethings/he did  . We can assert that the agent believes ( between Tbl and Tb3 ) he or she will do an action ( between Tbl and Th ) as follows: ( existx " al , el , Tb25) ACAUS lf(a&el , aD6) HOLDS ( believes ( ag , OCCUR(al , Tal )) , Tb2) where 7" b1(Tb2(Tb3 and
Tbl (
But this has not caused the change in ( 3 ) are true , asserting
Tal ( Tit captured the notion that belief ( 6 ) belief from ( 2 ) to ( 3 )  . Since ( 6 ) and a logical implication from ( 6 ) to ( 3 ) would have no force . It is essential that the belief ( 6 ) be a key-element in the reasoning that leads to belief  ( 3 )  . 
To capture this we must introduce a notion of causality  . This notion differs from ACAUSE in many ways ( e . g . see\[Taylor ,  1966\]) , but for us the major difference is that , unlike ACAUSE , it suggests no relation to intentionality . While ACAUSE relates an agent to an event , CAUSE relates events to events . The events in question here would be coming to the belief  ( 6 )  , which
CAUSES coming to the belief (3).
One can see that much of what it means to hide is captured by the above  . In particular , the following can be extracted directly from the definition : - if you hide something  , you intended to hide it , and thus can be held responsible for the action's consequences  ; -one canno thide something if it were not possible that it could be seen  , or if it were certain that it would be seen anyway  ; -one canno thide something simply by changing one's mind about whether it will be seen  . 
In addition , there atem any other possibilities related to the temporal order of events  . For instance , you can'thide something by performing an action after  , , he hiding is supposed to be done . 


I have introduced a representation for events and actions that is based on an interval-based temporalogic  . 
This model is sufficiently powerful to describe vents and actions that involve change  , as well as those that involve maintaining a state  . In addition , the model readily allows the composition and modification of events and actions  . 
In order to demonstrate he power of the model , the action of hiding was examined in detail . This forced the introduction of the notions of belief  , intention , and causality . While this paper does not suggest any breakthroughs in representing these three concepts  , it does suggest how they should interact with the notions of time  , event , and action . 
At present , this action model is being extended so that reasoning about performing actions can be modeled  . This work is along the lines described in \[ Goldman  ,  1970\] . 

The author wishes to thank Jerry Feldman , Alanl : risch , Margery I . ucas , and Dan I , ' , ussell for many enlightening comments on previous versions of this paper  . 
This research was supported in part by the National Science  . Foundation uder Grant No . IST-80-\]2418 , and in part by the Office of Naval Research under Grant No  . 


Allen , J . l : . , " A General View of Action and Time , " TR , Dept . Computer Science , U . Rochester , forthcoming . 
Allen , J . l ' ~ . , " A Plan-Based Approach to Speech Act Recognition  , " Ph . l ) . thesis , Dept . Computer Science,
U . Toronto , I979.
Allen , J . F . , " Maintaining Knowledge about Temporal Intervals  , "' 1'I ~ , 86 , Dept . Computer Science , U . 
I~ochester , January 1981.
Brachman , R . J . , " Taxonomy , Descriptions , and Individuals in Natural I . anguage Understanding , " in Proc . , 17th Annual Meeting of the Assoc'n . for Computational Linguistics ,  33-37 , UCSD , I , a Jolla . CA , August 1979 . 
Bruce , B . , " l ~ elief Systems and I . anguage Understanding , " Report 2973 , I \] olt , Beranek & Newman , Inc . , 1975 . 
Cohen , P . R . , " On Knowing What to Say : Planning Speech Acts , "" FR\]18 , Dept . Computer Science , U . Toronto , 1978 . 
l ) avid son , D . , " The Logical Form of Action Sentences , " in N . Rescher(l : . d ) . 77, eLogic of Decision and Action . 
Pittsburgh , PA : U . Pittsburgh Press , 1967.
F : ikes , R . .E . and N . J . Nilsson , " STI ~ , II ) S : A New Approach to the Application of Theorem Proving to Problem Solving  , " Arttficial Intelligence 2 ,  189-205 , I 971 . 
Goldman , A . A77 retry of Human Actton . New Jersey:
Princeton U . Press , 1970.
Grosz , ILL , " Utterance and Objective : Issues in Natural Language Communication  , " in Proc . , 6th IJCAI , I067-1076, Tokyo , August 1979 . 
Haas , A . , " Sententialism and the I , ogic of l \] elief and Action , " Ph . l ) . thesis , Dept . Computer Science , U . 
R , ochester , expected 1981.
Hare , R . M . " Wanting : Some Pitfalls , " in Binkley , Bronaugh , and Morras(l'ds ) . Agent . Action , and Reason . Toronto : U . Toronto Press , 197 l . 
Hintikka , J . Knowledge and Belief Ithaca , NY : Cornell U . 
Press , 1962.
Jackendoff , R . , " Toward an " Explanatory Semantic l~ , epresentation , " Linguistic " lnquiry 7 ,  1 ,  89-150 , 
Winter 1976.
Moore , R . C . , " Reasoning about Knowledge and Action , "
Ph.D . thesis , Mlq ', February 1979.
Perils D . , " Language , Computation , and Reality , " Ph . D . 
thesis , Dept . Computer Science , U . Rochester , i 981 . 
Sacerdoti , E . D . A Structure for Plans and Behavior . New York : - Elsevier North-Holland , Inc . , 1977 . 
Schank , R . arid R . Abelson . Script ~ Plan ~ Goalx and Understanding . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates , 1977.
Schmidt , C . F . , " Understanding Human Action , " in Proc . , Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Processing  , 
Cambridge , MA , 1975.
Searle , J . R . , " The Intentionality of Intention and Action , "
Cognitive Science 4, l , 1980.
Taylor , R . Action and Purpose . New Jersey : Prentice Hall , 1966, Wilensky , R . , " Understanding Goal-Based Stories , " Ph . D . 
thesis , Yale U ., 1978.

