A View of Parsing
Ronald M . Kaplan
Xerox Pale Alto Research Center
The questions before this panel presuppose a distinction between parsing and 
interpretation . There are two other simple and obvious distinctions that I think are necessary for a reasonable discussion of the issues  . First , we must clearly distinguish between the static specification of a process and its dynamic execution  . Second , we must clearly distinguish two purposes that a natural language processing system might serve : one legitimate goal of a system is to perform some practical ~ skefficiently and well  . while a second goal is to assist in developing a scientific understanding of the cognitive operations that underlie human language processing  .   1 will refer to pa~rs primarily oriented towards the former goal as Practical Parsers  ( PP ) and refer to the others as Performance Model Parsers  ( PMP )  . With these distinctions in mind . let menow turn to the questions at hand . 
1. The Computational Perspective.
From a computadonal point of view . there are obvious reasons for distinguishing parsing from interpretation  . Parsing is the process whereby linearly ordered scquences of character strings annotated with information found in a stored lexicon are transduced into labelled hierarchical structures  . 
Interpretation maps such structures either into structures with different formal properties  , such as logical formulas , or into sequences of actions to be performed on a logical model or database  . On the face of it , unless we ignore the obvious formal differences between string--to--structure and structure--to- -structure mappings  , parsing is thus formally and conceptually distinct from interpretation  . The specifications of th c two processes necessarily mention different kinds of operations that are sensitive to different-features of the input and express quite different generalizations about the correspondences betwecn form and meaning  . 
As far as I can see . these are simply factual assertions about which there can be little or node bate  . Beyond this level , however , there are a number of controversial issues . Even though parsing and interpretation operations are recognizably distinct  , they can be combined in a variety of ways to construct a natural language understanding system  . For example , the static specification of as ~ stem could freely intermix parsing and interpretation operations  , so that there is no part of the program text that is clearly identifiable as the parser or interpreter  , and perhaps no part that can even be thought of as more pa~er-like or interpreter-like than any other  . Although the microscopic operations fall into two classes  , there is no notion in such a system of separate parsing and interpretation components at a macroscopicte ~ cl  .   . Macroscopiealty . it might be argued ` a , ~yslcm specified in this way does not embody a parsmg/interprcmtitm distinct mn  . 
On the other hand . we can imagine a system whose static specification is carefully divided into two parts  , one that only specifies parsing operations and expresses parsing generalizations and one that involves only interpretation specifications  . And the rearc clearly untold numbers of system configurations that fall somewhere between these extremes  . 
I take it to be uncontrov crsial that . other things being equal , a homogenized system is less preferable on both practical and scientific grounds to one that naturally decomposes  . Practically . such a system is easier to build and maintain , since the parts can be designed , developed , and understood to a certain extent in isolation , perhaps even by people working independently . Scientifically . a decomposable system is much more likely to provide insight into the process of natural anguage omprehe ~ ion  , whether by machines or people . The reasons for this can be found in Simon's classic essay on the Architecture of Complexity  . and in other places as well . 
The debate arises from the contention that there are important " other things " that cannot be made equal  , given a completely decomposed static specification  . In particular , it is suggested that parsing and interpretation operations must be partially or totally interleave during the execuuon of a comprehension process  . For practical systems , arguments are advanced that a " habitable " system  , one that human clients fecl comfortable using , must be able to interpret inputs before enough information is available for a complete syntactic structure or when the syntactic information that is available does not lead to a consistent parse  . It is also argued that interpretation must be performed in the middle of parsing in the interests of reasonable efficiency : the interpreter can reject subconstituents that are semantically or pragmatically unacceptable and thereby permit early truncation of long paths of syntactic omputation  . From the performance model perspective , it is suggested that human seem able to make syntactic  , semantic , and pragmatic decisions in parallel , and the ability to simulate this capability is thus a condition of adequacy for any psycholinguistic model  . 
All these arguments favor a system where the operations of parsing and interpretation are interleave during dynamic execution  , and perhaps even executed on parallel hardware ( or wetw are , from the PMP perspective ) , If parsing and interpretation are runtime indistinguishable  , it is claimed , then parsing and interpretation must be part and parcel of the same monolithic process  . 
Of course , whether or not there is dynamic fusit ) n of parsing and interpetation is an empirical question which might be answere differently for practical systems than for perl brmance models  , and might even be answer e differently i or different practical implementations  . Depending on the relative computational efficiency of parsing versus interpretation operations  , dynamic in tcrlc:ning might increase or decrease oven dl system efli:'ctivcness  . For example , in our work t . n the I . UNAR system/Woods . 
Kaolan . & Nash-Webbcr . 1 q72) , we fl ) tmdit more ellicient odet brsemantic prt ~ . cssmg until after a complete , well-l ~ . , nncdparse had been discovered . 
The consistency checks embedded in the grammar could rule out syntactically unacceptable structures much more quickly than our particular interpretation component was able to do  . More recendy . Martin . Church . 
and Ramesh ( 1981 ) have claimed that overall efficiency is greatest if all syntactic analyses are computed in breadth -fi~t fashion before any semantic operations are executed  . These results might be taken to indicate that the particular semantic components were poorly conceived and implemented  , with little bearing on systems where interpretation is done " properly "  ( or parsing is done improperly )  . But they do make the point that a practical decision on the dynamic fusion of parsing and interpretation cannot be made a priori  , without a detailed study of the many other factors that can influence a system's computational resource demands  . 
Whatever conclusion we arrive at from practical considerations  , there is no reason to believe that it will carry over to performance modelling  . The human language faculty is an evolutiol , try compromise between the requirements hat language be easy to learn  , easy to produce , and easy to comprehend . Because of this . our cognitive mechanisms for comprehension may exhibit acceptable but not optimal efficiency  , and we would therefore expect a successful PMP to operate with psychologically appropriate inefficiencies  . Thus . for performance modelling , the question can be answered only by finding eases where the various hypotheses make crucially distinct predictions concerning human capabilities  , errors , or profiles of cognitive load . and then testing these predictions in a careful series of psycholinguist tc experiments  . It is often debated , usually by nonlinguists , whether the recta-linguistic intuitions that form the empirical foundation for much of current linguistic theory are reliable indicators of the naUve speaker's underlying competence  . When it comes to questions about internal processing as opposed to structural relations  , the psychological literature has demonstrated many times that intuitions are deserving of even much less trust  . Thus , though we may have strong beliefs to the effect that parsing and interpretation are psychologically inseparable  , our theoretical commitments should rather be based on a solid experimental footing  . At this point in time . the experimental evidence is mixed : semantic and syntactic processes are interleaved online in many situations  , but there is also evidence that these processes have a separate  , relatively non-interacting runtime coup . 

However , no matter how the question of . dynamic fusion is ultimately resolved , it should bccleart , ha\[dynamic interleaving or parallelism carries no implicau on of " static homogeneity  . A system whose run-rune behavior has no distinguishable components may never the lc~have a totally dccompo~d static description  . Given this possibilty , and given meevident scientific advantages that a dccorn posed static spccifgation aflords  . I have adopted in my own rescare h on these matters the strong working hypothesis that a statically deeompos ahlesys ~ nco ~ be constructed to provide the necessary efficiencics for practical purposes and ycL perhaps with minor modirr  . ations and l't wther ~ ipulations . Still supp ( ~ n signilicant explanauons of . 
p~ycholingmstic phenomena.
In short , I maintain the position that the " true " comprehension system will also meet our pre -the orctic notions of  . scientifice legance and " beauty ' . 
This hypothesis , that truth and beauty are highly correlated in this domain  , is perhaps implausible , but it presents a challenge for theory and implementation that has held my interest and fascination for many years  . 
2. The Linguistic Perspective.
While kiscertainly Irue that our tools ( computers and formal grammars ) have shoged our views of " what human languages and human language preceding may be like  , it seems a little bitstrange to think that our views have been warped by those tools  . Warping suggcsts , that there is rome other , more accurate view that we would have comcm either without mathematical or computational to olsor with a set of formal tools with a substantially different character  . There is no way in principle to exclude such a possibility  , but it could hctatar we have the tools w chave because they harmonize with the capabilities of the human mind for scientific understanding  . That is . a though substantially different ools might be better suited to the phenomena under investigation  , the results cleaved with \[ hose tools might not be humanly appreciable  . "\]' heviews that have emerged from using our present ools might be far off the mark  , but they might be the only views \[ hat we are c ~hleOCPerhaps a more interesting statement can be made if the question is interpreted as posing a conflict between the views that we as computational linguists have come to  . guided by our present practical and formal understanding of what constitutes a reasonable computation  , and the views that \[ henretical linguis X s , philosophers , and other similarly unconstrained by concrete computation  , might hold . Historically . computational Brammm ~ have represented a mixture of intuitions about the significant gntctural generalizations of language and intuitions about what can be p~efT ~: i entiy  , given a pani-'ular implementation that the grammar writer had in the back of his or her mind  . 
This is certainly\[rue of myown work on some of the catty ATN grammars  . Along with many others , If eltan often unconscious pressure to move forward along ? given computational path as long as possible before throwing my gramnmtical fate to the purser's general nondeterntioLs ~ coice mechanisms  , even though \[ his usually mean that feaster contents had to be manipulated in linguistically unjustified ways  . For example , the standard ATN account of " passive sent cnces used register operations to ? void backtracking that would re  . analyze the NP that was initially parsed as an active subject  . However . in so doing , the grammar confused the notions of surfare and deep suh  ) eets , and lost the ability to express gcn endizations concerning  , for exampl c , passive tag questions . 
In hindsigh LI con~der that my early views were " warped " by both the ATN formalism  , with its powerful register operations , and my understanding of the particular topdown , le  right underlying pa~ing algorithm . As \[ developed the more sophisticated model of parsing embodied in my General Syntactic Processor  , l realized that \[ here was a systematic , non-fpam rr ~*_~* ~ J way at " holding onto func Xionally misassigned constituent structures  . Freed from worrying about exponential constituent su ' ucture nondetermism  , it became possible to restrict and simplify\[he ATN's register opara Uons and  , ultimately , to give the manon-procedura Lalgebraic interpretation  . The result is a new grammatical formalism , Lexical-Functiona \] Grammar CKaplan & Bresnan , in press ) , a forrnal is an that admits a wider class of eff ? ient computational implementations than the ATN formalism just be cat ~ she grammar itself " makes fewer computational commi~nen ~ Moreover  , it is a particular and universal gencralizations , halso seems to b caformalism d'mt fatal/tales cooperao on between linguists and computational linguists  , despite the . ~" diffcnng theoretical and me\[hodologea Ibmses . 
Just as we have been warped by our computational mechanisms  , linguists have been warped by their formal tools , particularly the r~ansformational formalism . The convergence represented by Lexical-Functional Grammar is heartening in that it suggests hat imperfect tools and understanding can and will evolve into better tools and deeper insights  . 
3. The Interactions.
As indicated ? hove , I think computational grammars have been influenced by the algorithms that we expect o appb them with  . While difficult wweed out , that influence is not a thcore tica \] or practical oeces ~ ty  . By reducing and eliminaong the computational commitments of Our grammao calforn ~ is m  , as we have done with Lexical-Functional Grammar , it is possible to devise a variety or different parsing schemes  . By comparing and coou'as Ung their behavior with different grammars and sentences  , we can begin to develop a deeper understanding of \[ heway compulation a \] resources depend on properties of grammars  , smngs , and algorithms . This unders~nding is essen Ual both to practic ~ implementations and also top sycholinguistic modelling  . Furthermore , if a formalism allows grammars to be written as an abstract characterization of string--structure correspondences  , the Jp~nunm " should be in different as to recognition or generation  . We should be ? hie to implement fcasible generators as well as parsers  , and again , shed light on the interdependencies of grammars and grammaucal prrx : cssmg  ,   . Lc ( me conclude with a few comments about the psychol , ogea I validity or grammars and parsing algorithms . To the extent that a grammar cor ~ j . ly models a native speaker's ling tusu compel cnce , or , less tend ~ Uously , the set of metalinguistic judgments he is able to make  . then ti'mt srammar has a certain psyehok ~ gical " validity '  . h becomes much more interepang , however , if " it can ? l ~ . J be cmped dcd in a psychologeally accurate motel of speaking and comprehending  , h . ~ all cumpct ? , nce grammars will mcc ~\[ his additional requL , ~ment , but I have the opt Lmis ~ c belief that such a grammar will ~ y be found  . 
It is also possible to find psychological validation for a parsing algorithm in the ? bsence of a particular Ipmnn ~  . One could in principle adduce evidence to \[ he effect that \[ hearch itecture of \[ he parser  , the structuring of its memory and operations , corresponds point by point to well-e ,  . , . , . , . , . , . , . , . , ~ mhl~hed cognitive mectmnisms . As ? research strategy for ? fraying at a psychologically valid model of comprehension  , it is much more reasonable to developling u is r . ically justified 8rammars and computation a Uymotivated pmT , ing algorithms in a collaborative f for t . A model with such independently motivated yet mutually compatible knowled Be and process components is much more likely to resuhinan explanatory account of \[ he mechanisms underlying human linguisl ~ a bilil ~ =  . 

Kaplan , R . & Bres . oan , J . Lexical-functional grammar : . A fen'hal system for grammatical representation " In J  . Bresnanted . ), Theme ; m~l rep vecentalion of ~ mmal ~ . olrela , on ~ Cambridse : MIT Press . in prem . 
Martin . W ~ Church , K . . & P , ame ~, P . Paper presented to the Symposium on Modelling Human Parsing Strategies  , Unive ~ ty of Texas at Austin , ~ z . 
Woods . W . Kaplan , R . & Nash-Wehber . B . The Lunarsr/encesnalum/language information . Wslem . Cmnbrid sc : Belt " Ikranek and Newnlan `
Report 2378, 1972.
