J . Norwood Crout
Artificial Intelligence Corporation
The INTELLECT natural language database querysys tem  , a
product of Artificial Intelligence Corporation , is the
only commercially available system with true English query capability  . Based on experience with INTELLECT in the areas of quality assurance and customer support  , a number of issues in evaluating a natural language database query system  , particularly the INTELLECT system , will be discussed . 
A , I . Corporation offers licenses for customers to use the INTELLECT software on their computers  , to access their databases . We now have a number of customer instal-lations , plus reports from companies that are marketing INTELLECT under agreements with us  , so that we can begin to discuss user reactions as possible criteria for evaluating our system  . 
INTELLECT's basic function is to translate typed English queries into retrieval commands for a database management system  , then present the retrieved data , or answers based on it , to the terminal user . It is a general software tool , which can be easily applied to a wide variety of databases and user environments  . For each database , a Lexicon , or dictionary , must be prepared . 
The Lexicon describes the words and phrases relevant to the data and how they relate to the data items  . The system maintains a log of all queries , for analysis of its performance . 
Artificial Intelligence Corporation was founded about five years ago  , for the specific purpose of developing and marketing an English language database query product  . INTELLECT was the creation of Dr . Larry Harris , who presently supervises it sou-goln g development  . The company has been successful in developing a marke table product and now looks forward to sisnlficant expansion of both its customer base and its product line  . Ver-sions of the product presently exist for interfacing with ADABAS  , VSAM , Multics Relational Data Store , and A . I . Corporation's own Derived File Access Method . 
Additional interfaces , including one to Cullinane's Integrated Database Management System  , are nearing completion . 
A . I . Corporation's quality assurance program tests the ability of the system to perform all of its intended retrieval  , processing , and data presentation functions . 
We also test its fluency : its ability to understand  , retrieve , and process requests that are expressed in a wide variety of English phrasings  . Part of this fluency testing consists of free -wheellng queries  , but a major component of it is conducted in a formalized way : a number of phrases  ( between 20 and 50 ) are chosen , each of which represents either selection of records  , specification of the data items or expressions to be retrieved  , or the formatting and processing to be performed . A query generator program then selects different combinations of these phrases and  , for each set of phrases , generates queries by arranging the phrases in different permutations  , with and without connecting prepositions , conjunctions , and aruicles . The file of queries is then processed by the INTELLECT system in a batch mode  , and the resulting transcript of queries and responses is scanned to look for instances of improper interpretation  . Such a file of queries will contain , in addition to reasonable English sentences , both sentence fragments and unnatural phrasings . This kind of test is desirable , since users who are familiar with the system will frequently enter only those words and phrases chatare necessary to express their needs  , with little regard for English syntax , in order to minimize the number of keystrokes . The system in fact performs quite well with such terse queries  , and users appreciate this capability . Query statistics from this kind of testing are not meaningful as a measure of system fluency since many of the queries were deliberately phrased in an un-English way  . 
In addition to our testing program , information on INTELLECT's performance comes from the experiences of our customers  . Customer evaluations of its fluency are uniformly good  ; there is a lot of enthusiasm for this technical achievement and its usefulness  . Statistics on ? several hundred queries from two customer sites are presented  . They show a high rate of successful processing of queries  . The main conclusion to be drawn from this is chat the users are able to communicate effectively with INTELLECT in their environment  . 
INTELLECT's basic capability is data retrieval . Within the language domain defined by the retrieval semantics of the particular DBMS and the vocabulary of the particular database  , INTELLECT's understanding is fluent . 
INTELLECT's capabilities go beyond simple retrieval  , however . It can refer back to previous queries , do arithmetic calculations with numeric fields , calculate basic functions such as maximum and total  , sort and breakdown records in categories , and vary its output format . Through this ausment at lon of its retrieval capability  , INTELLECT has become more useful in a business environment  , but the expanded language domain is not so easily charaeterlzed  , or described , to naive users . 
A big advantage of English language query systems is the absence of training as a requirement for its use  ; this permits people to access data who are unwilling or unable to learn how to use a structured query system  . All that is required is that a person know enough about the data to be able to pose a meaningful question and be able to type on a terminal keyboard  . INTELLECT is a very attractive system for such casual or technically unsophisticated users  . Such people , however , often do not have a clear concept of the data model being used and cannot distinguish between the data retrieval  , summarization , or categorization of retrieved data which INTELLECT can do  , and more complex processing . They may ask forthlngs that are outside the system's functional capabilities and  , hence , its domain of language comprehension . 
Inst- , ~- ry , we feel that INTELLECT has effectively solved the man-machine communication problem for database retrieval  , within its realm of applicability . We are now addressing the question of what business environments are best served by Engllsh -langua Ee database retrieval while at the same time continuing our development by si ~ ificant ly expanding INTELLECT's semantic  , and hence its l in ~ u is t l c , domain . 

