Analo ~ esin Spontaneous Discourse I
Rachel Relcbman
Harvard University and
Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc.

This paper presents an analysis of analogies based on observations of oatural conversations  . People's spontaneous use of analogies provides In slg~t into their implicit evaluation procedures for analogies  . The treatment here , therefore , reveals aspects of analogical processing that is somewhat more difficult to see in an experimental context  . The work involves explicit treatment of the discourse context in which analogy occurs  . A major focus here is the formalization of the effects of analogy on discourse development  . There is much rule-llke behavior in this process , both in underlying thematic development of the discourse and in the surface lir ~ ulst lcforms used in this development  . 
Both these forms of regular behavior are discussed in terms of a hierarchical  structurin6 of a discourse into distinct , but related and linked , context spaces . 
1 Introduction
People's use of analogies in conversation reveals a rich set of processing strategies  . Consider the following example . 



I . I think if you'regoing to marry someone in the 2 . Hindu tradition , you have to-Well , you-They3 . say you give money to the family , to the glrl ,  4 . but in essence , you actually buy her . 
5 . It's the same in the Western tradition . You 6 . know , you see these greasy fat millionaires going 7 . around with film stars , right ? They've8 . essentially bought them by their status (? money ) . 
9 . HO , but , there , the woman is selllngher self . 
10 . In these societies , the woman isn't selling 11 . herself , her parents are selling her . 
There are several interesting things happening in this exchange  . For example , notice that the analogy is argued and discussed by the conversants  , and that in the ar Eumentatlon C uses the close discourse deictlo " these " tO refer to the in ~t latlng subject of the a ~ alogy  , and that she uses the fard is course delctlo " there " to refer to the linearly closer analogous utterances  . In addition , notice that Cbases her rejection caan on -correspondence of relations effect lng the relation claimed constant between the two domains  ( women hei ~ sold )  . She does not simply pick any arbitrary non -correspondence between the two domains  . In the body of this paper , I address and develop these types of phenomena accompanying analogies in naturally ongoing discourse  . 
The body of the paper is divided into four sections  . 
First a theoretic framework for discourse is presented  . 
This is followed by some theoretic work on analo ~ es  , an integration of this work with the general theory of discourse proposed here  , and an illuntratlon of how the II would llke to thank Dedre Gentner for many useful comments end discussions  . 
integration of the different approaches explicates the issues under discussion  . In the last section of the paper , I concentrate on some surface llngulst lo phenomena accompanying a oon versant's use of analogy in spontaneous discourse  . 
2 The Context Space Theory of Discourse A close analysis of spontaneous dialogues reveals that discourse processing is focused and enabled by a conversant's ability to locate ~ single frame of reference  \[19  ,  15 , 16\] for the discussion . In effective communication , listeners are able to identify such a frame of reference by partitioning discourse utterances into a hierarchical organization of distinct but related and linked contexts naces  . At any given point , only some of these context spaces are in the foreground of discourse  . Foreg ~ ounded context spaces provide the ~ eeded reference frame for subsequent discussion  . 
An abstract process model of discourse generation /interpretation in corporatlng a hierarchical view of discourse has been designed using the formalism of an Augmented Transition Network  ( ATN )  \[29\] 2  . The ~ Ta~rencoding the context space theory \[20 ,   22\] views a conversation as a sequence of convers at looal moves  . 
Conversational moves correspond to a speaker's communio at lvego alvis-A-v is a particular preceding section of discourse  . Among the types of conversational moves-speaker communicative goals-formalized in the grammar are : Challenge  , Support , Future-Generallzation , and Further-Development . 
The correlation between a speaker Ps utterances and a speaker's communicative goal in the context space grammar is somewhat s~m ~ lar to a theory of speech acts Ala Austin  , Searle , and Grloe\[I , 2q ,  9\] . As in the speech act theory , a speaker's convers at lor almove is recognized as a functional communicative act\[q\]with an associated set of preconditions  , effects , and mode of fulfillment . 
However , in the context space approach , the acts recognlzed are specific to maxlm-abldlng thematic conversational development  , and their preconditions and effects stem from the discourse structure  ( rather than from/on arbitrary states in the external world  )  . 
All utterances that serve the fulfillment of a slng~le communicative goal are part it loned into a single discourse unit-called a context space  . A context space characterizes the role that its various parts play In the overall discourse structure and it explicates features relevant to " wellformedness " and " maxim-abiding " discourse development  . ~ ine types of context spaces have been formalized in the grammar representing the different constituent types of a discourse  . The spaces are characterized in much the same way as elements of a ? Systemic Grammar " Ala Halllday  \[10\] via attributes represented as " slots " per Minsky\[I ~\]  . All context spaces have slots for the followlng elements :  2The rules incorporated in the grammar by themselves do not form a complete system of discourse generation/interpret at lon  . Rather , they enable specification of a set of high level Semantlc/log~Ical constraints that a surfacelln ~ is tlc from has to meet in order to fill a certain maxlm-abidlng conversational role at a given point in the discourse  . 
6 3 oa propositional representation of the set of functionally related utterances said to iie An the space  ; othe communicative goal served by the space ; o a marker reflecting the influential status of the space at any given point in the discourse  ; olinks to preceding context spaces in relatlon to which this context space wan developed  ; ospecification at the relations involved . 
An equally important feature of a context space are its slots that hold the inferred components needed to recognize the communicative goal that the space serves in the discourse context  . There are various ways to fulfill a given communicative goal  , and usually , dependent on the mode of fulfillment and the goal in question  , one can characterize a set of standardized implicit components that need to be inferred  . For example , as noted by investigators of argumentation ( e . g .   ,  \ [~  ,  23 ,  5 ,  22 \ ] )  , in interpreting a proposition as supporting another  , we often need to infer some sot of mappings between an Interred generic principle of support  , the stated proposition of support , and the claim being supported . 
We must also infer some general rule of inference that allows for conclusion a claim given the explicit statements of support and these inferred components  . 
Reflecting this standardization of inferential elaborations  , I have o a tegorlzed dlfferent types of context spaces based on communicative goal and method ft tlftllment charaeterlzatlons  ( i . e . , specification of specific slots needed to hold the standardized inferential elaboratlons particular tOag ~ Lvengoal and mode of fulfillment  )  . Dell neatio o of context spaces , then , is functlomally based , and in the context space grammar , ImplAclt components of a move are treated an much a part of the discourse as those components verbally expressed  . 
3 The Analogy Conversational Move
Znterpretlng/understanding an analogy obviously involves some inferenoing cathepart of a listener  . An analogous context space , therefore , has some slots particular to it . The grammar's characterization of an analogous context space is derivative from its for ~ uLl analysis of an analogy oon versat lom-l move  . 
3.1 The Structure-Happing Approach
Identification of those aspects of knowledge considered important in analogy seems to be of major cavern in current Investlg at lon of this cognitive task  ( e . g .  , \[2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 18, 25, 28\]) . 
Gentner Js ~ theory\[6 ,  7 ,   8\] seems most compatlble with the findings of the context space approach  . Gentner argues that analogies aa-e based on an implicit understanding that " identical operations and relationships hol ~ among non identical things  . The relational structure is preserved , hut not the objects "\[8 , p . ~\ ]  . 
Gentner's analysis can be used to explain B's analogy between the Hindu and Western traditions in Excerpt I  . 
The relation ~ BUYING WOMAN . FOR $0~ COMPANION FUNCTION is held constant between the two doma/ns  , and the appropriateness Of the analogyiSnot affected  , for instance , hythen on correspondlng political views and/or religions of the two societies  . 
While Gentner cuts down on the number of correspondences that must exist between two domains for an analogy to be considered good  , she still leaves open a rather wide set o ? relations that must seemingly be matched between a base and target domain  . We need some . way to further characterize Just those relations that must be mapped  . 
For example , the relation TRADING WITHCHINA is totally irrelevant to the Hindu-Western analogy in this discourse context  . As noted by Lakoff & Johnson\[12\] , metaphors simultaneously " highlight " and " hide " aspects of the two domains being mapped onto each other  . The context space theory supplements both Lakoff & Johnson's analysis and the structure-mapplng approach in its ability to provide relevant relation characterization  . .
3.2 The Context Space Approach
In the context space theory , three elements are considered vital to analogy evaluation : othe structure mapping theory o relevant context identification o communicative goal identification The context space grammar's analysis of analogies can be characterized by the following : Explicating the connection between an utterance purportlng to make a claim analogous to another rests on recoghizlng that fc ~  . two propositions to be analogous , it anst be the cnse that they can bo~h be seen an~nstanc  , sOf some more general claim , such that the predicates of all three propositions are ident loal  ( i . e . , relation identity ) , and the correspondent objects of the two domains involved are both subsets of some larger sot specified in this more general claim  . 
Rejecting an analogy is based on specifylng some relation  , RI , of one domain , that one implies ( or claims ) is not true in the other ; or is based on specifying some non-ldent loal attrl bute-value pair ~' om whloh such a relation  , RI , can be inferred . In both cases , RIoust itself stand in a ' CAUSE ' relation ( or soma other such relatlon 3 ) with one Of the relations explicitly mentioned in the creation of the analogy  ( i . e . , one being held constant between the two domains , that we csulcall RC ) . 
Furthermore , it must be the cnse that the communicative goal of the analogy hinges on RI  ( RC ) being true ( or not true ) in both of the domains . 
3.3 A-alogous Context Spaces
Re?1ectlng this analysis of ~-- ! o ~ Les , all analogous context spaces have the follow lng slot defl nltlons  ( among others )   . 
Abstract : This slot contains the generic proposlt lon  , P , of which the Inlt latlng and analogous claim are instances  . 
Reflecting the fact that the same predication must be true of both cla  . lms ,   3Since a ceord in ~ to this analysis the prime focal point of the analogy is always the relations  ( i . e . , " actions ") being held constant , and a major aspect of an " action " is its cause ( reason , intent , or effect of occurrence ) , a non ~ or respondenoe in one of these relations will usually invalidate the point at the analogy  . 

Relations :

Mappings : the predicate in the abstract slot is fixed  ; other elements of the abstract are variables corresponding to the abstracted clansea of which the specific elements mention od in the analogous and initiating clalms are members  . The structure of this slot , reflecting this importance of relation identity , consists of two subslots :
This slot contains all st of the relations that are constant and true in the two domains  . 
This slot contains the generic proposition defined in terms of the constant predicates and their variable role fillers  . 
This slot contains all stoflists , where each llst corresponds to a variable of the generic proposition  , P , and them-ppings of the objects of the domain specified in the initiating context space onto the objects specified in the analogous context space  . 
3 . ~ Communicative Goals Served by Analogies An analog Y conversational move can carve in fulfillment of a number of different communicative goals  . Major roles currently identified are :
I . Means of Explanation 2 . Means of Support 3-Means of Implicit Judgement ( i . e . , conveying an evaluative opinion on a given state -of-a/falrs by comparing it to a situation for which opinion  , either positive or negative , is assumed generally shared ) 4 . Topic ShiSt by Contrast 5 . Hemna for Future-Genera Lizatlon ~ nmaxlm-abldlng discourse  , only elements felt to be directly analogous cr contrast lveto elements contained in the Inltiat ~ ng context space are discussed in the analogous space "  . Analogy construction entails a local shift in toplo  , and , therefore , in general , a/tardiscussion of the analogous space ( is cluding its component parts , such as " supports-of , "" challenges-of , , etc . ) , we have immediate resumption of the initiating context space  .   ( When analogies are used for goals ~& 5 noted above , if the analogy is accepted , then there need not be a return to the initiating space  . ) 3 . 5Illuetratlon In this section , I present an analysis of an excerpt in which convereants spontaneously generate and argue about analog ~ les  . The analysis hiEhlights the efficacy of inteKratlng the structure napping approach with r ~ e communicative gnal directed approach of the context space theory  . The excerpt also illustrates the rule-llke behavior governing continued thematic development of a discourse after an analogy is given  . 
Excerpt 2 is taken from a taped conversation between two friends  , M and N , wherein M , a British citizen , is trying to explain to H , an American , the history cf the current turmoil in Irel and . The conversational moves involved in the excerpt ( A&D being of the same category ) are the following :
A : A Dalogy
B : Challenge of Analogy
C : Defense of A~alogy
D : Alternate Aralogy
E : Return to the initiating context space of the analogy  ; with the return belng in the form of a " Further -Development "  ( assign alled by the clue " sow " )  . 










I . And , of course , what's made it worse this tima 2 . is the Britisharmy moving in . And , moving in , 3 . in the first place , as a police force . It ' s4 . almost a Vietnam , in a way . 
5 . But , all within Northern Ireland ?6 . All within Northern Ireland . Moving in as a 7 . police force , belng seen by every body as a 8 . police force that was going to favor the 9 . Protestants . 
10 . It'd rather bellke Syriabeing in Lebanon , 11 . rlg ht?12 . I don't know enough about it to know , may be . 
13 . There's-Where , there's a foreign police force I ~ . in one country . I mean , when you say it's llke 15 . Vietnam , I can't take Vietnam . Vietnamis North 16 . Vietnam and South Vietnam . 
17 . No , I meant war . Youknow , moving in and sayln6   18o we'rea police action and actually flg~ting a war  19  . when you got there . 
20 . Oh , well , that's Syria , that's obviously Syria ,  21 . rlght ? Who are implicitly supporting-not 22 . supportlng -' cause actually it's very similar 23  . in Lebanon , right ? You have the Catholics and 2 ~ . the Moslem . That's right , that's Lebanon . 
25. I suppose , yes.
26 . You have the Catholics and the Moslem , and then 27 . Syria ' seomlng in and implicitly supporting the 28  . Moslem , because Syria itself is Moslem . 
29 . Now , England is Protestant ? qOf course , digressions . 
this does not preclude explicitly noted We ~ an begin the analysis with a more formal chaFaoterlzatlon of M's analogy conversational move  . 
The generic proposition underlying N's analogy : $ Countryl  81  $  Country2 $ Countryl R2   NEthnioGroup2 
Where , the constant relations are :
R1: MOVE-IN-AS-~OLICE-FORCE
H2: TAKE-SIDE-OF
The objects sapped onto each other :
Mappings 1: England , America
Mappings 2: Ireland , Vietnam
Mapping = S : Protestants , South Viet ~ amese The communicative goal served by the analogy : 
Negative Evaluation on England
In rejection of the analogy , N claims that in the Vietnam case alone the fo llowing three relations occur : 
R3: FOREIGNIN VASION
Rq:AIDAGAINSTFOREIGNIN VASION
RS:CAUSE
Where , R5 laa relation between relations , i . e . , 83 CAUSE a ~5 . 
The purpose of M's analogy is to hig ~ llg hther negative assessment of England in the Irel and altuatlon  ( as identified by her utterance , " And , what Osmade it worse this tlme . . . ") . Mattempts to accomplish this by mapplng the presummed acknowledged negative assessment of America in Vietnamonto England  . Such a negative evaluative ~ apping , however , can only occur of course if one o on denns America 's involvement in Vietnam  . Ndenies such a presummed negativity by argu ing that it is possible to view America's involvement in Vietnama ~ coming to the aid of a country under foreign attack ~  ( i . e .   , as a positive rather than a negative act )   . 
Thus , argues N , the " cause " relations of the acts being held constant between the two domain ~  ( i . e .   , enter an ~ easa police force but being part is an ) are quite different in the two cases . And , in the Vietnam case , the cause of the act obviates any common negativity associated with such " unfair police force treatment  . " There is no negativity of America to map onto England  , and the whole purpose of the analogy has failed . Hence , according to 5Rq can be thought of as another way of loo ~ . ing at R1 and R2 . Alternatively , it could be thought of as replacing RI and R2 , since when one country invades another , we do ~ ot usually co~slder third party intervention as mere " coming in as a polio = force and taklng the sldeof  , " but rather as an entrance into an ongoing war . However , I think in one light one o enview the relations of  81 and R2 holding in either an internal or external war . 
6Most criticisms of America's involvement in Vietnam rest on viewing it as an act of intervention in the internal affairs of a country aga lns t the will of half oE i t s people  . 
H , the analogy in thls discourse context is vacuous an ~ warrants reject lon  7  . 
After N's rejection o ~ M ' e analogy , and N's offering o ~" an alternative analogy , which is somewhat accepted by M~as predicted by the gr--~r's analysis of an analogy convers at ional move u~ed for purposes or evaluatlon /Justlficatlon  , it is time to have ~ he initiating subject of the analogy returned-to  ( i . e . , i ~ is time to return to the subject of Br~Italn ' smoving into 

The return , on Line 28 , in the for = of " Further-Development , " constitutes a subordinating shaft ~ rom dlsoussion of ~ e event of the Britisha ~ my entering I reland on to dl souss lon of England's underlying mot ~ ivatlons and reasons for engaging in this event  . 
The form of return illustrates Lakoff & Johnson's notion of a metaphor creating new meanlngs for u  ~  , and its ability to " induce new similarities " \[12\]  . That is , it exemplifies a conversant's attempt to map new knowledge on topre existing knowledge of a domain based upon  , and induced by , an analogy , , , deto this domain . An appropriate extended paraphrase = of N's question on Line  28 is : " Okay , so we accept Syria's presence in Lebanon as a better analogy for England's presence in Irel and  . 
Now , we know , or have Just shown that Syria's bias to the Moslems can be explained by the fact that Syria herself is Moslem  . It has been stated that England , in as in Milarsltu at l ~ R , is favoring Protestants . can we then carry ? otlves '" over as well in the analogy ? That is  , can we then infer that England is Favoring the Protestants because she is Protestant ?"  7In a different context , perhaps , i . e .   , had the analogy been cited for a different purpose  , N may have accept edit . In addition , it is ia portant to recognize ~ at though there are mmerouso ~ her non-correspondences between the Amlrioan-Vletnam and England-L-=l and situations  ( e . g . , the respective geographlc distances i nvo lved )   , N's rando a selection of any one of these o the rn on nor responding relations  ( irrespective of the lr complexlty ) would not have necessarily led to effeot lve communication or a reason to reject the analogy  . 
8N '= citing of this alternative analogy is supportive of the grammar's analysis that the purpose of an analogy is vital to Its acceptance  , slope , it happens that N views Syria's intervention in Lebanon quite negatively : thus  , her cho?ce of this domain where ( Anherview ) is = reisplenty of negativity to ~ p . 
9Notice , by the way , that in tsr ' ~ a of " at ~ ribute identity , " Amities is a = mob closer latch to England than Syriala  . This example supports the theory that " attr ibute identity " play = amil Limal role in an a logy ~ appings  . 
1 0The fact that Mattempts to map a " cause " relat ion between the two domains  , further supports the theory that it is cor respondence of so hesatizatlon or relat ions between do smins  , rather than object identity , that is a governing criteria in analogy construction and evaluation  . 

Surface Lingulst lc Phenomena
The rules of reference encoded in the context space grammar do not complement traditional pronominal lzatl on theories which are based on criteria of recency and resulting potential semantic amblguities  . Rather , the rules are more in llne with the theory proposed by Olson who states that " words designate  , signal , or specify an intended referent relative to the set of alternatives from which it must be differentiated "  \[17  , p . 26~\] . The context space grammar is able to delineate this set of alternatives governlng as peaker's choice  ( and listener's resolution ) of a referring express lon ; I by continually updating its model of the discourse based on its knowledge of the effects associated with different types of conversational moves  . 
Its rule of reference , relevant to current discussion , is : Only elements in a currently active and controlling context space pair are in the set of alternatives vying for pronominal and close delctic referring expressions  . 
The context space grammar continually updates its model of the discourse so that at any given point it knows which preceding utterances are currently in the active and controlling context spaces  . Discourse model updating is governed by the effects of a conversational move  . 
Major effects of most conversational moves are : o changes to the influential statuses of preceding context spaces  ; changes to focus level assignments of constituents of the utterances contained in these Spaces  ; oestabll shment of new context spaces ; the creation of outstanding discourse expectations corresponding to likely subsequent conversational moves  . 
The effects of initiating an analogy conversational move are to : put the initiating context space in a Controllln ~ state  ( denoting its foreground role during the processing of the analogous space  )  ; o create a new Active context space to contain the forthcoming analogous utterances  ; create the discourse expectation that upon completion of the analogy  , discussion of the initiating context space will be resummed  ( except in cases of communicative goals q and 5 noted above )  . 
End in ~ an analogy conversational move , makes available to the grammar the " Resume -lnit latlng " discourse expectation  , created when the analogy was first generated . The effects of choosing this discourse expactation are to:  11Lacking from thls theory , however , but hopefully to be include data later date , is Webber's notion of evoked entities \ [27\]   ( i . e . , entities not previously mentioned in the discourse but which are derivative from it- especially  , quantified sets ) . 
67 o Close the analogous context space ( denoting that the space no longer plays a foreground discourse role  )  ; ore instant late the initiating context space as

Excerpt 3 illustrates how the grammar's rule of reference and its updating actions for an alo@les explain some seeming surprising surface linguistic forms used after an analo ~ in the discourse  . The excerpt is taken from an informal conversation between two friends  . In the discussion , G is explaining to J the workings of a particle accelerator  . Under current discussion is the cavity of the accelerator through which protons are sent and accelerated  . Particular attention should be given to G's referring expressions on Line  8 of the excerpt . 

G : j .
G : j .

I . It's just a pure electrostatic field , which , 2 . between two points , and the protonaccelerates 3 . through the electrostatic potential . 
~. Okay.
5 . Same physical la was if you drop aball . It 6 . accelerates through a gravitational potential . 
7. Okay.
8: And the only important point here is that 9 . the potential is maintained with this 10 . Cockcroft-Walton unit . 
Lines 1-3:
Lines 5-6:
Lines 8-10:
ContextSpace CI , The Initiating ~ pace.
ContextSpace C2, The Analogous Space.
ContextSpace CI , The Resumption.
On Line 9 , G refers to the " electrostatic potential " last mentioned on Line  3  . with the unmodified , closedeict lc referring expression 12 " the potential , " despite the fact that lntervening ~ ty on Line 5 he had referenced ? gravitational potent i al  , " a potential semantic contender for the unmodified noun phrase  . In addition , G uses the close delctic " here " to refer to context space CI  , though in terms of linear order , context space C2 , the analogous context space , is the closer context space . 
Both these surface linguistic phenomena are explainable and predictable by the context space theory  . Line 8 fulfills the discourse expectation of resumml r ~ discussion of the initiating context space of the analogy  . As noted , the effects of such a move are to close the analogous context space  ( here , C2) and to reassign the initiating space ( here , CI ) an active status . As noted , only elements of an active or controlling context space a reviable contenders for pronominal and closedeict l creferences  ; elements of closed context spaces are not . Hence , despite criteria of recency and resulting potentials of semantic ambiguity  , G's references unambiguously refer to elements of CI  , the active foregrounded context space in the discourse model  . 
As a second example of speaker sualng close deictlcs to refer to elements of the initiating context space of an analogy  , and corresponding use of fardeictics for elements of the analogous space  , lets reconsider Excerpt1 , repeated below . 
1 2Th e grammar considers n The X " a close deict l creference as it is often used as a comple ~ment to " That X  , " a clear fardeictic expression \[21\]



I . I think if you'regoing to marry someone in the 2 . Hindu tradition , you have to-Well , you-They3 . say you give money to the family , to the glrl , q . but in essence , you actually ~ uy her . 
5 . It's the same in the Western tradition . You 6 . know , you see these greasy fat millionaires going 7 . around with ~ ilm stars , right ? They've8 . essentially bought them by their status (? money ) . 
9 . No , but , there , the women is selling herself . 
10 . In these societies , the woman isn't selling 11 . herself , her parents are selling her . 
Lines ; -5: ContextSpace CI , The Initiating Space . 
Lines 5-8: ContextSpace C3, The Analogous Space . 
LAnes 9-11: Context Space C3 , The Challenge Space . 
On Line 9 , Crejects B's analogy ( as signalled by her use Of the clue words , " t~o , but " ) by citing a nonoor respondence of relations between the two domains  . 
Notice that in the rejection , C uses the fardaictic ? there = to refer to an element of the linearly close analogous context space  , C2 , t 3 and that she uses the clone de ~ ctlc " these " to refer to an  1~lement ~ of the linearly far initiating context space , CI . 
The grnmm " r models C's move on Line 9 by processing the ? Challenge-Analogy-Happlngs  "   ( CAM ) conversational move defined in its discourse network  . This move is a subcategory of the grammar's Challenge move category  . 
Since this type of analogy challenge entails contrasting constituents of both the initiatlng and analogs context spaces '% the grammar must decide which of the two spaces should be in a controlling status  , i . e . , which space should serve as the frame of reference for subsequent processing  . Reflecting the higher influential status of the initiating context space  , the grammar chooses it as its reference frame Is . 
As such , on its transition path for the CAM move , move , the gr-mnutr " 13This conversation was recorded in Switzerland , and in terms of a locative use of delctics , Western society is the closer rather than Hindu society  . Thus , the choice of deict ? c cannot be explained by appeal to external reference criteria  . 
1 ~ Notlce , however , that C does not use the close " delctlc " here , " though it is a better contrast lveterm with " there " than is = these  . " The rule of using close delctlcs seems to be slightly constrained in that if the referent of " here = is a location  , and the s~aker is not in the location being referenced  , then , s/he cannot use ? here . "15 Zn a different type of analogy challenge , for example , one could simply deny the truth of the smalo ~ us utterances  . 
1 6Zn the canes of Pre-Generalizatlon and Topic -Contrast-Shlftanalogies  , it is only after the analogy has been accepted that the analogous space is allowed to u surp the foreground role of the initiating context space  . 
O puts the currently active context space ( i . e .   , the analogous context space ) in a state ( reflecting its new background role )   ; cleaves the initiating space in its Cont rolling state  ( I . e .   , it has been serving as the reference frame for the analogy  )   ; o creates a new Active context space in which to put the challenge about to be put forward  . 
Performing such u ~ latlng actions , and using ? ts rule that only elements in a controlling or active space a reviable contenders for close delot lc and pronominal references  , enables the grammar to correctly model , explain , and predict C's reference forms on Lines 9   11 of the excerpt . 
5 Conclusion
In this paper I have offered a treatment of analogies with in spontaneous  dlalo6ues   . In order to do thls I first proposed a context space model of discourse  . In the model discourse utterances are partitioned into discrete discourse units based on the communicative goal that they serve in the discussion  . All communicative acts effect the precedlng discourse context and I have shown that by tracking these effects the grammar can specify a frame of reference for subsequent discussion  . 
Then , a structure-~applng approach tO analogies was discussed  . In this approach it is claimed that the focus of an analogy is on system ~ of relatlonships between objects  , rather than on attributes of objects . Analysis of naturally occurring analogies supported this claim  . I then showed that the context space theory's communicative goal analysis of discourse enabled the theory to go beyond thestruoture-mapplng approach by providing a further specification of waich k lnds of relationships are most likely to be Included in description of an analogy  . 
? Lastly , Z presented a number of excerpts taken from naturally ongoing discourse and showed how the context space analysis provided a cogent explanation for the types Of analogies found in dl sooure e  , the types OfreJemt ? ons given tO them , the rule-like thematic development of a dl so ourse after an a ~ alogy  , and the surfacellngulst lcforms used in these development  . 
In conclusion , analyzing speakers spontaneous generation of analogies and other conversants ' reaotlons to them  , provides uaan usually direct form by which access individuals ' implicit criteria for analogies  . These exchanges reveal what conversants bel ieve analogies are responsible for and thereby what i ~ or matl on they need to convey  . 
68 zEvv~ENCES 1 . Auatln J . L . ~ ow To DoT ~ n~s With Words . Oxford
University Press , 1962.
2. Black M . Metaphor revisited . Metaphor and

3 . Carbonell J . Metaphor-A key to extenelble semantic analysis . Proceedings of the 18th Annual Meeting of the
ACL , 1980, pp .  1721, 4 . Cohen P . Perrau ZtR . Elements of a plan-ha~ed theory of speech acts . ~ ~ aieneei (1979), 177-212 . 
24 . Searle J . B . Speech Acts . Cambridge University
Press , 1969.
25 . Sternberg R . J . Component processes in analogical reasoning . Psv cholo ~ c ~ lReview 8 ~ (1977), 353-378 . 
26. Toulmln S . The Uses 9? Arlene . Cambridge
University Press , 1958.
27 . Webber B . ~formalao Draoaht O discourse a na~h or a . 
Ph.D . Th ., Harvard University , 1978.
28 . Winston P . H . Learning and reasoning by analogy . 
~. Cohen R . Understanding arguments.
CSCSI , Canadian Society for Computational Studies of
Intelligence , 1980.
6 . Gentner D . The structure of analogical models in science . ~51, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc . , 1980 . 
7 . Gentner D . Metaphor as structure-preserving mapping . Proceedings American Psychological Association ,  1980 . 
8. Gentner D . A rescientific analogies metaphors ?
Problems and Perspectives , 1981.
9 . GFlce , H . P . Logic and conversation . Syntax and
Semantics , 1975?10 . H ~ liday M . A . K . Options and functions in the english clause . 8 RNO Studies in Enmllsh 8(1969), . 
11 . Hobbs J . Metaphor schemata , and selective inferenolng . Start \ [ oral Research Isstltute , 1979 . 
12 . Lak of TG . Johnson M . Metavhor ? We Live BY . The
University of Chicago Press , 1980.
13 . Miller G . A . Images and models : Similes and metaphors . Metaphor and Thought , 1979, pp .  202-250 . 
I ~ . Minsky M . A framework for representing knowledge . 
The Psychology of Computer Vision , 1975.
15 . Neisser U . ~~ svcholoav . Meredith Publishing
Company , 1967.
16. Lindsay P . Norman D . Human ~ Fr~cess ln = .
Academic Press , 1972.
17 . Olscn D . Language and thought : aspects of a cognitive theory of semantios  . ~ Review 77, " (1970), 2~7-273 . 
18 . Ortony A . Beyond literal similarity . Psychological
Review 86 (1979), 161-180.
Proceedings of the ~ of/,~ACM~l , 12(1980), . 
29 . Woods W . A . Transition network grammars for natural language analysis  . Comm . ACM//(1970), 591-606 . 

