P ~ FLECTIONS ONT WENTYYE ARS OF THE ACL
Jonathan Allen
Research Laboratory of Electronics

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge , MA 02139
I entered the field of computational
linguistics in 1967 and one of my earliest recollections is of studying the Harvard Syntactic Analyzer  . To this date , this parser is one of the best documented programs and the extensive discussions cover a wide range of English syntax  . 
It is sobering to recall that this analyzer was implemented on an IBM  7090 computer using 32K words of memory with tape as its mass storage medium  . A great deal of attention was focussed on means to deal with the main memory and mass storage limitations  . It is also interesting to reflect back on the decision made in the Harvard Syntactic Analyzer to use a large number of parts of speech  , presumably , to aid the refinement of the analysis . Unfortunately , this introduction of such a large number of parts of speech  ( approximately 300 ) led to a large number of unanticipated ambiguous parsings  , rather than cutting down on the number of legitimate parsings as had been hoped for  . This analyzer functioned at a time when revelations about the amount of inherent ambiguity in English  ( and other natural languages ) was a relatively new thing and the Harvard Analyzer produced all possible parsings for a given sentence  . At that time , some effort was focused on discovering a use for all these different parsings and I can recall that one such application was the parsing of the Geneva Nuclear Convention  . By displaying the large number of possible interpretations of the sentence  , it was in fact possible to flush out possible misinterpretations of the document and I believe that some editing was performed in order to remove these ambiguities  . 
In the late sixties , there was also a substantial effort to attempt parsing in terms of a transformational grammar  . StanPetrick's Doctoral Thesis dealt with this problem  , using underlying logical forms very different from those described by Chomsky  , and another effort at Mitre Corporation , led by DonWalker , also built a transformational parser . I think it is significant that this early effort at Mitre was one of the fJr = ~ examples where linguists were directly involved in computational applications  . 
It is in = cresting that in the development of syntax  , from the perspective of both linguists and computational linguists  , there has been a continuing need to develop formalisms that provided both insight  , as well as coverage . I think these two requirements can be seen both in transformational grammar and the ATN formalism  . 
Thus , transformational grammar provided a simple , insightful base through the use of contextfree grammar and then provided for the difficulties of the syntax by adding onto this base the use of transformations and of course  , gaining turing machine power in the process . Similarly , ATNs provided the simple base of a finite state machine and added to it turing machine power through the use of actions on the arcs  . It seems to be necessary to provide some representational means that is relatively easy to think about as a base and then contemplate how these simpler baseforms can be modified to provide for the range of actual facts of natural language  . 
Moving to today's emphasis , we see increased interest in psychological reality  . An example of this work is ' the thesis of Mitch Marcus  , which attempts to deal with constraints imposed by human performance  , as well as constraints of a more universal nature recently characterized by linguists  . This model has been extended further by Bob Berwick to serve as the basis for a learning model  . Another recent trend that causes me to smile a little is the resurgence of interest in context free grammars  . I think back to Lyons ' book on theoretical linguistics where contextfree grammar is chastised as was the custom  , due to its inability to insightfully characterize subject verb agreement  , discontinuous constituents , and other things thought inappropriate for contextfree grammars  . The fact that a contextfree grammar can always characterize any finite segment of the language was not a popular notion in the early days  . Now we find increasing concern with efficiency arguments  , and also due to the increasing emphasis in trying to find the simplest possible grammatical formalism to describe the facts of language  , avigorous effort to provide contextfree systems that provide a great deal of coverage  . In the earlier days , the necessity of introducing additional nonterminals to deal with problems such as subject verb agreement was seen as a definite disadvantage  , but today such criticisms are hard to find . An additional trend that is interesting to observe is the current emphasis on ill-formed sentences which are now recognized as valid exemplars of the language and with which we must deal in a variety of computational applications  . Thus , there has been attention focused on relaxation techniques and the structures that may be ill -formed  . 
In the early days of the ACL , I believe that computation was seen mainly as a tool used to represent algorithms and provide for their execution  . Now there is a much different emphasis on computation  . Computing is seen as a metaphor , and as an important means to model vario Us linguistic phenomena  , as well as more broadly cognitive phenomena . This is an important trend , and is due in part to the emphasis in cognitive science on representational i?sues  . When we must deal representations explicitly , then the branch of knowledge that provides the most help is computer science  , and this fact is becoming much more widely appreciated  , even by those workers who are not focused primarily on computing  . This is a healthy trend , I believe , but we need also to be aware of the possibility of introducing biases and constraints on our thinking dictated by our current understanding and view of computation  . 
Since our view of computation is in turn conditioned very substantially by the actual computing technology that is present at any given time  , it is well to be very cautious in attributing basic understanding of these representations  . A particular case in point is the emphasis , quite popular today , on parallelism . When we were used to thinking of computation solely in terms of single-sequence V on Neumann machines  , then parallelism did not enjoy a prominent place in our models  . Now that it is possible technologically to implement a great deal of parallelism  , one can even discern more of a move to breadth first rather than depth first analyses  . It seems clear that we are still very much the children of the technology that surrounds us  . 
I want to turn my attention now to a discussion of the development of speech processing technology  , in particular , text-to-speech conversion and speech recognition , during the last twenty years . Speech has been studied over many decades , but its secrets have been revealed at a very slow pace  . Despite the substantial infusion of money into the study of speech recognition in the seventies  , there still seems to be a natural gestation period for achieving new understanding of such complicated phenomena  . Nevertheless , during these last twenty years , a great deal of useful speech processing capability has been achieved  . Not only has there been much achievement , but these results have achieved great prominence through their coupling with modern technology  . The outstanding example in speech synthesis technology has been of course the Texas Instruments Speak and Spell which demonstrated for the first time that acceptable use of synthetic speech could be achieved for a very modest price  . 
Currently , there are at least 20 different integrated circuits , either already fabricated or under development , for speech synthesis . So a huge change has taken place . It is possible today to produce highly intelligible synthetic speech from text  , using a variety of techniques in computational linguistics  , including morphological analysis , letter-to-sound rules , lexical stress , syntactic parsing , and prosodic analysis . While this speech can be highly intelligible , it is certainly not very natural yet . This reflects in part the fact we have been able to determine sufficient correlates for the percepts that we want to convey  , but that we have thus far been unable to characterize the redundant interaction of a large variety of correlates that lead to integrated percepts in natural speech  . Even such simple distinctions as the voiced /unvolced contrast are marked by more than a dozen different correlates  . We simply don't know , even after all these years , how these different correlates are interrelated as a function of the local context  . 
The current disposition would lead one to hope that thls interaction is deterministic in nature  , but I suppose there is still some segment of the research community that has no such hopes  . When the redundant interplay of correlates is properly understood  , I believe this will her ald a new improvement in our understanding needed for high performance speech recognition systems  . Nevertheless , it is important to emphasize that during these twenty years  , commercially acceptable text-to-speech systems have become viable  , as well as many other speech synthesis systems utilizing parametric storage or waveform coding techniques of some sort  . 
Speech recognition has undergone a lot of change during this period also  . The systems that are available in the marketplace are still based exclusively on template matching techniques  , which probably have little or nothing to do with the intrinsic nature of speech and language  . That is to say , they us a some form of informationally-reduced representation of the input speech waveform and then contrive to match this representation against a set of stored templates  . Various techniques have been introduced to improve the accuracy of this matching procedure by allowing for modifications of the input representation or the stored templates  . For example , the use of dynamic programming to facilitate matching has been very popular  , and for good reason , since its use has led to improvements in accuracy of between  20 and 30 percent . Nevertheless , I believe that the use of dynamic programming will not remain over the long pull and that more phonetically and linguistically based techniques will have to be used  . This prediction is predicated , of course , on the need for a huge amount of improved understanding of language in all of its various representations and I feel that there is need for an incredibly large amount of new data to be acquired before we can hope to make substantial progress on these issues  , Certainly an important contribution of computational linguistics is the provision of instrumental means to acquire data  , In my view , the study of both speech synthesis and speech recognition has been hampered over the years in large part due to the sheer lack of insufficient data on which to base models and theories  . While we would still like to have more computational power than we have  , at present , we are able to provide highly capable interactive research environments for exploring new areas  . The fact that there is none too much of these computational resources is supported by the fact that the speech largest user of  370/168 time at Yorktown Heights . 
An interesting aspect of the study of speech recognition is that there is still no agreement among researchers as to the best approach  . Thus , we see techniques based on statistical decoding , those based on template matching using dynamic programming  , and those that are much more phonetic and linguistic in nature  . I believe that the notion , at one time prevalent during the seventies , that the speech waveform could often be ignored in favor of constraints supplied by syntax  , semantics , or pragmatics is no longer held and there is an increasing view that one should try to extract as much information as possible from the speech waveform  . Indeed , word boundary effects and manifestations at the phonetic level of high level syntactic and semantic constraints are being discovered continually as research in speech production and perception continues  . For all of our research into speech recognition , we are still along ways away from approximating human speech perception capability  . We really have no idea as to how human listeners are able to adapt to a large variety of speakers and a large variety of communication environments  , we have no idea how humans manage to reject noise in the background  , and very little understanding as to the interplay of the various constraint domains that are active  . Within the last five years , however we have seen an increasing level of cooperation between linguists  , psycholinguists and computational linguists on these matters and I believe that the depth of understanding in psycholinguisties is no wata level where it can be tentatively exploited by computational linguists for models of speech perception  . 
Over these twenty years , we have seen computational linguistics grow from a relatively esoteric academic discipline to a robust con~ercial enterprise  . Certainly the need within industry form an -machlne interaction is very strong and many computer companies are hiring computational linguists to provide for natural language access to databases  , speech control of instruments , and audio announcements of all sorts . 
There is a need to get newly developed ideas into practice  , and as a result of that experience , provide feedback to the models that computational linguists create  . There is a tension , I believe , between , on the one hand , the need to be far reaching in our research programs vs  . the need for short term pay off in industrial practice  . It is important that workers in the field seek to influence those that control resources to maintain a healthy balance between these two influences  . 
For example , the relatively new interest in studying discourse structure is a difficult  , but important area for long range research and it deserves encouragement  , despite the fact that there are large areas of ignorance and the need for extended fundamental research  . One can hope however , that the demonstrated a chi ~ vp ~ nt of computational linguistics over the last twenty years will provide a base upon which society will be willing to continue to support us to further explore the large unknowns in language competence and behavior  . 

