At ~3 MENTING ADATA BASEK NOWLED GERE PRESENTATION
FORNATURALL ANGUAGEGENERATION *
Kathleen F . M ~ Coy
Dept . of Computer and Information Science
The Moore School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , Pa . 19104

The knowledge representation is an important factor in natural language generation since it limits the semantic capabilities of the generation system  . This paper identifies several information types in a knowledge representation that can be used to generate meaningful responses to questions about database structure  . Creating such a knowledge representation , however , is a long and tedious process . A system is presented which uses the contents of the database to form part of this knowledge representation automatically  . It employs three types of world knowledge axioms to ensure that the representation formed is meaningful and contains salient information  . 
representation reflects both the database contents and the database designer's view of the world  . 
One important class of questions involves comparing database entities  . The system's knowledge representation must therefore contain meaningful information that can be used to make comparisons  ( analogies ) between various entity classes . This paper focuses specifically on those aspects of the knowledge representation generated by ENHANCE which facilitate the use of analogies  . 
An overview of the knowledge representation used by TEXT is first given  . This is followed by a discussion of how part of this representation is automatically created by ENHANCE  . 
i . 0IN ' IIRODUCTION
In order for a user to extract meaningful information from a database system  , s/he must first understand the system's view of the world what information the system contains and what that information represents  . An optimal way of acquiring this knowledge is to interact  , in natural language , with the system itself , posing questions to it about the structure of its contents  . The TEXT system\[McKeown 82\] was developed to faci~te this type of interaction  . 
In order to make use of the TEXT system , a system's knowledge about itself must be rich enough to support the generation of interesting texts about the structure of its contents  . As I will demonstrate , standard database models\[Chen76\] , \[Smith & Smith 77\] are not sufficient to support this type of generation  . Moreover , since time is such an important factor when generating answers  , and extensive inferencing is therefore not practical  , the system's self knowledge must be i ~ ediately available in its knowledge representation  . TneENHANCE system , described here , has been developed to augment a database schema with the kind of information necessary for generating informative answers to users ' queries  . 
The ENHANCE system creates part of the knowledge representation used by TEXT based on the contents of the database  . A set of world knowledge axioms are used to ensure that this knowledge ~ rk was partially supported by National Science  5oundatlon grant # MCS81-07290  . 
2 . 0 KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION FOR G~ERATION The TEXT system answers three types of questions about database structure :  ( i ) requests for the definition of an entity ;   ( 2 ) requests for the information available about an entity  ;   ( 3 ) requests concerning the difference between entities  . It was implemented and tested using a portion of an  0NR database which contained information about vehicles and destructive devices  . 
TEXT needs several types of information to answer the above questions  . Some of this can be provided by features found in a variety of standard database models \[ Chen  76\]  , \[Smith&Smith77\] , \[ Lee & Gerritsen78\] . 
Of these , TEXT uses a generalization hierarch Z on the entities in order to define or identify them in terms of  ( I ) their constituents ( e . g . " There are two types of entities in the ONR database : destructive devices and vehicles  . "*) (2) their superordinates ( e . g . " A destroyer is a surfaceship . . A bomb is a free falling projectile . " and " A whiskey is an underwater submarine . . . ") . Each node in the hierarchy contains additional descriptive information based on standard features which is used to identify the database information associated with each entity and to indicate the distinguishing features of the entities  . 
* The quoted material is excerpted from actual output from TEXT  . 

One type of comparison that TEXT must gerjerate has to do with indicating why a particular individual falls into one entity subclass as opposed to another  . For example , " Aship is classified as an oceane scort if the characters  1 through 2 of its HULL NO are DE . . . 
A ship is classified as a cruis--er if the characters  1 through 2 of its HULLNO are CG . " and " A submarine is classified as an e ~ ho II if its CLASS is ECHOII  . " In order to generate this kind of comparison , TEXT must have available database information indicating the reason for a split in the generalization hierarchy  . This information is provided in the based DB attribute  . 
In comparing two entities , TEXT must be able to identify the major differences between them  . 
Part of this difference is indicated by the descriptive distinguishing features of the entities  . For example , " The missile has a target location in the airor on the earth's surface  . . . 
The torpedo has an underwater target location . " and " A whiskey is an underwater submarine with a PROPULSIONTYPE of DIESE landaFLAG of RDOR  . " These dist'inguishing features consist of a number of attribute-value * pairs associated with each entity  . They are provided in an information type termed the distinguishing descriptive attributes  ( DDAs ) of an entity . 
In order for TEXT to answer questions about the information available about an entity  , it must have access to the actual database information associated with each entity in the generalization hierarchy  . This information is provided in what a retermed the actual DB attributes  ( and constant values ) and there la ' ~ i6nal at Eributes ( and values )  . This informa ? ioh-is also useful in comparing the attributes and relations associated with various entities  . For example , " Other DB attributes of the missile include PROBABILITY OFKILL  , SPEED , ALTI~DE . . . Other DB attributes-of-the torpedo include FUSE TYPE  , MAXIMUMDEPTH , ACCURACY & UNITS . . . " and " Echo IIs carry 16 torpe does , betwe--e~16 and 99 missiles and 0 guns . " 3 . 0 AUGMENTING THEKNOWLED GEREPRESENTATION
The need for the various pieces of information in the knowledge representation is clear  . How this representation should be created remains unanswered  . The entire representation could be handcoded by the database designer  . 
This , however , is a long and tedious process and therefore a bottleneck to the portability of TEXT  . 
In this work , a level in the generalization hierarchy is identified that contains entities for which physical records exist in the database  ~4~tabase entity classes )  . It is asstmled that the hierarchy above this level must be handceded  . 
The information below this level , however , can be derived fr ~ the contents of the database itself  . 
* these attributes are not necessarily attributes contained in the database  . 
The database entity classes can be subclassified on the basis of attributes whose values serve to partition the entity class into a number of mutually exclusive subtypes  . For example , PEOPLE can be subclassified on the basis of attribute SEX:MALE and FEMALE  . As pointed out by Lee and Gerritsen\[Lee & Gerritsen  78\]  , some partitions of an entity class are more meaningful than others and hence more useful in describing the system's knowledge of the entity class  . For example , a partition based on the primary key of the entity class would generate a single member subclass for each instance in the database  , thereby simply duplicating the contents of the database  . The ENHANCE system relies on a set of world knowledge axioms to determine which attributes to use for partitioning and which resulting break downs are meaningful  . 
For each meaningful break down of an entity class , nodes are created in the generalization hierarchy  . These nodes must contain the information types discussed above  . ENHANCE computes this information based on the facts in the database  . The attribute used to partition the entity class appears as the based DB attribute  . 
The DDAs are a list of actual DB attributes , other than the based DB attribute , which when taken together distinguish a subclass from all others in the breakdown  . Since the subclasses inherit all DB attributes from the entity class  , the values of the attributes within the subclass are important  . ENHANCE records the values of all constant DB attributes and the range of values of any DB attributes which appear in the DDA of any sibling subclass  . These can be used by TEXT to compare the values of the DDAs of one subclass with the values of the same attributes within a sibling subclass  . The values of relational attributes within a subclass are also recorded by 

The descriptive information will be used by the generation system to indicate how the subclasses differ  . It is therefore important that the most salient differences between the subclasses are indicated  . Here again , the world knowledge axioms are used to guide the systam in choosing the most salient information  . 
The world knowledge axioms fall into three categories which reflect the extent to which they must be changed when applying ENHANCE to a new database  . ~ heyrange from very specific axioms , which must always be changed , to very general axioms , which are domain independent . The axioms and their use by the system will be described after first giving an example of a question answered by TEXT based on information created by 

3 . 1 EXAMPLE USING AUGMENTED REPRESENTATION This example illustrates how TEXT integrates the above information to form meaningful comparisons between entities  . This example is taken from actual TEXT output in response to the 
OCE AN-ESCORT and a CRUISER ?* i ) The cruiser and the oceanes cortare surface ships  .  2 ) The ship's surface-going capabilities are provided by the DB attributes DISPLACEMENT and DRAFT  . 3) The ship has DB attributes MAXIMUM_SPEED , PROPULSION , FUEL ( FUEL CAPACITY and FUELTYPE) , DIMENSIONS , SPE~DEPENDENTRANGE and OFFICIALNAME . 
4 ) Oceanescorts have a DISPLACE MENT~tween 3400 and 4100  .  5 ) Alloceane scorts in the ONR database have R ~ MARKS of  0  , FUEL TYPE of BNKR , FLAG of BLBL and MASTHEIGHT--of 85 . 
6) Oceanes corts carry between 2 and 22 torpe does , 16 missiles and between 1 and 2 guns .  7 ) A ship is classified as an oceane scort if the characters  1 through 2 of its HULL NO are DE .  8 ) Cruisers have a PROPULSION of S--TMTURGRD and a LENGTH between  510 and 673  . 
9 ) All cruisers in the ONR database have RE~MA~S of 0  . I0) Cruisers carry between 8 and 42 torpe does , between 4 and 98 missiles and between I and 4 guns . ii ) A ship is classified as a cruiser if the characters  1 through 2 of its HULLNO are CL or the characters i through  2 o ~ its HULLNO are CG . 
12) Theoceanes cort , therefore , has a smaller LENGTH and a smaller DISPLACEMENT than the cruiser  . 
The first sentence is derived from the fact that both ocean-escorts and cruisers are subtypes of entity class ship  . TEXT then goes on to describe some characteristics of the ship  ( sentences 2 and 3 )  . Information about the ship is part of the hand coded representation  , it is not generated by ENHANCE . Next , the distinguishing features ( indicated by the DDA ) of the ocean-escort are identified followed by a listing of its constant DB attributes  ( sentences 4 and 5 )  . The values of the relation attributes are then identified  ( sentence 6 ) followed by a statement drawn from the based DB attribute of the ocean-escort  . Next , this same type of information is used to generate parallel information about the cruiser  .   1~e text closes with a simple inference based on the DDAs of the two types of ships  . 
4.0 WORLDKNOWLED GEAXIOMS
In order for the generation system to give meaningful descriptions of the database  , the knowledge representation must effectively capture both a typical user's view of the domain and how that domain has been modelled within the system  . 
Without realworld knowledge indicating what a user finds meaningful  , there are several ways in which an automatically generated taxonomy may deviate from how a user views the domain :  ( I ) the representation may fail % o capture the user ' spreconceived notions of how a certain database * The sentences are numbered here to simplify the discussion : there are no sentence n~nbers in the actual material produced by TEXT  . 
entity class should be partitioned into subclasses  ;   ( 2 ) the system may partition an entity class on the basis of a nonsalient attribute leading to an inappropriate break down  ;   ( 3 ) nonsalient information may be chosen to describe the subclasses leading to inappropriate descriptions  ;   ( 4 ) a break down may fail to add meaning to the representation  ( e . g . a partition chosen may simply duplicate information already available  )  . 
qhe first case will occur if the subtypes of these break downs are not completely reflected in the database attribute names and values  . For example , even though the partition of SHIP into its various types  ( e . g . Aircraft-Carrier , Destroyer , etc . ) is very common , there may be no attribute SHIPTYPE in the database to form this partition  . Th ~ partition can be derived , however , if a semantic mapping between the subtype names and existing attribute-value pairs can be identified  . In this case , the partition can be derived by associating the first few characters of attribute HULLNO with the various ship-types  . 
The ~ s ~: ~ ificaxioms are provided as a means for defl-ning such mappings  . 
The taxonomy may also deviate from what a user might expect if the system partitions an entity class on the basis of nonsalient attributes  . It seems very natural to have a breakdown of SHIP based on attribute CLASS  , but one based on attribute FUEL-CAPACITY would seemless appropriate  . A partition based on CLASS would yield subclasses of SHIP such as SKORY and KITFY-HAWK  , while one on FUELCAPACITY could only yield ones like SHI  PS-4~q~H  -  10   0-FUEL-CAPAC ITY . 
Since saliency is not an intrinsic property of an attribute  , there must be a way of indicating attributes salient in the domain  . The specific axioms are provided for this purpose . 
The user's view of the domain will not be captured if the information chosen to describe the subclasses is not chosen from attributes important to the domain  . Saliency is crucial in choosing the descriptive information  ( particularly the DDAS ) for the subclasses . Even though a DESTROYER may be differentiated from other types of ships by its ECONOMIC-SPEED  , it seems more informative to distinguish it in terms of the more commonly mentioned property DISPLACE MENT  . Here again , this saliency information is provided by the specific axioms  . 
A final problem faced by a system which only relies on the database contents is that a partition formed may be essentially meaningless  ( adding no new information to the representation )  . 
This will occur if all of the instances in the database fall into the same sub-cl~ss or if each falls into a different one  . Such break downs either exactly reflect the entity class as a whole  , or reflect the individual instances . This same type of problem occurs if the only difference between two subclasses is the attribute the breakdown is based on  . Thus , no trend can be found among the other attributes within the subclasses formed  . Such a break down would add no from the database itself  . These types of break downs are " filtered out " using the @ eneral axoms  . 
The world knowledge axioms guide ENHANCE to ensure that the break downs formed are appropriate and that salient information is chosen for the subclass descriptions  . At the same time , the axioms give the designer control over the representation formed  . The axioms can be changed and the system rerun . The new representation will reflect the new set of world knowledge axioms  . In this way , the database designer can tune the representation to his/her needs  . Each axiom category , how they are used by ENHANCE , and the problems each category solves are discussed below  . 
4.1 Ver~Specific Axioms
The very specific axioms give the user the most control over the representation formed  . They let the user specify break downs that s/he would a priori like to appear in the knowledge representation  . The axioms are formulated in such a way as to allow breakdowns On parts of the value field of a character attribute  , and on ranges of values for a numeric attribute ( examples of each are given below )  . This type of breakdown could not be formed without explicit information indicating the defining portions of the attribute value field and their associated semantic values  . 
A sample use of the very specific axioms can be found in classifyingships by their type  ( i e . 
Aircraft-carriers , Destroyers , Mine-warf are-ships , etc . . . ), qhis is a very common breakdown of ships . Assume there is no database attribute which explicitly gives the ship type  . With no additional information , there is no way of generating that break down for ship  . A user knowledgeable of the domain would note that there is a way to derive the type of a ship based on its HULLNO  . In fact , the first one or two characters of \[ he HULL NO uniquely identifies the ship type  . 
~Dr example , -- all AIRCRAFT-CARRIERS have a HULLNO whose first two characters are CV  , while the fi?st two characters of the HULL NO of a CRUISER are CA or CG or CL  . This information can be captured in a very specific axiom which maps part of a character attribute field into the subtype names  . 
An example of such an axiom is shown in Figurei.
(SHIP " SHIP HULL NO " " OTHER-SH IP-TYPE " ( I2"C ~'" AIRCRAFT-CARRIER " )   ( i2"CA""CRUISER " )   ( I2"CG""CRUISER " )   ( i2"CL""CRUISER " )   ( i2"DD""DESTROYER " )   ( i2"DL""FRIGATE " )   ( I2"DE""OCEAN-ESCORT " )   ( i2"PC""PATROL-SHIP-AND-CRAFT " )   ( i2"PG""PATROL-SHIP-AND-CRAFT " )   ( i2"PT""PATROL-SHIP-AND-CRAFT " )   ( i1"L""AMPHIBIOUS-AND-LANDING-SHIP " )   ( i2"MC " , MINE-WARFARE-SHIP " )   ( I2"MS "" MINE-WARFARE-SHIP " )   ( i1"A "" AUXILIARY-SHIP " ) ) Figure I . Very Specific ( Character ) Axiom Sub-typing of entities may also be specified based on the ranges of values of a numeric attribute  . For example , the entity BCMB is often subtyped by the range of the attribute BOMBWEIGHT  . A BOMB is classified as being HEAVY if i~s weight is above  900  , MEDIUM-WEIGHT if it is between 100 and 899 , and LIGHT-WEIGHT if its weight is less than i00 . An axiom which specifies this is shown in FIGURE 2  . 
(BOMB " BCMB WEIGHT " " OTHER-WEIGHT-BOMB " ( 90099999"HEAVY-BOMB " )   ( i00899" MEDIUM-WEIGHT-BOMB " )   ( 099 " LIGHT-WEIGHT-BOMB " )   ) Figure 2 . Very Specific ( Numeric ) Axiom
Formation of the very specific axioms requires in depth knowledge of both the domain the database reflects  , and the database itself . 
Knowledge of the domain is required in order to make common classifications  ( break downs ) of objects in the domain . Knowledge of the database structure is needed in order to convey these break downs in terms of the database attributes  . 
It should be noted that this type of axiom is not required for the system to run  . If the user has no preconceived breakdowns which should appear in the representation  , no very specific axioms need to be specified . 
4.2 Specific Axioms
The specific axioms afford the user less control than the very specific axioms  , but are still a powerful device . The specific axioms point out which database attributes are more important in the domain than others  . They consistim ~ ortant attributes list . The important at ? ributes list does not " control " the system as the very specific axioms do  . Instead it suggests paths for the system to try ; it has no binding effects . The important attributes list used for testing ENHANCE on the ONR database is shown in 
Figure 3.
( CLASSFLAG



LET HALRADIUS
MINIMU MALTITUDE

HO~ZRANGE
MAXIMUMAL TITUDE
FUSE TYPE
PROPULSION TYPE
PROPULSION - -
MAXIMU MOPERATING DEPTH
PRI~YZRo ~) -
Figure 3. Important Attributes List
ENHANCE has two major uses for the important attributes list :  ( i ) It attempts to form break downs based on some of the attributes in the list  .   ( 2 ) It uses the list to decide which attributes to use as DDAs for a subclass  . 
ENHANCE must decide which attributes are better as the basis for a breakdown and which are better for describing the resulting subclasses  . While most attributes important to the domain are good for descriptive purposes  , character attributes are better than others as the basis for a break down  . 
Attributes with character values can more naturally be the basis for a break down since they have a small set of legal values  . A breakdown based on such an attribute leads to a small well-defined set of subclasses  . Nt ~ meric attributes , on the other hand , often have an infinite number of legal values . A breakdown based on individual numeric values could lead to a potentially infinite number of subclasses  . This distinction between numeric and character ( symbolic ) attributes is also used in the TEAM system\[ Groszet  . al .  82\] . ENHANCE first attempts to form break downs of an entity based on character attributes from the important attributes list  . Only if no breakdowns result from these attempts , does the system attempt break downs based on numeric attributes  . 
The important attributes list also plays a major role in selecting the distinguishing descriptive attributes  ( DDAs ) for a particular subclass . Recall that the DDAs are a set of attributes whose values differentiate one subclass from all other subclasses in the same break down  . It is often the case that several sets of attributes could serve this purpose  . In this situation , the important attributes list is consulted in order to choose the most salient distinguishing features  . The set of attributes with the highest number of attributes on the important attributes list is chosen  . 
The important attributes list affords the user less control over the representation formed than the very specific axioms since it only suggests paths for the system to take  . The system attempts to form break downs based on the attributes in the list  , but these break downs are subjected to tests encoded in the general axioms which are not used for break downs formed by the very specific axioms  . Breakdowns formed using the very specific axioms are not subjected to as many tests since they were explicitly specified by the database designer  . 
4.3 General Axioms
The final type of world knowledge axioms used by ENHANCE are the general axioms  . These axioms are domain independent and need not be changed by the user  . They encode general principles used for deciding such things as whether subclasses formed should be added to the knowledge representation  , and how subclasses should be named . 
The ENHANCE system must be capable of naming the subclasses  . The name must uniquely identify a subclass and should give some semantic indication of the contents of the subclass  . At the same time , they should sound reasonable to the ~ HANCE user . These problems are handled by the general axioms entitled naming conventions  . An example of a naming convention is : Rule 1 -The name of a subclass of entity ENT formed using a character * attribute with value 
VAL will be : VAL-ENT.
Examples of subclasses named using this rule include : WHISKY-SUBMARINE and FORRESTAL-SHIP  . 
The ENHANCE system must also ensure that each of the subclasses in a particular breakdown are meaningful  . For instance , some of the subclasses may contain only one individual from the database  . 
If several such subclasses occur , they are combined to form a CLASS-OTHER subclass . This use of CLASS-OTHER compacts the representation while indicating that a number of instances are not similar enough to any others to form a subclass  . The DDA for CLASS-OTHER indicates what attributes are common to all entity instances that fail to make the criteria for membership in any of the larger named subclasses  . Without CLASS-OTHER this information would have to be derived by the generation system  ; this is a potentially time consuming process . The general axioms contain several rules which will block the formation of " CLASS-OTHER " in circumstances where it will not add information to the representation  . These * This is a slight simplification of the rule actually used by EN~NCE  , see\[McCoy82\] for further details . 
125 include:
Rule 2-Do not form CLASS- ( TfHER if it will contain only one individual . 
Rule 3 -Do not form CLASS-OTHER if it will be the only child of a superordinate  . 
Perhaps the most important use of the general axioms is their role in deciding if an entire break down adds meaning to the knowledge representation  . The general axioms are used to " filter out " break downs whose subclasses either reflect the entity class as a whole  , Or the actual instances in the database . They also contain rules for handling cases when no differences between the subclasses can be found  . Examples of these rules include : Rule 4 -If a breakdown results in the formation of only one subtype  , then do not use that break down . 
Rule 5 -If every subclass in two different break downs contains exactly the same individuals  , then use only one of the break downs . 
5.0 SYSTEMOVER VIEW
The ENHANCE system consists of ~ set of independent modules  ; each is responsible for generating some piece of descriptive information for the subclasses  . When the system is invoked for a particular entity class  , it first generates a number of breakdowns based on the values in the database  . These breakdowns are passed from one module to the next and descriptive information is generated for each subclass involved  . This process is over seen by the general axioms which may throwout break downs for which descriptive information cannot be generated  . 
Before generating the breakdowns from the values in the database  , the constraints on the values are checked and all units are converted to a common value  . Any attribute values that fail to meet the constraints are noted in the representation and not used in the calculation  . 
From these values a number of break downs are gener at c~d using the very specific and specific axioms  . 
The break downs are first passed to the " fitting algoritl ~ n "  . ~entwoor more break downs are generated for an entity-class  , the subclasses in one breakdown may be contained in the subclasses of the other  . In this case , the subclasses in the first break down should appear as the children of the subclasses of the second break down  , adding depth totl ~ hierarchy . ~efitting algoritun is used to calculate where the subclasses fit in the generalization hierarchy  . 
After the fitting algoritt ~ is run , the general axioms may intervene to throw out any breakdowns which are essentially duplicates of other break downs  ( see rule 5 above )  . 
At this point , the DDAs of the subclasses within each break down are calculated  . The algorithm used in this calculation is described below to illustrate the combinatoric nature of the augmentation process  . If no DDAs can be found for a break downformed using the important attributes list  , the general axioms may again intervene to throw out that break down  . 
Flow of control then passes through a number of modules responsible for calculating the based DB attribute and for recording constant DB attributes and relation attributes  . The actual nodes are then generated and added to the hierarchy  . 
Generating the descriptive information for the subclasses involves combinatoric problems which depend on the number of records for each entity in the database and the number of subclasses formed for these entities  . The ENHANCE system was implemented on a VAX 11/780  , and was tested using a portion of an ONR database containing  157 records . It generated subtype information for 7 entities and ran in approximately 159157 CPU seconds . For a database with many more records , the processing time may grow exponentially . This is not a major problem since the system is not interactive  ; it can be run in batch mode . In addition , it is run only once for a particular database . After it is run , the resulting representation can be used by the interactive generation system on all subsequent queries  . A brief outline of the processing involved in generating the DDAs of a particular subclass will be given  . This process illustrates the kind of combinatoric problems encountered in automatic generation of subtype information making it unreasonable computation for an interactive generation system  . 
5.1 Generatin@DDAs
The Distinguishing Descriptive Attributes ( DDAs ) of a subclass is a set of attributes , other than the based DB attribute , whose collective value differentiates that subclass from all other subclasses in the same break down  . 
Finding the DDA of a subclass is a problem which is ccmbinatoric in nature since it may require looking at all combinations of the attributes of the entity class  . This problem is accentuated since it has been found that in practice  , a set of attributes which differentiates one subclass from all other subclasses in the same break down does not always exist  . Unless this problem is identified ahead of time , the system would examine all combinations of all of the attributes before deciding the subclass cannot be distinguished  . 
There are several features of the set of DDAs which are desirable  . ( i ) The set should be as s,~all as possible .   ( 2 ) It should be made up of salient attributes ( where possible )  .   ( 3 ) The set should add information about that subclass not already derivable from the representation  . In other words , they should be different from the A method for generating the DDAs could involve simply generating all  1-combinations of attributes , followed by 2-combinations etc . .
until a set of attributes is found which differentiates the subclass  . Attributes that appeared in the DDA of the immediate parent subclass would not be included in the combinations formed  . To ensure that the DDA was made up of the most salient attributes  , combinations of attributes from the important attributes list could be generated first  . This method , however , does not avoid any of the combinatoric problems involved in the processing  . 
To avoid some of these problems , a preprocessor to the combination stage of the calculation was developed  . The combinations are formed of only potential -DDAs  . These are a set of attributes whose value-can be used to differentiate the subclass from at least one other subclass  . The attributes included in potential-DDAs take on a value within the subclass that is different from the value the attributes take on in at least one other subclass  . Using the potential-DDAs ensures that each attribute in a given combination is useful in distinguishing the subclass from all others  . 
Calculating the potential-DDAs requires comparing the values of the attributes within the subclass with the values within each other subclass in turn  . This calculation yields two other pieces of important information  . If for a particular subclass this comparison yields only one attribute  , then this attribute is the only means for differentiating that subclass from the subclass the DDAs are being calculated for  . In order for the DDA to differentiate the subclass from all others  , it must contain that attribute . 
Attributes of this type are called definite-DDAs.
The second type of information identified has to do with when the subclass cannot be differentiated from all others  . The comparing of attribute values of subclasses makes immediately apparent when the DDA for a subclass cannot be found  . In this case , the general axioms would rule out the break down containing that subclass  . * Assuming that the subclass is found to be distinguishable  , the system uses the potential-DDAs and the definite-DDAs to find the smallest and most salient set of attributes to use as the DDA  . It forms combination of attributes using the definite-DDAs and me~rs of the potential-DDAs  . The important attributes list is consulted to ensure that the most salient attributes are chosen as the DDA  . 
5.2 Time/Space Tradeoff
There is a time/space tradeoff in using a * There are several cases in which ENHANCE would not rule out the break down  , see\[McCoy82\] for details . 
system like ENHANCE . Once the ~ CE system is run , the generation system is relieved from the time consuming task of subtype inferencing  . ~ his means , however , that a much larger knowledge representation for the generation system's use results  . Since the generation system must be concerned with the amount of time it takes to answer a question  , the cost of the larger knowledge representation is well worth the savings in inferencing time  . If , however , at some future point , time is no longer a major factor in natural language generation  , many of the ideas put for th here could be used to generate the subtype information only as it is needed  . 
6 . 0 USE OF REPRESENTATION CREATED BY ENHANCE The following example illustrates how the TEXT system uses the information generated by ENHANCE  . The example is taken from actual output generated by the TEXT system in response to the question : What is an AIR CRAFT-CARRIER ?  . It utilizes the portion of the representation generated by ENHANCE  . Following the text is a brief description of where each piece of information was found in the representation  .   ( The sentences are numbered here to simplify the discussion : there are no sentence numbers in the actual material produced by TEXT  )  . 
( i ) An aircraft carrier is a surfaces hip with a DISPLACEMENT between  78000 and 80800 and a LENGTH between 1039 and 1063  .   ( 2 ) Aircraft carriers have a greater LENGTH than all otherships and a greater DISPLACEMENT than most other ships  . (3) Minewar fareships , for example , have a DISPLACEMENT of 320 and a LENGTH of 144 .   ( 4 )   7%11 aircraft carriers in the ONR database have R~S of  0  , FUEL TYPE of BNKR , FLAG of BLBL , BEAM of --252 , ENDURANCER ANGE of 4000 , ECONOMIC SPEED of 12 , ENDURANCE -- SPEED of 30 and PROPULSION of STM~'ORGRD ? ( 5 ) A ship is classified as an aircraft carrier if the characters  1 through 2 of its HULLNO are CV . 
In this example , the DDAs of aircraft carrier are used to identify its features  ( sentence i ) and to make a comparison between aircraft carriers and all other types of ships  ( sentences 2 and 3 )  . 
Since the ENHANCE system ensures that the values of the DDAs for one subclass appear in the DB attribute list of every other subclass in the same break down  , the comparisons between the subclasses are easily calculated by the TEXT system  . M~reover , since ENHANCE has selected out several attributes as more important than others  ( based on the world knowledge axioms )  , TEXT can make a meaningful comparison instead of one less relevant  . The final sentence is derived from the based DB attribute of aircraft carrier  . 
127 7.0 FUTURE WORK
There are several extensions of the ENHANCE system which would make the knowledge representation more closely reflect the real world  . These include ( i ) the use of very specific axioms in the calculation of descriptive information and  ( 2 ) the use of relational information as the basis for a break down  . 
At the present time , all descriptive subclass information is calculated from the actual contents of the database  , although subclass formation may be based on the very specific axioms  . The database contents may not adequately capture the realworld distinctions between the subclasses  . For this reason , a set of very specific axioms specifying descriptive information could be adopted  . The need for such axioms can best be seen in the DDA generated for ship subtype AIRCRAFT-CARRIER  . Since there are no attributes in the database indicating the function of a ship  , there is no way of using the fact that the function of an AIRCRAFT-CARRIER is to carry aircraft to distinguish AIRCRAFT-CARRIERS from other ships  . This is , however , a very important realworld distinction . Very specific axioms could be developed to allow the user to specify these important distinctions not captured the the contents of the database  . 
The ENHANCE system could also be improved by utilizing the relational information when creating the break downs  . For example , missiles can be divided into subclasses on the basis of what kind of vehicles they are carried by  . AIR-TO-AIR and AIR-TO-SURFACE missiles are carried on aircraft  , while SURFACE-TO-SURFACE missiles are carried on ships  . Thus , the relations often contain important subclass distinctions that could be used by the system  . 
8.0 CONCLUSION
A system has been described which automatically creates part of a knowledge representation used for natural language generation  . ' IR is enables the generation system to give a richer description of the database  , since the information generated by ENHANCE can be used to make comparisons between subclasses which would otherwise require use of extensive inferencing  . 
ENHANCE generates subclasses of the entity classes in the database  ; it uses a set of world knowledge axioms to guide the formation of the subclasses  . The axioms ensure the subclasses are meaningful and that salient information is chosen for the subclass descriptions  . This in turn ensures that the generation system will have salient information available to use making the generated text more meaningful to the user  . 
9.0 A CKNCWLED GEMENTS
I would like to thank Aravind Joshi and
Kathleen McKeown for their many helpful comments throughout the course of this work  , and Bonnie Webber , Eric Mays , and Sitaram Lanka for their comments on the content and style of this paper  . 
i0 . 0 REFERENCES\[Chen 76\] . (: hen , P . P . S . , " The Dltity-Relationship Model - Towards a Unified view of Data "  , ACM Transactions on Database Systems , Vol . i , No . I , 1976 . 
\[Groszet . el .  82\] . Grosz , B . , et . el . , " TEAM : A Transportable Natural Language System  "  , TechNote 263 , Artificial Intelligence Center , SRI International , Menlo Park , Ca . , ( to appear) . 
\[ Lee & Gerritsen78\] . Lee , R . M . , and Gerritsen , R . , " Extended Semantics for Generalization Hierarchies "  , Proceedings of the 1978 ACM-SIGMOD International Conference-'on ~% an ! ~ ement of Data  , Austin , Texas , May 31 to J~-e2 ,  1978 . i\[McCoy82\] . McCoy , K . F . , " The ENHANCE System : Creating Meaningful Sub -Types in a Database Knowledge Representation For Natural Language Generation "  , forthcoming Master's Thesis , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , pa . , 1982 . 
\[ McKeown82A\] . McKeown , K . R . , " Generating Natural Language Text in Response to Questions About Database Structure "  , Ph . D . Dinnertatio : ~ , ; University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pa . , 1982 . 
\[ McKeown82 B\] . McKeown , K . R . , " The TEXT system for Natural Language Generation : An Overview "  , to appear in Proceedings of the 20th Antual Conference of the Association of Computational Lin ~ uis ?\[ cs  , Toronto , Canada , June 1982 . 
\[Smith and Smith 77\] . Smith , J . M . , and Smith , D . C . P . , " Database Abstractions : Aggregation and Generalization "  , ACM Transactions on Database
Systems , Vol . 2, No . 2, June 1977.

