2002: ANOTHERSCORE
David G . Hays

25 Nagle Avenue , Apartment 3-G
New York , NY 10040
Twenty years is a long time to spend in prison , but it is a short time in intellectual history . In the few years Just prior to the foundation of this Association  , we had come from remarkably complex but nevertheless rather superficial analysis of text as strings of characters or  , perhaps , lexlcal units to programs for parsing that operated on complex grammatical symbols but according to rather simple general principles  ; the programs could be independent of the language  . And at the moment of foundation , we had--In the words of D . R . Swans on -- run up against the stone wall of semantics  . No one at the time could say whether it was the wall of a prisonyard or another step in the old intellectual pyramid  . 
On my reading , the record is unmistakable.
The best work of the past twenty years has been on a higher level than that of  1962  . Those who learned about syntactic , semantic , and cognitive structures as students must feel quites cornful of the timidity with which we introduced these new topics to a world that doubted their propriety  . 
But then some were not so timid . After all , the new ideas are in the curriculum . 
Meanwhile , the commercial significance of strings of characters has come to everyone's attention  . So-called word processors are widely used , and the market grows . Commercialization of our most rudimentary techniques has taken twenty years  . We may wonder how long it will take to put on the market systems with our more recent  , more advanced techniques , but we can be sure that the market will eventually buy them  . 
We can also be sure of encountering new barriers . Our most important gain in the past twenty years is  , as I see it , the assurance that whatever barrier we meet can be climbed  . This is no case of " Climbone , climb them all . " Such arrogance is folly . Language is closely associated with thought . Knowledge of them both , and of their association , is Just what carried us over the barriers that were in surmountable twenty yea ~ sago  . The bazrlers we meet are inherent in the systems of thought that we use  . We know enough about thought to announce that its characteristic and dlsczlminatlng feature is the capacity to generate new and more powerful systems of its own kind  . Arail road does not become a nelevator when it reaches a cliff  , but thought does
Just that.
No one anticipated in 1962 that the study of language or the investigation of " thinking machines " would lead in twenty yea ~s to an understanding of how intellectual bazzlers convert themselves into scaffolding for the erection of new theoretical systems  , and no great social institution -- not the university  , and certainly not government--has yet recognized the revolutionary thrust of our small enterprise  . The world understands , vaguely , that great change is taking place , but who understands that the pace of change will nevers low down ? 
Intellectual progress consists in the routinlzatlon of the work of intuitive genius  . 
Before the Renaissance in Europe , some persons by insight could establish the sum of two numbers or the truth of some fact about nature  . Since the Renaissance we take these accomplishments so much for granted that we scarcely understand the system of thought in which they were problematic  . At most twenty-flve years ago , the determination of the surface structure of a sentence was problematic  . By now we understand rather clearly how phonological  , syntactic , semantic , and cognitive considerations interact in parsing . 
We , as a global culture , have taken a step comparable to the Renaissance , and we , as the members of an Association , have had a significant role . Advances in linguistics , in cognitive science , in the art of computation , and in artificial intelligence have contributed to our work  . Some would say that we are merely users of their results  . I think that we have supplied a crucial element , and I understand our name--computational linguistics -- to designate our special conceptualization  . 
Until we went to work , the standard conceptualization of analysis in western thought was translation into a universal scheme  . Logic , mathematics , and computation assumed that all argument would be by manipulation of certain forms  . The logician , mathematician , or computatlonist was expert in these forms and manipulations  . Given any problem domain , someone would translate its material into the standard form  . After manipulations , someone would translate the results back . 
Computational linguistics has the idea that computation can be designed on the pattern of linguistic theory  . In this respect , it seems to me , there is a sharp distinction between computational linguistics and natural language processing  . The latter seems to belong to artificial intelligence  , and artificial intelligence seems to be the inheritor of the standard assumptions  . I think that computational linguistics has the advantage  . 
Language and thought are fantastically complex , and when their mechanisms are translated into the old universal forms the representations perspective  , we have seen that language and thought have simple structures of their own  . If we translate linguistic mechanisms into computational terms  , the first step is hard , but the zest is comparatively easy . 
The making of software is still , as it has been from the beginning , a grave problem . For this problem I see only one remedy . Computational mechanisms must be translated into the terms of the user for whom the rest will be easy  . But the user is not unique ; the class of users is heterogeneous . Hence computational mechanisms must be translated into many different kinds of terms  , and so farth is translation seems very difficult . " Metagramming " is my name for an approach to the simplification of the hard part  . 
For thousands or tens of thousands of years humanity has engaged in the translation of linguistic mechanisms into the terms of different perspectives on the world  . Thus , cultures and languages vary in profound ways . And cultures and languages vary together . Until now no one has understood this process . It went on In billions of brains , and it was effective . Now we try to understand it and to extend it from the linguistic level to the computational  . 
The curious formula that we offer for the conversion of intellectual barriers into scaffolding is Just this : Formulate a description of the barrier  . Translate the mechanisms of thought or of computation into the terms of the description  . Execute the new mechanisms . As I see the matter , such work was done by intuitive genius until recently  , but we aler outinizing it . 
This formula generalizes on a central notion of computational linguistics and seems tome our first contribution to universal knowledge  . 
The formula contains an in explicit element.
What are the terms of the description to be ? In what language does one formulate the description ? I seen oplain answer to this question  . In fact , I am willing to take it as identifying , but not as describing , the next barrier . 
Another way to put the matter is to say that the proper description of the barrier is a metaphor of its elimination  . Metaphor is at present in the same limelight that illuminated semantics twenty years ago  . We have not yet found the correct angle to illuminate the problem of metaphor  , the proper language for description of the problem  . 
Again , I suggest that metaphors serve us in discussions of abstract matters  . Surmounting an intellectual barrier is stepping to a higher level of abstraction or  , in a somewhat novel technical sense , moving to a metalevel . 
And finally I point out our inability to characterize the mutual influence of any complex whole and its myriad parts  . If we consider a play or novel , a religion , a culture , or a science and ask how the unique quality of the whole emerges from the mass of elements  , we have little or nothing of a scientific nature to say  . And if we ask how to construct a system of this kind  , how to design a building or a programming language  , how to enhance a culture or educate a child , we find ourselves with traditions and intuitions but without explicit theories  . 
So I see a goal worth scoring , and I imagine the possibility that computational linguistics can move toward it  . Deep study of computation in culcates powerful methods of thought  , and deep study of language supplies the right objects of thought  . Computational linguistics contains what Ireck on to be needed by those who would wrestle with abstraction  , metaphor , and meta systems . 
Mank in d is a complex whole , and its individual human parts are myriad . The computer in every home will alter the mutual influence of person and population  . For better or for worse , no one can yet say . Moral issues arise . 
Technical issues will determine not only whether morally sound principles can be put into practice  , but also how we formulate the moral questions . 
Here is workfor twenty years to come and beyond.

