OURDOUBLE ANNIVERSARY
Victor H . Yngve
University of Chicago
Chlcngo , 1111 nols 60637 USA

In June of 1952 , ten years before the founding of the Association , the first meeting ever held on computation all inguistics took place  . This meeting , the succeeding ten years , and the first year of the Association are di scussed  . Some thoughts are offered as to what the fu ture may bring  . 
ITHEEARLYYEARS
When the suggestion came from DonWalker to ce lebrate our twentie than niversary by a panel discussion I responded with enthusiasm at the op -portunlty for us all to reminisce  . Much has happened in those twenty years to look back on  , and there have been many changes : Not many here will remember that founding meeting  . As our thoughts go back to the beginnings it must also be with a note of sadness  , for some of our most illustrious early members can no longer be counted among the living  . 
Not many of you will remember either that our meeting here today marks another anniversary of signal importance for this Association  . Thirty years ago the first organized conference ever to be held in the field of computational linguistics took place  . The coincidence of the dates is remarkable . 
This conference is on June 1618 ,  1982 , that one was on June 1720 ,  1952 , overlapping two of our three dates . That meeting was the M . I . T . Conference on Mechanical Translation . It was an international meeting organized by ? . Bar-Hillsland held at the M . I . L faculty club . If our association was born twenty years ago , this was the moment of its conception , exactly thirty years ago . I will try to recall that meeting for you , as best I can , for I propose that we celebrate that anniversary as well  . 
For that very first meeting Bar-Hillel had brought together eighteen interested peop le from both coasts and from En~In~d  . The first session was an evening session open to the public  . It consisted of five short semi-popular talks . The real business of the meeting took place the next three days in closed sessions in a pleasant room overlooking the Charles River  . We sataround a kind of rectangular round-table , listened to fifteen prepared papers or presentations  , and discus-sed them with a no-holds-barred give-and-take cata-lyzed by the intense  , open , and candidly outspoken personality of Bar- Hillel  . He was the only person I ever knew who could a rgue with you  , shouting excitedly at the top of his lungs until your back was literally against the wall  , and always with that angelics mile on his face and you couldn't helpllkl nghim through it all  . The stenotype transcript of the dlsousslonat that first meetlng makes interesting reading even today  . The participants grappled in a preliminary but often insightful way with difficult issues many of which are still with u ~ As for the papers at the conference  , three were given by Erw in Relfler of the Far Eastern and Russian Institute  , the University of Washington ; two by Victor Os wald of the Department of Germanic Languages  , UCLA ; two by Willlam Bull of the Department of Spanish , UCLA ; one each by Stuart Dodd of the University of Washington  , William Locke of the Department of Modern Languages  , M . I . T . , James Perry of the Center for International Studies  , M . I . T . , Harry Huskey of the National Bureau of Standards computerlab at UCLA  , and Jay For rester of the Digital Computer Laboratory  , M . I . T . Two were by Bar-Hillel hlmself , from M . I ? T . ; and one was by A . 
D?Booth of the Electronic Computer Section , Birk-beck college , London . Most of the substantial papers were later rev ised for publication as some of the four teen articles in the volume Machine ~ of L an ~ u~esedited by Locke and Booth  , or in the pages of the Journal Mechanical T ransla-tion  , which was started in March of 195 ~ . Two reports of the conference were subsequently published in the Journal  , one by Erwln Relfler and one by Craig Reynolds , J  ~ of IBM . 
The ten years between the first conference and the founding of the Association were marked by many news worthy events and considerable technical prog -ress  . A number of individuals and groups entered the field  , both here and abroad , and an adequate level of support material i zed  , mostly from government agencies . This important contribution to progress in our field should be a matter of pride to the agencies involved  . It was an essential ingredient in the mix of efforts that have put us where we are today  . Progress in that first ten years can beest imated by considering that up to the time of the founding of the Association the journal ~ ~ publl shed  52 articles , 187 abstracts of the llterature , and ran to 532 pages . 

To review all of that research adequately wou ld be a large task  , and one that I will not undertake here . But I should like to say that it includes a number of cases where computer techniques have played an essential role in linguistic research  . Just one example is the work on the depth hypothesis during the summer of  1959  , which owes everything to the heuristic advantages of computer modeling in linguistics  . Those linguists who still scorn or ignore computational linguistics should consider care fully those many examples of the efflcaoy of computer methods in their dlsoi-pllne  . 
IIFOUNDING THE SOCIETY
Toward the end of those ten years the need for a professional society became clear  . We did keep in touch by phone and letter , and adhoc committees had been formed for var ious purposes  . But most of all we needed a formal organizat ion to bring a degree of order into the process of planning meet-ings  . We could make plans through our informal contacts  , but there was always the problem that new groups or existing organizations would go a head with plans of their own for meet ings too so on before or after our own  . There were also requests from sponsoring agencies for symposia reviewing progress and encouraging cooperation between the growing number of federally supported projects  . We wanted regular meetings but were sisted the idea of having too many  . 
As an example of the situation we faced , I received a letter early in 1959 from the Association for Computing Machinery , who were planning a National Conference to be held at M  . I . ~ September 13, 1959 . They askedme if I thought that people connected with mechanical translation would llke to have a session at the meeting or meet concurrently  . 
I said I didn't know , but agreed to write to some people in the field about it  . I did write , offering to setup a session or a separate meeting if others wanted me to do it  , but expressing the thought that there were very few of us doing research in the field and that there now were a number of organizations that would llke to include mechanical translation papers in their programs to build interest and attendance  . It was a hot topic at the time . 
We did not take up the ACM in their kind offer . Hadwedoneso , we might today be a Special Interest Group of the AC~l  , and that would have hindered our close ties to linguistics  . 
In any event , the people at UCLA organized a National Symposium on Machine Translation  , which took place on February 25 ,  1960 , Just five months after the date of the ACM meeting  , and five months after that , on July 1822 ,  1950 , a meeting of federally sponsored machine translation workers  , organized by Harry Josselson and supported by NSF and ONR was held at the Princeton Inn  , Princeton , New Jersey . The next year , on April q-7 ,  1961 , a similar conference was helds t Georgetown University  , and Just five months after that , on September 58 ,  1961 , the National Physical Laboratory in Teddlngton , England hosted an International Conference on Machine Translation of Languages and ? p-plied Language Analysis  . Somethln E clearly had to be done . So the stage had been set , and nine months later , on June 13 ,  1962 , at another conference organized by the irrepressible Harry Jossels on at the Princeton Inn  , we finally founded a professional society : The Association for Machine Translation and Computational Linguistics  , renamed six years later the Association for Computational Lin-gulstlca  . 
I have not been able to locate alls to four charter members  . I am sure one exists . The officers for the first year were Victor H . Yngve , President ; David G . Hays , Vice-Presldent ; and Harry H . Josselson , Secretary-Treasurer . Mrs . IdaRhodes , Paul Garvln , and Wlnfred P . Lehmann were members of the Executive Council . Richard See , Anthony G . 
Oettinger , and Sydney M . Lamb were members of the Nominatlng Commlttee . Our announced purpose was to encourage high professional standards by a ponsoring meetings  , publication , and other exchange of ln/or-mation . It was to provide a means of doing to- gether what individuals cannot do alone  . 
Many of us had hoped for a truly international association  . We felt this would be particularly appropriate for an organization involved in trying to improve the means for international communication through mechanical translation  . But the cost of travel , travel restrictions from some countries , and various other practical problems stood in the way  . We became an international but predominantly American association  . We decided from the begin-ning to meet in a lternate years in conjunction with a major computer conference and a major linguistics conference  , My year oftenure as President was uneventful , or so it seem S . It is difficult to extract one year of memories twenty years ago  . I do remember a trip to Denver to see about arrangements for our first annual meetlng at the Denver Hilton  , to take place August 25 and 26 ,  1963 , the two days immediately preceding the ACM National Conference  . The local arrangements people for that meeting were most helpful  . The program was put together by Harry Jossels on . There were thirty-four papers covering a wide variety of topics including syntactic analysis  , semantics , particulars of languages , theoretical linguistics , research procedures , and research techniques . Abstracts for the thirty four papers were published in ~ ~  , Yol . 7, No .  2 , and a group photograph of some of the delegates attending appeared in Vol  . 8, No . I . 
Looking at this photograph and those taken at -earlier conferences and published in earlier issues invokes considerable nost algia for those days  . 
IIITHE FUTURE
I do remember my presidential address , for its tressed some matters that I thought were particu-were also embodied in a longer paper read to the American Philosophical Society three months later  , in November 1963 , and published the next year by that organ ization  . I should like to quote a few sentences for they are particularly appropriate at this point : ? A new field of research has grown up which revolves about languages  , computers , and symbolic processes . This sometimes is called computational llnguistlcs  , mechanical linguistics , information processing , symbol manipulation , and so on . None of the names are really adequate . The implications Of this research for the future are far-reachlng  . 
Imagine what it would mean if we bad computer programs that could actually understand English  . 
Besides the obvious practical implications , the implications for our understanding of language are most exciting  . This research promises to give us new insights into the way in which languages convey information  , the way in which people understand English , the nature of thought processes , the nature of our theories , ideas , and prejudices , and eventually a deeper understanding of ourselves  . 
Perhaps one of the last frontiers of man~s understanding of his environment is his understand lr ~ of man and his mental processes  . 
" This new field touches , with various degrees of overlap and interact ion  , the already well-estab-lished diverse f ields of linguistics  , psychology , logic , philosophy , information theory , circuit theory , and computer design . The interaction with linguistics has already produced several small revolutions in methodology  , point of view , insight into language , and standards of rigor and exactness . It appears that before we are done , linguistics will be completely revolutionized . " This quotation is particularly apt because I still believe that before we are done linguistics will be completely revo lutionized  . Let me explain . 
First , the difficulties in mechanlzlng translation had already at that early date called attention to fundamental inadequacies in linguistic theory  , traditional or transformational , it makes no difference . Second , the depth hypothesis and the problems raised in trying to square it with current linguistic theory threw further doubt on the scientific integrity of linguistics  . And third , the depth hypothesis also provided an important clueas to how the Inadequacies in linguistic theory might eventually be overcome  . I have spent the last two decades or so fol lowing this lead and trying to find a more satisfactory foundation for linguis-tics  . The following is a brief progress report to the parent body  , as it were . A recent written report may be found in the J anua ~ Series Major volume  97  , edited by Florian Coulmas . 
Modern scientific linguistics , since its be-Elnnlng a century and a half ago , has been characterized by three central goals ( 1 ) that it study language , (2) that it be scientific , and ( 3 ) that it seek explanations in terms of people . It turns out that these goals are contradictory and mutually incompatible  , and this is the underlying reason for the most serious Inadequacies in linguistic the or ~ Linguistics  , and that includes computational linguistics , is faced with two mutually exclusive alternatives  . We can either accept the first goal and study language by the methods of grammar  , or we can accept the second and third goals and seek explanations of communicative phenomena in terms of people by the methods of sclence  . 
We cannot continue with business ausual and try to have it both ways  . Basically this is because science studies real objects given in advance whereas grammar studies objects that are only created by a point of v lew  , as Saussure realized . 
Their study rests on a special assumption that places grammar outside of science  . To try to have it both ways also leads to the fallacies of the psychologlcal and social reality of grammar  . 
The full implications of this for k in the road that linguistics faces is Just now sinking in  . 
Only the second alternative is viable , science rather than grammar . This means we will have to give up the two thousand year grammatical tradition at the core of linguistic thought and reconstruct the discipline on wellknown scientific principles instead  . This will open upvast opportunities for research to uncover that essential and unique part of human nature  , how people communicate . We may then finally be able to do all those things we have been trying so hard to do  . 
In this necesaary reconstruction If or esee that computational linguistics is dest ined to play an essential role  . 

