
~avind K . ~ shi
Department of Computer and Information Science
R .268 Moore School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , PA 19104
As I was reflecting deeply in front of the statue of Bodh is at tva of Gr ~ and W is dom in the University Muset ~ n  , I was start led to see Jane . 
Having heard from Dontha the had asked the old cats to reflect on the  20 years of ACL , Jane had decided that she should drop in on some of them to seek their advice concerning the future of ACL  . 
* This work is supported by the unfunded grant FSN-RND-HIN-82-57  . I wish to thank Alice , the Cheshire Puss , and Lewis Carroll for their help in the pre -paration of this paper  . 
' ~4 hatbrings you here ? " I asked with a grin.
Jane thought for a while and said : " Would you tell me  , please , which way Iought to take ACL in the future ?"" That depends a good deal on where you think it should go ~" I replied  . 
"I don't much care where , ", said Jane.
" Then it doesn't matter ~ c ~ way you take it , " I said after prolonged reflection . 
" so long as I take it somewhere , " Jane added as an explanation . 
" Oh , you are sure to do that , " said I , " if you only parse long enough . " Jane felt that this could not be denied , so just to be friendly she decided to ask another question : '" What sort of computational linguists live about here ? " " Well ~ in that direction lives Bonnie  , " I said waving my right paw and waving the other paw  , " and in that direction lives Barbara . Visit either you like : they're both mad . "" But I don't want to go among mad people , "
Jane remarked.
" Oh , you can't help that , " said I , " we'reallmad here . I'mmad . You'remad . "" How do you know I'm mad ? " said Jane . 
' ~ fou must be , " said I , " or you wouldn't have come here . " Janed idn't think that proved it at all . However , she went on : " And how do you know that you're mad ? " " Well  , to begin with , " said I , "Donis not mad . You grant that ?"" I suppose so , " said Jane . 
'" ~ ell , then , " I wenton , " Don is not mad and
Iamnot Don . Therefore , Iammad."
Jane didn't appear to be satisfied with this bit of catatonic logic  ( quite distinct from the monotonic logic )  . 
" I must go for a walk now and continue reflecting , "I said , as I left her , leaving my grin behind . 

