ONTHEPRESENT
Norman K . Sondheimer
Sperry Univac
Blue Bell , PA 19424 USA
The Association for Computational Linguistics is twenty years old  . We have much to be proud of : a fine journal , significant annual meetings , and a strong presence in the professional community  . 
Computational Linguistics , itself , has much to be proud of : influence in the research community  , courses in universities , research supporting over nment and industry , and attention in the popular press . 
Not to spoil the fun , but the same was true twenty years ago and the society and the field has had to go through some difficult times since then  . 
To be sure , much has changed . The ACL has over 1200 members . Computational Linguistics has many new facets and potential applications  . However to an outsider , we still appear to be a field with potential rather than one with achievement  . Why is that ? There are certainly many reasons . One is the attractiveness of our most abstract theories  . 
They are widely presented and receive the most scholarly attention  . The popular and technical press contributes by pub1~cizing our w ~\] der claims and broades thopes . ~ imilar \] y , the press oversells our current systems , leading more careful observers to wonder even about these  . 
Finally , mechanizing the understanding of natural language ~s very difficult  . We cannot hope to achieve many of our goals in the near future  . 
Making do with the technology now available is very frustrating  . All this contributes to we the members of the field gravitating to the orizing and small laboratory studies  . We are choosing to focus on the ? uture rather than the present  . 
There is a real danger in this state of affairs . The build up of public and institutional expectations without a corresponding emergence of useful systems will produce a counterreaction  . 
We have seen it before . To this day , machine translation research in the United States has not completely recovered  . There is more need than ever ~ there is more technology than before  , word processing and computer type setting have changed the price equation  , but it is stilS not considered wise to be associated with MT  . We cannot let this sort of reversal happentous again  . 
Fortunately , we need not.
We do have substantial achievements . Over the years , we have produced or bad influence on useful systems for information storage and retrieval  , speech understanding and generation , and document processing . Natural language interfaces to databases are just now reaching the market  . There are even limited but useful machine translation systems  . There is more that we all know can and will be done in these areas  . 
This will not be easy . We must accept the compromises forced on us by our limited technology  . We must accept the unglamorous work that needs to be done  . We must be careful in the way we present our work . 
It will not be all bad . There appear to be some attractive financia \] returns  . These are not to be ignored . In fact , it would probably dous all good if Computational Linguistics ~ a dafew million aires to its credit  . 
We must congratulate ourselves on twenty years of life  , but we must also work hard to carry off a ~ other twenty years  . I am sure we will . 

