MYTERM
Winfred P . Lehmann
Department of Linguistics
The University of Texas
Austin , Texas 78712
My term came at the time of the New York World Fair  . The Association , still of MT as well as CL , was trying to crash the club that shared profits from the annual meetings of AFIFS  . These were producing something over $20 , 000 , a sum which in those days would do more than pay a fraction of one's annual overhead on an NSF grant  . ACM of course was grabbing the bulk of this , but ? EEE wasn't doing badly , to Judge by the magnificence of its Journal . I attended the pow wows of the powers national and international  . In spite of our run-downheels , they treated me courteously . 
Among other actlvltfeswe Journeyed out for a preview of the World Fair exhibits  . 
IBM's massive show , with a que ~ tlon-answer demonstration as its highlight  , didn't absorb all that much attention from a group  , all of whom may have shaken the hand of Seymour Czay and pondered a this hill top  . Convention memories fade aftez so long a time . I remember best a conversation from a representative from Japan  . He expressed great wonder at all things and beings American  . The head of our computation center was at all tennis-buff  . When I gave my new friend the name his response was : " Oh the great  . . . ? " I still haven't reconciled the possible interpretations on his use of the adjective  . 
A couple of the more prominent members of the hardware crowd offered mearide back to town after our group had paid its respects to a few more pavilions of the Fair  . When we located their car it turned out to be an old four-door Buick  , barely hanging together . The back seat was clogged with computer parts , an overflow from the trunk ; Imade a bit of zoom for myself among the pirated splendors and llstened to the hopeful chatter on the wonders of the new wo ~ id  , hoping both the Buick and the absorbed drlvez would preserve me for it  . 
Thanks to a successful outcome of the zlde no doubt  , I received issues of the elegant IEEE Journal for a few years  . The Association didget a cut out of the AFIPS pot  , as I recall , but since it was distributed i ~ accordance with membership  , our 600 didn't stack up too well against the 20 , 000 of ACM . 
The rest of my year was more routine.

