NATURAL-LANGUAGE ACCESS TO DATA BASES--THEORETICAL /TECHNICALISSUES 
Robert C . Moore
Artificial Intelligence Center
SRI International , Menlo Park , CA 94025
IINTRODUCTION
Although there have been many experimental systems for natural language access to databases  , with some nowgoing into actual use , many problems in this are are main to be solved . The purpose of this panelis to put some of those problems before the conference  . The panel's motivation stems partly from the fact that  , too often in the past , discussion of natural language access to databases has focused  , at the expense of the underlying issues , on what particular systems can or cannot do . To avoid this , the discussions of the present panel will be organized around issues rather than systems  . 
Below are descriptions of five problem areas that seem to me not to be adequately handled by any existing system I know of  . The pane lists have been asked to discuss in their position papers as many of these problems as space allows  , and have been invited to propose and discuss one issue of their own choosing  . 
IIQUANTITY QUESTIONS
Database query languages typically provide some means for counting and totaling that must be invoked for answering " how much " or " how many " questions  . The mapping between a natural language question and the corresponding database query  , however , can differ dramatically according to the way the database is organized  . For instance , if DEPART MENT is a field in the EMPLOYEE file , the database query for " How many employees are in the sales department ? " will presumably count the number of records in the EMPLOYEE file that have the appropriate value for the DEPARTMENT field  . 
On the other hand , if the required information is stored in a NUMBER -OF-EMPLOYEES field in a DEPART MENT file  , the database query will merely return the value of this field from the sales department record  . Yet a third case will arise if departments are broken down into  , say , offices , and the number of exployees in each office is recorded  . Then the database query will have to total the values of the NUMBER-OF-EMPLOYEES field in all the records for offices in the sales department  . In each case , the English question is the same , but the required database query is radically different  . Is there some unified framework that will encompass all these cases ? Is this a special case of a more general phenomenon ? 
IIITIME AND TENSE
This is a notorious black hole for both theoretical and computational linguistics  , but , since many databases are fundamentally historical in character  , it cannot really be circumvented . 
There are many problems in this general area , but the one I would suggest is how to handle , within a common framework , both concepts defined with respect to points in time and concepts defined with respect to intervals  . The location of an object is defined relative to a point  ; it makes sense to ask " Where was the Kennedy at 1800 hours on July I , 19807" The distance an object has traveled , however , is defined solely over an interval ; it does not make sense to ask " How fardid the Kennedysallat  1800 hours on July I , 19807 " Or , to turn things around , " How fard id the Kennedy sell during July 1982?" has only a single answer ( for the entire interval ) -- but " Where was the Kennedy during July 1982?" may have many different answers ( in the extreme case , one for each point in the interval ) . Must these queries be treated as two completely distinct types  , or is there a unifying framework for them ? If they are treated separately  , how can a system recognize which treatment is appropriate ? The fact that any interval contains an infinite number of points creates a special problem for the representation of temporal information in databases  . Typically , information about atlme-varying attribute such as location is stored as samples or snapshots  . We might know the position of a ship once every hour  , but obviously wec-~-~k have a record in an extensional database for every point in time  . How then are we to handle questions about specific points in time not stored in the database  , or questions that quantify over periods of time ?   ( E . g . , " Has the Kennedy ever been to Naples ?" ) Interpolation naturally suggests itself , but is it really appropriate in all cases ? Normally  , most of the inputs to a system for nat ~ ral -language access to databases will be questions  . Their semantic interpretation , however , is not yet completely understood . In particular , quantlflers in questions can cause special problems  . In speech act theory , it is generally assumed that a question can be analyzed as a having a propositional content  , which is a description , and an illocutionary force , which is a request to enumerate the entities that satisfy the description  . Questions such as " Who manages each department ? " resist this simple analysis  , however . If " each " is to be analyzed as a universal quantifier  ( as in " Does each department have a manager ?" )  , then its scope , in some sense , must be wider than that of the indicator of the sentence'sillo cutlonary force  . That is , what the question actually means is " For each department  , who manages the department ? " If we to try to force the quantifier to be part of the description of the entities to be enumerated  , we seem to be asking for a single manager who manages every department--i  . e . , " Who is the manager such that he manages each department ? " The main issues are : What would be a suitable representation for the meaning of this sort of question  , and what would be the formal semantics of that representation ? VQUERYING SEMANTICALLY COMPLEX FIELDS Natural-language query systems usually assume that the concepts represented by database fields will always be expressed in English by single words or fixed phrases  . Frequently , though , a database field will have a complex interpretation that can be interrogated in many different ways  . 
For example , suppose a college admissions office wants to record which applicants are children of alumni  . This might be indicated in the database record for each applicant by a CHILD-OF-ALUMNUS field with the possible values T or F  . If this field were queried by asking " Is John Jones a child of an alumnus ? " then " child of of an alumnus " could be treated as if it were a fixed phrase expressing a primitive predicate  . The difficulty is that the user of the system might Just as well ask " Is one of John Jones's parents an alumnus ? " or " Did either parent of John Jones attend the college ?" Can anything be done to handle cases llke this  , short of treating an entire question as a fixed form ? All the foregoing examples involve questions that can be answered by querying a single file  . 
In a multifile database , of course , questions will often arise that require information from more than one file  , which raises the issue of how to combine the information from the various files involved  . In database terms , this often comes down to forming the " Join " of two files  , which requires deciding what fields to compute the Join over  . In the LADDER system developed at SRI , as well as in a number of other systems , it was assumed that for any two files there is at most a single pair of fields that is the " natural " pair of fields to Join  . For instance , in a SHIP file there may be a CLASS field containing the name of the class to which as hip belongs  . Since all ships in the same class are of the same design  , attributes such as length , draft , speed , etc . , may be stored in a CLASS file , rather than being given separately for each ship . If the system knows that the natural Join between the two files is from the CLASS field of the SHIP file to the CLASSNAME field of the CLASS file  , it Can retrieve the length of a particularship by computing this join  . 
The scheme breaks down , however , when there is more than one natural Join between two files  , as would be the case if there were a PORT file and fields for homeport  , departure port , and destination port in the SHIP file . This is sometimes called the " multlpath problem . " Is there is a solution to this problem in the general case ? If not  , what is the range of special cases that one can reasonably expect to handle ? 
