ONTHELINGUISTICCHAR ACTEROFNON-STANDARDINPUT
Anthony S . Kroch and Donald Hindle
Department of Linguistics
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , PA 19104 USA

If natural language understanding systems are ever to cope with the full range of English language forms  , their designers will have to incorporate a number of features of the spoken vernacular language  . This communication discusses such features as nonstandard grammatical rules  , hesitations and false starts due to self -correction  , systematic errors due to mismatches between the grammar and sentence generator  , and uncorrected true errors . 
There are many ways in which the input to a natural language system can be nonstandard without being uninterpretable ~ Most obviously  , such input can be the wellformed output of a grammar other than the standard language grammar with which the interpreter is likely to be equipped  . This difference of grammar is presumably what we notice in language that we call " nonstandard " in everyday life  . Obviously , at least from the perspective of a linguist , it is wrong to think of this difference as being due to errors made by the nonstandard language user  ; it is simply a dialect difference . 
Secondly , the nonstandard input can contain hesitations and self-correct lons which make the string uninterpretable unless some parts of it are edited out  . This is the normal state of affairs in spoken language so that any system designed to understand spoken communication  , even at a rudimentary level must be able to edit its input as well as interpret it  . Thirdly , the input may be ungrammatical even by the rules of the grammar of the speaker but be the expected output of the speaker's sentence generating device  . This case has not been much discussed , but it is important because in certain environments speakers  ( and to some extent unskilled writers ) regularly produce ungrammmatical output in preference to grammatically unimpeachable alternatives  . Finally , the inputt ~ at the system receives may simply contain uncorrected errors  . How important this last source of nonstandard input would be in a functioning system is hard to judge and would * The discussion in this paper is based an ongoing study of the syntactic differences between written and of spoken language funded by the National Institute of Education under grants 
G78-0169 and G80-0163.
depend on the environment of use . Uncorrected errors are , in our experience , reasonably rare influent speech but they are more common in unskilled writing  . These errors may be typographical , a case we shall ignore in this discussion , or they may be grammatical . Of most interest to us are the cases where the error is due to a language user attempting to use a standard language construction that he/she does not natively command  . 
In the course of this brief communication we shall discuss each of the above cases with examples  , drawing on work we have done describing the differences between the syntax of vernacular speech and of standard writing  ( Kroch and Nindle ,  1981) . Our work indicates that these differences are sizable enough to cause problems for the acquisition of writing as a skill  , and they may arise ' as well when natural language understanding systems come to be used by a wider public  . Whether problems will indeed arise is , of course , hard to say as it depends on so many factors . The most important of these is whether natural language systems are ever used with oral  , as well as typed-in , language . We do not know whether the features of speech that we will be outlining will also show up in " keyboard " language  ; for its special characteristics have been little studied from a linguistic point of view  ( for a recent attempt see Thompson 1980 )  . They will certainly occur more sporadically and at a lower incidence than they do in speech  ; and there may be new features of " keyboard " language that are not predictable from other language modes  . We shall have little to say about how the problem of nonstandard input can be best handled in a working system  ; for solving that problem will require more research  . If we can give researchers working on natural language systems a clearer idea of what their devices are likely to have to cope within an environment of widespread public use  , our remarks will have achieved their purpose . 
Informal . generally spoken , English exists in a number of regional , class and ethnic varieties , each with its own grammatical peculiarities . 
Fortunately , the syntax of these dialects is somewhat less varied than the phonology so that we may reasonably approximate the situation by speaking of a general " nonstandard vernacular  ( NV ) " , which contrasts in numerous ways with standard written English  ( SWE )  . Some of the differences between the two dialects can lead to problems for parsing and interpretation  . Thus , SWE , is variable in NV . In fact , in some environments subject verb agreement is rarely indicated in NV  , the most notable being sentences with dummy there subjects  . Thus , the first of the sentences in ( i ) is the more likely in NV while , of course , only the second can occur in SWE : ( I ) a . There was two girls on the sofa . 
b . There were two girls on thes of a.
Since singular number is the unmarked alternative , it occurs with both singular and plural subjects ; hence only plural marking on a verb can be treated as a clear signal of number in NV  . This could easily prove a problem for parsers that use number marking to help find subject verb pairs  . A further , perhaps more difficult , problem would be posed by another feature of NV , the deletion of relative clause ? omplementizers on subject relatives  . SWE does not allow sentences like those in (2) ; but they are the most likely form in many varieties of NV and occur quite freely in the speech of people whose speech is otherwise standard :  ( 2 ) a . Anybody says it is a liar . 
b . There was a car used to drive by here.
Here a parser that assumes that the first tensed verb following an NP that agrees with it is the main verb  , will be misled . There are severe constraints on the environments in which subject relatives can appear without a complementizer  , apparently to prevent hearers from " garden -pathing " on this construction  , but these restrictions are not statable in a purely structural way  . A final example of a NV construction which differs from what SWE allows is the use of it for expletive there  , as in ( 3 ) : - -  ( 3  ) It was somebody standing on the corner , This construction is categorical in black English  , but it occurs with considerable frequency in the speech of whites as well  , at least in Philadelphia , the only location on which we have data . This last example poses no problems in principle for a natural language system  ; it is simply a grammatical fact of NV that has to be incorporated into the grammar implemented by the natural language understanding system  . There are many features like this , each trivial in itself but nonetheless a productive feature of the language  . 
Hesitations and false starts are a consistent feature of spoken language and any interpreter that-cannot handle them will fail instantly  . In one count we found that 52% of the sentences in a 90 minute conversational interview contained at least one instance  ( Hindle , i 981b ) . Fortunately , the deformation of grammaticality caused by self -correction induced disfluency is quite limited and predictable  ( Labov ,  1966) . With a small set of editing rules , therefore , we have been able to normalize more than 95% of such disfluencies in preprocessing texts for input to a parser for spoken language that we have been constructing  ( Hindle , 1981b ) . These rules are based on the fact that false starts in speech are phonetically signaled  , often by truncation of the final syllable . Marking the truncation and other phonetic editing signals in our transcripts  , we find that a simple procedure which removes the minimum number of words necessary to create a parsable sequence eliminates most ill-formedness  . 
The spoken language contains as a normal part of its syntactic repertoire constructions like those illustrated below :  ( 4 ) The problem is is that no body understands me . 
(5) That's the only thing he does is fight.
(6 ) John was the only guest who we were n't sure whether he would come  . 
(7) Didn't have to worry about us.
These are constructions that it is difficult to accomodate in a linguistically motivated syntax for obvious reasons  . Sentence (4) has two tensed verbs ; (5) , which has been called a " portmanteau construction "  , has a constituent belonging simultaneously to two different sentences  ;   ( 6 ) has a wh-movement construction with no trace ( see the discussion in Kroch ,  1981) ; and ( 7 ) violates the absolute grammatical requirement that English sentences have surface subjects  . We do not know why these forms occurs oregularly in speech  , but we do know that they are extremely common . The reasons undoubtedly vary from construction to construction  . Thus ,   ( 5 ) has the effect of removing a heavy NP from surface subject position while preserving its semantic role as subject  . Since we know that heavy NPs in subject position are greatly disfavored in speech  ( Kroch and Hindle ,  1981) , the portmanteau construction is almost certainly performing a useful function in simplifying syntactic processing or the presentation of information  . Similarly , relative clauses with resumptlve pronouns , like the one in (6) , seem to reflect limitations on the sentence planning mechanism used in speech  . If a relative clause is begun without computing its complete syntactic analysis  , as a procedure like the one in MacDonald used to fill a gap that turned out to occur in a non -deletable position  . This account explains why resumptlve pronouns do not occur in writing  . They are ungrammatical and the real-tlme constraints on sentence planning that cause speech to be produced on the basis of limited lookahead are absent  . 
Subject deletion , illustrated in (7) , is clearly a case of ellipsis induced in speech for reasons of economyllke contraction and clltlcizatlon  . 
However , English grammar does not allow subjectless tensed clauses  . In fact , it is this prohibition that explains the existence of expletive it in English  , a feature completely absent from lang~ges with subJectless sentences  . Of course , subject deletion in speech is highly constrained and its occurrence can be accommodated in a parser without completely rewriting the grammar of English  , and we have done so . The point here , as with all these examples , is that close study of the syntax of speech repays the effort with improvements in coverage  . 
The final sort of nonstandard input that we will mention is the uncorrected true error  . In our analysis of 40 or more hours of spoken interview material we have found true errors to be rare  . 
They generally occur when people express complex ideas that they have not talked about before and they involve changing direction in the middle of a sentence  . An example of this sort of mistake is given in ( 8 )  , where the object of a prepositional phrase turns into the subject of a following clause :  ( 8 ) When I was able to understand the explanation of the moves of the chessmen started to make sense tome  , he became interested . 
Large parts of sentences with errors llke this are parsable  , but the whole may not make sense . 
Clearly , a natural language system should be able to make whatever sense can be made out of such strings even if it cannot construct an overall structure for them  . Having done as well as it can , the system must then rely on context , just as a human interlocutor would . Unlike vernacular speech , the writing of unskilled writers quite commonly displays errors  . One case , which we have studied in detail is that of errors in relative clauses with " pied-plped " prepositional phrases  . 
We often find clauses like the ones in (9) , where the wrong preposition ( usually in ) appears at the beginning of the clause . 
(9) a . methods in which to communicate with other people b  . rules in which people can direct their efforts Since pied-plped relatives are nonexistent in NV  , the simplest explanation for such examples is that they are errors due to imperfect learning of the standard language rule  . More precisely , instead of moving a wh-prepositional phrase to the complementlzer position in the relative clause  , unskilled writers may analyze the phrase in which as a general oblique relativize requivalent to where  , the form most commonly used in this function in informal speech  . 
In summary , ordinary linguistic usage exhibits numerous deviations from the standard written language  . The sources of these deviations are diverse and they are of varying significance for natural language processing  . It is safe to say , however , that an accurate assessment of their nature , frequency and effect on interpretability is a necessary prerequisite to the development of truly robust systems  . 

Hindle , Donald . " Near-sentences in spoken English . " Paper presented at NWAVEX , 1981 a . 
Hindle , Donald . " The syntax of self-correct lon . "Paper presented at the Linguistic Society of
America annual meeting , 1981b.
Kroch , Anthony . " On the role of resumptive pronouns in amnestying island constraint violations  . " in CLS #17, 1981 . 
Kroch , Anthony and Donald Hindle . ~ quantitative stud Z of the syntax of speech and writin $  . 
Final report to the National Institute of
Education on grant #78-0169, 1981.
Labor , William . " On the grammatl callty of everyday speech . " unpublished manuscript , 1966 . 
MacDonald , David " Natural language production as a process of decision making under constraint  . " draft of an MIT Artifical Intelligence Lab technical report  ,  1980 , Thompson , Bozena H . " A linguistic analysis of natural language communication with computers  . " in Proceeding so_f the eishth international conference on computation all lnsulstics  . Tokyo , 1980 . 

