REFLECTIONSON20 YEARS OF THE ACL
ANINTRODUCTION
Donald E . Walker
Artificial In~elligence Center
SRI International
Menlo Park , California 94025, USA
Our society was founded on 13 June 1962 as the Association for Machine Translation and Computational Linguistics  . Consequently , this 1982 Annual Meeting represents our 20th anniversary . We did , Of course , change our name to the Association for Computational Linguistics in  1968  , but that did not affect the continuity of the organization  . The date of this panel , 17 June , misses the real anniversary by four days , but no matter ; the occasion still allows us to reflect on where we have been and where we are going  . I seem to be sensitive to opportunities for celebrations  . In looking throughmy AMTCL/ACL correspondence over the years  , I came across a copy of a memosent to Bob Simmons and Hood Roberts during our l Oth anniversary year  , recommending that something in commemoration might be appropriate  . I cannot identify anything in the program of that meeting or in my notes about it that suggests they took meseriously then  , but that reflects the critical difference between volunteering a recommendation and Just plain volunteerlngl My invitation to participate in this panel was sent out to the presidents of the Association  , who were , in order , VicYngve , Dave Hays , Win Lehmann , Paul Garvin , Susumo Kuno , ( If it here in the sequence ) , Martin Kay , Warren Plath , Joyce Friedman , Bob Simmons , Bob Barnes , Bill Woods , Aravind Joshi , Stan Petrick , Paul Chapin , Jon Allen , Ron Kaplan , Bonnie Webber , Norm Sond heimer , and Jane Robinson , and tomy predecessor as Secretary-Treasurer , Hood Roberts . Harry Josselson , our first Secretary-Treasurer , is no longer among us , but he would have enjoyed such a gathering , being one force remony and celebration . 
Vic , Dave , Martin , Warren , Joyce , Bob
Simmons , Bill , Aravind , Stan , Paul , Jon , Ron , Bonnie , and Normagreed to Join me on the panel . 
Jane refused on the grounds that she was not yet part of history and that her Presidential Address provided ample platform to convey her reflections  . 
Win , Paul , Susumo , and Bob Barnes were not able to come , and Hood was still waffling when this piece was being written  . Vic , Dave , Win , Bob Simmons , Aravind , Paul , Jon , Norm , and I have written down some of our reflections ; they appear on the following pages . 
My charge to the pane lists , with respect to both oral and written tradition , was quite broad : " You are asked to reflect on significant experiences during your tenure of that office  , in particular as they reflect on the state of computational linguistics then and now  , and perhaps with some suggestions for what the future will bring  . " The written responses are varied , as you can see ; I am sure that theoral responses will prove to be equally so  . 
To provide some perspective -- and record some history  , I am attaching a synopsis of " officers , editors , committees , meetings , and program chairing " ( please let me know about errors ! )  . It is interesting to note the names of people- -many of whom are still prominent in the field  , the practices associated with our annual meetings  , and our publication history . I will comment on the latter two . 
Our first meeting was held in conjunction with the  1963 ACM National Conference , but it is clear that our primary allegiance has been with the Linguistic Society of America  , since we mets even times in conjunction with its summer meetings  . For a period , we alternated between the LSA and the Spring Joint Computer Conference -- and actually included that schedule in our membership flyer  . We Joined with the American Society for Information Science twice  , and the Cognitive Science Society once . The convocation of the first International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , now known popularly as COLING , replaced our annual meeting in 1965 , and we are scheduled to host COLING-84 in two years . 
Recently , we have been meeting independently , reflecting an increased confidence in our ability to " make it on our own ! " The publication history of the Association has been equally varied  . The Finite String , our news letter , was published as a separate under the editorship of Hood Roberts from  1964 through 1973  , and has continued in various forms ever since . In 1965 , the Association adopted MT : Mechanical Translation  , a Journal founded by VicYngve in 1954 , changing its name to Mechanical Translation and Computational Linguistics in the process  . 
However , that Journal was not able to sustain a sufficient flow of manuscripts  , and the last issue , dated 1968 , was published in 1970 . After a lengthy exploration of an alternative primary Journal  , Dave Hays brought the American Journal of Computational Linguistics into being in  1974  . Hi-asintention had been to create a printed Journal that contained extended abstracts  , supplemented by microfiches that provided details  , programs , and computer listings . This proposal was submitted to the National Science Foundation for support  . A grant was approved , but it stipulated that we publish a microfiche -only Journal  , and we did that until 1978 , The FiniteString being issued as a separate microfiche during this period  . It became increasingly clear during the five microfiche years that the micropublishing industry was not going to develop as predicted in the early  1970s  . 

Microfic hereaders that were both inexpensive and convenient had not materialized  , and our members were reluctant to commit their manuscripts to a medium that restricted readership to a dedicated few  . Consequently , George Heldorn set about converting the AJCL to a printed Journal  , the first issue of which appeared in 1980 . Respectful of its micro formal origins , it is distributed with a microfiche that duplicates the printed version but sometimes contains additional material  . The FiniteStrin ~ News letter continues to provide general information of interest to the membership as a special section  . 
To complete our publl catlon history , I can an nounce a new venture that the Association is Just beginning  , Studies in Natural Language Process ln ~ , a monograph series under the Editorship of Aravlnd Joshl  . It was prompted by Norm Sond heimer and brought into being through the organizatlonal efforts of Paul Chapln  . We are Just completing negotiations with Cambridge University Press  , which will publish it for us . 
So much for general history , I will reservemy proper place downthellne for other kinds of commentary  . 
ASSOCIATION FOR MACHINE TRANS LATION AND
COMPUTATION ALLINGUISTICS ( founded 6-13-1962 ) ASSOCIATION FOR COMPUTATION ALLING UISTICS ( renamed 7-24-1968 ) Officers , Editors , Committees , Meetings , and Program Chairing
Program Chair
Vice-President Hays
Set-Treasurer Jossels on
Executive Rhodes
Committee Garvin
Members Lehmann
Editor ( F8) Roberts
Editor ( MTCL )
Nominating See
Committee Oettlnger
Members Lamb
Annual Meeting Denver 8/25-26 ( ACM)











Bloomington 7/29-30 ( LSA)
Chafe 1965 1966
President Lehmann Garvin
Vice-President Garvin Oettinger
Set-Treasurer Jossels on Jossels on
Executive Sebeok Sebeok
Committee Hockett Hockett
Members Kuno Prender graft
Editor ( FS ) Roberts Roberts ~ ditor ( MTCL ) Yngve Yngve
Nominating Yngve Yngve
Committee Rays Rays
Members Lamb Lieberman
Annual Meeting New York Los Angeles 5/19-21 fiICCL 7/26-27   ( LSA ) 
Program Chair Pendergraft Kay 1967 1968
President Kuno Walker
Vice-President Walker Mersel
See-Treasurer Jossels on Jossels on
Executive Satterthwalt Satterthwalt
Committee Hockett From kln
Members Pender graft Pender graft
Editor ( FS ) Roberts Roberts
Editor ( MTCL ) Yngve Yngve
Assoc Editor Chapln
Nominating Garvin Garvin
Committee Hays Kuno
Members Lieberman Lieberman
Annual Meeting Atlantic City Urbana 4/21 ( SJCC )  7/24-25  ( LSA ) 
Program Chair Walker Petrlck
Vice-Presldent Plath
Set-Treasurer Jossels on
Executive Satterthwalt
Committee From kln
Members Montgomery
Editor ( FS ) Roberts
Editor ( MTCL ) Yngve
Assoc Editor Chapin
Nominating Garvin
Committee Kuno
Members Walker
Annual Meeting Boston 5113 ( sJcc)
Program Chair Fraser











Columbus 7/22-23 ( LSA)
Wall 1971 1972
President Friedman Simmons
Vice-Pres Simmons From kin
Sec-Treas Jossels on Roberts
Executive Wall Wall
Committee Robinson Robinson
Members Montgomery Chapln
Editor ( FS ) Roberts Roberts
Nominating Kay Kay
Committee Plath Plath
Members Walker Friedman
Annual Meeting Atlantic City Chapel Hill 5/17 ( SJCC )  7/26-27  ( LSA ) 
Program Chair Barnes Schank
Program Chair
Vice-President Woods
Set-Treasurer Roberts
Executive Martins
Committee Robinson
Members Chapin
Editor ( FS ) Roberts
Editor ( AJCL)
Nominating Simmons
Committee Plath
Members Friedman
Annual Meeting Ann Arbor 8/1-2 ( LSA)










Amherst 7/26-27 ( LSA)

President Joshi Petrick
Vice-Preaident Petrick Grimes
Sec-Treasurer Roberts Roberts/Walker
Executive Martins Diller
Committee Rieger Rieger
Members Nash-Webber Nash-Webber
Editor ( AJCL ) Hays Hays
Nominating Simmons Joshl
Committee Barnes Barnes
Members Woods Woods
Annual Meeting Boston San Francisco 10/30-11/I ( ASIS ) 5/IO ( ASIS ) 
Program Chair Diller Chapin 1977 1978
President Ch'ap in Allen
Vice-President Allen Kaplan
Sec-Treasurer Walker Walker
Executive Diller Diller
Committee Hobbs Hobbs
Members Nash-Webber Bruce
Editor ( AJCL ) Hays Hays
Assoc Editor Heldorn Heidorn
Nominating Joshi Joshi
Committee Petrick Petrick
Members Woods Chapin
Annual Meeting Georgetown Urbana 3/16-17 ( RTLL ) 7/25-27 = TNLP
Program Chair Allen Waltz 1979 1980
President Kaplan Webber
Vice-President Webber Sond heimer
Sec-Treasurer Walker Walker
Executive Rosenschein Rosenschein
Committee Hobbs Lehnert
Members Bruce Bruce
Editor ( AJCL ) Heidorn Heldorn
Assoc Editor McCord
Nominating Allen Allen
Committee Petrlck Kaplan
Members Chapln Chapln
Annual Meeting La Jolla Philadelphia 8/11-12 ( CSS )  6/19-22
Program Chair Sondheimer Hendrix 1981 1982
President Sondheimer Robinson
Vice-President Robinson Perrault
Sec-Treasurer Walker Walker
Executive Rosenschein Karttunen
Committee Lehnert Lehnert
Members Mann Mann
Editor ( AJCL ) Heldorn Petrick/Damerau
Assoc Editor McCord McCord
Editor ( SNLP ) Joshi
Nominating Allen Sondhelmer
Committee Kaplan Kaplan
Members Webber Webber
Annual Meeting Stanford Toronto 6/29-7/16/16-18 ~
Program Chair Perrault Bates






Editor ( AJCL)
Assoc Editor
Editor ( SNLP )



Annual Meeting
Program Chair 1983 1984




Sondheimer Sondheimer
Webber "
Cambridge Stanford
June July = COLING-84
SOMEABBREVIATIONS

FS=The Finite String (1964-present)
MTCL = Machine Translation and Computational
Linguistics (1965-1968)
AJCL = American Journal of Computational
Linguistics (1974-present)
SNLP=Studies in Natural Language Process in ~ ( Cambridge University Press Monograph
Series , 1982-1987)
Other organizations in conjunction ( ) with which our meeting was held or which coopted = our meeting: 








COLING = Association for Computing Machinery = Linguistic Society of America-International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics ( now called COLING ) m Spring Joint Computer Conference ( now called National Computer Conference ) -American Society for Information Science- Georgetown Round Table on Languages and 
Linguistics m Theoretical Issues on Natural Language 
P rocessing-2 = Cognitive Science Society-International Conference on Computational 

