ACLIN 1977
Paul G . Chapin
National Science Foundation
1800 GSt.NW
Washington , D . C . 20550
As I leaf through my own " ACL ( Historical ) " file ( which , I am frightened to observe , goes back to the Fourth Annual Meeting , in 1966) , and focus in particular on 1977 , when I was President , it strikes me that pretty much everything significant that happened in the Association that year was the work of other people  . DonWalker was completing the mammoth task of transferring all of the ACL's records from the East Coast to the West  , paying of four indebtedness to the Center for Applied Linguistics  , and in general getting the Association onto the firm financial and organizational footing which it has enjoyed to this day  . Dave Hays was seeing to it that the microfiche journal kept on coming  , and George Heldorn Joined him as Associate Editor that year to begin the move toward hard copy publication  . That was the year when we hitched up our organizational pants and moved our Annual Meeting back to the Spring  , after some years when it had been in the Fall . Jonathan Allen and his Program Committee coped admirably with the challenge of putting on an Annual Meeting program less than six months after the last one  . 
The culinary staff at the Foundry Restaurant in Georgetown provided a banquet that I still remember as delicious  . 
AFIPS weighed in in a less constructive fashion with their demand that ween roll a membership of  1500 by a certain time ( 1982 , I think ) to retain our status as fullfledged members , which would require tripling our membership ( may be we'll make it yet--who knows ? )  . They were also responsible for one of the non -events of the decade  , the abortive founding of a bacus , which was to be the Scientific American of computing  . We pledged $5 , 000 to the start up costs on that , payable on request , but they never got far enough to make the request . 
What of the field ? The program for the 1977 Annual Meeting shows names which are mostly still familiar to all of us  , speaking on topics which would not be out of place at the  1982 Annual Meeting . I take this as a sign not of stagnation , but of per severing people working on problems of enormous complexity  . 
One event of 1977 may end up having more impact on our field than anything the ACL did that year  . That was the year that the Sloan Foundation made the first grants in its Particular Program in Cognitive Science  . It will be a long time before we know all of the results of the ferment that Program created  , but it is already abundantly clear that one result has been a massive increase in the interested attention of theoretical linguists to computational linguistics  . This is going to be beneficial to both fields , but especially so , I think to computational linguistics , by keeping our attention fixed on problems far larger than making the program work  . 

