ASOCIETYINTRANSITION
Donald E . Walker
Artificial Intelligence Center
SRI International
Menlo Park , California 94025, USA
I was President in 1968 , the year during which the Association for Machine Translation and Computational Linguistics became the Association for Computational Linguistics  . Names always create controversy , and the founding name , selected in 1962 , was chosen in competition with others , not the least of which was the one that subsequently replaced it  . In fact , a change of name to the Association for Computational Linguistics was actually approved in  1963  , at what has been described as an " unofficial meeting  . " However , that action was subsequently ruled out of order , since it did not result from a constitutional amendment  . Five years later , proper procedure having been followed , the change was made officially . 
The organization alimpetus for the establishment of the Association did came primarily from a group of people who had been working on machine translation  . However , as in most scientific societies , there has always been -- and probably always will be--atension between research and applicatlons  . The primary motivation for the name change in 1968 was the recognition , shared but by no means universal , that we needed to address more basic issues first  . The report on Language and Machines : Computers in Translation 
Linguistics by the Automatic Language
Processing Advisory Committee ( ALPAC ) in 1966 became a focal point for this controversy . It was viewed by translation specialists as an attack on their work  , and it certainly resulted in dramatic reductions in funding for machine translation  . 
However , its authors claim it was intended as an argument for increased support of research  . 
Certainly , the lead article in the October-November 1966 issue of The Finite String , which was titled " Potential Bright for Language -Analysis by Computer  ; NRC Report Urges Support , " presented that view . In any case , the argument that computational linguistics " should be supported as a science and should not be Judged by any immediate or for eseeable contributions to practical translation " seemed to frighten rather than challenge the funding agencies in the immediately following years  . 
Another factor motivating the change of name in 1968 was the appreciation of the potential for the use of computational linguistics in information retrieval and in stylistic analysis  . 
~ . ~nanical translation was only one of a number of exciting application areas  . During that year , I spent a substantial amount of time coordinating with the Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval  ( SIGIR ) and the Special Interest Committee on Language Analysis and Studies in the Humanities  ( SICLASH )  , both of the Association for Computing Machinery , and with the Special Interest Group on Automated Language Processing  ( SlGALP ) of the American Society for Information Science . 
There were also meetings with the Linguistic Society of America  , the Modern Language Association , and the Center for Applied Linguistics . In addition , during the year , ACL became a constituent society of the American Federation of Information Processing Societies  ( AFIPS )  , of which it had been first an unofficial and then an official " observer " since  1964  . I was the first ACL member of the Board of Directors  , and I became actively involved in a number of its committees  , most particularly the one on Information Systems . I also became the ACL representative to the newly formed International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence and  , subsequently , Program Chairman of its first meeting in 1969 . 
These organizational relationships , coupled with my own tendency toward global perspectives  , led me to view the ACL as a central point around which everything elserevolved  . In computational linguistics , there are aspects of science , engineering , the humanities , the social and behavioral sciences , education , and communications . I contemplated the time when , in addition to being members of AFIPS , our Association would be equally implicated in the American Association for the Advancement of Science  , the American Council of Learned Societies , and the Social Science Research Council . And I only regretted that at that time there were no aggregate groups for education  , and communications to round out the picture . 
This " message " was the substance of my
Presidential address . I tried to leaven it with a little humor to make it more palatable  , but I remember the banquet which preceded it ( prepared by the University of lllinois 1111ni Union ) as the most horrible meal the ACL has ever had to confront  . I am sure that the failure of the members attendant to rally to my cause and carry my message to the multitudes  ( or even to Garcia ) was due in no small measure to the poor quality of the food  . 
But let me return briefly to name changes and to the tension between research and applications  . 
During our discussions about the forthcoming Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , which the ACL will be cosponsoring with the Naval Research Laboratory  , 13 February 1983 , in Santa Applied Computational Linguistics . " However , it became clear that we could not expect to have as broadly based a meeting as we wanted with that name  . It is important now to reach out to the larger community  . Once we have them listening to us , it will be all right for them to find out that they have been " practicing computational linguistics all their  ( professional ) lives ! " Fascinated as I am about the applicability of computational linguistics for its own sake  , what I find most exciting is the value that the use of our systems will have for deepening our insights into the basic research issues that still faceus  . 
I believe that studying people " organizing and using information " on the kinds of systems we are now beginning to develop can revolutlonlze our understanding of what we do and do not know about computational linguistics  , as well as guide the improvement of our systems more effectively  ( Walker ,  1971 ,  1972 , in press ) . 
Walker , DE . " The Organization and Use of Information : Contributions of Information Science  , Computational Linguistics and Artificial Intelligence  . Journal of the American Society for Information Science  1981  ,  32:347-363 . 
Walker , D . " Natural-Language-Access Systems and the Organization and Use of Information  . " In
COLING82: Proceedings of the Ninth
International Conference on Computatlonal Linguistlcs  . North-Holland Publishlng Company,
Amsterdam , Netherlands , 1982.
Walker , DE . " Computational Strategies for
Analyzing the Organization and Use of
Information . "In Knowledge Structure and Use : Perspective so_ ~ n Synthesis and Interpretation  . 
Edited by SWard and L Reed . National
Institute of Education , Washington , D . C . , in cooperation with CEMREL , Inc . , St . Louis,
Missouri ( in press).

Automatic Language Processlng Advisory Cor.m/ttee.
Languages and Machines : Computers in n
Translatlon and Linguistics ? National Academy of Sciences  , National Research Council , Publl cat lon 14 16 , Washington , D . C . , 1966 . 

