DEPENDENCIES OF DISCOURSEST RUCTUREON THE MODALITY 
OFCCI~4t ~ ICATION : TELE PHONE vs . TELE TYPE
Philip R . Cohen
Dept . of Computer Science
Oregon State University
Corvallis , OR 97331
Scott Fertig
Bolt , Beranek and Newman , Inc.
Cambridge , MA 02239
Kathy Starr
Bolt , Beranek and Newman , Inc.
Cambridge , MA 02239

A desirable long-range goal in building future speech understanding systems would be to accept the kind of language people spontaneously produce  . We show that people do not speak to one another in the same way they converse in type written language  . Spoken language is finer-grained and more indirect  . The differences are striking and pervasive . Current techniques for engaging in type written dialogue will need to be extended to accomodate the structure of spoken language  . 
I . INTRODUCTION
If a machine could listen , how would we talk to it ? Tn is question will be hard to answer definitively until a good mechanical listener is developed  . As a next best approximation , this paper presents results of an exploration of how people talk to one another in a domain for which keyboard-based natural language dialogue systems would be desirable  , and have already been built ( Robinson et al , 1980; Winograd ,  1972) . 
Our observations are based on transcripts of person-to-person telephone-mediated and teletype -mediated dialogues  . In these transcripts , one specific kind of communicative act dominates spoken task-related discourse  , but is nearly absent from keyboard discourse . 
Importantly , when this act is performed vocally it is never performed directly  . Since most of the utterances in these simple dialogues do not signal the speaker's intent  , techniques for inferring intent will be crucial for engaging in spoken task-related discourse  . The paper suggests how a plan-based theory of communication  ( Cohen and Perrault , 1979; Perrault and Allen ,  1980 ) can uncover the intentions underlying the use of various forms  . 
This research was supported by the National
Institute of Education under contract
U S-NIE-C-400-76-0116 to the Center for the Study of Reading of the University of Illinois and Bolt  , 
Beranek and Newman , Inc.
II . THESTUDY
Motivated by Rubin's ( 1980 ) taxonomy of language experiences and influenced by Chapanis et al  . ' s(1972 ,  1977 ) and Grosz ' ( 1977 ) communication mode and task-oriented dialogue studies  , we conducted an exploratory study to investigate how the structure of instruction-giving discourse depends on the communication situation in which it takes place  . Twenty-five subjects ( " experts " ) each instructed a randomly chosen " apprentice " in assembling a toy water pump  . All subjects were paid volunteer students from the L hiversity of Illinois  . Five " dialogues " took place in each of the following modalities : face-to-face  , via telephone , teletype (" linked " CRT's ) , ( non-interactive ) audio tape , and ( non-interactive ) written . In all modes , the apprentices were videotaped as they followed the experts ' instructions  . Telephone and Teletype dialogues were analyzed first since results would have implications for the design of speech understanding and production systems  . 
Each expert participated in the experiment on two consecutive days  , the first for training and the second for instructing an apprentice  . 
Subjects playing the expert role w are trained by : following a set of assembly directions consisting entirely of imperatives  , assembling the pump as often as desired , and then in structing a research assistant . This practice session took place face-to-face . Experts knew the research assistant already knew how to assemble the pump  . Experts were given an initial statement of the purpose of the experiment  , which indicated that communication would take place in one of an ~ ber of different modes  , but were not informed of which modality they would communicate in until the next day  . 
In both modes , experts and apprentices were located in different rooms  . Experts had a set of pump parts that , they were told , were not to be assembled but could be manipulated  . In Telephone mode , experts communicated via a standard telephone and apprentices communicated through a speaker -phone  , which did not need to be held and which allowed simultaneous two-way communication  . 
Distortion of the expert's voice was apparent , but not measured . 
Subjects in " Teletype " ( TTY ) modetyped their co~mnunication on Elite Datamedia  1500 CRT network to a computer at Bolt , Beranek and Newman , Inc . The terminals were " linked " so that whatever was typed on one would appear on the other  . 
Simultaneous typing was possible and did occur ? Subjects were informed that their typing would not appear simultaneously on either terminal  . 
Response times averaged 1 to 2 seconds , with occasionally longer delays due to system load  . 
A . Sample Dialogue Fragments
The following are representative fragments of
Telephone and Teletype discourse.
A Telephone Fra~ent

J : " OK . Take that . Now there's a thing called a plunger . It has a red handle on it , agreen bottom , and it's got a blue lid . 

OK now , the small blue cap we talked about before ?
J : Yeah
S : Put that over the hole on the side of that tube-- 
J : Yeah
S : -- that is nearest to the top , or nearest to the red handle . 
J : OK
S : You got that on the hole ?
J : yeah
S : Ok . now . now , the smallest of the red pieces ?
J : OK "
A Teletype Dialogue Fragment





N : " fit the blue cap over the tube end done put the little black ring into the large blue cap with the hiole in it  . . . 
okput the pinkvalve on the twD pegs in that blue cap  . . . 

Communication in Telephone mode has a distinct pattern of " find the x " " put it into / onto/over they "  , in which reference and predication are addressed in different steps  . To relate these steps , more reliance is placed on strategies for signalling dialogue coherence  , such as the use of pronouns . Teletype communication involves primarily the use of imperatives such as " put the xIn to / onto / around they "  . Typically , the first time each object ( X ) is mentioned in a TrY discourse is within a request for a physical action  . 
B . A Methodolog : for Discourse Analysis This research aims to develop an adequate method for conducting discourse analysis that will be useful to the computational linguist  . The method used here integrates psychological , linguistic , and formal approaches in order to characterize language use  . Psychological methods are needed in setting up protocols that do not bias the interesting variables  . Linguistic methods are needed for developing a scheme for describing the progress of a discourse  . Finally , formal methods are essential for stating theories of utterance interpretation in context  . 
To be more specific , we are ultimately interested in similarities and differences in utterance processing across modes  , Utterance processing clearly depends on utterance form and the speaker's intent  . The utterances in the transcripts are therefore categorized by the intentions they are used to achieve  . Both utterances and categorizations become data for cross-modal measures as well as for formal methods  . Once intentions differing across modes are isolated  , our strategy is to then examine the utterance forms used to achieve those intentions  . 
Thus , utterance forms are not compared directly across modes  ; only utterances used to achieve the same goals are compared  , and it is those goals that are expected to vary across modes  . With form and function identified , one can then proceed to discuss how utterance processing may differ from one mode to another  . 
Our plan-based theory of speech acts will be used to explain how an utterance's intent coding can be derived from the utterance's form and the prior interaction  . A computational model of intent recognition in dialogue  ( Al~en , 1979; Cohen , 1979; Sidner et al ,  1981 ) can then be used to mimic the theory's assignment of intent  . Thus , the theory of speech act interpretation will describe language use in a fashion analogous to the way that a generative grammar describes how a particular deep structure can under lie a given surface structure  . 
C . Coding the Transcripts
The first stage of discourse analysis involved the coding of the conm ~ unicator's intent in making various utterances ? Since attributions of intent are hard to make reliably  , care was taken to avoid biasing the results . Following the experiences of S in clair and Coulthard  ( 1975 )  , Dote et al (1978) and Mann et al (1975) , a coding use . The coders relied both on written transcripts and on videotapes of the apprentices ' assembly  . 
The scheme , which was tested and revised on pilot data until reliability was attained  , included a set of approximately 20 " speech act " categories that w are used to label intent  , and a set of " operators " and propositions that were used to describe the assembly task  , as in ( Sacerdoti ,  1975) . The operators and propositions often served as the propositional content of the communicative acts  . In addition to the domain actions , pilot data led us to include an action of " physically identifying the referent of a description " as part of the scheme  ( Cohen ,  1981) . 
This action will be seen to be requested explicitly by Telephone experts  , but not by experts in Teletype mode . 
Of course , a coding scheme must not only capture the domain of discourse  , it must be tailored to the nature of discourse per se  . Many theorists have observed that a speaker can use antmber of utterances to achieve a goal  , and can use one utterance to achieve a number of goals  . 
Correspondingly , the coders could consider utterances as jointly achieving one intention  ( by " bracketing " them )  , could place an utterance in multiple categories , and could attribute more than one intention to the same utterance or utterance part  . 
It was discovered that the physical layout of a transcript  , particularly the location of line breaks , affected which utterances were coded . To ensure uniformity , each coder first divided each transcript into utterances that he or she would code  . These joint " bracketings " were compared by a third party to yield a base set of codable  ( sic ) utterance parts . The coders could later bracket utterances differently if necessary  . 
The first attempt to code the transcripts was overly ambitious -- coders could not keep  20 categories and their definitions in mind , even with a written coding manual for reference . Our scheme was then scaled back--only utterances fitting the following categories were considered : 
Requests-for-assembly-actions ( RAACT ) ( e . g . , " put that on the hole " . ) Requests-for-orientation-actions ( RORT ) ( e . g . , " the other way around " , " the top is the bottom " .  )
Requests-to-pick-up ( RPUP ) ( e . g . , " take the blue base " . )
Requests-for-identification ( RID ) ( e . g . , " there is a little yellow rubber " . ) piece o
Requests-for-other ( ROTH ) ( e . g . , requests for repetition , requests to stop , etc . )
Inform-completion ( action ) ( e . g . , " OK "," yeah ", " got it " . )
Label(e.g ., " that's a plunger ")
Interrater reliabilities for each category ( within each mode )  , measured as then unber of agreements X 2 divided by then tmber of times that category was coded  , w are high ( above 90%) . Since each disagreement counted twice ( against both categories that w are coded )  , agreements also counted twice . 
D . Analysisi : Frequency of Request types Since most of each dialogue consisted of the making of requests  , the first analysis examined the frequency of the various kinds of requests in the corpus of five transcripts for each modality  . 
Table I displays the findings.
TABLEI
Distribution of Requests
Telephone Teletype
Type IN ~ mber Percent ~. ACTI 7325%
RORTI 269%
ROT Hl 43 15%
RPUPI 45 16%
RIDIi 0135%
Ntm~erPercent 6951% ii 8% 1813% 2317% 1310%
Total : 288134
This table supports Chapanis et al's (1972 ,  1977 ) finding that voice modes were about " twice as word y " as non-voice modes  . Here , there are approximately twice as many requests in Telephone mode as Teletype  . Chapenis et al examined how linguistic behavior differed across modes in terms of measures of sentence length  , message length , ntm ~ ber of words , sentences , messages , etc . 
In contrast , the present study provides evidence of how these modes differ in utterance function  . Identification requests are much more frequent in Telephone dialogues than in Teletype conversations  . In fact , they constitute the largest category of requests -- fully  35%  . Since utterances in the RORT , RPUP , and ROTH categories will often be issued to clarify or follow upon a previous request  , it is not surprising they would increase in number  ( though not percentage ) with the increase in RID usage . Furthermore , it is sensible that there are about the same number of requests for assembly actions  ( and hence half the percentage ) in each mode since the same " assembly wDrk " is accomplished  . ~ t ~ ru for e , identification requests seem to be the primary request differentiating the two modalities  . 
E . Analysis 2: First time identifications
Frequency data are important for computational linguistics because they indicate the kinds of utterances a system may have to include mistakes  , dialogue repairs , and repetition . Perhaps identification requests occur primarily after referential misco~unication  ( as occurs for telety pedialogues ( Cohen ,  1981)) . One might then argue that people would speak more carefully to machines and thus would not need to use identification requests frequently  . 
Alternatively , the use of such requests as a step in a Telephone speaker's plan may truly be a strategy of engaging in spoken task-related discourse that is not found in TI~discourse  . 
To explore when identification requests were used , a second analysis of the utterance codings was undertaken that was limited to " first time " identifications  . Each time a novice ( rightly or wrongly ) first identified a piece , the communicative act that caused him/her to do so was indicated  . However , a coding was counted only if that speech act was not jointly present with another prior to the novice's part identification attempt  . Table II indicates the results for each subject in Telephone and Teletype modes  . 
TABLE II
Speech Acts just preceding novlces ' attempts . . . . tol-q-d-6ntifyl2pleces . 
Telephone Teletype
SUBJRIDR PUPRAACT 1   9   2   1   2   1   i0   1   3 ii 1   0   4   9   1   0   5   i0   0   0 
RIDR PUPRAACT 1   2   9   0   2   9   1   2   9   0   6   3   2   6   4 Subjects were classifed as habitual users of a communicative act if  , out of 12 pieces , the subject " introduced " at least 9 of the pieces with that act . In Telephone mode , four of five experts were habitual users of identification requests to get the apprentice to find a piece  . In Teletype mode , no experts were habitual users of that act . 
To show a " modality effect " in the use of the identification request strategy  , then tmber of habitual users of RID in each mode were subjected to the Fischer's exact probability test  ( hypergeometric )  . Even with 5 subjects per mode , the differences across modes are significant ( p = 0 . 023) , indicating that Telephone conversation per se differs from Teletype conversation in the ways in which a speaker will make first reference to an object  . 
F . Analysis 3: Utterance forms
ThUS far , explicit identification requests have been shown to be pervasive in Telephone mode and to constitute a frequently used strategy  . One might expect that , in analogous circumstances , a machine might be confronted with many of these acts  . Computational linguistics research then must discover means by which a machine can determine the appropriate response as a function  , in part , of the form of the utterance . To see just which forms are used for our task , utterances classified as requests - for -identification were tabulated  . Table III presents classes of these utterance , along with an example of each class . 
The utterance forms are divided into four major groups  , to be explained below . One class of utterances comprising 7% of identification requests , called " supplemental NP " ( e . g . , " Put that on the opening in the other large tube  . 
with the round top ") , was unreliably coded not c--6~-side~-6d for the analyses below . 
Category labels followed by " ( ? ) " indicate that the utterances comprising those categories might also have been issued with rising intonation  . 
TABLE III
Kinds of Requests to Identif \[ i__nn Telephone Mode Group CATEGORY\[example\]PerCent of RID 's 
A . ACTION-BASEDi . THERE'SANP ( ? ) 28%\[" there's a blacko-ring ( ? ) "\] 2 . INFORM ( IFACTTHENEFFECT )   4% \[" If you look at the bottom you will see a projection "\]  3  . QUESTION ( EFFECT ) 4%\[" Do you see three small red pieces ?"\]4 . INFORM ( EFFECT ) 3%\[" you will see two bluetubes "\]
B . FRAGMENTS
I . NP ANDP PFRAGMENTS ( ? ) 9%\[" the smallest of the red pieces ?"\]2 . PREPOSE DORINTERIOR PP ( ? )   6% \[" In the greenthing at the bottom < pause > there is a hole "\]\[" Put that on the hole on the side of that tube  . . . that is nearest the top "\] C . INFORM(PROPOSITION ) --> REQUEST(CONFIRM)i . OBJHASPART 18%\["It's gotapeg in it "\] 2 . LISTENER HAS OBJ 5% \[" Now you have two devices that are clear plastic "\]  3  .   DESCRIPTION1  =  DESCRIPTION2   8% \[" The other one is a bubbled piece with a blue base on it with one spout "\]\[" Look on the desk "\]\[" The next thing your gonna look for is  . . . "\]  2%   1% Notice that in Telephone mode identification requests are never performed directly  . No speaker used the paradigmatic direct forms , e . g . " Find the rubber ring shaped like an O " , which occurred frequently in the written modality  . However , the use of indirection is selective--Telephone experts frequently use direct imperatives to perform assembly requests  . Only the identification-request seems to be affected by modality  . 
III . INTERPRETINGINDIRECTREQUESTSFOR
REFERENTIDENTIFICATION
Many of the utterance forms can be analyzed as requests for identification once an act for physically searching for the referent of a description has been posited  ( Cohen ,  1981) . 
Assume that the action IDENTIFY-REF(AGT , DESCRIPTION ) has as precondition " there exists an object 0 perceptually accessible to agt such that 0 is the ( semantic ) reference of DESCRIPTION . " The result , of the action might be labelled by ( IDENTIED-REFAGT DESCRIPTION )  . Finally , the means for performing the act will be some procedural combination of sensory actions  ( e . g . , looking ) and counting . The exact combination will depend on the description used  . The utterances in Group A can then be analyzed as requests for IDENTIFY-REFERENT using Perrault and Allen's  ( 1980 ) method of applying plan recognition to the definition of communicative acts  . 
A.Action-based Utterances
Case 1 ( " There is a NP " ) can be interpreted as a request that the hearer IDENTIFY-REFERENT of NP by reasoning that a speaker's in forming a hearer that a precondition to an action is true can cause the hearer to believe the speaker wants that action to be performed  . All utterances that communicate the speaker's desire that the hearer do some action are labelled as requests  . 
Using only rules about action , Perrault and Allen's method can also explain why Cases  2  ,  3 , and 4 all convey requests for referent identification . Case 2 is handled by an inference saying that if a speaker communicates that an act will yield some desired effect  , then one can infer the speaker wants that act performed to achieve that effect  . Case 3 is an example of questioning a desired effect of an act  ( e . g . , " Is the garbage out ?" ) to convey that the act itself is desired . 
Case 4 is similar to Case 2 , except the relationship between the desired effect and some action yielding that effect is presumed  . 
In all these cases , ACT = LOOK-AT , and EFFECT="HEARERSEEX " . Since LOOK-AT is part of the " body " ( Allen , 1979) of IDENTIFY-REFERENT , Allen's " body-action " inference will make the necessary connection  , by inferring that the speaker wanted the hearer to LOOK-AT something as part of his 
IDENTIFY-REFEP dR~Tact.
B . Fragments
Group B utterances constitute the class of fragments classified as requests for identification  . Notice that " fragment " is not a simple syntactic classification  . In Case 2 , the speaker per a linguistically " calls for " a hearer response in the courseOf some linguistically complete utterance  . Such examples of parallel achievement of communicative actions cannot be accounted for by any linguistic theory or computational linguistic mechanism of which ~ are aware  . These cases have been included here since we believe the theory should be extended to handle them by reasoning about parallel actions  . A potential source of inspiration for such a theory would be research on reasoning about concurrent programs  . 
Case 1 includes NP fragments , usually with rising intonation . The action to be performed is not explicitly stated  , but must be supplied on the basis of shared knowledge about the discourse situation -- who can do what  , who can see what , what each participant thinks the other believes , what is expected , etc . Such knowledge will be needed to differentiate the intentions behind a traveller's saying " the  3:15 train to Montreal ?" to an information booth clerk  ( who is not intended to turn around and find the train  )  , from those behind the uttering of " the smallest of the red pieces ?"  , where the hearer is expected to physically identify the piece  . 
According to the theory , the speaker's intentions conveyed by the elliptical question include i  ) the speaker's wanting to know whether some relevant property holds of the referent of the description  , and 2 ) the speaker's perhaps wanting that property to hold  . Allen and Perrault ( 1980 ) suggest that properties needed to " fill in " such fragments come from shared expectations  ( not just from prior syntactic forms , as is current practice in computational linguistics  )   . The property in question in our domain is IDENTIFIED-REFERENT  ( HEARER , NP ) , which is ( somehow ) derived from the nature of the task as one of manual assembly  . Thus , expectations have suggested a starting point for an inference chain--it is shared knowledge that the speaker wants to know whether IDENTIFIED -REFERENT  ( ~ , NP ) . 
In the same way that questioning the completion of an action can convey a request for action  , questioning IDENTIFIED-REFERENT conveys a request for IDENTIFY-REFERENT  ( see Case 3 , Group A , above ) . Thus , ~ our positing an IDENTIFY-REFERENT act , and by assuming such an act is expected of the user  , the inferential machinery can derive the appropriate intention behind the use of a noun phrase fragment  . 
The theory should account for 48% of the be extended to account for an additional 6%  . The next group of utterances cannot now , and perhaps should not , be handled by a theory of communication based on reasoning about action  . 
C . Indirect Requests for Confirmation
Group C utterances ( as well as Group A , cases i ,  2 , and 4 ) can be interpreted as requests for identification by a rule stipulated by Labor and Fanshel  ( 1977 ) -- if a speaker ostensibly informs a hearer about a state-of-affairs for which it is shared knowledge that the hearer has better evidence  , then the speaker is actually requesting confirmation of that state-of-affairs  . In Telephone ( and Teletype ) modality , it is shared knowledge that the hearer has the best evidence for what she " has "  , how the pieces are arranged , etc . ~ hentheap prentice receives a Group C utterance  , she confirms its truth perceptually ( rather than by proving a theorem )  , and thereby identifies the referents of the NP's in the utterance  . 
The indirect request for confirmation rule accounts for  66% of the identification request utterances ( overlapping with GroupA for 35% )  . 
This important rule cannot be explained in the theory  . It seems to derive more from properties of evidence for belief than it does from a theory of action  . As such , it can only be stipulated to a rule-based inference mechanism  ( Cohen ,  1979) , rather than be derived from more basic principles . 
D . Nearly Direct Requests
Group Dutterance forms are the closest forms to direct requests for identification that appeared  , though strictly speaking , they are not direct requests . Case 1 mentions " I mokon " , but does not indicate a search explicitly . The interpretation of this utterance in Perrault and Allen's scheme would require an additional " body-action " inference to yield a request for identification  . Case 2 is literally an informative utterance , though a request could be derived in one step . Importantly , the frequency of these " nearest neighbors " is minimal  ( 3% )  . 
E . S~mary
The act of requesting referent identification is nearly al~ys performed indirectly in Telephone mode  . This being the case , inferential mechanisms are needed for uncovering the speaker's intentions from the variety of forms with which this act is performed  . A plan-based theory of communication augmented with a rule for identifying indirect requests for confirmation would account for  79% of the identification requests in our corpus . A hierarchy of communicative acts ( including " their propositional content ) can be used to organize derived rules for interpreting speaker intent based on utterance form  , shared knowledge and shared expectations ( Cohen ,  1979) . Such a rule-based system could form the basis of a future pragmatics/discourse component for a speech understanding system  . 
IV . RELATIONSHIPTOOTHERSTUDIES
These results are similar in soma ways to observations by Ochs and colleagues  ( Ochs , 1979; Ochs , Schieffelin , and Pratt ,  1979) . They note that parent-child and child-child discourse is often comprised of " sequential " constructions -- with separate utterances for securing reference and for predicating  . They suggest that language development should be regarded as an overlaying of newly-acquired linguistic strategies onto previous ones  . Adults will often revert to developmentally early linguistic strategies when they cannot devote the appropriate time/resources to planning their utterances  . Thus , Ochs et al suggest , when competent speakers are communicating while concentrating on a task  , one would expect to see separate utterances for reference and predication  . 
This suggestion is certainly backed by our corpus , and is important for computational linguistics since  , to be sure , our systems are intended to be used in soma task . 
It is also suggested that the presence of sequential constructions is tied to the possibilities for preplanning an utterance  , and hence or al and written discourse would differ in this way  . Our study up holds this claim for Telephone vs . Teletype , but does not do so for our Written condition in which many requests for identification occur as separate steps  . 
Furthermore , Ochs et al's claim does not account for the use of identification requests in Teletype modality after prior referential miscommunication  ( Cohen ,  1981) . Thus , it would seem that sequential constructions can result from  ( what they term ) planned as well as unplanned discourse . 
It is difficult to compare our results with those of other studies  . Chapanis et al's observation that voice modes are faster and wordier than teletype modes certainly holds here  . 
However , their transcripts cannot easily be used to verify our findings since  , for the equipment assembly problem , their subjects were given a set of instructions that could be  , and often were , read to the listener . Thus , utterance function would often be predetermined . Our subjects had to remember the task and compose the instructions a fresh  . 
Grosz ' ( 1977 ) study also cannot be directly compared for the phenomena of interest here since the core dialogues that were analyzed in depth employed a " mixed " communication modality in which the expert communicated with a third party by telety p e  . The third party , located in the same room as the apprentice , vocally transnitted the expert's communication to the apprentice  , and typed the apprentice's vocal response to the expert  . The findings of finer-grained and indirect vocal requests would not appear under these conditions  . 
Thompson's ( 1980 ) extensive tabulation of utterance forms in a multiple modality comparison overlaps our analysis at the level of syntax  . 
Both Thompson's and the present study are primarily concerned with extending the phenomena that people use but which would be problematic for machines  . However , our two studies proceeded along different lines . 
Thompson's was more concerned with utterance forms and less with pragmatic function  , whereas for this study , the concerns are reversed in priority . Our priority stems from the observation that differences in utterance function will influence the processing of the same utterance form  . 
However , the present findings cannot be said to contradict Thompson's  ( nor vice-verse )  . Each corpus could perhaps be used to verify the findings in the other  . 
V . CGNCI/JSIONS
Spoken and teletype discourse , even used for the same ends , differ in structure and inform . 
Telephone conversation about object assembly is dominated by explicit requests to find objects satisfying descriptions  . However , these requests are never performed directly . Techniques for interpreting " indirect speech acts " thus may become crucial for speech understanding systems  . 
These findings must be interpreted with two cautionary notes  . First , the request-for-identification category is specific to discourse situations in which the topics of conversation include objects physically present to the hearer  . Though the same surface forms might be used , if the conversation is not about manipulating concrete objects  , different pragmatic inferences could be made . 
Secondly , the indirection results may occur only in conversations between humans  . It is possible that people do not wish to verbally instruct others with finegrained imperatives for fear of sounding condescending  . Print may remove such inhibitions , as may talking to a machine . 
This is a question that cannot be settled until good speech understanding systems have been developed  . We conjecture that the better the system , the more likely it will be to receive finegrained indirect requests  . It appears to us preferable to err on the side of accepting people's natural forms of speech than to force the user to think about the phrasing of utterances  , at the expense of concentrating on the problem . 

We would like to thank Zoltan Ueheli for conducting the videotaping  , and Debbie Winograd , Rob Tierney , Larry Shirey , Julie Burke , Joan Hirschkorn , Cindy Hunt , Norma Peterson , and Mike Nivens for helping to organize the experiment and transcript preparation  . Than ~ s also go to Sharon Oviatt , Marilyn Adams , Chip Bruce , Andee Rubin , Pay Perrault , Candy Sidner , and EdSmith for valuable discussions . 
VI . REDES
Allen , J . F . , A plan-based approach to speech act recognition , Tech . Report 131 , Department of Computer Science , University of Toronto , 
January , 1979.
Allen , J . F . , and Farrault , C . R . , " Analyzing intention in utterances " , Artificial
Intelligence , vol . 15, 143-178, 1980.
Chapanis , A . , Parrish , R . , N . , Ochsman , R . B . , and
Weeks , G . D . , " Studies in interactive communication : II . The effects of four communication modes on the Iinguistic performance of teams during cooperative problem solving "  , Human Factors , vol .  19,
No . 2, April , 1977.
Chapanis , A . , Parrish , R . N . , Ochsman , R . B . , and
Weeks , G . D . , " Studies in interactive communication : I . The effects of four communication modes on the behavior of teams during cooperative problem -solving "  , Human
Factors , vol . 14, 487-509, 1972.
Cohen , P . R . , " The Pragmatic/Discourse Component " , in Brachman , R . , Bobrow , R . , Cohen , P . , Klovstad , J . , Webbar , B . L . , and Woods , W . 
A . , " Research in Knowledge Representation for Natural Language Understanding "  , Technical Report 4274 , Bolt , Beranek , and Nowman , Inc . ,
August , 1979.
Cohen , P . R . , " The need for referent identification as a planned action "  , Proceedings of the Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , 
Vancouver , B.C ., 3136, 1981.
Cohen , P . R . , and Perrault , C . R . , " Elements of a plan-based theory of speech acts"  , 
Cognitive Science 3, 1979, 177-212.
Dore , J . , No , man , D . , and Gearhart , M . , " The structure of nursery school conversation " , Children's Language , Vol . 1, Nelson , Keith ( ed . ), Gardner Press , NOw York , 1978 . 
Grosz , B . J . , " The representation and use of focus in dialogue understanding "  , Tech . Report 151,
Artificial Intelligence Canter , SRI
International , July , 1977.
Labor , W ., and Fanshel , D ., Therapeutic
Discourse , Academic Press , Now York , 1977.
Mann , W . C . , Moore , J . A . , Levin , J . A . , and Carlisle , J . H . , " Observation methods for htamn dialogue " , Tech . Report 151/RR-75-33 , Information Sciences Institute , Marina del
Rey , Calif ., June , 1975.
Ochs , E ., " Planned and Unplanned Discourse ",
Syntax and Semantics , Volume 12: \] Yi ~ rse ~ Syntax , Givon , T . , ( ed . - ~, Academic Press , Now York , 51-80, 1979 . 

Ochs , E . , Schieffelin , B . B . , and Pratt , M . L . , " Propositions across utterances and speakers " , in Developmental Pragmatics , Ochs , E . , and Schleffelin , B . B . , ( eds . ), Academic Press , 251-268, 1979 . 
Perrault , C . R . , and Allen , J . F . , " A plan-based analysis of indirect speech acts  "  , American
Journal of Computational Linguistics , vo ~, no . - - ~ J , 167-182, 1980 . 
Robinson , A . E . , Appelt , D . E . , Grosz , B . J . ,
Rendrix , G . G . , and Robinson , J . , " Interpreting naturallanguage utterances in dialogs about tasks "  , Technical Note 210 , 
Artificial Intelligence Canter , SRI
International , March , 1980.
Rubin , A . D . , " A theoretical taxonomy of the differences between oral and written language "  , Theoretical Issues in Reading Comprehension , Spiro , R . J . -'\[ Bruce , B . C . , and Brewer , W . F . , ( eds . ), Lawrence Erlbaun Press , Hillsdale , N . J . , 1980 . 
Sacerdoti , E ., " Reasoning about
Assembly/D is assembly Actions ", in Nilsson , N.
J ., ( ed .), Artificial Intelligence --
Research and Applications , Progress Report,
Artificial Intelligence Canter , SRI
International , Menlo Park , Calif ., May , 1975.
Sidner , C . L . , Bates , M . , Bobrow , R . J . , Brachman , R . J . , Cohen , P . R . , Israel , D . J . , Schmolze,
J . , Webber , B . L . , and Woods , W . A . , " Research in Knowledge Representation for Natural Language Understanding "  , BBN Report 4785 , Bolt , Beranek , and Newman , Inc . , Nov . , an Analysis of Discourse : The \]~ glish Used -- - b__~ Teachers a ~ ~ p~  , Oxford--~iversity Pres ~ , l--gg'5 . 
Thompson , B . H . , " Linguistic analysis of natural language communication with computers "  , Proceedings of COLING-80 , Tokyo ,  190-201 ,  1980 . 
Winograd , T ., Understanding Natural
Language , Academic Press , New York , 1972.

