Automatic Recognition of Intonation Patterns
Janet B . Pierrehumbert
Bell Laboratories
Murray Hill , New Jersey 07974
1. Introduction
This paper is a progress report on a project in linguistically based automatic speech recognition  , The domain of this project is English intonation . The system I will describe analyzes fundamental frequency contours  ( F0 contours ) of speech in terms of the theory of melody laid out in Pierrehumbert  ( 1980 )  . 
Experiments discussed in Liberman and Pierrehumbert  ( 1983 ) support the assumptions made about intonational phonetics  , and an F0 synthesis program based on a precurs or to the present theory is described in Pierrehumbert  ( 1981 )  . 
One aim of the project is to investigate the descriptive adequacy of this theory of English melody  . A second motivation is to characterize cases where  F0 may provide useful information about stress and phrasing  . The third , and to my mind the most important , motivation depends on the observation that English intonation is in itself a small language  , complete with a syntax and phonetics . Building a recognizer for this small language is a relatively tractable problem which still presents some of the interesting features of the general speech recognition problem  . 
In particular , the F0 contour , like other measurements of speech , is a continuously varying time function without overt segmentation  . Its transcription is in terms of a sequence of discrete elements whose relation to the quantitative level of description is not transparent  . An analysis of a contour thus relates heterogeneous levels of description  , one quantitative and one symbolic . In developing speech recognizers , we wish to exploit achievements in symbolic computation  . At the same time , we wish to avoid forcing into a symbolic framework properties which could more insightfully or simply be treated as quantitative  . In the case of intonation , our experimental results suggest both a division of labor between these two levels of description  , and principles for their interaction . 
The next section of this paper sketches the theory of English intonation on which the recognizer is based  . Comparisons to other proposals in the literature are not made here  , but can be found in the papers just cited . The third section describes a preliminary implementation  . The fourth contains discussion and conclusions . 
2 . Background on intonation 2 . 1 Phonology The primitives in the theory are two tones  , low ( L ) and high ( H ) . The distinction between L and H is paradigmatic ; that is , Lislower than H would be in the same context . It can easily be treated as a distinction in a single binary valued feature  . 
Utterances consist of one or more intonation phrases  . The melody of an intonation phrase is decomposed into a sequence of elements  , each made up of either one or two tones . Some are associated with stressed syllables , and others with the beginning and end of the phrase  . Superficially global characteristics of phrasal F0 contours are explicated in terms of the concatenation of these local elements  . 
Bt75-150-
N ..l-zt25-o

100-75-i IIIt SEC.

NOONE WASWEARIER THANELIE ILIECH
Figure I : An F0 contour with three H * pitch accents , which come out aspeaks . The alignment of " E limelech " is indicated . 
* This work was done at MIT under NSF Grant No . IST-8012248 . 
85:=450 z
O125 It.

III1 Iilf\\?

NOONE WASWEARIER THANELIEECH
Figure 2: The two H+L"accents in this contour are circled . 
Compare the FO contour on the stressed syllable in " Elimelcch " to that in Figure  1  . 
The characteristic FO configurations on stressed syllables are due to pitch accents  , which consist of either a singletone or a sequence of two tones  . For example , each peak circled in Figure 1 is attributed to a H pitch accent . The steps circled in Figure 2 are analyzed as H+L , because they have a relatively higher level just before the stress and a relatively lower\[eve\ [ on the stress  , In two tone accents , which tone fails on the stress is distinctive , and will be transcribed with a * . \[ n this notation , the circled accents in Figure 2 are H+L* . Seven different accents arc posited altogether . Some possible accents do not occur because they would be neutralized in every context by the realization rules  . Differentypes of pitch accents can be mixed b )  450 -~ 440 300-  )  250  ;  -
N-r " 200-450-

O in one phrase . Also , material which is presupposed in the discourse may be unaccented  . \[ n this case , the surrounding tonal elements control its F0 contour . 
The tonal correlates of phrasing are the boundary tones  , which control the FO at the onset and offset of the phrase  , and an additional element , the phrase accent , which controls the FO between the last pitch accent and the final phrase boundary  . The boundary tones and the phrase accent are all singletones  , either L or H . In what follows , a "% " will be used as the diacritic for a boundary tone  . Figure 3 shows two pitch contours in which a L phrase accent is followed by a H % boundary tone  . When the last pitch accent is early in the phrase  , as in 3A , the level of the phrase accent is maintained over a fairly long segmental string  ( " doesn'think " )  . In 3B , on the other hand , the pitch accent , phrase accent , and boundary to nehave all been compressed onto a single syllabic  . 
As far as is known , different pitch accents , phrase accents , and boundary tones combine freely with each other  . This means that Figure 3: Both of these contours have a L'+H accent followed by a L phrase accent and a H % boundary tone  . In 3A , the accent is on " father-in-law " . and the LH % sequcnce determines the FO contour on the rest of the utterance  . The alignment of the speech segments with the FO contour is roughly indicated by the placement of lettering  . In 3B , L '+ HLH % is compressed onto a monosyllabic . 
ts
YOURFATHER-IN-LAWDOESN'TTHINKSO %
TONE ACCENTS
Figure 4: The grammar of the
Pierrehumbert (1980).
the grammar of English phrasal melodies can be represented by a transition network  , as shown in Figure 4 . This grammar defines the level of description that the recognizer attempts to recover  . There is no effort to characterize the meaning of the transcriptions established  , since our focus is on the sound structure of speech rather than its meaning  . In production , the choice of loci for pitch accents depends on the focus structure of the sentence  . The choice among different melodic elements appears to be controlled by the attitudes of the speaker and the relation of his phrase to others in the discourse  . Meanings suggested in the literature for such elements include surprise  , contradiction , elicitation , and judiciousness . 
2.2 Phonetics
Two types of rules have a part in relating the tonal level of description to the continuously varying  F0 contour . One set of rules maps tones into crucial points , or targets , in the F0 contour . Both the small tonal inventory and the sequential decomposition proposed depend on these rules being nontrivial  . 
Specifically , a rule of d own step lowers a Ht one in the contexts H+L_ and HL+w  . The value of the downstep podH is a fixed fraction of the value for the preceding H  , once a phrasal constant reflecting pitch range is subtracted  , herative application of this rule in a sequence of accents which meet its structural description generates an exponential decay to a nonzero asymptote  . A related rule , up step , raises a H % after a H phrase accent . This means that the L*HH % melody often used in yes/no questions  ( and illustrated in Figure 5 below ) takes the form of a rise--plate au--rise in the F0 contour . 
Differences in the relative level of accent tones can also result from differences in the emphasis on the material they are associated with  . This is why the middle H ? in Figure 1 is lower than the other two , for example . 
A second class of rules computes transitions between one target and the next  . These fill in the F0 contour , and are responsible for the FO on syllables which carry not one  . Transitions are not always monotonic ; in Figure 1 , for example , the F0 dips between each pair of H accents . Such dipping can be found between two targets which are above the low part of the range  . Its extent seems to depend on the time-frequency separation of the targets  . 
PHRASEBOUNDARY
ACCENTTONE phrasal tunes of English given in In certain circumstances  , a singletone gives rise to a flat stretch in the  F0 contour . For example , the phrase accent in Figure 3A has spread over two words . This phenomenon could be treated either at a phonological level  , by linking the tone to a large number of syllables  , or at a phonetic level , by positing a sustained style of transition . There are some interesting theoretical points here  , but they do not seem to affect the design of an intonation recognizer  . 
Note that the rules just described all operate in a small window  , as defined on the sequence of tonal units . To a good approximation , the realization of a given tonal element can be computed without lookahead  , and looking back no further than the previous one  . Of course , the window size could never be stated so simply with respect othe segmental string  ; two pitch accents could , for example , be squeezed onto adjacent syllables or separated by many syllables  . One of the crucial assumptions of the work , taken from autosegment alnd metrical phonology , is that the tonal string can be projected off the segmental string  . 
The recognition system will make strong use of the locality constraint that this projection makes possible  . 
2.3 Summary
The major theoretical innovations of the description just sketched have important computational consequences  . The theory has only two tones , L and H , whereas earlier tone-level theories had four . In combination with expressive variation in pitch range  , a fourt one system has too many degrees of freedom for a transcription to be recoverable  , in general , from the F0 contour . Reducing the inventory to two tones raises the hope of reducing the level of ambiguity to that ordinarily found in natural anguage  . The claim that implementation rules for tonal elements are local mean that the quantitative vidence for the occurrence of a particular element is confined to a particular area of the  F0 contour . This constraint will be used to simplify the control structure  . A third claim , that phrasal tunes are constructed syntactically from a small number of elements  , means that standard parsing methods are applicable to the recognition problem  . 
3. A recognition system
The recognition system as currently implemented has three components  , described in the next three sections . First , the F0 contour is preprocessed with a view to removing pitch tracking a schematization i terms of events is established  , by finding crucial features of the smoothed contour through analysis of the derivatives  . Events are the interface between the quantitative and symbolic levels of description  ; they are discrete and relatively sparse with respect o the original contour  , but carry with them relevant quantitative information  . Parsing of events is carried out topdown , with the aid of rules for matching the tonal elements to event sequences  . Tonal elements may account for variable numbers of events  , and different analyses of an ambiguous contour may divide up the event stream in different ways  . Steps in the analysis of an example F0 contour are shown in Figure 5  . 
3.1 Pveprocessing
The input to the system is an FO contour computed by the Gold Rabiner algorithm  ( Gold and Rabiner ,  1969) . Two difficulties with this input make it unsuitable for immediate prosodic analysis  . First , the pitch tracker in some cases returns values which are related to the true values by an integer multiplier or divisor  . Theses tray values are fatal to any prosodic analysis if they survive in the input to the smoothing of the contour  . This problem is addressed by imposing continuity constraints on the  F0 contour . When astray value is located , an attempt of inda multiplier or divis or which will bring it into line is made  , and if this attempt fails , the stray value is deleted . In our experience , such continuity constraints are necessary to eliminate sporadic errors  ; without them , no amount of parameter tweaking suffices . 
A second problem arises because the speech segments per turb the  F0 contour ; here , consonantal effects are of particular concern . There are no FO values during voiceless segments . 
Glottal stops and voiced obstruents depress the F0 on both sides . 
In addition , voiceless obstruents raise the F0 at the beginning of a following vowel . Because of these effects , a attempt was made ca01 sec . II . , . , z Are I e gumes a good source of v i tamins ( b ) Max
MaxMlnt
IPA in MinPlateauyk ~ J\J\J
L%L~HH %\ J
L % k~H ~ HH %
Figure 5: Panel A shows an unprocessed F0 contour . The placement of lettering indicates roughly the alignment of tune and text  . Parts of the F0 contour which survive the continuity constraints and the clipping are drawn with a heavier line  . 
Panel B shows the connected and smoothed F0 contour , together with its event characterization . The two transcriptions of the contour are shown underneath  . The alignment of tonal elements indicates what events each covers  . 
8 8 to remove F0 values in the immediate vicinity of obstruents . An adapted version of the Fleck and Liberman ( 1982 ) syllable peak finder controlled this clipping . Our modification worked outward from thesy ! labic peaks to finds on orant regions  , and then retained the FO values found there . In Figure 5A , the portions of the F0 contour remaining after this procedure are indicated by a heavier line  . The retained portions of the contour are connected by linear interpolation  . Following Hildreth and Marr's work on vision , the connected contour is smoothed by convolution with a Gaussian in order to permit analysis of the derivatives  . The smoothed contour for the example is shown in
Figure 5B .
3.2 Schematization
Events in the contour are found by analysis of the first and second derivatives  . The events of ultimate interest are maxima , minima , plateaus , and points of inflection . Roughly speaking , peaks correspond to Htones , some valleys are L tones , and points of inflection can arise through down step  , up step , or a disparity in prominence between adjacent H accents  . Plateaus , or level parts of the contour , can arise from tone spreading or from a sequence of two like tones  . Events are implemented as structures which store quantitative information  , such as location , 
F0 value , and derivative values.
Maxima and minima can be located as zeroes in the first derivative  . Those which exhibit insufficient contrast with their local environment are suppressed  ; in regions of little change , such as that covered by the phrase accent in Figure  3A   , this threshholding prevents minor fluctuations from being treated as prosodic  . Plateaus are significant stretches of the contour which are as good as level  . A plate au is created from a sequence of low contrast maxima and minima  , or from a very broad peak or valley . In either case , the boundaries of the plateau are marked with events  , whose type is relevant othe ultimate tonal analysis  . 
These events are not located at absolute maxima or minima  , which in nearly level stretches may fall a fair distance from points of prosodic significance  . Instead , they are pushed outward to a near-maximum , or a near-minimum . The event locations in Figure 5B reflect this adjustment . Minima in the absolute slope ,   ( which form a subset of zero crossings in the second derivative  ) are retained as points of inflection if they contrast sufficiently in slope with the slope maxima on either side  . In some cases , such points were engendered by smoothing from places where the original contour had a shelf  . In many others , however , the shoulder in the original contour is a slope minimum  , although a more prototypical realization of the same prosodic pattern would have as hell Presumably  , this fact is due to the low pass characteristics of the articulatory system itself  . 
3.3 Parsing
Tonal analysis of the event stream is carried out by a topdown nondeterministic finite state parser  , assisted by a set of verification rules . The grammar is a close relative of the transition network in Figure  1  .   ( There is no effort to make distinctions which would require independent information about stress location  , and provision is made for the case where the phrase accent and boundary tone collapse phonetically  , ) The verification rules relate tonal elements to sequences of events in the  F0 contour . As each tonal element is hypothesized , it is checked against the event stream to see whether it plausibly extends the analysis hypothesized so far  . The integration of successfulocal hypotheses into complete analyses is handled conventionally  ( see Woods 1973 )  . 
The ontology of the verification rules is based on our understanding of the phonetic realization rules for tonal elements  . Each rule characterizes the realization of a particular element or class of elements  , given the immediate left context . 
Wider contexts are unnecessary , because the realization rules are claimed to be local  . Correct management of chained computations , such as iterative down steps , falls out automatically from the control structure  . The verification rules refer both to the event types  ( e . g . " maximum ' , " inflection , ' ) and to values of a small vocabulary of predicates describing quantitative characteristics  . The present system has five predicates , though a more detailed accounting of the F0 contour would require a few more . One returns a verdict on whether an event is in the correct relation to a preceding event to be considered downstepped  . Another determines whether a minimum might be explained by a nonmonotonic  F0 transition , like that pointed out in Figure I . In general , relations between crucial points are considered , rather than their absolute values . 
Even for a single speaker , absolute values are not very relevant to melodic analysis  , because of expressive variation in pitch range . Our experiments showed that local relations , when stated correctly , are much more stable . 
Timing differences result in multiple realizations for some tonal sequences  . For example , the L*HH % sequence in Figure 5A comes out as a rise--plate au--rise . If the same sequence were compressed ontoless segmental material  , one would see arise--inflection--rise , or even a single larger is e . For this reason , the rules OR several ways of accepting a given tonal hypothesis  . As just indicated , these can involve different numbers of events . 
The transcription under figure 5B indicates the two analyses returned by the system  . Note that they differ in the total number of tonal elements  , and in the number of events covered by the H phrase accent  . The first analysis correctly reflects the speaker 's intention  . The second is consistent with the shape of the F0 contour , but would require a different phrasal stress pattern  . Thus the location of the phrasal stress cannot be uniquely recovered from the  F0 contour , although analysis of the
F0 does constrain the possibilities.
4 . Discussion and conclusions 4 . 1 Intellectual antecedents The work described here has been greatly influenced by the work of Marr and his collaborators on vision  . The schematization of the F0 contour has a family resemblance to their primal sketch  , and I follow their suggestion that analysis of the derivatives  , i ~ a useful step in making such a schematization . 
Lea ( 1979 ) argues that stressed syllables and phrase boundaries can be located by setting a thresh hold on FO changes  . This procedure uses no representation of different melodic types  , which are the main object of interest here . Its assumptions are commonly met , but break down in many perfectly wellformed
English intonation patterns.
Vires et al ( 1977 ) use F0 in French to screen lexical hypotheses , by placing restrictions on the location of word boundaries  . This procedure is motivated by the observation that the FO contour constrains but does not uniquely determine the boundary locations  . In English , F0 does not mark word boundaries , but there are somewhat comparable situations in which it constrains but does not determine an analysis of how the utterance is organized  . However , the English prosodic implementation f this idea is accordingly more dii ~ cult  . 
4.2 Segmentation ad labelling
The ~ p proach to segmentation used here contrasts trongly with that used in the past in phonemic analysis  . Whereas the HWIM system , for example , proposed segmental boundaries bottom up ( Woods et al ,  1976) , the system described here never establishes boundaries  . For example , there is no point on the rise between a L * and a H * which is ever designated as the boundary between the two pitch accents  . Whereas phonetic segments ordinarily carry only categorical information  , the events found here are hybrids , with both categorical and quantitative ! nformation  . A kind of soft segmentation comes out , in the sense that a particular tonal element accounts for some particular sequer ~ ce of events  . Study of ambiguous contours indicates that this grouping of events cannot be carried out separately from labelling  . Thus , there is no stage of analysis where the contour is segmented  , even in this soft sense , but not labelled . 
It is not hard to find example suggesting that the approach taken here is also relevant for phonemic analysis  . Consider the word " joy ", shown in Figure 6 . Here , the second formant fails from the palatal locus to a back vowel position  , and then rises again for the off-glide . A different transcription involving two syllables might also be hypothesized  ; the second formant could be falling through a rather nondistinct vowel into a vocalized/I/  , and then rising for a front vowel . Thus , we can only establish the correct segment count for this word by evaluating the hypothesis of a medial  /1/  . Even having clone so , there is no argument for boundary locations . The multiple pass strategy used in the HW ! M system appears to have been aimed at such problems  , but ~ loes not really get at their root . 
4.3 Problems
A number of defects in the current implementation have become apparent  . In the example , the amount of clipping and smoothing needed to suppressegmental effects enough for parsing results in poor time alignment of the second transcription  . The H*in this analysis is assigned to " source  '  , whereas the researcher looking at the raw F0 contour would be inclined to put it on " gumes ' . In general , curves which are too smooth may still be
L . . L k : i - k sentence " We find joy in the simplest things  . " The example is taken from Zue et al (1982) . 
insufficiently smooth to parse . An alternat we 2rpproacn basea on Hildreth's suggestions about integration of different scale channels in vision was also investigated  . ( Hildreth , 1980 . ) Most of the obstacles he mentions were actually encountered  , and no way was found to surmoun them . Thus , I view the separation of segmental and prosodic effects on  F0 as an open problem . 
Adding verification rules for segmental effects appears to be the most promising course  . 
Two classes of extraneous analyses generated by the system merit discussion  . Some analyses , such as the second in Figure 5 , violate the stress pattern . These are of interest , because they in form us about how much F0 by itself constrains the interpretation of stress  . A second group , namely analyses which have too many tonal elements for the syllable count  , is of less interest . A future implementation should eliminate these by referring to syllable peak locations  . 

I would like to thank Mitch Marcus and Dave Shipman for helpful discussions  . 

Fleck , M . and M . Y . Liberman (1982) . " Test of an automatic syllable peakfinder , " J . Acoust . Soc . Am . 72, Suppl .  1 $78 . 
Gold , B . and L . Rabiner (1969) . " Parallel Processing Techniques for Estimating Pitch Periods of Speech in the Time Domain  . " J . Acoust . Soc . Am .  46, 442-448 . 
Hildreth , E .  (1980) . " Implementation of a Theory of Edge Detection , " Artificiallnt et ligience Laboratory Report AI-TR-579  , MIT . 
Lea , W . A .  (1979) . " Prosodic Aids to Speech Recognition . " in W . A . Lea , ed . Trends in Speech Recognition . Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs N . J . 166-205.
Liberman , M . Y . and J . Pierrehumbert ( forthcoming in 1983) . 
"Intonational nvariance under Changes in Pitch Range and Length  . " Currently available as a Bell Labs Technical

Marr , D .  (1982) . Vision . W . H . Freeman and Co . , San

Pierrehumbert , J .  (1980) . " The Phonology and Phonetics of English Intonation  . " PhD dissertation , MIT . ( forthcoming from
MIT Press).
Pierrehumbert , , I .  (1981) . " Synthesizing intonation . " J . Acoust . 
Soc . Am . 70, 985-995.
Vires , R . , C . LeCorre , G . Mercier . and JVaissiere (1977) . 
" Utilisation , pour lare connaissance de la parole continue , demar queurs prosodiques extraits de la frequence du fondamental  . "7 iemes Journeesd ' Etudessurla Parole , Groupement des Acousticiens de Langue Franca is ,  353-363 . 
Woods , W . A .  (1973) . " An Experimental Parsing System for Transition Network Grammars  . " in R . Rustin , ed . , Natural Language Processing . Algorithmics Press , Inc . , New York . 
Woods , W . A , M . Bates , G . Brown , B . Bruce , C . Cook , J . 
Klovstad , J . Makhoul , B . Nash-Webber , R . Schwartz , J . Wolf , and V . Zue (1976) . " Speech Understanding Systems Final Report Volume II  . " BBN Report No .  3438 . 
Zue , V . , F . Chen , and L . Lamel (1982) . Speech Spectrogram
Reading : Special Summer Course . MIT.

