A Framework for Processing Partially Free Word Order * 
Hans Uszkoreit
Artificial Intelligence Center
SRI International
333 Ravenswood Avenue
Menlo Park , CA 94025
Abstract
The partially free word order in German belongs to the class of phenomena in natt tralanguage that require a close interaction between syntax and pragmatics  . Several competing principles , which are based on syntactic and on discourse information  , determine the \[ in eacorder of noun phrases . A solution to problems of this sort is a prerequisite for high-quality language generation  . The linguistic framework of Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar offers tools for dealing with -word order variation  . Some slight modifications to the framework allow for an analysis of the German data that incorporates just the right  , degree of interaction between syntactic and pragmatic components and that can account for conflicting ordering statements  . 
I . Introduction
The relatively free order of major phrasal constituents in German belongs to the class of natural language phenomena that require a closer interaction of syntax and pragmatics than is usually accounted for informal linguistic frameworks  . 
Computational linguists who pay attention to both syntax and pragmatics will find that analyses of such phenomena can provide valuable data for the design of systems that integrate these linguist ic components  . 
German represents a good test case because the role of pragmatics in governing word order is much greater than in English while the role syntax plays is greater than in some of the so called free-word-order languages like Warlpiri  . The German data are well attested and thoroughly discussed in the descriptive literature The fact that English and German are closely related makes it easier to assess these data and to draw parallels  . 
The . ~ imple analysis presented here for dealing with free word order in German syntax is based on the linguistic framework of Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar  ( GPSG , especially on its Immediate Dominance/Linear Precedence formalism ID/LP  )  , and complements an earlier treatment of German word order  ) The framework is slightly modified to accommodate the relevant class of word order regularities  . 
The syntactic framework presented in this paper is no thound to any particular theory of discourse processing  ; it enables syntax to interact with whatever formal model of pragmatics one might want to implement  . A brief discussion of the framework's implication ~ for computational implementation centers Upon the problem of the status of metagrammatical devices  . 
2. The Problem
German word order is essentially fixed : however , there is some freedom in the ordering of major phrasal categories like NPs and adverbial phrases -for example  , in the linear order of subject ( SUBJ ) , direct object ( DOBJ ) , and indirect object ( lOBJ ) with respecto one another . All six permutations of these three constituents are possible for sentences like  ( In )  . Two are given as Ib ) and ( It ) . 
( la ) Dannhatte der Doktor dem Mann die Pillege ben . 
Then had the doctor them an the pill given ( lb ) Dannhatte dec Doktor die Pille dem Mann gegeben . 
Then had the doctor the pill them an given ( It ) Dannhatte die Pille der Doktor dem Manngegeben . 
Then had the pill the doctor the man given All permutations have the same truth conditional meaning  , which can be paraphrased in English as : Then the doctor gave them an the pill  . 
There are several basic principles that influence the ordering of the three major NPs : ? The unmarked order is SUBJ-iOBJ-DOBJ ? Comment  ( or focus ) follows non-comments * Personal pronouns precede other NPs ? Light constituents precede heavy constituents  , * This rese . ' trch was supported by the National Science Foundation Grant \ [  ST-RI03$50  , The views and conclusions expressed in this paper are those  , , r the : tutbor and should not be interpreted as representative of the views of the Nati  . ,nal Science Foundation or the United States government  . I have benefited fr , ~ rn discussions with and comments from Barbara Grosz  , Fernand , , Pcreira . Jane Robinson . and Stuart Shieber . 
t The best overview of the current GPSG framework can be found in Gazdar and Pullum  ( 1982 )  . For : t description of the II ) /LP format refer to Gazdar and Pullum ( Ig8l and Klein ( 1983 )  , for the ID/LP treatment of Germant , , tszkoreit (\] g82a . lgB2b and Nerbonne(Ig82) . 

The order in ( la ) is based on the unmarked order ,   ( lb ) would be appropriate in a discourse situation that makes them an the focus of the sentence  , and ( 1c ) is an acceptable sentence if both doctor and man are focussed upon  . luse focus here in the sense of comment , he part of the sentence that contains new important information  .   ( lc ) could be uttered as an answer to someone who inquires about both the giver and recipient of the pill  ( for example , with the question : Who gave whom the pill ? l . The most complete description of the ordering principles  , especially of the conflict between the unmarked order and the topic-commeni  , relation , can be found in Lenerz (1977) . 
3 . Implications for Processing Models Syntactic as well as pragmatic information is needed to determine the right word order  ; the unmarked-order principle is obviously a syntactic statement  , whereas the topic comment order principle requires access to discourse information  .  ? , Sometimes different ordering principles make contradictory predictions  . Example ( lb ) violates the unmarked-order principle ;   ( In ) is acceptable venif demMan n\[theman \] is the focus of the sentence ~  3 The interaction of ordering variability and pragmatics can be found in many languages and not only in socalled free-word-order languages  . Consider the following two English sentences : ( 2a ) I will talk to him after lunch about the offer . 
(2b ) I will talk to him about the offer after lunch . 
Most semantic frameworks would assign the same truth conditional meaning to  ( 2a ) and ( 2b )  , but there are discourse situations in which one is more appropriate than the other  .   ( 2a ) can answer a que ~- tion about the topic of a planned afternoon meeting  , but is much less likely to occur after an order to mention the offer as soon as possible  .   4 Formal linguistic theories have traditionally assumed the existence of rather independent components for syntax  , semantics , and pragmatics , sLinguistics not only could afford this idealization but has probably temporarily benefited from it  . 
However , if the idealization is carried over to the computational implementation of a framework  , it can have adverse effects on the efficiency of the resulting system  . 
2The heaviness principle requires access to phonological information in addition  , but , : ~ discussion of this dependence is beyond the scope of this paper  . 
3Sentences that differ only in their discourse role assignments  , e . g . . do not focus on the same constituent(s , usually exhibit different sential stress patterns  . 
4The claim is not that these sentences are not interchangeable in the men-ti  ,   . n  ~ . d i . < o-, urseituations under any circumstances . In English . marked in-tonarian can usually over write default discourse role assignments asociated w ~  . . the order of the constituents . 
$ Scvera\[more recent theories can account for the interaction among some of the components  . Montague Grammar ( Montague . 1974) and its successors ( incl . GPSG ) link semantic and syntactic rules . Work on presuppositions ( Karttunen and Peters .  1979) , discourse representations ( Kamp , If 80) and Situati ~ , n Semantics ( Barwise and Perry . 1981) narrows the gap between . ,, . 'mantics and pragmatics . 
If we as . ~ ume that a language generation system should be able to generate all grammatical word orders and if we further assume that  , every generated order should be appropriate to the given discourse situation  , then at ruly nonintegrated system , i . e . , a system whose semantic , syntactic , and pragmatic omponents apply in sequence , has to be in el ~ cient . The syntax will first generate all possibilities , after which the pragmatic omponent will have to select the appropriate variant  . To do so , this component will also need access to syntactic information  . 
In an integrated model , much unnecessary work can be saved if the syntax refrains from using rules that introduce pragmatically inappropriate orders  . A truly integrated model can discard improper parses very early during parsing  , thereby considerably reducing the amount of syntactic processing  . 
The question of integrating rammatical components i a linguistic problem  . Any reasonable solution for an integration of syntax and pragmatics has to depend on linguistic findings about the interaction of syntactic and pragmatic phenomena  . An integrated implementation of any theory that does not account for this interaction will either augmen the theory or neglec the linguistic facts  . 
By supporting integrated implementations , the framework and analysis to be proposed below fulfill an important condition for effcient treatment of partially free word order  . 
4 . The Framework and Syntactic Analysis 4 . 1 Ti le F ramework of CPSG in ID / LP Format The theory of GPSG is based on the assumption that natural languages can be generated by contextfree phrase structure  ( CF-PS ) grammars . As we know , such a grammar is bound to exhibit a high degree of redundancy and  , consequently , is not the right formalism for encoding many of the linguistic generalizations a framework for natural language is expected to express  . However . the presumption is that it is possible to give a condensed inductive definition of the CF-PS grammar  , which contains various components for encoding the linguistic regt  , laritics and which can be interpreted as a metagrammar  , i . e . . a grammar for generating the actual CF-PS grammar  . 
AGPSG can be defined as a two-leve J grammar containing a metagrammar and an object grammar  . The object grammar combines CF-PS syntax and model theoretic semantics  . Its rules are ordered triples ( n . r . t ) where n is an integer ( the rule number , r is a CF-PS rule . and t is the tramlation of t . he rule , its denotation represented in some version of intensional logic  . The translation t is actually an operation that maps the translation of the children nodes into the translation of t  . heparent . The nonterminals of rare complex symbols , subsets of a finite set of syntactic features or - as in the latest version of the theory  ( Gazd : w and Pullum , 1982)-feature trees of finite size . The rules o /' the obJect grammar are interpreted as tree-admissability conditions  . 
The metagrammar consists of four different kinds of rules that are used by three major components to generate the object structure of a GPSG metagrammar  . 
(3) Basic Rules ~ N ~
IDR doubles ) j/
Application ~\ [ Metarule ( IDR doubles)
Rule Extension Ii
IDR triples)
I binearization . ' l ~ bjeet-Grammar ~' X ~
F-PS Rules ), ~/
Metaxules ) ~ Rule Ext . Princpls).
LP rules )
First . there is a set of banjo rules . Basic rules are immediated omi . a . cerule(IDR ) double ~ , ordered pairs < n , i > , where n is the rule number and i is an \[ DR . 
1 DRs closely resemble CF-PS rules , but , whereas the CF-PS rule "1--6t 6 .   .   .   .   .  6 . contains information about both immediate dominance and linear precedence in the subtree to be accepted  , the corresponding IDR "~--6 t , / f  ~ .   .   .   .   .   . / f . encodes only information about immediate dominance  . The order of the right-hand-side symbols , which are separated in IDRs by commas , has no significance . 
Metarule Application , maps\[DR doubles to other IDR doubles . For this purpose , metaxules , which are the second kind of rules are applied to basic rules and then to the output of metarule applications to generate more IDR doubles  . Metarules are relations between sets of IDRs and are written as A = B  , where A and B are rule templates . The metarute can be read as : If there is an IDR double of k in dA  , then there is also an IDR double of kind/3 . In each case the rule number is copied from A to /3  . s . Several metarules can apply in the derivation of a single II  ) R double ; however , the principle of Finite Closure , defined by Thompson (1982 , allows every metarule to apply only once in the derivational history of each IDR double  . The invocation of this principle avoids the derivation of infinite rulesets  ,   in-6Rule number might heam is leading term for n because this copying : ~  . ssigns the s~meinteger to the whole class of rules that were derived from the ~ ame basic rules  . This rule number propagation is a prerequisite for the < iPSG accouht of  subcategori2ation  . 
eluding those that generate non-CF , non-CS , and no a recursive languages J 7 Another component maps IDR doubles to IDR triples  , which are ordered triples ( n , i , t ) of a rule number . , an IDRi , and a translation t . The symbols of the resulting IDRs axefully instantiated feature sets  ( or structures and therefore identical to object grammar symbols  . Thus , this component adds semantic translations and instantiates syntactic features  . The mapping is controlled by a third set of rule czten6io   , principles including feature cooccurrence restrictions  , feature def . ult principles , and an algorithm that assigns the right kind of translation to each rule on the basis of its syntactic information  . 
The last component of the metagrammar maps the IDR triples to the rules of the object grammar  . For each IDR triple all the object grammar triples are generated whose CF-PS rules conform with the linear precedence  ( LP ) rules , the fourth rule set of the metagrammar . LP rules are members of the LP relation , a partial ordering on V'r I . IVN . An LP rule(a , $ is usually written as a <~/ and simply states that a  precedes/9 whenever both a and d occur in the right-hand -side of the same CF-PS rule  . 
It is the separation of linear precedence from immediate dominance statements in the metagrammar that is referred to  . as ID/LP format . And it is precisely this aspect of the formalism that  . makes the theory attractive for application to languages with a high degree of word-urder freedom  . The analysis presented in the next section demonstrates the functioning of the formalism and some of its virtues  . 
4.2 The Analysis of German Word Order
Uszkoreit ( 1982a ) proposes a GPSG analysis of German word order that accounts for the fixed-order phenomena  , including the notoriously difq cult problem of the position of finite and nonfinite verbs  . Within the scope of this paper it is impossible to repeat  , the whole set of suggested rules . A tiny fragment should sumce to demonstrate the basic ideas as well as the need for modifications of the framework  . 
Rule ( 4 1 is the basic VPID rule that combines ditransitive verbs like forms of gebe  . ( give ) with its two objects : (4(,5, VP-- . NP,NP,V)\[+DATI\[+ACC\]Th,~rule . ~tates that a VP can expand as a dative NP ( IOBJ , an att n . -alive NP ( DOBJ ), and a verb . Verbs that can occur in dilrnnsitive VPs , like geben ( give ) . are marked in the lexicon with the rule number 5 . Nothing has been said about the linear order of these constituents  . The following metarule supplies a " flat " sentence rule for each main verb VP rule \[+ NOM  1stands for the nominative case , which marks the subject . 
7F,r~d*scu . -sion see Peters and Uszkoreit ( 1982 and Shieber et M .  (1983 . 
I08 (5) VP~X,V~S- . * NP , X , V\[-AUX\]\[+NOM\]It generates the rule under  ( 6 ) from ( 4 ) :  ( 6 )   ( 5 , S - - - , NP , NP , NP , V ) \[+ NOMI\[+DAT\]\[+ACC\]Example ( 7 ) gives a German constituent that will be admitted by a PS rule derived from ID rule  ( 6 ) :  ( 7 der Doktor dem Mann die Pille gegeben the doctor them an the pill given I shall not list the rules here that combine the auxiliary halle and the temporal adverb dann with  ( 7 ) to arrive at sentence ( la )  , since these rules play no role in the ordering of the three noun phrases  . What is of interest here is the mapping from ID rule  ( 5 ) to t . heap propriate set of PS rules . Which LP rules are needed to allow for all and only the acceptable linearizations ? The position of the verb is a relatively easy matter : if it is the finite matrix verb it precedes the noun phrases  ; in all other cases , it follows everything else . We have a feature MC for matrix clause as well as a feature cooccurrence rstriction to ensure that + MC will alway simply + FIN  ( finite )  . Two LP rules are needed for the main verb : ( Sa ) + MC < NP ( 8b ) NP <- MC The regularities that govern the order of the noun phrases can also be encoded in LP rules  , as in ( ga ) -! ge ) :  ( O a ) + NOMINATIVE <+ DATIVE ( 9b ) + NOMINATIVE <+ ACCUSATIVE ( 9c ) + DATIVE <+ ACCUSATIVE ( 9 d ) -FOCUS <+ FOCUS ( 9e ) + PRONOUN <- PRONOUN ( Kart . tunen and Peters ,  1979 )   8or a function from discourse situations to the appropriate truth conditional meaning in the spirit of Barwise and Perry  ( 1981 )  . The analysis here is not concerned with choosing a formalism for an extended semantic omponent  , but rather with demonstrating where the syntax has to provide for those elements of discourse information that influence the syntactic structure directly  . 
Note , that the new LP rules do not resolve the problem of ordering-principle conflicts  , for the violation of one LP rule is enough to rule out an ordering  . On the other hand , the absence of these LP rules would incorrectly predict that all permutations are acceptable  . The next section introduces are definition of LP rules that provides a remedy for this deficiency  . 
4.3 The Modified Framework
Before introducing a new definition of LP rules , let me suggest , a not . her modification that will simplify things somewhat  . 
The I , Prules considered so far are not really LP rules in the sense in which they were defined by their originators  . After all . LP rules are defined as members of a partial ordering on " v ~  , ? UVT ' . 
Our rules are schemata for LP rules at best , abbreviating the huge set of UP rules that are instantiations of these schemata  . 
This definition is an unfortunate one in several respects  . It not . only creates an unnecessarily large set of rules IVN contains thousands of fully instantiated complex symbols  ) but also suppresses some of the important generalizations about the language  . Clearly , one could extract the relevant generalizations even from a fully expanded LP relation  , e . g . , realize that there is no LP rule whose first element has-MC and its second element NP  . However , it should not be necessary to extract generalizations from the grammar  ; the grammar should express these generalizat . ions directly . Another disadvantage follows from the choice of a procedure for arriving at the fully expanded LP rela-Lion  . Should all extensions that are compatible instantiations of  ( Sa )  , ( Sb ) . and (9a ) - (9 e be LP rules : If so . then (10) is an instantiat . ion of (8a ): ( I0) + MC'NP+DEF <+ FIN, . \ feature FOCUS has been added that designates a focused con-sfit  , eat . Despite its name FOCUS is a syntactic'f cature , justified by syntactic Pacts , such as its influence on word order . This syntactic feature needs t , obe linked with the appropriate discourse information  . The place to do this is in the rule exteu-sioq component  , where features are instantiated and semantic translations added to ID rules  . It is assumed that in so doing the translation part of rules will have to be extended anyways o as to incorporate non-truth-conditional aspects of the meaning  . 
For example , the full translation could be an ordered pair of truth conditional nd non-truth-conditional content  , extending Karttunen and Peters's treatment of conventional implicature Yet nothing can be a matrix verb and definite simultaneously  , and NPs cannot be finite . (101 is a vacuous rule . Whether il is a LP rule at all will depend on the way the nonterminal vocabulary of the object grammar is defined  . If it only includes the nonterminals that actually occur in rules then  ( 10 ) is not as LP rule . \[ n this case we would need a component of the metagrammar  , the feature instantiation principles , to determine 8T , ~ be more precise . Karttunen and Peters actua Jly make their transla -ti  , ,ns ordered triples of truth-conditiona . l content , impll catures , and an in-hcrhance expression that plays a role in h ~  . ndling the projection problem for presuppositions . 
109 another compouent of the metagrammar , the LP component . 9LP will be redefined as a partial order on 2p , where F is the set of syntactic features I0 The second and more important change can best be described by viewing the LP component as a function from a pair of symbols  ( which can be characterized as feature sets ) to truth values , telling us for every pair of symbols whether the first can precede the second in a linearized ru ! e  . Given the LP relation ( al , ~/ t ), ( a ~, B ~ . )  .   .   .   .   . ( a  ~ , ~) and a pair of complex symbols (3' , 6) , the function can be expressed as in (11) . 
(11 clAc,~A .   .   . Ac , ~ where c~----~(~ ; _C6A # ; C : 3') for 1 < i < n ~ , Vecall the conjunct clauses LP conditions ; the whole conjunction is a complex LP condition . The complex LP condition allows " T to precede/~ on the right hand side of a CF-PS rule if every LP condition is true  . An LP condition ct derived from the LP rule ( a ~ , // i ) is true if it is not the case that 3 has the features ; /~ and 6 has the features a ? . Thus the LP rule NP < VP stanch for the following member of the LP relation + N  , -V , +2B ~ R , l-N , + V , +2BAR ) . 
The LP condition following from this rule prevents a superset of - N  , + V , +2BAR from preceding a superset of l-N , + V , +2BAR , i . e . , a VP from preceding an NP . 
But notice that there is nothing to prevent us from writing a fictitious LP rule such as  ( 1 2 + PRONOUN <- ACCUSATIVE German has verbs like I chrcn that take two accusative noun phr ~  . ses as complements . If 12 ) were an LP rule then the resulting LP condition defined as in  ( l1 ) would rule out any occurrence of two prouominalized sister NPs because it her order would be rejected  . l1 It . is an empirical question if one might ever find it useful to write LP rules as in  ( 12 , i . e . , rules a < ~/ , where a U 3 could be a ~ ubset of a complex symbol . Let me introduce a minor redefinition of the interpretation of LP  , which will take care of cases such as ( 12 ) and at the same prepare the way for a more substantial modification of LP rules  . LP shall again be interpreted as a function from pairs of feature sets  ( associated with complex symbols to truth values . Given the LP relation ( a1,,' Jl ), ( oo . .;\]' . ,  .   .   .   .   . ( a . ,~q ~ ) and a pair of complex symbols 0The wide tyus cd notation for nomnstantiated LP rules and the feature in-stantiati  , ,n principles could be regarded an meta , met . L grammatical devices that inductively define a part of " the metagrammar  . 
10 Remember that , in an . ~- synta . x . syntactic ategories abbreviate fature sets NP ~ + N  , -V , +2BAR . The definition canemily be extended to work on feature trees instead of feature sets  . 
1 lln principle , there is nothing in the original ID/LP definition either that would prevent the grammar writer from abbreviating a set of LP rules by  ( 121 . It is not quite clear , however , which set of LP rules is abbreviated by ( r ") . 
(3',/~), the function can be expressed as in (13).
(13) ctAc2,A . . . A cn where ~ , -( a~c6AB ~ C3 , )-( o ~ C3 , A B , C6 ) for l < i < nT hat means 3' can precede 6 if all LP conditions are true . 
For instance , the LP condition of LP rule ( 12 ) will yield false only if " t is + ACCUSATIVE and  #is + PRONOUN  , and either 3 , is-PRONOUN or 6 is-ACCUSATIVE ( or both ) . 
-Nowlet . us assume that , in addition to the kind of simple LP rules just introduced  , we can also have complex LP rules consisting of several simple LP rules and notated in curled brackets a  . sin ( 14: 14 ) '+ NOMINATIVE <+ DATIVE\]+NOMINATIVE <+ ACCUSATIVE+DATIVE <+ ACCUSATIVE ~- FOCUS <+ FOCUS+PRONOUN <- PRONOUN/TheLP condition associated with such a complex LP rules hall be the disjunction of the LP conditions assigned to its members  . LP rules can be generally defined as sets of ordered pairs of feature sets  ( at , Bt ) , ( a  ~ , ~)  .   .   .   .   . ( am , ~/ m ) , which are either notated with curled brackets as in  ( 10 )  , or , in the case of singletons , as LP rules of the familiar kind . A complex LP rule at , dl ), ( no _,%) .   .   .   .   . am , B , n ) is interpreted as a LP condition of the following form  ( o1C6A~tC-~ ) V ( a ~ C6 At /= C_- , ) v . v t ~ . , C6A ~,, C_~))--((a , C_3, A3, c_~v(a .   . c_"lA,'t = C6) V .   .   . V ( amC3, Adm~6) . Any of the atomic LP rules within the complex LP rule can be violated as long as the violations are sanctioned by at least one of the atomic LP rules  . 
Notice that with respect oth is definition , " regular " LP rules , i . e . , singelons , can be regarded as a specia J case of complex
I , P rules.
\[ want ? o suggest that the LP rules in Sa , (8h ) , and ( l-Iarca subset of the LP rules of German . This analysis makes a number of empirical predictions  . For example , it predicts that (15) and (16) are grammatical , but not (17) . 
(15 ) Dann batteder Doktor dem Mann die Pillege ben -FOCUS+FOCUS-FOCUS+NOM+DAT+ACC Then had the doctor them an the pill given  ( 18 ) Danah atteder Doktor die Pille dem Manngegeben -FOCUS+FOCUS+FOCUS+NOM-+ACC+DAT Then had the doctor the pill them an given  ( 17 ) ? ? Dannhatte der Doktor die Pille dem Manngege ben -FOCUS+FOCUS-FOCUS+NOM+ACC+DAT Then had the doctor the pill them an given  ii0 In ( 17 ) the sub-LP-rules+DAT <+ ACC and-FOCUS <+ FOCUS are violated  . No other sub-LP-rule legitimizes these violations and therefore the sentence is bad  . 
This agrees with the findings of Lenerz (1977) , who tested a large number of sample sentences in order to determine the interaction of the unmarked syntactic order and the ordering preferences introduced by discourse roles  . There are too many possible feature iustantious and permutations of the three noun phrases to permit making grammaticality predictions here for a larger sample of ordering variants  . So far 1 have not discovered any empirical deficiencies in the proposed analysis  . 
5 . Implications for Implementations The theory of GPSG  , a , s described by its creators and as outlined in this paper  , cannot be used directly for implementation . The number of rules generated by the metagrammar is just too large  . The Hewlett-Packard system ( Gawron et al .   , 1982 as well as Henry Thompson's program , which are both based on a pre-ID/LP version of GPSG  , use metarules as metagrammatical devices , but with feature iustantiation built into the processor  . 
Agreement checks , however , which correspond to the work of the metagrammatical feature instantiation principles  , are done at parse time . As Berwick and Weinberg (1982\] have pointed out , the context-freeness of a grammar might not accomplish much when the number of rules explodes  . The more components of the metagrammar that can be built into the processor  ( or used by it as additional rule sets at parse time  )  , the smaller the resulting grammar will be . The task is to search for parsing algorithms that  . incorporate the work of the metagrammar into contextfree phrase structure parsing without completely losing the parsing time advantages of the latter  . Most PSG parsers do feature handling at parse time  . Recently , Shieber ( forthcoming ) has extended the Earley algorithm ( Earley 1970 ) to incorporate the linearization process without a concomitant loss in parsing c~ciency  . The redefinition of the LP component proposed in this paper can be intrusted easily and efficiently into Shieber's extension  . 
If the parser uses the disjunctive LP rules to accept all ordering variants that are wellformed with respectoa discourse  , there still remains the question of how the generator chooses among the disjuncts in the LP rule  . It would be very surprising if the different orderings that can be obtained by choosing one LP rule disjua:t over another did in fact occur with equal frequency  . Although there are no clear results that might provide an answer to this question  , there are indications that certain dis-junt as " win out " more often than others  . However , this choice is purely stylistic . A system that is supposed to produce high-quality output might contain a stylistic selection mechanism that avoids repe  , hions or choose ~ among variants according to the tyt:e of text or dialogue  . 
6. Conclusion
The proposed analysis of partially free word order in German makes the accurate predictions about the gram-musicality of ordering variants  , including their appropriateness with respect to a given diseo~se  . The 1D/LP format , which has the mechanisms to handle free word order  , has been extended to account for the interaction of syntax and prag-mat  . its , as well as for the mutually competing ordering principles  . 
The modifications are compatible with efficient implementation models  . The redefined LP component can be used for the implementation of stylistic choice  . 

Barwise , J . and J . Perry (1981) " Situations and Attitudes ', . Iouwna/of Philosophy , lgHl , 668-891 . 
Berwick , R . C . , and A . S . We inberg " Parsing Efficiency , Computational Complexity , and the Evaluation of Grammatical Theories , " Linguistic Inquiry ,  13 ,  165-191 . 
Earley , d .   ( 1970 " An Efficient ContextFree Parsing Algorithm , " Communle at lona of the ACM ,  13 ,  (1970) ,  94-102 . 
Gawron , M . J . . et al (1982) " The GPSG Linguistics System , " Procced lnla of the 20th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computat ional Lingu ~ ties  , University of
Toronto . Toronto , June 1982, 7481.
Gazdar , G . and G . Pullum (1981) " Subcategorization , Constituent Order and the Notion ' II ead ' , " in M . Moortgat , H . v . d . Huistanti T . Hoekstra . eds . , The Scope of Lexleal Rules , 107-123, Foris . Dordreeht , Holland , 1981 . 
Gaz , lar , G . and G . Pullum ( 1982 ) " Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar : A Theoretical Synopsis  , " Indiana University Linguistics Club , Bloomington , Indiana . 
Gazdar . G . . G . Pullum . and I . Sag 1981 ) " Auxiliaries and related phenomena in a restrictive theory of grammar  , " Lnngttatge 58 .  591-638 . 
Kamp , H .   ( 1980 ) "A theory of truth and semantic representation " ms  . 
l ~: art tunen . L . and S . Peters (1979) " Conventional implicature , " in C . 
I ',: . Oh and D . Dinneen ( eds . ), Syntauttad Semantics , Vol . 
11: Presupposition , Academic Press , New York ,  1-66 . 
t < lein . E . (1983) " A . ~h , ltisct Analysis of Immediate Domination
Rules " ms.
Lenerz . J .   ( 1077 ) Zuw Abfolge nomlnnlet Satsglled cr Im Deutschen , TBL Verlag Gunter Narr . Tuebingen , 1977 . 
~lontag , , e . R . (19741 Corms 1Philosophy , edited and with an introduction I , yR . Thomason , Yale University Press , New Haven . 
Nerhonne . J .   11082 "' Phantoms ' in German fronting : Poltergeist constituents '  . " paper presented at the 108'2 , Annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of America  , San Diego , California . 
December 1982.
Peters . S . and II . L'szkoreit , " Essential Variables in Metarules , " paper presented at the 1982 Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America  , San Diego , California , December 1982 . 
Pul/um . G . (1982) " Free Word Order and Phrase Structure , Rules , " J . Pustejovsky and P . Sells . ( eds . ) , Peoceedlntm of the Twelfth Annual Meeting of the North Eauttern Lhagulstle Society  , Graduate Linguistics Student Association , University of Massachusetts , Amherst , 
Massachusetts 1982.
Shicber . S .   ( forthcoming ) "Direct Parsing of ID/LP Grammars . " Uszkoreit . H . (1982 ai " German Word Order in GPSG , " in D . 
Flickinger , NI . Macken , and N . Wieg and ( eds . L Proccedint : , Llnttuhttie , , Stanford University , Stanford , California (1982) . 
Uszkoreit , H . (1982b ) " Topicalizationi Standard German , " paper presented at the 1982 Annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of America  , San Diego , December 1982 . 

