Conceptual Analysis of Garden Path Sentences
Michael J . Pazzani
The MITRE Corporation
Bedford , MA 01730

By integrating syntactic and semantic processing , our parser ( LAZY ) is able to deterministically parse sentences which syntactically appear to be garden path sentences although native speakers do not need conscious reanalysis to understand them  . 
LAZY comprises an extension to conceptual nalys is which yields an explicit representation of syntactic information and a flexible interaction between semantic and syntactic knowledge  . 
1. INTRODUCTION
The phenomenon we wish to model is the understanding of garden path sentences  ( GPs ) by native speakers of English . 
Parsers designed by Marcus \[81\] and Shieber \[83\] duplicate a reader's first reaction to a GP such as  ( 1 ) by rejecting it as ungrammatical , even though the sentence is , in some sense , grammatical . 
(1) The horse raced past the barnfell.
Thinking first that * r ~ cedS is the main verb , most readers become confused when they see the word  , " fell ' . Our parser , responding like the average reader , initially makes this mistake , but later determines that * fell " is intended to be the main verb  , and ? raced * is ap . ~sive participle modifying " horse ' . 
We are particularly interested in a class of sentences which Shieber's and Marcus'parsers will consider to be GPs and reject as ungrammatic although many people do not  . For example , most people can easily understand ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) without conscious reanalysis . 
(~ ) Three percent of the courses filled with freshmen were cancelled  . 
(8) The chick encooked with broccoli is delicious.
The syntactic structure of ( 2 ) is similar to that of sentence ( 1 )  . 
However , most readers do not initially mistake ' filled " to be the 
Current Address :
The Aerospace Corporation
P.O . Box 92957
Los Angeles , CA 90009 main verb . LAZY goes a step further than previous parsers by modeling the average readers ability to deterministieally recognize sentences  ( 2 ) and ( 3 )  . 
If " filled " were the main verb , then its subject would be the noun phrase = three percent of the courses * and the selectional restrictions \[ KATZ  63\] associated with " to fill " would be violated . 
LAZY prefers not to violate selectional restrictions  . Therefore , when processing (2) , LAZY will delay deciding the relationship among * filled " and " three percent of the courses " until the word " were * is seen and it is clear that " filled " is a passive participle  . We call sentences like ( 2 ) semantically disambiguatable garden path sentences  ( SDGPs )  . Crain and Croker \[79\] have reported experimental evidence which demonstrates that not all potential garden path sentences are actual garden paths  . 
LAZY uses a language recognition scheme capable of waiting long enough to select the correct parse of both  ( 1 ) and 2 ) without guessing and backing up\[MARCUS 76\] . However , when conceptual links are strong enough , LAZY is careless and will assume one syntactic ( and therefore semantic ) representation before waiting long enough to consider alternatives  . We claim that we can model the performance of native English speakers understanding SDGPs and misunderstanding GPs by using this type of strategy  . For example , when processing (1) , LAZY assumes that " the horse " is the subject of the main verb " raced " as soon as the word " raced " is seen because the selectional restrictions associated with = raced = are satisfied  . 
One implication of LAZY's parsing strategy , is that people could understand some true GPs if they were more careful and waited longer to select among alternative parses  . Experimental evidence \ [ Matthews 791 suggests that people can recognize garden path sentences as grammatical if properly prepared  . Math hews found that subjects recognized sentences uchas  ( 21 as being grammatical , and after doing so , when later presented with a sentence like ( 1 ) will also judge it to be grammatical . In a more informal experiment , we have found that , colleagues whore ~ d papers on GPs , understand new GPs easily by tile end of a paper . ) LAZY exhibits this behavior by being more careful after encountering SDGPs or when reanalyzing arden path sentences  . 
4861 I . SYNTAXINACONCEPTUAL ANALY ZER
The goal of conceptual analysis is to map natural language text into memory structures that represent the meaning of the text  . 
It is claimed that this mapping can be accomplished without a prior syntactic analysis  , relying instead on a variety of knowledge sources including expectations from both word definitions and inferential memory  ( see\[Ricsbeck 76\] , \[Schank80\] , \[Gershman82\] , \[Birnbaum81\] , Pazzani83\] and\[Dyer83\]) . Given this model of processing , in sentence (4) , (~) Af ~ rgkick cd John . 
llow is it possible to tell who kicked whom ? There is a very simple answer : Syntax  . Sentence ( 4 ) is a simple active sentence whose verb is " to kick '  . " Mary " is the subject of the sentence and ? Bill " is the direct object  . There may be a more complicated answer , if , for example , John and Mary are married , Mary is ill-tempered , John is passive , and Mary has just found out that John has been unfaithful  . In this case , it is possible to expect hat Mary might hit John , and confirm this prediction by noticing that the words in  ( 4 ) refer to Mary , John , and hitting . In fact , if this prediction was formulated and the sentence were " John kicked Mary " we might take it to mean " Mary kicked John ' and usually notice that the speaker had made araistake  . Although we feel that this type of processing is an important part of understanding  , it cannot account for all language comprehension . Certainly ,   ( 4 ) can be understood in contexts which do not predic that Mary might hit John  . requiring syntactic knowledge to determine who kicked whom  . 
fla . Precedes and Follows
Syntactic information is represented in a conceptual analyzer  , in a number of ways , the simplest of which is the notion of one word preceding or following another  . Such information is encoded as a positional predicate in the test of a type of production which Ries beck calls a request  . The test also contains a semantic predicate ( i . e . , the selectional restrictions ) . A set of requests make up the definition of a word  . For example , the definition of " kick " has three requests :
REQI : Test : true
Action : Add the meaning structure for " kick " to an ordered list of concepts typically called the C-list  . 
REQg : Test : Is there a concept preceding the concept for " kick " which is animate ? 
Action : ...
R EQ3: Test : Is there a concept following the concept for " kick " which is a physical object ? 
Action : ...
The action of a requestypically builds or connects concepts  . 
Although people who build conceptual analyzers have reasons for not building a representation f the syntax of a sentence  , there is no reason that they cannot . LAZY builds syntactic representations . --" lib . Requests in LAZYLAZY , unlike other conceptual analyzers , separates the syntactic ( or positional ) information from the selectioual restrictions by dividing the test part of request into a number of facets  . There are three reasons for doing this . First , it allows for a distinction between different kinds of knowledge  . Secondly , it is possible to selectively ignore some facets . Finally , it permits a request to access the information encoded in other requests  . 
In many conceptual analyzers , some syntactic information is hidden in the control structure  . At certain times during the parse , not all of the request are considered . For example , in ( 5 ) it is necessary to delay considering a request . 
(5) Who is Mar~lreerniting f
To avoid understanding the first three words of sentence  5  ) as a complete sentence , " Who is Mary ?' , some request from " is " must be delayed until the word " recruiting " is processed  . In LAZY , the time that a request can be considered is explicitly represented as a facet of the request  . Additionally , separate tests exist for the selectional restriction  , the expected part of speech , and the expected sentent iMposition . 
In LAZY , REQ2 of " kick " would be:
REQ2a : Position : Subject of " kick "
Restriction : Animate
Action : Make the concept found the syntactic subject of " kick " 
Part-Of-Speech : ( noun pronoun )
Time : Clause-Type-Known ?
In REQ2a , Subject is a function which examines the state of the C-list and returns the proper constituent as a function of the clause type  . In an active declarative sentence , the subject precedes the verb , in a passive sentence it may follow the word " by  '  , etc . 
\[ The usage of " subject " is incorrect in the usual sense of the word  . ) The Time facet of REQ2a states that the request should be considered only after the type of the clause is know  . The predicates which are included in a reques to control the time of consideration are : End-Of - Noun-Group ?  , Clause-Type-Known ? , Head . Of , Immediate-Noun-Group ?, and End-Of-Sentence ? . These operate by examining the C-list in a manner similar to the positional predicates  . 
The other facets of REQ2a state that the subject of " kick " must be animate  , and should be a noun ors pronoun . 
487 ll IGARDEN PATHSENTENCES ....
Several different types of local ambiguities cause GPs  . 
Misunderstanding sentences I ,   2 and 3 is a result of confusing a participle for the main verb of a sentence  . Although there are other types of GPs ( e . g . , imperative and yes/no questions with an initial " have '  )   , we will only demonstrate how LAZY understands or misunderstands passive participle and main verb conflicts  . 
Passive participles and past main verbs are indicated by a ? ed"suffix on the verb form  . Therefore , the definition of " ed " must discriminate between these two cases  . The definition of " ed = is shown in Figure 3a . A simpler definition for " ed ? is possible if the morphology routine reconstruct sentence so that the suffix of a verb is a separate " word " which precedes the verb  . The definition of " ed " is shown in Figure 3a . Throughout his discussion , we will use the name Root for the verb immediately following = ed " on the 

If Root appears to be passive
Then mark Root as a passive participle.
Otherwise if Root does not appear to be passive
Then note the tense of Root.
Figure 3a . Definition of " ed'.
It is safe to consider this request only at the end of the sentence or if a verb is seen following Root which could be the main verb  . One test that is used to determine if Root could be passive is:  1  . There is no known main verb seen preceding " ed '   , and 2 . The word which would be the subject of Root if Root were active agrees with the selectional restrictions for the word which would precede Root if Root were passive  ( i . e . , the selectional restrictions of the direct object if there is no indirect object  )  , and 3 . There is a verb which could be the main verb following 

Figure 3b.
One test performed to determine if Root does not appear to be passive is:  1  . The verb is not marked as passive , and 2 . The word which would be the subject of Root if Root were active agrees with the selectional restrictions for the subject  . 
Figure 3c.
Note that these tests rely on the fact that one request can examine the semantic or syntactic information encoded in another request  . 
As we have presented request so far , four separate tests must be true to fire a request  ( i . e . , to execute the request's action ) : a word must be found in a particular position in the sentence  , the worif must have the proper part of speech , the word must meet the selectional restrictions , and the parse must be in a state in which it is safe to execute the positional predicate  . We have relaxed the requirement that the selectional restrictions be met if all of the other tests are true  . This avoids problems present in some previous conceptual analyzers which are unable to parse some sentences such as " Dorocks talk ? =  . Additionally , we have experimented with not requiring that the Time test succeed if all other tests have passed unless we are reanalyzing a sentence that we have previously not been able to parse  . We will demonstrate that this yields the performance that people exhibit when comprehending GPs  . 
LAZY processes a sentence one word at a time from left to right  . When processing a word , its representation is added to the C-list and its requests are activated  . Next , all active requests are considered . When a request is fired , a syntactic structure is built by connecting two or more constituents on the C-list  . At the end of a parse the C-list should contain one constituent as the root of a tree describing the structure of the sentence  . 
Sentence ~6 ) is a GP which people normally have trouble reading :  ( 6 ) The boat 8 ailed across the riversank . 
When parsing this sentence , LAZY reads the word " the " and adds it to the C -list  . Next , the word " boat " is added to the C-list . 
A request from " the slooking for a noun to modify is considered and all tests pass  . This request constructs a noun phrase with " the " modifying " boat '  . Next , " eds is added to the C-list . All of its requests look for a verb following , so they cannot firey et . The work " sail " is added to the C-list . The request of Sed " which sets the tense of the immediately following verb is considered  . It check the semantic features of " boats and finds that they match the selectional restrictions required of the subject of " sail '   . The action of this request is executed , in spite of the fact that its Time reports that it is not safe to do so  . Next , are quest from " sail " finds that that " boat " could serve as the subject since it precedes the verb in what is erroneously assumed to be an active clause  . The structure built by this request notes that * boat " is the subject of " sail '  . A request looking for the direct object of " sail " is then considered  . It notices that the subject has been found and it is not animate  , therefore " sail " is not being used transitively  . This request is deactivated . The word " across " is added to the C-list and " the river " is then parsed analogously to " tile boat '  . Next , are quest from " across " looking for the object of the preposition is considered  . . . 
and finds the noun phrase , " the river ' . Another request is then activated and attaches this prepositional phrase to " sail '  . At this point in tintile parse , we have built a structure describing an active sentence " The boat sailed across the river  . ' and the C-list contains one constituent . After adding the verb suffix and " sink " to the C-list we find that " sink " cannot find a subject and there are two constituents left on the C-list  . This is an error condition and the sentence must be reanalyzed more carefully  . 

It is possible to recover from misreading some garden path sentences by reading more carefully  . In LAZY , this corresponds to not letting a request fire until all the tests are true  . Although other recovery schemes are possible , our current implementation starts ? over from the beginning  . When reanalyzing (6) , the request from " ed " which sets the tense of the main verb is not fired because all facets of its test never become true  . This request is deactivated when the word " sank " is read and a not here quest from " ed " notes that " sailed " is a participle  . At the end of the parse there is oae constituent left on the C-list  , similar to that which would be produced when processing " The boat which was sailed across the riversank '  . 
It is possible to parse SDGPs without reanalysis . For example , most readers easily understand ( 7 ) which is simplified from \[ Birnbaum81\] . 
(7) The plane stuffed with marijuan acrashed.
Sentence ( 7 ) is parsed analogously to ( 6 ) until the word " stuff " is encountered . A request from " ed"triest , , determine the sentence type by testing if " plane " could be the subject of " stuff * and fails because " plane " does not meet the selectional restrictions of " stuff'  . 
This request also checks to see if " stuff " could be passive  , but fails at this time ( see condition 3 of Figure 3b )  . A request from " stuff " then finds that " plane " is in the default position to be the subject  , but its action is not executed because two of the four tests have not passed : these leetional restrictions are violated and it is too early to consider the positional predicate because the sentence type is unknow  . A request looking for the direct object of " stuff " does not succeed at this time because the default location of the direct object follows the verb  . Next , the prepositional phrase " with marijuana " is pawed analogously to " across the lake " in  ( 6 )  . After the suffix of " crash " ( i . e . , " ed ') and " crash " are added to the C-list ; the request fr . m the " ed'of"stuff " is considered , and it finds that " stuff " could be a passive participle because " plane " can fulfill the selectional restrictions of the direct object of " stuff '  . A request from " stuff " then notes that " plane " is the direct object  , and a request from the " ed"of"crash " marks the tense of " er ~ h'  . Finally , " crash " finds " plane " as its subject . The only constituent of the C-list is a tree similar to that which would be produced by " The plane which was-stuffed with marijuanacrashed '  . 
There are some situations in which garden path sentences cannot be understood even with a careful reanalysis  . For example , many people have problems understanding sentence ( 8 )  . 
(8) The canoef loated down the riveraank.
To help some people understand this sentence , it is necessary to inform them that " float " can be a transitive verb by giving a simple example sentence such as " The man floated the canoe '  . Our parser would fail to reanalyze this sentence if it did not have a request associated with " float " which looks for a direct object  . 
" ~ e have been rather conservative ingiving rules to determine when " ed " indicates a past participle instead of the past tense  . In particular , condition 3 of Figure 3b may not be necessary . By removing it , as soon as " the plane stuffed " is processed we would assume that " stuffed " is a participle phrase  . This would not change the parse of (7) . However , there would be an impact when parsing (0) . 
(9) The chick encooked with broccoli.
With condition 3 removed , this parses as a noun phrase . With it included , (9) would currently be recognized as a sentence . We have decided to include condition 3 , because it delays the resolving of this ambiguity until both possibilities are clear  . It is our belief that this ambiguity should be resolved by appealing to episodic and conceptual knowledge more powerful than sclectional restrictions  . 
IV . PREVIOUSWORK in PARSIFAL , Marcus'parser , the misunderstanding of GPs is caused by having gramma rules which can lookahead only three constituents  . To deterministically parse a GP such as (1) , it is necessary to have a lookahead buffer of at least four constituents  . 
PARSIFAL's grammar rules make the same guess that readers make when presented with a true GP  . For a participle/main verb conflict , readers prefer to choose a main verb . However , PARSIFAL will make the same guess when processing SDGPs  . Therefore , PARSIFAL fails to parse some sentences ( SDGPs ) deterministically which people can parse without conscious backtracking  . In LAZY , the C-list corresponds to the lookahead buffer . When parsing most sentences , the C-list will contain at most three constituents  . 
\] owever , when understanding a SDGP or reanalyzing a true garden path sentence  , there are four constituents in the C-list . Instead of modeling them is understanding of GPs , by limiting the size of the lookahead buffer and the lookahead in the grammar  , LAZY models this phenomenon by deciding on a syntactic representation before waiting long enough to disamhiguate on a purely syntactic basis when semantic expectations are strong enough  . 
Shieber models the misunderstanding of GPs in a LALRI  ) parser\[Aho 77\] by the selection of an incorrect reduction in a reduce-reduce conflict  . In a participle/main verb conflict , there is a state in his parser which requires choosing between a participle phrase and a verb phrase  . Instead of guessing like PARSIFAL , Shieber's parser looks up the " lexical preference " of the verb  . Some verbs are marked as preferring participle forms  ; others prefer being main verbs . While this lexicai preference can account for the understanding of SDGPs and them is understanding of GPs in any one particular example  , it is not a very general mechanism . One implication of using lexical preference to select the correct form is that some verbs are only understood or misunderstood as main verbs and others only as participles  . If this were true , then sentences ( 10 a ) and 10b ) would both be either easily understood or GPs . 
(10n ) N of reshmenre gistered for Calculus failed.
(lOb ) No car registered in California should be driven in 


We find that most people easily understand (10b ) , but require conscious backtracking to understand ( 10 a )  . Instead of using a predetermined preference for one syntactic form  , LAZY utilizes semantic lues to favor a particular parse  . 
V . FUTURE WORK
We intend to extend LAZY by allowing it to consult and episodic memory during parsing  . The format that we have chosen for requests can be augmented by adding an EPISODIC facet to the test  . This will enable expectation to predict individual objects in addition to semantic features  . We have seen examples of potential garden path sentences which we speculate are misunderstood or understood by consulting world knowledge e  . g . , 11 and 12) (11) At MIT , ninety five percent of the freahmen registered for Calculus passed  . 
(1~) At MIT , five percent of the freshmenre gistered foe
Calculus failed.
We have observed that more people mistake " registered " for the main verb in  ( 11 ) than 12 )  . This could be accounted for by the fact that the proposition that " At MIT  , ninety five percent of the freshmenre gistered for Calculus " is more easily accepted than " At MIT  , five percent of the freshmenre gistered for Calculus '  . 
Evidence such as this suggests that semantic and episodic processing are done at early stages of understanding  . 
VI . CONCLUSION
We have augmented the basic request consideration algorithm of a conceptual analyzer to include information to determine the time that an expectation should be considered and shown that by ignoring this information when syntactic and semantic expectations agree  , we can model the performance of native English speakers understanding and misunderstanding garden path sentences  . 
VII . ACK NOW LED GMENTS
This work was supported by USAF Electronics System Division under Air Force contract  F19628-84-C-0001 and monitored by the Rome Air Development Center . 

Birnbanm , L . and M . Selfridge , " Conceptual Analysis of Natural Language ' , in Inside Artificial Intelligence : Five Prol ~rams Plus Miniatures  , Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates ,  1981 . 
Crain , S . and P . Coker , s A Semantic Constraint on Parsing ' , Paper presented at Linguistic Society of America Annual Meeting  . 
University of California at Irvine , 1979.
Dyer , M . G . , In-Depth Understanding : A Computer Model of Integrated Processing for Narrative Comprehension  , Cambridge , 
MA : The MIT Press , 1083.
Gershman , A . V . , " A Framework for Conceptual Analyzers ' , in Strategies for Natural Language Process in ~ b Hillsdale  , NJ : Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates , 1982.
Katz , 3 . S . and J . A . Fodor , " The Structure of Semantic
Theory ', in Language , 309, 1963.
Marcus , M . , A Theory of Syntact~ic Recognition for Natural Language  , Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press ,  1980 . 
Marcus , M . , * Wait-and-See Strategies for Parsing Natural Language '  , MIT WP-75 , Cambridge , MA : 1974 . 
Matthews , R . , mAre the Grammatical Sentences of s Language of Recursive Set ?'  , in Systhese 400 ,  1979 . 
Pazzani , M . J . , * Interactive Script Instantiation ' , in Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ,  1983 . 
Riesbeck , C . and R . C . Schank , " Comprehension by Computer : Expectation Based Analysis of Sentences in Coute ~ t '  , Research Report ~78 , Dept . of Computer Science , Yale University , 1976 . 
Schank , R . C . and L . Birnbaum , Nlemory ~ Meaning , and Synta X , , Research Report 189 , Yale University Department of
Computer Science , 1980.
Shieber , S . M . , " Sentence Disambiguatiou by a Shift-Reduce Parsing Technique '  ,   21st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Association for Computational
Linguistics , 1983.

