THERESOLUTION OFQUANTIFICATION ALAMBIGUITYIN THETENDUM SYSTEM 
Harry Bunt
Computational Linguistics Research Unit
Dept . of Language and Literature , Tilburg University
P.O . Box 90153, 5000 LE Tilburg
The Netherlands

A method is described for handling the
ambiguity and vagueness that is often found in quantifications - the semantically complex relations between nominal and verbal constituents  . In natural language certain aspects of quantification are often left open  ; it is argued that the analysis of quantification in a model theoretic framework should use semantic representations in which this may also be done  . This paper shows a form for such a representation and how " ambiguous " representations are used in an elegant and efficient procedure for semantic analysis  , incorporated in the TENDUM dialogue system . 
The quantification ambi~uit\[explosion problem Quantification is a complex phenomenon that occurs whenever a nominal and a verbal constituent are combined in such a way that the denotation of the verbal constituent is predicated of arguments supplied by the  ( denotation of the ) nominal constituent . 
This gives rise to a number of questions such as ( i ) What objects serve as predicate arguments ? ( 2 ) Of how many objects is the predicate true ? ( 3 ) How many objects are considered as potential arguments of the predicate ? When we consider these questions for a sentence with a few noun phrases  , we readily see that the sentence has a multitude of possible interpretations  . Even a sentence with only one NP such as ( I ) Five boats were lifted has a variety of possible readings  , depending on whether the boats were lifted individually  , collectively , or in groups of five , and on whether the total number of boats involved is exactly five or at least five  . For a sentence with two numerically quantified NPs  , such as ' Three Russians visited five Frenchmen ' , Partee ( 1975 ) distinguished 8 readings depending on whether the Russians and the Frenchmen visited each other individually of collectively and on the relative scopes of the quantifiers  . Partee's analysis is in fact still rather crude ; a somewhat more refined analysis , which distinguishes group readings and readings with equally wide scope of the quantifiers  , leads to 30 interpretations ( Bunt , in press ) . 
This presents a problem for any attempt at a precise and systematic description of semantic structures in natural language  . On the one hand an articulate analysis of quantification Js needed for obtaining the desired interpretations of every sentence  , while on the other hand we do not want to end up with dozens of interpretations for every sentence  . 
To some extent this " ambiguity explosion problem " is an artefact of the usual method of formal semantic analysis  . In this method sentences are translated into formulae of a logical language  , the truth conditions of which are determined by model theoretic interpretation rules  . No wone might want to consider a sentence like ( i ) not as ambiguous , but only assaying that five boats were lifted , w ~ thout specifying how they were lifted . But translation of the sentence into a logical representation forces one to be specific  . That is , the logical representation language requires distinction between such interpretations as represented by  ( 2 )   ( individual reading ) and ( 3 )   ( group reading ) :  ( 2 )  ~ ( xeBOATS : LIFTED ( x ) ) = 5  ( 3 ) 3 xEyCBOATS : ~ ( y ) = 5: LIFTED ( x ) In other words , the analysis framework forces us to make distinctions which we might not always want to make  . 
To tackle this problem , I have devised a method of representing quantified expressions in a logical language with the possibility of leaving certain quantification aspects open  . 
This method has been implemented in the TENDUM dialogue system  , developed jointly at the Institute for Perception Research in Eindhoven and the Computational Linguistics Research Unit at Tilburg University  , Department of Linguistics ( Bunt , 1982; ~983; Bunt & thoe Schwartzenberg ,  1982;) . This method is not only of theoretical interest , but also provides a computationally efficient treatment of quantification  . 
Ambiguity resolution
In a semantic analysis system which translates natural language expressions into formal representations  , all disambiguation takes place during this translation  . 

This applies both to purely lexical ambiguities and to structural ambiguities  . For lexical disambiguation this means that a lexical item has several translations in the representation language  ( RL )  , which are all produced by a dictionary lookup at the beginning of the analysis  . The generation of semantic representations for sentences that display both lexical and structural ambiguity thus takes place as depicted in Fig  . i:"~Z;\];~;;ZNL~RL . . . . . . . . model \ " ~ . . . . . . . . . /\~-"-~;;; Z ; ; ; ? ~ .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . /dictionary application of interpre-lookup grammar rule station Fig  . i Longer arrows indicate larger amount of processing  . 
Since the lexical ambiguities considered here are purely semantic  , the same grammar rules will be applicable to all the lexical interpretations  ( assuming that the grammar does not contain world knowledge to filter out those interpretations that are meaningless in the discourse domain under consideration  )  . Since the amount of processing involved in the application of grammar rules is very large compared to that of translating a lexical item to its RL instances  , this setup is not very efficient . In the PHLIQAI question-answering system ( Bronnenberg et al ,  1980 ) the syntactic/semantic and lexical processing stages were therefore reversed  , so that disambiguation takes place as depicted in Fig  .  2:
NL ? : : : : : : : : oO0Ol/ . . . . . . . . /  ; ;-_222 ; 2 / application of dictionary Interpre-grammar rules lookup ration Fig  .   2 Longer arrows indicate larger amount of processing  . 
In this setup an intermediate representation language is u~ed which is identical to RL except that is has an ambiguous constant for every content word of the natural language  . 
It turns out that semantic analysis along these lines can be formulated entirely in terms of the traditional model theoretic framework  ( Bunt , in press ) , therefore this method is appropriately called two -level model theoretic semantics  . This method has been implemented in the TENDUM system  , with an intermediate representation language that contains ambiguous constants corresponding to quantification aspects  , in addition to ambiguous constants corresponding to nouns  , verbs , etc . 
Quantification aspects
The different aspects of quantification are closely related to the semantic functions of determiners  . These functions depend on their syntactic position in a determiner sequence  . A fullfledged basic noun phrase has the layout : ( 4 ) pre-+central+post-+head determiner determiner determiner noun  ( see Quirk et al ,  1972 , p . 146) . For example , in the NP ( 5 ) All my four children the central determiner'my ' restricts the range of reference of the head noun ' children ' to the set of my children  ; the predeterminer ' all ' indicates that a predicate  , combined with the noun phrase to form a proposition  , is associated with all the members of that set , and the post determiner ' four ' expresses the presupposition that the set consists of four elements  . This set is determined by the central determiner plus the denotation of the head noun  ; I will call it the source of the quantification . In the case of an NP without central determiner the source is the denotation of the head noun  . For the indication of the quantity or fraction of that part of the source that is invol-ved in a predication I will use the term source involvement  . 
Quantification owes its name to the fact that source involvement is often made explicit by means of quantitative  ( pre- ) determiners like ' five ' , ' many ' , ' all ' , or ' two liters of ' . Obviously , source involvement is a central aspect of quantification  . 
Another important aspect of quantification is illustrated by the following sentences :  ( 6a ) The chairs were lifted by all the boys ( 6b ) The chairs were lifted by each of the boys These sentences differ in that  ( 6b ) says unambiguously that everyone of the boys lifted the chairs  , whereas ( 6a ) is unspecific as to what each individual boy did : it only says that the chairs were lifted and that all the boys were involved in the lifting  , but it does not specify , for instance , whether everyone of the boyslifted the chairs or all the boys together lifted the chairs  . The quantifiers ' all ' and ' each ( of ) ' thus both indicate complete involvement of the source  , but differ in their determination of how a predicate  ( ' lifted the chairs ' ) is applied to the source . 
' Each ' indicates that the predicate is applied to the individual members of the source  ; ' all ' leaves open whether the predicate is applied to individual members  , to groups of meubers , or to the sources as a whole . To designate the way in which a predicate is applied to  , or " distributed over " , the source of a quantification , I use the term distribution . A way of expressing the distribution of a quantification is by specifying the class of objects that the predicate is applied to  , and how this class is related to the source . In the distributive case this class is precisely the : having the source as its only element  . I will refer to the class of objects that the predicate is applied to as the domain of the quantification  . The distribution of a quantification over an NP denotation can be viewed as specifying how the domain can be computed from the source  . Where domain = source I will speak of individual distribution  , where domain = source of collective distribution  . 
Individual and collective are not the only possible distributions  . Consider the sentence ( 7 ) All these machines assemble 12 parts . 
This sentence may describe a situation in which certain machines assemble sets of twelve parts  , i . e . a relation between individual machines and groups of twelve parts  . If PARTS is the set denoted by ' parts ' , the direct object quantification domain is ~ I ~ ( PARTS )  , the subset of ~ ( PARTS ) containing only ? ~ ose subsets of PARTS that have twelve members  . I call this type of distribution group distribution  . In this case the numerical quantifier indicates group size  . 
A slightly different form of " group quantification " is found in the sentence  ( 8 ) Twelvemen conspired . 
In view of the collective nature of conspiring , it would seem that ' twelve ' should again be interpreted as indicating group size  , so that the sentence may be represented by ( 9 ) BxE~12 ( MEN ) : CONSPIRE ( x ) However , as the existential quantifier brings out clearly , this interpretation would leave open the possiblity that several groups of  12 menconspired , which is probably not what was intended . The more plausible interpretation , where exactly one group of 12 men conspired , I will call the strong group read in q of the sentence  , and the other one the weak group reading . On the strong group reading the quantifier ' twelve ' has a double function : it indicates both source involvement and group size  . 
In a sentence like ( i0 ) The crane lifted the tubes there is no indication as to whether the tubes were lifted one by one  ( individual distribution )  , two by two ( weak group distribution with group size 2 )  , one-or-two by one-or-two ( weak group distribution with group size I2 )  ,   . . . , or all in one go ( collective distribution ) . The quantification is unspecific in this respect . In such a case I will say that the distribution is unspecific  . If S is the source of the quantification , the domain is in this case the set consisting of the elements of S and the plural subsets of S  . 
Distribution and source involvement are the two central aspects of quantification that I will focus on here  . 
Quantification in two-level model theoretic semantics Consider a non-intensional verb  , denoting a one-place predicate P ( a function from individuals to truth values )  , which is combined with a noun phrase with associated source S  ( a set of indivi-duals )  . The quantification then predicates the source involvement of the set of those elements of the quantification domain  , defined by S and the distribution , for which P is true . This can be represented by a formula of the following form:  ( ii ) S-IN VOLVE MENT ( xeQUANT . DOMAIN : P ( x )) For example , consider the representation of the readings of sentence  ( I ) ' Five boats were lifted ' , with individual , collective , and weak and strong group distribution : ( 12 a )   ( A z : ~ z ) =5 )   ( x ~ BOATS : LIFTED ( x ) )  ( 12b )   ( ~ z : ~ ( z ) > l )   ( x 6 ~ ( BOATS ) : LIFTED ( x ) )  ( 12c )   ( A z : ~ z ) = l )   ( xq  ~ ( BOATS ) : LIFTED ( x ) )  ( 12 d )   ( A z : ~ z ) =5 )   ( UB oA TSD ( XeBOATSU ~+ ( BOATS )  :
LIFTED ( x )   )   ) where ~+ ( S ) denotes the set of plural subsets of S . 
The notation U ( D ) is used to represent the set of S , 1 those members of S occuring in D " ; the precise definition is: ( 13 ) Us ( D ) = xES : xED v ( ByED : x6 y ) Note that in all cases the quantification domain is closely related to the source in a way determined by the distribution  . I have claimed above that the distribution can be construed as a function that computes the quantification domain  , given the source . Indeed , this can be a complished by meads of a function of two arguments  , one being the source and the other the group size  , in the case of a group distribution . A little bit of formula manipulation readily shows that all the formulas  ( 12 a-d ) can be cast in the form ( 14 )   ( lz:N ( Us ( Z )   )   )   ( xed ( k , S ) : P ( x )    ) where S represents the quantification source , ~ z : N(U_(z ))) the source involvement , k the group size , an ~ d the " distribution function " computing the quantification domain  .   ( For technical details of this representation see Bunt  , in press ) . The most interesting point to note about this representation is that the distribution of the quantifica-tion  , which in other treatments is always reflec-ted in the syntactic structure of the representation  , corresponds to a term of the representation language here  . For this term we substitute expressions like ~ k , S : ~ k(S )) to obtain a particular interpretation . 
I will now indicate how representations of the form  ( 14 ) are constructed in the TENDUM system . 
The construction of quantification representation in the TENDUM system The TENDUM system uses a gra ~ nar consisting of phrase-structure rules augmented with semantic rules that construct a representation of a rewritten phrase from those of its constituents  ( see Bunt ,  1983) . For the sentence ' Five boats were lifted'this works as follows  . 
The number ' five ' is represented in the lexicon as an item of syntactic category ' number ' with representation  '5'  . To this item , a rule applies that constructs a syntactic structure of category ' numera ~ with representation structure a rule applies that constructs a syntactic structure of category ' determiner with representation  ( 15 )   ( AX: ( AP:FIVE ( Ux ( XEd ( FIVE , X ) : P ( x )    ) ) ) ) A rule constructing a syntactic structure of cate-gory'noun phrase " from a determiner and a nominal  ( in the simplest case : a noun ) applies to ' five ' and ' boats ' , combining their representations by applying ( 15 ) as a function to the noun representation BOATS . Afterl-conversion , this results in ( 16 )   ( AP:FIVE ( t ) BOATS ( xEd ( FIVE , BOATS ) : P ( x ) ) ) ) A rule constructing a sentence from a noun phrase and a verb applies to ' five boats ' and ' were lifted '  , combining their representations by applying ( 16 ) as a function to the verb representation LIFTED . Afterl-conversion , this results in (17): (17) FIVE~3BOATs(XEd(FIVE , BOATS ) : P ( x )   ) ) NOW suppose the sentence is interpreted relative to a domain of discourse where we have such boats and lifting facilities that it is impossible for more than one boat to be lifted at the same time  . 
This is reflected in the fact that the RL predicate LIFTED r is of such a type that it can only apply to individual boats  . Assuming that the ambiguous constant BOATS has the single instance BOATS and r that LIFTED has the single instance  ( Az : LIFTED ( z ) ) , the instantiation rules , constrained by r the type restrictions of RL , will produce the representation : ( 18 ) FIVE ( UBOATS ( xEBOATS r:LIFTED r ( X )    ) ) r ( For the instantiation process see Bunt , in press , chapter 7 . ) This is readily seen to be equivalent to the more familiar form :  ( 19 )  # ( xEBOATS : LIFTED ( x ) ) = 5 r r If , in addition to , or instead of the distributive reading we want to generate another reading of the sentence  , then we extend or modify the instantiation function for LIFTED accordingly  . 
This shows how the analysis method generates the representations of only those interpretations which are relevant in a given domain of discourse  , and does so without generating intermediate representations as artefacts of the use of a logical representation language  . 

Bronnenberg , W . J . , Bunt , H . C . , Landsbergen , S . P . J . , Scha , RoJ . H . , Schoenmakers , W . J . , van Utter , n , E . P . C . (1979) The question answering system PHLIQAI . In L . Bolc ( ed . ) , Natural communication with computers , McMillan , London ; Hanser
Verlag , M~nehen.
Bunt , H . C . (1982) The IPO Dialogue Project . SIGART
News letter 80.
Bunt , H . C .   ( 1983 ) A grammar formalism with augmented phrase -construction rules  . IPO
Annual Progress Report 18.
Bunt , HoC .   ( in press ) Mass terms and model theoretic semantics . Cambridge University
Press.
Bunt , H . C . and thoe Schwartzenberg , G . O . (1982) Syntactic , semantic and pragmatic parsing for a natural language dialogue system  . IPO Annual
Progress Report 17.
Partee , B . (IJ975) Comments on C . J . Fillmore's and N . Chemsky's papers . In : D . Austerlltz ( ed ) The scope of American linguistics . DeRidder
Press , Lisse ?
Quirk , R . , Greenbaum , S . , Leech , G . , and Svartvik , J . (1972) A grammar of contemporary English . 
Longman , London.

