MACHINETRANS LATION : WHATTY PEOFPOST-EDITING
ONWHATTYPE OF DOCUMENTS FOR WHAT TYPE OF USERS
Anne-Marie LAURIAN
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
Universitd de la Sorbonne Nouvelle-Paris III 19 ruedes 8ernardins   , 75005 Paris ( France)

Various typologies of technical and seientifical texts nave already been propose Obvauthors involved in multilingual transfer problems  . They were usually aimed at a better knowledge of the criteria for deciding if a document has to be or can be machine translated  . Such a typology could also lead to a better knowledge of the typical errors occuring  , and so lead to more appropriate postediting , as well as to improvements in the system . 
Raw translations being usable , as they are quite often for rapid information needs  , it is important to draw the limits between a style adequate for rapid information  , and an elegant , high qualit v style such as required for information large dissemination  . Style could be given a new definition through a linguistic analysis based on machine translation  , on communication situations and on the users ' requirements and satisfaction  . 
I . MACHINETRANS LATION AND POST-EDITING,
AEUROPE ANEX AMPLE
Machine translation is often considered as a project  , an experimental process , if not an impossible dream . Translation theoreti-clans woulds avno machine can understand the meaning of a text and reex press it in another language  , so no machine can translate . 
The debate is about the necessity of a deep semantic understanding for translating  , opposed to a language structure knowledge to be sufficient to produce a translation  . The usual debate is thus about the ideal concept each one has of what a translation should be  . 
Translation can only be defined in particular situations  , regarding particular documents . And machine translation is only to be used for certain types of documents to be handled a certain way  . 
HY observations are based on several studies I carried out on the SYSTRAN output produced in Luxembourg within the Commission of the European Communities  . 
In Luxembourg the amount of documents to be translated is not only very big  , it is also growing very fast . The european rule is that all official documents have to be translated into the seven official languages  ; technical documents needed for conferences or experts meetings are sometimes translated only in three or four languages  ( english , french , german , italian ) . The delay available is often very short . That led the C . E . C . 
General Direction for Multilingual Transfers to promote machine translation  . When they started it , some six years ago , SYSTRAN was the only system ready to produce translations  . This system , originated in the U . S . , has then been developed for the proper use of the Commission  . 
The output was far from being perfect , far from being usable as it was . Postediting was being done . Even with the huge progress of the output quality  , postediting is still necessar Y . It will , in fact , be always necessary because as people get used to their translation to be done by a computer  , their requirements are becoming more precise . The errors one would admit at an experimental stage  , are no more possible at a productive stage . 
Postediting is thus becoming a new specialization within the numerous fields related to translation  . 
I ;- ATY POLOGY OF DOCUMENTS
BASEDON M.T . ERRORS
All documents are not suitable for machine translation  . Lots of negative reactions against M . T . have been induced by a wrong use of M . T . Aware of the necessity of differentiating the documents  , people res-ponsible for translation proposed several types of typologies  . They were mainly based on the subject field of the text  , on its function , on its structure , on the sentence and paragraph length and complexity  , on the use of particular terminologies . 

The aim was to enable the chief of a translation division to choose which texts were to be sent to a human translator  , and which could be processed by M . T . 
My study of the errors remaining in the raw translations led me to propose a strictly linguistic typology  . I There are three major tvpes of errors : i . errors on isolated words , 2 . errors on the expression of relations , 3 . errors on the structure and on the information display  . 
These errors are classified in three tables : i . i vocabulary , terminology 1 . 2 proper names and abbreviations , 1 . 3 relators :- in nominai groups , -inverbai groups ,  1 . 4 noun determinants , verbal modificators ; 2 . 5 verb forms ( tense ), 2 . 6 verb forms ( passive/active ) and personalization ( passive/nonperson ai )  ,  2 . 7 expression of moda Iity or not , 2 . 8 negation ; 3 . 9 logical relations , phrase introducers , \] . 10 words order , 3 . 11 general problems of incidence . 
The relative frequence of these errors can be read in my tables  . 
These tables can be used to evaluate the probable quantity and location of errors existing after M  . T . , i . e . the probable quantity , location and type of postediting . With a short training in linguistics , anyone could get trained to use these tables . By a rapid reading of the documents to be translated on the basis of these features  , and according to the relative frequence of one category of probable errors or the other  , one could then easily evaluate if a document should be translated by a translator or is suitable for M  . T . 
III-TYPE SO FPOST-EDITING
The system used in Luxembourg is still being developped  . That means that errors are getting fewer . For instance three years ago verb forms were translated " form to form "  , now new rules have been introduced in order to get a past tense for a present tense  ( or reverse )  , a passive form for an impers on a Ione ( or reverse )  , a . s . o . 
icf . A . M . Loffler-Laurian , Pourunet vpo-logie deserreurs dans la traduction automatique  , in MULTiLINGUA ,  22 (1983) ,   65-78 But at the same time the variety of documents machine trabslated is growing  . That means new sources on errors ( main Iv vocabulary , but aisomodaiities , structures , a . s . o . ) . 
Postediting is always necessary . Until now postediting has been done by translators who are wishing to do it  . The amount of postediting to do is increasing everyday  , it becomes obvious that postediting can't be done just according to somebody's feeling of language and style  . There has to be some rules . 
Postediting is not revision , nor correction , nor rewriting . It is a new way of considering a text , a new wav of working on it , for a new aim . In order to define the characteristics of postediting  , I carried out a study on the two major types of postediting as they appear in the C  . E . C . 2 i . The conventional postediting ( C . P . E . ) is supposed to produce a text as similar as possibie to what a human translation would have been  , that means a high quality text . 
2 . The rapid postediting ( R . P . E . ) is supposed to produce a correct text ( on the language level as well as on the level of the meaning  ) but without taking care of the stvie . 
In the experiment I carried out , time required for postediting was the only criteria to differenciate these two methods  . 
It appeared that special Iinguistical attitudes were induced by time I imitation  . A statistical survey of C . P . E . and R . P . E . shows the limits between :
I . necessary postediting , 2 . possible postediting , 3 . superfluous postediting . 
First group includes all postediting that has to be done to make the text under-standabie  , clear , readable , exact . Second group inciudes some research in style focused on the adaptation to the communication situation  , to the author and to the presumed reader . Third group is postediting done bY peop Ie who didn't want to admit that perfection was not the aim  , and that a document that will be read quick I y and thrown away immediate I vooes not require the same style as a oocument that will be pubiished and large iv distributed  . These people usuaIly could not give out their R . P . E . in the limited time allowed for it . 
2cf . A . M . L . L . , Post-~dition conventionnelle t post-6dition rapide~versune m6thodologie delapost-~dition , to be published . 

In rapid postediting one has to focus on the central information  , and is naturally kept out from the temptation of rewriting the sentence were errors occur  . Then the posteditor finds the shortest solution , which is usually the right one . By staying very close to the raw translation , post-editors succeed in giving a good and acceptable translation  . 
Those who , after having postedited according to the minimal requirements  , try to make the text fit better the usual style they know  , give us indications to point out the difference between : - a text that is correct according to standard language rules  , -a text that obeys the usage rules in use on that level of documents or level of language  ( some " subrules " specific to some specialized f ields  , authors , situations ) . 
IV-STYLE , SITUATIONS ANDUSERS
Style in literature is usually defined as the specific way an author writes  . Do technical and scientific documents have a specific style ? Many people would agree on the idea that these documents have no style-or have a neutral stYle-  . In terms of linguistic features , they can be described as well as any other writing  . However the non-apparent aspect of style in informative documents is an important component of their ability to be machine translated  . In a novel , the style of the author would be its main value whereas in an informative document  , the transparency of style , its leaving the reader unaware of it would be essential  . Even more : if style were to be felt , the information would most probably loose some of its accuracy and credibility  . 
In every translation situation the author has some information to transmit to a user  . Let it be a technical or a political information , a scientific or a social information , the goal may be double : have the reader know more about a question  ( that relates to didactics )  , and have the reader react in a specific way to the text  . Regar-ding this second goal , the best style , most adequate , would be the one that would bring the reader to the point the author wanted him  . The neutrality of a computerized system is quite fitted to that situation  . And the minimal postediting creates often the best style  . 
The users ' satisfaction should be the ultimate criterion to evaluate the adequacy of a style  . 
A rereaders getting used to some new stylebased on machine translation ? Some people fear for the future of their language : it could evolve uncontrolled because of a new kind of users getting used to some new variety of language induced by a new tool for translation  . They fear a loss of some linguistical property . Languages have always been exposed to multiple influences  ( wars , invasions , economical trends , cultural exchanges , a . s . o . ) . They are now exposed to technical influences . 
Machine translation is already used by translation services  . It will certainly be soon used by private translators  ( various systems are developped or under development in several countries  )  . It could be used with great profit by linguists and professors to help them think about their own use of language  , about the varieties of specialized uses of language  , and about the future programmes that could be built up for new generations of students  . 
REFERENCES-MULTILINGUA , a journal of interlanguage communication , Mouton publishers , see : G . Van Slype , 14(1982), 221-237
A.M . Loffler-Laurian , 22(1983), 65-78
I . M . Pigott ,  23 (1983) , 149-156-CONTRASTES , a journal of contrastive linguistics , A DEC publisher , see : J . Humbley , N ? 7, Nov .  1983, 35-47
M . King , NaA ), 1983, 53-59
A.M . Loffler-Laurian , S . Krsuwer & L.
Des Tombe , M.C . Bourquin-Launey , X.
Huang , G . Bourquin , J.L . Vidalenc ; R.
Johnson , J . M . Zemb , N ? A4 ( " Traduction automatique-aspects europ ~- ens " )  ,  1984 , 167 pp . 

