ACONNECTIONIST MODEL OF SOME A SPECTS OF AN APHOR RESOLUTION 
Ronan G . Reilly
Educational Research Centre
St Patrick's College , Drum condra
Dublin 9, Ireland

This paper describes some recent developments in language processing involving computation a l models which more closely resemble the bra in in both structure and function  . These models employ a large number of inte r connected parallel computational units which communicate via weighted levels of excitation and inhibition  . A specific model is described which uses this approach to process some fragments of connected discourse  . 
ICONNECTIONIST MODELS
The human brain consists of about i00 , 0 00 million neuronal units with between a lO00 and I0  , 000 connections each . The two main classes of cells in the cortex are the striate and pyramidal cells  . The pyramidal cells are generally larse and heavily arborized  . They are the main output cells of a region of cortex  , and they mediate connections between one region and the next  . The strlate cells are smaller , and act more locally . 
The neural circuitry of the cortex is , apart from some minor variations , remarkably consistent . Its dominant characteristics are Its parallelism , its large number processing units , and the extensive interconnection of these units  . This is a fundamentally different st ructure from the traditional von Neumann model  . Those in favor of adopting a connectionist approach to modelling human cognition argue that the structure of the human nervous system is so different from the structure implicit in current information-processing models that the standard approach cannot ultimately be successful  . They argue that even at an abstract level , removed from immediate neural considerations , the fundamental structure of the human nervous system has a pervasive effect  . 
Counectloulst models form a class of spreading activation or active semantic network model  . Each primitive computing unit in the network can be thought of as a stylized neuron  . 
Its output is a function of a vector of inputs from neighbourlng units and a current level of excitation  . The inputs can be both excitatory and inhibtory . The output of each unit has a restricted range  ( in the case of the model described here , it can have a value between i and lO ) . Associated with each unit are a number of computational functions  . At each input site there are/unctions which determine how the inputs are to be summar ized  . A potential function determines the relat ionship between the summarized site inputs and the unit's overall potential  . Finally , au output function determines the relations h ip between a unit's potential and the va lue that it transmits to its nelgh hours  . 
There are a number of constraints inhererent in an eurally based model  . One of the most significant is that the coinage of the brain is frequency of firing  . This means that the inputs and outputs cannot carry more than a few bits of information  . There are not enough bits in firing frequency to allow symbol passing between individual units  . This is perhaps the single biggest difference between thls approach and and that of standard informatlon-processing models  . 
Another important constraint is that decisions in the network are completely distributed  , each unit computes its output solely on the basis of its inputs  ; it cannot " look around " to see what others are doing  , and no central controller gives it instructions . 
A number of language related applications have been developed using this type of approach  . 
The most notable of these is the model of McC lell and and Rumelhart  ( 1981 )   . They demonstrated that a model based on connect ionist principles could reproduce many of the characterist cs of the so-called word - superiority effect  . This is an effect in which letters in b riefly presented words and pseudowords are more easily identifiable than letters in nonwords  . 
At a higher level in the processing hie rarchy  , connectionist schemes have been proposed for modelling wOr ~  . sense disambiguation ( Cottrell & Small ,  1983)  , and for sentence parsing in general ( Small , Cottrell , & Shastrl ,  1982) . 

The model described in this paper is basically an extension of the work of Cottrell and Small  ( 1983 )  , and of Small (1982) . It extends their sentence-centred model to deal with connected text  , or discourse , and specifically with anaphor lc resolution in discourse  . The model is not proposed as definitive in any way  . 
It merely sets out to illustrate the properties of connect lonlst models  , and to show how such models might be extended beyond simple word recognition applications  . 
ITANAPHORA
The term anaphor derives from the Greek for " po inting back "  . What is pointed to is often referred to as the antecedent of the anaphor  . 
However , the precise definition of an antecedent is problematic  . Superfl clally , it might be thought of as a preceding text element  . However , as Sidner ( 1983 ) pointed out words do not refer to other words ; people use words to refer to objects , and anaphora are used to refer to objects which have already been mentioned in a discourse  . Sidner also maintains that the concept of coreference is inadequate to explain the relationship between anaphor and antecedent  . 
Coreference means that anaphor and antecedent both refer to the same object  . This explanation suffices for a sentence llke : ( i ) I think green apples are best and they make the best cooking apples too  . 
where both the ~ and green apples refer to the same object  . However , it is inadequate when dealing with the fol lowing discourse :  ( 2 ) My neighbour has an Irish Wolfhound . 
The ~ are really huge , but friendly dogs.
In this case they refers to the class of Irish Wolfhounds  , but the antecedent phrase refers to a member of that set  . Therefore , the anaphor and antecedent cannot be said to corefer  . Sidner introduces the concept of specification and co-specl flcetlon to get around this problem  . 
Tnstead of referring to objects in the realworld , the anaphor and its antecedent specify a cognitive element in the hearer ls mind  . Even though the same element is not co-speclfled one specification may be used generate the other  . 
This is not possible with coreference because , as Sidnerputs it : Co-specl fl cat lon , unlike coreference , allows one to construct abstract representations and define relationships between them which can be studied in a computational framework  . With coreference , no such use is posslble , since the object referred to exists in the world and is not available for examination by the computational process  . ( Sidner , 1983; p . 

Sidner proposes two major sources of constrain to n what can become the co-specl fl cat lon of an anaphor l c reference  . One is the shared knowledge of speaker and hearer  , and the other is the concept of focus . At any given time the focus of a discourse is that discourse element which is currently being elaborated upon  , and on which the speakers have centered their attention  . This concept of focus will be Implemented in the model to be described  , though differently from the way Sidner ( 1983 ) has envisaged it . In her model possible focuses are examined serlally  , and a decision is not made until a sentence has been completely analyzed  . In the model proposed here , the focus is arrived at on-llne , and the process used is a parallel one . 
IllTHESIMULATOR
The model described here was constructed using an interactive e on nectionist simulator w r itten in Salford LISP and based on the des ign for the University of Rochester's ISCON simulator  ( Small , Shastri , Brucks , Kaufman , Cottrell , & Addanki ,  1983) . The simulator allows the user to design dif ferent types of units  . These can have any number of input sites , each with an associated site function . Units also have an associated potential and output function  . As well as unit types , ISCON allows the user to design different types of weighted llnk  . A network is constructed by generating units of various types and connecting them up  . Process lnE is initiated by activating designated input units  . The simulator is implemented on a Prime 550 . A network of about 50 units and 300 links takes approximately 30 CPU seconds per iteration . 
As the number of units increases the simula tor takes exponentially longer  , making it very unwieldy for networks of more than  100 units . One solution to the speed problem is to compi le the networks so that they can be executed f as ter  . A more radical solution , and one which we are currently working on , is to develop a progra-- , ing language which has as its basic unit a network  . 
This language would involve a batch system rather than an interactive one  . There would , therefore , be a trade-off between the ease of use of an interactive system and the speed and power of a batch approach  . Although ISCON is an excellent medium for the construction of networks  , it is inadequate for any form of sophisti cated execution of networks  . The proposed Network Programming Language ( NPL ) would permit the definition and construct ion of networks in much the same way as ISCON  . However , with N-PL it will also be possible to selectively activate sections of a parti cular network  , to create new networks by combining separate subnetworks  , to calculate summary indices of any network , and to use these indices in guiding the flow of control in the of control facilities  ( for example , FOR and WHILE loops ) . Unfortunately , thls language is still at the design stage and is not available for use  . 
IVTHEMODEL
The model consists of five main components which interact in the manner illustrated in Figure i  . The llnesending in filled circles indicate inhibitory connections  , the ordinary lines , excitatory ones . Each component consists of sets of neuron-llke units which can either excite or inhibit neighbouring nodes  , and nodes in connected components . A successful parsing of a sentence is deemed to have taken place if ~ during the processing of the discourse  , the focus is accurately followed , and if at its end there is a stable coalition of only those units central to the discourse  . A set of units is deemed a stable coalition if their level of activity is above threshold and nondecreasing  . 
CASESCHEMAi/
SENSE l
Figure I . The main components of the model.
A . Lexical Level
There is one unit at the lexical level for every word in the model's lexicon  . Most of the units are connected to the word sense level by unidirectional links  , and after activation they decay rapidly . Units which do not have a word sense representation  , such as function words and pronouns , are connected by unidirection all lnk to the case and schema levels  . A lexical unit is connected to all the possible senses of the word  . 
These connections are weighted according to the frequency of occurence of the senses  . To simulate hearing or reading a sentence the lexlcal units are activated one after another from left to right  , in the order they occur in the sentence . 
B . Word Sense Level
The units at this level represent the " meaning " of the morphemes in the sentence  . 
Ambiguous words are connected to all their posslble meaning units  , which are connected to each other by inhibitory links  . As Cottrell and Small (1983) have shown , this arrangement provides an accuraate model of the processes involved in word sensed l samblguatlon  . 
Grammatical morphemes , function words , and pronouns do not have explicit representations at this level  , rather they connect directly to the case and schema levels  . 
C . Focus Level
The units at this level represent possible focuses of the discourse in the sense that Sidner  ( 1983 ) intends . The focus with the strongest activation inhibits competelng focuses  . At anyone time there is a single dominant focus , though it may shift as the discourse progresses . A shift in focus occurs when evidence for the new focus pushes its level of activation above that of the old one  . In keeping with Sidner's ( 1983 ) position there are two types of focus used in this model  , an actor focus and a discourse focus . 
The actor focus represents the animate object in the agent case in the most recent sentence  . The discourse focus is , as its name suggests , the central theme of the discourse . The actor focus and discourse focus can be one and the same  . 
D . Case Level
This modal employs what Cottrell and Small ( 1982 ) call an " exploded case " representation . 
Instead of general cases such as Agent , Object , Patient , and so on , more specific case categories are used . For instance , the sentence John kicked the ball would activate the specific cases of Kick-agent and Kick -object  . The units at this level only fire when there is evidence from the predicate and at least one filler  . Their output then goes to the appropriate units at the focus level  . In the example above , the predicate for Kick-~gentiskick , and its filler is John . The unit Kick-agent then activates the actor focus unit for John  . 
E . Schema Level
This model employs a partial implementation of Small's  ( 1982 ) proposal for an exploded system of schemas . The schema level consists of a hierarchy of ever more abstract schemas  . At the bottom of the hierarchy there are schemas which are so specl fc that the number of possib leoptions for filllng their slots is h ighly serves  , in turn , to activate all its slot fillers . Levels further up in the hierarchy contain more general schema details  , and the connections between slots and their potential fillers are less strong  . 
VT HEMO DEL'S PER FOR MANCE
At its current stage of development the model can handle discourse involving pronoun anaphora in which the discourse focus is made to shift  . It can resolve the type of reference involved in the following two discourse examples  ( based on examples by Sidner , 1983; p .  276 ) : DI-I:I've arranged a meeting with Mick and

2: It should be in the afternoon.
3: We can meet in my office.
4: Invite Pat to come too.
D2-1:I've arranged a meeting with Mick , Peter , and Pat . 
2: It should be in the afternoon.
3: We can meet in my office.
4: It's kind of small , 5: but we'll only need it for an hour . 
In discourse DI , the focus throughout is the meeting mentioned in DI-I  . The it in DI-2 can be seen to co-specl fy the focus . In order to determine this a humanllstner must use their knowledge that meetings have times  , among other things . Although no mention is made of the meeting in DI-3 to DI-4 humanllstners can interpret the sentences as being consistent with a meetlng focus  . In the discourse D2 the initial focus is the meeting , but at D2-4 the focus has clearly shifted to my office ~ and remains there until the end of the discourse  . 
The network which handles this discourse does not parse it in its entirety  . The aim is not for completeness , but to illustrate the operation of the schema level of the model  , and to show how it aids in determining the focus of the discourse  . In itlally , in analyzlng D1 the word meet in ~ activates the schema WORKPLACE MEETING  . 
This schema gets activated , rather--than ~ nyother meeting schema , because the overall context of the discourse is that of an office memo  . Below , is a representation of the schema . On the left are its component slots , and on the right are all the possible fillers for these slots  . 
WORK PLACE MEETING schema
WP M location : library to m office my ~ ff lce
WPM time : morning afternoon
WPM_part l clpants : tom vincent patric lamick peter me When this schema is activated the slots become active  , and generate a low level of subthreshold activity in their potential fillers  . 
When one or more fillers become active , as they do when the words Hick and Peter are encountered at the end of DI-I  , the slot forms a feedback loop with the fillers which lasts until the activity of the sense representation of meet ln~declines below a threshold  . A slot can only be active if the word activating the schema is active  , which in this case is meet in $ . When a number of fillers can fill a slot , as is the case with the WPM participant slot , a form of regulated sub-~et work is used . On the other hand , when there can only be one filler for a slot , as with the WPM location slot , a winner-take-all network is u~ed ( both these types of subnetwork are described in Feldman and Ballard  ,  1982) . 
Associated with each unit at the sense level is a focus unit  . A focus unit is connected to its corresponding sense unit by a bidirectional excitatory link  , and to other focus units by inhibitory links . As mentioned above , there are two separate networks of focus units , corresponding to actor focuses and discourse focuses  , respectively . Actors are animate objects which can serve as agents for verbs  . An actor focus unit can only become active if its associated sense level unit is a filler for an agent case slot  . The discourse focus and actor focus can be , but need not be , one and the same . 
The distinction between the two types of focus is in llne with a similar distinction made by Sidner  ( 1983 )  . The structure of the focus level network ensures that there can only be one discourse focus and one actor focus at a given time  . In discourses D1 and D2 the actor focus throughout is the speaker . 
At the end of the sentence DI -1 the WORKPLACEMEETING schema is in a stable coa l ~ i on w ~ th the sense units representing Hick and Peter  . The focus units active at this stage are those representing the speaker of the discourse  ( the actor focus )  , and the meeting ( the discourse focus ) . When the sentence D1-2 is co-specl fl cat lon of it . The lexlcal unit ttis connected to all focus units of inanimate objects  . It serves to boost the potential of all the focus units active at the time  . At this stage , if there are a number of competitors for co -speclficatlon  , a number of focus units will be activated . However , by the end of the sentence , if the discourse is coherent , one or other of the focuses should have received sufficient activation to suppress the activation of its competitors  . In the case of DI there is no competitor for the focus  , so the itserves to further activate the meeting focus  , and doess oright from the beginning of the sentence  . 
The sentence DI-3 serves to fill the
WPM location slot . The stable coalition is then enl~rged to include the sense unit my office  . 
The activation of my office activates a schema , which might look llke this:
MY OF FICE schema
MO location : Prefab1
MO size : small
MO windows : two
It is not strictly correct to call the above structure a schema  . Being so specific , there are only single fillers for any of its slots  . It is really a representation of the properties of a specific office  , rather than predictions concerning offices in general  . However , in the context of this type of model , with the emphasis on highly specific rather than general structures  , the differences between the two schemas presented above is not a clear cut one  . 
When my office is activated , its focus unit also receives some activation . This is not enough to switch the focus away from meeting  . 
However , it is enough to make it candidate , which would permit a switch in focus in the very next sentence  . If a switch does not take place , the candidate's level of activity rapidly decays . This is what happens in DI-4 , where the sentence specifies another participant , and the focus stays with meeting . The final result of the analysis of discourse DI is a stable coalition of the elements of the WORK PLACE MEETING frame  , and the various part ~ clpan ~ , times , and locations mentioned in the discourse . The final actor focus is the speaker , and the final discourse focus is the meeting . 
The analysis of discourse D2 proceeds identically up to D2-4  , where the focus shifts from meeting to my office . At the beginning of D2-4 there are two candidates for the discourse focus , meeting and my office . The occurence of the ~ or dit then causes both these focuses to become equally active  . This situation reflects our intuitions that at this stage in the sentence the co-specifler of i ~tisambiguous  . However , the occurence of the word small causes a stable coalition to form with the MYOFFICE schema  , and gives the my office focus the ~ xtra activation it needs to overcome the competing meeting focus  . 
Thus , by the end of the sentence , the focus has shifted from meeting to my office . By the time the it in the final sentence is encountered  , there is no competing focus , and the anaphor is resolved immediately . 
There are a number of fairly obvious drawbacks with the above model  . The most important of these being the specificity of the the schema representations  . There is no obvious way of implementing a system of variable binding  , where a general schema can be used , and various fillers can be bound to , and unbound from , the slots . It is not possible to have such symbol passing in a connectionist network  . Instead , all possible slot fillers must be already bound to their slots  , and selectively activated when needed . To make this selective activation less unwieldy , a logical step is to use a large number of very specific schemas  , rather than a few general ones . 
Another drawback of the model proposed here is that there is no obvious way of showing how new schemas might be developed  , or how existing ones might be modified . One of the basic rules in building connectlonist models is that the connections themselves cannot be modified  , although their associated weights can be . This means that any new knowledge must be incorporated in an old structure by changing the weights on the connections between the old structure and the new knowledge  . This also implies that the new and old elements must already be connected up  . In spite of the apparent over supply of neuronal elements in the human cortex  , to have everything connected to virtually everything else seems to be profligate  . 
Another problem with connectlonist models is their potential " brittleness "  . When trying to program a network to behave in a particular way  , it is difficult to resist the urge to patch in arbitrary fixes here and there  . There are , as yet , n O equivalents of structured programming techniques for networks  . However , there are some hopeful signs that researchers are identifying basic network types whose behavior is robust over a range of conditions  . In particular , there are the wlnner-take-all and regulated networks  . The latter type , permits the specification of upper and lower bounds on the activity of a subnetwork  , which allows the designer to avoid the twin perils of total saturation of the network on the one hand  , and total silence on the other . A reliable taxonomy of subnetworks would greatly aid the designer in building robust networks  . 

VICONCLUSION
This paper briefly described the connectlonist approach to cognitive modelling  , and showed how it might be applied to langauge processing  . A connectionist model of language processing was outlined  , which employed schemas and focusing techniques to analyse fragments of discourse  . The paper described how the model was successfully able to resolve simple i__tt anaphora  . 
A tape of the simulator used in this paper , ? along with a specification of the network used to analyze the sample discourses  , is available from the author at the above address  , upon receipt of a blank tape . 
VIIRE FERENCES
Cottrell , G . W . , & Small , S . L .  (1983) . A connectionist scheme for modelling word sense disambiguatlon  . Cognition and Brain Theory , ~, 89-120 . 
Feldman , J.A ., & Ballard , D.N . (1982).
Connectlonlst models and their properties.
Cognitive Science , 6, 205-254.
McClell and , J . L . , & Rumelhart , D . E .  (1981) . An interactive activation model of context effects in letter perception : Parti  . An account of basic findings . Psychological
Review , 88, 375-407.
Sidner , C . L .  (1983) . Fo cussing in the comprehension of definite anaphora  . In M . 
Brady & R . C . Berwick ( Eds . ), Computational models of discourse , Cambridge,
Massachusetts : MIT Press.
Small , S.L . (1982). Exploded connections :
Unchunklng schematic knowledge.
In Proceedings of the Fourth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society , Ann Arbor , Michigan.
Small , S.L ., Cottrell , G.W ., & Shastr I , L.
(1982). Toward connection lst parsing.
In Proceedings of the National
Conference on Artificial
Intelligence , Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania.
Small , S . L . , Shastrl , L . , Brucks , M . L . , Kaufman , S . G . , Cottrell , G . W . , & Addanki , S .  (1983) . 
ISCON : a network construction aid and simulator for connect lonlst models  . TRIO9 . 
Department of Computer Science , University of


