MACHINE-READABLEDICTIONARIES , LEXICALDATABASES
AND THELEXICAL SYSTEM
Nicoletts Calsolsri
Dipartimento dl Lingustica , Universitadl Plsa , Pisa , ITALY
Istituto di Linguistics Cornputssions le del CNR  , Piss , ITALYI should like to raise some issues concerning the conversion from a traditional Marhine-Readable Dictionary  ( MRD ) on tape to a Lexical Data Base ( LDB )  , in order to highlight some important consequences for computational linguistics which can follow from this transition  . The enormous potentialities of the information implicitly stored in a standard printed dictionary or a MRD can only be evidenced and made explicit when the same data are given a new logical structure in a database model  , and exploited by appropriate software . 
A suitable use of DB methodology is a good starting point to discover several kinds of lexical  , morphological , syntactic , and semantic relationships between lexieal entries which would otherwise have remained unexploited  . Moreover , the transformation of a " very largescale " MRD into a LDB provides the means of operating throughout he lexicon in a really extensive manner  . I think in fact that an " almost exhaustive " approach to lexical facts is essential both for reliable investigations of a lexical system  , and for many kinds of linguistic applications which cannot be restricted to a particular domain of discourse  . 
The possibility of abstracting significant regularities from recurrent patterns of natural language definitions by means of suitable computational methods  , and of reaching a formalization of a number of important structuring relations within the lexicon will be discussed  . An overview of the " associative links " already produced in the Italian LDB  , and of other allowable interconnections will be given  . 
In a " relational " organization of a computerized dictionary with complex interlinked structures  , each word acquires its meaning as a result of its position in some of the partitionings created by the formalized relations  . When an entry is activated , all of its relations with other entries can be activated  , too . Conversely , when a relation is activated , all of its linked concepts are made immediately available  . Conceptual and linguistic information at many levels is thus interactively retrievable from the LDB following the appropriate pointers  . 
I shall especially take into consideration those types of relations which can be of relevance not only for " Computational Lexicology " research  , but also in a more general Computational Linguistics framework  . An example is provided by derivational relationships which  , when formalized , give riset of a milies of semantically and syntactically connected entries  , linked to the same base-word node , and substitutable in different syntactic formulations of the same conceptual meanings  . Another example concerns ease or argument relations  , both ( a ) between lexieal items , and ( b ) governed by lexical items . From ( a ) 1 expect o achieve , from the natural language definitions , useful information on the different lexicalizatons of ease-slot fillers in the case frames of typical actions  . In contrast , with ( b ) I can establish an encoding with each entry - and often with each word sense-of information on its surface and deep case-argument structure  . The utility of the extensive inclusion of similar information in a LDB which should be the input for a lexically driven parser  , for machine translation , etc . , is obvious . 
As a conclusion , it should be pointed out how a LDB must be considered at the crossroad between texts and system  , and in this persective some essential properties of a LDB must be stressed  . A first property is " multifunctional is m " ; it is connected to the role of interfaces to the LDB  . We must tend towards creating ' a single ' integrated system which  , through many different interfaces , can be adopted for all the range of possible applications  , and by all the possible users , where user means both a human user and a computer program  . Another important property is that of being " multiperspective  . " This property of multiple access can create something like a constellation of sublexicons  , which altogether capture the many possible structures which can be observed in the lexical system  , along many dimensions of relatedness . The mediating function of a LDB between system and texts can thus be considered as the mapping of lexical structures  , of many kinds , on linear unstructured texts . 

