ONPARSING PREFERENCES
Lenhart K . Schubert
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta , Edmonton
Abstract . It is argued that syntactic preference pr inciples such as Right Association and Minimal Attachment are unsatisfactory as usually formulated  . Among the difficulties are: ( I ) dependence on ill-specified or implausible principles of parser operation  ;   ( 2 ) dependence on questionable assumptions about syntax  ; (3) lackOf provision , even in principle , for integration with semantic and pragmatic preference principles  ; and (4) apparent counterexamples , even when discounting ( I ) - (3) . A possible approach to a solution is sketched . 
I . Some preference principles
The following are some standard kinds of sentences illustrating the role of syntactic preferences  . 
(I ) John bought the book which I had selected for
Mary ( 2 ) John promised to visit frequently ( 3 ) The girl in the chair with the spindly legs looks bored  ( 4 ) John carried the groceries for Mary ( 5 ) She wanted the dress on that rack ( 6 ) The horse raced past the Darn fell ( 7 ) The boy got fatmelted ( I )   ( 3 ) illustrate Right Association of PP's and adverbs  , i . e . , the preferred associat ion of these modif iers with the rightmost verb  ( phrase ) or noun ( phrase ) they can modify ( Kimball 1973 )  . Some variants of Right Association ( also characterized as Late Closure or Low Attachment  ) which have Dean proposed are Final Arguments ( Ford et al 1982 ) and Shifting Preference ( Shieber 1983 )  ; the former is roughly Late Closure restricted to the last obligatory constituent and any fol lowing optional constituents of verb phrases  , while the latter is Late Closure within the context of an LR  ( 1 ) shift-reduce parser . 
Regarding (4) , it would seem that according to Right Associ at i on the PP for Mar ~ should be preferred as postmodifier of groceries rather than carried  ; yet the opposite is the case . Frazier & Fodor's ( 1979 ) explanation is based on the assumed phrase structure rules VP->VNP PP  , and NP->NPPP : attachment of the PP into the VP minimizes the resultant number of nodes  . This principle of Minimal Attachment is assumed to take precedence over Right Association  . For detal's ( 1982 ) variant is Invoked Attachment , and Shieber's ( 1983 ) variant is Maximal Reduction ; roughly speaking , the former amounts to early closure of no ___ nn -final constituents  , while the latter chooses the longest reduction among those possible reductions whose initial constituent is " strongest "  ( e . g . , reducing V NP PP to VP is preferred to reducing NP PP to PP  )  . 
In (5) , Minimal Attachment would predict association of the PP on that rack with wanted  , while the actual preference is for association with dress  . Both Ford et al and Shieber account for this fact by appeal to lexical preferences : for Ford et al  , the strongest form of want takes an NP complement only  , so that Final Arguments prevails ; for Shieber , the NP the dress is stronger than wanted , viewed as a V requiring NP and PP complements , so that the shorter reduction prevails . 
sentence ( 6 ) leads most people " down the garden path " , a fact explainable in terms of Minimal Attachment or its variants  . The explanation also works for ( 7 )   ( in the case of Ford et al with appeal to the additional principle that reanalysis of complete phrases requiring re-categorization of lexical constituents is not possible  )  . Purportedly , this is an advantage over Marcus ' ( 1980 ) parsing model , whose three-phrase buffer should allow trouble -free parsing of  ( 7 )  . 
2 . Problems with the preference principles 2 . 1 Dependence on i l l - speci f ied or implausible principles of parser operation  . 
Frazier & Fodor's ( 1979 ) model does not completely specify what structures are built as each new word is accommodated  . Consequently it is hard to tell exactly what the effects Of their preference principles are  . 
Shieber's ( 1983 ) shift-reduce parser is well-defined . However , it postulates complete phrases only , whereas human parsing appears to involve integration of completely analyzed phrases into larger  , incomplete phrases . Consider for example the following sentence Deginnings :  ( 8 ) So I says to the . . . 
(9) The man reconciled herself to the ...
(10) The news announced on the ...
(11) The reporter announced on the ...
(12) John beat a rather hasty and undignified . . . 
People presented with complete , spoken sentences beginning like ( 8 ) and ( 9 ) are able to signal detection of the errors about two or three syllables after their occurrence  . Thus agreement constituents .   ( 10 ) and ( 11 ) suggest that even semantic features ( logical translations ? ) are propagated before phrase completion . The " premature " recognition of the idiom in ( 12 ) provides further evidence for early integration of partial structures  . 
These considerations appear to favoura " full -paths " parser which integrates each successive word  ( in possibly more ways than one ) into a comprehensive parse tree ( with overlaid alternatives ) spanning all of the text processed . 
Ford et al . ' s ( 1982 ) parser does develop complete topdown paths , but the nodes on these paths dominate no text . Nodes postulated bottom-up extend only one level above complete nodes  . 
2 . 2 Dependence on quest ionable assumptions ab____out syntax The successful predict ion of observed preferences in  ( 4 ) depended on an assumption that PP postmod if iers are added to carried via the rule VP->V NPPP and to groceries via the rule NP->NP PP  . However , these rules fail to do justice to certain systematic similarities between verb phrases and noun phrases  , evident in such pairs as ( 13 ) Johnloudly quarreled with Mary in the kitchen ( 14 ) John's loudquarrel with Mary in the kitchen When the analyses are aligned by postulating two levels of postmodification for both verbs and nouns  , the accounts of many examples that supposedly involve Minimal Attachment  ( or Maximal Reduction ) are spoiled . These include ( 4 ) as well as standard examples involving non -preferred relative clauses  , such as ( 15 ) John told the girl that heloved the story ( 16 ) Is the block sitting in the box ?2 . 3 Lack of provis ion for integrat ion with semant ic/pragmatic preference principles Right Association and Minimal Attachment  ( and their variants ) are typically presented as principles which prescribe particular parser choices  . As such , they are simply wrong , since the choices often do not coincide with human choices for text which is semantically or pragmatically biased  . 
For example , there are conceivable contexts in which the PP in  ( 4 ) associates with the verb , or in which (7) is trouble-free . ( For the latter , imagine a story in which a young worker in a shortening factory to ils long hour smelting downhog fatin clarifying vats  . ) Indeed , even isolated sentences demonstrate the effect of semantics :  ( ~7 ) John met the girl that he married at a dance ( \]8 ) John saw the bird with t ~ e yellow wings ( !9 ) She wanted the gun on hernight table ( 20 ) This lens get slight focused These sentences should be contrasted with  ( I )  ,  (4) ,  (5) . and (7) respectively . 
While the reversal of choices Dy semantic and pragmatic factors is regularly acknowledged  , these factors are rarely assigned any explicit role in the theory  ; ( however , see Crain & Steedman 1981) . 
Two views that seem to underlie some discuss ions of this issue are  ( a ) that syntactic preferences are " defaults " that come into effect only in the absence Of semantic /pragmatic preferences  ; or ( b ) that alternatives are tried in order of syntactic preference  , with semantic tests serving to reject incoherent combinations  . Evidence against both positions is found in sentences in which syntactic preferences prevai lover much more coherent alternatives :  ( 21 ) Mary saw the man who had lived with her while on maternity leave  . 
(22) John metth et all , slim , auburn-haired girl from Montreal that hemarr ie data dance  ( 23 ) John was named after his twinsister What we apparently need is not hard and fast decision rules  , but some way of trading off syntactic and non -syntactic preferences of various strengths against each other  . 
2.4 Apparent counterexamples.
There appear to be straightforward counterexamples to the syntactic preference pr inciples which have been proposed  , even if we discount evidence for integration of incomplete structures  , accept the syntactic assumptions made , and restrict ourselves to cases where none of the alternatives show any semantic anomaly  . 
The following are apparent counterexamples to Right Association  ( and Shifting Preference . etc . ):  ( 24 ) John stopped speaking frequently ( 25 ) John discussed the girl that hemet with his mother  ( 26 ) John was alarmed by the disappearance of the administrator from head office  ( 27 ) The deranged inventor announced that he had perfected his design of a clip carshoe  ( shoecar clip , clipshoe car , shoeclip car , etc . ) (28) Lee and Kimor Sandy departed (29) a . John removed all of the fat and some of the bones from the roast b  . John removed all of the fat and sine wy pieces of meat The point Of  ( 24 ) - ( 26 ) should Declear .   ( 27 ) and ( 28 ) show the lack of right-associative tendencies in compound nouns and coordinated phrases  .   ( 29 a ) illustrates the nonoccurrence of a garden path predicted by Right Association  ( at least DyShieber's version )  ; note the possible adjectival reading off at and  . . . , as illustrated in (29b ) . 
The following are apparent counterexamples to Minimal Attachment  ( or Maximal Reduction ) :  ( 30 ) John abandoned the attempt to please Mary ( 31 ) Kim over heard John and Mary's quarrel with
Sue (32) John carried the umDre ! la , the transister radio , the bundle of old magazines , and the groceries for Mary ( 33 ) The boygot fats pattered on his arm While the account of  ( 30 ) and ( 31 ) can be rescued by distinguishing subcategor ized and non-subcategorized noun postmod if iers  , such a move would lead to the failures already mentioned in section  2  . 2 . Ford et al ( 1982 ) would have no price : they would erroneously predict association of the PP with the object NP in  ( 34 ) Suehad difficulties with the teachers ( 35 ) Suewanted the dress for Mary ( 36 ) Sue returned the dress for Mary ( 32 ) is the sort of example which motivated Frazier & Fodor's  ( 1979 ) Local Attachment principle , but their parsing model remains too sketchy for the implications of the principle to be clear  . Concerning (33) , a small-scale experiment indicates that this is not a garden path  . This result appears to invalidate the accounts of  ( 7 ) based on irreversible closure at fat . Moreover , the difference between ( 7 ) and ( 33 ) cannot De explained in terms of one word lookahead  , since a further experiment has indicated that ( 37 ) The boygot fats pattered . 
is quite as difficult to understand as (7).
3 . Towards an account of preference tradeoffsMy main objective has been to point outdefic iencies in current theories of parsing preferences  , and hence to spur their revision . \] conclude with my own rather speculative proposals  , which represent work in progress . 
In summary , the proposed model involves ( I ) a full-paths parser that schedules tree pruning decisions so as to limit the number of ambiguous constituents to three  ; and ( 2 ) a system of numerical " potentials " as a way of implementing preference tradeoffs  . These potentials ( or " levels of activation " ) are assigned to nodes as a function of their syntactic/semantic/pragmatic structure  , and the preferred structures are those which lead to a globally high potential  . The total potential of a node consists of ( a ) a negative rule potential ~ ( b ) a positive semantic potential ,   ( c ) positive expectation potentials contributed by all daughters following the head  ( where these decay with distance from the head lexeme  )  , and ( d ) transmitted potentials passed on from the daughters to the mother  . 
I have already argued for a full-paths approach in which not only complete phrases but also all incomplete phrases are fully integrated into  ( overlaid ) parse trees dominating all of the text seen so far  . Thus features and partial logical translations can be propagated and checked for consistency as early as possible  , and alternatives chosen or discarded on the basis of all of the available information  . 
The rule potential is a negative increment contr ibuted by a phrase structure rule to any node which instantiates that rule  . Rule potentials lead to a minimal-attachment tendency : they " inhibit " the use of rules  , so that a parse tree using few rules will generally Dep referred to one using many  . Lexical preferences can be captured by making the rule potential more negative for the more unusual rules  ( e . g . , for N-->fat , and for
V-~time).
Each " expected " daughter of a node which fol lows the node's head lexeme contribqtes a non -negative expectation potential to the total potential of the node  . The expectation potential contributed by a daughter is maximal if the daughter immediately follows the mother's head lexeme  , and decreases as the distance ( in words ) of the daughter from the head lexeme increases . The decay of expectation potentials with distance evidently results in a right-associat ive tendency  . The maximal expectation potentials of the daughters of a node are fixed parameters of the rule instantiated by the node  . 
They can be thought Of as encoding the " affinity " of the head daughter for the remaining constituents  , with " strongly expected " constituents having relatively large expectation potentials  . For example , I would assume that verbs have a generally stronger affinity for  ( certain kindsOf ) PP adjuncts than do nouns . This assumption can explain PP-association with the verb in examples like  ( 4 )  , even if the rules governing verb and noun postmodification are taken to be structurally analogous  . Similarly the scheme allows for counterexamples to Right Association like  ( 24 )  , where the affinity of the first verb ( stop ) for the frequency adverbial may be assumed to De sufficiently great compared to that of the second  ( speak ) to over power a weak right-associatlve effect resulting from the decay of expectation potent i als with distance  . 
I suggest that the effect Of semantics and pragmatics can in principle be captured through a semantic potential contributed to each node potential by semantic/pragmatic processing of the node  . The semantic potential of a terminal node ( i . e . , a lexical node with a part icular choice of word sense for the word it dominates  ) is high to the extent that the associated word sense refers to a familiar  ( highly consolidated ) and contextually salient concept ( entity , predicate , or function ) . 
For example , a noun node dominating star , with a translation expressing the astronomical sense Of the word  , presumably has a higher semantic potential than a similar node for the show-bus ~ ness sense Of the word  , when an astronomical context ( but no show-business context ) has been established ; and vice versa . Possibly a spreading activation mechanism could account for the context-dependent part of the semantic potential  ( of . , Qui l l ian 1968 , Collins & Loftus 1975 , Charniak 1983) . 
The semantic potential of a nonterminal node is high to the extent that its logical translat ion  ( obtained by suitably combining the logical t ranslations of the daughters  ) is easily transformed and elaborated into a description of a familiar and contextually relevant kind of object or situation  .   ( My assumption is that an unambiguous meaning representation of a phrase is computed on the basis of its initial logical form by context -dependent pragmatic processes  ; see Schubert & Pelletier 1982 . ) For example , the sentences Time flies , The years pass swiftly , The minutes creep by , etc . , are instances of the famil iar pattern of predication < predicate of locomotion >  ( < timeterm > )  , and as such are easily transformable into certain common place  ( and unambiguous ) assertions about one's personal sense of progression through time  . 
Thus they are likely to be assigned high semantic alternative analysis  . Similarly the phrases met\[someone\]ata dance  ( versus married\[someone\]atadance ) in sentence ( 17 )  , and bird with the yellow wings ( versus saw\[something \] with the yellow wings  ) in ( 18 ) are easily interpreted as descriptions of familiar kinds of objects and situations  , and as such contribute semantic potentials that help to edge Out competing analyses  . 
Crain & Steedman's ( 1981 ) very interesting suggestion that readings with few new presuppositions are preferred has a possible place in the proposed scheme : the mapping from logical form to unambiguous meaning representation may often be relatively simple when few presuppositions need to Deadded to the context  . However , their more general plausibility principle appears to fail for examples like  ( 21 ) - ( 23 )  . 
Note that the above pattern of temporal predicat ion may well be considered to violate a selectional restriction  , in that predicates of locomotion cannot literal ly apply to times  . Thus the nodes with the highest semantic potent i al are not necessarily those conforming most fully with selectional restrictions  . This leads to some departures from Wilks'theory of semantic preferences  ( e . g . , 1976) , although I suppose that normally the most easi ly interpretable nodes  , and hence those with the highest semantic potential  , are indeed the ones that conform with select ional restrictions  . 
The difference between such pairs of sentences as  ( 17 ) and ( 22 ) can now be explained in terms of semantic/syntact icpotential tradeoffs  . In both sentences the semantic potential of the reading which associates the PP with the first verb is relatively high  . However , only in ( 17 ) is the PP close enough to the first verb for this effect to over power the right-associative tendency inherent in the decay of expectation potentials  . 
The final contribution to the potential of a node is the transmitted potential  , i . e . , the sum of potentials of the daughters . Thus the total potential at a node reflects the syntactic/semantic/pragmatic properties of the entire tree it dominates  . 
A crucial question that remains concerns the scheduling Of decisions to discard globally weak hypotheses  . Examples like ( 33 ) have convinced me that Marcus ( 1980 ) was essentially correct in positing a three -phrase limit on successive ambiguous constituents  . ( In the context of a full-paths parser , ambiguous constituents can be defined in terms of " upward or-forks " in phrase structure trees  . ) Thus I propose to discard the global ly weakest a l ternat ive at the latest when it is not possible to proceed rightward without creating a fourth ambiguous constituent  . Very weak alternatives ( relative to the others ) may be discarded earlier , and this assumption can account for early d is ambiguation in cases like  ( 10 ) and ( 11 )  . 
Although these proposals are not fully worked out ( especially with regard to the definition of semantic potential  )   , preliminary investigation suggests that they can do justice to examples like  ( I ) - ( 37 )  . Schubert & Pelletier 1982 briefly described a full-paths parser which chains upward from the current word to current " expectations " by " left-corners tack-ups " Of rules  . However , this parser searched alternatives by backtracking only and did not handle gaps or coordination  . A new version designed to handle most aspects of Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar  ( see Gazdar et al . , to appear ) is currently being implemented . 

I thank my unpaid informants who patiently answered strange questions about strange sentences  . 
I have also benefited from discussions with membersOf the Logical Grammar Study Group at the University of Alberta  , especially Matthew Dryer , who suggested some relevant references . The research was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada under 
Operating Grant A 8818.

Charniak , E .  (1983) . Passing markers : a theory of contextual in f luence in language comprehension  . 
Cognitive Science 7, pp . 171-190.
Collins , A . M . & Loftus , E . F .  (1975) . A spreading activation theory of semantic processing  . 
Psychological Review 82, pp . 407-428.
Crain , S . & Steedman , M .  (1981) . The use of context by the Psychological Parser . Paper presented at the Symposium on Modelling Human Parsing Strategies  , Center for Cognitive Science , Univ . 
of Texas , Austin.
Ford , M . , Bresnan , J . & Kaplan , R .  (1981) . A competence-based theory of syntactic closure . In Sresnan , J . ( ed . ) , The Mental Representation of Grammatical Relat ions MIT Press  , Cambridge , MA . 
Frazier , L . & Fodor , J .  (1979) . The Sausage Machine : a new twostage parsing model  . 
Cognition 6, pp . 191-325.
Gazdar , G . , Klein , E . , Pullum , G . K . & Sag , I . A . 
( to appear ). Generalized Phrase Structure
Grammar : A Study in English Syntax.
Kimball , J .  (1973) . Seven principles of surface structure parsing in natural language  . Cognition 2, pp .  15-47 . 
Marcus , M .  (1980) . A Theory of Syntactic Recognition for Natural Language  , MIT Press , 
Cambridge , MA.
Quillian , M . R .  (1968) . Semantic memory . In Minsky , M . ( ed . ), Semantic Information Processing , MIT
Press , Cambridge , MA , pp . 227-270.
Schubert , L . K . & Pelletier , F . J .  (1982) . From English to logic : context-free computat ion of ' conventional ' logical translations  . Am . J . of Computational Linguistics 8, pp .  26-44 . 
Shieber , S . M .  (1983) . Sentence disambiguation by a shift-reduce parsing technique  . Proc . Sth Int . 
Conf . on Artificial Intelligence , Aug . 812, Karlsruhe , W . Germany , pp .  699-703 . Also in Proc . of the 21st Ann . Meet . of the Assoc . for Computational Linguistics , June 1517, MIT,
Cambridge , MA ., pp . 113-118.
Wilks , Y .  (1976) . Parsing English II . In Charniak , E . & Wilks , Y . ( eds . ) , Computational Semantics , North-Holland , Amsterdam , pp .  155-184 . 

