ANOTHERLO OKATNOMIN ALCOMPOUNDS
Pierre Isabelle
D ~ partement delinguistique
Universit ~ de Montreal
C . P . 6128, Succ . A , Montreal , Qua . , Canada H)C ) 37

We present a progress report on our research on nominal compounds  ( NC's )  . Recent approaches to this probiem in linguistics and naturalian guage processing  ( NLP ) are reviewed and criticized . We argue that the notion of " roie nominal " , which is at the interface of linguistic and extraiinguis-tic knowledge  , is crucial for characterizing NC'eas we II as other Iinguistic phenomena  . We examine a number of constraints on the semantic interpretation ruies for NC's  . Proposals are made that shouid improve the capability of NLP systems to dea I with NC's  . 
IINTRODUCTION
A . Problem Statement
As a first approximation , we define a " nominal compound ( NC ) ass string of two or more nouns having the same distribution as a singie noun  , as in example ( I ) :  ( 1 ) aircraft bomb bay do or actuating cylinders We will see below that provisions have to be made in some cases for intervening adjectives  . 
NC's can exhibit various degrees of lexica -lization  , but we will focus our attention on productive rules for forming novel compounds  . As to their surface syntax , NC's can assume any structure generated by the rule N - -> NN  ; accordingly , their structural ambiguity grows exponentially with their length  ( following the " Catalan sequence " )  . How , then , do we determine that the normal interpretation for  ( i ) imposes the bracke-ting shown in ( 2 )  , rather than any of the other 41 syntactically possible bracketings ? ( 2 )   ( ( aircraft ( ( bomb bay ) door ) )  ( actuating cylinder ) )
B . Goal __s softh ___ ee study
We believe that the analysis of NC's represents an important and largely unsolved problem  . 
From a theoretical point of view this problem raises the question of how to deal with noun semantics  . And since noun meaning appears to be closely connected with knowledge of the world  , one is led to explore the modes of interaction between linguistic and conceptual knowledge  . 
From an NLP perspective , NC's have turned out to be an important stumbling block for systems that attempt to dea I with real -iife text  , especia Ily in technical domains , for purposes such as machine translation ( Isabe Ile , to appear ) , information retrieval , etc . 
Our ultimate goal is to develop an NLP system capable of analyzing large classes of NC's in the sublanguage  ( Kittredge and Lehrberger , i982) of aircraft maintenance manuals . We do not aim at solving all cases , since we believe the problem to be exceedingly difficult  . At the present stage of our inquiry , we concentrate on the design of ssuitable theoretical framework  . 
In section II , we present a brief review of previous work in linguistics and NLP  . In sections III and IV , we examine two aspects of the semantics of nouns that are crucially relevant to the analysis of NC 's : predicative nouns and role nominals  . Finally , in section V , we explore possible constraints on the semantic interpretation of NC's  . 
IIBACKGROUND
A . Approaches in Linguistics
The early study of Lees ( 1963 ) classified NC's on purely grammatical criteria , and it failed to provide constraints that could explain how NC's are semantically interpreted  . 
In s number of more recent studies , such as Levi ( 1978 ) 9 there has been an attempt to view NC's as governed by tight semantic constraints  . 
Thus , according to Levi , any novel NC realizes a pattern where either : a ) the head noun is a deverbal naminalizstion and its modifier is interpreted as an argument of the related verb  ; or b ) the two nouns are related by one of exactly nine deletable predicates  ( " is the cause of " , " isfor " , etc . ) . 
This reductionist attempt has been criticized , most notably by Downing (1977) , on the involves pragmatic knowledge , and that numerous cases of NC's ( such as thalidomide parents ) will resist any analysis in terms of a closed set of relations  . These criticisms have led theorists like Selkirk ( 1982 ) to adopt the position that only " verbal compounds "  ( those constructed on a pattern " argument + nominalization "  ) are amenable to linguistic characterization ; all other NC's would have to be explained in separate extralinguistic theories  . 
C . Approaches in NLP
Several systems have been developed in an NLP framework to deal with the problem of interpreting NC's  ; two recent exempIes are reported in
Finin (1980) and McDonaId(i982).
In both systems , the individual nouns of an NC are first mapped on to conceptual representations where concepts are characterized by a set of " roles " or " slots "  , and are arranged in an abstraction hierarchy . Interpreting a compound then amounts to forming a derived concept on the basis of the constituent concepts  ; in most cases , this is done by interpreting one of the concepts as a slot filler for the other  . For example , the interpretation of steel adapter would involve inserting the concept associated with steel into a RAW-MATERIAL slot within the representation of adapter  . But the authors do not examine in any detail the question of eventual constraints on this interpretation process  , such as the effect of word order . 
Another crucial issue which has not been explored insufficient detail  , is the nature of , and the justification for the particular set of slots which is assigned to a given concept  . Finin is somewhat more explicit on this question . Some nouns have slots which represent standard case roles  . Role nominals , on the other hand , are nouns which refer to a particular case role of another concept  ; for example , food refers to the object role of eat , and this fact provides the key to the interpretation of cat food  . This notion will be examined in detail below . But Finin also resorts to other types of slots ( e . g . 
" raw-material ") which are not discussed.
IIIPREDICATIVE NOUNS
A . Root Nouns with Arguments
The fact that several classes of nonderived nouns strictly subcategorize phrases which are semantically interpreted as arguments has received very little attention in the literature  . 
This phenomenon would deserve an extensive study , and we can only give here some relevant examples , together with an indication of the semantic categories between which the relation expressed by the noun effects a mapping :  ( 3 ) a . measure nouns map : objects onto quantities examples : speed  ( of )  , temperature ( of ) , volume ( of ) , size ( of ) b . " area " nouns map : objects onto subparts examples : top  ( of )  , side ( of ) , bottom ( of ) , center ( of ) , core(of)c . collective nouns map : individuals onto sets examples : group  ( of )  , set(of ) d . representational nouns map : objects onto representations of objects examples : picture  ( of )  , diagram ( of ) , sense ( of ) e . other examples location ( of ) , goal ( of ) , brother ( of ) , king ( of ) Most if not all of these argument-taking nouns can have their argument satisfied by a modifier noun in an NC:  ( a ) a . oil temperature b . boxt opc . tank group d . circuit diagrame . component location A treatment in terms of predicate/argument patterns for this type of NC seems far superior to Levi's  ( 1978 ) use of the semantically empty " deletable predicate " HAVE  ( " the component HAS alocation " )  . Although these NC's are excluded from Selkirk's ( 1982 ) class of verbal compounds , they are amenable to the same type of semantic description  . 
B . Action and State Nominalizations
Most studies on NC's have recognized the fact that deverbal nominalizations exhibit a semantic behavior closely related to that of the verb  , and subcategorize elements that can occur as modifier nouns in NC's  . As mentioned above , these are in fact the only cases that Selkir k ( 1982 ) deems characterizable at the level of linguistic competence  . 
8ut there seems to be no reason why deadjec-tival nominalizations should be handled in a different way  . In examples (5) and (6) , an action and a state are nominalized , with the argument occurring either in a prepositional phrase or as a modifier in an NC :   ( 5 ) a . Someone removes the pump . 
b . removal of the pump c . pump removal (6) a . Uranium is scarce . 
b . scarcity of uranium c . uranium scarcity synonymy between the ( b ) and ( c ) examples , but only that they exhibit the same predicate / argument pattern  . Action nominals can take various types of arguments in NC's  , and sometimes several of them simultaneously : ( 7 ) a . pump failure ( subject ) b . Montreal flight(source , goal ) (8) a . poppet chatter tendency
IVROLE NOMINALS
A . Nominalizations
Deverbal nominalizations can refer not only to the action expressed by the verb  , but also to the agent ( driver ) , instrument ( lubricant ) , patient ( employ-~-~ and result ( assembly ) of this action . Except may be for results , the term " role nominal " seems appropriate , since the nominalization refers to the filler of one of the roles of the verb  . Although these nouns are not , strictly speaking , predicative , they generally permit to form NC's in which the other is interpreted as an argument of the underlying verb :  ( 9 ) truck driver = one who drive strucks ( I0 ) engine lubricant = something with which engines are cated ill  ) 18 Hemployee=one who is employed by IBH lubri- ( 12 ) pump assembly = the result of assembling a pump With agent and instrument nominals  ( 9 , i0) , there is a strong tendency to assign a n " habitual " aspect to the underlying verb and generic reference to its object  ; this kind of interpretation is awkward when the argument appears in a PP:  ( I ) ) ? a driver of trucks
B . Root Nouns
The term " role nominal " is due to F in in ( 1980 ) who uses it to cover not only nominalizations of the type described above  , but also any noun which can be semantically interpreted as referring to a role of a given verb  , whether or not this verb happens to be morphologically related  . This claims amounts to saying that , semantically , we have relations such as the following : (14) a . pilot : fly :: driver : drive b . gun:shoot :: lubricant : lubricate c . food:eat::employee:employArelated claim under lies Zholkhovskij & Hel'cuk's  ( 1971 ) use of certain " lexical functions ": ( 15 ) a . Sl(bUy ) = buyer b . S3(buy ) = seller c . Sloc(battle ) = battle field d . Sinst(See ) = eyes where Si ,   $1o c and S inst are defined as functions t~t yield the typical name of  , respectively , the i-arrant , the location and the instrument . 
Fillmore (1971) also makes a comparable proposal , when he suggests that the lexical entry of knife should include  ( 16 ) as a component : ( 16 ) use : I of < V01A > where V = cut
C . On the Definition of Role Nominals
Mow exactly should we understand the notion of role nominals ? Finin's statement that they refer to an underlying case role of a verb is not accurate : they refer to role fillers  , not to the roles themselves . Assuming that they denote a set of role fillers , we can ask if this set is : a . the set of all possible fillers for the role ; or b . a set of typical fillers for that role ; or c . any set of possible fillers for the role . 
Possibility ( a ) seems to describe correctly numerous cases of deverbal nouns  . For example , it seems clear that anyone who is employed is an employee  . However , with agents and instruments , there is a tendency to reserve the role nominal for habitual fillers : one hesitates to apply the term writer to a person who only wrote a letter  . 
Horeover , with this definition , knife would not be a role nominal for cut , since it is perfectly possible to cut bread with as word  . The notion would then loose much of its power , since we need it to explain why bread knife is interpreted as " aknife used as an instrument for cutting bread "  . 
On the other hand , definition ( c ) seems too weak : even if as word can be used to cut bread  , breads word is odd in a normal context ( contextual factors will be discussed below )  . Thus , definition ( b ) seems the most appropriate . 
D .3 uatify in 9Role Assignments
For those role nominals where there is no morphological evidence of relatedness with the underlying verb  , one is forced to rely mostly on intuitions . However , the risk of arbitrariness can be reduced by looking for further evidence from other linguistic phenomena  . 
511 i . Evaluative Adjectives
When Fillmore ( 1971 ) introduced his notion of role nominal , he was attempting to characterize the behavior of evaluative adjectives  , not the behavior of NC's . He noted that a ~ ood ~ , where X is a role nominal , means : a . if X is an agent : one who performs the associated activity skilfully  ( sgood driver , a good pianist ); b . if X is an instrument : a thing which permits the associated activity to be performed easily  ( a good knife , a good broom ); c ? In other cases , it seems that the resultant meaning is less predictible  ( good food has certain properties concerning nutritiousness and taste  ; a good house is comfortable , built to last , etc .  )  . 
As far as we can tell , the evaluation domain for agents and instruments is precisely the acti-vity which is relevant for the understanding of NC'B  . Thus while good driver evaluates the dri-ving , card river specifies its object ; moreover , in ~ ood card river , car falls within the evaluation domain : car drivers and truck drivers are evaluated on different scales  . Evaluative adjectives can thus be used as a further source of evidence in the description of role nominals  . 
2. Denominal Verbs
Another phenomenon which is relevant to the question of role nominals and NC's is the creation of denominal verbs  . Clark & Clark ( 1979 ) examine this very productive process , in which a verb formed by zero-affixation is understood " in such a way that the parent noun denotes one role in the situation  , and the remaining surface arguments of the denominal verb denote other roles in the situation "  ( p .  787) . For example , Max sub-wayed downtown means that Maxwent downtown on a subway  . Intuitively , it appears obvious that the knowledge involved in this interpretation process is very closely related to whatever permits interpreting the NC downtown subwayas " the subway that goes downtown "  . 
An important aspect of C&C's work is to show that the formation of denominal verbs is heavily dependent on contextuai know I edge  . Thus if you and me both know that Phii hasion g had the crazy habit of sticking trombones into the nose of by passers  , I can in form you that PhiI has just tromboned a poiice officer  . Notice that in the same context ,   9opd trombone wouId presumably mean at rombone that is easy to stick into some-one's nose  . 
In such cases , the interpretation is based on particular , situational knowledge . NC's can also be based on this type of knowledge . For example , if that same Philuses different types of trombones for men and women  , we might speak of his women trombones , to meant rombones of the type that Philsticks into the nose of female by paasers  . 
But C&C claim that , more frequently , deno-minal verbs are based on ~ eneric knowledge about concrete objects  , know I edge which is accessib Ie to ai is peakers in a Iinguistic community  . This claim is to be linked with Downing's ( i 977 ) remark that aithough NC's are sometimes " deictic  "  , they are most often based on generic or permanent reIationships  . 
Obviously , the relevant knowledge ( whether particular or generic ) is at least as much about the world as about language  . In fact , it is clear that both types condition each other . For example , objects that are used as vehicles will tend to be verbalized on the syntactic pattern of movement verbs  ; and in the absence of other evidence , one is likely to infer from its syntax that The fairy pumpkined the kids to Narnia allu-des not to an " satin  9 pumpkin " but to a " transportation pumpk in " . 
In order to predict the range of meaning of large classes of denominal verbs  , C&C propose to encode some generic knowledge in the lexicon  , by means of " predominant features " such as: ( 17 ) a . x is the agent of Act ( topiloty ) b . x is the instrument of Act ( to pumpy ) c . x is the result of Act ( to groupy ) d . x is the location of y ( to can y)e . x is the locatum of y ( to covery ) f . x is the time of Act ( to weekendiny ) It is quite apparent that these features are meant to capture the same type of facts as role nominsIs  . It is easy to find NC's which paraIiel each ciass of verb singled out by them :  ( 17' ) a . aircraft piiot b . oiipump c . tank group d . oil cane . pump cover f . Montreal weekend We believe that the semantic mechanisms that are at work in the interpretation of NC's  , deno-minal verbs and evaluative adjectives are basically similar  . By using independent evidence from these phenomena  , and an adequate generalization of the notion of role nominal  , one can go slong way toward uncovering the relevant semantic mechanisms  . 
The notion of role nominal , as we understand it , is at the interface between linguistic and extralinguistic knowledge  . Nouns may have severa I different roies , depending on the contingencies of the entities that they denote  ; in those cases context usuaiiy makes one roie moresaiient  . In fact , context may even impart a noun with an unusuai roie  , as we have seen . However , we beiieve that in ordinary texts , such as technieai role nominals are most often based on the usual  , generic roles of the nouns . But this can only be shown through a largescale description of the relevant NC's  . 
E . A Tentative Scheme
Since the knowledge we have to encode is tied to world knowledge  , there is a risk that it could become overwhelmingly compiex  . However , we will minimize this risk , by limiting the scope of our inquiry to a suitably restricted subianguage  . 
Technical manuals are interesting in this respect because they exhibit at the same time a tight I y constrained universe of interpretation  , and an exceptional productivity in compounding . 
As to the semantic framework , we will not use case grammar , even if our discussion of role nominals was couched in the terms of this theory for expository purposes  . As is well known , case grammars raise a number of difficult problems  . 
For example , the distinction between agent and instruments is problematic  . At the morphological level , both can give rise to-ernominalizations ; at the syntactic level , both can appear in subject position , and in with NP environments ( cf . co-agents ); and at the semantic level , both notions are frequently undistinguishable , especially in texts dealing with machines , such as technical manuals . Since action verbs can gene-rally occur with an agent  , an instrument , or both , it does not seem necessary to include two slots for each verb in the dictionary : general rules should predict the relevant facts  . 
Another problem is that if we want the notion of role nominal to be general enough  , a role nominal should be able to refer to entities which are not case slots  , at least in the usual sense of this term . Result nominals , for instan-ce , do not refer to a case slot as such . 
There is in fact no evidence that the interpretation rules for NC's crucially involve case roles rather than argument places  , and our descriptions will be couched in terms of a predi-cate/argument notation  . This notation is perfec-tly compatible with the use of an ontology that is richer than standard predicate logic  . 
For example , if we agree with 3ack end off's ( 198 ) ) claim that " place " and " paths " constitute basic cognitive categories  , we can define " typed " variables with the appropriate range  . In our descriptions below , p will denote a path variable , that is , a variable ranging over entities denoted by complex expressions constructed out of  , !  , , path functions ( into , from , toward , via , etc . ), ! , , and places . Similarly , we will use e as an " event " variable , as in Moore (1981) ~ d Hobbs (1984) . 
A role nominal will contain within its lexical entry one or more statements of the form " x such that P  ( x ) " . We do not think that diacritic markers such as " typical function " are required  ; rather , notions such as typicality , should be a consequence of the semantic rules which interpret lexical entries  . 
We give below a few examples of the type of lexical specification for role nominals with which we want to experiment  . At this stage of our work this should be taken as nothing more than a first approximation  . The material enclosed in brackets represents selectional restrictions  . 
(18) pilot x such that FLY(x , y , p ) < aircraft ( y ) >  ( 19 ) adapter x such that ADAPT ( x , y , z )   ( this entry is produced morphology ) by derivational ( 20 ) tank x such that CONTAIN ( x , y ) < fluid(y ) > ( container , chamber , reservoir , bay , compar-tment , etc . are similar but selection res-trictions can differ  )   ( 21 ) hingex such that ATTACH ( x , y , z ) (22) brace x such that SUPPORT(x , y ) (23) witness x such that SEE(x , e ) (24) linex such that CONDUCT(x , y , p ) < fluid(y ) >
IVCONSTRAINING INTERPRETATION RULES
The preceding sections have discussed two aspects of the lexical semantics of nouns that are relevant for the analysis of NC's : argument -taking nouns and role nominals  . Assuming that the lexicon contains this type of information  , we can no wask how it is used by semantic interpretation rules  . 
More specifically , the picture that emerges is that lexical entries provide predicate/argu-ment patterns which contain variables  ; these variables have to be bound to the semantic material associated with some other noun  . We must then ask what are the rules that govern this binding process  . 

A . Relative Order of the two Nouns
I . Predicative Nouns
Selkirk ( 1982 ) claims that the modifier noun can satisfy an argument of the head noun but not vice versa  . Finin ( 1980 ) claims that argument satisfaction ( or slot filling ) is possible in both directions . Finally , McDonald ( 1982 ) takes the intermediate position that satisfaction of the head by a modifier is much more frequent  . 
Now , consider the following pairs of examples : ( 25 ) a . oil temperature b . ? ? temperature oil (26) a . uranium scarcity b . ? ? scarcityuranium(27) a . pump removal b . ? ? removal pump (28) a . student invention b . ? ? invention student It is clear that the ( b ) examples , if interpreta-blest all , cannot easiIy realize the pattern found in the ( a ) examples . However , there is a very productive process which permits an action nominal to occur to the left of its argument  ; this pattern is most productive within animate head nouns :  ( 29 ) a . repairman b . ? man repair (30) a . cooling device b . device cooling (3 l ) a . bleed valve b . ? ? valve bleed c . valve bleeding (32) a . jacking point b . ? ? point jacking In the first three ( a ) examples , the head noun is interpreted as a subject argument  ( agent or ins-trument )  . In (28a ) , point is interpreted as aiocation ( where one jacks something )  . In all of the ( a ) examples , the action nominai is interpreted as denoting a perman entroie or function of the head noun  . 
When order is reversed , meaning and , eventually , acceptability are affected . In the ( b ) examples , the action nominal is not interpreted as expressing a permanent function of the other noun  . Thus , if one can manage subject interpretations in ( 29b ) and ( 31c ) --" are pair done by men ( not robots ) " and " avalve which bleeds something "-- , it will not follow that the men are repair men or that the valve is able edvalve  . 
The pattern " argument+predicative noun " has some pecularities of its own  ; for example , why is ( 32 b ) unacceptable no matter the role assignment that one makes ? Or why is girls wim-min  9 unacceptable ? In the latter case , it cannot be , as suggested by Selkirk ( 1982 ) that subject arguments are prohibited in general : pump failure is fine  . It may be that subjects are ruled out for-ing nominals  , unless they express a result ( cf . consumer spending ) . 
But on the whole , the pattern where the predicate comes first is much more constrained  , since it permits oniy action nomina Is , and produces a semantic resuit very simiiar to = oie nomina is  . Thus , a cooIing device and cooier denote very simi Iar entities  ; the same is true of jacking system and jack . Notice that in exampies such as: ( )3 ) air temperature monitoring system monitor in 9 system forms a constituent , even if air temperature is understood as the object of of the monitoring  ; this is confirmed by the fact that ( 34 ) receives a similar interpretation : ( 34 ) monitoring system for air temperature It seems that this modification pattern has the effect of creating a role nominal out of its two constituents  . 
2. Role Nominals
Here again , the order of the nouns strongly conditions the resulting interpretation :  ( 35 ) a . truck driver b . ? ? drivertruck(36) a . oil pump b . pumpoil (37) a . pump case b . ? case pump (38) a . equipment bay b . bay equipment In the ( a ) examples , the modifier noun is interpreted as the object of the underlying verb  ( drive , transfer , detect , hold ); here too , a permanent connection is established . A truck d river is a person whose ( social ) function is to drive trucks , and that person is still a truck driver when he /shedrives as cooter  . If you use a noil pump to pump your tomato juice , it still qualifies to be called a noil pump . 
But when the nouns are inverted , there is a change in meaning and , possibly , inacceptability . It is hard to find a sensible interpretation for driver truck  . The most natural interpretation for pumpoil is " oil used for lubricating pumps ": in this case  , oil has become the relevant role nominal . There is also a possibility for an interpretation such as " oil in the pump " or " oil coming from the pump "  . We are not sure how that type of interpretation should be produced  . But it seems clear that oil can only become an actor in head noun  . 
It is easy to see that the other examples exhibit ssimilar behavior  . We therefore conclude that role nominals tend to establish permanent  , functional connections with their modifiers only . 
When they modify a head noun , either this noun will absorb them itself ( if it is a predicative or role nominal ) or else a looser connection such as a locative one will be created  . 
B . Multiple Modification i . Argument Ordering When a predicative noun or role nominal in head position is modified by more than one argument  , it seems that ordering (39) will apply , as illustrated in the examples below = ( )9 ) time < paths < subject < object loc ( 40 ) s . computer fuel testing b . ? ? fuel computer testing (41) a . Montreal jetflights b . ? ? jet Montreal flights (42) a . evening Montreal trains b . ? ? Montreal evening trains 2 . A Broader Perspective So far , we have concentrated on predicative nouns and role nominals  , thereby excluding various types of compounds . When we look at the broader picture , different problems are raised . 
First ,   ( in technical manuals ) we find examples with intervening adjectives as in  ( 43 ) :  ( 43 )   ( Remove ) front cockp it rights helfaft con-trol panel  . 
While the formation of NC's such as those we have examined in previous sections is usually considered to be a lexical process  , there is some evidence that , in examples like (43) , syntactic processes are at work . Notice that each one of the three main groups in ( 43 ) is referential = " the (   .   .   . ) panel of the ( .   .   . ) shelf of the ( .   .   . ) cockpit " , much as if there was an implicit geni-ti vemarker  . But genuine compounds ( that is , those of syntactic category N ) are usually consi-dered to be anaphoric is l and s  ( Levi ,  1978) . One possible explanation is that ( 43 ) should in fact be analyzed as containing three NP's  . 
A comparison of the following examples provides some support for that view =  ( 44 ) a . Remove front cockp it rights helf . 
b . Remove right cock pits helf.
In (44a ) , cockp it has definite reference and is interpreted as no more than a location for the shelf  . However , in (44b ) , when the scope of right includes shelf , cockp it becomes nonreferential ; cockp its helf then denotes a type of shelf . These facts seem to indicate that this scoping of right  , in virtue of syntactic constraints , forces one to take cockp its helf as something of category N  ; and when we do so , shelf becomes a role nominal whose argument receives the type of " permanent function " interpretation discussed above  . 
CoreNC'B , those which establish argument connections with a predicative noun or role nominal  , appear to form a tightly bound unit : (45) a . ? ? oil high temperature b . ? ? truck good driver c . ? ? equipment left bay Some adjectives , the " nonpredicating " adjectives of Levi ( 1978 ) can appear with incore NC's . But they are in fact nouns in disguise , and they receive an argument interpretation ; in (46) , it is understood that one repairs a structure . 
(46) aircraft structural repairs
Thus , if we are willing to make a distinction between syntactic compounding  ( similar to genitive phrases ) and coreNC's , it can be claimed that true compounds form anaphoric islands and cannot be separated by adjectives  . 
Finally , there are certain types of nominal modifiers ( for which we have as yet no analysis to offer ) whose degree of cohesion with the head noun is somehow intermediate between nouns interpreted as arguments and nouns in separate  ( pseudo-genitive ) NP's . For example , nouns which stand in a " material of " relation to the head cannot precede adjectives  , but must precede arguments = (43) a . largesteel tank b . ? ? steel large tank (44) a . steel fuel tank b . ? ? fuelsteeltank The constraints that we have seen  , and no doubt others yet to be discovered , are certainly significant from a theoretical point of view  ; but they also have practical value for NLP systems which have to deal with NC's  . 
VICONCLUSIONS
We have discussed two classes of nouns that have particular importance in NC formation = predicative nouns and role nominals  . We have shown that the latter class is also relevant to the description of evaluative adjectives and denominal verbs  . Atentative framework for the description of role nominals has then been proposed  . 
Finally , we have seen that rules which interpret has been made between " pseudo-genitive " constructions and coreNC's  , the latter forming a tightly bound unit with internal ordering constraints  . 
Much work remains to be done on the issues that we have discussed here  ; it is likely that experimentation with actual descriptions on a larger scale will lead to several refinements and revisions  . Moreover , as has been pointed out in the last section , our description still ignores a number of types of compounding  , and further difficulties are to be expected . Nonetheless , we are confident that our work will , in the near future , result in a small NLP system capable of analyzing a broad range of NC's  . 
Selkirk E . , The Syntax of Words , MIT Press , 1982 . 
Zholkovskij A . , Mel'cuk I . , SUrla synthbses d-mantique , in T . A . Informations , 11:2, 1971 . 
VIIRE FERENCES
Aronoff M . , Contextuals , in Language , 56:4, 744-758, 1980 . 
Clark E . , Clark H . When Nouns Surface as Verbs , in Language ,  55:4 , , 767-811 ,  1979 . 
Downing P . , On the Creation and Use of English Compound Nouns  , in Lanquaqe ,  5):4 ,  810-842 ,  1977 . 
Fillmore C ., Types of Lexicsl Information , in D.
Steinberg and L.3akobovits(eds.), Semantics,
Cambridge Univ . Press , 197I.
Finin T . , The Semantic Interpretation of Compound Nominals  , Coordinated Science Lab . , Univ . of
IIIinois , 1980.
Hobbs 3 . , Sublanguage and Knowledge , paper presented at the NYU Conference on Subianguages  , 3 anuary 1984 . 
Isabelle P . , Machine Translation at the TAUM Group , paper presented at the Lugano Tutorial on Machine Trane Iation  , Aprili 984 , to appear . 
3 ackendoff R ., Semantics and Cognition , MIT
Press , 198).
Kittredge R . , Lehrberger 3 . , Sublanguage : Studies of Language in Restricted Semantic Domains  , De
Gruyter , 1982.
Lees R ., The Grammar of English Nominalizations,
Mouton , i96).
Levi3., Th__ee Syntax and Semantics of Comp I ex
Nominals , Academic , 1978.
McDonald D . B ., Understand in 9Noun Compounds,
Carnegie-Meiion University , i982.
Moore R . , Problems in Logical Form , Tech . note 241, SRI , 1981 . 

