USEOFH ~ ru'RISTICKN ~ L~EDGEINCHINF- . SELANGUAGEANALYSIS
Yiming Yang , Toyoaki Nishida and Shuji Doshita
Department of Information Science,
Kyoto University,
Sakyoku , Kyoto 606, JAPAN

This paper describes an analysis method which uses heuristic knowledge to find local syntactic structures of Chinese sentences  . We call it a preprocessing , because we use it before we do global syntactic structure analysis Cl\]of the input sentence  . Our purpose is to guide the global analysis through the search space  , to avoid unnecessary computation . 
To realize this , we use a set of special words that appear in commonly used patterns in Chinese  . We call them " characteristic words " . 
They enable us to pick out fragments that might figure in the syntactic structure of the sentence  . Knowledge concerning the use of characteristic words enables us to rate alternative fragments  , according to pattern statistics , fragment length , distance between characteristic words , and so on . The preprocessing system proposes to the global analysis level a most " likely " partial structure  . In case this choice is rejected , backtracking looks for a second choice , and so on . 
For our system , we use 200 characteristic words . Their rules are written by 101 automata . 
We tested them against 120 sentences taken from a Chinese physics textbook . For this limited set , correct partial structures were proposed as first choice for  94% of sentences . Allowing a 2nd choice_ , the score is 98% , with a 3rd choice , the score is 100% . 
I . THE PROBLE MOF CHINESE
LANG UAGE ANALYSIS
Being a language in which only characters ( ideograns ) are used , Chinese language has specific problems . Compared to languages such as English , there are few formal inflections to indicate the grammatical category of a word  , and the few inflections that do exist are often omitted  . 
In English , postfixes are often used to distinguish syntactical categories  ( e . g . translation , translate ; difficul ! , dificulty ) , but in Chinese it is very common to use the same word  ( characters ) for a verb , a noun , an adjective , etc . . So the ambiguity of syntactic category of words is a big problem in Chinese analysis  . 
In another exa~ole , in English , "- ing " is used to indicate a participle , or "- ed " can be used to distinguish passive mode from active  . In Chinese , there is nothing to indicate participle , and although there is a word ,  "~ "  , whose function is to indicate passive mode , it is often omitted . Thus for a verb occurring in a sentence , there is often now ~ y of telling if it transitive or intransitive  , active or passive , participle or predicate of the main sentence , so there may be many ambiguities in deciding the structure it occurs in  . 
If we attempt Chinese language analysis using a conputer  , and try to perform the syntactic analysis in a straightforward way  , we run into a combinatorial explosion due to such ambiguities  . What is lacking , therefore , is a simple method to decide syntactic structure . 
2. REDUCING AMBIGUITIES USING
CHARACTERISTICWORDS
In the Chinese language , there is a kind of word ( such as preposition , auxiliary verb , modifier verb , adverbial noun , etc . .) , that is used as an independant word ( not an affix )  . They usually have key functions , they are not so numerous , their use is very frequent , and so they may be used to reduce anbiguities . Here we shall call them " characteristic words " . 
Several hundreds of these words have been collected by  linguists\[2\]  , and they are often used to distinguish the detailed meaning in each part of a Chinese sentence  . Here we selected about 200 such words , and we use them to try to pick out fragments of the sentence and figure out their syntactic structure before we attempt global syntactic analysis and deep meaning analysis  . 
The use of the characteristic words is described below  . 
a ) Category decision:
Some characteristic words may serve to decide the category of neighboring words  . For example , words such as "~" ,  "~" ,  "~" ,  "4~" , are rather like verb postfixes , indicating that the preceding word must be a verb  , even though the same characters might spell a noun  . Words like " ~" ,  " ~ " , can be used as both verb and auxiliary . If , for example , " ~" is followed by a word that could be read as either a verb or a noun  , then this word is a verb and "~" is an auxiliary . 
b ) Fragment picking
In Chinese , many prepositional phrases star to oxx f2 ,  #vP o0x~~f 5 ,  #V Poooxx
Translation : ? ox
The ball must run a longer distance before returning to the initial altitude on this slope  . 
distinguish a word frem others characteristical word fragment verb Or adjective the word cannot he predicate of sentence 
Fig . iAn Example of Fragment Finding with a preposition such as "~"  ,  "~" ,  "~" , and finish on a characteristic word belonging to a subset of adverbial nouns that are often used to express position  , direction , etc . . When such characteristic words are spotted in a sentence  , they serveto forecast a prepositional phrase . 
Another example is the pattern " . . .   . . . ~", used a little like " . . . is to . . . " in English , so when we find it , we may predict a verbal phrase from " ~" " to " % . ~", that is in addition the predicate
VP of the sentence.
These forecasts make it more likely for the subsequent analysis system to find the correct phrase early  . 
c ) Role deciding
The preceding rules are rather simple rules like a human might use  . With a cxm puter it is possible to use more ~ lex rules  ( such as involving many exceptions or providing partial knowledge  ) with the same efficiency . For example , a rule cannot usually with certainty decide if a given verb is the predicate of a sentence  , but we know that a predicate is not likely to precede a characteristic word such as  "~9 " or "" or follow a word like "~-~" , " ~" or "~" . We use this kind of rule to reduce the range of possible predicates  . This knowledge can be used in turn to predict the partial structure in a sentence  , because the verbal proposition begins with the predicate and ends at the end of the sentence  . 
In the example shown in Fig . l , fragments f3 and f4 are obtained through step ( a )   ( see above )  , fl through ( b ) , and f2 and f5 through(c ) . The symbol " o " shows a possible predicate , and " x " means that the possibility has been ruled out  . 
Out of 7 possibilities , only 2 remained.
3. RESOLVING CONFLICT
The rules we mentioned above are written for each characteristic word independantly  . They are not absolute rules , so when they are applied to a sentence , several fragments may overlap and thus be incrmpatible  . Several crmabinations of compatible fragments my exist  , and frcm these we must choose the most " likely " one  . Instead of attempting to evaluate the likelihood of every combination  , we use a scheme that gives different priority scores to each fragment  , and thus constructs directly the " hest " combination  . If this combination ( partial structure ) is rejected by subsequent analysis , backtracking occurs and searches for the next possibility  , and so on . 
Fig . 2 shows an example involving conflicting fragments  . We select f3 first because it has the highest priority . We find that f2 , f4 and f5 collide with f3 , so only fl is then selected next . 
The resulting combination ( fl , f3) is correct.
Fig . 3 shows the parsing result obtained by computer in our preprocessing subsystem  . 
4. PRIORITY
In the preprocessing , we determine all the possible fragments that might occur in the sentence and involving the characteristic words  . 
Then we give each one a measure of priority . This measure is a complex function , determined largely by trial and error . It is calculated by the following principles : a ) Kind of fragment Some kinds of fragments , for example , compound verbs involving "~" , occur more often than others and are accordingly given higher priority t "  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . I ' v / . " F , ~- . ., t .  - - - "  .   .   .   . 
r--~f3, V3 I\]I ....
Translation r---I~-----J
V/N : In the perfect situation-without friction the object will keep moving with constant speed  . 
: pattern of fragment : a word which is either a verb or a noun  ( undetermined at this stage ) Fig . 2 An Example of Conflicting Fragments
I .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . FWD
I ?

F .   .   .   .   . M-DO5--DE .   .   .   . M-XR1 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . M .   .   .   .   .   . FW-D04-FZD0-L6
IIIII 234567
IIIII
IIIII
IIIII
A I4A   MEI2YOU3   MO2CA1   DE4A L I3X   IANG3   QING2KUANG4   XIA4A 

I ?

JD .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . i .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . ~-- DODA .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . EN
IroI #



III

DO3 . . . . . . . FZDO
II 14 & lI
I 15....16
III/UN4DONG4XIA4 AQU4A
Translation f l ,   f3 : In the perfect situation without friction the object will keep moving with constant speed  . 
: fragment obtained by preprocessing subsystem : the names of fragments shown in Fig  .   2 : the omitted part of the resultant structure tree Fig  .   3 An Exan ~ leof The Analysing Result Obtained by The Preprocessing Subsystem  ( process )   ( have/finish )   ( - ed ) 
Translation : had processed
I : fragment given the higher priority r--~: fragment given : ~ the lower priority 
Fi~ . 4 An Example of Fragment Priority ( Fig . 4) . We distinguish 26 kinds of fragments . 
b ) Preciseness
We call " precise " a pattern that contains recognizable characteristic words or subpatterns  , and imprecise a pattern that contains words we cannot recognize at this stage  . For example , f3 of Fig . 2 is more precise than fl , f2 or f4 . We put the more precise patterns on a higher priority level  . 
c ) Fragment length
Length is a useful parameter , but its effect on priority depends on the kind of fragment  . 
Accordingly , a longer fragment gets higher priority in some cases  , lower priority in other cases . 
The actual rules are rather complex to state explicitly  . At present we use 7 levels of priority . 
tried the method on a set of mere complex sentences  . From the same textbook , out of 800 sentences containing prepositional phrases , 80 contained conflicts , involving 209 phrases . Of these conflicts , in our test 83% w are resolved at first choice , 90% at second choice , 98% at third choice . 
6. SUMMARY
In this paper , we outlined a preprocessing technique for Chinese language analysis  . 
Heuristic knowledge rules involving a limited set of characteristic words are used to forecast partial syntactic structure of sentences before global analysis  , thus restricting the path through the search space in syntactic analysis  . 
Comparative processing using knowledge about priority is introduced to resolve fragment conflict  , and so we can obtain the correct result as early as possible  . 
In conclusion , we expect this scheme to be useful for efficient analysis of a language such as Chinese that contains a lot of syntactic ambiguities  . 

We wish to thank the members of our laboratory for their help and fruitful discussions  , and Dr . Alain de Cheveigne for help with the

REFERENCE\[i \]. Yiming Yang:
A Study of a System for Analyzing Chinese Sentence  , masters dissertation ,  (1982) \[2\] . Shuxiang Lu : "~,\~", (800 Mandarin Chinese
Words ), Bejing , (1980) 5 . PREPROCESSINGEFFICIENCY
The preprocessing system for chinese language mentioned in the paper is in the course of development and it is partly ~ u ~ leted  . The inputs are sentences separated into words ( not consecutive sequences of characters )  . We use 200 characteristic words and have written the rules by  I01 automata for ~ them . As a preliminary evaluation , we tested the system ( partly by hand ) against 120 sentences taken from a Chinese physics textbook . Frem these 369 fragments were obtained , of which 122ware in conflict . The result of preprocessing was correct at first choice  ( no backtracking ) in 94% of sentences . 
Allowing one backtracking yeilded 98% , two back-trackings gave 100% correctness . 
In this limited set , few conflicting pre-positional phrases appeared . To test the performance of our preprocessing in this case we 
