WHENISTHENEXTAL PACREPORTDUE ?
Margar et KING
Dalle Mol Ie Institute for Semantic and Cognitive Studies 
University of Geneva

~ . ~ chine translation has a scme % ~ at chec quered history  . There were already proposals for autcmatic translation systems in the  30's   , but it was not until after the second world war that realent husiasmled to heavy funding and unrealistic expectations  . Traditionally , the start of intensive work on machine translation is taken as being a memor and ~ n of Warren Weaver  , then Director of the Natural Sciences Division of the Rockefeller Foundation  , in 1949 . In this memor and L~n , called ' Translation ' , We aver took stock of earlier work done by Booth and Richens  . He likened the problem of machine translation to the problem of code breaking  , for which digital cc~uters had been used with considerable success : " It is very tempting to say that a book written in Chinese issilly a book written in English which was coded into the ' Chinese code '  . If we have useful methods for solving almost any cryptographic problem  , may it not be that with proper interpretation we already have useful methods for translation ?"  ( Weaver ,  1949) . 
We aver'sm ~ ror and ~ led to a great deal of activity in resoarch on machine translation  , and eventually to the first conference on the topic  , organised by Bar-Hillelin 1952 . At this conference , optimism reigned . Afterwards , tea~s in a number of American universities pursued research along the general lines agreed at the conference to be fruitful  . At Georgetown University , L . E . 
Dostert started up a machine translation project with the declared aim of building a pilot system to convince potential funding agencies of the feasibility and the practicability of machine translation  . This led in 1954 to the famous Georgetown experiment , a pilot system translating from Russian to English  , which was hailed as an unqualified success : during the next ten years over  20 million dollars were invested in machine translation by various US government agencies  . 
An idea of the anount of resoarch between 1956 and 1959 can be gained by considering that in those years no fewer than twelve research groups were established in the US  , a number of groups in the USSR ca~e into existence  , most within the Academy of Sciences in Moscow , and two British Universities were carrying on research  . 
Most of the systems developed were based on what Buchmann  ( 1984 ) has called a ' brute force ' approach : Syntactic analysis was only done at a local word-centred level  , both socalled syntax and dictionary cc~pilation ~ erevery narrowly corpus based  , and thus almost totally empirical . 
Indeed , the problem of machine translation was perceived as being an engineering problem requiring clever programming rather than linguistic insight  . 
By_thelate 1960"s , workers in m chine translation themselves had begun to see that the enpi-rical approach was unsatisfactory  . The European projects begun in the early 1960's at Grenoble and Milan reflect this , as does the work of the group sotup in Montreal in  1962  . These groups based their work from the start on clear theoretical foundations  ( dependency theory in Grenoble , correlational grammar in Milan , transformational theory in Montreal ) . 
However , the growing perception that brute force was not enough came too late to save research in the US  . In 1964 , the US National Academy of Sciences setup an investigatory committee  , the Autcmatic Language Processing Advisory C~n -mlttee  ( ALPAC )  , with the task of investigating the results so far obtained and advising on further funding  . The committee , in setting up a fra~e-work for assessing machine translation  , considered such questions as quality and effectiveness of h ~ an translation  , t_he time and money required for scientists to learn Russian  , amounts spent for translation within the US goverrfaent and the need for translations and translators  . Based on such criteria , the committee care to a strong negative conclusion '  . . . we do not have useful machine translation . Further , there is no immediate or predictable prospect of useful machine translation '  . 
The ALPAC report effectively killed machine translation research in the States  , although some
European projects survived.
In the years since the ALPAC report , a number of commercial systems has been developed  , some of them , ironically , based on the very systems or oundly condemned by the ALPAC conndttee  . Two trends can he distinguished : systems , such as SYSTRAN , which still aim at no significant human intervention during the translation process  , but accept pre-and/or postediting , and interactive systems which aim primarily at being translators ' aids  , such as Weidner or Alps . 

In recent years , partially because the development of commercial systems renewed faithin the feasibility of mad % ine translation  , partially because of the results achievt ~ by the surviving res ~ ar ~ - - h projects  , above all because of the growing and pressing need for tramslation  , research in machine translation has begun to revive  . At the recreant , the European Ccn munity is sponsoring a large research and development programme  , France has a National Project on machine translation  , a very largent m~r of projects are being funded in Japan and a German Corporation is proposing mercial development of a system developed at the 
University of Texas.
There are people whose estrong parallels between the present situation and that ~ ately before the publication of the ALPAC report  , for e-seeing a second ' failure ' for machine translation as a discipline  . Others believe that advances in linguistics and in computer science  , together with the results of the last twenty years  , justify a cautious optimism , especially when the more rea-listic expectations of today's research workers  ( and of their funding authorities ) are taken into account . 
The panel discussion will aim at clarifying similarities and differences in the two states of the world  , weighing both scientific conside-rations and other relevant factors  . 
The availability of Buc~m ~% n ( 1984 ) greatly facilitated the writing of the first part of this panel paper  . I would like to record my thanks to its author . 

ALPAE , 1966 . Language and Machines C~ters in Translation and Linguistics  . Washington D . C . , Publication 1416, National Academy of Sciences . 
Buchmann , B . Early His . to r ~ of Machine Translation . .
Paper prepared for the Lugano Tutorial on
Machine Translation , April 1984.
Wea % ~ r,W . Translation . New York , 1949. Mimeo.

