DEALING WITH CONJUNCTIONS
INAMACHINE TRANS LATION ENVIRON MENT
Xiumlng HUANG
Institute of Linguistics
Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
BeiJing , China *

The paper presents an algorithm , written in PROLOG , for processing English sentences which contain either Gapping  , Right Node Raising ( RNR ) or Reduced Conjunction ( RC )  . The DCG ( Definite Clause Grammar ) formalism ( Pereira & Warren 80 ) is adopted . The algorithm is highly efficient and capable of processing a full range of coordinate constructions containing any number of coordinate conjunctions  ( ' and ' , ' or ' , and ' but ') . The algorithm is part of an EnglishChinese machine translation system which is in the course of construction  . 
0 INTRODUCTION
Theoretical linguists have made a cons iderable investigation into coordinate constructions  ( Ross 67 a , Hankamer 73 , Schachter 77 , Sag 77 , Gazdar 81 and Sobin 82 , to name a few ) , giving descriptions of the phenomena from various perspectives  . Some of the descriptions are stimulating or convincing  . Computational linguists , on the other hand , have achieved less than their theoretical counterparts  . 
(Woods 73)'s SYSCONJ , to my knowledge , is the first and the most often referenced faci lity designed specifically for coordinate construction processing  . It can get the correct analysis for
RC sentences like ( i ) John drove his carthrough and completely demolished a plate glass window but only after trying and failing an indefinite number of t imes  , due to its highly nondeterministic nature . 
(Church 79 ) claims ' ~ ome impressive initial progress " processing conjunctions with his NL parser YAP  . Using a Marcus-type attention shift mechanism , YAP can parse many conjunction constructions including some cases of Gapping  . 
It doesn't offer a complete solution to conjunction processing though : the Gapping sentences YAP deals with are only those wlth two 
NP remnants in a Gapped conjunct.
* Mailing address : Cognitive Studies Centre,
University of Essex,
Colchester C043 SQ , England.
(McCord 80 ) proposes a " more straightforward and more contro llable " way of parsing sentences like  ( I ) within a Slot Grammar framework . He treats " drove his carthrough and completely demolished " as a conjoined VP  , which doesn't seem quite valid . 
(Boguraev 83 ) suggests that when " and " is encountered , a new ATN arc be dynaml cally constructed which seeks to recognise a righthand constituent categorlally similar to the lefthand one just completed or being currently processed  . 
The problem is that the lefthand conjunct may not be the current or most reconstituent hut the constituent of which that former one is a part  . 
(Berwlck 83 ) parses successfully Gapped sentences like ( 2 ) Max gave Sally a nickel yester day , and a dime today using an extended Marcus-type deterministic parser  . It is not clear , though , how his parser would treat RC sentences llke ( I ) where the fi~t conjunct is not a complete clause . 
The present work attacks the coordinate construction problem along the lines of DCG  . Its coverage is wider than the existing systems : both Gapping  , RNR and RC , as well as ordinary cases of coordinate sentences  , are taken into consideration . The work is a major development of ( Huang 83 ) 's CASSEX package , which in turn was based on ( Boguraev 79)'s work , a system for resolving linguistic ambiguit ies which combined ATN grammars  ( Woods 73 ) and Preference Semantics ( Wilks 75 )  . 
In the first section of the paper , problems raised for Natural Language Processing by Gapping  , RNR and RC are investigated . Section 2 gives a grouping of sentences containing coord in ate conjunctions  . Finally , the algorithm is described in Section 3 . 
IGAPPING , RIGHTNODERAISING AND
REDUCED CONJUNCTION
I . I Gapping
Gapping is the case where the verb or the verb together with some other elements in the non -leftmost conjuncts is deleted from a sentence :  ( 3 ) Bobsaw Bill and Sue\[saw \] Mary . 
243  ( 4 ) Max wants to try to begin to write a novel , and Alex\[wants to try to begin to write \] a play  . 
Linguists have described rules for generating Gapping  , though none of them has made any effort to formulate a rule for detecting Gapping  .   ( Ross 67b ) is the first who suggested a rule for Gapping . The formalisation of the rule is due to ( Hankamer 73 ) :
Gapplng
NPXAZ and NPXBZ-->NPXAZ and NPB where A and B are nonidentical major constituents *  . 
(Sag 76 ) pointed out that there were cases where the left peripheral in the right conjunct might be a non -NP  , as in (5) Atourhouse , we play poker , and at
Betsy'shouse , bridge.
It should be noted that the two NPs in the Gapping rule must not be the same  , otherwise ( 7 ) would be derived from ( 6 ) :  ( 6 ) Bobsaw Bill and Bobsaw Mary . 
(7) Bobsaw Bill and Bob Mary.
whereas people actually say ( 8 ) Bobsaw Bill and Mary . 
When processing (8) , we treat it as a simplex containing a compound object  ( " Bill and Mary " ) functioning as a unit ( " unit interpretation " )  , although as a rule we treat sentence contain ing conjunction as derived from a " complex "   , a sentence consisting of more than one clause , in this case " Bob saw Bill and Bob saw Mary " ( " sentence coordination interpretation " )  . The reason for analysing ( 8 ) as a simplex is first , for the purpose of translation , unit interpretation is adequate ( the ambiguity , if any , will be " transferred " to the target language )  ; secondly , it is easier to process . 
Another fact worth noticing is that in the above Gapping rule  , B in the second conjunct could be anything , but not empty . E . g . , the ( a ) s in the following sentences are Gapping examples , but the ( b ) s are not: ( 9 )   ( a ) Maxspoke fluently , and Alberthaltingly . 
* ( b ) Maxspoke fluently , and Albert.
( I0) ( a ) Max wrote a novel , and Alexa play.
* ( b ) Max wrote a novel , and Alex.
( II ) ( a ) Bobsaw Bill , and Sue Mary.
(b ) Bobsaw Bill , and Sue.
Before trying to draw a rule for detecting * According to the dependency grammar we adopt  , we define a major constituent of a given sentence S as a constituent immediately dominated by the main verb of S  . 
Gapping , we will observe the difference between ( 12 ) and ( 13 ) on one hand , and ( 14 ) on the other : ( 12 ) Bobmet Sue and Markin London . 
(13 ) Ik new the man with the telescope and the woman with the umbrella  . 
(14) Bobmet Sue in Paris and Mary in London.
As we stated above , (12) is not a case of Gapping ; instead , we take " Sue and Mary " as a coordinate NP . Noris (13) a case of Gapping .  (14) , however , cannot be treated as phrasal coordination because the PP in the left conjunct  ( " in Paris " ) is directly dominated by the main verb so that " Mary " is prevented from being conjoined to " Sue "  . 
Now , the Gapping Detecting Rule:
The structure " NPIVAX and NP2 B " where the left conjunct is a complete clause , A and B are major constituents , and X is either NIL or a constituent not dominated by A  , is a case of Gapping if ( OR ( AND ( X = NIL )   ( B = NP ) )  ( AND ( V = 3-valency verb ) *  ( OR ( B = NP )   ( B = to NP ) ) )   ( AND ( X /= NP )   ( X /= NIL ) ) ) ** 1 . 2 Right Node Raising ( RNR ) RNR is the case where the object in the nonrightmost conjunct is missing  . 
(15) Johnstruck and kicked the boy.
(16) Bob looked at and Bill took the jar.
RNR raises less serious problems than Gapping does  . All we need to do is to parse the right conjunct first  , then copy the object over to the left conjunct so that a representation for the left clause can be constructed  . Then we combine the two to get a representation for the sentence  . 
Sentences llke the following may raise difficulty for parsing :  ( 17 ) I at e and youd rank everything they brought . ( cf . Church 79 )   ( 17 ) can be analysed either as a complex of two full clauses  , or RNR , according to whether we treat ' ~ te " as transitive or intransitive  . 
1.3 Reduced Conjunction
Reduced Conjunction is the case where the conjoined surface strings are not well-fo rmed constituents as in  ( 18 ) John drove his carthrough and completely demolished a plate glass window  . 
where the conjoined surface strings " drove his carthrough " and " completely demolished " are not wellformed constituents  . The problem will not be as * 3-valency verbs are those which can appear in the struc ture " NP VNP NP'  , such as " give ' , " name ' , " select ' , ' call ' , etc . 
** Here "/=" means " is not ".
244 serious as might have seemed , given our understanding of Gapping and RNR . After we process the left conjunct , we know that an object is still needed ( assuming that " through " is a preposition )   . Then we parse the right conjunct , copying over the subject from the left ; finally , we copy the object from the right conjunct to the left to complete the left clause  . 
IIGROUPING OFSENTENCES CONTAINING CONJUNCTIONS We can sort sentences containing conjunctions into three major groups on the basis of the nature of the leftmost conjunct : Group A contains sentences whose leftmost conjuncts are recognized by the analyser as complete clauses  ; Group B , the leftmost conjuncts are not complete clauses , but contain verbs ; and Group C , all the other cases . 
The following is a detailed grouping with example sentences : AI  .   ( Gapping ) Clause-lnternal ellipsis: ( 19 ) I played football and John tennis . 
(20) Bobmet Sue in Paris and John Mary in

(21) Maxspoke fluently and Alberthaltingly.
A2. ( Capping ) Left-peripheral ellipsis wlth two
NP remnants : ( 22 ) Max gave a nickel to Sally and a dime to Harvey . 
(23) Max gave Sally an ickel and Harvey a dime.
(24) Jackcalls Joe Mike and Sam Harry.
A3 .   ( Gapping ) Left-perlpheral ellipsis with one NP remnant and some non-NP remnant  ( s ) :  ( 25 ) Bobmet Suein Paris and Mary In

(26 ) John played football yesterday and tennis today . 
A4 .   ( Gapping ) Right-perlpheral ellipsis concomitant with clause-internale lllpsls :  ( 27 ) Jackbegged Elsie to get married and
Wilfred Phoebe.
(2~) John persuaded Dr . Thomas to examine
Mary , and Bill Dr . Jones.
(29) Betsy talked to Bill on Sunday , and
Alanto Sandy.
A5 . The right conjunct is a complete clause : ( 30 ) I played football and John watched the television . 
A6 . The right conjunct is a verb phrase to be treated as a clause with the subject deleted :  ( 31 ) The mankicked the child and threw the ball . 
AT . Sentences where the " unit interpretation " should be taken :  ( 32 ) Bobmet Sue and Maryin London . 
(33) I knew the glrl bitten by the dog and the cat . 
BI . Right Node Raising: ( 34 ) The mankicked and threw the ball . 
(35) The mankicked and the woman threw the baI1 . 
B2 . Reduced Conjunction : ( 36 ) John drove hlscarthrough and completely demolished a plate glass window  . 
C . Unlt interpretations : ( 37 ) The man with the telescope and the woman with the umbrella kicked the ball  . 
(38) Slowly and stealthily , he crept towards his victim . 
IIITHEALGORITHM
The following algorithm , implemented in
PROLOG Version 3 . 3 ( shown here in much a bridged form ) , produces correct syntact l co-semantic representations for all the sentences given in Section  2  . We show here some of the essential clauses * of the algorithm : " sentence '  , " rest sentence l " and " sentence conjunction ' . The top-most clause " sentence " parses sentences consisting of one or more conjuncts  . In the body of " sentence ' , we have as sub-goals the disjunction of " noun_phrase " and ' noun phrase l '  , forgetting the sentence subject ; the disjunction of "\[ W\] , Isverb " and ' verbl ' , plus ' rest verb ' , for treating the verb of the sentence ; the disjunction of ' rest sentence " and " rest  sentence1" for handling The object , preposlt lona T phrases , etc ; and finally " sentence conJunctlon ' , for handling coordinate conjunct lon ~ The Gapping  , RNR and RC sentences In Section II contain deletions from either left or right conjuncts or both  . Deleted subjects in right conjuncts are handled by ' noun phrase l ' in our program  ; deleted verbs in right conjuncts by ' verbl ' . The most difficult deletions to handle ( for previous systems ) are those from the left conjuncts , i e . the deleted objects of RNR ( Group BI ) and the deleted preposition objects of RC ( Group B2 )  , because when the left conJuncts are being parsed , the deleted parts are not avallabl ~ This is dealt with neatly in PROLOGDCG by using logical variables which stand for the deleted parts  , are " holes " In the structures built , and get filled later by unification as the parsing proceeds  . 
sentence ( Stn , PSubj , PSubj Head Noun , P Verb , PVType , PC ontent verb , P Tense , 
P ~ Ob-j , PObJH~d Noun ) --> % Pmeans " possible ": P arguments only % ~ vevalues if " sentenCe ' is called by %' sentence_conjunct lon'to parse a second %  ( right ) conjunct . Those values will be % carried over from the left conjunct  . 
( noun phrase ( SubJ , HeadNoun ); noun phrase l(PSubJ , PSubJHeadNoun , SubJ , 
Head Noun )) , % " noun_phrasel " copies over the subject % from the left conjunct  . 
adverb lal_phrase(Adv ) , (\[ w\] , % W is the next lexlcal item . 
is_verb(W , Verb , Tense ); % IsWaverb ? verbl(P_Verb , Verb , PC ontent verb , Content verb , 
P Tense , Tense , P_V Type , VType)) ,  "  verb1" copies over the verb from the % left conjunct . 
* A " clause " in our DCG comprises a head ( a single goal ) and a body ( a sequence of zero or more goals )  . 
245 rest verb ( Verb , Tense , Verbl , Tensel ) , 'rest verb " checks whether Verb is an % auxi ~ary  . 
( rest sentence ( dcl , Subj , Head Noun , Verbl , V Type , Co~tent verb , Tensel , Obj , O~j_ . Head_Noun , P__ObJ,
PObj Head Noun , In dobj , S ); %" rest sentence " handles all cases but RC . 
rest sentence I(dcl , SubJ , Head Noun , Verb I , V Type , C~ntent verb , Tensel , Obj , Obj_Head_Noun , PObJ , P_ . Obj_ . Head . _Noun , In dobj , S )) , " rest sentence l " handles RC . 
sentence_ . co~junctlon(S , Stn , Subj , Head Noun , Verbl , V_Type , Content verb , Tensel , Obj , 
Obj Head Noun ) ? rest sentence I(Type , Subj , Head_Noun , Verbl , V Type , ~ ontent ver 5 , Tense , PrepObJ , Prep ObJ Head
Noun , P_Obj , PObJHeadNoun , In dobj , s(type(Type ) , tense ( Tense ) , v ( V erb sense , agent ( Subj ) , object ( Obj ) , post--verb_mods(prep(Prep ) , pre ~ obj ( Prep_Obj ) ) ) Y-->% Here Prep ObJ is a logical variable which % will be Instantlated later when the % right conjunct has been parsed  . 
verb type ( V erb , VType ) , comp ~ ement ( V Type , Verb , Content verb , Subj , Head Noun , Obj , Obj_Head Noun , PObj , P_Ob~_Head_Noun , v ( V erb sense , agent ( ~ ubj ) , object ( Ohj ) , post_v ~ rb_mods(prep(W ) , prep_obJ ( Prep_ . Obj ))) , % The sentence object is processed and the % verb structure built here  . 
\[ w \], preposit lon(W).
sentence_ . conjunction(S , s(conj(W ) , S , Sconj ) , Subj , Head Noun , Verbl , V Type , Verb 2 , Tense , Obj , 
Obj ~ eadNoun)--(\["\] . \[ wT;\[w\]) , conj(W ) , % Checks whether W is a conjunction . 
sentence ( Sconj , Subj , Head Noun , Verbl , V_Type , 
Verb2, Tense , 0bj , 0bj He~d Noun).
% " sentence " is called recursively to parse % right conjuncts  . 
sentence conjunction ( S , S ,  _ ,  _ ,  _ ,  _ ,  _ ,  _ ,  _ ,  _) --> \]\] . % Boundary condition . 
For sentence ( 36 )   ( " John drove his carthrough and completely demolished a plate glass window "  )  , for instance , when parsing the left conjunct , " rest sentence l " will be called event-ually . The follo~ing verb structure will be built : v ( drovel , agent(np(pronoun(John ))) , object ( np(det(his ) , premod(\[\]) , n(carl ) , postmods(\[\]))) , postverb mods ~ prepmods ( prep ( through ~ , pre~obJ ( PrepObj )) , where th\[logical variable PrepObJ will be unified later with the argument standing for the object in the right conjunct  ( i e , " a plate glass window ") . When ' sentence " is called via the subgoal ' sentence_conjunct lon " to process the right conjunct  , the deleted subject " John " will be copied over via " noun phrase l '  . Finally a structure is built which is a combination of two complete clauses  . During the processing little effort is wasted . The backward deleted constituents ( " aplate glass window " here ) are recovered by using logical variables ; the forward deleted ones ( " John " here ) bypassing over values ( via unification ) from the conjunct already processed . 
Moreover , the " try-and-fail " procedure is carried out in a controlled and intelligent way  . Thus a high efficiency lacking in many other systems is achieved  ( space prevents us from providing a detailed discussion of this issue here  )  . 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would llke to thank Y . Wilks , D . Arnold , D . Fass and C . Grover for their comments and instructive discussions  . Any errors are mine . 

Berwlck , ~ C .   ( 1983 ) " A deterministic parser with broadcoverage . "Bundy , A . ( ed ) , Proceedings of IJCAI 83 , William Kaufman , Inc . 
Boguraev , B . K .   ( 1979 ) Automatic Resolution of Linguistic Ambiguities . Technical Report No . II , University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory,

Boguraev , B . K .   ( 1983 ) " Recognlslng conjunctions withing the ATN framework  . " SparckJones , ~ and Wilks , Y . ( eds ), Automatic Natural Language
Parsing , Ellis Horwood.
Church , K . W .   ( 1980 ) On Memory Limitations in Natural Language Processing  . MIT . 
Reproduced by Indiana Univ . Ling . Club,
Bloomingtong , 1982.
Gazdar , G .   ( 1981 ) " Unbounded dependencies and coordinate structure  , " Linguistic Enquiry ,  12: 155 - 184 . 
Hankamer , J . (1973) " Unacceptable ambiguity , "
Lingulstic Inquiry , 4:17-68.
Huang , XM .   ( 1983 ) " Dealing with conjunctions in a machine translation environment  , " Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics 
European Chapter Meeting , Pisa.
McCord , M . C . (1980) " Slot grammars , " American Journal of Computational Linguistics ,  6:1 , 31-43 . 
Perelra , F . & Warren , D .   ( 1980 ) "Definite clause grammars for language analysis - a survey of the formalism and a comparison with augmented transition networks  , " Artificial Intelllgence ,  13:231 - 278 . 
Ross , J . R . (1967a ) Constraints on Variables in Syntax . Doctoral Dissertation , MIT , Cambridge , Massachusetts . Reproduced by Indiana Univ . Ling . 
Club , Bloomington , 1968.
Ross , J . R . (1967b ) " Gapping and the order of constituents , " Indiana Univ . Ling . Club , Bloomington . Alsoin Bierwisch , M . and K . 
Heidolph , ( eds ), Recent Developments i__nn
Linguistics , Mouton , The Hague , 1971.
Sag , I . A . (1976) Deletion and Logical Form . Ph . D . 
thesis , MIT , Cambridge , Mass.
Schachter , P . (1977) " Constraints on coordination , " Language ,  53:86 - 103 . 
Sobin , N .   ( 1982 ) " Ong apping and discontinuous constituent structure  , " Linguistics , 20:727-745 . 
Wilks , Y . A . (1975) " Preference Semantics , " Keenan ( ed) , Formal Semantics of Natural Language , 
Cambridge Univ . Press , London.
Woods , W .  ~  ( 1973 ) "A experimental parsing system for Transition Network Grammar  , " Rustin , ( ed ) , Natural Language Processing , Algorithmic
Press , N.Y.

