
NATURALL ANGUAGE AND DATABASES , AGAIN
Karen Sparck Jones
Computer Laboratory , University of Cambridge
Corn Exchange Street , Cambridge CB23 QG , England

Natural Language and Databases has been a common panel topic for some years  , partly because it has been an active area of work  , but more importantly , because it has been widely assumed that database access is a good test environment for language research  . I thought the time had come to look again at this assumption  , and that it would be useful , for COLING 84 , to do this . I therefore invited the members of the Panel to speak to the proposition  ( developed below ) that database query is no longer a good , let alne the best , test environment for language processing research  , because it is insufficiently demanding in its linguistic aspects and too idiosyncratically demanding in its nonlinguistic ones  ; and to propose better task environments for language understanding research  , without the disadvantages of database query , but with its crucial advantage of an independent evaluation test  . 

PROS , CONS , AND WHATINSTEAD ?
Database query has a long and honourable history as a vehicle for natural language research  . 
Its value for this purpose was restated , for example , by Bonnie Webber at IJCAI-83 ( Webber 1983) . In ever the less think it is now time to question the value of database query as a continuing vehicle for language research  . 
Database query has two major points in its favour . The task is relatively restricted , so success in building a frontend does not depend on solving all the problems of language and knowledge processing at once  . More importantly , the task provides a hard , rather than soft , test environment for a language processor : the processor's performance is independently evaluated via its output formal search query  . 
Natural language research has profited in the past from the restrictions on the database task : its limited linguistic functions and world references have allowed concentration on  , and hence progress in dealing with , obvious problems of language and knowledge processing  . But I believe that database query is reaching the end of its utility for fundamental research on natural language understanding  , for two reasons . 
The first is that current database systems are too impoverished to call for some important language processing capabilities in their front ends  , so work on these capabilities is discouraged . 
Obvious examples of the expressive poverty of typical database systems include their lack of resources for handling  , at all properly , such important components of text meaning as qualifying concepts like negation and a variety of quantifiers  ; intensional concepts including meta description , modality , presupposition , different semantic relations , and constraints of all sorts ; and the full range of linguistic functions subsumable under the heading of speech acts  . More generally , the nature of the task means that many typical requirements of language understanding  , e . g . the determination of the domain of discourse and hence senses of words  , and many typical forms of language use , e . g . interactive dialogue , are never investigated . ( Though attempts may be made , forced by the way natural language is actually used in input  , to handle some of these phenomena via superimposed knowledge bases  , this does not undermine my general point : the additional resources are merely devices for reducing the richness of natural language expressions to obtain sensible database mappings  . )
The second reason for doubting the continuing utility of database query as a field for natural language research  , is that the autonomous characteristics of database systems impose idiosyncratic constraints on the language processor that are of no wider interest for natural language understanding in general  . Most of the problems listed by Robert Moore at ACL-82   ( Moore 1982 ) fall into this class , as do many of those identified by , for example , Templeton and Burger (1983) . The examples include database-specific quantifier interpretation  , quantity determination , procedures for mapping to compound attributes , techniques for dealing with open value word sets , and ripping a part complex queries . Further , even more database oriented , problems include , for instance , path optimisation , parallel ( coroutine based ) query evaluation , and null values . 
These problems can be very intractable for individual data models or databases  , and as the solutions tend to be adhoe and specialised  , the issues are essentially diversions from research on more pervasive language phenomena and functions  , and hence on generally relevant language understanding procedures  . 

This is of course not to deny that database access presents many perfectly ' ordinary ' language interpretation problems  . The crux is whether the central interpretive process  , mapping from language concepts onto database ones  , is sufficiently like the interpretation procedures required for other natural language using functions  , for it to be an appropriate study model for these . 
I believe that much of the attraction of the database case comes from the stimulus to logic -based meaning representation provided by the formal database query languages into which natural language questions are usually ultimately mapped  . 
The database application naturally appeals to those who believe that the meanings of natural language texts should be expressed in something like first order logic  . 
But current data languages , however logical , are very limited . More importantly , they are geared to data models expressing properties of databases that are manifestly artificial  , and are not properties of the realworlds with which natural language is concerned  . Third normal form is a property of this kind . I do not believe that third normal form has got anything to do with the meaning of natural language expressions  . But the ultimate consequence of working with present data models is behaving as if it does  . This is clearly unsatisfactory . I am of course not attacking the idea of logical meaning representations  . What I am claiming is that the database application is an inadequate test environment for natural language understanding systems  . 
One argument for continuing with database query processing must therefore be that those mainstream language handling problems which do arise have not been fully resolved  , so it is legitimate to concentrate on these , in what is a convenient test environment , and defer an attack on other language processing tasks  . The second is that there are ill-understood knowledge handling operations triggered by and interacting with language processing that are not specialised to one contemporary computational task  , but are sufficiently typical of a whole range of other knowledge processing tasks to justify further study in the exemplary database case  . 
Without wishing to imply that the database query function is all wrapped up  ( or doubting the need for much further system engineering  )  , I do not think these arguments are strong , simply because it is impossible to disentangle general language problems from database ones  , and database problems from current highly restricted data models and implementations  . Moore's example of time and tense illustrates this very well  . Time information determination problems arise in database questions  ; but because of the database domain context , they are typically only an arbitrary subset of those ordinarily occurring  , and require interpretive responses biassed to the particular time concepts of the database  . It may be that finding anything out about time interpretation  , even in a limited context , is of some use . ~t it is surely better to consider time interpretation in the more motivated way allowed by a richer environment involving a fuller range  , or at least less arbitrarily selected set , of temporal concepts than those of current databases  . 
My point is that to make progress in natural language research in the next five to ten years we need the stimulus of a new application context  . This must meet the following criteria : it must be more ' central'to language understanding than database query  ; it must be harder , without overwhelming us with its difficulty ; and we should preferably be able to make a start on it by exploiting what we have learnt from the database application  . But most importantly , the new task must have built in evaluation criteria for the performance of language processors  . This is more difficult to achieve with systems whose entire function is language processing  , like translation , than with systems where natural language processing is required for the system's external world interface  ; but it is still possible to evaluate translation , for example , or summarising , reasonably objectively : the problem is the sheer effort involved  . 
Some candidate applications meeting these criteria are : natural language interfaces to conventional computing systems  ( e . g . operating systems , numerical packages , etc . ) natural language interfaces to expert systems natural language interfaces to robots natural language interfaces to teaching systems All of these meet the evaluation requirement  ; what requires examination is the extent to which nontrivial backend systems  ( e . g . a robot more interesting than SHRDLU ) would be too severe a challenge for language processing  . It is not necessary , in this context of principle , to base choices on potential market interest : expert systems would score here  , presumably . However it is necessary to consider the expected ' technological ' plausibility for the requirement for a natural language interface e  . g . to a robot . 
These candidates are for interface systems.
Should we instead be renewing the attack on language systems  , e . g . for translation or summarising ; or upgrading semi-linguistic systems like those for document retrieval ? 

Webber , B . L . ' Pragmatics and database question answering ' , IJCAI-83 , Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence , 198-3~204-205.
Moore , R . C . ' Natural-language access to databases - theoretical ~ technical issues '  , Proceedings of the 20th Annual Meeting of the --- Association for Computational Linguistics '  1982  ,  ~4-45 . 
Templeton , M . and Burger , J . ' Problems in natural language interface to DBMS with examples from EUFID '  , proceedings of the Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  ,  1983 ,  316 . 

