TRANSFERINA MULTILINGUAL MTSYSTEM
Steven Krauwer & Louisdes Tombe
Institute for General Linguistics
Utrecht State University
Trans 14,351 2 JKU trecht , The Netherlands

In the context of transfer based MT systems , the nature of the intermediate represenations , and particularly their ' depth ' , is an important question . This paper explores the notions of ' independence of languages ' and ' simple transfer '  , and provides some principles that may enable linguists to study this problem in a systematic way  . 
I . Background
This paper is relevant for a class of MT systems with the following characteristics :  ( i ) The translation process is broken down into three stages : source text analysis  , transfer , and target text synthesis . 

The text that serves as unit of translation is at least a sentence  . 

The system is multilingual , at least in principle . 
These characteristics are not uncommon ; however , Eurotra may be the only project in the world that applies  ( iii ) not only as a matter of principle but as actual practice  . 
We will regard a natural language as a set of texts  . A translation pair is a pair of texts ( T ~ , T ~) from the source and target language , respectively . One sometimes wonders whether for every T $ there is at least one translation Tt  , but we will ignore that kind of issue here . 
For translation systems of the analysis-transfer -synthesis family  , the following diagram is a useful description :* The research described here was done in the context of the Eurotra project  ; we are grateful to e~l the Eurotrans for their stimulation and help  ( i ) 

R ~ .... . R ~ .
I ! l !
ANiGEN !! l!i !
T mT ~ .

TRA , AN , TRF , and GEN are all binary relations.
Given the sets of texts SL ( source language ) and TL ( target language )  , and the set of representations RR , we can say:
TRA__~--SL xTL , AN_C-SL xRR
TRF~-_RRxRR , and GEN~RR xTL
The subsystems analysis , transfer , and synthesis are implementations of AN , TRF , and GEN . In this paper , we are not interested in the implementations , but in the relations to be implemented . 
Especially , we try to find a principled basis for the study of the represenations R and R  . 
Such a basis can only be established in the context of some fundamental philosophy of the translation system  . We will assume the following two basic ideas : ( i ) 
Simple transfer :
Transfer should be kept as simple as possible.

Independence of languages :
The construction of analysis and synthesis for each of the languages should be entirely independent of knowledge about the other languages covered  . 
These two ideas are certainly not trivial , and especially ( ii ) may be a bit exceptional compared to other MT projects  ; however , they are quite reasonable given a project that really tries to develop a multilingual translation system  . In any case , they are both held in the Eurotra project . 

The reason for ( i ) is simply the number of transfer systems that must be developed for k langua-ges  , which is k(k-1) . 
From this , it follows that ' simple ' here means ' simple to construct '  , not's imple to execute ' . 
The reason for principle ( ii ) also follows for multilinguality ; while developing analysis and synthesis for some language  , one may be able to take into account two or three other languages  , but this does not hold in a case like Eurotra , where one not only has seven languages to deal with  , but also the possibility of adding languages must be kept open  . 
Principles ( i ) and ( ii ) together constitute a philosophy that can serve as a basis for the development of a theory about the nature of the representations R and R t in  ( I )  . The remainder of this paper is ~ evoted to a clearer and more useful formulation of them  . 
2. Division of labour.
Suppose that simple transfer is taken to mean that transfer will only substitute lexical elements  , and that the theory of representation says that the representations are something in the way of syntactic structures  . We now have a problem in cases where translation pairs consist of texts with different syntactic structures  . Two wellknown examples are: ( i ) the graag-like case ; Example : Dutch ' Tomzwemtgraag ' translates as English ' Tom likes to swim '  , with syntactic structures : (2) Dutch :
IsTomC~?zwem\[;~graag\]3\](3) English :
Tom~v ~ like ~ empty\[w~swim ~
In the case of Dutch-English transfer , lexical substitution would result in an Rt like the following :  ( 4 ) Possible R:
Tom\[,~swim ~% ~, like-to . J3\]
In this way , the pair < . (4) , ' Tom likes to swim ' ~ becomes a member of the relation GEN for English  . However , it is hard to believe that English linguists will be able to accomodate such pairs without knowing a lot about the other languages that belong to the project  . 
( ii ) The kenner-somebody who knows case Dutch and English both have agentive derivation  , like talk = ~ talker , s ~: in ~=> swimmer . 
However , as usually , derivational processes are not entirely regular , and so , for example though Dutch has ' kenner ' , English does not have the corresponding'knower  '  . So we have the following translation pair : ( 5 ) Dutch : ' kenner van hetTurks '
English : ' somebody who knows Turkish '
Again , the English generation writer is introuble if he has to know that the Rt may contain a construction like ' C ~ now \] + er ~'  , because this implies knowledge about all the other languages that participate  . 
The general idea is that we want to have a strictly monolingual basis for the development of the implementations of AN and GEN  . Therefore , so , we have the following principle : ( 6 ) Division of labour ( simple version ) :
For each language L in the system,
R,T ~ GENL iff ~ T,RY6ANL
Principle ( 6 ) makes AN and GEN each others ' mirror image ' , and so it becomes more probable ( though it is not guaranteed ) that the linguists knowing L will understand the class of R ts they can expect  . 
However , (6) is too strong , and may be in conflict with the idea of simple transfer  . 
For example , if surface syntactic structure is taken as a theory of representation  , then ( 6 ) implies that TRF relates source language surface word order to target language word order  , which clearly involves a lot more than substitution of lexical elements  . 
Therefore , the notion of isoduidy has been developed . I so duidy is an equivalence relation between representations that belong to the same language  . Literally , the word ' is oduid ' ( from Greek and Dutch stems ) means ' same interpretation ' ; but the meaning should be generalized to something like'equivalent with respect to the essence of translation '  . 
To give an example , suppose that representations are surface trees with various labelings  , including semantic ones like thematic relations and semantic markers  . Isodui ~ y might then be defined loosely as follows : two representations are isoduid if they have the same vertical geometry  , and the same lexical elements and semantic labels in the corresponding positions  . 
Obviously , the definition of the contents of the isoduidy relation depends on the contents of the representation theory  . However , we think that the general idea must be clear : is oduidy defines in some general way which aspects of representations are taken to be essential for translation  . 

Given is oduidy , one can give a more sophisticated version of the principle of division of labour as follows :  ( 7 ) Division of labour ( final version ) :
For each language L in the system,
R ', T7 ~ GENL iff
KT , R76 ANL and R'isi so duid to R
As a consequence , TRF has not to take responsibili-ty for target language specific aspects like word order anymore  . 
3. Simple and complex transfer.
Given the principle of division of labour , we can relate to each other the following three things : - the notion of simple transfer-the representation theory  , especially , the ' depth ' of representation ; -the contents of the relation is oduidy Given some definition of what counts as simple transfer  , we can now see whether the representation theory is compatible with it  . 
It is easy to see that some popular theories of simple transfer  , including the one saying that transfer is just substitution of lexical elements  , will now give rise to a rather ' deep ' theory of representation  . This follows from cases like'graag-like ' and ' kenner-knower '  , where some language happens to lack lexical elements that others happen to have  . In such cases , the language lacking the element usually circumscribes the meaning in some way  . If one excludes transfer other than lexical substitution  , such examples give rise to a theory of representation where similar circumscriptions must be assigned as representations in the language that does have the lexical element  . So , in Dutch we get pairs in AN like ' kenner ' , ~ somebody\[whoknows~~'Tomzwemtgraag ' , ~ Tom graag ~ empty zwem ~ ~ ~> Instead of having deep representations like these  , one may consider the possibility that transfer is complicated sometimes  . So , one may still desire that transfer consists of just lexical substitution most of the time  , but allow exceptions . The question then arises as to how simple and complex transfer interact  . 
As a basis for that , one may observe that the relation TRF now holds between representations  , while in practice just lexical elements are translated most of the time  . A straightfoward generalization is possible for the case where a representation is some hierarchical object  , say some tree . We can then introduce a new relation , called translates-as . This is a binary relation , probably many-to-many ; its lefthand term is a subtree of R , and its righthand term is a tree . Clearl ~, TRF is a subset of translates-as . 
We then have the following principle : ( 8 ) Transfer translates a tree node-by-node . 
Note that , obviously , this only makes sense as long as we have representations that are tree ~  . The following example may clarify the idea . Dotted lines indicate instantiations of the relation  . 
(9) ~  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . N(TomiAB .   .   .   .   . FC .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . IOR(Tom ) ( Tom ~ Ailik ~
JK5T
O . .  .   .   . B E .   .   .   .   . ~( ilke ) A ( emoty i , ( swim)/\(zwem ) ( swim)(graag)
LM ( empty ) ( sNim)
Note that Dutch'graag'is not translated at all  ; it only serves as a basis for the complex transfer element KC  , l~ . 
The principle of simple transfer can now be formulated as follows : If A translates-as A '  , then we will call A'a TN of A . We now call an elements , t of the set defined by translates-as a simple iff . 
either s and t are both terminal nodes , or ( i ) s is a subtree , dominated by the nonterminal node A , and ( ii ) t is a tree , dominated by A ' , and ( iii ) A ' is a copy of A ' , and ( iv ) the immediate daughters of A ' are copies of the TNs of the immediate daughters of A  . 
The principle of simple transfer then says that the proportion of simple elements in translates -as must be maximal  . 
The generalised relation translates-as makes it possible to put some order into complex transfer  . It localises it in a natural way , based on a tree structure . 
In (9) , only the pair ~ C , 12 is complex ; all the others are simple . This view on transfer is easily implemented by means of an inbuilt strategy that simulates recursion  . 
4. Conclusion.

The principle of division of labour , together with the principle of node-by-node transfer constitute a framework in which it is possible to study ' depth of representation ' in a systematic way  . 

