THEDICTIONARY SERVER
Martin Kay
Intelligent Systems Laboratory
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center
3333 Coyote Hill Road
Pain Alto , California 94304 ~ USA
The term " machine-readable dictionary " can clearly be taken in two ways  . In its stronger and better established interpretation  , it presumably refers to dictionaries intended for machine consumption and use as in a language processing system of some sort  . In a somewhat weaker sense , it has to do with dictionaries intended for human consumption  , but through the intermediary of a machine . Ideally , of course , the two enterprises would be conflated , material from a single basic store of lexical information being furnished to different clients in different forms  . Such a conflation would , if it could be accomplished , be beneficial to all parties . Certainly human users could surely benefit from some of the processes that the machine-oriented information in a machine-readable dictionary usually makes available  . They can profit even more from other processes pecifically oriented to the human user but which have not yet received much attention  . For the ~ e reasons ,   1 believe that machine-readable dictionaries should  , and probably so on will , come to replace traditional book-form dictionaries fairly so on  .   1 do not have in mind machine-readable dict ~ ionaries that single users load into their personal machines so much as centralized services to which individual clients subscribe  . 
I have spend a considerable proportion of the last two years designing and implementing a " dictionary server  . " This is a computer with a large dictionary in its file system  , specifically the American Heritage Dictionary ( for the use of which we are indebted to its publisher  , Hought on-Mifflin Company ) , together with a variety for indices forgiving rapid access to it  . 
The machine is connected thorugh a packet -switching et work to a large number of other computers and workstations  . 
Through a mechanism known as " remote procedure call "  ( RPC )  , developed concurrently with the dictionary server  , a program running on any of these other machines can execute one of a number of procedures " exported " by the server  , causing the corresponding procedure to be executed in the server and the result returned to the client as though it had all happened in the same machine  . The client reaps several benefits from this mode of operation  . First , he does not have to provide storage for this very considerable body of data  , nor the time necessary to operate on it . Second , by consigning its care to others , he can profit from regular maintenance and improvements resulting from experience with a large community of users  . Less obvious , though perhaps more important hanthese advantages  , is the fact that he can hope to profit from the sophisticated and specialized processing methods available at the central ocation  . 
The server I have built represents only a few steps towards the one that would provide the richness of service I can easily imagine  . Among its present capabilities are the following : a client can discover if a sequence of letters constitutes a word recognized by the dictionary even though it is presented in an inflectional variant not actually stored in the dictionary  . The methods used to accomplished this have sound theoretical bases and generalize across a wide range of language types so that languages with much richer morphological structures than English are provided for  . A client can consult the dictionary for the spelling of a word by presenting it with candidate spellings  . The server is able to locate entries that could be pronounced in the same way  , or ways , as the candidate . It presents these to the client in order of decreasing similarity to the candidate  . If the client has difficulty recognizing the appropriate one  , he can have the associated definitions presented to him  . Definitions , etymologies , ynonyms , and so forth can be obtained in a variety of ways  . The server undertakes the most onerous procedures that must be carried out by a spelling correction program  , namely those that relate putatively misspelled words to actual words into which they can be transformed as a result of the kinds of error commonly made by typists  . 
These facilities are relatively easy to provide , using as the database , a machine readable version of a standard ictionary  . 
A dictionary designed specifically for use through a dictionary server could do a great deal more  . For example it could present a client with several different perspectives on a semantic field so as to provide a means of finding " le motjnste  , " that is on the tip of the writer's tongue . This is the function that Roget designed his thesaurus to fill and  1 believe it is such a device as the dictionary server that will provide the first possibility of doing better than he  . What stands in the way of dictionary services of far greater utility than even the largest currently available books is not technological inadequacies  , or even shortcomings of linguistic or lexicological theory  , so much as the courage and foresigh to invest in lexicographic databases of radical design  . 

