AUTOMATICCONSTRUCTION OF DISCOURSE REPRESENTATIONSTRUCTURES 
Franz Guenthner
Universit ~ it Tiibingen
Wilhelmstr . 50
D-7400Td bingen,FRG
Hubert Lehmann
IBM Deutschl and GmbH
Heidelberg Scientific Center
Tiergarten str .15
D-6900 Heidelberg , FRG

Kamp's Discourse Representation Theory is a major breakthrough regarding the systematic translation of natural language discourse into logical form  . We have therefore chosen to marry the User Specialty Languages System  , which was originally designed as a natural language frontend to a relational database system  , with this new theory . In the paper we try to show taking-for the sake of simplicity-Kemp's fragment of English how this is achieved  . The research reported is going on in the context of the project Linguistics and Logic Based Legal Expert System undertaken jointly by the IBM He idelberg Scientific Center and the Universit ~ it Tiibingen  . 
1 Introduction
In this paper we are concerned with the system at ic translation of natural languaged is course into Discourse Representation St ructures as they are de-fined in Discourse Representation Theory  ( DRT ) first formulated by Kamp ( 1981 )  . This theory re-presents a major breakthrough in that it system at-ically accounts for the context dependent interpretation of sentences  , in particular with re-gard to anaphoric relations  . 
From a syntactic point of view , however , Kamp chose a very restricted fragment of Engl ish  . It is our goal , therefore , to extend the syntactic coverage for DRT by linking it to the grammars described for the User Specialty Languages  ( USL ) system ( Lehmann ( 1978 )  , Ott and Zoeppritz (1979) , Leh-mann (1980) , Sopefia (1982) , Zoeppritz ( 1984 ) ) which are comprehensive enough to deal with realistic discourses  . Our main tasks are then to describe the syntactic framework chosen Discourse Representation Structures  ( DRSs ) the translation from parse trees to DRSs The translation from parse trees to DRSs will  , as we shall see , not proceed directly but rather via Intermediate Structures  . which were already used in the USL system . Clearly , it is not possible here to describe the complete process in full detail  . We will hence limit ourselves here to a presentation Kamp's fragment of English in our framework  . 
The work reported here forms part of the devel -opment of a Natural Language Analyzer that will translate natural language discourse into DRSs and that is evolving out of the USL system  . We intend to use this Natural Language Ana lyzer as a part of a legal expert system the construction of which is the objective of a joint project of the University of Ti ib ingen and the IBM Heidelberg Scientific Center  . 
2 SyntaJc 2 . 1 Syntactic framework and parsing process The parser used in the Natural Language Analyzer was originally described by Kay  ( 1967 ) and subsequently implemented in the REL system ( Thompson et . al .  (1969)) . The Natural Language Analyzer uses a modified version of this parser which is due to Bert r and & al  ( 1976 , IBM (1981)) . 
Each grammar rule contains the name of an inteP -pretation routine  , and hence each node in the parse tree for a given sentence also contains the name of such a routine  . The semantice xecuter invokes the interpretation routines in the order in which they appear in the parse tree  , starting at the root of the tree . 
2.2 Syntactic coverage
The syntactic coverage of the Natural Language Analyzer presently includes 


Adjectives and adjectival phrases : gradation , modification by modal adverbial , modification by ordinal number - Units of measure -Noun phrases : definiteness  , quantification , interrogative pronouns , personal pronouns , possessive pronouns , relative pronouns-Verb complements : subjects and nominative complements  , direct objects , indirect objects , prepositional objects - Noun complements : relative clauses  , participial attribute phrases , genitive attributes , appositions , prepositional attributes-Complements of noun and verb : negation  , locative adverbials , temporal adverbials - Coordination for nouns , noun phrases , adjectives , verb complexes and sentences - Comparative constructions - Subordinate clauses : conditionals-Sentences : declarative sentences  , questions , commands In this section we give the categories and rules used to process the Kamp fragment  . The syntax rules given below are somewhat simplified with regard to the full grammars used in the Natural Language Analyzer  , but they have been formulated in the same spirit . For a detailed account of the German syntax see Zoeppritz  ( 1984 )  , for the Spanish grammar see
Sopefia (1982).
Syntactic categories
We need the following categories : < NAME > , < NOMEN > , < QU > , < NP > ( features : REL , PRO , NOM , ACC ) , < VERB > ( features : TYP = NI , TYP = NA) , < SENT > , < SC > ( feature : REL ) . 

The vocabulary items we have taken from Ramp ( 1981 )  . 
< NAME >: Pedro , Chiquita , John , Mary,
Bill , ...
<NOMEN:?NOM , ? ACC >: farmer , donkey , widow , man , woman ,   . . . 
< VERB:TYP=NI >: thrives , ...
< VERB:TYP=NA >: owns , beats , loves , admires , courts , likes , feeds . . . .
< QU > : a , an , every < NP:+PRO , + NOM > : he , she , it < NP : ? PRO , + ACC > : him , her , it < NP : ? REL , ? NOM >: who , which , that < NP : ? REL , + ACC >: whom , which , that 2 . 3  . I Syntax rules To help readability , the specification of interpreta-tion routines has been taken out of the lefthands ide of the syntax rules and has been placed in the succeeding line  . The numbers appearing as parame-tersto in terp retation routines refer to the posit ion of the categories on the right hand side of the rules  . As can be seen , interpretation routines can be nested where appropriate  . The operation of the interpretation routines is explained below  . 
1. < NP > <-< NAME >
PRNAME(1) 2.<NP><--QU><NOMEN >
NPQUAN(1,2)3. < NOMEN > <-< NOMEN > < SC:*REL >
RELCL(1,2)4 . < SC:?REL><-<NP:?REL><VERB:TYP=NI >
NOM(VERB(I ), i ) 5 . < SC : ? REL > <-< NP : * REL , ? NOM><VERB:TYP=NA><NP:-REL >
NOM(ACC(VERB(2), 3), I ) 6 . < SC : ? REL > <-< NP : * REL , ? ACC > < VERB:TYP=NA > < NP:-REL >
ACC(NOM(VERB(2), 1), 3) 7 . < SC><-<NP><VERB:TYP=NI >
NOM(VERB(2), 1) 8 . < SC > <-< NP : ? NOM > < VERB : TYP = NA > < NP >
NOM(ACC(VERB(2), 1), 3) 9. < SENT > <- < SC >
STMT(1) 10? < SENT > <- if < SC > then < SC >
STMT ( COND (1 , 2  )   )   3 Intermediate Structures Intermediate St ructures are used to facilitate the trans lation from parse trees to the semantic repre-sentation language  . They are trees containing all the informat ionnecessary to generate adequate ex-press ions in the semantic representation language for the sentences they represent  . 
3 . 1 The def init ion of Intermediate S t ructures The bas ic not ions used in In termed ia te S t ruc tures are RELATION and ARGUMENT  . In order to come to adequate meaning representations it has also to be distingu is hed whether RELATIONs stand for verbs or nominals  , therefore the notions VERBSTR and NOMSTR have been introduced in addition  . In case of coordinate structures a branching is needed for the ARGUMENTs  . It is provided by COORD . In-formation not needed to treat the Kampf ragment is left outhere to simplify the presentation  . 
3 . 1 . 1 Relation nodes and Argument nodes Nodes of type Relation contain the relation name and poin ters to first and last ARGUMENT  . 
Nodes of type Argument contain the following in for-mation : type  , standard role name , pointers to the node representing the contents of the argument  , and to the previous and next ARGUMENTs . 
3.1.2 Verb nodes
Verb nodes consist of a VERBSTR with a pointer to a RELATION  . That is verb nodes are Relation nodes where the relation corresponds to a verb  . 
Verb nodes ( VERBSTR ) contain a pointer to the RELATION represented by the verb ? They can be ARGUMENTs  , e . g .   , when they represent a relative clause ( which modifies a noun , i . e . is attached to a
RELATION in a nominal node).
3.1.3 Nominal nodes
Nominal nodes are Argument nodes where the ARGUMENT contains a nominal element  , i . e . a noun , an adjective , or a noun phrase . They contain the following information in NOMSTR : type on noun  , a pointer to contents of NOMSTR , congruence informa-tion ( number and gender ) , quantifier , a pointer to referent of demonstrative or relative pronoun  . 
3 . 1  . 4 Formation ru les for In termediate ?: truetures 1  . An Intermediate Structure representing a sentence is called a sentential Intermedia teStruct  , ~ re(SIS ) . 
Any well-formed Intermediate Structure represent-ing a sentence has a verb node as i ts root  . 
399 2 . An Intermediate Structure with an Argument node as root is called an Argument In termediate 
Structure ( AIS).
An Intermediate Structure representing a nominal is an AIS  . 
3 . If s is a SIS and a is an AIS , then s ' is a well-formed SIS , if s ' is constructed from s and a by attach in ga as last element to the list of ARGUMENTs of the RELATION in the root of s and defining the role name of the ARGUMENT fo rming the root of a  . 
4 . If n and m are AIS , then n ' is a well-formed AIS , if the root node of n contains a RELATION and m is attached to its list of ARGUMENTs and a role name is defined for the ARGUMENT fo rming the root of m  . 
5 . If s is a SIS and a is an Argument node , then a ' is an AIS , if s is attached to a and the argument type is set to VERBSTR  . 
6 . If a and b are AIS and e is an Argument node of type COORD  , then c'is an AIS if the contents of a is at tached as left part of COORD  , the contents of b is attached as right part of COORD  , and the conjunction operator is defined . 
3 . 2 The const ruct ion of In termed ia te S t ructures from parse trees To cover the Rampf ragment the following interpre-tation routines are needed : PRNAME and NOMEN which map strings of charac-ters to elements of AIS  ; NP DEF , NPINDEF and bl PQUAN which map pairs consist ing of strings of characters and elements of 
AIS to elements of AIS;
VERB which maps strings of characters to e lements of SIS  ; NOM and ACC which operate according to Intermed i-ate Structure formation rule  3  ; RELCL which applies Intermediate Struc ture for ma-tion rule  5 and then 4  ; COND which combines a pair of elements of SIS by applying Intermediate Structure fo rmation rule  5 and then rule 3  ; STMT which maps elements of SIS to DRSs . 
These routines are applied as indicated in the parse tree and give the desired Intermed iate Struc-ture as a result  . 
4 D iscourse Representat ion S t ructures In th i s sec t ion we g ive a br ie f descr ip t ion of Kamp's Discourse Representation Theory  ( DRT )   . For a more detailed discussion of this theory and its gen-eral ramifications fo rnatural language processing  , cf . the papers by Kamp (1981) and Guenthner (1984 a , 1984b ) . 
According to DRT , each natural anguage sentence ( or discourse ) is associated with a socalled Discourse Representation Structure  ( DRS ) on the basis of a set of DRS for rnatio rules . These rules are sensitive to both the syntactic structure of the sentences in question as well as to the DRS context in which in the sentence occurs  . 
4 . 1 Definition of Discourse Representation Structures A DRS K fo r a d i scourse has the genera l fo rm K = < U  , Con > where U is a set of " discourse refe rents " for K and C on a set of " conditions " on these indi-viduals  . Conditions can be either atomic or complex . An atomic condition has the form P ( tl, . . . ,tn ) or tl=c , where t i is a discourse referent , caproper name and Pann-place predicate . 
Of the complex conditions we will only ment ion " implicational " conditions  , written as K1IMPK2 , where K1 and K2 are also DRSs . With a discourse D is thus associated a D is course Representation Struc-ture which represents D in a quantifier-free " c lausal " form  , and which captures the propositional import of the discourse  . 
Among other things , DRT has important consequences for the treatment of anaphora which are due to the condition that only those discourse referents are admissible for a pronoun that are accessible from the DRS in which the pronoun occurs  ( A precise definition of accessibility is given in Ramp  ( 1981 ) ) . 
Discourse Representation Structures have been implemented by means of the three relat ionsASSERTION  , ACCESSIBLE , and DR shown in the appendix . These three relations are written out to the relational database system  ( Astrahan & al ( 1976 )   ) af-ter the current text has been processed . 
4 . 2 From Intermediate Structures to DRSs The Intermediate Structures are processed starting at the top  . The transformation of all the items in the Intermediate Structure are relatively straightforward  , except for the proper semantic representation of pronouns  . According to the spirit of DRT , pronouns are assigned discourse referents accessible from the DRS in which the pronoun occurs  . In the example given in the appendix , as we can see from the ACCESSIBLE table there are only two discourse referents available  , namely ul and u2 . 
Given the morphological information about these individuals the pronoun " it " can only be assigned the discourse referent  u2 and this is as it should be . 
For further problems arising in anaphora resolution in general cf  . Kamp (1981) and Guenthner and Leh-mann (1983) . 
5 Remarks on work in progress
We are at present engaged in extending the above construction algorithm to a much w ider variety of linguistic struc tures  , in particular to the entire fragment of English covered by the USL grammar  . 
Besides incorporating quite a few more aspects of discourse structure  ( presupposition , ambiguitity , cohesion ) we are particularly interested info rmulat-ing a deductive account for the ret rieval of information from DRSs  . This account will mainly consist in combin ing techniques from the theory of relation a l database query as well as from present techn i ques in theorem proving  . 

In our opinion Ramp's theory of Discourse Representation Structures is at the moment the most promising vehicle for an adequate and efficient implementation of a natural language processing system  . It incorporates an extremely versatile dis-course -oriented representation language and it allows the precise specification of a number of up to now intractable discourse phenomena  . 

Astrahan , M.M ., M.W . Blasgen , D.D.
Chamberlin , K . P . Eswaran , J . N . Gray , P . P . 
Griffiths , W . F . King , R . A . Lorie , P . R . McJones , J . W . Mehl , G . R . Putzolu , I . L . Traiger , B . W . 
Wade , V . Watson ( 1976 ) : " SystemR : Relational Approach to Database Management "  , ACM Transactions on Database Systems , vol . 1, no . 2, June 1976, p . 

Bertrand , O . , J . J . Daudenarde , D . Starynkevich , A . Stenbock-Fermor ( 1976 ) : " User Application Generator " , Proceedings of the IBM Technical Conference on Relational Data Base Systems  , Bari , 
Italy , p .83.
Guenthner , F .   ( 1984 a ) " Discourse Representation Theory and Databases  "   , forthcoming . 
Guenthner , F .   ( 1984b ) " Representing Discourse Representation Theory in PROLOG "  , forthcoming . 
Guenthner , F . , H . Lehmann (1983) " Rules for Pron-ominalization " , Proc .   1st Conference and In augural Meeting of the European Chapter of the ACL  , Pisa ,  1983 . 
II3M ( 1981 ) : User Language Generator : Program Description ~ Operation Manual  , SBI0-7352 , IBM
Prance , Paris.
Ramp , H .   ( 1981 ) " A Theory of Truth and Semantic Represent at ion "  , in Groenendijk , J . et al . Formal Methods in the Study of Language . Amsterdam . 
Lehmann , H .   ( 1978 ) : " Interpretation of Natural Language in an In formation System "  , IBM J . Res . 
Develop . vol . 22, p . 533.
Lehmann , H .   ( 1980 ) : " A System for Answering Questions in German " , paper presented at the 6th International Symposium of the ALLC , Cambridge , 

Ott , N . and M . Zoeppritz ( 1979 ) : " USL - an Experimental Information System based on Natural Language "  , in L . Bolc(ed ): Natural Language Based
Computer Systems , Hanser , Munich.
de Sopefia Pastor , L .   ( 1982 ) : " Grammar of Spanish for User Specialty Languages "  , TR 82 . 05 . 004, IBM
Heidelberg Scientific Cente ~.
Zoeppritz , M .   ( 1984 ) : Syntax for German in the User Specialty Languages System  , Niemeyer , 
T fibing en .
Appendix : E ~ mmple
SENT i

I4------ .   .   .   .   .  ~  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  -  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  +  .   .   .   .  -4 -

NP i + . . . . +


I +......+

QUNOHEN VERB NP
IIII every farmer donkey beats it

I+...+....+
II\[
IixP\[I\[
II+.....+
IIIi
NP VERBQDNOHEN
II Ii who owns a
Parse tree
R : BEAT
A(NOH ): R:FARHER(EVERY)
A(NOH ): R : OWN
A(NOM ): RELPRO
A(ACC):R:DONKEY(A)
A(ACC):PERSPR0
Intermediate Structure
ASSERTION table
Ii\]DRS#1ASSERTION 1 FARHER(ul ) 1OWN(ul , u2)1 DONKEY(u2) 2BEAT(ul , u2)
DR relation iDRiVRSi CongriSi ' eveliIIlul l  1 he\ ]1   1   lu21   1 it 11   2 
III
III
III
ACCESSIBLE relation\[upper DRS lower DRS

I 12i
