Panel on Natural Language and Databases
Daniel P . Flickinger
Computer Research Center
Hewlett-Packard Company
1501 Page Mill Road
Palo Alto , California 94304 USA
While I disagree with the proposition that database query has outlived its usefulness as a test environment for natural language processing  ( for reasons that I give below )  , I believe there are other reasonable tasks which can also spurnew research in NL processing  . In particular , I will suggest hat the task of providing a natural language interface to a rich programming environment offers a convenient yet challenging extension of work already being done with database query  . 
First I recite some of the merits of continuing research on natural language within the confines of constructing an interface for ordinary databases  . One advantage is that the speed of processing is not of overwhelming importance in this application  , since one who requests information from a database can expect the retrieval to take time  , with or without a natural language interface . Of course speed is desirable , and waiting for answers to apparently simple requests will be irritating  , but some delay will be tolerable . 
This tolerance on the part of the user will , I suggest , disappear in applications where an attempt is made to engage a system in dialogue with the user  , as would be the case in some expert systems , or inteaching systems . Assuming that natural language systems will not by themselves get faster as they are made to cope with larger fragments of a natural language  , it will be useful to continue with database query while we wait formiracles of technology to fill our demands for ever greater processing speed  . 
A second reason for not yet abandoning the database query as a test environment is that a great deal of important natural language processing research remains to be done in generalizing systems to cope with more than one natural language  . Work on language universals gives reason to believe that some significant part of a natural anguage system for English should be recyclable in constructing a system for some other language  . How much these crosslinguistic concerns ought to affect the construction of a particular system is itself one of the questions deserving of attention  , but our experience to date suggests that it pays to avoid language-particular solutions in an implementation which aspires to treatment of any sizable fragment of a language  , even a single language like English . The degree of language-independence that a natural language system can boast may also prove to be one useful metric for evaluating and comparing such systems  . \[ t seems clear that even the task of answering database queries will provide a more than adequate supply of linguistically interesting problems for this line of research  . 
Finally , it has simply not been our experience at Hewlett -Packard that there is any shortage of theoretically interesting problems to solve in constructing a natural language interface for databases  . For example , in building such an interface , we have recently designed and implemented a hierarchically structured lexicon for a fragment of English  , together with a set of lexical rules that can be run either when loading the system  , or when parsing , to greatly expand the size of the lexicon actually used in the system  . 
Several questions of theoretical interest hat arose in that process remain unanswered  ; at least some can be answered by experimenting with our present system  , functioning simply as an interface to an ordinary relational database  . 
Having argued that significant work remains to be done in natural language processing as an interface to databases  , In one the less believe that it would be fruitful to expand the scope of a natural language interface  , to permit some manipulation of a programming environment  , allowing not only the retrieval of information describing the state of the system  , but also some modification of the system via natural language  . Of course , such a task would be facilitated by having the information about the environment stored in a manner similar to that of a database  , so that our attention could be devoted to the new range of linguistic issues raised  , rather than to details of how the whole programming environment is structured and maintained  . I will not offer an account of how such a merging of database and general programming environment might be accomplished  , but instead will offer some motivation for stretching natural language research in this direction  . 
It seems clear , first of all , that such an interface would be useful , given that even a common programming environment provides a wide array of tools  , not all of which are familiar to anyone user . While it is usually the case that one who is accustomed to a given facility would be hampered by having to employ only a natural language interface to accomplish familiar tasks  ( e . g . , imagine typing " Move down to the beginning of the next line " every time a carriage-return was required  )  , such an interface would be invaluable when trying to utilize an unfamiliar part of the system  . A related benefit would be the ability of a user new to a programming environment to customize that environment without any detailed knowledge of it  . This indirect access to the multitude of parameters that determine the behavior of a complex environment would also be convenient for an experienced user attempting to alter some language interface might also cope with " how to " questions  , at least serving as another link to online documentation  . 
The linguistically interesting issues that such an extended interface would raise include a greater need for some language production capability  ( where the ordinary database query system can get by with only language understanding  )  , and a greater need for some discourse repre- . 
sentation . I suspec that some new syntactic onstructions might also appear  , rare in a database application but more common in programming applications  . 
Using an extended interface of this kind , some dialogue between the user and the system would be useful  , especially in cases where a request was too vague  , and the system ( like an expert system ) could present a series of choice points to the user in order to reduce the original request to a manageable one  . Presenting these choices would provide a convenient forum for research in language production  , while suffering the disadvantage mentioned above of forcing us to worry more about the speed with which the system performs  . 
Issues concerning discourse representation could be studied with this kind of task in a fairly natural way  , since questions about a programming environment would have to do in part with the changes taking place during a session  , so that the system would want to keep track of at least some history of a session  , both previous events and previous discourse . In addition to providing a test bed for discourse-  . 
related research , a system like this would also offer a good set t ing for study of tense and aspect issues which are not so readily raised in a simple database query application  . 
A final advantage of extending a natural anguage interface to include the programming environment is that if the interface were being developed in such an environment  , one could use natural language to develop the natural language system itself  , a property that would be not only useful but also elegant  . 

