DETECTING PATTERNS IN ALEXICAL DAT A BASE
Nicoletta Calzolari
Dipartimento di Linguistica - Universita ' diP is a
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale del CNR
Via della Faggiola 32
50100 Pisa-Italy

In a well-structured Lexica \] Data Base , a number of relations among lexica \] entries can he interactively evidenced  . The present article examines hyponymy , as an example of paradigmatic relation , and " restriction " relation , as a syntagmatic relation . The theoretical results of their implementation are illustrated  . 
IINTRODUCTION
In previous papers it has been pointed out that illawell-structured Lexical Data Has  (  . it becomes possible to detect automatical ; y , an ( l~e evidence through interact lve queries a number Of morphologica \]  , syntact . ic , or semanti ~ . 
relationships between lexical entries, . ~ uch ~ lb synonymy , hyponymy , hyperonymy , derivation , case-argument , lexical field , etc . 
The present article examines hyponymy , a . ~d I : example of paradigmatic relation , and what can b ( . 
called " restriction or modification " rela Lion  , as a syntagmatic relation , l-~yreSLl'ietJellor modification relation , l mean that part of a socalled " aristotellan " definition which hastiJe function of linking th  ( ~" genus " and the " differentia specifica " . 
When evidenced in a lexicon , tile hyponymy relation produces hierarchical trees partition iI * K the lexicon in many semant icaily coilerent subsets  . These trees are not created once and for ali , but it is important that uhey are procedurally activated at the query moment  . 
While evidencing the second relation considered , one can investigate as to whether it is possible to discover any correlation be ~ wneI * lexical or grammatical features in definitions and particular kinds of " definienda "  , and thus try to answer questions such as the following : " Are there any connections between these restriction relations and ~ he fundamental ways of definition  , i . e . the criterial parameters by which people defines things ? " For both relations  , the paper presents the different procedures by which they are " automatically recognized and extracted from the natural language definitions  , the degree of reliability of their automatic labeling  , the use of these labels in interactive queries on the lexical database  , and finally the theoretical results of their implementation in a 

IITHEL ANGUAGE OF DEFINITIONS A SASUBLANG UAGE 1 amtrying to develop and exploit the idea of considering the language of dictionary definitions as a particular sublanguage within natural language  . This perspective cannot obviously be adopted for subject matter restrictions in definitions  , but only for the purpose of the text , i . e . the specific communicative goal . From this restriction on the purpose of the text  , certain lexicogrammatical restrictions do result , which prove to be very useful . 
As totile restrictions on tile lexica lrichness of definitions  , these are not due to the fact that they relate to a specific domain of discourse  , but only to the property of closure ( although not satisfied at 100%' ) that the defining vocabulary should in principle be simpler and more restricted than the defined set of \] emmas  , i . e . the former should be a proper subset of the latter  . 
This kind of quantitative restriction on the vocabulary of definitions would not be of any interest in itself  , if it were not accompanied by other kinds of constraints both on a  ) the lexical , and on b ) the grammatical side . 
a ) From the frequency list of the words used in definitions  ( about 800 , 000 word-occurrences , and 75 , 000 word types ) , it appears in fact that some words have a much greater importance than in normal language  , as evidenced by a comparison with the data of the Lessico di Frequenza della Lingua Italiano Contemporaneo  ( Bortolini et al .  , 1971) . These are the defining generic terms such as ACT , EFFECT , PERSON , OBJECT , WHO , PROCESS , CAUSE , etc . It is not by chance that these same concepts are of relevance in many 
Artificial Intelligence systems.
b ) Not only single words , or classes of words , are particularly relevant in the defining sublanguage  . There are also lexical patterns and syntactic patterns which occur with great frequency  , and which play a very special role in defining sentences  . 
The combination of these constraints carl be and actually is very useful  , when trying to exploit the information contained in definitions  , and when transforming an archive of natural language definitions into a knowledge base  . 
structured as a network . Some important parts of knowledge are in fact already retrievable in interactive mode from the Italian Lexica \] Data Base  , which has recently been restructured . 
Analyses on large corpora of definitions , carried out on many dictionaries ( Amsler . I ') 80; Calzolari , 1983a , 1983b ; Michiels , Noel ,  1' ) 82 ) have in fact shown that the definitions sublanguage displays several regularities of lexJca \] and syntactic occurrences and pat terns  . 
These general lexica\]c\]asses and the c lasses of recurrent patterns can be more or lesseusi \] y captured for instance by pat tern-matching r  . les . 
and if possible characterized with formal rules  . 
II\]HYPONYMY RELATION
Hyponymy is the most important relation to b ( , evidence dill a lexicon . DuetOit . % taxollomi:nature , it gives the lexicon , when implemented , a particular hierarchical structure : its result is obviously not a tree  , but many tangled hierarchies ( Amsler ,  1980) . 
Instead of evidencing and labelling this relation by hand  , I have tried to characterize it procedurally . The procedure which automatically coded ( with a precision of more thah 90% calculated on a random sample of 2000 definitions ) true superordinates in all the definitions ( approx .  185 . 000 for \]03 . 000 iemmas ) . 
was based almost exclusively on the position of the " genus " term at the beginning of the definitional phrases  , giving Nouns , Verbs . and Adjectives as superordinates of defined entries of the same lexical category  . Adhoc subroutines solved exceptional cases where a  ) quantifiers , or other modifiers preceded the genus term ( e . g . 
a letta--->piccologruppodiDonnedietrol ' angolodell ' ala  )  , or b ) more than one genus was present in the definition  ( e . g . Qss or do re ---> attutire , smorzar side t to disuono ) , or c ) a prepositional phrase , usually of locative type , was at the beginning of the phrase ( e . g . piazzato ---> nelrug by , calcioal pall one collocate sulterreno ) . 
Even though the first immediate purpose of this procedure is of classification a\] nature  , the ultimate goal is the extraction and formalization of the most relevant relationship between lexical items which is implicitly stored in any standard printed dictionary  . It is in fact now possible to retrieve in the \] exica \] database not only all the definitions in which any possible wordform appears  , together with the defined lemmas ( e . g . 
SUONO appears in 328 definitions ) , but also to retrieve online , if desired , only the definitions in which the given word form is used as a superordinate  , therefore with the list of its hyponyms ( e . g . the same word SUONO is used as superordinate of only  65 words , i . e . of a subset of the preceding set containing MUSICA  , RUNORE , 
SQUILLO , SUSSURRO , etc.~.
The query-languages of arimplemented for the lexica \] database permits therefore trieve information on this hierarchical relation  . 
identifying online the a \] lowable interconnections within the entire lexicon  . The links produced can he analyzed , evaluated , and , if necessary , interactive \] y corrected . 
From explorations on the trees thus obtained.
we can also try Loset up classes and subclasses of superordinates  , on the basis of the upper nodes to which many other nodes are connected as descendants  . Only as an example , the identification criterion for the noun-class " SETOF " containing \] NSIEME  , GR UP PO , COLLEZJONE , COMPLESSO . AGGREGATO . etc . , among the set of noun-superordinates , is the fact that they are linked one to the other in the tree which results from querying the data base  . Their hyponyms will obviously be for the most part collective nouns  . 
The identification of word-classes like this one leads to the next step Jn the formalization of the hyponymy relation  , which will consist in the insertion of a label indicating a semantic class to these sets of superordinates  . It will thus be possible to retrieve , for example , all the nouns generically definable as " SETOF " , independently of tile particular word denoting a set used in definitions  . Since it is already possible to trace these chains of hyponyms going upwards or downwards for more than one level  , one can immediately ask whether , for example , MASSERIA belongs to the set of collectives even if it is defined as HANDRIA  , because MANDRIA is defined as BRANCO , which is in turn defined as INSIENE , which finally is one of the nouns belonging to the class " SETOF "  . 

IVRESTRICTION RELATION
Even though some refinements are still required in order to improve the reliability of the automatic recovery of ISA-re\]ated terms chains  , this kind of structural relation within the lexicon  , that is hyponymy , is at a good stage of implementation in the Italian \] exica \] database  . 
Much still remains to be done as far as other very interesting relatiouships bt ~ tweentile entries are concerned  . I am now considering what could be called " restriction or modificatioi * " relation  , since its purpose is to restrictor modify the meaning of the genus term  . It is exemplified in the following definit ions by the words in italics : stannJte---> calcopirite contenent estagnoar ricciolare ---> modellareo\[or modirieciol or is on a to re-- -:" dispositivo ot too generar or is on auza I wish to evaluate what could be done with respect to this kind of relation  , starting from the available definitional data . One of the first aims of this lexicolog J calrese ; Irchisto analyze , by m~ans of computational tools .   ; llld to use tile information ConLalned intiled J flor  , ,nL def init ional formats and suructures . " l'i ~ c implement a Lion of a number of proc : eduros which convert the natural language information convey ~  , d by definitions into processable formals , made tlp by structured relational links between lexJcalitems or classes of lexical items  , i . ~ nokLakol ; into consideration . 
These formals call be made ~ race able e . g . in all Information Retrieval system on definit ions  , like , the one actually implemented , onth , : entir . , corpus , for the taxonomic part of the exical structure . But these formatted reIation a\]structures can also be used as starting points for a comput at ionally exploitable reorgnnizat ~ on of the definitional content  . ( me , of the characteristics of the definitional sublanguage  , i . e . the presence of recurrent patterns ( , % uc has propriodi , relotivoo , prodotrodo , originoriodi , etc . ) , enables , at least in certain cases , to produce a constant mapplng from certain variable types of more frequently detected definitional phrases no constant underlying relation a ! structures  . 
Using rather simple pattern-matching procedures some classes and subclasse ~ of definitions can be separated  , and a small number of simpler types of definit ions have already been converted into a formalized coded format also with regard to this restriction relation  . A new virtual Relation is thus added to the original database  . The distinguished elements of a number of simple natural language patterns are mapped into some general structured information formats  . Up to now , some of the definitions displaying the fol lowing restriction relations have been treated : 
REL . FORM ( e.g . of or modi)
REL . PROV ( e.g . provvistodi)
REL . APT ( e . g . ot too ) and the corresponding relational links generated . 
Among the lexical variants of REL . PROV there are for ni to di , do to to di , munitodi , pienodi , rlccodi , etc . ; while REL . FORM groups the following variants of a different type:in\[ormodi  , cheha(la ) form a(di ) , di formo , di for mosimile a ( quelladi ) , $ ot to form adl , avente for modi , etc , It is thus possible , for example , to retrieve , among the 1271 definitions in which the word FORHA appears , only those defining something as " having the shape of something else "  . The implementation of these links allows to produce another kind of partitioning within the lexical system  , and permits to better investigate the internal structure of words  . 
A procedure of the kind exemplified above , based on pattern-matching , is possible for a good number of definition types  ; for example , with a different form a L , for many adjectives : def , NP =
Adj .   .   .   . >> REL . X : VP : where several groups of definitions are found to share a common underlying structure in terms of the restriction relation involved  , in spite of other lexical and syntactic differences  . 
VFUTURE PERSPECTIVES
A comparison with the definitional corpora of other dictionaries  , also of other languages , will certainly prove to be useful in establish ing the set of the most general or primitive Relations  , used for definition in lexicographieal practice  , often overlapping with the primitive Relations stated in many AI systems  . These relations , mapped into a formal link in the database , can then be paraphrased in each language , in the standard language . 
The database structure envisaged does permit both to maintain at a lower level  ( the starting level )  , and to eliminate at an upper level , many peculiarities and variations in the l inguistic relations  ; their effect is to facilitate the comprehension by the users of the printed dictionary  , inhibiting however immediate comprehension by procedural routines in the mechanical processing of dictionary data  . 
By applying similar methods of automatic conversion and mapping into suitable formats  , as extensively as possible throughout the lexicon  , many definitional expressions can be submitted to an attempt of standardization  , thus achieving major precision , which gives a considerable improvement when performing  , for example , information retrieval operations on the content of a dictionary  . 
This more structured , but , in another sense.
simplified version of definitions , which also accounts for their relational nature , provides an excellent basis for testing and studying the " knowledge of the world " which underlies the structure of a dictionary  . 
VlREFERENCES
Alinei , M . , La Strutturadell , essico , Bologna : Ii
Hulino , 1974.
Amsler , R.A ., The Structure of the
Herriam-Webster Pocket Dictionary , Ph . D , Thesis , Department of Computer Science ~ . 
University of Texas , Austin , Texas , 1')80.
Bortolini , U ., Tag\]iavini , C ., Zampolli , A..
Lessico di Frequenza de \] la Lingua Ita \] ian , J Contemporanea , Hilano : Garzanti .  1972 . 
Calzolari , N .   , " Towards the organization of lexical definitions or  . a databus , ' structure , COLING82 Abstracts , ed . by " E . 
Haji ~ ov ~ , Prague : Charles University ,  1982 ,  61-64 . 
Calzolari , N . , " Lexiual definitions in a computerized dictionary '"  , Computers and Artificial Intelligence , II(1983a ~3 ,  225-233 . 
Calzolari , N .   , " Semantic links and the dictionary " , in Proceedings of the ~ tl ! International Conference on Computers and the Humanities  , ed . by S . K . Burton , D . D . Shor L , Rockville ( Haryland ): Computer Science
Press , 1983b , 47-50.
Calzolari , N . , Ceccotti , H . L . , " Organizing a large scale lexica \] database dictionary "  , Acresdu Con~r~s Informatique et Sciences Humaines  , Li & ge:L . A . S . L . A . , 1981, 155-163 . 
Clark , E . V . , Clark , H . H . , " When nouns surface as verbs " , Language ,  55(1979)4 ,  767-811 . 
Evens , M . W . , Litowitz , B . E . , Harkowitz , J . A . , Smith , R . N . , Werner , O . , Lexical-Semantic Relations : a Comparative Survey  , Edmonton , Alberta : Linguistic Research Inc . , 1980 . 
Findler , N . V . ( ed . ), Associative Networks , New
York : Academic Press , 1979.
Hendrix , G . G . , " Natural-language interface " , Proceedings of the Workshop ' Applied Computational Linguistics in Perspective '  , 
American Journal of Computational
Linguistics , 8(198-)-, 56-61.
Michiels , A . , M~llenders , J . , No~l , J . , " Exploiting a large database by Longman ",
COLING 80: Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics , Tokyo , 1980, 374-382.
Hichiels , A . , Noel , J . , " Approaches to thesaurus production " , COLING82: Proceedings of the
Ninth International Conference on
Computational Linguistics . ed . by J . \] lorecky ' , Amsterdam : North-lo\]land ,  1982 ,  227-232 . 
Nagao , M . , Tsujii , J . , t ; eda , Y . , Takiyama , M . , " An attempt to computerize dictionary dale bases "  ,   COLING80: Proceedings of tht:~th International Confermme on Computational 
Linguistics , Tokyo , \] qSO , 534-542.
Quillian , H . R .   , " Semantic memory '" , in Semantic Information Processing , ed . by . ~ I . .~li:*s ky , Cambridge ( . ~lass . ): liTPress .  1!)68, -,,??'--;0 . "" Smith , R . N . , " On def in ing ad jec t ives : par t I I \ ] " Dictionaries  , the Journal of the Dictionary Society of North America  , Winter , lq~l ) 5 . 

Smith , R . N . , , Haxwell , E .   , " An English diction-ry for compute ri zed syntactic and semantic processlug "  , in Computation e\]ar , d Hathematica \] Linguistics , ed . by A . Zampo \] li , N . Calzolari , Firenze : Olschki , 1977, 303-322 . 
Walker , D . E . , Amsler , R . A . , Proposal to the
National Science Foundation on al J
Invitational Workshop on Machine-Readahl ~ D ictionaries  , SRI , 1982 ( mimeo ) . 
Zingarelli , N .   , Vocabolario dellaital ~99 a , Bologna : Zanichelli ,  1971 . 
lingua
