PANEL SESSION
MACHINE-READABLEDICTION ABr ~. S
Donald E . Walker
Natural Language and Knowledge-Ruouree Systems
SRI International
Menlo Park , California 04025, USA

Artificial Intelligence and Information Science Research 
Bell Communicatlons Research
445 South Street
Morrlstown , New Jersey 07960, USA
Abstract
The papers in this panel consider machine-readable dictionaries from several perspectives : research in computational linguistics and computational lexicology  , the development of tools for improving accessibility  , the design of lexical reference systems for educational purposes  , and applications of machine-readable dictionaries in information science contexts  . As background and by way of introduction , a description is provided of a workshop on machine-readable dictionaries that was held at SRI International in April  1983  . 
Introduction
Dictionaries constitute a unique resource for a broad range of research involving natural language  , information , knowledge , and the analysis of contemporary culture . Although they are often regarded as the special preserve of lexicographers and lexicologists  , data contained in dictionaries have significant implications for research in linguistics  , computational linguistics , artificial intelligence , information science , psychology , anthropology , sociology , philosophy , education , and probably other fields as well . Dictionaries embody the lexicon of the language . They provide phonological , grammatical , semantic , and historical information relevant for linguists and other language specialists  . They are useful adjuncts for the development of natural-language-understanding systems and natural-language-interface technology  . They can provide a mechanism for processing full text data sources and for information retrieval more generally  . Dictionary data figure in psychological experiments on language and perception  . 
Semantics and usage are reflected in ways that are factored in toeth no semantic and sociolinguistic research  . Philosophical and logical inquiries build on lexical information  . For education , dictionaries provide not only reference , but are practical aid for teaching both adults and children reading and writing skills  . 
Dictionaries have always had these potential attributes  , but they are complex structures and difficult to manipulate  . 
Having them available in machine-readable form makes more sophisticated research in lexieology and lexicography possible -- and the results of such work feedback into research in the other are as mentioned above  . In addition , dictionaries can be utilized in areas like word processing and office automation  , where people are currently showing considerable interest in them  . A number of dictionaries have now been prepared by computer type setting  , so the tapes used to drive the photo composer ae available  . However , there is a significant difference between having a dictionary in computerized form and having a database m bodying its contents which can be accessed in a number of different ways  . 
A Workshop
Recognizing the potential of machine-readable dictionaries and  , at the same time , the lack of coordination among people working in the field  , Bob Amsler and 1 organized aA Workshop on Machine-Readable Dictionaries at SR ! International in April  1983  . The National Science Foundation agreed to provide funds  ( Grant No . 1 ST-8300940; SRI Project 5699) , and we succeeded in involving 29 people from Belgium , England , West Germany , Italy , Japan , Sweden , and the United States for a period of three days . The group included research scientists from universities and institutes  , publishers , and people involved in marketing dictionary products  . 
There were a number of objectives that motivated convening the workshop and that served as a guide to its organization and the assessment of its results :  1  . Clarification of the research interests and goals of both the participants and the broader community that they represent  . Including in the latter are dictionary publishers and the various classes of potential users of machine-readable dictionaries and their by products  . 
2 . Identification of the resources in the field : for example  , dictionaries actually in machine-readable form , the people engaged in research on them , programs developed for processing dictionary data  , references to the relevant literature . 
3 . Examination of the problems entailed in research in this area  . 
4 . Delineation of computational requirements for various research tasks  . 
5 . Specification of guidelines for dictionary design  , both form and content . 
6 . Formulation of a comprehensive plan to coordinate research efforts in the field  . 
7 . Determination of needs and potential sources of funding for research  . 
8 . Arrangements for future workshops or other meetings  . 
A volume containing a challenge paper prepared by BOb Amsler  , contributions from a number of the participants , summaries of the discussions , and an extensive bibliography of work in the field is in preparation  . 

