Semantic Interpretation Using KL-ONE 1
Norman K . Sondheimer
USC/Information Sciences Institute
Marina del Rey , California 90292 USA
Ralph M . Weischedel
Dept . of Computer & Information Sciences
University of Delaware
Newark , Delaware 19716 USA
Robert J . Bobrow
Bolt Beranek and Newman , Inc.
Cambridge , Massachusetts 02238 USA

This paper presents extensions to the work of Bobrow and Webber\[Bobrow & Webber  80a   , Bobrow & Webber 80b \] on semantic interpretation using KL-ONE to represent knowledge  . 
The approach is based on an extended case frame formalism applicable to all types of phrases  , not just clauses . The frames are used to recognize semantically acceptable phrases  , identify their structure , and , relate them to their meaning representation through translation rules  . Approaches are presented for generating KL-ONE structures as the meaning of a sentence  , for capturing semantic generalizations through abstract case frames  , and for handling pronouns and relative clauses . 
1. Introduction
Semantic interpretation is the process of relating the syntactic analysis of an utterance "  , o its meaning representatio h . 
Syntactic analyses associate immediate constituents with their syntactic function in a matrix constituent  , e . g . , the sentence " Send him the message that arrived yesterday  . " , has a syntactic analysis in RUS\[Bobrow 78\] as shown in Figure 1  . 2 The elements of the meaning representation are the objects  , events , and states of affairs perceived by the speaker . The relationships between these entities will be called semantic functions  . The basis for our semantic processing scheme is a familiar one based on that of case frames used to describe clausa structure \[ Bruce  75\]  . Our case frames are used for all phrase types : clauses  , noun phrases , prepositional phrases , etc . We choose to represent both the syntactic and semantic analyses in the knowledge representation language KL-ONE\[Brachman & Schmolze  82  , Schmolze & Lipkis 83 , Moser 83\] . The essential properties for the meaning representations constructed are that each concept represents a semantic constituent and each of its roles identifies the semantic function of one of its immediate constituents  . Figure 23 gives an analysis of the example sentence above . We have picked a constituent structure and names for semantic functions fitting the computer mail application of  . the the Consul project at USC/Information Sciences Institute\[Kaczmarek  83\]  . The exact details of the analysis are not critical  ; the essential point is that 1This material is based upon work supported in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under Contract Numbers MDA  903-81-C-0335  , ARPA Order No . 2223, and N00014-77-C-0378, ARPA Order No .  3414 . Views and conclusions contained in this paper are the authors ' and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies of DARPA  , the U . S , Government , or any person or agency connected with them . 
2We use this sentence to illustrate many of the points in this paper  . Assume that " yesterday " modifies " arrived " . 
3All of the KL-ONE diagrams in this paper are simplified for expository purposes  , semantic interpretation relates a ' phrase's analysis based on syntactic criteria to one based on semantic criteria  . 

Head : Send
Indire ~- IObject : Noun Phrase
Head : Him
Direct Object Noun Phrase
Head : Message
Article : The
Relative : Clause
Head : Arrive
Subject : That
Time : Yesterday
Figure 1: Syntactic Analysis of " Send him the message that arrived yesterday  . " . Simplifications in tense , determiners and numbers are for the sake of presentation  . 
Figure 2: Meaning Representation of " Send him the message that arrived yesterday  . " . Simplification on determiners and the further -constraints structure for the sake of presentation  . 

Our framework does not assume that a syntactic analysis of a complete sentence is found before semantic interpretation begins  . Rather , the implemented semantic interpreter proceeds incrementally as the grammar proposes the syntactic function of an immediate constituent  ; this moc~el of communication between syntax and semantics has been termed a cascade\[Woods  80  , Bobrow & Webber 80b \] . 
To achieve semantic interpretation , some well . known types of knowledge need " to be employed , e . g . , selection restriction information ( often represented using semantic features )  , structural information ( often encoded in case frames )  , and translation information ( often defined with various kinds of projection rules  )  . 
Some of the difficulties in representing and applying this knowledge include the following :  1  . Translation rules ( projection rules ) for generating correct meaning representations must be defined  . 
We have been able to define modular projection rules that make use of the inheritance properties of KL- 

2 . Since much of the knowledge for a particular application is necessarily domain specific  , it is important oorganize it in a way to ease extension of the knowledge base and to ease moving to a new domain  . 
3 . Since distributional restrictions require specific semantic features  , pronouns and other semantically neutral terms not necessarily having those features must be accepted wherever they are consistent with the expected type of noun phrase  . 
4 . The inter-constituent relationships arising in relative clauses must be consistent with all selection restrictions and be represented in the resulting meaning representation  . 
This paper addresses each of these issues in turn.
We are building on techniques presented by Bobrow and Webber\[Bobrow & Webber  80a   , Bobrow & Webber 80b \] . This paper describes the system currently in use at USC/Information Sciences Institute  . The basic framework is reviewed in Section 2 . 
Section 3 presents the translation mechanism\[Sond heimer 84\]  . 
Capturing semantic generalizations is the topic of Section  4  . 
Sections 5 and 6 discuss issues regarding pronouns and relative clauses  , respectively . Related work is identified in Section 7 . The final section summarizes the results , and identifies further work . 
A very brief introduction to KL-ONE is provided in an appendix  . 
2. Background
The framework being developed uses a frame for each semantically distinguishable type of phrase  . Thus , a frame will be required for each class of phrase having a uniq  . ue combination of . semantic distribution , -selection restrictions on constituents making up the phrase  , and -_ assignment of semantic relations to syntactic function  . 
It is likely that the frames will reflect the natural categories of descriptions of objects  , events , actions , and states of affairs in any particular application  . For example , in the computer mail domain , the following are some frames that have been useful : - Clauses describing the sending of messages : SEND  . 
CLAUSE-Clauses describing message arrival : ARRIVE  . 
CLAUSE-Noun phrases describing messages : MESSAGE-NP-Noun phrases describing senders and recipients : 

In the framework developed by Bobrow and Webber\[ Bobrow & Webber  80a   , Bobrow & Webber 80b \] , for each frame , each possible immediate constituent is associated by syntactic function with a case or slot  . The clause frames have slots identified as head , subject , 4" direct object , indirect object , etc . 
Noun phrase frames have slots for the head , adjective modifiers , article , etc . Each slot specifies the fillers that are semantically acceptable  , whether it is required or optional , and the number of times it may be filled in a phrase  . The constraints on fillers of frames ' slots are stated in terms of other frames  , e . g . , the direct object of a SEND-CLAUSE must be a MESSAGE  . NP , or in terms of word senses and categories of these senses  . Some example word sense categories are : ? Message description nouns  , such as " message " or " letter ": MESSAGE . NOUN ? Information transmission verbs , such as " send " or " forward ": TRANS MISSION . VERBIn our domain the constraint on the subject of an ARRIVE-CLAUSE is that it satisfies the MESSAGE  . NP frame . A constraint on the head of the MESSAGE . NP frame is that it is a word sense in the category MESSAGE  . NOUN . 
Frames are represented as KL . ONE concepts . Case slots appear as roles of concepts .   5 Semantic constraints on what can fill a case slot are encoded as the value restrictions of roles  . 
These value restrictions are concepts representing frames  , word senses , or word sense categories . Number restrictions on roles show the number of times the syntactic function may be realized  . 
A required slot is marked by the number restriction on its role having a minimum of  1  ; an optional slot has a number restriction with a minimum of  0 and a maximum greater than 0  . A phrase is said to instantiate a given frame X if and only if its immediate constituent satisfy the appropriate value and number restrictions of all of X's roles  .   6 The collection of frames and word sense 4Subject   , object , etc . refer to logical roles rather than surface syntactic ones  . 
5 1t is possible to associate roles with semantically defined subsets of other roles  , e . g . , to assign separate roles to uses of color adjectives  , ize adjectives , etc . This is an important convenience in constructing frames but not crucial to our discussion  . 
6A recognition algorithm for this representation has been presented \[ Bobrow&Webber  80b \] and several others have been developed since then  . Thase will be presented in separate reports . 
102 information is called a Syntaxonomy ( for syntactic taxonomy )  , since it encodes knowledge regarding semantic interpretation in a hierarchy of syntactic classes  . 
3. Translation Rules
To achieve the mapping from syntactic analysis to meaning representation  , translation rules are associated with individual frames  . Though the rules we give generate KL-ONE structures as the meaning representation  , other translation rules could be developed for generating forms in a different target representation language  . 
Any KL . ONE concept C representing a frame has an associated concept C ' representing the main predicate of the translation  . For example , the translation of SEND-CLAUSE is the concept Send-mail  . Translations are stored in data attached to the frame  ; we label this data TRANSLATION . 
The translation rules themselves can be associated with individual case slots  . When inheritance results in more than one translation rule for a case slot  , the one originating from the most specific frame in the hierarchy is selected  .   7 Suppose we are building the translation C' of a matched frame C  . One common translation rule that could appear at a role R of C is  ( Paraphrase-as R ' )  . This establishes the translation of the filler of R as the filler of R ' at concept C '  . For example , the indirect object slot of SEND-CLAUSE has the rule "  ( Paraphrase-as addressee ) " to map the translation of the noun phrase in the indirect object position into the addressee role of the Send-mail  . 
Another rule form , ( Attach-SDsf ) , takes a semantic functions f as an argument and attaches the translation of the constituent filling R as the filler F of sf  . A example of its use in the processing of relative clauses as described in Section  6  . Attach-SD differs from Paraphrase-as by having facilities to establish a role from F to C '  . This automatic feature is essentially the opposite of Paraphrase  . as , in that a semantic function runs from the embedded constituent o its matrix phrase  . 
Another rule form is not a translation rule per s e  , but stores data with the syntactic concept representing the syntactic analysis of the phrase  . The data could be checked by other ( conditional ) translation rules . 
Underlying these forms and available for more complex types of translation is a general mechanism having the form " source ==> goal  . " The source identifies the structure that is to be placed at the location identified by the goal  . The formalism for the source allows reference to arbitrary constants and concepts and to a path through the concepts  , roles , and attached data of a KL-ONE network . The goal formalism also shows a path through a network and may specify establishment of additional roles  . 
A separate test may be associated with a translation rule to state conditions on the applicability of a rule  . If the test is false , the rule does not apply , and no translation corresponding to that role is generated  . The most common type of condition is ( Realized-Function ? role )  , which is true if and only if some 7There is also an escape mechanism that allows inheritance of all rules not indexed to any role  . 
immediate constituent fills that role in the analysis  . It can be used as an explicit statement hat an optional role is translated only if filled or as a way of stating that one constituent's translation depends on the presence of another role  . Additional conditions are ( EMPTY-RC ) LE?role ) , which checks that role is not filled , and ( ROLE-FILLER ? role class ) , which checks that the filler of role is of type class  . Since all three take a role name as argument , they may be used to state cross , dependencies among roles . 
Figure 3 contains some of the frames that allow for the analysis  . of our example . The treatment of the pronoun and relative clause in the example sentence of Section I will be explained in Sections  5 and 6  . 
4 . Capturing Semantic Generalizations via Abstract Case Frames Verbs can be grouped with respect to the cases they accept \[ Simmons  73  , Celce-Murcia 76 , Gawron 83\]; likewise , groups exist for nouns . AKL-ONE syntaxonomy allows straightforward statement of common properties  , as well as individually distinct properties of group members  . Abstract case frames are semantic generalizations applicable across a set of the familiar sort of concrete frames  . Properties common to the generalization can be defined at the abstract frames and related to the concrete frames through inheritance  . 
The use of time modification in " that arrived yesterday " is the same as that of other verbs describing completion of an activity  , e . g . , " come ", " reach ", and " finish " . A general frame for clauses with these verbs can show this role  . The concrete frames for clauses with verbs in this group are subconcepts and thereby accept the time modifier  ( see Figure 4 )  . The concrete frames can restrict both the number and type of time modifiers  , if necessary . 
Translation rules associated with this time role can also be restricted at the concrete frames  . 
Some modifiers dramatically affect the translation of entire phrases  , as in the partitive modifier " half of " . A description of " half of " some individual entity  ( as opposed to a set of entities ) may not have the same distribution . For example , " Delete this message from my directory . " , makes sense , but " Delete half of this message from my directory  . ", does not . This can be easily stated through an abstract frame for the basic message description specialized by two concrete frames  ( see Figure 5 )  . 
A related case is " to yX . " The translation of " to yX " is certainly different from that of X  , and their distributions may differ as well . This may be handled in a way similar to the partitive example  .   8 This class of examples points out the limits of case frame systems  . Other modifiers , such as " model " and " fake " , are easily recognizable . However , more complex modifiers also make the same distinctions  , e . g . , " The gun that was a fake was 8An'interesting alternative is . to show the toy modifier as an optional role on an abstract frame for object descriptions  . Underneath it could be an abstract frame distinguished only by requiring the to y modification ' role  . All appropriate inferences associated with descriptions of toys could De associated with this concept  . Frames for the basic descriptions of specific objectypes could be placed underneath the object description frame  . These could recognize " to yX " . 
Our systems invoke the KL-ONE classifier after the recognition of each phrase \[ Schmolze & Lipkis  83\]  . in this case , classification will result in identification f the phrases sakind of both X description and to y description allowing translation to show what is known about both without creating a " to yX " frame by hand  . We have not completely analyzed the affect of this strategy on the translation system  . 

TBA kit21 ATIt~kJ*~slationRule:If ( Realized-Function ? Indirect Object ) then ( Paraphrase-as addressee ) ~ slationRule : ( Paraphrase . as message )
TRANSLATION : )
Min : lMax : l_~
Subject Min : O Max : l Translation Rule : If ( Realized . Function ? Subject ) then ( Paraphrase-as message ) TimeMin : 0 Max : l Translation Rule : If ( Realized . Function ? Time ) then ( Paraphrase . as completion-time . interval)

Min : lMax : ~
Determiner Min : l
Relative Min : O Max : oo Translation Rule : If ( Realized-Function ? Relative ) then ( Attach . SD further . constraint ) Figure 3: Some frames used for " Send him the message that arrived yesterday  . "  . ti Figure 4: A fragment of the syntaxonomy . Double arrows are subcrelationships , i . e . , essentially " isa " arcs . Not all roles are shown . 
partitive ~ partitive
Min : OMax : OM in : lMax : l
Figure 5: Syntaxonomy for partitives.

John's . ", and " The gun that was made of soap was John's . " . 
Viewing our semantic interpretation system as a special purpose infereoce system  , it seems prudent to leave the recognition of the type of these " guns " to more general  . purpose reasoners . 
Abstract case frames have significantly eased the development and expansion of semantic coverage within our application by helping us to focus on issues of generality and speciiicity  . The new frames we add have many slots established by inheritance  ; consistency has been easier to maintain ; and the structure of the resulting syntaxonomy has helped in debugging  . 
5. Semantically Neutral Terms
Case frames are an attempt to characterize semantically coherent phrases  , for instance , by selection restrictions . In computational linguistics , selection restrictions have been applied to the constituents that are possible fillers rather than to what the constituents denote  . For example , the restriction on the direct object of a SEND -CLAUSE is MESSAGE-NP  , rather than messages . Problems with using such approximations in parsing are discussed in \[ Ritchie  83\]  . 
For many natural language interfaces , a noun phrase's internal structure gives enough information to determine whether it satisfies a restriction  , s However , there are forms whose semantic interpretation does not provide enough information to guarantee the satisfaction of a constraint and yet need to be allowed as fillers for slots  . These include pronouns , some elliptical forms , such as " the last three " , and other neutral noun phrase forms , such as " the thing " and " the gift " . This also includes some nonlexical gestural forms like the input from a display that shows where the user pointed  ( literally or via a mouse )  . We refer to all of these assernantica // yneutra /terms  . A semantic interpretation system should accept such forms without giving up restrictions on acceptable semantic categories  . 
However , these forms cannot , in general , appear everywhere . In discussing computer mail , "1 senthim " should be considered nonsense . 
Bobrow and Webber\[Bobrow & Webber 80b \] propose a general strategy for testing the compatibility of a constituent as a slot filler based on non-incompatibility  . The current system at USC/ISI takes a conservative view of this proposal  , developing the idea for only neutral reference forms  . All noun phrase types displaying neutral reference are defined as instances of the concept Neutra I Reference  . NP . Furthermore , disjointness " relations are marked between the various subclasses of neutral references and those classes of explicit descriptions which have noninter secting sets of potential references  . During interpretation , when such a Neutral Reference-NP is proposed as a slot filler  , and that concept is not disjoint from the value restriction on the slot  , it is accepted . 
In addition , since the slot restriction and the filler each have meaning of their own  , e . g . , " he " describes a human male in the computer mail domain  , the translation should show the contribution of both the neutral term and the constraint on the slot  . When the neutral form is qualified as a constituent by the system  , both the neutral form and the selection constraint are  9Clearly   , misreference also intederes with this method \[ Goodman  8  , 3\] , as does personification , metonymy and synecdoche . We propose other methods for these last phenomena in\[Weischedel  84  , Weischedel83\] . 
remembered . When it is time to produce the translation , the translation rule for the slot applies to a concept which is the conjunction of the translations of the neutral reference form and the restriction  . 
Part of the network that supports the translation of " he " in the example of section  1 is shown in Figure 6  . Referring to Figures 2 and 3 , the effect of a reference to a male where a reference to a computer-user was expected can be seen  . 
~ ANSLATION : sex
I Head Min : lMax : l ~ TRANSLATION :
Figure 6: Network for " he . " Note that computer User is a subconcept of Person  . 
6. Inter-Constituent Relationships :
Relative Clauses
In relative clauses , the constraint on the slot filled by the relative pronoun or the trace  1? must be satisfied by the noun phrase that the relative clause modifies  . In addition , the translation of the noun phrase must reflect the contribution of the use of the pronoun or trace in the relative clause  . For example , in " Send him the message that arrived yesterday  "  , the constraint on the subject of " arrive " must be satisfied by the noun phrase of which it is a part  . Further , translation must result in coreference within the meaning representation of the value of the message role of the Arrival  . mail concept and the value of the message role of the Send  . mail concept ( see Figure 2) . This is a form of inter-constituent relationship . 
Our system processes relative clauses by treating the relative pronouns and trace elements as neutral reference forms  ( just as in the pronominal cases discussed in Section  5 and by storing the constraints on the head of the relative clause until they can be employed directly  . In our example , the noun phrase " that " is seen as a Trace-NP , a kind of Neutral Reference . NP . 
The structure assigned " that " is compatible with MESSAGE-NP and hence acceptable  . On translation , the Trace-NP is treated like a neutral reference but the role and unchecked constraint are recorded  , as attached data on the instantiated case frame that results from parsing the arrival clause  . In the example , the facts that a Trace . NP is in the subject role and that a Message . NP is required are stored . That constraint is tested against the classification of the matrix noun phrase when the clause is proposed as a relative clause modifier  .   11   10The RUS parser which we employ supplies a " trace " to establish ? syntactic placeholder with reduced relatives  . 
1 1 If the use of the relative pronoun or trace is inside ? phrase inside the relative clause  , as in " the town from which I come " , the role and constraint will be passed upward twice  , pronoun and noun phrase corefer is recorded . When the entire noun phrase is processed successfully  , the appropriate coreferences are established by performing  ( Attach-SD further-constraint ) and by retrieving the translation associated with the role filled by the Trace-NP  . This establishes coreference between the concept attached by the translation rule and the : translation of the entire noun phrase  . In our example , the translation of the noun phrase is made the value of the message role of the Arrival-mail  . 
7. Related Work
Our technique uses properties of KL-ONE to build a simplified  , special-purpose inference engine for " semantic interpretation  . The semantic processor is separate from both syntactic and pragmatic processing  , though it is designed to maintain well-defined interaction with those components through Woods's cascade model of natural language processing \ [ Woods  80\]  . Uniform methods include logic grammars \ [ Pereira  83  , Palmer 83\] and semantic grammars \[ Burton 77 , Hendrix 78 , Wilensky 80\] . Logic grammars employ a Horn-clause theorem prover for both syntactic and semantic processing  . Semantic grammars collapse syntactic and semantic analysis into an essentially domain  . specific grammar . Semantic interpretation is handled through unification in some evolving systems  , such as
PATTR-II\[Robins on 83\].
Several recent systems have separate semantic interpretation components  . Hirst\[Hirst 83\] uses a Montague-inspired approach to produce statements in a frame language  . 
He uses individual mapping rules tied to the meaning-affecting rules of a grammar  . Boguraev\[Boguraev 79\] presents a semantic interpreter based on patterns very similar to those of our case frames  . The meaning representation it produces is very similar to the structure of our case frames  . 
8. Conclusion
We have presented approaches to typical difficulties in building semantic interpreters  . These have included a sketch of a translation system that maps from the matched frames to KL -ONE meaning representations  . The idea of abstract case frames and applications of them were introduced  . Finally , ways of accepting neutral references and allowing for the inter-constituent constraints imposed by relative clauses were presented  . 
Our experience indicates that KL-ONE is effective as a means of building and employing a library of case frames  . The basic approach is being used in research computer systems at both USC/Information Sciences Institute and Bolt Beranek and 
Newman , Inc.
Of course , many problems remain to be solved . Problems currently under investigation include : -Robust response to input that appears semantically ill  . formed , such as using an unknown word , -A general treatment of quantification , -Treatment of . conjunction, . Feedback from the pragmatic component to guide semantic interpretation  , ? Generation of error messages ( in English ) based on the case frames if the request seems beyond the system's capabilities  , -Understanding classes of metonymy , such as " Send this window to Jones , " and ? Provision for meaningful use of nonsense phrases  , such as " Can Is end a package over the ARPA net ?"
I . Brief Description of KL-ONE
KL-ONE offers a rigorous means of specifying terms  ( concepts ) and basic relationships among them , such as subset/superset , disjointness , exhaustive cover , and relational structure . Concepts are denoted graphically as ovals . Concepts are Structured objects whose structure is indicated by named relations  ( ro/es ) between concepts . Roles are drawn as arcs containing a circle and square  . The concepts at the end of the role arcs are said to be va/ue restrictions  . In addition , roles have maximum and minimum restrictions on the number of concepts that can be related by the role to the concept at the origin of the arc  . Concepts can also have data attached to them , stored as a property list . Finally , the set of concepts is organized into an inheritance hierarchy  , through subcrelations drawn with double . 
linear rows from the subconcep to the superconcept . 
All of the KL-ONE diagrams in the text are incomplete  ; for instance , Figures 3 and 5 focus on different aspects of what is one KL-ONE structure  . In figure 3 , the diagram for SEND-CLAUSE specifies the concepts of " send " clauses  . They have exactly one head , which must be the lexical concept " send . " They must have a direct object which is a MESSAGE . NP , and they optionally have an indirect object which is a USER-NP  . 
Figure 5 shows that SEND-CLAUSE's are MESSAGE-TRANS MISSION -CLAUSE's  , which are a type of CLAUSE . 
The meaning representation , Figure 2 , generated for " Send him the message that arrived yesterday " consists of the concept Send-mail  , having an addressee which is a Computer-User and a message which is Computer Mail  . 
References\[Bobrow78\]R . J . Bobrow , " The RUS System , " in B . L . Webber , R . Bobrow ( eds . ) , Research in Natura/Language Understanding , Bolt , Beranek , and Newman , Inc . , Cambridge , MA , 1978 . BBN Technical Report 3878 . 
\[ Bobrow & Webber 80a \] Robert Bobrow and Bonnie Webber , " PSI-KLONE : Parsing and Semantic Interpretation in the BBN Natural Language Understanding System  , " in Proceedings of the 1980 Conference of the Canadian Society for Computationa / Studies of/nte // igence  , 
CSCSI/SCE IO , May 1980.
1 06 \[ Bobrow & Webber 80b \] Robert Bobrow and Bonnie Webber , " Knowledge Representation for Syntactic/Semantic Processing  , " in Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , AAAI , August 1980 . 
\[ Boguraev 79\] Branimir K . Boguraev , Automatic Resolution of Linguistic Ambiguities , Computer Laboratory , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , U . K . , Technical Report NO .  11,
August 1979.
\[Brachman & Schmolze 82\] James Schmolze and Ronald Brachman ( eds . ) , Proceedings of the 1981 KL-ONE Workshop , Fair child , Technical Report No . 618, May 1982 . 
\[Bruce 75\]B . Bruce , " Case Systems for Natural Language , " Artificial Intelligence 6 , (4) ,  1975 ,  327-360 . 
\[Burton77\]R . R . Burton , J . S . Brown , Semantic Grammar : A technique for constructing natural anguage interface to instructional systems  , Bolt , Beranek , and Newman , Inc . , BBN
Report 3587, May 1977 . Cambridge , MA\[Celce-Murcia 76\]M . Celce-Murcia , " Verb Paradigms for Sentence Recognition , " American Journal of Computational
Linguistics , 1976. Microfiche 38.
\[Gawron83\]J . M . Gawron , Lexical Representation and the Semantics of Complementation  , Ph . D . thesis , Univ . of California , Berkeley , Linguistics Dept . , 1983 . 
\[Goodman83\]BradleyA . Goodman , "Repairing Miscommunication : Relaxation in Reference  , " in AAAI-83 , Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , pp . 134-138, AAAI , Washington , D . C . , August 1983 . 
\[ Hendrix 78\] Gary Hendrix , et al , " Developing a Natural Language Interface to Complex Data  , " ACM Transactions on Database Systems 3 ,  (2) ,  1978 ,  105-147 . 
\[Hirst83\]G . Hirst , " A Foundation for Semantic Interpretation , " in Proceedings of the 21st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp . 64-73, Association for
Computational Linguistics , June 1983.
\[ Kaczmarek83\]T . Kaczmarek , W . Mark , and N . Sondheimer , " The Consul/CUE Interface : An Integrated Interactive Environment  , " in Proceedings of CHI '83 Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp .  98 . 102, ACM , December 1983 . 
\[Moser83\]M . G . Moser , " An Overview of NIKL , the New Implementation of KL-ONE , " in Research in Natural Language Understanding , B01t , Beranek , and Newman , Inc . , Cambridge , MA , 1983 . BBN Technical Report 5421 . 
\[Palmer83\] Martha Stone Palmer , " Inference . Driven Semantic Analysis , " in AAAI-83 , Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , pp . 310-313, AAAI,
Washington , D.C ., August 1983.
?\[ Pereira83\] Fernando C . N . Pereira and David H . D . Warren , " Parsing as Deduction , " in Proceedings of the 21th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp .  137-144 , Association for Computational Linguistics , 
Cambridge , Massachusetts , June 1983.
\[ Ritchie83\]G . Ritchie , " Semantics in Parsing , " in Margaret J . King ( ed . ), Parsing Natural Language , pp .  199-217,, 1963 . 
\[ Robins on 83\] Jane Robinson et at . ._= , Personal Communication , " Classification in the KL-ONE Knowledge Representation System  , " in Proceedings of the Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , IJCAI ,  1983 . 
\[ Simmons 73\]R . F . Simmons , " Semantic Networks : Their Computation and Use for Understanding English Sentences  , " in R . Schank and K . Colby ( eds . ), Computer Models of Thought and Language , pp . 63-113, W . 
H . Freeman and Company , San Francisco , 1973.
\[Sondheimer84\] Norman K . Sondheimer , Consul Note 23: " Translating to User Model " ,  1984 . 
\ [ Weischedel83\]Ralph M . Weischedel and Norman K . S0 nd heimer , " Meta-Rules as a Basis for Processing Ill-Formed Input  , " American Journal of Computational
Linguistics 9, (34), 1983.
\ [ Weischede184\] Ralph M . Weischedel and Norman K . Sondheimer , Consul Note 22: " Relaxing Constraints in
MIFIKL ", 1984.
\[ Wilensky 80\] Wilensky , Robert and Yigal Arens , " PHRAN . . A Knowledge-Based Natural Language Understander , " in Proceedings of the 18th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and Parasession on Topics in Interactive Discourse  , pp .  117-121 , Association for Computational Linguistics , Philadelphia , PA , June 1980 . 
\[Woods80\]W . A . Woods , " Cascaded ATN Grammars , " American Journal of Computational Linguistics 6 ,  (1) ,  1980 ,  112 . 

