APPLICATIONS OF ALEXICOGRAPHIC ALD AT A BASE FOR GERMAN 
Wolfgang Teubert
Institut f~rdeutsche Sprache
Friedrich-Karl-Str .12
6800 Mannheimi , West Germany

The Institut fHrdeutsche Sprache
recently has begun setting up a
LExicographical DAta Base for German
( LEDA ). This database is designed to
improve efficiency in the collection , analysis , ordering and description of language materia l by facilitating access to textual samples within corpora and to word articles  , within machine readable dictionaries and by providing a frame to store results of lexicographical research for further processing  . LEDA thus consists of the three components Tezt Bank  , 
Diationary Bank and ResuZtBank and serves as a tool to suppport monolingual 
German dictionary projects at the
Institute and elsewhere.
IINTRODUCTORY REMARKS
Since the foundation of the Institut fHrdeutsche Sprache in  1964  , its research has been based on empirical findings  ; samples of language produced in spoken or writ ten from were the main basis  . To handle efficiently large quantities of texts to be researched it was necessary to use a computer  , to assemble machine readable corpora and to develop programs for corpus analysis  . An outline of the computational activities of the Institute is given in LDV-Info  ( 1981 ff )  ; the basic corpora are described in Teubert ( 1982 )  . 
The present main frame computer , which was installed in January 1983 , isa Siemens 7 . 536 with a core storage of 2 megabytes , a number of tape and disc decks and at the moment  15 visual display units for interactive use . 
Whereas in former years most jobs were carried out in batch  , the terminals now make it possible for the l in guist to work interactively with the computer  . It was therefore a logical step to devise
Lexicographical Data Base for German ( LEDA ) as a tool for the compilation of new dict ionaries  . The ideology of interactive use demands a dif ferent concept of programming where the lexicographer himself can choose from the menu of alternatives offered by the system and fixh is own search parameters  . Work on the Lexicographical Data Base was begun in  1981  ; a first version incorporating all three components is planned to be  . ready for use in 1986 . 
What is the goal of LEDA ? In any lexicographica l project  , once the concept for the new dictionary has been established  , there are three major tasks where the computer can be employed :  ( i ) For each lemma , textual samples have to be determined in the corpus which is the linguistic base of the dict ionary  . 
The text corpus and the programs to be applied to it will form one component of 
LEDA , namely the TextBank.
( ii ) For each lemma , the lexico-grapher will want to compare corpus samples with the respective word articles of existing relevant dictionaries  . For easy access , these dictionaries should be transformed into a machine readable corpus of integrated word articles  . Word corpus and the pertaining retrieval programs will form the second component  , i . e . the
Dictionary Bank.
( iii ) Once the formal structure of the word articles in the new dictionary has been established  , description of the lemmata within to the framework of this structure can be begun  . A database system will provide this frames o that homogenous and interrelated descriptions can be carried out by each member of the dict ionary team at all stages of the compilation  . This component of LEDA we call the Result Bank . 
IITEXTBANK
Each dictionary project should make use of a text corpus assembled to the specific requirements of the particular lexicographical goal  . As self-evident as this claim seems to be , it is nonetheless true for most German monol in gual dictionaries on the market that they have been compiled without any corpus  ; this is apparently even the case for the new six volume BROCKHAUS-WAHRIG  , as has been pointed out by Wiegand/Kucera ( 1981 and 1982 )  . For a general dictionary of 200000 lemmata , the Homburger Thesen ( 1978 ) asked for a corpus of not less than 50 million words ( tokens )  . 
To be used in the text bank , corpora will have to conform to the special codi fication or pre-editing requirements demanded by the interactive query system  . 
At present , a number of machine readable corpora in unified codification are available at the Institute  , including the Mannheim corpora of contemporary written language  , the Freiburg corpus of spoken language and the East/West German newspaper corpus  , totalling altogether about 7 million running words of text . 
Further corpora habe been taken over from other research institutions  , publishing houses and other sources . These texts had been coded in all kinds of different conventions  , and programs had to ( and still have to ) be devel Qped to transform them according to the Mannheim coding rules  . Other texts to be included in the corpus of the textbank will be recorded by OCR  , via terminal or by use of an optical scanner , if they are not available on machine readable data carriers  . By the end of 1985 texts of a total length of 20 million words will be available from which any dictionary project can make its own selection  . 
A special query system called REFER has been developed and is still being improved  . For a detailed description of it , see Br ~ ckner (1982) and (1984) . The purpose of this system is to ensure quick access to the data of the text bank  , thus enabling the lexicographer to use the corpus interactively via the terminal  . 
Unlike other query programs , REFER does not search a word form ( or a combinantion of graphemes ) in the corpus itself , but in registers containing all the word forms . 
One register is arranged in the usual alphabetical way  , the other is organized in reverse or atergo to allow a search for suffixes or the terminal elements of compounds  . All wordforms in the registers are connected with the references to their actual occurrence in the corpus  , which are then looked up directly . With REFER , it normally takes no more than three to five seconds for the search procedure to be completed  , and all occurrences of the wordform within an arbitrarily chosen context can be viewed on the screen  . Response behaviour does not depend on the size of the text bank  . 
In addition , REFER following options : features the-The lexicographer can search for a word form  , for wordforms beginning or ending with a spec if ied string of graphemes or for word forms containing a specified string of graphemes at any place  . 
-The lexicographer can search for any combin at ion of wordforms and/or graphemic strings to occur within a single sentence of the corpus  . 
-REFER is connected with a morphological generator supplying all inflected forms for the basic form  , e . g . the infinitive ( cf . fahren ( inf . ) - - - fahre , f ~ hrst , fahrt , f-~rt , fuhr , fuhren , fuhrst , f~hre , f  ~ , f-~st , 9e fahren ) . -?--~ s will make it much easler for the lexicographer to state his query  . 
-For all word forms , REFER will provide information on the relative and absolute frequency and the distribution over the texts of the corpus  . 
- The lexicographer hat a choice of options for the output  . He can view the search item in the context of a full sentence  , in the context of any number of sentences or in the form of a 
KWIC-Index , both on the screen and in print.
-For each search procedure , the linguist can define his own subcorpus from the complete corpus  . 
-Lemmatized registers are in preparation.
They will be produced automatically using a complete dictionary of wordforms with their morphological descriptions  . These lemmatized registers not only reduce the search time  , but also give the accurate frequency of a lemma , not just a word form , in the corpus . 
-Register of word classes and morphological descr iptions  ( e . g . listing references of all past participles ) will be produced automatically by inverting the lemmatized registers  . Thus the linguist can search for relevant grammatical constructions  , like all verb complexes in the passive voice . 
-Another feature will permit searching for an element at a predetermined sentence position  , like all finite verbs as the first words of a sentence or all nouns preceded by two adjectives  . 
Thus the textbank is a tool for the lexicographer to gain information of the following kind : - Which wordforms of a lemma are found in the corpus ? Are there spelling or inflectional variations ?- In which meanings and syntactical constructions is the lemma employed ?- What collocations are there ? What compounds is the lemma part of ?- Is there evidence for idiomatic and phraseological usuage?-What is the relative and absolute frequency of the lemma ? Is there a characteristic distribution over different text types ?- Which samples can best be used to demonstrate the meanings of the lemma ? are in use since  1982  . Not only lexicographers but also grammarians employ this interactive system to gain the textual samples they need  . A steadily growing number of service demands both from members of the Institute and from l inguists at other institutions are being fulf illed by the text bank  . 
IIIDICTIONARY BANK
If access to the textual samples of a corpus is an in disputable prerequisite for successful dict ionary compilation  , consultation of other relevant dictionaries can facilitate the drawing up of lexical entries  . It is virtually impossible to assemble a corpus so extensive and encompassing that it wil l suffice to describe the whole vocabulary of a language  , even within the limits of the particular conception of any dictionary  ( unless it were a pure corpus dictionary )  . A dictionary of contemporary language should not let down its user if he is reading a text written in the early  19th century though it will contain words and meanings of words not found in a corpus of post World War II texts  . This holds even more for languages for special purposes  ; they cannot be described without recurrence to technical dictionaries  , collections of terminology and thesauri , because the more or less standardized meanings cannot be retrieved from their occurrences in texts  . 
According to Nagao et al (1982) , " dictionaries themselves are rich sources , as linguistic corpora . When dictionary data is stored in a database system  , the data can be examined by making cross references of various viewpoints  . This leads to new discoveries of linguistic facts which are almost impossible to achieve in the conventional printed versions " Adict ionary bank will therefore form one of the components of the Lexicographical Data Base  . 
Since 1979 ateam at the Bonn
Institut fur Kommunikations forschung und Phonetik is compiling a ' cumulative word database for German '  , using ii existing machine readable diction ar ies of various kinds  , including dictionaries assembled for Artific ial Intelligence projects  , machine translation systems and , for copyright reasons , only two generals purpose dictionaries . Programs have been developed to make up for the differences in the description of lemmata and to permit automatic cumulation  . For further information regarding this project , see
Hess/Brust kern/Lenders (1983) and
Brustkern/Schulze (1983, 1983a ) . The cumulative word database , which is due to be completed in 1984 , will then be implemented in Mannheim and form the core of the dictionary bank of LEDA  . 
In its final version , the dictionary bank will provide a fully integrated cumulation of the sourcedict ionaries  , down to the level of lexical entries , including statement of word class and morphosyntactical information  . A complete integration within the microstructure of the lexical entry  , however , seems neither possible nor even desirable . Automatic unification cannot be achieved on the level of semantic and pragmatic descript ion  . Here , the source for each information item has to be retrievable to assist the lexicographer in the evulation  . 
The dictionary bank will be a valuable tool not only for the lexicographer but also for the grammarian  . 
Retrieval programs will make it possible to come up with a listing of all verbs with a dative and accusative complement  , or of all nouns belonging to a particular in f lectional class  . Since the construction of the dictionary bank and the result bank will be related to each other  , every time a new dictionary has been compiled in the result bank  , it can be copied into the dictionary bank , making it a growing source of lexical knowledge . The dictionary bank can then be used as a master dictionary as defined by Wolfart  ( 1979 )  , from which derived printed versions for d if ferent purposes can be produced  . 
IVRESUL TBANK
Whereas textbank and dictionary bank supply the lexicographer with linguistic information  , the result bank will be empty at the beginning of a project  ; it consists of a set of forms which are the frames for the word articles  . Into these forms the lexicographerenters the ( often preliminary ) results of his work , which will be altered , amended or shortened and interrelated with other word articles  ( e . g . via synonymy or antonymy ) in the course of compilation ; he copies into those forms relevant textual samples from the textbank and useful informat ion units from the dictionary bank  . 
Access via terminal is not only possible to any file representing a word article but also to any record representing a category of explication  . 
The result bank , which can be constructed within the framework of any standard database management system  , thus permits consultation and comparison on any level of lexical description  . Descriptive uniformity in the morphosyntact ical categories seems easy enough  . But as has been shown in a number of studies , e . g . by Mugdan (1984) , most existing dictionaries which easily can be avoided by crosschecking within the result bank  . 
More difficult is homogeneity in the semantic description of the vocabulary  , representing a partly hierarchical , ~artly associative net of conceptual relations . 
The words used in semantic explications must be used only in the same sense or senses in which they are defined under their respective heard words  . These tasks can be carried out easier within a database system  . Furthermore , the result bank will support collecting and comparing the related elements of groups such us :- all verbs with the same sentence patterns - all adjectives used predicatively only-all nouns denoting tools-all words rated as obsolete-the vocabulary of automobile engineering  . 
Files will differ from word class to word class , as particles or adverbs cannot be describend within the same cluster of categories as nouns or verbs  . Similarily , macro structure and microstructure will not be the same for any two dictionaries  . 
Still Categories should be defined in such a way that the final version of the dictionary can be copied into the dictionary bank without add it ional manual work  . 
After the dictionary has been compiled , it can be used a scopy , using standard editing programs to produce the pr inted version directly from the result bank  . At that level , strict formatting is no longer necessary and should be abandoned  , where ever possible , in favour to economy of space . 
Work on the result bank will begin in autumn 1984 . The pilot version of it will be applied to the current main dictionary project of the Institute  , i . e . the " Manual of Hard Words " , which at present is still in its planning stage . Even in its initial version , however , LEDA will be accessible and applicable for other lexicographical projects as well  . 

Tobias Br ~ ckner . Programm Dokumentation
Refer Versioni . LDV-Info2.
Informations schrift der Arbeitsstelle
Linguistische Datenverarbeitung.
Mannheim : Institut furdeutsche
Sprache , 1982, pp . 1-26.
Tobias Br ~ ckner . Derinteraktive Zu@riffauf die Text date ider Lexiko graphischen 
Datenbank ( LEDA ) Sprache und
Datenverarbeitung 1-2/1982, 1984, pp.

Jan Brustkern/Wolfgang Schulze . Towards a Cumulated Word Data Base for the German Language  . IKP-Arbe its bberichte Abtei-lung LDV . Bonn : Institut fur Kommuni-kations for schung und Phonetik der 
Universit ~ tBonn , 1983, pp . 19.
Jan Brustkern/Wolfgang Schulze . The Structure of the Word Data Base for the
German Language . IKP-Arbe its bericht e
Abteilung LDV , Nr . i . Bonn : Institut fur Kommunikations forschung und Pho-netik der Universit ~ t Bonn  ,  1983 , pp 19 . 
Klaus He B/Jan Brustkern/Winfried Lenders.
Maschinenles baredeutsche W~rterb0 cher.
Dokumentation , Vergleich , Integration.
T ~ bingen , 1983.
LDV-Info . Informations schrift der Arbeits-stelle L inguistische Datenverarbeitung  , 
Mannheim : Institut furdeutsche
Sprache , 1981ff.
Joachim Mugdan . Grammatikim W~rterbuch : wortbildung . Germanistische Linguistik 1-3/83, 1984, pp .  237-309 . 
M . Nagao , J . Tsujii , Y . Ueda , M . Takiyama.
An Attempt to Computerize Dictionary
Data Bases . J . Gotschalckx , L . Rolling ( eds . ) . Lexicography in the Electronic
Age . Amsterdam , 1982, pp . 51-73.
Wolfgang Teubert Corpus and Lexicography.
Proceedings of the Second Scientific
Meeting " Computer Processing of
Linguistic Data " . Bled , Yugoslavia , 1982, pp .  275-301 . 
Herbert Ernst Wieg and/Anton in Kucera.
Brockhaus-Wahrig . Deutsches W6rterbuch auf dem Pr~fst and der praktischen Lexikologie . I . Teil:I . B and ( A-BT ); 2 . B and ( BU-FZ ) . Kopenha gener Beitr ~ gezur Germanistischen Linguistik  ,  18 ,  1981 , pp . . 94-217 . 
Herbert Ernst Wieg and/Anton in Kucerao
Brockhaus-Wahri@ . Deutsches W~rter buch auf dem Pr~fst and der prakt is chen Lexi-kologie  . II . Teil : i . B and ( A-BT ); 2 . 
B and ( BU-FZ ); 3. B and ( G-JZ).
Germanistische Linguistik 3-6/80, 1982, pp .  285-373 . 
H . C . Wolfart . Diversified Access in Lexicography . R . R . K . Hartmann ( edo ) . 
Dictionaries and Their Users . Papers from the 1978 B . A . A . L . Seminar on
Lexicography . (= Exeter Linguistic
Studies , Vol . 4). Exeter , 1979, pp.


