CONVEYINGIMPLICITCONTENTINN ARRATIVE SUMMARW ~S 
Malcolm E . Cook , Wendy G . Lehnert , David D . ~ d
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst , Massachusetts 01003

One of the key characteristics of any summary is that it must be concise  . To achieve this the content of the summary ( 1 ) must be focused on the key events , and ( 2 ) should leave out any information that she audience can infer on their own  . We have recently begun a project on summarizing simple narrative stories  . In our approach , we assume that the focus of the story has already been determined and is explicitly given in the story ' slung-term representation  ; we concentrate instead on how one can plan what inferences an audience will be able to make when they read a summary  . Our conduglon is that one should think about inferences as following from the audience's recognition of the central concepts in the story ' splot  , and then plan the textual structure of the ~ mm ~ ' y so as go reinforce that recognition  . 

This research builds on our previous work on narrative structure and generation  . We are using Plot Units \[ Lchnert 1981\] to represent he structure of the ori ~ nal narrative  , and use Mumble\[McDonald 1983\] to do the linguistic realiTAtion . To connect these two facilities we have a new interface and a new text plann in ~? omponeng named Plot units are a technique for organizing the conceptual representation of a narrative in such a way that the topological structure of the representation directly indicates which events are central to the story and which are peripheral  . A graph of connected plot units is constructed for a story as it is understood  , based on the recognition of goal-oriented behavior by the characters and their affective reactions to events  . Plot units summarize larger-scale relationships among explicit and implicit events in the story  , and are oriented toward longterm recall rather than appreciation of story style or specific wording  . 
Mumble is a " realization " module for language generation  ; it takes a stream of output from a text planner and incrementally produces fluent  , cohesive En~lightext in accordance with the planner's spec/ficatious  . The planner decides what information should be imparted and most of its rhetorical features  ; Mumble filters those decis/ons in accordance with grammatical constraints  , handles syntax and morphology , and performs the " smoothing " operations that are required by the discourse context in which the information a Ivears  . 
1 . This research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under contracts  IST-8217502 and IST-8104984  , and in part by the Office of Naval Research under coatract  N00014  . E3-K-0~0 . 
Precisstands between the plot unit graph and Mumble  . 
h has been under development for a only short time and the ultimate form that its architecture will take is not yet fixed  . We have so far been working bottom up , experimenting with different ways to combine the texts contributed by individual units and affect states  , and trying to understand the consequences of the alternatives  . 
We report here on one key"tactical " problem in narrative summarization which we refer to as conceptualell ~ s is  , omitting those events from a summary that we expect an audience to be able to infer on their own  , and reinforcing that inference through a judicious choice of textual form  . 
THENggnFORCONCEPTUAL gLLlWb'IS
Ever since the original work by Bartlett , researchers have appreciated that people who are remembering a story sometime after they have heard it typically fail to distinguish between events that were explicitly stated in the stray and throe that they only inferred while reading it  . Present day story understaDding systems act in a ~ imilar way by malntain in ~ Oilily alingie conceptual record of what they have understood regardless of its murte\[Jcehi & Weischedel  1977  , Graemer 1980 , Dyer 1983\] . Since our summarization process starts from the conceptual representation of the story rather than the text itself  , it too will be unable to make this distinction . 
This theory of memory has two consequences . One is that any decisions about what constituted the crux or point of the story must have been made at comprehension time rather than summarization time  . This is one of the purposes of a plot unit ~ tat iun  . The other is that we now need to deliberately recalculate what information should be explicit in our summary and what should be left for the audience to infer  ; were this not done , the superfluous information in the summary would make it sound quite unnatural-as though it were being told by a person from a different society who did not have any commonsen~understanding of the social context in which the story was set  . How the explicit versus left-to-inference calculation turns out will vary with the tmmmary : the tame story can be summarized or retold in diffeie ~  . tways depending on which character's point of view is taken or which events are emphasized  . The plot unit graph is neutral on this question , and it will be an important part of what we do next in this research  . 
Decisions about conceptual ellipsis are made prior to any of the linguistic decim'unsabout form  ; they are however linked to those later decim'ons ince some linguistic forms will be more effective than others in indicating to the audience that an inference is intended  . Certain marked choices of form will suggest to the reader that particular implications were ~' m the mind of the writer " at the time of generation  . The conceptual decm'ons are thus the source where the text-form decis/ens will be made in order that the i ~ htre ~ liTntiontarechOOSe ~  . By the lalne toke D there will also be dependencies percolating back to the conceptual ellipsis decisions indicating what alternative realizations are actually available in a given case and thus whether a partien lar implication can be adequately supported by the information that is included and the way it is phrased  . 
AN  ~
The followin8 simples tray will demomarate the gene_"al phenomenou  . 
THE COMSYSSTORY
John and Mike were campot/ng for the same job at IBM  . John got the job and Mike derided to stwn Msown consulting f~m  , COMSgS . W~hin three years , COMSg$wasflourfsMn & . By that time , John had become dissatisfied wfth IBMs oheasked Mike for a job  . M~tespU~d~yturned~n down . 
A analysis of this text in terms of plot unJet has " Competition " as a central unit in the graph  , which would make it a candidate bash for a snmmaEy of the story  . All competition unim have this pattern :

Agent 1 Ageat 2

M2+
Underlying this levd of representation are the actual goals and events experieaced by the two charate ~ In any competitim unit  , we have:
M1: geal ( agent l ~ xtll)
M2: goal(ageat 2~2) + : m_ , y~_ , goall , event l ) : failme ( gml2~-veat2 ) with the additional constraints :
Cl : event1 = evenl2
C2: go all and gml 2 cannot boch be realized.
(Note that in C1 the positive and negative acuudizatious are actually the mine event but from the point of view of two different charaeten  . ) In the COMSYS story the competition is between John and Mikeover who will get a particular job at IBM  . The instanfiatiou of the Competition unit in this story is:  M1 : A-go all ( John has-role  #employee in M-job 1 ( where ~ employer = raM ) M2: A-goal2 ( Mikehu-role ~- mployee in M-JOb1 where ~ employer = IBM ) +: m___o ~__ . A-go all , gm~IBM john )) -: fall m ~ A-guai2 , not($~re(WM , Mike ))) where cl:event l = event2 = hire(IBM , / ohn ) ?2: A-goall and A-goal2 cannot both be realized . 
At the time of this writing , Preciscan specify any of the following texts for this instantiation of the Competition unit  , prefeie ~ cesdilated by conceptual ellips ~ aside . 
(Discourse fluency effects inch as verb phrase deletion or prouominalizatiou are put in by Mumble as it is realizing 
Pre ~? we cification . )  ( a ) " John wanted to work for IBM and so did Mike . They hired John and did not hire Mike . " Co ) " Both John and Mikewanted to work for IBM , but they hired John . "(c ) " Mike wanted to work for IBM , but they hired John . n These three choices vary according to how much of the content of the Competition unit they explicitly express  . 
Choice A includes each of the four a Hect states ( MI , M2 ,  + ,   . ) , smoothed somewhat by the recognition that MI and M2 share the same predicate . The very simplest choice . one that did not ? a preuthat commonality in its textual structure  , e . g . " John wanted to work for IBM . Mike wanted to work for IBM . They Mred John and did not hire Mike . '- is cotnpletely nn natural ; people wouldn't say it . This minimal level of implicit information that the textual m ' uctum must carry is ~  . +dingiy not even made Prech " respom/bllity , but is in o *~ d carried out automatically within Mumble  . The alternative realization of this commonality , ruing a coujolned subject rather than verb phrase deletion  , is taken to be a da:ba ' ou and is not de . be rated over by Pro : is . 
If we begin to include the constraints that accompany the Competltion Unit  ( ClSlidC ~ ) eXplicitiy in the tmm magy then we can leave out mote of the affect states as in/erable  . In choice B we make use of the first comgralnt , iJ  ~ . that the pmitive and the negative a caualizations are consequences of the same event  , to enable the omit ' on of ~ ellg 2 , nog(hlgt~MlkeJ\]~M )) , ~ the tegg of the lmmm~l ~ by dropping the phrase " they did not ~ reMike "  . 
In our present vernon of choice B there is . no structural indicator of the constraint . It is probably no coincidena ~ . 
then that the text for Brounds a little odd -readers nnf ~ with the orj ~ nalstory wi\[!not really understand what the but is mppouxl to be communicating until they go further and make the deduction that there mustoaly have been one job available  . A better venion of B would probably be : " Both John and Mikewanted to work for IBM  , bus they f~lyhired John " , with the only acting as an explicit aruetural indicator of the information in the constraints  . 
This addition can probably be licensed as a cotue que ~ e of the second constrain that only one of the two goals can be realized  . At the time of this writing we do not yet have an adequately general mechanism for making observation and incorporating the on/y  , so we have not included it among Prec is " choices . 
It is intriguing that choice c , "Mike wanted to work for IBM , but they hired John " , is probably the best of the three choices even though it requires the audience to do the most inferencing  . Inc we have omitted state Ml-that John wanted to work for IBM-yet the audience is able to recover this information quite easily given the presence of the but  . Given the ease with which choice c is undemoud , we are led to the suggestion that there may be a very general " template " being recognized here -that choice c is seen by an audience as an instance of the pattern : < expression of agent A ' s goal >  , but < . realization of agent B's goal > and that this template alwa ~ carries with it the inference that the two goals must be incompatible and therefore A's goal has not be satisfied  . 
Note that here again the choice would be improved by including an explicit lexical indication of the constraint : " Mike wanted to work for IBM  , but they hired John ~ nstead " . 
We expect that most instances of these " rhetorical markers " in texts will turn out to be indicators of constraint-lev clinformation akin to our present cases  , which raises the intriguing possibility that a general theory of how they are used might arise out of this kind of work in generation  . 

Cuiie , , tly , we are working with two programs . PUGG ( Plot Unit Graph Generator ) operates on an affect-state representation of a story  , and produces a graph or network of plot units that act as pointers to the o~e of the conceptual representation of the input story and organizes how it will be ' ~ n ~ sented " to the program that plans the text of the summary  , Precis . Precisis in the early stages of its development and so far can only use a single  , core plot unit from the graph as the basis of the summ ~' y of the story  . 
Precis works at the interface between purely conceptuml and purely linguistic concideratiens as it makes its planning decisions  . It chooses from a set of alternative specifications for the summary that vary according to which of the elements of the plot unit are included and which left to be inferred by the audience once they recognize the story as a case of competition  . Preciscan state the three alternative choices described above  ( and a few other sets like them )  , and Mumble can take those specifications and produce the indicated texts  . However we do not as yet have any general mechanism for deciding which choice to prefer over the others  . Perhaps such a decision mechanism will become apparent once these single unit summaries are embedded in a larger context  , or possibly there is no reasonable basis for decision without more knowledge of the purpose of the summary or the ability of a particular audience to make these kinds of inferences  ( one might have to talk quite differently to young children for exam #e  )  . In futu ~ work we also hope to be able to work out a ~ basis for planning the use of infe ~ e ~  , ce-directing words like on/yor/nstead . 

Dyer , M .   ( 1983 ) In ~ kTm Undermmd ~: A Compu ~ r Model of Integrated Proesss ~ for Narrative Comprehemien  , Cambridge , Mass . : M1T Press . 
Graemer , A . fic . (1981) Prose Comprehension Beyond the
Word New York , N.Y .: Springer . Verlag.
Joshi , A . K . , and Woischedel ( 1977 ) Computation of a subclass of inferences : Presupposition and EntAilment  , in
AmJ . of Comp . Lingulst ~
Lehnert , W .   ( 1982 ) Plot Units : A Narrative Summarization Strategy , in Lehnert , W . and Ringle , M . 0Eds . ) , Strategies for Natural Language Prmaush ~ , Hilisdale , NJ . :
Lawrence Erl beum Associates.
Lehnert , W .   ( 1983 ) " Narrative Complexity Based on Summarization Algorithms  , " ~ of the Seventh Internat lomd Joint Canf ~ on Art/fkal ~  , 
Karisruhe , Germany.
McDonald , D .   ( 1983 ) "National Language Generation as a Computatienal Problem-an Introduction " in Brady  , M . 
and Berwick , R . ( Eds . ) Computatiomd Models of Discourse , Cambridge , Mass . : MIT Press . 
McDonald , D .   ( 1982 )  "~ ) escription Directed Control : its Implications for Natural Language Generation "  , in Cercone ( ed . ) Computational IJn_maistics , Dublin :
Pergamon Press.
