HANDLING SYNTACTICAL AMBIGUITYIN MACHINE TRANSLATION 
Vladimir Pericliev
Institute of Industrial Cybernetics and Robotics 
Acad.O . Bontchev Sir ., bl . 12
1113 Sofia , Bulgaria

The difficulties to be met with the reso lu-tion of syntactical ambiguity in MT can be at least partially overcome by means of preserving the syntactical ambigu ity of the source language into the target language  . An extensive study of the co-r respondences between the syntactically ambiguous st ructures in English and Bulgarian has prov ided a solid empirical basis in favor of such an approach  . 
Similar results could be expected for o ther suffi-ciently related languages as well  . The paper con-centrates on the linguistic grounds for adopting the approach proposed  . 
1. INTRODUCTION
Syntactical amblgulty , as part of the ambiguity problem in general , is widely recognized as a major difficulty in MT  . To solve this problem , the efforts of computational linguists have been mainly directed to the process of analysis : a unique analysis is searched  ( semantical and/or world knowledge informat ion being basically employed to this end  )   , and only having obtained such an ana-lysis , it is proceeded to the process of synthesis . 
On this approach , in addition to the wellknown difficul ties of general-linguistic and computa -tional character  , there are two principle embarras-ments to he encountered  . It makes usentirely in-capable to process  , first , sentences with " unre-solvable syntactic a lambiguity "  ( with respect to the disambiguation in format ion stored  )   , and , se-condly , sentences which must he translated ambi- guously  ( e . g . puns and the like ) . 
In this paper , the burden of solution of the syntactical ambiguity problem is shifted from the domain of analysis to the domain of synthes is of sentences  . Thus , instead of trying to resolve such ambiguit ies in the source language  ( SL )   , syntac-tically ambiguous sentences are synthesized in the target language  ( TL ) which preserve their ambigui-ty , so that the user himself rather than the par -serdisambiguates the ambiguities in quest ion  . 
This way of handling syntactical ambiguity may be viewed as an illustration of a more general approach  , outlined earlier ( Penchev and Perl-cliev 1982 , Pericliev 1983 , Penchev and Perlcllev 1984) , concerned also with other types of a mbt- guitles in the SL translated by means of syntactical  , and not only syntactical , ambiguity in the

In this paper , we will concentrate on the linguistics ~ rounds for adopting such a manner of handl ing of syntactical ambiguity in an Engli shin-to Bulgarian translation system  . 
2. PHILOSOPHY
This approach may be viewed as an attempt to s imulate the behavior of sman-translator who is linguistically very competent  , but is quite unfa-miliar with the domain he is translating his texts from  . Such a man-translator will be able to say what words in the original and in the t ranslated sentence go together under all of the syntactica-llyad missible analyses  ; however , he will be , in general , unable to make a decision as to which of these parses " make sense "  . Our approach will be an obvious way out of this situation  . And it is in fact not Infrequently employed in the everyday practice of more " smart " t ranslators  . 
We believe that the capacity of such trans la-tors to produce quite intelligible translations is a fact that can have a very direct bearing on at least some trends in MT  . Resolvlng syntactical ambiguity , or , to put it more accurately , evading syntactical ambiguity in MT following a similar human-like strategy is only one instance of this  . 
There are two further points that should be made in connection with the approach d is cussed  . 
We assume as more or less self-evident that :   ( i ) MT should not be intended to explicate texts in the SL by means of texts in the TL as previous approache simply  , but should only tran-slate them , no matter how ambiguous they might happen to be ;   ( ii ) Since ambiguities almost always passun-not iced in speech  , the user will unconscious lydtsambtguate them  ( as in fact he would have done , had heread the text in the SL ); this , in effect , will not diminish the quality of the t ranslation in comparison with the orig inal  , at least insofar as ambiguity is concerned . 
521 3. THE DESCRIPTION OF SYNTACTICAL AMBIGUITY
INENGLISH AND BULGARIAN
The empirical basis of the approach is provi-ded by an extensive study of syntactical ambiguity in English and Bulgarlan  ( Pericliev 19835 , accomplished within the framework of a version of dependency grammar using dependency arcs and bra -cketlngs  . In this study , from a given llst of configurations for each language  , all logically-ad-mlssible ambiguous strings of three types in En-gllsh and Bulgarian were calculated  . The first type of syntactl cally ambiguous strings is of the form:  ( 15 A~L ~ B , e . g . 
adv.mod ( how long ?) f
The statistician studied ( V ) the ~ hole year ( PP )   , obj . dir(wh~t ?) where A,B , .   .   . are complexes of word-classes , "---~" is a dependency arc , and 1 ,  2 ,   .   .   . are syn-tactical relations . 
The second type is of the form: ( 2 ) A-~->B <-~- C , e . g . 

Shegreeted ( V ) the girl ( N ) ~ it has mil 6 ( PP ) attrib ( what ? ) The third type is of the form: ( 3 ) A-!-~B~-~-C , e . g . 
adv.mod(how ?)\[
He failed ( V ) enttrely ( Adv ) to cheat ( V inf ) her adv . mod(how ?) It was found , first , that almost all logically-admissible strings of the three types are actually realized in both languages  ( cf . the same result al-so for Russian in Jo rdanska Ja  ( 1967 ) 5  . Secondly , and more important , the returned out to be a stri-king coinc idence between the strings in English and Bulgarian  ; the latter was to he expected from the coinc idence of configurations in both languages as well as from their sufficiently simi larglobal syntactic organization  . 
4. TRANSLATION ALPROBLEMS
With a view to the aims of translation , it was convenient to distinguish two cases : Case A  , in which to each syntactically ambiguous string in English corresponds a syntactically ambiguous string in Bulgarlan  , and Case B , in which to some English strings do not correspond any Bulgarian ones  ; Case A provides a possibility for literal English into Bulgarian translation  , while there is no such possibillty for sentences containing strings classed under Case B  . 
4.1. Case A : Literal Translation
English strings which can be literally tran-slated into Bulgarian comprise  , roughly speaking , the majority and the most common of strings to appear In real English texts  . Informally , these strings can be included into several large groups of syntactically ambiguous constructions  , such as constructions with " floating " word -classes  ( Adverbs , Prepositional Phrases , etc . acting as slaves either to one , or to another master-word ) , constru-ctions with prepositional and post- positional ad-juncts to conjoined groups  , constructions with se-veral conjoined members  , constructions with symmet-rical pred icates  , some elliptical constructions , etc . 
Due to space limitations , a few English phra-ses with their lite ral translations will suffice as an i llustration of Case A  . ( Further on , syntac-tical relations as labels of arcs will be omitted where superfluous in marking the ambiguity  ) :  ( 4 ) 
I41 a review ( N ) " of a ^ boo ~ ( PP )  ~  ( PP )  ===~
Itl\[---==>retsenzija ( N )  ~  ( PP ) o ~-- ~ ( PP )   ( 5 ) I saw ( V ) the car ( N ) ouslde ( Adv ) - -== ~>=== ~ A zlvid jah ( V ) ik ? l ~ Ata ( N ) navan ( Adv ) IO'v?iy'dv ' )  ===> . mnogo ( Adv ) ~Iskromen ( Adjjl )   ) i " razumen ( Adj ) i , beauful ( d ) ( wo n ( N ) IIg is ( N ) > v'!1'v )   ( ze , ,  , (N ) " momicheta(N )) ----> kraivi(dj , It 4 . 2  . Case B : Non-Literal Translation Engli sh strings which cannot be literally t ranslated into Bulgarian are such strings which contain :  ( i ) word-classes ( Vif Gerund ) not pre-n'sent in Bulgarian , and/or ( ii ) syntactical relations ( e . g . " composite ": language ~-~-- theory , etc . ) not present in Bulgarian , and/or ( iii ) other differences ( in global syntactical organization , agreement , etc .  )  . 
It will be shown how certain English strings falling under this heading are related to Bulgarian strings preserving their ambiguity  . A way to overcome difficulties with ( i l ) and ( iii ) is exemplified on a very common ( complex ) string , vlz . 
Adj/N/Prt+N/N's+N(e . g . stylish ~ entlemen's suits ) . 
As an illustration , here we confine to problems to be met with ( i ) , and , more concretely , to such English strings containing V in f . These strings are mapped onto Bulgarian strings containing da-construction or a verbal noun  ( Vi ~ generally b-eeing translated either way )  . E . g . nX the Vlnfinobj . dlr (8) a . He promised ( V ) toplease ( Vinf ) mother t . _JI . eL . 
adv . mod ( promised what or why ? ) is rendered by a da-con-struction in agreement with the subject  , preserving the ambiguity : obj . dir ~ , ' " I\[~1' zaradva ( da-constr ) objel hta ( V ) dab . T  ~ J . ~I__m~J kaadv . mod
In the string attrib (9) a . ~ have(V ) jl , instructions ( N ) ~ , to j s t ~ d y ( V inf ) j obJ . dlr ( what instructions or I have to study what ? ) V . _can be rendered alternatively by a d_~a -construc ~ nz-tion or by a prepositional verbal noun : attribb  . A Zimam ( V ) lnstruktsii ( N ) daucha ( d__aa-constr ) ohj dir attribc . instruktsii(N ) zauchene(PrV blN ) obj . dlrJ Yet in other strings , e . g . The chicken(N ) is ready(Adj ) to eat(V .   . ) ( the chicken eats or is eaten .  )  , in order to preserve the ambiguity the inf in itive should be rendered by a preposition a l verbal noun : Pileto  ( N ) egotovo ( Ad J ) z_~ajadene ( Pr Vbl N )  , rather than with the finited a-construc- tion  , since in the latter case we would obtain two unambiguous translations : Pile to egotovo da~ade  ( the chicken eats ) or Pile to egotovase ~ a de ( the chicken is eaten )   , and so on . 
For some English strings no syntactical lyam-biguous Bulgarian strings could be put into corres-pondence  , so that a translation with our method proved to be an impossibility  . E . g . 
predicative
V~--7 I\[ob ~ . dir ~ ( I0 ) He found ( V ) the mechanic ( N ) a helper ( N ) ~ Jl ~ bJ . in dir ~ to bJ . dir ( either the mechanic or someone else is the helper  ) is such a sentence due to the impossibility in Bul-garian ~ r two non-preposition alob jects  , a direct and an indirect one , to appear in a sentence . 
4  . 3  . Mul ~ , ,iple Syntact i ca l Ambiguity Many very f requent lyen countered cases of mul-tiple syntactic a lambiguity can also be handled successful ly within this approach  . E . g . a phrase like Cybernetical devices and sys tems for automatic control and dia ~ nosis in biomedicine with more than  30 possible parsings is amenable to literal trans-lation into Bulgarian  . 
4  . 4  . Semantically Irrelevant Syntactical

Disambiguating syntactical ambiguity is an im-portant task in MT only because diffe rent meanings are usually associated with the different syntac-tical descript ions  . This , however , is not always the case . There are some constructions in English the syntactical ambiguity of which cannot lead to multiple understanding  . E . g . in sentences of the form A is not B ( He is not happy )   , in which the adverbial particle not is ei the raverbal negation  ( Heisn't happy ) or a non-verbal negation ( He's not happy )   , the different syntactical trees will be in-terpreted semantically as synonymous :' A is not B '~-== ~ A is not-B'  . 

We should not worry about finding Bulgarlan syntactically ambiguous correspondences for such English constructions  . We can choose arbitrarily one analysis , since either of the syntactical des-criptions will provide correct information for our translational purposes  . Indeed , the construction above has no ambiguous Bulgarian correspondence : in Bulgarian the negating particle combines either with the verb  ( then it is written as a se-parate word ) or with the adjective ( in which case it is prefixed to it )   . Either construction , however , will yield a correct translation : To ~nee==--radosten or To~eneradosten  . 
4.5. A Lexical Problem
Certain difficulties may arise , having managed to map English syntactical lyambiguous strings onto ambiguous Bulgar ianones  . These difficulties are due to the dif ferent behavior of certain English lexemes in comparison to their Bulgarian equiva-lents  . This behavior is displayed in the phenomenon we call " in tralingual lexica l-resolution of syn-tactical ambigui ty "  ( the substitution of lexemes in the SL with their translational equivalents from the TL results in the resolution of the syn -tactical ambiguity  )   . 
For instance , in spite of the existence of am-biguouss trings in both languages of the form Verb tr/ it r ~-> Noun  , with some particular le-xemes ( e . g . shoot ~ r/itr == -~> zast rel ~ amtrorstrel ~ amitr  )   , In which to One Engllsh lexeme co-r respond two in Bulgarian  ( one only transitive , and the other only intransitive ) , the ambiguity in the translation will be lost  . This situation explains why it seems impossible to translate ambiguously into Bulgarian examples containing verbs of the type given  , or verbal nouns formed from such verbs , as the case is in The shoot in ~ of the hunters . 
This problem , however , could be generally tackled in the translat ion into Bulgarian  , since it is a language usually providing a series of forms for a verb : transiti ve  , intransitive , and transitive/in-transitive , which are more or less synonymous ~ for more details  , cf . Penchev and Perlcliev (1984)) . 
5. CONCLUDING REMARKS
To conclude , some syntactically ambiguous strings in English can have literal  , others non-ll-teral , and still others do not have any correspondences in Bulgarian  . In summary , from a total number of approximately 200 simple strings treated in Engllsh more than 3/4 can , and only 1/4 cannot , be literally translated ; about half of the latter strings can be put into correspondence with syntactically ambiguous strings in Bulgarian preserving their ambiguity  . This gives quite a strong support to the usefulness of our approach in an English into Bulgarian translation system  . 
Several advantages of this way of handling of syntactical ambiguity can be mentioned  . 
First , in the processing of the majority of syntactically ambiguous sentences within an English into Bulgarian translation system it dispen-ses with semantical and world knowledge information at the very low cost of studying the ambiguity co-r respondences in both languages  . It could be expected that investigations along this line will prove to be frultful for other pairs of languages as well  . 
Secondly , whenever this way of handling syn-tactica l ambiguity is applicable  , the impossibili-ty of previous approaches to translate sentences with unresolvable ambiguity  , or such with verbal Jokes and the like , turns out to be an easily attainable task . 
Thirdly , the approach seems to have a very na-turalex tension to another principal difficul tyin MT  , viz . coreference ( cf . the three-ways ambiguity of Jim hit John and then he  ( Jim , John or neither ? ) went away and the same ambiguity of tQ ~ ( = he ) in its literal translation into Bu lgarian : D $ imudari DJ onitogava to j  (  ?  ) siotide )   . 
And , finally , there is yet another reason for adopting the approach discussed here  . Even if we choose to go another way and ( somehow ) dlsamblgu-ate sentences in the SL , almost certainly their translational equivalents will be again syntact l-cally ambiguous  , and quite probably preserve the very ambigui ty we tried to resolve  . In this sense , for the purposes of MT ( or other man-oriented applications of CL ) we need not waste our efforts to di sambiguate e  . g . sentences like John hit the dog with th___eelon ~ hator John hitth____eedo ~ wi th the long  woo1  , since , even if we have done that , the correct Bulgarian translations of both these sentences are syntactically ambiguous in exactly the same way  , the resolution of ambiguity thus proving to be an entirely superfluous operation  ( cf . D ~ onudari kuchetos dal ~ at a palka and Dj on udariku-chetosdal ~ at avalna  )   . 
6. REFERENCES
Jordanska Ja , L .  1967 . Syntactical ambiguity in Russian ( with respect to automatic analysis and synthesis )  . Scientific and Technical Information , Moscow , No . 5, 1967 . ( in Russian ) . 
Penchev , J . and V . Perl cllev .  1982 . On meaning in theoretical and computational semantics  . In : COLING-82, Abstracts , Prague , 1982 . 
Penchev , J . and V . Perlcliev .  1984 . On meaning in theoretical and computational semantics  . 
Bulgarian Language , Sofia , No . 4, 1984. ( in

Pericliev , V .  1983 . Syntactical Ambiguity in Bulgarian and in English  . Ph . D . Dissertation , ms . , Sofia , 1983 . ( in Bulgarian ) . 

