A Plan Recognition Model
for Clarification Subdialogues
Diane J . Litman and James F . Allen
Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester , Rochester , NY 14627

One of the promising approaches to analyzing task -oriente dialogues has involved modeling the plans of the speakers in the task domain  . In general , these models work well as long as the topic follows the task structure closely  , but they have difficulty in accounting for clarification subdialogues and topic change  . We have developed a model based on a hierarchy of plans and metaplans that accounts for the clarification subdialogues while maintaining the advantages of the plan-based approach  . 
I . Introduction
One of the promising approaches to analyzing task -oriente dialogues has involved modeling the plans of the speakers in the task domain  . The earliest work in this area involved tracking the topic of a dialogue by tracking the progress of the plan in the task domain \[ Grosz  ,  1977\] , as well as explicitly incorporating speech acts into a planning framework \[ Cohen and Perrault  , 1979; Allen and Perrault ,  1980\] . A good example of the current status of these approaches can be found in \[ Carberry  ,  1983\] . In general , these models work well as long as the topic follows the task structure closely  , but they have difficulty in accounting for clarification subdialogues and topic change  . 
Sidner and Israel \[1981\]suggest aolution to a class of clarification subdialogues that correspond to debugging the plan in the task domain  . They allow utterances to talk about the task plan  , rather than always being a step in the plan . Using their suggestions , as well as our early work\[Allen et al , 1982: Litman ,  1983\] , we have developed a model based on a hierarchy of plans and metaplans that This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant  IST-8210564  , the Office of Naval Research under Grant N00014-80-C-1097  , and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under Grant 

accounts for the debugging subdialogues they discussed  , as well as other forms of clarification and topic shi ~  . 
Reichman \[1981\] has a structural model of discourse that addresses clarification subdialogues and topic switch in unconstrained spontaneous discourse  . Unfortunately , there is a large gap between her abstract model and the actual processing of utterances  . Although not the focus of this paper , we claim that our new plan recognition model provides the link from the processing of actual input to its abstract discourse structure  . Even more important , this allows us to use the linguistic results from such work to guide and be guided by our plan recognition  . 
For example , consider the following two dialogue fragments . The first was collected at an information booth in a train station in Toronto\[Horrigan  ,  1977\] , while the second is a scenario developed from protocols in a graphics command and control system that displays network structures \[ Sidner and Bates  ,  1983\] . 
1 ) Passenger : 2 ) Clerk : 3 ) Passenger : 4 ) Clerk : 5 ) Passenger : 6 ) User:7 ) System : 8 ) User : 9 ) System : 10 ) User:11 ) System :
The eight-fifty to Montreal ?
Eight-fifty to Montreal . Gates even.
Where is it ?
Down this way to the left . Second one on the left . 
OK . Thank you.
Dialoguei
Show me the generic concept called " employe e."
OK . < system displays network >\[ can'tfit a new IC below it  . Can you move it up ?
Yes . < system displays network >
OK , now make an individual employee concept whose first name is " Sam " and whose last name is " Jones  . " The
Social Security number is 234-56-7899.

Dialogue 2 phenomena characteristic of spontaneous conversation  . 
That is , subdialogues correspond not only to subtasks ( utterances ( 6 ) - ( 7 ) and ( 10 ) - ( 11 ) ) , but also to clarifications ((3)-(4)) , de bugging of task execution ((8)-(9)) , and other types of topics witch and resumption . Furthermore , since these are extended discourses rather than unrelated question/answer x changes  , participants need to use the information provided by previous utterances  . For example ,   ( 3 ) would be difficult to understand withouthe discourse context of  ( 1 ) and ( 2 )  . Finally , these dialogues illustrate the following of conversational convention such as terminating dialogues  ( utterance ( 5 ) ) and answering questions appropriately . For example , in response to (1) , the clerk could have conveyed much the same information with " The departure location of train  537 is gates even , " which would not have been as appropriate . 
To address these issues , we are developing a plan-based natural language system that incorporates knowledge of both task and discourse structure  . In particular , we develop a new model of plan recognition that accounts for the recursive nature of plan suspensions and resumptions  . Section 2 presents this model , followed in Section 3 by a brief description of the discourse analysis performed and the task and discourse interactions  . Section 4 then traces the processing of Dialogue 1 in detail , and then this work is compared to previous work in Section  5  . 
2 . Task Analysis 2 . 1 The Plan Structures in addition to the standard domain-dependent knowledge of task plans  , we introduce some knowledge about the planning process itself  . These are domain-independent plans that refer to the state of other plans  . 
During a dialogue , we shall build a stack of such plans , each plan on the stack referring to the plan below it  , with the domain-dependent task plan at the bottom  . As an example , a clarification subdialogue is modeled by a plan structure that refers to the plan that is the topic of the clarification  . As we shall see , the manipulations of this stack of plans is similar to the manipulation of topic hierarchies that arise in discourse models  . 
To allow plans about plans , i . e . , metaplans , we need a vocabulary for referring to and describing plans  . 
Developing a fully adequate formal model would be a large research effort in its own right  . Our development so far is meant to be suggestive of what is needed  , and is specific enough for our preliminary implementation  . We are also , for the purpose of this paper , ignoring all temporal qualifications ( e . g . , the constraints need to be temporally qualified )  , and all issues involving beliefs of agents . All plans constructed in this paper should be considered mutually known by the speaker and hearer  . 
We consider plans to be networks of actions and states connected by links indicating causality and subpart relationships  . Every plan has a header ' , a parameterized action description that names the plan  . The parameters of a plan are the parameters in the header  . Associated with each plan is a set of constraints  , which are assertions about the plan and its terms and parameters  . The use of constraints will be made clear with examples  . As usual , plans may also contain prerequisites , effects , and a decomposition . Decompositions may be sequences of actions , sequences of subgoals to be achieved , or a mixture of both . We will ignore most prerequisites and effects thoughout this paper  , except when needed in examples . 
For example , the first plan in Figure 1 summarizes a simple plan schema with a header " BOARD  ( agent , train ) , " with parameters " agent " and " train , " and with the constraint " depart-station ( train ) = Toronto . " This constraint captures the knowledge that the information booth is in the Toronto station  . The plan consists of the
HEADER : BOARD(agent , train)
STEPS : do BUY-TICKET ( agent , train ) do GOTO(agent , depart-location ( train ) , depart-time ( train )) do GETON(agent , train ) CONSTRAINTS : depart-station ( train ) = Toronto .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
HEADER : GOTO(agent , location , time)
EFFECT : AT(agent , location , time) .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
HEADER : MEET(agent , train)
STEPS : do GOTO(agent , arrive-location ( train ) , arrive-time ( train ) ) CONSTRAINTS : arrive-station ( train ) = Toronto
Figure I : Domain Plans its effect . Other plans needed in this domain would include plans to meet trains  , plans to buy tickets , etc . 
We must also discuss the way terms are described , for some descriptions of a term are not informative nough to allow a plan to be executed  . What counts as an informative description varies from plantoplan  . We define the predicate KNOWREF ( agent , term , plan ) to mean that the agent has a description of the specified term that is informative nough to execute the specified plan  , all other things being equal . Throughout this paper we assume a typed logic that will be implicit from the naming of variables  . Thus , in the above formula , agent is restricted to entities capable of agency  , term is a description of some object , and plan is restricted to objects that are plans . 
Plans about plans , or metaplans , deal with specifying parts of plans , debugging plans , abandoning plans , etc . To talk about the structure of plans we will assume the predicate IS-PARAME TER-OF  ( parameter , plan ) , which asserts that the specified parameter is a parameter of the specified plan  . More formally , parameters are skolem functions dependent on the plan  . 
Other than the fact that they refer to other plans  , metaplans are identical in structure to domain plans  . Two examples of metaplans are given in Figure 2 . The first one , SEEK-ID-PARAME TER , is a plan schema to find out a suitable description of the parameter that would allow the plan to be executed  . It has one step in this version , namely to achieve KNOWREF ( agent , parameter , plan ) , and it has two constraints that capture the relationship between the metaplan and the plan it concerns  , namely that " parameter " must be a parameter of the specified plan  , and that its value must be presently unknown . 
The second metaplan , ASK , involves achieving KNOWREF ( agent , term , plan ) by asking a question and receiving back an answer  . Another way to achieve KNOWREF goals would be to lookup the answer in a reference source  . At the train station , for example , one can find departure times and locations from a schedule  . 
We are assuming suitable definitions of the speech acts  , as in Allen and Perrault\[1980\] . The only deviation from that treatment invol~es adding an extra argument on to each  ( nonsurface ) speech act , namely a plan parameter that provides the context for the speech act  . For HEADER : SEEK-ID-PARAME TER(agent , parameter , plan)STEPS : achieve KNOWREF(agent , parameter , plan)CONSTRAINTS:IS-PARAMETER-OF ( parameter , plan ) ~ KNOWREF(agent , parameter , plan ) .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
HEADER : ASK(agent , term , plan)
STEPS : do REQUEST(agent , agent2,
INFORMREF(agent2 , agent , term , plan ) , plan ) do INFORMREF(agent2 . , agent , term , plan )
EFFECTS : KNOWREF(agent , term , plan)
CONSTRAINTS : ~ KNOWREF(agent , term , plan) .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Figure 2: Metaplans example , the action INFORMREF(agent , hearer , term , plan ) consists of the agent informing the hearer of a description of the term with the effect that KNOWREF  ( hearer , term , plan ) . Similarly , the action REQUEST ( agent , hearer , act , plan ) consists of the agent requesting the hearer to do the act as a step in the specified plan  . 
This argument allows us to express constraints on the plans suitable for various speech acts  . 
There are obviously many more metaplans concerning plandebugging  , plan specification , etc . Also , as discussed later , many conventional indirect speech acts can be accounted for using a metaplan for each form  . 
2.2 Plan Recognition
The plan recognizer attempts to recognize the plan ( s ) that led to the production of the input utterance . 
Typically , an utterance it herex tends an existing plan on the stack or introduces a metaplantoa plan on the stack  . 
If either of these is not possible for some reason  , the recognizer attempts to construct a plausible plan using any plan schemas it knows about  . At the beginning of a dialogue , a disjunction of the general expectations from the task domain is used to guide the plan recognizer  . 
More specifically , the plan recognizer attempts to incorporate the observed action into a plan according to the following preferences : l  ) by a direct match with a step in an existing plan on the stack  ; the stack ;  3 ) by introducing a metaplant oa plan on the stack ; 4) by constructing a plan , or stack of plans , that is plausible given the domain-specific expectations about plausible goals of the speaker  . 
Class ( 1 ) above involves situations where the speaker says exactly what was expected given the situation  . The most common example of this occurs in answering a question  , where the answer is explicitly expected . 
The remaining classes all involve limited bottom -upforward chaining from the utterance act-In other words  , the system tries to find plans in which the utterance is a step  , and then tries to find more abstract plans for which the postulated plan is a subplan  , and so on . Throughout this process , postulated plans are eliminated by a set of heuristics based on those in Allen and Perrault  \[1980\]  . For example , plans that are postulated whose effects are already true are eliminated  , as a replans whose constraints cannot be satisfied  . When heuristics cannot eliminate all but one postulated plan  , the chaining stops . 
Class ( 3 ) involves not only recognizing a metaplan based on the utterance  , but in satisfying its constraints , also involves connecting the metaplantoaplan on the stack  . If the plan on the stack is not the top plan , the stack must be popped down to this plan before the new metaplan is added to the stack  . 
Class ( 4 ) may involve not only recognizing metaplans from scratch  , but also recursively constructing a plausible plan for the metaplant obe about  . This occurs most frequently at the start of a dialogue  . This will be shown in the examples . 
For all of the preference classes , once a plan or set of plans is recognized , it is expanded by adding the definitions of all steps and substeps until there is no unique expansion for any of the remaining substeps  . 
If there are multiple interpretations remaining at the end of this process  , multiple versions of the stack are created to record each possibility  . There are then several ways in which one might be chosen over the others  . For example , if it is the hearer's turn in the dialogue ( i . e . , no additional utterance is expected from the speaker  )  , then the hearer must initiate a clarification subdialogue  . If it is still the speaker's turn , the hearer may wait for further dialogue to distinguish between the possibilities  . 
3 . Communicative Analysis and Interaction with Task

Much research in recent years has studied largely domain-independent linguistic issues  . Since our work concentrates on incorporating the results of such work into our framework  , rather than on a new investigation of these issues  , we will first present here levant results and then explain our work in those terms  . Grosz \[1977\] noted that in task-oriented dialogues the task structure could be used to guide the discourse structure  . She developed the notion of global focus of attention to represent the influence of the discourse structure  ; this proved useful for the resolution of definite noun phrases  . Immediate focus \[ Grosz , 1977; Sidner ,   1983\] represented the influence of the linguistic form of the utterance and proved useful for understanding ellipsis  , definite noun phrases , pronominalization , " this " and " that . " Reichman \[1981\] developed the context space theory , in which the nonlinear structure underlying a dialogue was reflected by the use of surface phenomena such as mode of reference and clue words  . Cluewords signaled a boundary shift between context spaces  ( the discourse units hierarchically structured ) as well as the kind of shift , e . g . , the clue word " now " indicated the start of a new context space which further developed the currently active space  . However , Reichman's model was not limited to task-oriented dialogues  ; she accounted for a much wider range of discourse popping  ( e . g . , topic switch ), but used no task knowledge . Sacksetai .   \[1974\] presenthesy stematics of the turntaking system for conversation and presenthenotion of adjacency pairs  . That is , one way conversation is interactively governed is when speakers take turns completing such conventional  , paired forms as question/answer . 
Our communicative analysis is a step toward incorporating these results  , with some modification , into a whole system . As in Grosz\[1977\] , the task structure guides the focus mechanism , which marks the currently executing subtask as focused  . Grosz , however , assumed an initial complete model of the task structure  , as well as the mapping from an utterance to a given subtask in this assumptions  . Carberry \[1983\] provided explicit rules for tracking shifts in the task structure  . From an utterance , she recognized part of the task plan , which was then used as an expectation structure for future plan recognition  . For example , upon completion of a subtask , execution of the next subtask was the most salient expectation  . Similarly , our focus mechanism updates the current focus by knowing what kind of plan structure traversals correspond to coherent topic continuation  . These in turn provide expectations for the plan recognizer  . 
As in Grosz\[1977\] and Reichman \[1981\] , we also use surface linguistic phenomena to help determine focus shifts  . For example , clue words often explicitly mark what would be an otherwise incoherent or unexpected focus switch  . Our metaplans and stack mechanism capture Reichman's manipulation of the context space hierarchies for topic suspension and resumption  . Cluewords become explicit markers of meta-acts . In particular , the stack manipulations can be viewed as corresponding to the following discourse situations  . If the plan is already on the stack , then the speaker is continuing the current topic , or is resuming a previous ( stacked ) topic . If the plan is a metaplant o a stacked plan , then the speaker is commenting on the current topic  , or on a previous topic that is implicitly resumed  . Finally , in other cases , the speaker is introducing a new topic . 
Conceptually , the communicative and task analysis work in parallel  , although the parallelism is constrained by synchronization requirements  . For example , when the task structure is used to guide the discourse structure \[ Grosz  ,  1977\] , plan recognition ( production of the task structure ) must be performed first . However , suppose the user suddenly changes task plans . Communicative analysis could pick up any clue words signalling this unexpected topic shift  , indicating the expectation changes to the plan recognizer  . What is important is that such a strategy is dynamically chosen depending on the utterance  , in contrasto any a prior is equential ( or even cascaded\[Bolt , Beranek and Newman , Inc . , 1979\]) ordering . The example below illustrates the necessity of such a model of interaction  . 
4. Example
This section illustrates the system's task and communicative processing of Dialogue  1  . As above , we will concentrate on the task analysis ; some discourse analysis will be briefly presented to give a feel for the complete system  . We will take the role of the clerk , thus concentrating on understanding the passenger 's utterances  . 
Currently , our system performs the plan recognition outlined here and is driven by the output of a parser using a semantic grammar for the train domain  . The incorporation of the discourse mechanism is under development  . The system at present does not generate natural language responses  . 
The following analysis of " The eight-fifty to
Montreal ?" is output from the parser :
S-REQUEST ( Person1, Clerkl , ( R1)
INFORMREF ( Clerkl , Person 1 , ? fn(train1) , ? plan ) with constraints : IS-PARAME TER-OF ( ? plan , ? f n ( train l ) ) arrive-station ( train l ) = Montreal depart-time ( train l ) = eight-fifty In other words , Person 1 is querying the clerk about some ( as yet unspecified ) piece of information regarding train l . 
In the knowledge representation , objects have a set of distinguished roles that capture their properties relevan to the domain  . The notation " ? f n ( train 1 ) " indicates one of these roles of trainl . Throughout , the "?" notation is used to indicates kolem variables that need to be identified  . S-REQUEST is a surface request , as described in Allen and
Perrault\[19801.
Since the stack is empty , the plan recognizer can only construct an analysis in class  ( 4 )  , where an entire plan stack is constructed based on the domain-specific expectations that the speaker will try to BOARD or MEET at rain  . From the S-REQUEST , via REQUEST , it recognizes the ASK plan and then postulates the SEEK-ID-PARAME TERplan  , i . e . , ASK is the only known plan for which the utterance is a step  . Since its effect does not hold and its constraint is satisfied  , SEEK-ID-PARAME TER can then be similarly postulated  . In a more complex example , at this stage there would be competing interpretations that would need to be eliminated by the plan recognition heuristics discussed above  . 

In satisfying the IS-PARAMETER-OF constraint of SEEK-ID-PARAME TER  , a second plan is introduced that must contain a property of a train as its parameter  . This new plan will be placed on the stack before the SEEK-ID-PARAMETER plan and should satisfy one of the domain-specific expectations  . An eligible domain plan is the GOTO plan , with the ? fn being either a time or a location . 
Since there are no plans for which SEEK-ID -PARAME TER is a step  , chaining stops . The state of the stack after this plan recognition process is as follows: 

SEEK-ID-PARAME TER ( Personl , ? fn ( trainl ) , PLAN1)

ASK(Person1,?fn(train1),PLAN 1)

REQUEST ( Person1, Clerk1,
INFOR MREF ( Clerk1, Person1,
I?fn(trainl ), PLAN 1))
S-REQUEST ( Personl , Clerkl,
INFORMREF ( Clerkl , Person 1 , ? fn ( trainl ) , PLAN1 ) ) CONSTRAINT : ? fn is location or time role of trains PLANI:GOTO  ( ? agent , ?location , ? time ) .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Since SEEK-ID-PARAME TER is a metaplan , the algorithm then performs a recursive recognition on  PLAN1  . This selects the BOARD plan ; the MEET plan is eliminate due to constraint violation  , since the arrive-station is not Toronto . Recognition of the BOARD plan also constrains ? fn to be depart-time or depart-location  . 
The constraint on the ASK plan indicated that the speaker does not know the ? fn property of the train  . Since the depart-time was known from the utterance  , depart-time can be eliminated as a possibility . Thus , ? fn has been constrained to be the depart -location  . Also , since the expected agent of the BOARD plan is the speaker  , ? agent is set equal to Person 1 . 
Once the recursive call is completed , plan recognition ends and all postulated plans are expanded to include the rest of their steps  . The state of the stack is no was shown in Figure 3  . As desired , we have constructed an entire plan stack based on the original domain-specific expectations to 
BOARD or MEET a train.
Recall that in parallel with the above , communicative analysis is also taking place . Once the task structure is recognized the global focus  ( the executing step ) in each plan structure is noted . These are the S-REQUEST in the metaplan and the GOTO in the task plan  . Furthermore , since R1 has been completed , the focus tracking mechanism updates the focito the next coherent moves  ( the next possible steps in the task structures )  . These are the INFORMRE For a metaplant othe SEEK -ID- 


SEEK-ID-PARAME TER ( Person 1 , depart-loc(train1) , PLAN1) ! ASK ( Person1 , depart-loc(trainl ) PLAN1) REQUEST ( Personl , Clerkl , ~ REF ( Clerkl , Personl , INFOR MREF ( Clerk 1 , Person 1 , depart-loc(trainl ) , PLAN 1) depart-loc(trainl) , PLAN1))

BOARD ( Personl , trainl)
BUY-TICKET ( Peo1 , train l )\] GET-ON ( Person l , train1)!GOTO(Person1 , depart-loc(trainl ) , depart-time ( train l ) ) Figure 3: The Plan Stack after the First Utterance INFOR MREF in  PLAN2 as expected , which could be realized by a generation system as " Eight-fifty to Montreal  . Gates even . " The global focus then corresponds to the executed INFOR MREF plan step  ; moreover , since this step was completed the focus can be updated to the next likely task moves  , a metaplan relative to the SEEK-ID-PARAME TER or a pop back to the stacked BOARD plan  . Also note that this updating provides expectations for the clerk's upcoming plan recognition task  . 
The passenger then asks " Where is it ? " , i.e.,
S-REQUEST ( Person1, clerk 1
INFOR MREF ( clerk 1 , Person 1 , loc(Gate 7) , ? plan )   ( assuming the appropriate resolution of " it " by the immediate focus mechanism of the communicative analysis  )  . The plan recognizer now attempt so incorporate this utterance using the preferences described above  . The first two preferences fail since the S -REQUEST does not match directly or by chaining any of the steps on the stack expected for execution  . The third preference succeeds and the utterance is recognized as part of a new SEEK-ID-PARAME TER referring to the old one  . This process is basically analogous to the process discussed in detail above  , with the exception that the plan to which the SEEK-ID-PARAME TER refers is found in the stack rather than constructed  . Also note that recognition of this metaplan satisfies one of our expectations  . The other expectation ivolving popping the stack is not possible  , for the utterance cannot be seen as a step of the BOARD plan  . With the exception of the resolution of the pronoun  , communicative analysis is also analogous to the above  . 
The final results of the task and communicative analysis are shown in Figure  4  . Note the inclusion of INFORM , the clerk's actual realization of the INFORMREF . 

S-REQUEST ( Person1, clerk 1,
INFOR MREF ( clerk 1 , Person 1 , loc(Gate 7) , PLAN2) SEEK-ID-PARAME TER ( Person 1 , loc(Gate 7) , PLAN 2)l
ASK(~rsonl , loc(Gate 7~), PLAN2)
INFO-~MREF(clerkl , Person 1 , loc(Gate 7) , PLAN2)

REQUEST ( Person1, Clerk1,
INFOR MREF ( Clerk 1 , Person 1 , depart-loc(train1) , PLAN 1)) SEEK-ID-PARAME TER ( Person 1 , depart-loc(uainl ) , PLAN 1)/
A ~, ~ nl , depart-loc ~ LAN 1)
INFOR MREF ( Clerk 1 , Person 1 , depart-loc(train1) , PLAN1)

S-INFORM ( Clerk 1 , Person 1 , equal ( depart-loc(trainl ) , loc(Gate 7)))
PLAN 1 ~. ~ R Dt Person l , trainl)
BUY-TICKETP ~ Pe~onl , trainl ) ~ ~ GEON ( Personl , train l ) GOTO(Person l , depart-loc(train1) , depart-time ( train l ) ) Figure 4: The Plan Stack after the Third Utterance PLAN3  , corresponding to " Down this way to the left- -second one on the left  , " the focus updates the expected possible moves to include a metaplant o the top SEEK-ID-PARAME TER  ( e . g . , " Second whar f ") or apop . The pop allow same taplan to the stacked SEEK-ID -PARAME TER of  PLAN2   ( " What's a gate ?" ) or apop , which allows a metaplan to the original domain plan  ( " It's from Toronto ?" )  . Since the original domain plan involved no communication  , there are no utterances that can be a continuation of the domain plan itself  . 
The dialogue concludes with the passenger's " OK.
Thank you . " The " OK " is an example of a clue word \[ Reichman  ,  1981\] , words correlated with specific manipulations to the discourse structure  . In particular , " OK " may indicate apop\[Grosz ,  1977\] , eliminating the first of the possible expectations  . All but the last are then eliminated by " thank you  , " a discourse convention indicating termination of the dialogue  . Note that unlike before , what is going on with respecto the task plan is determined via communicative analysis  . 
5 . Comparisons with Other Work 5 . 1 Recognizing Speech Acts The major difference between our present approach and previous plan recognition approaches to speech acts  ( e . g . , \[ Alien and Perrault , 1980\]) is that we have a hierarchy of plans , whereas all the actions in Allen and Perrault were contained in a single plan  . By doing so , we have simplified the notion of what a plan is and have solved a puzzle that arose in the one -plan systems  . In such systems , plans were networks of action and state de ~riptions linked by causality and subpart relationships  , plus a set of knowledge-based relationships . This latter class could not be categorized as either a causal or a subpart relationship and so needed a special mechanism  . 
The problem was that these relationships were not part of any plan itself  , but a relationship between plans . In our system , this is explicit_The " knowref " and " know-pos " and " know-neg " relations are modeled as constraints between a plan and a metaplan  , i . e . , the plan to perform the task and the plan to obtain the knowledge necessary to perform the task  . 
Besides simplifying what counts as a plan , the multiplan approach provide some insight into how much of the user's intentions must be recognized in order to respond appropriately  . We suggest that the top plan on the stack must be connected to a discourse goal  . The lower plans may be only partially specified , and be filled in by later utterances . An example of this appears in considering Dialogue  2 from the first section , but there is no space to discuss this here ( see\[Litman and Allen , forthcoming \]) . 
The knowledge-based relationships were crucial to the analysis of indirect speech acts  ( ISA ) in Allen and Perrault \[1980\] . Following the argument above , this means that the indirect speech act analysis will always occur in a metaplant o the task plan  . This make sense since the ISA analysis is a communicative phenomena  . As far as the task is concerned , whether a request was indirector direct is irrelevant_In our present system we have a set of metaplans that correspond to the common conventional ISA  . These plans are abstractions of inference paths that can be derived from first principles as in Allen and Perrault-Similar " compilation " of ISA can be found in Sidner and Israel  \[1981\] and Carberry \[1983\]  . It is not clear in those systems , however , whether the literal interpretation of such utterances could ever be recognized  . In their systems , the ISA analysis is performed before the plan recognition phase  . In our system , the presence of " compiled " metaplans for ISA allows indirect forms to be considered easily  , but they are just one more option to the plan recognizer  . The literal interpretation is still available and will be recognized inappropriate contexts  . 
For example , if we set up a plan to ask about someone's knowledge  ( say , by an initial utterance of " I need to know where the schedule is incomplete "  )  , then the utterance " Do you know when the Winds or train leaves ?" is interpreted literally as a yes /no question because that is the interpretation explicitly expected from the analysis of the initial utterance  . 
Sidner and Israel \[1981\] outlined an approach that extended Allen and Perrault in the direction we have done as well  . They allowed for multiple plans to be recognized but did not appear to relate the plans in any systematic way  . Much of what we have done builds on their unexplored in their paper  . In the longer version of this paper \[ Litman and Allen  , forthcoming \] , our analysis of the dialogue from their paper is shown in detail  . 
Grosz\[1979\] , Levy\[1979\] , and Appelt \[1981\] extended the planning framework to incorporate multiple perspectives  , for example both communicative and task goal analysis  ; however , they did not present details for extended ialogues  . ARGOT\[Allen et al ,   1982\] was an attempt to fill this gap and led to the development of what has been presented here  . 
Pollack \[1984\] is extending plan recognition for understanding in the domain of dialogues with experts  ; she abandons the assumption that people always know what they really need to know in order to achieve their goals  . In our work we have implicitly assumed appropriate queries and have not yet addressed this issue  . 
Wilensky's use of metaplanning knowledge \[1983\] enables his planner to deal with goal interaction  . For example , he has meta-goals such as resolving oal conflicts and eliminating circular goals  . This treatment is similar to ours except for a matter of emphasis  . His meta-knowledge is concerned with his planning mechanism  , whereas our metaplans are concerned with acquiring knowledge about plans and interacting with other agents  . The two approaches are also similar in that they use the same planning and recognition processes for both plans and metaplans  . 
5.2 Discourse
Although both Sidner and Israel \[1981\] and Carberry \[1983\] have extended the Allen and Perrault paradigm to deal with task plan recognition in extended ialogues  , neither system currently performs any explicit discourse analysis  . As described earlier , Carberry does have a ( non-discourse ) tracking mechanism similar to that used in \[ Grosz  , 1977\]; however , the mechanism cannot handle topic switches and resumptions  , nor use surface linguistic phenomena to decrease the search space  . Yet Carberry is concerned with tracking goals in an information-seeking domain  , one in which a user seeks information in order to formulate a plan which will not be execute during the dialogue  .   ( This is similar to what happens in our train domain  . ) Thus , her recognition procedure is also not as tied to the task structure  . Supplementing our model with metaplans provided a unifying  ( and cleaner ) framework for understanding in both task -execution adinformation-seeking domains  . 
Reichman \[1981\] and Grosz \[1977\] used a dialogue's discourse structure and surface phenomena to mutually account for and track one another  . Grosz concentrated on task-oriented dialogues with subdialogues corresponding only to subtasks  . Reichman was concerned with a model underlying all discourse genres  . However , although she distinguished communicative goals from speaker intent her research was not concerned with either speaker intent or any interactions  . Since our system incorporates both types of analysis  , we have not found it necessary to perform complex communicative goal recognition as advocated by Reichman  . Knowledge of plans and metaplans , linguistic surface phenomena , and simple discourse conventions have so far sufficed  . This approach appears to be more tractable than the use of rhetorical predicates advocated by Reichman and others such as Mann et al  \[1977\] and
McKeown\[1982\].
Carbonell \[1982\] suggests that any comprehensive theory of discourse must address issues of recta-language communication  , as well as integrate the results with other discourse and domain knowledge  , but does not outline a specific framework . We have presented a computational model which addresses many of these issues for an important class of dialogues  . 
6. References
Allen , J . F . , A . M . Frisch , and D . J . Litman , " ARGOT : The Rochester Dialogue System , " Proc . , Nat'l . Conf . on Artificial Intelligence , Pittsburgh , PA , August 1982 . 
Allen , J . F . and C . R . Perrault , " Analyzing intention in utterances , " TR 50 , Computer Science Dept . , U . 
Rochester , 1979: Artificiallntell . 15, 3, Dec .  1980 . 
Appelt , D . E . , " Planning natural language utterances to satisfy multiple goals  , " Ph . D . thesis , Stanford U . , 1981 . 
Bolt , Beranek and Newman , Inc . , " Research in natural language understanding , " Report 4274 ( Annual Report) , September 1978-August 1979 . 

Carberry , S . , " Tracking user goals in an information seeking environment  , " Proc . , Nat'LConf . on Artificial
Intelligence , 1983.
Carbonell , J . G . , " Meta-language utterances in purposive discourse  , " TR 125 , Computer Science Dept . ,
Carnegie Mellon U ., June 1982.
Cohen , P . R . and C . R . Perrault , " Elements of a plan-based theory of speech acts , " Cognitive Science 3 ,  3 ,  1979 . 
Grosz , B . J . , " The representation and use of focus in dialogue understanding  , " TN 151 , SRI , July 1977 . 
Grosz , B . J . , " Utterance and objective : Issues in natural language communication  , " Proc . , IJCAI , 1979 . 
Horrigan , M . K . , " Modelling simple dialogs , " Master's
Thesis , TR108, U . Toronto , May 1977.
Levy , D . , " Communicative goals and strategies : Between discourse and syntax  , " in T . Givon ( ed) . Syntax and Semantics ( vol .  12) . New York : Academic Press , 1979 . 
Litman , D . J . , " Discourse and problem solving , " Report 5338 , Bolt Beranek and Newman , July 1983; TR 130 , Computer Science Dept . , U . Rochester , Sept .  1983 . 
Litman , D . J . and J . F . Allen , " A plan recognition model for clarification subdialogues  , " forthcoming TR , Computer Science Dept . , U . Rochester , expected 1984 . 
Mann , W . C . , J . A . Moore , and J , A . Levin , "A comprehension model for human dialogue , " Proc . , 5th
IJCAi , MIT , 1977.
McKeown , K . R . , " Generating natural language text in response to questions about database structure  , " Ph . D . 
thesis , U . Pennsylvania , 1982.
Pollack , M . E . , " Goal inference in expert systems , " Ph . D . 
thesis proposal , U . Penn ., January 1984.
Reichman , R . , " Plain speaking : A theory and grammar of spontaneous discourse  , " Report 46 81 , Bolt , Beranek and Newman , Inc . , 1981 . 
Sacks , H . , E . A . Schegloff . and G . Jefferson , " A simplest systematics for the organization of turntaking for conversation  , " Language 50 ,  4 , Part 1 , December 1974 . 
Sidner , C . L . , " Focusing in the comprehension of definite anaphora  , " in M . Brady ( ed) . Computational Models of Discourse . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1983 . 
Sidner , C . L . and M . Bates , "Requirements for natural language understanding in a system with grapic displays  , " Report 52 42 , Bolt Beranek and Newman , 
Inc ., 1983.
Sidner , C . L . and D . Israel , " Recognizing intended meaning and speakers " plans  , " Proc . , 7th IJCAI,
Vancouver , B.C ., August 1981.
Wilensky , R . Planning and Understanding . Addison-
Wesley , 1983.

