MACHINE-READABLE COMPONENTSIN A VARIETYOF
INFOR MATION-SYSTEM APPLICATIONS
Howard R . Webber
Reference Publishing Division
Hought on-Mifflln Company
2 Park Street
Boston . MA 02108
Components of the machine-readable dictionary can be applied in a number of information systems  . The most direct applications of the kind are in word processing or in " writing-support " systems built on a word processing base  . However , because a central function of any dictionary is in fact data verification  , there are other proposed applications in communications and data storage and retrieval systems  . 
Moreover , the complete interrelational electronic dictionary is in some sense the model of the language  ; and there are , accordingly , additional implications for language-based information search and retrieval  . 
In regard to word processing , the electronic lexicon can serve as the base for spelling verification  ( in which the computer detects many spelling or typographical errors and spelling correction  ( in which the computer offers corrections to the errors it has identified  )  . Because it is possible to develop algorithms that permit the computer to calculate the chances that the single best alternative it offers is actually correct  , this substitution can in many cases be made automatically  . It is at this point in the development of such systems wise to flag such automatic or rections for inspection by the operator  . 
At the presentime , these processes generally depend upon the application of strict frequency measures  , which permit the lexicon to be reduced to small -machine proportions and thereby reduce the possibility of a false hit--the passing of a misspelled common word that happens to coincide in orthography with a legitimate but rare word  . As our ability to draw cognitive information from text increases  , and as available memory increases , then such limits can be abandoned . 
Truncation of the lexicon for other specific applications can be considered  . It is possible , for example , to shape the lexicon to reflect a children's vocabulary and thereby to develop spelling correction and other writing aids for the early educational years on a very small machine base  . It is also possible to shape the lexicon to the needs of the educated adult user  , for whom information about common words is unnecessary  , and thereby to provide an exceptionally rich resource about " difficult " words within small -machine memory for online access to spelling  , definition , and pronunciation . 
Configuring the lexicon pyramidally by frequency , including all words of high frequency , seems an inevitable model to us now , but it is of course a kind of historical accident . 
As many of these comments already make clear , even if one resolves to work within the linguistic bounds of the ordinary print dictionary  , there are differences in the demands placed upon the dictionary by print applications and those arising out of electronic applications  . It is a matter of judgment or taste for the print lexicographer not to include geographic and biographic terms in the lexicon  , but the electronic lexicographer does not have that latitude  . 
Access to online dictionaries can be by the standard alphabetic means or by well-developed phonetic algorithms  ( which solve the conund rum of needing to know spelling before being able to find spelling  ) or by definition ( the reverse dictionary )  . As electronicitation for words and senses is done on the basis of machines cans of print -composition tapes and even of voices cans  , then sensitive subject coding should permit the development of lexicons tailored to the user profile  , with attendant benefits in comprehensiveness and economy of memory  . One can conceive of dictionaries that monitor their own use and respond by offering only unkown information to the individual user  . 
The dictionary that contain synonymy is a resource in the construction of electronic synonym generators  , of which there is at least one model that returns synonyms in the inflections of the source words  , including phrasal synonyms , taking precise account of all irregularities in doing so  . Presentation of synonyms is useful for " knowledge workers " but not for clerical workers  . 
If usage information is included in the dictionary  , then it is deliverable as a discrete electronic product  . The most direct key to specific usage guidance is by " trigger " words or phrases that call up guidance information for the operator  , but much more sophisticated implementations are possible when programming addresses grammar and syntax  . 
In large-system an agement , where accuracy of alpha data is a consideration , the machine dictionary can be the base or one of the bases for verification and correction of data streams in communication or of stored data  . ~ hat I have called the complete interrelational dictionary-fully coded to reflect the range of significant linguistic information-will serve as the base for retrieving information by meaning rather than mechanics  . 

