Discourse Structures for Text Generation
William C . Mann
USC/Intorrnation Sciences Institute
4676 Admiralty Way
Marina del Rey , CA 90292-6695
Abstract
Text generation programs need to be designed around a theory of text organization  . This paper introduces Rhetorical Structure Theory  , a theory of text structure in which each region of text has a central nuclear part and a number of satellites related to it  . A natural text is analyzed as an example , the mechanisms of the theory are identified , and their formalization is discussed . In a comparison , Rhetorical Structure Theory is found to be more comprehensive and more informative about text function than the text organization parts of previous text generation systems  . 
1, The Text Organization Problem
Text generation is already established as a research area within computational linguistics  . Although so farther e have been only a few research computer programs that can generate text in a technically interesting way  , text generation is recognized as having problems and accomplishments that are distinct from those of the rest of computation a linguistics  . Text generation involves creation of multisentential text without any direct use of people's linguistic skills  ; it is not computer-aided text creation . 
Text planning is a major activity within text generation  , one that strongly influences the effectiveness of generated text  . 
Among the things that have been taken to be part of text planning  , this paper focuses on just one : text oreanization  . People commonly recognize that well . written text is organized , and that it succeeds partly by exhibiting its organization to the reader  . 
Computer generated text must be organized . To create This research was supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research contract No  . F49620-79-C-0181 . The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the author and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements  , either expressed or implied , of the Air Force Office of Scientific Research of the U  . S . 

text generators , we must first have a suitable theory of text organization  . In order to be most useful in computational linguistics  , we want a theory of text organization to have these attributes :  1  . comprehensiveness : applicable to every kind of text  ;  2 . functionality : informative in terms of how text achieves its effects for the writer  ;  3 . scale insensitivity : applicable to every size of text  , and capable of describing all of the various sized units of text organization that occur  ;  4 . definiteness : susceptible to formalization and programming  ;  5 . generativity : capable of use in text construction as well as text description  . 
Unfortunately , no such theory exists . Our approach to creating such a theory is described below  , and then compared with previous work on text generation in Section  3  . 
2. Rhetorical Structure Theory
Creating a comprehensive theory of text organization is necessarily a very complex effort  . In order to limit the immediate complexity of the task we have concentrated first on creating a descriotiv ~ theory  , one which fits naturally occurring text . In the future the descriptive theory will be augmented in order to create a constructive theory  , one which can be implemented for text generation . The term Rhetorical Structure Theory ( RST ) refers to the combination of the descriptive and constructive parts  . 
An organized text is one which is composed of discernible parts  , with the parts arranged in a particular way and connected together to form a whole  . Therefore a theory of text organization must tell at least :  1  . What kinds of parts are there?2 . How can parts bear ranged ?3 . How can parts be connected together to form a whole text ? resources available to the writer  . 
2 . 1 . Descriptive Rhetorical Structure Theory 1 What are the organizational resources available to the writer ?  . Here we present the mechanisms and character of rhetorical structure theory by showing how we have applied it to a particular natural text  . As each new construct is introduced in the example  , its abstract content is described . 
Our illustrative text is shown in Figure 2 . 1 . 23 In the figure , we have divided the running text into numbered clause-like units  . 4 At the highest level , the text is a request addressed to CCC members to vote against making the nuclear freeze initiative  ( NFI ) one of the issues about which CCC actively lobbies and promotes a position  . The structure of the text at this level consists of two parts : the request  ( clause 13 ) and the material put forth to support the request  ( clauses 1 through 12 )  ,  2 . 1 . 1 . The Request Schema-- .  112 ; 13 To represent the highest level of structure , we use the Request schema shown in Figure 22 . The Request schema is one of about 25 schemas in the current version of RST . 
Each schema indicates how a particular unit of text structure is decomposed into other units  . Such units are called spans . Spans are further differentiated into text spans and conceptual spans  , text spans denoting the portion of explicit text being described  , and conceptual spans denoting clusters of propositions concerning the subject matter  ( and sometimes the process of expressing it ) being expressed by the text span . 
1The descriptive portion of rhetorical structure theory has been developed over the pest two years by Sandra Thoml:~son and me  , with major contributions by Christian Matthiassen and Barbara Fox  . They have also given helpful reactions to a previous draft of this paper  . 
2 Quoted ( with permission ) from The Insid Qr , California Common Cause state news letter ,  2 . 1, July 1982 . 
3We expect the generation of this sort of text to eventually become very impo ~ Rant in Artificial Intelligence  , because systems will have to establish the acceptability of their conclusions on heuristic grounds  . AI systems will have to establish their credibility by arguing for it in English  . 
4Although we have not used technically-defined clauses as units  , the character of the theory is not affected . The decision concerning what will be the finast -grain unit of description is rather arbitrary  ; here it is set by a preliminary syntax . oriented manuel process which identifies low -level  , relatively independent units to use in the discourse analysis  . One reason for picking such units is that we intend to build a text generator in which most smaller units are organized by a programmed grammar \[ Mann & Matthieasen  3  . \] . 
1 . I don't believe that endorsing the Nuclear Freeze Initiative is the right step for California CC  . 
2 . Tempting as it may be , 3 . we should n'tem brace every popular issue that comes along  . 
4 . When we do so we use precious , limited resources where other players with superior resources are already doing an adequate job  . 
6 . Rather , I think we will be stronger and more effective 7 . if we stick to those issues of governmental structure and process  , broadly defined , that have formed the core of our agenda for years . 
8 . Open government , campaign finance reform , and fighting the influence of special interests and big money  , these are our kinds of issues . 
9 . ( New paragraph ) Let's be clear : 10 . I personally favor the initiative and ardently support disarmament negotiations to reduce the risk of war  . 
11 . But I don't thinken dorsing a specific nuclear freeze proposal is appropriate fol : CCC  . 
12 . We should limit our involvement in defense and weap onry to matters of process  , such as exposing the weapons industry's influence on the political process  . 
13 . Therefore , Iur geyout ovote against a CCC endorsement of the nuclear freeze initiative  . 
( signed ) Michael Asimow , California Common Cause Vice-Chair and UCLA Law Professor Figure  2  . 1 : A text which urges an action Each schema diagram has a vertical line indicating that one particular part is nuclear  . The nuclear part is the one whose function most nearly represents the function of the text span analyzed in the structure by using the schema  . In the example , clause 13 (" Therefore , Iur geyout ovote against a CCC endorsement of the nuclear freeze initiative  . ") is nuclear . It is a request . If it could plausibly have been successful by itself  , something like clause 13 ( without " Therefore " ) might have been used instead of the entire text . However , in this case , the writer did not expect that much to be enough , so some additional support was added . 

Request ~/ ~ ~ e ~ ablement

Figure 22: The Request and Evidence schemas The support , clauses 1 through 12 , plays a satellite role in this application of the Request schema  . Here , as in most cases , satellite text is used to make it more likely that the nuclear text will succeed  . In this example , the writer is arguing that the requested action is right for the organization  . 
In Figure 22 the nucleus is connected to each satellite by a relation  . In the text clause 13 is related to clauses 1 through 12 by a motivation relation . Clauses 1 through 12 are being used to motivate the reader to perform the action put for thin clause  13  . 
The relations relate the conceptual span of a nucleus with the conceptual span of a satellite  . Since , instext structure , each conceptual span corresponds to a text span , the relations may be more loosely spoken of as relating text spans as well  . 
The ReQuest schema also contains an eneblement relation  . Text in an " enablement " relation to the nucleus conveys information  ( such as a pass word or telephone number ) that makes the readerable to perform the requested action  . In this example the option is not taken of having a satellite related to the nucleus by an " enablement " relation  . 
One or more schemas may be instsntiated in a text . The pattern of instantiation of schemas in a text is called a text structure  . So , for our example text , one part of its text structure says that the text span of the whole text corresponds to an instance of the Request schema  , and that in that instance clause 13 is the text span corresponding to the schema nucleus and clauses  1 through 12 are the text span corresponding to a satellite related to the nucleus by a " motivation " relation  . 
In any instance of a schema in a text structure , the nucleus must be present , but all satellites are optional . We s do not instantiate a schema unless it shows some decomposition of its text span  , so at least one of the satellites must be present  . Any of the relations of a schema may be instantiated indefinitely many times  , producing indefinitely many satellites . 
5 Here and below , the knowledgeable prs on using RST to describe a text  . 
The schemas do not restrict the order of textual elements  . 
There is a usual order , the one which is most frequent when the schema is used to describe a large text span  ; schemas are drawn with this order in the figures describing them apart from their instantiation in text structure  . However , any order is allowed . 
2 . 1 . 2 . The Evidence Schema . . .  1 ;  28 ;   912 At the second level of decomposition each of the two text spans of the first level must be accounted for  . The final text span , clause 13 , is a single unit . For more detailed description a suitable grammar ( and other companion theories ) could be employed at this point . 
The initial span , clauses 1 through 12 , consists of three parts : an assertion of a particular claim  , clause 1 , and two arguments supporting that claim , clauses 2 through 8 and 9 through 12 . The claim says that it would not be right for CCC to endorse the nuclear freeze initiative  ( NFI )  . The first argument is about how to allocate CCC's resources  , and the second argument is about the categories of issues that CCC is best able to address  . 
To represent his argument structure we use the Evidence schema  , shown in Figure 22 . Conceptual spans in an evidence relation stand as evidence that the conceptual span of the nucleus is correct  . 
Note that the Evidence schema could not have been instantiated in place of the Request schema as the most comprehensive structure of the text  , because clause 13 urges an action rather than supporting credibility  . The " motivation " relation and the " evidence " relation restrict the nucleus in different ways  , and thus provide application conditions on the schemas  . The relations are perhaps the most restrictive source of conditions on how the schemas may apply  . In addition , there are other application conventions for the schema  , described in
Section 2.2.3.
The top two levels of structure of the text , the portion analyzed so far , are shown in Figure 23 . The entire structure is shown in Figure 25 . 


Ev~enct 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 tt 12 13
Figure 23: The upper structure of the CCC text At each level of structure it is possible to trace down the chain of nuclei to find a single clause which is representative of the entire level  . Thus the representative of the whole text is clause  13   ( about voting )  , the representative of the first argument is clause  6   ( about being stronger and more effective )  , and the representative of the second argument is clause  12   ( about limiting involvement to process issues )  . 
2 . 1 . 3 . The Thesis/Antithesis Schema---25 ;   6   -8 The first argument is organized contrastively , in terms of one collection of ideas which the writer does not identify with  , and a second collection of ideas which the writer does identify with  . 
The first collection involves choosing issues on the basis of their popularity  , a method which the writer opposes . The second collection concerns choosing issues of the kinds which have been successfully approached in the past  , a method which the writer supports . 
To account for this pattern we use the Thesis / Antithesis schema shown in Figure  2  . 4 . The ideas the writer is rejecting , clauses 2 through 5 , are connected to the nucleus ( clauses 6 through 8 ) by a Thesis/Antithesis relation , which requires that the respective sections be in contrast and that the writer identify or not identify with them appropriately  . 
Notice that in our instantiations of the Evidence schema and the Thesis/Antithesis schema  , the roles of the nuclei relative to the satellites are similar : Under favorable conditions  , the satellites would not be needed , but under the conditions as the author conceives them  , the satellites increase the likelihood that the nucleus will succeed  . The assertion of clause 1 is more likely to succeed because the evidence is present  ; the antithesis idea is made clearer and more appealing by rejecting the competing thesis idea  . The Evidence schema is different from the Thesis /Antithesis schema because evidence and theses provide different kinds of support for assertions  . 
2 . 1 . 4 . The Evidence Schema ---23; 456 In RST , schemes are recursive . So , the Evidence schema can be instantiated to account for a text span identified by any schema  , including the Evidence schema itself . This text illustrates this recursive character only twice  , but mutual inclusion of schemas is actually used very frequently in general  . It is the recursiveness of schemas which makes RST applicable at a wide range of scales  , and which also allows it to describe structural units at a full range of sizes within a text  .   7 Clauses 2 and 3 make a statement about popular causes ( centrally , that " we shouldn't embrace every popular issue that comes along "  )  . Clauses 4 and 5 provide evidence that we should n'tem brace them , in the form of an argument about effective use of resources  . 
The Evidence schema shown in Figure 2 . 2 has thus been used again , this time with only one satellite . 
2.1.5. The Concessive Schema---2; 3
Clause 2 suggests that embracing every popular issue is tempting  ( and thus both attractive and defective )  . The attractiveness of the move is acknowledged in the notion of a popular issue  . Clause 3 identifies the defect : resources are used badly . 
The corresponding schema is the Concessive schema , shown in Figure 24 . The concession relation relates the conceded conceptual span to the conceptual span which the writer is emphasizing  . The " concession " relation differs from the " thesis/antithesis " relation in acknowledging the conceptual  6Except for single-clause text spans , the structure of the text is presented depth -first  , left to right , and shown in Figuro 25 . 
7This contrasts with some approaches to text structure which do not provide structure between the whole-text level and the clause level  . Stodes , problem-solution texts , advertisements , and interactive discourse have been analyzed in that way  , inform b . 7,ou
Justify Conditional
Figure 24: Five other schemas
IIIIIIIIIIIII Iiiii iIIIII lll llllllllIIllllll liiiIl l 
R ~ eff ~ blll1 The Su/Anrl the Ji J
Co~m~Cmm',m ~, m/....7,.-"~,o7---~I

Co~d,m ~ l23 456?

ImD ~ at ~ C(WCeUI ~77 Wu/Amlalb ~ J 111234 S6?g
Vg 101 112
Figure 2 . 5: The full rhetorical structure of the CCC text '7 acknowledge some potential detraction or refutation of the point to be made  , By accepting it , it is seen as not contradictory with other beliefs held in the same context  , and thus not a real refutation for the main point . 
Concessive structures are abundant in text that argues points which the writer sees as unpopular or in conflict with the audience's strongly held beliefs  . In this text ( which has two Concessive structures )  , we can infer that the writer believes that his audience strongly supports the NFI  . 
2.1.6. The Conditional Schema - - - 4; 5
Clauses 4 and 5 present a consequence of embracing " every popular issue that comes along  . " Clause 4 ( " when we do so " ) presents a condition , and clause 5 a result ( use of resources ) that occurs specifically under that condition . TO express this , we use the Conditional schema shown in Figure 24 . The condition is related to the nuclear part by a condition relation  , which carries the appropriate application restrictions to maintain the conditionality of the schema  . 
2.1.7. The Inform Schema - - - 67; 8
The central assertion of the first argument , in clauses 6 through 8 , is that CCC can be stronger and more effective under the condition that it sticks to certain kinds of issues  ( implicitly excluding NFI )  . This assertion is then elaborated by exemplifying the kinds of issues meant  . 
This presentation is described by applying the Inform schema shown in Figure  24  . The central assertion is nuclear , and the detailed identification of kinds of issues is related to it by an elaboration relation  . The option of having a span in the instantiation of the Inform schema related to the nucleus by a background relation is not taken  . 
This text is anomalous among expository texts in not making much use of the Inform schema  . 8 It is widely used , in part because it carries the " elaboration " relation  . The " elaboration " relation is particularly versatile  . It supplements the nuclear statement with various kinds of detail  , including relationships of : 1 . sat:member 2 . abstraction : instance 3 . whole : part 4 . process : step 5 . object : attribute 2 . 1 . 8 . The Conditional Schema - - - 6 ;   7 This second use of the Conditional schema is unusual principally because the condition  ( clause 7 ) is expressed after the . consequence ( clause 6) . This may make the consequence more prominent or make it seem less uncertain  . 
2.1.9. The Justify Schema ---9; 1012
The writer has argued his case to a conclusion , and now wants to argue for this unpopular conclusion again  . To gain acceptance for this tactic , and perhaps to show that a second argument is beginning  , he says " Let's be clear . " This is an instance of the Justify schema , shown in Figure 24 . Here the satellite is attempting to make acceptable the act of exoress in q the nuclear conceptual span  . 
2 . 1 . 10 . The Concessive Schema- . - 10 ;   1   112 The writer again employs the concessive schema , this time to show that favoring the NFI is consistent with voting against having CCC endorse it  . In clause 10 , the writer concedes that hepersonally favors the NFI  . 
2 . 1 . 1 1 . The Thesis/Antithesis Schema- . - 1 1  ;   12 The writer states his position by contrasting two actions : CCC endorsing the NFI  , which he does not approve , and CCC acting on matters of process , which he does approve . 
2.2. The Mechanisms of Descriptive RST
In the preceding example we have seen how rhetorical schemas can be used to describe text  . This section describes the three basic mechanisms of descriptive RST which have been exemplified above:  1  . Schemas2 . Relation Definitions 3 . Schema Application Conventions 2 . 2 . 1 . Schemas A schema is defined entirely by identifying the set of relations which can relate a satellite to the nucleus  . 
2.2.2. Relation Definitions
A relation is defined by specifying three kinds of information :  1  . A characterization of the nucleus , 2 . A characterization of the satellite , 3 . A characterization of what sorts of interactions between the conceptual span of the nucleus and the conceptual span of the satellite must be plausible  , s 8It is also anomalous in another way : the widely used pattern of presenting a problem and its solution does not occur in this text  . 
9All of these characterizations must be made propedy relative to the writer's viewpoint and knowledge  . 

In addition , the relations are heavily involved in implicit communication  ; if this aspect is to be described , the relation definition must be extended accordingly  . This aspect is outside of the scope of this paper but is discussed at length in \[ Mann & 
Thompson 83\].
So , for example , to define the " motivation " relation , we would include at least the following material :   1  . The nucleus is an action performable but not yet performed by the reader  . 
2 . The satellite describes the action , the situation in which the action takes place , or the result of the action , in ways which help the reader to associate value assessments with the action  . 
3 . The value assessments are positive ( to lead the reader to want to perform the action )  . 
2 . 2 . 3 . Schema Application Conventions Most of the schema application conventions have already been mentioned :  1  . One schema is instantiated to describe the entire text  . 
2 . Schemas are instantiated to describe the text spans produced in instantiating other schemas  . 
3 . The schemas do not constrain the order of nucleus or satellites in the text span in which the schema is instantiated  . 
4. All satellites are optional.
5. At least one satellite must occur.
6 . A relation which is part of a schema may be instantiated indefinitely many times in the instantiation of that schema  . 
7 . The nucleus and satellites do not necessarily correspond to a single uninterrupted text span  . 
Of course , there are strong patterns in the use of schemas in text : relations tend to be used just once  , nucleus and satellites tend to occur in certain orders  , and schemas tend to be used On uninterrupted spans of text  . 
The theory currently contains about 25 schemas and 30 relations .   1? We have applied it to a diverse collection of approximately  100 short natural texts , including administrative memos , advertisements , personal letters , newspaper articles , and magazine articles . These analyses have identified the usual patterns of schemause  , along with many interesting exceptions . 
The theory is currently informal . Applying it requires making judgments about the applicability of the relations  , e . g . , what counts as evidence or as an attempt to motivate or justify some action  . These are complex judgments , not easily formalized . 
1 0In this paper we do not separate the the ow into framework and schemas  , zd though for other purposes there is a clear advantage and possibility of doing so  . 
In its informal form the theory is still quite useful as a part of a linguistic approach to discourse  . We do not expect to formalize it before going on to create a constructive theory  . ( Of course , since the constructive theory specifies text construction rather than describing natural texts  , it need not depend on human judgements in the same way that the descriptive theory does  . ) 2 . 3 . Assessing Descriptive RST The most basic requirement on descriptive RST is that it be capable of describing the discernible organizational properties of natural texts  , i . e . , that it be a theory of discourse organization . 
The example above and our analyses of other texts have satisfied us that this is the case  . 11 tn addition , we want the theory to have the attributes mentioned in Section  1  . Of these , descriptive RST already satisfies the first three to a significant degree :  1  . comprehensiveness : It has fit many different kinds of text  , and has not failed to fit any kind of non -literary monologue we have tried to analyze  . 
2 . functionality : By means of the relation definitions  , the theory says a great deal about what the text is doing for the writer  ( motivating , providing evidence , etc , )  . 
3 . scale insensitivity : The recursiveness of schemas allows us to posit structural units at many scales between the clause and the whole text  . Analysis of complete magazine articles indicates that the theory scales up well from the smaller texts on which it was originally developed  . 
We Seeno immediate possibility of formalizing and programming the descriptive theory to create a programmed text analyzer  . To do so would require reconciling it with mutually compatible formal theories of speech acts  , lexical semantics , grammar , human inference , and social relationships , a collection which does not yet exist . Fortunately , however , this does not impede the development of a constructive version of RST for text generation  . 
2.4. Developing a Constructive RST
Why do we expect to be able to augment RST so that it is a formalizable and programmable theoretical framework for generating text ? Text appears as it does because of intentional activity by the writer  . It exists to serve the writer's purposes . Many 11 in another paper , we have shown that implicit communication arises from the use of the relations  , that this communication is specific to each relation  , and that as linguistic phenomena the relations and their implicit communication are not accounted for by particular existing discourse theories \[ Mann & Thompson  83\]  . 
3 73 of the linguistic resources of natural languages are associated with particular kinds of purposes which they serve : questions for obtaining information  , marked syntactic constructions for creating emphasis  , and so forth . At the schema level as well , it is easy to associate particular schemas with the effects that they tend to produce : the Request schema for inducing actions  , the Evidence schema for making claims credible , the/n form schema for causing the reader to know particular information  , and so forth . Our knowledge of language in general and rhetorical structures in particular can be organized around the kinds of human goals that the linguistic resources tend to advance  . 
The mechanisms of RST can thus be described within a more general theory of action  , one which recognizes means and ends . Text generation can be treated as a variety of goal pursuit  . 
Schemas area kind of means , their effects area kind of ends , and the restrictions created by the use of particula relations are a kind of precondition to using a particular means  . 
Goal pursuit methods are well precedented in artificial intelligence  , in both linguistic and nonlinguistic domains \ [ Appelt  81  , Allen 78 , Cohen 78 , Cohen & Perrault 77 , Perrault & Cohen 78 , Cohen & Perrault 79 , Newell & Simon 72\] . We expect to be able to create the constructive part of RST by mapping the existing part of RST onto AI goal pursuit methods  . In particular computational domains , it is often easy to locate formal correlates for the notions of evidence  , elaboration , condition , and so forth , that are expressed in rhetorical structure ; the problem of formalization is not necessarily hard  . 
At another level , we have some experience in using RST informally as a writer's guide  . This paper and others have been written by first designing their rhetorical structure in response to stated goals  . For this kind of construction , the theory seems to facilitate rather than impede creating the text  . 
3. Comparing RST to Other Text
Generation Research
Given the mechanisms and example above , we can compare RST to other computational linguistic work on text generation  .   12 The most relevant and wellknown efforts are by Appelt  ( the KAMP system\[Appelt81\] )  , Davey ( the PROTEUS system\[Davey 79\]) , Mann and Moore ( the KDS system\[Mann & Moore 80 , Mann & Moore 81\]) , McDonald ( the MUMBLE system 12Relating RST to the relevant/inguistic literature is partly done in \[ Mann & Thompson  83\]  , and is outside the scope of this paper . However , we have been particularly influenced by Grimes\[ Grimes  75\]  , Hobbs\[Hobbs76\] , and the work of
McKeown discussed below.
\[ McDonald80\] ) and McKeown ( the TEXT system\[McKeown82\] )  . 
All of these are informative in other areas but , except for McKeown , they say very little about text organization . 
Appelt acknowledges the need for a discourse component  , but his system operates only at the level of single utterances  . 
Davey's excellent system uses a simple fixed narrative text organization for describing tic  . tac . to egames : moves are described in the sequence in which they occurred  , and opportunities not taken are described just before the actual move which occurred instead  . Mann and Moore's KDS system organizes the text , but only at the whole-text and single-utterance levels  . It has no recursion in text structure , and no notion of text structure components which themselves have text structure  . 
McDonald took as his target what he called " immediate mode  , " attempting to simulate spontaneous unplanned speech  . His system thus represents a speaker who continually works to identify something useful to say next  , and having said it , recycles . 
It operates without following any particular theory of text structure and without trying to solve a text organization problem  . 
McKeown's TEXT system is the only one of this collection that has any hint of a scale -insensitive view of text structure  . It has four programmed " schemas " ( limited to four mainly by the computational environment and task  )  . Schemas are defined in terms of a sequence of text regions  , each of which satisfies a particular " rhetorical predicate  . " The sequence notation specifies optionality , repeatability , and allowable alternations separately for each sequence element  . Recursion is provided by associating schemas with particular predicates and allowing segments of text satisfying those predicates to be expressed using entire schemas  . Since there are many more predicates than schemas  , the system as a whole is only partially recursive . 
McKeown's approach differs from RST in several ways : McKeown's schemas are ordered  , those of RST unordered . 
Repetition and optionality are specified locally ; in RST they are specified by a general convention . 
McKeown's schemas do not have a notion of a nuclear element  . 
McKeown has no direct correlate of the RST relation  . 
Some schema elements are implicitly relational ( e . g . , an " attributive " element must express an attribute of something  , but that thing is not located as a schema element  )  . The difference is reduced by McKeown's direct incorporation of " focus  . " The presence of nuclear elements in RST and its diverse collection of schemas make it more informative about the functioning of the texts it describes  . Its relations make the account of implicit communication  . 
Beyond these differences , McKeown's schemas give the impression of defining a more finely divided set of distinctions over a narrower range  . The four schemas of TEXT seem to cover a range included within that of the RST Inform schema  , which relies strongly on its five variants of the " elaboration " relation  . Thus RST is more comprehensive , but possibly coarser . grained in providing varieties of description . 
Our role for text organization is also different from McKeown's  . In the TEXT system , the text was organized by a schema-controlled search over thin as that are oer missible to sav  . 
In constructive RST , text will be organized by goal pursuit , i . e . , byooal-based selection . For McKeown's task the difference might not have been important  , but the theoretical differences are large . 
They project very different roles for the writer , and very different toplevel general statements about the nature of text  . 
Relative to all of these prior efforts , RST offers a more comprehensive basis for text organization  . Its treatment of order , optionality , organization around a nucleus , and the relations between parts are all distinct from previous text generation work  , and all appear to have advantages . 
4. Summary
A text generation process must be designed around a theory of text organization  . Most of the prior computational linguistic work offers very little content for such a theory  . In this paper we have described a new theoretical approach to text organization  , one which is more comprehensive than previous approaches  . It identifies particular structures with particular ways in which the text writer is served  . The existing descriptive version of the theory appears to be directly extendible for use in text construction  . 
References\[Allen78\] Allen , J . , Recognizing Inlention in Dialogue , Ph . D . thesis , University of Toronto , 1978 . 
\[Appelt81\]Appeit , D . , Planning natural anguage utterances to satisfy multiple goals  . Forthcoming Ph . D . thesis , Stanford

\[Cohen76\]Cohen , P . R . , On Knowing What to Say : Planning Speech Acts , University of Toronto , Technical Report 118 ,  1978 . 
\ [ Cohen & Perrault 77\] Cohen , P . R . , and C . R . Perrault , " Overview of ' planning speech acts ' , " in Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , August 1977 . 
375\[Cohen & Perrauit 79\] Cohen , P . R . , and C . R . Perrault , " Elements of a plan-based theory of speech acts , " Cognitive Science 3 ,  1979 . 
\[ Davey 79\] Davey , A . , Discourse Production , Edinburgh University
Press , Edinburgh , 1979.
\[Grimes 75\] Grimes , J . E . , The Thread of Discourse , Mouton , The
Hague , 1975.
\[ Hobbs 76\] Hobbs , J . , A Computational Approach to Discourse Analysis , Department of Computer Science , City College , City University of New York , Technical Report 76-2 , December 1976 . 
\[ Mann & Matthiessen3 . \] Mann , W . C . , and C . M . LM . Matthiessen , Nigeh A Systemic Grammar for Text Generation , USC/Information Sciences Institute , RR . 83-105, February 1983 . The papers in this report will also appear in a forthcoming volume of the Advances in Discourse Processes Series  , R . Freedle ( ed . ): Systemic Perspectives on Discourse : Selected Theoretical Papers from the  9th International Systemic Workshop , tO be published by Ablex . 
\[ Mann & Moore80\] Mann , W . C . , and J . A . Moore , Computer as Author- . Results and Prospects , USC/Information Sciences
Institute , RR-79-82, 1980.
\[ Mann & Moore81\] Mann , W . C . , and J . A . Moore , " Computer generation of multiparagraph English text  , " American Journal of Computational Linguistics 7 ,  (1) , January-March 1981 . 
\[ Mann & Thompson83\] Mann , W . C . , and S . A . Thompson , Relational Propositions in Discourse , USC/Information Sciences Institute , Marina del Rey , CA 90291 , Technical
Report RR-83.115, July 1983.
\[ McDonald80\]McDonald , David D . , Natural Language Production as a Process of Decision-making under Constraints  , Ph . D . thesis , MIT , Cambridge , Mass . , November 1980 . 
\[ McKeown82\] McKeown , K . R . , Generating Natural Language Text in Response to Questions about Database Structure  , Ph . D . thesis , University of Pennsylvania , 1982 . 
\ [ Newell & Simon 72\] Newell , A . , and H . A . Simon , Human Problem Solving , Prentice-Hall , Englewood Cliffs , N . J . , 1972 . 
\ [ Perrault & Cohen78\]Perreuit , C . R . , and P . R . Cohen , Planning Speech Acts , University of Toronto , Department of Computer
Science , Technical Report , 1978.
