Referring as Requesting
Philip R . Cohen
Artificial Intelligence Center
SRI International

Center for the Study of Language and Information
Stanford University
1. Introduction 1
Searle\[14\] has arg , edforce fully that referring is a speech act ; that people refer , uot just expressions . This paper considers what kind of speech act referring might be  . I propose a generalization of Searle's " propositional " act of referring that treats it as an illocutionary act  , a request , and argue that the propositional ct of referring is unnecessary  . 
The essence of the argument is as follows : First , I consider Searle's definition of the propositional ct of referring which I term the PAA  , for Propositional ActAccount ) . This definition is found inadequate to deal with various utterances in discourse used for the sole purpose of referring  . Although the relevance of such utterances to the propositional ct has been defined away by Searle  , it is clear that any comprehensive account of referring should treat them  . l develop an account of their use in terms of a speaker's requesting the act of referent identification  , which is to be understood in a perceptual sense . This it locutionary act analysis ( IAA ) is shown to satisfy Searle's conditions for referring yet captures utterances that the PAA cannot  . The converse posit if ) n is then examined : Can the IAA capture the same uses of referring expressions as the PAA ? If one extends the perceptually-based notion of referent identification to include Searle's concept of identification  , then by associating a complex proposition a latt itude to one use of the definite determiner  , a request can be derived . The \] AA thus handles the referring use of definite noun phrases with independently motivated rules  . Referring becomes a kind of requesting . 
llence , the proposition a lact of referring is unnecessary . 
2 . Referring as a propositional speech act Revising Austin's  \[2\] Iocutionary/illocutionary dichotomy , Searle distinguishes between illoeution ary acts ( IAs ) and proposition alacts ( PAs ) of referring and predicating . Both kinds of acts are performed in making an utterance  , but propositional cts can only be performed in the course of performing some illocution ary act  . 
Let us consider Searle's rules for referring , which I term the " propositional ct analysis " , or PAA . Aspeaker , S , " successfully and non-defectively performs the speech act of singular identifying reference " in uttering a referring expression  , R , in the presence of hearer , 
H , in a context , C , if and only if : 1 . Normal input and output conditions obtain . 
2 . Tile utterance of R occurs as part of the utterance of some sentence  ( or similar stretch of discourse ) T . 
3 . The utterance of T is the ( purported ) performance of an illocutionary act . 
4 . There exists some object X such that either R con -\] The research reported in this paper was supported initially by the Fair child Camera and Instrument Corp  . Its subsequent development has been made possible by a gift from the System Development Foundation  . I have benefitted from many discussions with Itector Levesque and Ray Ferra  . ult . 
rains an identifying description of XcrS is able to supplement R with an identifying description of X  . 
5 . S in tends that the utterance of R will pick out or identify X to If  . 
6 . S in tends that the utterance of R will ideatify X to tt by means of If's recognition of S's intention to identify X and he intends this recognition to be achieved by means of It's knowledge of the rules governing R and his awareness of C  . 
7 . The semantical rules governing R are such that it is correctly uttered in T in C if and only if conditi ~ ms  16 obtain . "( l\]4\], PP .  9495 . ) Conditions 2 and 3 are justified as follows : Proposition alacts cannot occur alone : that i soue cannot just \ [ emphasis no riginal--PRC\] refer and predicate without making an assert if morasking a question or performing some other illocutionary act  . .  . One only refers as part of the performance of an illocutionary act  , and the grammatical clothing of aniilocutionary act is the complete sentence  . An utterance of a referring expression only counts as referring if one says something  . 
( Ibid , p . 25.)
The essence of Conditions 4 and 5 is that the speaker needs to utteran " identifying description "  . For Searle , " i ( lentification ~ means " . . . there should no longer be any doubt what exactly is being talked about "  . ( lbid , p .  85 . ) Furthermore , not only should the description be an identifying one  ( one that would pick out an object )  , but the speaker should intend it to do so uniquely  ( Colidition 5 )  . Moreover , the speaker's intention is supposed to be recognized by the hearer Condition  6  . This latter Gricean \[7\] condition is needed to distinguish having the hearer pick out an object by referring to it versus  , for example , hitting him in the back with it . 
3 . Problems for the Propo ~ itional Act Ac-count In a recent experiment  \[3\]  , it was shown that in giving instructions over a telephone  , speakers , but not users of keyboards , often made separate utterances for reference and for predication  . Frequently ? thes . e " referential utterances " took the form of existential sentences  , uchas " Now , there's a black O-ring " . Occasionally , speakers used question noun phrases " OK , now , the smallest of the red pieces ? " The data present wo problems for the PAA  . 
3 . 1 . Referring as a Sentential Phenomenon Conditions 2 and 3 require the referring expression to be embedded in a sentence or " similar stretch of discourse " that predicates ti  , nary act . l lowever , it is ~ bvious that speakers can refer by issuing isolated noun phra  , : e or prepositional phrases . Since speakers performed il loculi , mary acts iumaking these utterances , then , according to Conditi . ns2 and 3 , tl ' ere should be an act of predication , either in the sentence . r the " similar stretch of discourse " . For example , consider the f . l !, wingdial , , gue fragment : 1 . " Now , the small blue cap we talked about before ?"'2 . " l ~' h-huh ", 3 . " Put that over the hole Oil the side of thai tube  .   .   . " The illocutlonary art performed by uttering phrase  ( it is finished and responded to in phrase ( 2 before the i l locutionary act performed in phrase  ( 3 ) containing the predication " put " is performed . The appeal to a sentence or stretch of discourse in which to find the illocu-tiouary act containing tile proposition a lact in  ( 1 ) is therefore is un-convincing . The cause of this inadequacy is that , according to Searle , to perform an ill . eutionary act , an act of predicating is required , and the predicate must be uttered ( Ibid , pp . 1k 26 . -127~ . llence , there is no appeal to context to supply t , bvious predications . Likewise , there is no room for context to supply a nob vi~ms focus of attention  . Unfortunately , we can easily imagiue cases in which an object is mutually  , but nonlinguistically , bcused upone . g . , when Ilolmes , having come up on a body on the ground , listens for a heart beat , and says to Watson : " Dead ") . Insnchacase , we need only l ) redicate . Thus , the requirement that the act of reference b ~" j ~ , intly located with some predication in a sentence orilh ~ cutiuuary actist ~ or estrictive -- the  9oals involved with reference and predication can be satisfied separately and contextually  . The point of this paper is to bring such goals to the for e  . 
3 . 2 . Referring without a Propositional Act Tile second pr  ( llqi'ni is that I nost of tile separate utterances is ued to secure reference were declarative sentences whose logical form was  3 zP ( z )  . For example , " there is a little yellow piece of rubber " , and " it's got a plug in it " . However , Searle claims that these utterances contain no referring act  . ( lbid , p .  29 . ) flow then can speakers use them to refer ? The answer in wdves an analysis of indirect speech acts  . Although such declarative utterances can be issued just to be informative  , they are also issued as requests that the hearer identify the referent  . : The analysis of these utterances as requests depends on our positing an action of referent identification  . 
4 . Identification as a Requested Action In Searle's account  , speakers identify referents for hearers . ! revise this notion slightly and treat identification as an act performed by the hearer  131   . I use the term " identify " in a very . narrow , though important and basi- , sense--one that intimately involves perception . 
Thus , the analysis is not intended to be general ; it applies only to the case when the referents are perceptually accessible to the hearer  , and when the hearer is intended to use perceptual means to pick them out  . For the time b ~' iug . I am explicitly not concerned with a hearer's mentally " identifying " some entity satisfying a description  , or discovering a coreferring descriptic m . Th , perceptual use of " identification " would appear to be a ~ p e  ( ' ial case of . % arb " s use of the term , and thus Searle's condition , sh ,  . uhl apply to , it . 
Referent identifica ~: ionithis perceptual sense requires an agent and a description  . The essence of the act is that the agent pick out the thing orth ! nffs satisfying the description  . The agent need not '2The classification of these utterances a identification requests was done by two coders who were trained by the author  , but who worked independently . The reliability of their ? odings were high-- over  90 percent for such existential ~ tatements . 
be the speaker of the description , and indeed , the description need not be communicated linguistically  , or even conlmunicated at all . A crucial component of referent identification is the act of perceptually searching for something that satisfies the description  . The description is decomposed by the agent into a plan of action for identifying the referent  . The intended and expected physical , sensory , and cognitive actions may be signalled by tile speaker's choice of predicates  . For example , a speaker uttering the phrase " the magnetic screwdriver "  , may intend for the hearer to place various screw drivers against some piece of iron to determine which is magnetic  . Speakers know that hearers map ( at least some ) predicates , onto actions that determine their extensions , and thus , using a model of the heater's capabilities and the causal connections among people  , their senses , and physical objects , design their expression , D , so that hearers can successfully execute those actions in the context of the overall plan  . 
Not only does a speaker plan for a hearer to identify the referent of a description  , but he often indicates his intention that the hearer do so  . According to Searle , one possible way to do this is to use a definite determiner  . Of course , not all definite NP's are used to refer : for example  , in the sentence " the last piece is the nozzle ' , the referent of the first NP is intended to be identified  , whereas the referent of the second NP is not . The attributive use of definite noun phrases \[6\] is a case in which the speaker has no intention that the hearer identify a referent  . Yet other nonanaphoric u~es of definite noun phrases include labeling an object  , correcting a referential miscommunicatiou , having the hearer wait while the speaker identifies the referent  , etc . ' ~ To respond appropriately , a hearer decide ~ when identi\[icatiou is the act he is supposed to perform on a description  , what part this act " will play in the speaker's and hearer's plan ~  , and how aud when to perform the act . If perceptually identifying a feb'rentL ~ represented as an action in the speaker's plan  , hearers can reas , ,u ab< , ut it just as any other act . thereby allowing them to infer the speaker'si at ; 'ntions behind indirect identification re . quests . 
In snmmary , referent identification shall mean l . lie conducting = , faper ceptual search process for the referent < , fa description . Tile verb " pick out " should be taken as synonymous  . 
The following is a sketchy definition of tlw ceil , rent identification action , in which the description is formed fr~mi " a/ lh  , ?y such that
D(y ) ".43 X\[PERCEPTUALLY-
ACCESSIBLE ( X.Agt ) &
D(X ) &
IDENTIADLE(Agt,D )

RESULT ( Agt,
IDENTIFY-REFERENTAgt.D).
IDENTIFIED-REFEI'HDNT(Agt . D . X ) I The formula follows the usual axi , ml;ttizati , mo facti , ) n ~ in dynamic logic : PD fAct\]Q ; that is , if P , aft , 'rd . iugAct . Q .  \[" . . ll . ,'*ing Moore's \[9\] possible worlds semantics for act bJn , t i t , " nv , , , laloperau , rRESULT is taken to be true of an agent , an acti . n , an , I a formula , iff in the world resulting from the agent's perf , ~ rmfltg that act it m , tl , e formula is true . s The antecedent includes three conditions . The first is a-per-3See also 15 , IO \] for discu-:~ion of sl ) ~ , akors ' goal ~ toward ~ th ,  . ir C ~ rir , . , a'i ,, n of descriptions . 
4Thls definition is not particularly ilhlullnating  , tutitisng ! . ; lily , : a ' . :u, . rth za Searle's . The point of giving it is that if a definition can be given in this form  ( i . e . , as an action characterizable in a dynamic logic )  , the illocuti ~ nary analysis applies . 
SActually , Moore characterizes R . ESULT astaking an event and a for nmla as arguments  , and an agent's doing an action denotes an event . This dijereace is not critical for what follows . 
2 08 ceptual accessibility " condition to guarantee that the IDENTIFY-REFERENT action is applicable  . This should guarantee that , for example , a speaker does not intend someone to pick out the referent of  "3  ~ , " democracy " , or " the first mantoland on Mars ~ . The condition is satisfied in the experimental task since it rapidly becomes mutual knowledge that the task requires communication about the objects in front of the hearer  . 
The second condition states that X fulfills the description D  . 
Here ,   1 a mignoring cases in which the description is not literally true of the intended referent  , including metonymy , irony , and the like ( but see\[12\]) . Lastly , D should be a description that is identifiable to this particular Agt  . It should use descriptors whose extension the agent already knows or can discover via action  . I am assuming that we can know that a combination of descriptors is identifiable without having formed a plan for identifying the referent  . 
To give a name to the state of knowledge we are in after having identified the referent of D  , we will use IDENTIFIED-REFERENTAgtDX ) . That is , Agt has identified the referent of D to be X . Of course , what has been notoriously difficult to specify is just what Agt has to know about X to say he has identified it as thereforent of D  . At a minimum , the notion of identification eeds to be made relative to a purpose  , which , perhaps , could be derived from the bodily acti . ns that someone ( in the context is intended to perform upon X . Clearly , " knowing who the D is "18 ,  9\] , is no substitute for having identified a referent  . After having picked out the referent of a do seription D  , we may still not not know who the D is . On the other hand , we may know who or what the description denotes , for example , hy knowing ~ ome " standard name " for it , and yet be unable to use that kn . wledge to pick out the object . For example , if weask " Which is tho Seattle train ?" and receive the reply " It's train number  11689"  , we may ~ till not be able to pick out and board the train if its serial number is not plainly in view  . 
Finally , a though not stated in this definition , the means by which the act is performed is some function mapping D to some procedure that  , when executed by Agt , enables Agt to discover the X that is the referent of D  . 
4.1. Requesting
Con . ~ ider what it takes to make a request . Hector Levesque and I\[4 , 5\] argu ~ , that requests and other illocution ary acts can be defined in terms of interacting plans--i  . e . , as beliefs about the conversants ' shared knowledge of the speaker's goals and the causal consequences of achieving those goals  . In this formalism , illocution acy acts are no longer conceptually primitive  , but rather amount otheorems that can be proven about a state of affairs  . The proof requires an axiomatiza-tion of agents ' beliefs  , expectations , goals , plans , actions , and a cur * relation of utterance mood with certain propositional attitudes  . The important point here is that the definition of a request is not merely stipulated  , but is derived from an independently motivated theory of action  . Any act that brings about the right effects in the rightway satisfies the reques theorem  . 
Briefly , a request is an action ( or collection of actions ) that makes it (  1  ) shared knowledge that the speaker's goal is that the hearer thinks the speaker wants the hearer to adopt the goal of doing a particular act  , thereby making it ( 2 ) shared knowledge between the speaker and hearer that the speaker wants the hearer to do that act  . This inference requires an additional " gating " condition that it be shared knowledge that the speaker is both sincere and can perform the requested act  ( i . e . , he knows how , and the preconditions of that act are true ) . 
The processing of an utterance is assumed to begin by applying the propositional attitude correlated with its mood to the propositional content associated with its literal interpretation  . Thus , correlated with imperatives and interrogatives is the attitude above corre-spending to goal  ( I ) ): 6  ( MUTUAL-BELIEF Hearer Speaker ( GOAL Speaker ( BEL Hearer ( GOAL Speaker ( GOAL Hearer ( DONE Hearer Act P )   )   )   )   )   . 
(DONE Hearer Act P ) is true if Hearer has done act Act and has brought about P  . For yes/no interrogatives , Act would be an INFORMIF\[11\] ; for imperatives , it would be the act mentioned in the sentence . Declaratives would be correlated with a different propositional attitude  . Beginning with the utterance-correlated attitudes  , a derivation process that constitutes plan -recogniti  . n reasoning determines what the speaker meant \[7\]  . Thus , for example , what the speaker meant could be classified as a request if the derivation included making  ( 2 ) true by making the above formula true . 
An act may simultaneous Jy achieve the goals constituting more than one illocution ary act  . This ability underlies the analysis of indirect speech acts  . Formalisms have been developed\[5 , 11\] that describe when we can conclude , from a speaker's wanting the hearer to want the precondition of some act to hold  ,   ( or wanting the hearer to believe the precondition does hold  )  , that the speaker wants the hearer to adopt the goal of performing the act  . The conditi . ns licensing this inference are that it be mutually known that the act  ( or its effect ) is an expected goal of the speaker , and that it be mutually known that : the hearer can perform the act  . is cooperative , and does not want not to do it . 
Returning to the trouble some x is tential sentences , this pattern of reasoning , which I term the " illoculionary act analysis "\ [ AAI  , can be used to derive a request for reh'rent identification  . The reasoning is similar to that needed to infer are ques to open the door on hearing a speaker  , with two arm-loads of groceries , say " the door i ~ closed " . 
The general form of this reasoning involves the a . ~serti . no ! an action's precondition when the effect of the action is an expected goal of the speaker  . In the case at hand , the speaker's existential assertion causes the hearer to believe the existential precondition of the referent identification act  , since speaker and hearer both think they are talking about objects in front of the h ~' arer  , and because the description is identifiable . Ilence , the hearer concludes he is intended to pick out its referent  . The hearer may go on to infer that he is intended to perform other acts  , such as to pick up the object . This inference process also indicates when the indirect request interpretation is not iutended  , for example , if it is mutually known that the description is not identifiable  , or if it is mutually known that the hearer would not want to identify the referent  . 
I argue that this kind of reasoning underlies the propositional ct account  . First , I show that Searle's conditions on referring are a special case of the conditions for requesting referent identification  . Then , I show that if one extends the definition of IDENTIFY-REFERENT to cover Searle's more general concept of identificatiou  , the IAA is applicable in the same circumstances a ~s Searle's analysis  . Because the IAA is independently motivated and covers more cases  , it should be preferred . 
5. Accounting for Searle's Conditions on

Assume Searle's Condition 1 , the " normali/O conditions . " For the reasons outlined above , do not assume Conditions 2 and 3 . Now , clearly , a speaker's planning of a request that the hearer identify the referent of some description should comply with the rules for requesting  , namely : the speaker is trying to achieve one of the effects of the CThe justification for this formula can be found in  \[5\]  . 
209 requested action ( i . e . , IDENTIF IED-REFERENT  by way of communicating ( in the (  ; rice an sense ) his intent that the hearer perform the action , provided that it is shared knowledge that the hearer can do the act i  . n . The last condition is true if it is shared knowledge that the the prec  . ndili . n to the action hohts , which includes Seacle's existential Condition 4 . Scarle's Condition 5 states that the speaker intends to identify Ihe referent othe hearer  . This condition is captured in the IAA by its bee . ruin gumtual knowledge that the speaker intends to achieve the effect of the referent identification act  , IDENTIFIED-IH'H"I';RENT . Finally , Searle's Grice an intent recognition Condition \ [ G  ) takes h-ld in the same way that it does for other illocutionary acts  . namely in virtue of a " feature " of the utterance  ( e . g . , utterance mood , or a definite determiner that is correlated with a complex prop  . sitional attitude . This attitude becomes the basis for subsequent reasoning about the speaker's plans  . In summary , Searle's conditions can be acconnted for by simply positing an action that the speaker requests aml that the heare reasons about and performs  . 
So far , the IAA and PAA are complementary . They each account for different aspects of referring  . The IAA characterizes utterances who ~ esolep . rpose is to secure referent identification , and the PAA characterizes the use of referring phrases within an illocutionary act  . 
I now precede to show how the IAA can subsume the PAA  . 
Searle argues that tree use of the definite article in uttering an NP is to indicate the speaker's intention to refer uniquely  . Moreover , from Condition 5 , this intention is supposed to be recognized by the hearer  . We can get this effect by correlating the following expression with the delinite determiner : AD\[  ( MUTUAL-BELIEF Hearer Speaker ( GOAL Speaker ( BELHearer3!X ( GOAL Speaker ( GOAL Hearer ( DONE Hearer
IDENTIFY-REFERENT(Hearer,D),
IDENTIFIED-REFERENT ( Hearer , D , X ) ) ) ) ) )\] Think - f tiffs expression as being a pragmatic " feature " of a syntactic constituent  , as in current linguistic formalisms . When this expression is applied to a descriptor ( supplied from the semantics of the NP we have a complete formula that becomes the seed for deriving a request  . Namely , if it is mutually believed the speaker is sincere  ,   7 then it is mutually believed there is a unique object that speaker wants the hearer to want to pick out  . If it is mutually believed the hearer candoit i  . e . . the prec~mditions to the referent identification act hold  , and the hearer kn . ws how to do it by decomposing the description into a planc~faction  )  , it is mutually believed of some object that the speaker's goal is that the hearer actually pick it out  . llence , a request . 
* Thus . for the perceptual ease , the IAA subsumes the PAA . 
5.1. Extending the Analysis
Assume that instead of just considering the act of identification in its perceptual sense  , we adopt Searle's concept--namely that * . . . 
there should no longer be any doubt what exactly is being talked about  . " Identification in this sense is primarily a process of establishing a coreferential link between the description in question and some other whose referent is in some way known to the hearer  . However , we again regard identification as an act that the hearer performs  , not something the speaker does to/for a hearer . If an analysis of this " r Sincerity can be dispensed with at no significant loss of generality SThat is  , I am suggesting that the interpretation fhow the speaker intends the noun phrase to be interpreted le  . g . , referentially , attributively , etc . begins with such a proposition alttitude . If the referential reading is unsuccessful , the hearer needs to make other inferences to derive the intended reading  . 
extended notion can be made similar inform to the analysis of the perceptual identification act  , then the IAA completely subsumes the PAA . Because both accounts are equally vague on what constitutes identification  ( as are , for that matter , all other accounts of which \[ amaware ) , the choice between them must rest on other grounds  . The grounds favoring the identification request analysis include the use of separate utterances and illocutionary acts for referring  , and the independently motivated satisfaction of Searle's conditions on referring  . 
5.2. Searlevs . Russell
Using the propositional ct of referring . Searle argues against Rus-sews \[13\] theory of descriptions , which holds that the uttering of an expression " the ~" is equivalent othe assertion of an uniquely existential proposition ~ there is a unique ~ b "  . Thus , when reference fails , it is because the uniquely existential proposit ionisnc  , t true . Searle claims instead that the existence of the referent is a precondition to the action of referring  . In referring to X , we do not a ~ ssert that X exists any more than we do in hitting X  ( lbid , p . 1G 0 . ) However , the precondition is necessary for successful performance  . Searle's argument against his theory essentially comes down to:  .   .   . It\[Russell's theory \] presents the proposit i on a lact of definite reference  , when performed with definite descriptions .   .   . as equivalen to the illocutionary act of asserting a uniquely existential proposition  , and there is no coherent way to integrate such a theory into a theory of illocutionary acts  . Underno condition is a prol . J : ~ itional act identical with the illocntionary act of assert i  . n , for a . proposition alact can only occur as part of s , uucillo-cutionary act , never simply by itself ( Ibid , p .  15 . I There are two difficulties with this argument . First , the require -" ment that acts of referring be part of an ilk  , cutionary act was shown to be unnecessarily restrictive  . Second , there is a way to assimilate the assertion of an existential proposition -- an act that  . % arle claims does not contain a referring act-- into an analysis of illocutionary acts  , namely as an indirectreq , est furreferent identification . However , because an assertion of a uniquely existential proposition may fail to convey an indirect request for referent identification  ( just a suttering ~ It's cold in here " may fail to convey a niuditert request Searle's argument  , though weakened , still stands . 
6. Summary
There are a number of advantages for treat it q~- refero : lthh'ntifi-cation as an action that speakers request  , and thus f ~ Jr treating the speech act of referring as a request  . The analysisn-t , , nly itrc , ~tllltS for data that Searle's account can \] to t , but it al . < o predicts each of Searle's conditions for performing tl wact of slngn lari dei ~ tifying reference  , yet it allows for appropriate xteushm into a Idaunitlg Impress  . If we extend the perceptual use of referent identification t  , ~ Searl ,  . ': ~ more general concept of identification , and we correlate a certain ( ; rice an ) proposition a lattitude with the use of definite determiners in a noun phrase  , then Searle's analysis is subsumed by the act of requesting referent identification  . The proposition a lact of referring is therefore unnecessary  . 
The promissory note introduced by this approach is to show how the same kind of plan-based reasoning u~ed in analyzing indirect speech acts can take hold when a hearer realizes he can n  . t , and was not intended to , identify the referent of a description . That is . 
plan-based reasoning should explain how a hearer might decide that the speaker's intention cannot be what it appears to be  ( based on the intent correlated with the use of a definite determiner  )  , leading , him , for example , to decide to treat a description attributively \[6 I . Moreover , such reasoning should be useful in determining intended referents  , as To keep this promise , we need to be specific about speaker-intentions for other uses of noun phrases  . This will be no easy task . 
One difficulty will be to capture the distinction between achieving effects on a hearer  , and doing so communicatively i . e . , in the Griceanway ) . Thus , for example , a hearer cannot comply with the illocutionary force of = Quick  , don't think of an elephant * because there seems to be an " automatic " process of ~ concept activation *  11\]  . Achieving effects non-communicatively , i . e . , without he recognition of intent , may be central to some kinds of reference . In such cases , speakers would be able to identify referents for a hearer  . If this held for singular identifying reference , then tl wre could be grounds for a propositional ct  . 
l lowever , we might have to give up the Gricean condition ( 5 )  , which l suspect Searle would not want to do . 
Finally , there are obviously many a . ~pects of reference that need to be accounted for by any comprehensive theory  . I make no claims yet ) about the utility of the present approach for dealing with them  . 
Rather ,   1 hope to have opened the door to a formal pragmatics for one aspect of referring  . 
7 . References 1 . Appelt , D . Planning natural language utterances to satisfy multiple  9oals   . Ph . D . Th . , Stanford University , Stanford , California , December 1981 . 
2 . Austin , J . L . How to do things with words . Oxford University
Press , London , 1962.
3 . Cohen , P . R . Pragmatics , peaker-reference , and the modality of communication . To appear in Computational Linguistics , 1984 . 
4 . Cohen , P . R . , & Levesque , If . J . Speech Acts and the Recognition of Shared Plans . Prec . of the Third Biennial Conference , Canadian Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence  , Victoria , B . C . , May , 1980, 263-271 . 
5 . Cohen , P . R . , & Levesque , 11 . J . Speech acts as summaries of shared plans . In preparation . 
6 . Donnellan , K . Reference and definite description . The Philosophical Re ~ Jieu , 7S . 1960, pp .  281-304 . 
7 . Grice , 11 . P . Meaning . Philosophical Review 66, 1957, pp .  377-388 . 
8 . \] lintikka , J . Semantics for proposition alttitudes . In Philosophicalo #ic , D . Reidel Publishing Co . , Dordrecht-Holland , 1969 . 
9 . Moore , R . C . Reasoning about knowledge and action . Technical Note 191 , Artificial Intelligence Center , SRI International , 
October , 1980.
10 . Ortony , A . Some psycholinguistic on straints on the construction and interpretation of definite descriptions  . Proceedings of the Second Conference on Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Processing  , Urbana , Illinois ,  1978 ,  73-78 . 
I 1 . Perrault , C . R . , & Allen , J . F . A plan-based analysis of indirect speech acts . American Journal of Computational Linguistics 6 ,  3 ,  1980 , pp .  167-182 . 
12 . Perrault , C . R . , & Cohen , P . R . It's for your own good : A note on inaccurate reference  . In Elements of Discourss Understanding , Cambridge Irniversity Press , Joshi , A . , Sag , I . , & Webber,
B . , Eds . , Cambridge , Mass . , 1981 . ) 13 . Russell , B . On denoting . MindI 4, 1905, pp .  479-492 . 
14 . Searle , J . R . Speech acts : An essay in the philosophy of language  . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 1969 . 
15 . Sidner , C . L . The pragmatics of nonanaphoric noun plzrases . 
In Research in Knowledge Representation for Natural Language Understand in #: Annual Report  ,  9/1/8?-8/81/88 , Bolt Beranek and Newman , Inc . , , Cambridge , Mass , 1983 . 
16 . Wilkes-Gibbs , D . How to do things with reference : The function of goals in determining referential choice  . Unpublishedms . 

