CONTROLSTRUCTURES AND THEORIES OFINTER ACTION
INSPEECIIUNDEP ~. WI'ANDING SYSTEMS
E.J . Briscoe and B.K . Boguraev
University of Cambridge , Computer Laboratory
Corn Exchange Street , Cambridge CB23 QG , England

lr : this paper , we approach the problem of organisation and controlip  . automatic speech understanding systems fira T . ly , by present in ~ a theory of the non-serial in teractions " ~ eces '  ; ary between two processors in the system ; namely , the morphosyntaetic and the prosodic , and secondly , by showing how , when generalised , this theory allows one to specify a highly effic ient architecture for a speech understand ing system with a simple control structure and genuinely independent components  . The theory of non-serial interactions we present predicts that speech is temporally organised in a very specific way  ; that is , tee system would not function effectively if the temporal distribution of various types of information in speech were different  . 
The architecture we propose is developed from a study of the task of speech  , unde:standing and , furthermore , is specific to this task . Consequently , the paper argues that general problem solving methods are unnecessary for speech understand ing  . 
!INTRODUCTION\]t is generally accepted that ( he control structures of speech understand ing systems  ( SUSs ) must allow for non-serial interactions between different knowledge sources or components within the system  . Byr , on-serial interaction ( NS1 ) we refer to communication which extends beyond the normal  , serial , flow of information entailed by the tasks undertaken by each component  . For example , the output of the word recognition system will provide the input to morphosyntactic analysis  , almost by definition ; however , the operation of the morpho . ~yntaetic anaiyser . ,~ hould be const ra ined on some occas ions by prosodic cues : say  , that he : " is accented and followed by a " pause  "  . whil , ':' . t do g is not , in (1) Max gave her dog b 4-'; cuits . 
Similarly , the output of the morphosyntactic analyser will provide the input to scrnantie analysis  , but on occasion , the operation of the rnor phosyntac Licanalyser will be more efficient if it has access to in formation about the discourse : say  , that the horse has no unique referent ip , (2) "/ he horse raced past the barn fell , because this information will facilitate the reduced relative interpretation  ( see Crain & Steedman , in press ) . Thus , NSIs will be required between components which occur both before and after the morphosyntactie analyser in the serial chain of processors which constitute the complete SUS  . 
NS ls can be captured in a strictly serial , hierarchical model , in which the flow of information is always " upwards "  , by computing every possibility compatible with the input at each level of processing  . 
However , this will involve much unnecessary computation within each separate component which could be avoided by utilising information already ten  , : ; orally available in the signal or context of ut terance  , \]:: ut net part of the input to that level . An alternative architecture is the heterarchical system  ; this avoids such inefficiency , in principle , by allowing each component , to communicate with all other components in the system  . However , controlling the flow of information and specifying the interfaces between components in such systems has proved very difficult  ( Rcddy & Erman ,  1975) . The most sophisticated SUS architecture to date is the blackboard model  ( Ermanata ! . , 1980) . The model provides a means for common represent at ion and a global database for communication between components and allows control of thesys tem to be eentralised and relatively independent of individual components  . The four essential elements of the model b lackboard entries  , knowledge sources , the blackboard and an intelligent control mechanism-interact t  . oemulate a problem solving style that is charactems ticatly incremental and opportunist ic  . NSIs arc thus allowed to occur , in principle , when they will be of greatest value for prevent ing unnecessary computation  . 
What is striking about these system architectures is that they place no limlts on the kinds of interaction which occur between component  . % that is . none of them are based on any theory of what kind of interactions and eom rnunication will be needed in a SUS  . The designers of tile Hear say-ll system were exphcit about this  , arguing that . what was required was an architecture capable of supporting ally form of interaction  , but which was still relatively efficient ( Erman & Lesser ,  1975:484) . 
2 59 qhcrc appear to b call east two problems with such an approach Fir  . ~tly . the designer of an mdiv Mua \] con ' . pe~lent must stdl take ml . o account whm hother component should be act ivated by its outputs  , as well as who prey , des~ts inputs , precmcly because no prmc ~ plcs of interaction are provided by the model  . This entails , even within the loosely structured aggreg at i on hierarchy of the blackboard  , some commttment to deci' . ;ions about in ter - component traff ic in in fo rmation-rational answers to these cismns cannot be provided without a theory of mteract mn between individual components in a SUS  . 
Secondly . a considerable amount of effort has gone into specify in global scheduling heuristics for maintaining an agenda of knowledges our cc activation recordsm blackboard system ~  , and this has sometimes led to treating the control problem as a distinct issue independent of the don-~a in under consideration  , localism gitonasc paratc , schcdu \] ing , blackboard(I \] alz cr , Errnan and London , t980; Haycs-Roth , 1983a ) . 
Once again , this is because the blackboard framework , as iL is defined , provides no inherent constraints on mt cract ions  ( tayes-Hoth , 1983b ) . While this means that the model is powerful enough to replicate control strategies used in qualitatively different  . AI systems , as well as generatise to problem-solwng in multiple domains  ( laycs-I , : oth , 1983a ) , the blackboard method of control still fails to provide a complete answer to the scheduling problem  . It is intended predommantty for solving prob lems whose solutien depends on heuristics which must cope with large volumes of nmsy data  . 
In the context of a blackboard-based SUS , where the assumpt mn that the formation of the " correct " interpretation of an input signal will  , mevitably , be accompanied hy the generatmn of many compet ing  ( partial ) mter prctatmns is Impiicitm the redundancy encoded in the individual knowledge sources  , the only real and practical answer to the control problem remains the development of global strategies to keep unnecessary computatmn within practical limits  . These stratcgms are developed by tuning the system on the basis of performance critema : this tuareg appears to hmlt interactions to just  . those optimal cases which are likely to yield successful analyses  , t lowever , ms of a rast hefmal system might claim to embody a theory about ~ hicilint  , - , ractions are useful , this will never be represented in an explicit fo rm in the loosely structured syzt  . cm  components , but only implimtly in the the run-time behav iour of the whole system : and therefore is unlikely to be rce ow  . ' rable ( see the analogous criticism in \] I a y es-l ~ . oth , 1983a:55) . 
IINTER ACTIVE DETER MINISM :
ATHEORY OF NON-SERIAL INTER ACTION
In this section , we concentrate on the study of NSI between morphosyntact m and prosodic information in specch  , largely from the perspective of morphosyntacti canalysis  . This interaction occurs between two of the bet ter understood components of a SUS and there for e seems an appropriate starting point for the development of a theory of NSIs  . 
Lea ( 1950 ) argues that prosodic information will be of use for morphosyntaetic processing  . This dmcussion is bascd on the observation ( see Cooper & Paccia-Cooper , 1980; Cooper & Sorenson ,  1981) , that there is a strong correlation between some syntactic boundaries and prosodice f fects such as lengthening  , step up in fundamental frequency , changes of amplitude and , sometimes , pausing . However , many of these effects are probably irre levant to morphosyntactic analysis  , being , for example , side effects of production , such as planning , hesitation , after thorghts , false starts , and so forth . If prosody is to be utilised effectively to facilitate morphosyntactic analysis  , then werc qmrea theory eapab!c of indicating when an ambiguous prosodic cue such as lengthen ing is a consequence of syntactic environment and  , therefore , relevant to morphosyntactie analysis . 
None of tea's proposals make this distinct ion  . 
In order to develop such a theory , we require a precise account of morphosyntact ie analysmembedded in a model of a SUS which specifies the nature of the NSIs available to the morphosyntae tie analyser Conm dcra simple modular architecture of a SUS m which most informatmn flows upwards through each lcvel of processing  , as in the serial , hierarchical model This information is passed without delay  , so any operation performed by a processor will be passed up to its successorm the cham of p rocessors immediately  ( see Fig . l ) . 
Furthermore , we constrain the model as follows : at least f rom the point of word recognition upwards  , only one interpretation is computed at each level  . 
That is , word recognition returns a series of unique , correct words , then morphosyntactic analysis provides the unique  , correct grammatical description of these words  , and so forth . In order to implement such a constraint on the process mg  , the model includes , in addition to the primary flow of informat ion  , secondary channels of commumcation which provide for the NSIs  ( represented by stogie arrows tn the diagram )  . These interactive channels are bidirectional , allowing one component to request certain highly restrtcted kinds of information f roman other component and  , in principle , can connect any pair of processors in a
SUS\[SEMANTICSI

PARSE'~---J4>
WORDS'~1 PROSODYI
Fig .   1 imagine a morphosyntactie analyser which bui lds a unique structure without backtrack ing and employs no  , or very little , look-ahead Such a parser will face ae hmce point  , irresolvable morph csyntaetically , almost every time it encounters a structura lambiguity  , whether local or global Further , suppose that this parser seeks to apply some general strategies to resolve such cho ices  , that is , to select a particular grammatical in terp retation when faced with ambiguity  . 
If such a parser m to be able to operated cterrn inlstically  , and still return the correct analysis wi thouter rer  , m cases when a general strategy would yield the wrong analysis  , then it will require interactive channels for transmitting a signal capable of block ing the application of the strategy and forcing the correct analysis  . These are the secondary channels of communic at i on posited in the model of the 
SUS above.
A theory of NS ls should specify when , in terms of the operation of any individual p rocessor  , interaction will be necessary ; interactive channels for this parser must be capable of providing this information at the onset of any given morphosyntaetic ambiguity  , which is defined as the point at which the parser will have to apply its resolutions t rategy  . In order to make the concept of onset of ambigu ity precise a model of the This diagram is not intended to be complete and is only in c luded to illustrate the two different types of communication proposed in this paper  . 
morphosyntactic component of a SUS was designed and implemented  . This analyser ( henceforth the LEX ieal-CA Tegorial parser- because it employs an Extended Categorial Grammar  ( eg . Ades & Steedman ,  1982 ) representing morphosyntactic information as an extension of the lexicon  ) makes specific predictions about the temporal availability of non-morphosyntact ie information crucial to the theory of NS ls presented here  . LEXICAT's strategy for resolution of ambigu ities is approximately a combination of late closure  ( Frazier , 1979) and right association ( Kimball ,  1973) . 
LEXICAT is a species of shift-reduce parser whicher np ~ oys the same stack for the storage and analysis of input and inspects the top three cells of the stack before each parsing operation  . Reduction , however , never involves more than two e e ' . ls , so the top cell of the stack acts as a very res tricted one word lookahead buffer  . In general , LEXICAT reduces the items in cells two and three provided thai  . reduction between cells one and two is not g rammatically possible *  . 
; Yhen LEXICAT encounters ambiguity , in the majority of situations this sur faces as a choice between shifting and reduc ing  . When a shift-reduce e hmcearises between e it hercells one and two or two and three  , reduction will be preferred by default ; although , of course , a set of interactive requests will be generated at the point when thin choice ar is es  , and these may provide information which b locks the preferred strategy  . The approximate effect of the preference for reduction is that incoming material is at tached to the constituent currently under an a lysis which is " lowest " in the phrase struc ture tree  . LEXICAT is mrnilar to recent proposals by Church  ( 1980 )  , i :' ercira ( in press ) and Shieber (1983) , in that it employs general strategies , stated in terms of the parser's basic operations  , in order to parse determin is lieally with an ambiguous grammar  . 
A theory of NS ls should also specify how in teraction occurs  . When LEXICAT recogniscs a choice point , it makes a request for non-morphosyntactic in formation relevant to this thrace on all of the interactive channels to which it is connected  ; if any of these channels returns a positive response  , the default interpretation is overr idden  . The parser is therefore agnostic concerning which channel might provide the relevant info rmation  ; for example , analysing ( 3 ) hafore the Kingridesh ~: shorse it's : tsually groomed  . 
The onset of this r nor phosyntactic ambiguity arises when the horse has bcen analysed as a noun phrase  . 
LEXICAT must decide at this point whether Tides is to be treated as transitive or in transitive : the transitive  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
This is not completely accurate ; see 1984: Ch3 fer a full description of LEXICAT . 
E ~ r is zo e outlin ( , . d above . "( herefore , an interactive request will be generated reque : ~tin ~ information concerning the rcP:tmnship between these two constituents  . A simple yes/nor c sponse is all that m needed along this interactive channei : " yes " to prevent appl  ;  . cation of the strategy , " no " if the processor concerned finds nothing relevant to the decision  . In relation to this example , consider the channel to the prosodic analyser which monitors for prosodic " breaks "  ( defined in terms or vowel lengthening , change of fundamental frequency and so forth ) : wh cn the request is rce civcd the prosodic analyscr returns a positive response if such a break is prcs cnt in the appropriate part of the speech signal  . In ( 3 ) none of these cues is likely to occur since t . hcrcl cvant boundary is syntactically wcak ( see Cooper & Paecm-Coopcr ,  1980) , so the interactive request will not rcsu ! t in a positive response  , the default resolution strategy will apply and his horse will bcint crprctcd as direct object of rides  . In ( 4 ) \[ Tefore the h~ngrides his horse is usually groomed  , cn the ether hand , an interactive request will be generated at the same point  , but the interactive channel between the prosodic and morphosyntactic components is likely to produce a positive response since the boundary between rides end his horse is synLacticallys L rong cr  . Thus , altachment will be blocked , closing the subordinate clause , and thereby forcing the correct interpret at ion  . 
NSI , then , is restricted to a set . of yes/no responses over the interactive channels at the explicit  . :' e qucst of the processor connected to those channels  , where a positive response on one interactive channel suffices to override th : ~ unmarked choice which would be made in the absence of such a signal  . 
This highly restricted form of interaction is:  ; ufficient to guarantee that I , EXICAT will proouce the correct analysis even in cases of severe muttipl cambiguity  ; for example ,   , Jnalymng the noun compound in ( b ) lior one poxy rocket motor chambers , ( from Mareu : ~ ,  \[980:253) , th ( : rc are fourteen+licit morph:~syntact min terp retations  , assuming standard gramrnat . ical analyses ( eg . Sellirk , t983) . However , if this example were spoken and we assume that it would have the prosodic structure predicted by Cooper & Paceia-Cooper's  ( 1980 ) algorithm for deriving prosody .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Possibly Lhese responses hon!d be represented as confidence ratings rather L hana discrete choice  . 
In this case levels of certainty concerning the prc scnce/absencc of relevant events cculd berv pre~i'ntcd  , llowcver , for timrest of ~ . his paper we assume binary channels wi !! suffice  . 
+ Corresponding to the Catalan numbers ; see Martine Lal . (198 l ) . 
from syntactic structure , LEXICAT could produce the correct analyms without error  , just through interaction with the prosodic analyser  . As each noun enters the ar , alyser , reduction will be blocked by the general strategy but  , because LEXICAT will reeognise the existence of ambL guity  , an interactive request will be generated before each shift  . The prosodic break channel will then prevent reduction after epoxy and after ~ ot or  , forcing the correct analysis ( ( boron epoxy )   ( ( rocket motor ) chambers ) ) , as opposed to the default right-branching structure  . 
Thus , NSI between the morphosyntae tie and prosodic components can be captured by a bistable  , bidirectional link capable of transmitt ing a request and signaling a binary reponse  , either blocking or allowing the application of the relevant strategy according to the presence or absence of a prosodic break  . Given the simplicity of this interaction , the prosodic analyser requires no more information from Lhe parser than that a decision is requested concerning a particular boundary  . Nor need the prosodic analyser decide , prior to an interactive request on this channel  , whether a particular occurrence of , say lengthening , is signalling the presence of a prosodic break , rather than for instance stress , since the request itself will help resolve the interpretation of the cue  . Moreover , we have a simple generalisation about when in Leractive requests will be made since L his account of NSIs predicts that prosodic infe rmatmn will only be relevant to morphosyntaetic analysis at the onset of a morphosyntactic ambiguity  . 
If we assume ( boldly ) that this account of NSIbcL ween the morphosyntae tie and prosodic analysers will generalisc to a complete model of SUS  , then such a model rnakcs a set of predictions concerning the temporal availability of in terac Qv cinformation in the speech signal and represent a Qon of the context of utterance  . In effect , it claims that the SUS architecture simply presupposes that language is organiscd Jilthe appropriate fashion since the model will not  . function if it is not . We call this strong prediction about the temporal organisation of the speech signal the Interactive Determinism  ( ID ) Hypothes , ssince it is essen Qally an extension of Marcus '  ( 1980 ) Determinism Hypothesis . 
IITESTING
THE INTERACTIVE DETERMINIS MHYPOTttESIS
The ID hypothesis predicts th , ~t speech and the represcntation of context is organiscd in such a way that  . information will be available , when needed , vzaNSILo resolve a choice in any individual component at the point when that choice arises  . Thus m the case of prosodic interaction with morphosyntae tie analysis the theory predicts that a prosodic break should be present in speech at the onset of a morphosyntae tie and wh ich is not resolved by other non -morphosyntactic information  . This aspect of the ID hypothesis has beentes ted and corroborated by Paul Warren  ( 1983 ; in prep ; also see Briscoe , 1984: Ch4) , who has undertaken a series of speech product i on experiments in which  ( typically ) ten subjects read aloud a list of sentences . This list contains sets of pairs of local ly ambiguous sentences  , and some filler sentences so that the purpose of the experiment is not apparent to the subjec ts  . Their productions arc analysed acoustical ly and the results of this analysis arc then checked statistically  . The technique gives a good indicatio ~ of whether the cues associated with a prosodic b reak are present at the appropriate points in the speech signal  , and their cons ,   , stency across different speakers . 
Returning to examples (3) and (4) above , we noted that a prosodic break would be requi red in  ( 4 )  , but not (3) , to prevent attachment of rides and hzshorse . Warren found exactly this pattern of resul ts  ; the duration of rides ( and similar items in this position ) is an average 51% longer in ( 4 ) and the fall in fundamental frequency is a l most twice as great with a corresponding step up to horse  , as compared to a smooth declination across th is boundary in  ( 3 )  . 
Similarly , analysing ( 6 )   7he company awarded the contract \[ to/was\] the highest bidcler  . 
I , E) , qCAT prefers attachment of The company to awarded  , treating awarded as the main verb . In the case where awarded must be treated as the beginning cf a reduced relative  , Warren found that the duration of the finals y llable of company is lengthened and that the same pattern of fall and step up in fundament a l frequency occurs  . Perhaps the mo'~t interesting cases are ambiguous constituent quest mns  ; Church (19 g0 , 117 ) argued that it is probably impossible to parse the sedcterministieally by employing look-ahead : " The really hard problem with wh-movement is finding the " gap " where the wh -element originated  . This is not particularly difficult for a non-deterministic competence theory  , but it is ( probably ) impossible for a deterministic processing model  . " LEXICAT predicts that in a sentence such as ( 7 ) ~ V hodid you want to give the presents to 5~ . e ? the potential point of attachment of Who as direct object of want will bc ignored by default in preference for the immediate at tachment of to give  . Thus there is a prediction that the sentence , when spoken , should contain a prosodic break at this point  . Warren has found some evidence for this pred iction  , i . e . want is lengthened as compared to examples where this is not the correct point of attachment of the prcposed phrase  , such as (8) Who did you want t . ~ give the presents to ? but the prosodic cues , although consistent , are comparatively weak , and it is not clear that listeners are ut i lising them in the manner predicted by the theory  ( see Briscoe , 1984: Ch4) . 
A different kind of support is provided by sentences such as  ( 9 ) Before the I~n grides a servant grooms h is horse  . 
which exhibit the same local ambiguity as ( 3 ) and (  , t ) but where the semantic interpretation of the noun phrase makes the direct object reading implausible  , in this case it is likely that an interact ive channel between the semantic and morphosyntact l canalysers would block the incorrect interpretation  . So there is a prediction that the function a lload on prosodic information will decrease and  , therefore , that the prosodic cues to the break may be less marked  . This prediction was again corroborated by Warren who found that the prosodic break in examples such as  ( 9 ) was significantly less rnarked acoustica lly than for c ~ arn plcs such as  ( 4 ) * . In general then , these experimental results support the ID hypothesis  . 
Ill CONTR Ol , STRUCI ' UREANDORGANISATION In a SU~J based on the ID model  , the main flow of information will be defined by the tasks of each component  , and their medium of communication , will be a natural consequence of these tasks ; as for the serial , hierarchical model . However , in the ID model , unlike the hierarchical model , the rearcless overheads because unnecessary computation at any icv  (  . l of processing will be eliminated by the NSIs between components  . These interactions will , of course , require a large number of interactive channels  ; but these do not imply a common representation language because the information which passes along them is representation-independent and restricted to a minimal request and ab in ary response  . Each channel in the full SUS will be dedicated to a specific interaction between components  ; so the morphosyntactie component will require a prosodic break channel and a unique re ferent channel  ( see example ( 1 ) ) , and so forth . 
Thus , a complete model of SUS will implement a theory of the types of NSI required between all components  . 
Finally , the ID model will not require that any indiv idual processor has knowledge of the nature of the operations of another processor  ; that is , the Note that this result is in explicable for theories which attempt to derl ve the prosodl c structure of a sentence directly from its syntactic structure  ; see Cooper 3: Paccia-Cooper(\] . 980:181f) . 
2 63 morphosyr : tacLic analyserneed riot know what is being eoiT~puted at the other end of the prosodic breakchannel  , or how ; norriced the p : ' osodic analyser know why it is eomput in ~ the presence or absence of a prosodic break  . Rather , the knowledge that this in for'ma ~ lonispotentia lly important is expressed by the existence of this particular in Leractive channel  . 
The control structure of this model is stra ig htforward  ; after each separate operation of each in div idual c~mponent the results of this operation will be passed to the next component in theser ial chainol processors  . An interactive request ~' ill be made by an , component only when faced with an in determinism irresolvable in " erms of the input avai lable to it  . No further scheduhn goreent . ralised control of processing will be reqmred . Furthermore , although each individual eomK . enent determines when . N3Is will occur , because of the restricted nature of this in teraction each component can still be developed as a completely independent knowledge source  . 
The deterministic nature of the individual component ~ of this SUS eliminates the need for any glob  , dh curm ! ies to be brought into the analysis o\ [ the speech signal  . Thus we have di--pensed neatly with the requi rement for an over-powerful and over-genera l problem-solving framework  , such as the blackboard , and replacr : dit with a theory specific to the domain under conm deralion  ; namely , language . The theory of X~qs offers a uatis faetory specific method for speech und ci  . -: tall ding which allow rr the separate specialist c  , ~mpor ; ent procedures of a SUS to be " a ! Forithmetized '" and compiled  . As Erman et al ( 1980::L16 ) suggest : " In such a ease tile f lexibili ty of a system like H carsay-ll may no longer be needed "  . 
" fhe restrictions on the nature and direct ionality of NSI ehanne is in a SUE :  , and the situations in which they\[iced to be activated  , a ; I owt ; a modular system who ' . ~ e control structure is not i nuch more complex thanth :  . ~t of the hierarchical mode , and yet , via the net . work of interactive channels , achieves the efficiency sought 5y the heterarchieal and blackboard models , without the concomitant prcblems of common knowledge representations and complexeom ! Tmni ~zations protocols between separate knowledge sources  . Thus , the ID mode ! dispenses with the overhe . id costs of data-directed activation of ' . mowledge sources and the need for opportunist ic scheduling or a complex focus-of-cont rol mechanism  . 
IVCONCLUSION
In this paper we have proposed a very idealised model of a SUS with a simple organisation and control structure  , Clearly , the ID model assumes a greater level of unders tanding of many aspects of speech processing than is current  . For example , we have assurn cd that the word recognition component is capable of returning a series of unique  , correct lexical items ; even with interaction of the kind envisaged , it is doubtful that our current understand ing of acoustic-phcnetic analysis is good enough for it to be possible to build such a component now  . Nevertheless , ti .   . experimental work reported by Marslcn-Wilson & Tyler  ( 1980 ) and Cole & Jakimik ( 1980 )  , for example , suggests that listeners are capable of access ing a unique Icxical item on the basis of the acoustic signal and interactive fc ackf rom the developing analysis of the utterance and its context  ( often before the acoustic signal is complete )   . More seriously , from the perspective of interactive determinism , little has been said about the many other interactive channels which will be required for speech understanding and  , in particular , whether , these channels can be as restricted a . ~: the prosodic breakchannel . For example , consider the channel which will be required to capture the interaction in example  ( 9 )  ; this will need to be sensiLive to something like semantic " anomaly "  . 
tIowever , ? . emantic anomaly is an inherently vague concept , particularly by comparison with that of a prosodic break  . Similarly , as we noted above , the morphosyntactic analyser will require an interactive channel to the discourse an a lyser which in dieates whether a noun phrase followed by a potential relative clause  , such as tar horse in (3) , has a unique referent . However . since this e hannel would only seem to be re levant to ambiguities involving relative c lauses  , it appears to east doubt on the claim that interaetive requests are generated automatical ly on every channel each time any type of ambiguity is encountered  . This , in turn , suggests that the control structure proposed in the last section is over simplified  . 
Nevertheless , by studying these tasks in terms of far more re  ,   ; trict cd and potentially more e omputationally efficient models  , we are more likely to uncover restrictions on language which  , once discovered , will take us a step closer to tractable so lutions to the task of speech understanding  . Thus , the work reported here suggests that language is organised in such a manner that morphosyntact i canalysis can proceed detcrministically on the basis of a very restricted parsing algorithm  , because non-structural information necessary to resolve ambiguities will be available in the speech signal  ( or representation of the context of utte rance  ) at the point when the choice arises during mcr phosyntaetic analysis  . 
Tile account of morphosyntactie analysis that thls constraint allows is more elegant  , parsimonious ( Marcus ,  1980) . Firstly , an account based on lookahead is forced to claim that local and global ambiguities are resolved by different mechanisms  ( since the latter , by definition , cannot be resolved by the use of morphosyntaetic information further downstream in the signal  )  , whilst the ID model requires only one mechanism . Secondly , restricted lookahead fails to delimit accurately the class of socalled garden path sentences  ( Milne , 1982; Briscoe ,  1983) , whilst the ID account correctly predicts their " interactive " nature  ( Briscoe ,  1982 , 1984; Crain & Steedman , in press ) . Thirdly , lookahead involves delaying decisions , a strategy which is made implausible , at least in the context of speech understanding , by the body of experimental results summar ised by Tyler  ( 1981 )  , which suggest that morphosynta : ': tie analysis is extremely rapid  . 
The generatisation of these results to a complete model of SUS represents commitment o a research programme which sets as its goal the discovery of const  . raints on language which allow the associated processing tasks to b c implemented in an eff icient and tractable manner What is advocated here  , therefore , is the development of a computational theory of iangoage processing derived through the study of language from the perspective of these process ing tasks  , much in the ~ a meway in whm h Marr ( 1982 ) developed his comput . ational theory of vision . 
Acknowledgements : We would like to thank David Carter  , Jane Robinson , Karen SparckJones and Jones and John Tait for their helpful comments  . Mistakes remain our own . 
VREFERENCES
Ades , A . and Steedman , M . (1982) ' On the Order of Words ' , Linguistics and Philosophy , col . 5, 320-363 Balzer , R . , Erman , L . , London , P . and Williams , C . (1980 ) ' HEARSAY-Ill : A Domain-Independent Framework for Expert Systems '  , Proceedings of the AAAI(1) , 
SLanford , CA , pp . 108-110
Briscoe,E . (1982 ) ' Garden Path Sentences or Garden Path Utterances  ? '   , Cambridge Papers in Phonetics and Experimental Lingui  . ~ tics , vol . \],19 Briscoc , E . (1983 ) ' Determinism and its implementation mP arsifal ' in SparckJones  , K and Wilks , Y . ( eds . ), Automatic Natural Language Parsing , Ell is
Horwood , Chichester , pp . 61-68
Briscoe,E . (1984 ) Towards an Understanding of Spoken Sentence Comprehension : The Interactive Determinism H ~ jpothesis  , Doctoral Thesis , 
Cambridge University
Church , K (1980) On Memory Limitations in Natural
Language Processing , MIT/LCS/TR-245
Cole , R and Jakimek , J . (1980) ' A Model of Speech Perception ' in Cole , R . ( eds ) , Perception and Production of Fluent Speech , Lawrence Erlbaum , 
New Jersey
Cooper , W . and Paccia-Cooper , J . (1980) 3yntax and Speech , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , Mass Cooper , W . and Sorenson , J .   ( 1981 ) Pundamental Prequency in Sentence Production , Springer
Verlag , New York
Crain , S . and Steedman , M . ( In press ) ' On Not Being Led Up the Garden Path : the Use of Context by the Psychologmal Parser ' in Dowty  , D . , Karttuncn , L and Zwicky , A . ( eds . ), Natural Language Processing,
Cambridge University Press , Cambridge
Erman , L , Hayes-Roth , F . , Lesser , V . and Rcddy , R . (1980 ) ' The tlear say-II Speech Understanding System : Integrating Knowledge to Resolve Uncertainty '   , 
Computing Surveys , col . 12, 213-253
Erman , L . and Lesser , V . (1975 ) ' A Multi-Level Organisation for Problem Solving Using Many  , Diverse , Cooperating Sources of Knowledge' , Proceedings of the 4th IJCAI , Tbilisi , Georgia , pp . d83-490 Fra:'ier , L .   ( 1979 ) On Comprehending Sentences : Syntactic Parsing 52rategies   , IULC , Bloomington , 
Indiana Iayes-Roth , B . (1983a ) A Blackboard Model of Control , Report No . HPP-83-38, Department of Computer
Science , Stanford University llayes-Roth , B . (1983b )   7he Blackboard Architecture : A General Framework for Problem Solving ?  , Report No HPP-83-30 , Department . of Computer Science,
Stanford University
Kimbatl,J . (1973 ) ' Seven Principles of Surface Structure Pars ing in Natural Language '  , Cognition , col . 2, 15-W . l , ea ( cds .  ) , Trends in Speech Recognition , Prentice Hall , New Jersey , pp 166-205 Marcus , M . (1980 ) A Theory of S ) jntactie Recognition for Natural I~nguage , MIT Press , Cambridge , Mass . 
Marr , D . (1982) V/sion , W.H . Freeman and Co ., San

Mars lcn-Wdson , W . and Tyler , L . (1980) ' The TemporalStructure of Spoken\]_ , anguagcUnderstanding : the Perception of Sentences and Words in Sentences '  , 
Cbgnition , col 8, 1-74
Martin , W . , Church , K . and Patil , R . (1982 ) Preliminary Analysis of a I3readth-F~rst Parsing Algorithm :
Theoretical and Experimental Results,
MIT/I , CS/TR-261
Milne,R . (1982)' Predicting Garden Path Sentences ',
Cognitive Science , col . 6, 349-373
Percira , F . ( \ ] n press ) ' A New Characterization of Attachment Pre ferences ' in Dowty  , D . , Karttunen , L . 
and Zwicky , A.(eds .), Natural I~nguage Processing,
Cambridge University Press , Cambridge
Selkwk , E . (1983) The Syntaz of Words , MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass.
Shieber , S(1983) ' Sentence Disambiguation by a Shift-21 . stA ~ . n . ~zctl , , ~4eeti . ng of AC\[, . C ~ rnb ridg c , Mass , pp 113-ilFJt , ~eddy , JL and Erman , \[  , (197 , 5 ) ' Tutorial on System Organls at lon for Speech Understanding ' in R ! eddy  ( eds )  , Speech\[?ecogr ~ tior ~" Invited Papers of th . ell '; J ' . ","  . b ~ . qrrtpos'i . um . Academic Pre~s , New
York , pp . , IbT-,179' ryler , L . (1981) ' , ~er ~ ai and Interactly e-Parallel Theories of Sentence Proces ~  ; ing ' , 7 ~ eorelLcat\[ , ir ~ g ~ zistics , vot . \[L29-65 War'ren , P . (19l\]3)' Temporal and Non-Tern poral Cues to Sent . enccStructure ' . 6 " ctmb mdgePapersir LPhonetics ~ ndI ; zperimenta . ll , ? r ~ guist ? cs , vot . H Warren , P . ( nprep ) lhz rationali ; ~ctors in 5~geech ~5' ocess in E , Doctoral Thesis , Cambridge University
