UNDERST ANDING PRAG MATICA LLYILL-FOR MEDINPUT
FL Sandra Carberry
Department of Computer Science
University of Delaware
Newark , Delaware 19711 USA

An utterance may be syntactically and semant -I cally wellformed yet violate the pragmatic rules of the world model  . This paper presents a context-based strateEy for constructing a cooperative but limited response to pragmatl cally ill-formed queries  . Sug~estlonheuristics use a context model of the speaker's task inferred from the preceding dialogue to propose revisions to the speaker's ill-formed query  . Selection heuristics then evaluate these suggestions based upon semantic and relevance criteria  . 
IINTRODUCTION
An utterance may be syntactically and semant -ically wellformed yet violate the prasmatlc rules of the world model  . The system will therefore view it as " ill-formed " even if a native speaker finds it perfectly normal  . This phenomenon has been termed " pragmatic over shoot "\[ Sond heimer and Weischedel  , 1 980\] and may be divided into three classes :\[ I\] User-specifled relationships that do exist in the world model  . 
\[2\] not
EXAMPLE : " Which apartments are for sale ?"
In a real estate model , single apartments are rented , not sold . However apartment buildings , condominiums , townhouses , and houses are for sale . 
User-specified restrictions on the relationships which can never be satisfied  , even with new entries . 
EXAMPLE : " Which lower-level English courses have a maxim  , - , enrollment of at most 25 students ? " In a University world model , it may be the case that the maxim , - , enrollments of This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grants  IST-8009673 and IST-8311400 lower-level English courses are constrained to have values larger than  25 but that such constraints do not apply to the current enrollments of courses  , the maximum enroll-ments of upper-level English courses  , and the maximum enrollments of lower-level courses in other departments  . The sample utterance is pragmatically ill-formed since world model constraints prohibit the restricted relations specified by t be user  . 
\ [3\] User-specifled relationships which result in a query that is irrelevant to the user's underlying task  . 
EXAMPLE : " What is Dr . Smlth's home address ?"
The home addresses of faculty at a university may be available  . However if a student wants to obtain special permission to take a course  , a query requesting the instructor's home address is inappropriate  ; the speaker should request the instructor's office addressor phone  . Although such utterances do not violate the underlying domain world model  , they are a variation of pragmatic over shoot in that they violate the listener's model of the speaker's underlying task  . 
A cooperative part lc/pant uses the information exchanged during a dialogue and his knowledge of the domain to hypothesize the speaker's goals and plans for achieving those goals  . This context model of goals and plans provides clues for interpreting utterances and formulating cooperative responses  . When pragmatic over shoot occurs , a human listener can modify the speaker's ill -formed query to form a similar query X that is both meaningful and relevant  . For example , the query " What is the area of the special weapons mag ~ a zine of the Alamo ?" erroneously presumes that storage locations have an AREA attribute in the REL database of ships\[ Thompson  ,  1980\]  ; this is an instance of the first class of pragmatl cover shoot  . Depending upon the speaker's underlying task , a listenerm/ght infer that the speaker wants to know the REMAINING-CAPACITY  , TOTAL-CAPACITY , or perhaps even the LOCATION ( if " area " is interpreted as referring to " place "  ) of the Alamo's Special Weapons Magazine . 
In each case , a cooperative participant uses the preceding dialogue and his knowledge of the the desired information  . 
This paper presents a method for handling this first class of pragmatic over shoot by formulating a modified query X that satisfies the speaker's needs  . Future research may extend thls technique to handle other pragmatic over shoot classes  . 
Our work on pragmatic over shoot processing is part of an ongoing project to develop a robust natural language interface\[Weischedel and Son -dhetmer  ,  1983\] . Mays\[1980\] , Webber and Nays\[1983\] , and Ramshaw and Welschedel\[1984\] have suggested mechanisms for detecting the occurrence of pragmatic over shoot and identifying its causes  . 
Thems . ln contribution of our work is a context-based strategy for constructing a cooperative butllm ~ted response to pragmatically ill-formed queries  . This response satisfies the user's perceived needs  , inferred beth from the preceding dialogue and the ill-formed utterance  . In particular , \[ i \] A context model of the user's goals and plans provides expectations about utterances  , expectations that may be used to model the user's goals  . We use e context mechanism\[Carberry ,   1983\] to build the speaker's underlying task-related plan as the dialogue progresses and differentiate between local and global contexts  . 
\ [23 Only alternative queries which mis~ht represent the user's intent or at least satisfy his needs are considered  . Our bvDothesls is that the user'aln ferred plan , ~ by the context model , ~ Jtggg4 Lt , ~substitution for the ZL~causln~the overshoot . 
IIKNOWLED GEREPRES ~ TATION
Our system requires a representation for each of the following : \[ i \]  \[2\]   \[3\]  \[ , \] the set of dome/n-dependent plans and goals the speaker  , splan inferred from the preceding dialogue the existing relationships among attributes and entity sets in the underlying world model the semantic difference of attributes  , relations , entity sets , and functlon ~ Plans are represented using an extended STRIPS\[Fikes and Nilsson  , 1971\] formalism . A plan can contain subgoals and actions that have associated plans  . We use a context tree \[ Carberry ,   1983\] to represent the speaker's inferred plan as constructed from the preceding dialogue  . Nodes within this tree represent goals and actions which the speaker has investlgated  ; these nodes are descendants of parent nodes representing higher-level goals whose associated plans contain these lower-level actions  . The context tree represents the global context or over all plan inferred for the speaker  . The focused plan is a subtree of the context tree and represents the local context or particular aspect of the plan upon which the speaker's attention is currently focused  . This focused plan produces the strongest expectations for future utterances  . 
An entity-relationship model states the possible primitive relationships among entity sets  . 
Our world model includes a generalization hierarchy of entity sets  , attributes , relations , and functions and also specifies the types of attributes and the dome/ns of functions  . 
IIICONSTRUCTING THECONTEXT MODEL
The plan construction component is described in \[ Carberry  ,  1983\] . It hypothesizes and tracks the changing task -level goals of a speaker during the course of a dialogue  . Our approach is to infer a lower-level task -related goal fr sm the speaker  , s explicitly comaunl cated goal , relate it to potential hi~er-level plans , and build the complete plan context as the dialogue progresses  . 
The context mechanism distinguishes local and glo -balcon texts and uses these to predict new speaker goals from the current utterance  . 
IV PRAG MATICO VERS HOOT PROCESSING
Once pragmatic over shoot has been detected , the system formulates a revised query QR requesting the lnformatlon needed by the user  . Our hypothesis is that the user's inferred plan , represented by the context model , suggests a substitution for the proposition that caused the pragmatic over shoot  . The system then selects from amongst these suggestions using the criteria of relevance to the current dialogue  , semantic difference from the proposition in the user's query  , and the type of revision operation applied to this proposition  . 
A . Su~stion
The suggestion mechanism examines the current context model and possible expansions of its constituent goals and actions  , proposing substitutions for the proposition causing the pragmatl cover shoot  . This erroneous proposition represents either a non-exlstent attribute or entity set relationship or a function applied to an inappropriate set of attribute values  . 
The suggestion mechanism applies two classes of rules  . The first class proposes a simple sub-or function appearing in the erroneous proposition  . The second class proposes a conjunction of propositions representing an expanded relatlon ~ ip path as a substitution for the user-specifled propositlo ~ These two classes of rules may be used together to propose both an expanded relationship path  . and an attribute or entity set substitution . 
I . SimD~-Substitution Rules
Suppose a student wants to pursue an independent study project  ; such projects can be directed by full-time or part-time faculty but not by faculty who are " extension " or " on sabbatical "  . 
The student might erroneously enter the query " what is the classificatioD of Dr  . Smith ? " Only students have classification attributes  ( such as Arts & Science-1985 , Engineerlng-1987) ; faculty have attributes such as rank , status , age , and title . Pursuing an independent study project under the direction of Dr  . Smith requires that Dr . 
Smith's status be " full-time " or " part-time " . If the listener knows the student wants to pursue independent study  , then he might infer that the student needs the value of this status attribute and anger the revised query " What is the status of Dr  . Smith ? " The suggestion mechanic , contains five simple substitution rules for handling such erroneous queries  . One such rule proposes a substitution for the user-specifled attribute in the erroneous propositio ~ Intuitively  , a listener anticipates that the speaker will need to know each entity and attribute value in the speaker's plan inferred from the domain and the preceding dialogue  . Suppose this inferred plan contains an attribute ATTI for a member of ENTITY-SETI  , namely ATTI(ENTITY-SETI , attribute-value ) , and that the speaker erroneously requests the value of attribute ATTU for a memberent l of ENTITY-SETI  . Then a cooperative listener might infer that the value of ATTI for entityent l will satisfy the speaker's needs  , especially if attributes ATTI and ATTU are closely related  . 
The substitution mechanism searches the user's inferred plan and its possible expansions for propositions whose arguments unify with the arguments in the erroneous proposition causing the pragmatic over shoot  . The above rule then suggests substituting the attribute from the plan's proposition for the attribute specified in the user's query  . This substitution produces a query relevant to the current dialogue and may capture the speaker 's intent or at least satisfy his needs  . 
2. ExDanded Path Rules
Suppose a student wants to contact Dr . Smithto discuss the appropriate background for a new seminar course  . Then the student might enter the query " What is Dr  . Smith's phone number ? " Phone numbers are associated with homes  , offices , and department aloffices . Course discussions with professors may be handled in person or by phone  ; contacting a professor by phone requires that the student dial the phone number of Dr  . Smith , soffice . Thus the listener might infer that the student needs the phone number of the office occu-pied by Dr  . Smith . 
The second class of rules handles such " missing logical Joins "  .   ( This is somewhat related to the philosophical concept of " deferred ostenal on "\[ Qulne  , 1569\] . ) These rules apply when the entity sets are not directly related by the user-specified relation RLU---but there is a path R in the entity relationship model between the entity sets  . We call this path expansion since by finding the missing Joins between entity sets  , we are constructing an expanded relational path . 
Suppose the inferred plan for the speaker includes a sequence of relations 
R1(ENTITY-SETI,~TITY-SETA)
R2(ENTITY-SETA,~TITY-SETB)
R3 ( ENTITY-SETB , ~ TITY-SET 2) ; then the listener anticipates that the speaker will need to know those members of ~ TITY-SETI that are related by the composition of relations RI  , R2 , R3 to a member of EIqTITY-SET 2 . If the speaker erroneously requests those members " of ENTITY-SETI that are related by ~  ( or alternatively RI or R3 ) to members of ~ TITY-SET 2 , then perhaps the speaker really meant the expanded path  RImR2*R3  . The path expansion rules suggest substituting this expanded path for the user-specified relation  . 
We employ a user model to constrain path expansion  . This model represents the speaker's beliefs about membership in entity sets  . If pragmatic over shoot occurs because the speaker misused a relation 
R(ENTITY-SETI , ~ TITY-SET 2 ) by specifying an argument that is not a member of the correct entity set for the relation  , then path expansion is permitted only if the user model indicates that the speaker may believe the erroneous argument is not a member of that entity set  . 
EXAMPLE : " Which be disDr . Brown assigned ? " Suppose beds are assigned to patients in a hospital model  . If Dr . Brown is a doctor and doctors cannot simul taneously be patients  , then path expansion is permitted if our user model indicates that the speaker may recognize that Dr  . Brown is not a patient . 
In this case , our expanded path expression may retrieve the beds assigned to patients of Dr  . Brown , if this is suggested by the inferred task-related plan  . 

To limit the components of path expressions to those relations which can be meaningfully combined in a given context  , we make a strong assumption : that the relations comprising the relevant expansion appear on a single path within the context tree representing the speaker's inferred plan  . For example , suppose the speaker's inferred plan is to take C-$105  . Expansion of this plan will contain the two actions Learn-From-Teacher-In-Class  ( SPEAKER , section , faculty ) such that Teach ( faculty , section )
Obtain-Necessary-Extra-Help ( SPEAKER , section , teaching-asslstant ) such that Assists ( teaching-assistant , section ) The associated plans for these two actions specify respectively that the speaker attend class at the time the section meets and that the speaker meet with the section's teaching assistant at the time of his office hours  . Now consider the utterance " When are teaching assistants available ? " A direct relationship between teach in E assistants and time does not exist  . The constraint that all components of a path expression appear on a single path in the inferred task-related plan prohibits composing Assists  ( teachlng-asslstant , sectlon ) and Meet-Time ( sectlon , tlme ) to suggest a reply consisting of the times that the  CSI05 sections meet . 
S . ~ ~ cha~sm
The substitution and path expansion rules propose substitutions for the erroneous proposition that caused the pragmatic over shoot  . Three criteria are used to select frnm the proposed substitutions the revised query  , if any , that is most likely to satisfy the speaker's intent in making the utterance  . 
First , the relevance of the revised query to the speaker 's plans and goals is measured by three factors : \[ i \] A revised query that interrogates an aspect of the current focused plan is most relevant to the current dialogue  . 
\ [2\] The set of higher level plans whose expansions led to the current focused plan form a stack of increasingly more general  , and therefore less immediately relevant , active plans to which the user may return . A revised query which interrogates an aspect of an active plan closer to the top of this stack is more expected than a query which reverts back to a more general active plan  . 
\[33 Within a given active plan , a revised query that investigates the single -level expansion of an action is more expected  , and therefore more relevant , than a revised query that investigates details at a much deeper level of expsnsion  . 
Second , we can classify the substitution T-->V which produced the revlsed query into four categories  , each of which represents a more signl-fl cant , and therefore less preferable , alteration of the user's query ( Figure I ) . Category I contains expanded relational paths R11P  . ? S . . . mRn such that the user-speclfied attribute or relation appears in the path expression  . For example , the expanded path Treats ( Dr . BrOwn , patient ) Wls-Assigned ( patient , room ) is a Category I substitution for the user -specified proposition 
Is-Assigned ( Dr . Brown , rotz ~)

CATEGORY TERMT
Expanded relational path including the user -specifled attribute or relation Attribute  , relation , entity set , or function semantically similar to that specified by the user 
Expanded relational path , including an attribute or relation semantically similar to that speclfled by the user 
Double substitution : entity set and relation semantically similar to a user-speclfled entity set and relation 

VARIABLEV
User-speclfled attribute or relation User-specified attribute  , \[ relation , entity se ~ , or function
User-specifled attribute or relation User-specified entity set \[ and relat ionI 


Figure I . Classification of Query Revision Operations query " Which be disDr  . Brown assigned ? " Category 2 contains simple substitutions that are semantically similar to the attribute  , relation , entity set , or function specified by the speaker . An example of Category 2 is the previously discussed substitution of attribute " status " for the user specified attribute " classification " in the query " What is the classification of Dr  . Smith ? " Categories 3 and 4 contain substitutions that are formed by either a Category I path expansion followed by a Category  2 substitution or by two
Category 2 substl tutlons.
Third , the semantic difference between the revised query and the original query is measured in two ways  . First , if the revised query is an expanded path , we count the number of relations comprising that path  ; shorter paths are more desirable than longer ones  . Second , if the revised query contains an attribute , relation , function , or entity set substitution , we use a generalization hierarchy to semantically compare substitutions with the items for which they are substituted  . Our difference measure is the distance from the item for which the substitution is being made to the closest common ancestor of it and the substituted item  ; small difference measures are preferred . In particular , each attribute , relation , function , and entity set ATTRFENT is assigned to a primitive semantic class : 
PRIM-CLASS ( ATTRFENT , CLASSA)
Each semantic class is assigned at most one immediate auper class of which it is a proper subset : 
SUPER ( CLASSA , CLASSB)
We define function f such that f(ATTRFENT , i+1) = CL  ~ . SS if PRIM-CLASS ( ATTRFENT , CLAS Sal ) and SUPER ( CLA $ Sal , CLASS a2) and SUPER ( CLASS a 2 , CLASS aS ) and .   .   . 
and SUPER ( CLkSSal , CLASS)
If a revised query proposes substituting
ATTRFENT new for ATTRFENT old , then semant lc#difference ( ATTRFENT new , ATTRFENTold ) = NIL if there does not exist j , k such that f(ATTRFENT new , j ) = f(ATTRFENT old , k ) = mlnk such that there exists j such that f ( ATTRFENT new , j ) = f(ATTRFENT old , k ) otherwise An initial set is constructed conslstil ~ g of those suggested revised queries that interrogate an aspect of the current focused plan in the context model  . These revised queries are particularly relevant to the current local context of the dialogue  . Members of this set whose difference measure is small and whose revision operation consists of a path expansion or simple substitution are considered and the most relevant of these are selected by measuring the depth within the focused plan of the component that suggested each revised query  . If none of these revised queries meets a predetermined acceptance level  , the same selection criteria are applied to a newly constructed set of revised queries sug~sted by a higher level active plan whose expansionied to the current focused plan  , and a less stringent set of selection criteria are applied to the original revised query  . 
~ et .   ( The revised queries in this new set are not immediately relevant to the current local dialogue context but are relevant to the global context  . ) As we consider revised queries suggested by higher level plans in the stack of active plans representing the global context  , the acceptance level for previously considered queries is decreased  . Thus revised queries which were not rated hill yenough to terminate processing when first suggested may eventually be accepted after less relevant aspects of the dialogue have been investigated  . This relaxation and query set expansion is repeated until either an acceptable revised query is produced or all potential revised queries have been consldered  . 
VEX ~. MPLF ~
Several examples are provided to illustrate the suggestion and selection strategies  . 
\[ I\]Relation or Entity Set Substitution " Which apartments are for sale ?" 
In a real estate model , single apartments are rented , not sold . However apartment buildings , cond c~ini , - , s , townhouses , and houses are for sale . Thus the speaker's utterance contains the erroneous proposition 
For-Sale ( apartment ) where apartment is a member of entity set

If the preceding dialogue indicates that the speaker is seeking temporary living arrangements  , then expansion of the context model representing the speaker's inferred plan will contain the posslble action 
Rent ( SPEAKER , apartment ) such that For-Rent ( apartment ) The substitution rules propose substituting relation For-Rent frc ~ this plan in place of relation For-Sale in " the speaker's utterance  . 
On the other hand , if the preceding dialogue indicates that the speaker represents are ale state investment trust interested in expanding its holdings  , an the speaker's inferred plan will contain the possible action Purchase  ( SPEAE ~ B , apartment-building ) where apartment-buildlngls a member of entity set APART meNT-BUILDING  . Purchasing an apartment building necessitates that the bttllding be for sale or that one convince the owner to sell It  . Thus one expansion of this Purchase plan in c ludes the precondition 

The substitution rules propose substituting entity set APABT ~ NT-BUILDING from thls plan for the entity set APABT ~ NT in the speaker's utterance  . 
\ [2\] Function Substitution " What is the average rank of CS faculty ? " The function AVEBAGE cannot be applied to non-numerlc elements such as " professor "  . 
The speaker's utterance contains the erroneous proposition 
AVERAGE(rank , fn-value ) such that Department-Of ( faculty , CS ) and Bank ( faculty , rank ) If the preceding dialogue indicates that the speaker is evaluating the C~department  , then an expansion of the context model represent -lng the speaker's lnferred plan wlll contain the possible action 
Evaluate-Faculty ( SPEAKER , CS)
The plan for Evaluate-Faculty contains the action
Evaluate ( SPEAKER , ave-rank ) such that ORDERED-AVE(rank , ave-rank ) and Department-Of ( faculty , CS ) and Bank ( faculty , rank ) If a domain D of non-numeric elements has an explicit ordering  , then we can associate wlth each of then dome . ln elements an ln dex number between 0 and n1 speclfylng its poaltlon in the sorted domain . The function ORDERED-AVE appearing In the speaker ' splan operates upon non-numeric elements of such domains by calculating the average of the index numbers associated wlth each element instead of attempting to calculate the average of the e lements themselves  . The substitution rules propose substituting the function ORDERED-AVE from the speaker's in ferred plan for the function AVERAGE in the speaker's utterance  . 
ORDERED-AVE and AVERAGE are semantically similar functions so the difference measure for the resultant revised query will be emall  . 
\ [3\] Expanded Relational Path " when does Mltchelme et ?" 
A university model does not contain a relation mET between FACULTY and TI~S  . 
H ~ ever , faculty teach courses , present seminars , chairoo amlttees , etc . , and courses , seminars , and committees meet at scheduled times . The speaker's utterance contalns theer roneous proposition 
Meet-Tlme ( Dr . Mttchel , time)
If the preceding dialogue indicates that the speaker is considering taking  CSI05  , then an expansion of the context model representing the speaker's inferred plan will contain the action Earn-Credit-In-Sectlon  ( SPEAKER , section ) such that Is-Sect lon-Of ( section , CS105) Expansion of the plan for Earn-Credlt-ln-
Section contains the action
Learn-From-Teacher-In-C1 ass ( SPEAKEB , section , faculty ) such that Teach ( faculty , section ) and the plan forthls action contains the action 
Attend-Class ( SPEAKER , place , time ) such that Meet-Plave ( sectlon , place ) and Meet-Time ( section , time ) The two relations Teach ( Dr . ~fltchel , sectton ) and Meet-Time ( section , time ) appear on the ? same path in the context model . Therefore the path expansion heuristics suggest the expanded relational path T each  ( Dr . Mitchel , section ) " Meet-Time ( aectlon , time ) as a substitution for the relation
Meet-Time ( Dr . Mitchel , time ) in the user's utterance . Only one arc Is added to produce the expanded re lational path and it contains the user -specifled relation Meet-Time  , so the difference measure for this revlsed query ls small  . 
VIBE LATED WORK
Erlk Mays\[1980\] discusses the recognition of pragmatic over shoot and proposes a response con-talnlng all st of those entity sets that are related by the user -speclfied relation and all st of those relations that connect the user-speclfled entity sets  . Houever he does not use a model of whether these pos ~ ibllltles are applicable to the user's underlying task  . In a large database , such responses will be too lengthy and include too many irrelevant alternatives  . 

Kaplan\[1979\] , Chang\[1978\] , and Sowa\[ 1   976\] have investigated the problem of missing Joins between entity sets  . Kaplan proposes using the shortest relational path connecting the entity sets  ; Chang proposes an algorithm based on minimal spanning trees  , using an a priori weighting of the arcs ; $ ow a uses a conceptual graph ( semantic net ) for constructing the expanded relation . None of these present a model of whether the proposed path is relevant to the speaker's intentions  . 
VIILIMITATIONS ~ NDFUTURE WORK
Pragmatic over shoot processing has been implemented for a domain consisting of a subset of the courses  , requirements , and policies for students at a University . Our system as s , s , es that the relations comprising a meaningful and relevant path expansion will appear on a single path within the context tree representing the speaker's inferred plan  . This restricts such expansions to those communicated via the speaker's underlying inferred task-related plan  . However this plan may fall to capture some associations  , such as between a person's Social Security Number and his name  . 
This problem of producing precisely the set of path expansions that are meaningful and relevant must be investigated further  . Other areas for future work include :\[ I\] Extensions to handle relationships among more than two entity sets  \[2\] Extensions to the other classes of pragmatic over shoot mentioned in the introduction  . 
\ [3\] Extensions to detect and respond to queries which exceed the knowledge represented in the underlying world model  . We are currently assuming that the system can provide the i  r2ormation needed by the speaker . 
VIIICONCLUSIONS
The main contribution of our work is a context -based strategy for constructing a cooperative but limited response to pragmatically ill-formed queries  . This response satisfies the speaker's perceived needs  , inferred both from the preceding dialogue and the ill-formed utterance  . 
Our hypothesis is that the speaker's inferred task -related plan  , represented by the context model , suggests a substitution for the proposition causing the pragmatic over shoot and that such suggestions then must be evaluated on the basis of relevance and semantic criteria  . 

I would like to thank Ralph Weischedel for his encouragement and direction iD this research and for his suggestions on the style and content of this paper and Lance Ramshaw for many helpful discussions  . 
REFEREI~CES1.











Carberry , S . , " Tracking User Goals in an Information-Seeking Environment "  , Proc . R ~ ~ . on Artificial Intelli~ence , Washington , D . C . , 1983 Chang , ~ L . , " Finding Missing Joins for Incomplete Queries in Relational Data Bases " IBM Res  . Lab . , RJ 2145, San Jose , Ca . , 1978 Fikes , R . E . and N . J . Nilsson , " STRIPS : A New Approach to the Application of Theorem Proving to Problem Solving "  , Artificial
Ig/_~2,1971
Kaplan , S . J .   , " Cooperative Responses from a Portable Natural Language Data Base Query System "  , Ph . D . Dlsa . , Univ . of Penn syl-van la , 1979 Mays , L , " Failures in Natural Language Query Systems : Applications to Data Base Query Systems "  , Proc . Nat . Conf . on Artificial
Int ~, Stanford , 1980
Quine , W.V ., " Ontologlcal Relativity " in
Ontological ~@ lativltv and Qther ~,
Columbia University Press , New York 1969 Ramshaw , L . A . endN . ~ Weischedel , " Problem Localization Strategies for Pragmatic Processing in Natural Language Front Ends "  , Proe . of 9~Int . Conf . on Com Dutatlonal ~, 1984 Sondbeimer , N . K . and R . ~ Welschedel , " A Rule-Based Approach to Ill-Formed Input " , Proo . 8th ~ Jl ~ . Conf . on ~ gm Dutatlonal ~ g , 1980 Sowa , J . F . , " Conceptual Graphs for a Data Base Interface " , IBM Journal of Research and
D . ~, July 1976
Thompson , B . H . , " Linguistic Analysis of Natural Language Communication with Computers "  , Proc . 8th Int . Conf . on Comouta-tlonal Lin ~ ulstics , 1980 Webber , B . L . and E . Mays , " Varieties of User Misconceptions : Detection and Correction "  , Proc . ~ Int . Joint Conf . on Artificial ~ telli ~ ence , Karlsruhe , West Germany , August
I983
Weischedel , R . ~ L and N . K . Sondheimer , " Meta-Rules as a Basis for Processing lll-Formed Input "  , ( to appear in ~ Journal of ~ Linguistics , Vol .  9, #3,
I983)
