DESIGN OF AMACHINE TRANS LATION SYST~4 FORASUBIASK ~ A ( ~
Beat Bu ~, Susan Warwick , Patrick Shann
Dalle Molle Institute for Semantic and Cognitive Studies 
University of Geneva


This paper describes the design of a prototype machine translation system for a sublanguage of job advert is ~ nents  . The design is based on the hypothesis that specialized linguistic subsystems may require special crmputational treatment and that therefore a relatively shallow analysis of the text may be sufficient for automatic translation of the sublanguage  . This hypothesis and the desire to minimize computation in the transfer phase has led to the adoption of a flat tree representation of the linguistic data  . 
1. INTRODUCTION
The most prcraising results in computational linguistics and specifically in Machine Translation  ( MT ) have been obtained where applications were limited to languages for special purposes and to restricted text types  ( Kittredge , Lehrberger ,  1982) . 
In light of these prospects , the prototype MT system described below I should be seen as an experiment in the ecnputational trea~nent of a particular sublanguage  . The project is meant to serve both as a didactic tool and as a vehicle for research in MT  . The development of a largescale operational system is not envisaged at present  . The following research objectives have been defined for this project : - to establish linguistic specifications of the sublanguage as a basis for automatic processing  ; -to develop translation algorithms tailored to a cc ~ putational treatment of the sublanguage  . 
The emphasis of the research lies in defining the depth of linguistic analysis necessary to adequately treat the ccrmplexity of the text type with a view to acceptable machine translation  . It is the conjecture of our research group that , within the particular sublanguage defined by our corpus  , acceptable translation does not necessarily depend on standard linguistic structural analysis but can be obtained with a relatively shallow analysis  . Thus , as a working hypothesis , the principle of ' flat trees ' has been adopted for the representation of the linguistic data  . Flat trees , as opposed to deep trees , only partially reflect the dependency strucn . 
1 Project sponsored by the Swiss government.
ture obtained by a traditional IC-analysis . The adoption of flat trees goes hand in hand with the further hypothesis that the sublanguage can be translated mechanically with only minimal semm ~tic analysis similarly to the  TAUM-M~'I%0 system ( Chevalier , et al ,  1978) . 
2. THE SUBLAN ( ETAGE
The corpus is taken from a weekly publication by the Swiss goverrm~nt announcing federal job openings  . The word load of this publication amounts to ca . I0 , 000 words per week ; however , many of the advertisements are carried for several weeks  . All job adds are published in the three national languages : German  , French and Italian , with German usually serving as the source language  ( SL )  , French and Italian as the target language ( TL ) . 
The study is hence based on a collection of texts already translated by human translators  . The ads are grouped according to profession , e . g . academic , technical , administrative , etc . At present , the corpus is limited to the domain of administrative positions  , an example of which is given in figu-reI . 
Verwaltungs beamt in
Fonctionnaired'administration
Funzionaria amministrativa
FOhrendes Sekreta dates eines Sektions chefs . Ausfertigeny on Korrespondenzen und 8erichten nach Diktat und Vorlage in deutscher , franz 6 sischer und englischer Sprache , Abgeschlos-senekaufm ~ nnische Lehreoder Handelsschulbildung  , Berufs-erfahrunger wOnscht , Sprachen : Deutsch , Franz 6 sisch . Eng-Iisch in Wortund Schrift . Italienischund/oder Spanischer-w0nscht . 
Dirigerlese cr(~tariatd'unchef desection . Dactylographier de la correspondance allemande , franqaise et anglaise et desrap-ports sous dicteeoud ' apr@s manus crits  . Certific at d'ern ployee decommerce ou dipl6me d'u neecole de commerce , Exp@-rience professionnelled@sirbe . Langues : lefran ~: a is , I'altemandetI'anglais parleset ~ crits . Connaissances de I'italie noude I'es pagnol , voire des deux souhaite es . 
Diriger eilsegretaria to diuncaposezione . Stesuradi corri-spondenza erapportise condo detta too manos critto  . Tiro cinio commercialeo formazione commerciale . Pratica pluriennale . 
Lingue : tedesco , frances e , inglese ( or aleeser it to ) . Buoneno-zioni deil'itahanoe/odellos pagnolo auspicate  . 
Figurei . Advertisement for an administrative position ( " DieStelle " ,  1981) . 

The corpus exhibits many of the textual features generally used to characterize a sublanguage  , i . e . ( i ) limited subject matter , ( ii ) lexical and syntactic restrictions , and ( iii ) high frequency of certain constructions . AS can be seen from the example , the style of the sublanguage is distinguished by cc~plex nominal dependencies with various levels of coordination  . In addition , most sentences are in oc~lete in that they consist of a series of nominal phrases and do no to ontain am~verb  ; no relative phrases nor dependent clauses occur . The inportance of nominal constituents is reflected in the statistics of the German texts : over  55% of the words in the corpus are nouns , 11% adjectives , 11% prepositions , 17% conjunctions ; verbs only make up1 % of the corpus . Accr ~ parison with the statistics of the French and Italian translations reveal approximately the sane distribution except for infinitival venbs  . The higher frequency of verbs in French and Italian is due to a preference for infinitival phrases in place of deverbal nominal constructions  . Apart from this difference , the major textual characteristics carry over from source to target sublanguage thereby facilitating mechanical translation  . 
3. BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE SYb-i ~4
Modemtransfer-based MT systems are based on the following design principles :  ( i ) modularity , e . g . separation of linguistic data and algorithms , ( ii ) multilinguality i . e . independent analysis , transfer , and generation phases ,   ( iii ) formalized specification of the linguistic model ( Hutchins ,  1982) . Although only a prototype , the system was ? designed in accordance with these considerations  . 
As to modularity , the software used is a general purpose rule-based transducer especially developed for MT  ( Shann , Cod % ard ,  1984) . This software tool not only allows for the separation of data and algorithms but also provides great flexibility in the organization of grammars and subgrammars  , and in the control of the cc~putational processes applied to them  . 
As a multilingual system it is not directly oriented towards any specific language pair  ; the s~ne Gem1~n analysis module serves as input for the German -French as well as the German-Italian transfer module  . Separate French and Italian generation modules use only language specific knowledge to produce the final translation  . However , the German analysis is indirectly influenced by target language considerations : the interface structure between analysis and transfer was defined to take advantage of the similarities between the three languages and to accommodate the differences  . 
4. L~ISTICA PPBDACH : MINIMAL BUTS UFFICIENT

With the sublanguage investigated displaying restricted syntactic structures within a limited semantic dcmain  , a grammar specifically tailored to these job advertisements can be defined  . Moreover , the linear series of nominal phrases as well as the almost one-to-one lexical equivalences found in the SL and TL texts suggest that a shallow analysis without a semantic component is sufficient for adequate translation  . The flat tree representation resulting from such a minimal depth ~  ; Tp~oach does not make any claim to linguistic generalizability for purposes other than the translation of this particular sublanguage  . 
4.1 Ccmputational considerations
In a transfer-based MT system , actual translation takes place in transfer and can be descri-bed as the ocr ~ putatic nal manipulation of tree structures  . In the absenoe of any formal theory of translation for MT  , and given the relatively well-developed analysis techniques currently available  , a major concern in Mr research is to minimize the o~n~stationneo essazy in the transfer phase  . A flat tree representation provides one way of simplifying the structures to be processed  ; an inter-faoere presentation defined to a cocmmodate both SL and TL structures in the same manner  , thus avoiding tree structure manipulation , is yet another means . The representation of the linguistic data in this system is a direct result of these two considerations  . 
4.2 Flat trees
The fact that the linearity of the surface structure constituents carries o ~ r from SL to the TLs justifies the adoption of a minimal depth analysis  . The analysis is restricted to the identification of the phrasal constituents and their internal structure  ; dependencies holding between constituents are only partially ccr~puted  . Thus , the interface structure resulting from analysis and serving as input to transfer does not reflect a linguistically correct dependency structure  . 
Instead , the IS respects the linear surface order of the constituents  ( with the exception of predicate groups , see below ) in a flat tree representation . 
In a flat tree , the major phrasal constituents , in particular the prepositional phrases , are not attached at the node from which they depend linguistically but at specified nodes higher up in the tree  . Schematically , the differences can be illustrated as follows :
NP NP
NP PNP pppp\ti ~ N
Fig . 2. Standard IC-tree vs . Flat tree
The flat tree representation applies to all three mj or phrasal constituents defined for this corpus  :   ( i ) nominal phrases proper ,   ( ii ) deverbal taken from the oorpus are given below to illustrate each of the three constituent structures  . 
( i ) Ncminal phrases proper b ~ veast and ard noun phrase as their head  , possibly followed by a linear sequence of prepositional phrases  . ( G~stands for both standard NPs and PPs .  )
GN  ~
Kauf~naennischemitinder
Ausbildung Erfahrung Verwaltung ( ii ) Deverbal nominal phrases have a deverbal noun as their head  , followed by a linear sequence of GNs . 

GN(deverbal ) GNGN
Schreibenyon nach
Texten Manuskrlpt ( iii ) Verbal phrases have a predicate as their head , followed by a linear sequence of GNs . ( F ~ enccrn-passes predicative participles , predicative adjectives , and infinitival predicates ; the few finite verbs in the corpus (0 . 4%) are not treated . )

PREDGNG ~ erwuenscht Erfahr % ulgin der
Datenverarbeitung ( "Erfahrung in der Datenverarbeit unger wuenscht " )  4 . 3 Normalized tree structures In order to further minimize manipulation of structure in transfer  , the interface representation is also normalized for two impo~t categories in the sublanguage  , narely deverbal ncminal phrases ( GDEV ) and noun and prepositional phrases ( ~ N )  . The structures are defined such that they remain valid for both the source and target language  . 
4.3.1 Devenbal nominal phrases
A marked stylistic difference between the SL and the TLs occurring with high frequency in the corpus is the translation of a German deverbal noun into an infinitive in French and Italian  . With the deverbal noun in Gennan usually serving as the head of accmplex D~minal structure with several ccsple-ments  , the translation of the noun into an infini- tive in the target language changes the type of cc ~ plement structure accordingly  . The complete linearization of the deverbal crmplements provides a format for acccmrc dating the target language infinitival construction aimed at in translation  . 
Structural transfer is thus reduced to renaming the nodes  ; the normalized tree structure remains the same , as can be seen in the SL and TL representations shown below  . 

GN~GN
Ueberwachender hinsicht lich
Bestellungen Material lieferungen
Fig .  3 . SL(German ) deverbal ncminal phrase analysis . 

PREDGNG ~
Surveiller lesquant alaoc~mandes livraison du materiel Fig  .  4 . Equivalent TL ( French ) verbal phrase analysis . 
4 . 3 . 2 Noun ~ hrases and prepositional phrases Certain noun phrases in German  ( e . g . genetive attributes ) are translated into prepositional phrases in French and Italian  . In order to avoid structural transfer of noun phrases into prepositional phrases and vice versa  , a normalized form for noun phrases has been defined which reserves a position in the tree for prepositions  . For standard noun phrases a special value ( NIL ) has been defined to fill the empty preposition slot  . Therefore , in the transfer phase , a translation from a noun Dhrase to a prepositional phrase or vice versa is merely a change in the value of the pre-positional slot without any change in the tree structure  . 
PREPNARTGN ...
Fig . 5. Example of the normalized form for
NPs and PPs.
4.4 CONSIDERATION SFORTRANS LATION
The goal of the system , and perhaps of MT in general , has to be to carry over the information content from SL to TL  , to produce output acceptable style of the text type  . It seems that treating a well-defined sublanguage enhances the possibilities for an Mr system to answer these requirements  . 
In fact , the sublanguage itself suggests possible strategies for dealing with some of the classical translation problems in Mr such as  ( i ) lexical anbiguity , (2) translation of prepositions , and (3) treatment of coordination . 
4.4.1 Lexi`ip ~ lems
Two wellknown lexical problems in computatio-nal linguistics are homograph resolution and polysemy disambiguatic n  . Given the small number of possible syntactic structures in the sublanguage  , the few homographs found in the corpus do not present any problems for analysis  . In turn , the limited s~mantic dana in of the sublanguage cc ~ pletely eliminates multiple word senses so that the transfer of lexical meanings is basically a one-to-one mapping  . Therefore , with the nouns serving as the major carriers of the textual meaning  , lexical transfer ensures that the information content of the text is carried over  . 
4.4.2 Translation of prepositions
The fact that the types of nouns occurring in the sublanguage are restricted and repetitive and that the possible prepositions commanded by any given noun is small in nt~nber  ( max . 3 in the corpus ) allows the adoption of a limited noun-focused approach for the translation of prepositions  . In such an approach , it is the particular noun or noun class rather than generals ~ mantic features that determine the translation of prepositions  . 
At present , the info~nation relevant to correct translation of prepositions is attached to individual noun entries in the transfer dictionary  ; semantic noun subclassification similar to other sublanguage research  ( Sager , 1982) is being investigated . 
4.4.3 Coordination
With SL and TLs exhibiting parallel surface syntactic structure  , and with inherent ambiguities of scope therefore carrying over  , analysis of coordination remains shallow . Conjunctions and intrasentential punctuation are defined functionally as coordinators to yield  , in keeping with the flat tree representation , a structure such as the one shown below . 

O00 RDG~O00 RDGN
Sprachen : Deutschund Englisch in Wortund Schri ft Fig  .  6 . Coordinated structure at sentence level . 
5. CONCLUSION
The evidence available to date seem ~ to show that , for the particular sublanguage dealt with , correct translation is feasible under the hypotheses described in this paper  . The non-generali-zability of such an approach is quite evident  ; however , the fact that such a ' minimal depth ' approach semns to work for this particular sublanguage gives substance to the impression that specialized linguistic subsystems differ quite sharply  , both in complexity and linguistic features , frc ~ the standard language and may therefore require special computational treatment  . 

Chevalier et al T/K 94-~' I'b O , Description du sys-t / ~ re . Universit ~ de Montreal , 1978 . 
Eidgen Sssisches Personal amt ( ed .). Die Stelle.
Stellenzeiger des Bundes . No . 21, 1981.
Grist , R ., Hirsdnman , L . and Frieclman , C.
"Natural Language Interfaces Using Limited Semantic Information  . " Proc .   9th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ,  1982 . 
Hutchins , W . J . " TneEvolution of Madline Translation Systems . "In : Lawson , V . ( ed . ) , Practical Experience of Madnine Translation , Amsterdam , 
N.Y ., Oxford , 1982.
Kittredge , R . , Lehrberger , J . ( eds . ) . Sublangua-@es , Studies of Lanuuage in Restricted Do-mai'ns , Berlin , N . Y . , 1982 . 
Sager , N . " Syntactic Formatting of Science Information . " In : Kittredge , Lehrburger , 1982 . 
Shann , P . , Cochard , J . L . "GIT : A General Transducer for Teaduing Ccmputational Linguistics  . "
COLING Ccmmunication , 1984.

