A Computational Analysis of Complex Noun Phrmms in N  , ,vy Messages
Elaine Marsh
Navy Center for Applied Research in Artificial Intelligence 
Naval Research Laboratory-Code 7510
Washington , D . C . 20375
ABSTRACT
Methods of text compression in Navy messages are not limited to sentence fragments and the omissions of function words such as the copula be  . Text compression is also exhibited within ~ grammatieal " sentences and is identified within noun phrases in Navy messages  . 
Mechanisms of text compression include increased frequency of complex noun sequences and also increased usage of nominalizations  . Semantic relationships among elements of a complex noun sequence can be used to derive a correct bracketing of syntactic onstructions  . 
IINTRODUCTION
At the Navy Center for Applied Research in Artificial Intelligence  , we have begun computer-analyzing and processing the compact text in Navy equipment failure messages  , specifically equipment failure messages about electronics and data communications systems  . 
These messages are required to be sent within 24 hours of the equipment casualty . Narrative remarks are restricted to a length of no more than  99 lines , and each line is restricted to a length of no more than  69 characters . 
Because hundreds of these messages are sent daily to updates hip readiness databases  , automatic procedures are being implemented to handle them efficiently  . Our task has been to process them for purposes of dissemination and summarization  , and we have developed a prototype system for this purpose  . To capture the information in the narrative , we have chosen to use natural language understanding techniques developed at the Linguistic 
String Project \[ Sager 1981\].
These messages , like medical reports \[ Marsh 1982\] and technical manuals\[Lehrberger 1982\]  , exhibit properties of text compression , in part due to imposed time and length constraints  . Some methods of compression result in sentences that are usually called ill-formed in normal English texts \ [ Eastman  1981\]  . Although unusual in normal , full English texts , these are characteristic of messages . Recent work on these properties ' include discussions of omissions of function words such as the copula be  , which results in sentence fragments and omissions of articles in compact text \[ Marsh  1982  , 1983; Bachenko 1983\] . However , compact extals outilizes mechanisms of compression that are present in normal English but are used with greater frequency in messages and technical reports  . Although the messages contain sentence fragments , they also contain many complete sentences . 
These sentences are long and complicated in spite of the telegraphic style often used  . The internal structure of noun phrases in these construction si often quite complex  , and it is in these noun phrases that we find syntactic constructions characteristic of text compression  . Similar properties have been noted in other report sublanguages \[ Lehrberger  , 1982; Levi ,  1978\] . 
When processing these messages it becomes important to recognize signs of text compression since the function words that so often direct a parsing procedure and reduce the choice of possible constructions are frequently absent  . Without these overt markers of phrase boundaries , straightforward parsing becomes difficult and structural ambiguity becomes a serious problem  . For example , sentences (1)-(2) are superficially identical , however in Navy messages , the first is a request for a part ( anantenna ) and the second a sentence fragment specifying an antenna performing a specific function  . ( a transmitanten na ) . 
(1 ) Requestantenna shipped by fastest available means  . 
(2 ) Transmitantenn as hipped by fastest available means  . 
The question arises of how to recognize and capture these distinctions  . We have chosen to take a sublangnage , or domain specific , approach to achieving correct parses by specifying the types of possible combinations among elements of a construction in both structural and semantic terms  . 
This paper discusses a method for recognizing instances of textual compression and identifies two types of textual compression that arise in standard and sublanguage texts : complex noun sequences and nominalizations  . These are both typically found in noun phrase constructions  . We propose a set of semantic relations for complex noun sequences  , within a sublanguage analysis , that permits the proper bracketing of modifier and host for correct interpretation of noun phrases  . 
IITEXTCOMPRESSIONINNOUNPHRASES
We can recognize the sources of text compression by two means :  ( 1 ) comparing a full grammar of the standard language to that of the domain in which we are working  , two different sublanguages . The first comparison distinguishes those constructions that are peculiar to a sublanguage / el  . Marsh 1982\] . A comparison of a full grammar with two sublanguage grammars  , the equipment failure messages discussed here and a set of patient medical histories  , disclosed that the sublanguage grammars were substantially smaller than full English grammars  , having fewer productions and reflecting a more limited range of modifiers and complements\[ Grishman  1984\]  . 
The second comparison identifies the types of constructions that exhibit text compression  . These are common even in full sentences . For example , we found that similar sets of modifiers were used in the two different sublanguages \[ Grishman  1984\]  . However , the equipment failure messages had significantly more left and right modifier constructions than the medical  , even though the equipment failure messages had about one-half the number of sentences of the patient histories  .   236 sentences in the medical domain were analyzed and  123 in the Navy domain . The statistics are presented in Tables 1 and 2 . 
In particular , there were significantly more noun modifiers of nouns constructions  ( Noun+Noun constructions ) in the equipment failure messages than there were in the medical records  , and more prepositional phrase modifiers of noun phrases  . Further analysis suggested these constructions are symptomatic of two major mechanisms text compression iN avy messages : of complex noun sequences and nominalizations  . 
Complex noun sequences . A major feature of noun phrases in this set of messages i the presence of many long sequences of left modifiers of nouns  ,  (3) . 
3 )   ( a ) forward king post sliding pade ye unit ( b ) coupler controllers t and by light ( c ) base plate insulator welds d ) recorder-reproducer tape transport ( e ) nbsvorship-shorettys at communications ( f ) fuze setter extend/retracty cle Complex noun sequences like these can cause major problems in processing  , since the proper bracketing requires an understanding of the semantic/syntactic relations between the components  . \[ Lehrberger 1982\] identifies similar sequences ( empilage ) in technical manuals . As he notes , this results from having to give highly descriptive names to parts in terms of their function and relation to other parts  . 
Modifiers of nouns include nouns and adjectives . In

Total noun phrases

Left Modifiers of Nouns
Navy\[Medical
Adjectival Modifiers :

Adj+Adj
Possessive N 40
Noun Modifiers:
Noun 9976
N+N2 54
Verb 70
Table I : Left Modifier Statistics
Right Modifiers of Nouns
Type\[Navy\[Medical
Prepositional Phrases 95107
Relative Clauses 15
Adverb 40
Reduced Relative Clauses 79
Table 2: Right Modifier Statistics modifiers of nouns also occur  . This construction is not common in standard English or in the medical record sublanguage mentioned above  . It is illustrated above in (2) and below in (4) . 
(4 )   ( a ) receive sensitivity ( b ) operate mode ( c ) transmitantenna Because the verbs are unmarked for tense or aspect  , they can be mistaken by the parsing procedure for imperative or presentense verbs  . Furthermore , in this domain the problem is compounded by the frequent use of sentence fragments consisting of a verb and its object  , with no subject present (1) repeated as (5) below . 
(5) Requestantenna ...
Complex noun sequences also commonly arise from the omission of prepositions from prepositional phrases  . 
The resulting long sequences of nouns are not easily bracketed correctly  . In this dataset , the omission of prepositions is restricted to place and time sequences  ( 67 )  . 
(6) Request NAVSTA Guantanamo Bay Cuba coordinate . . . 
Request RSG May portar range ....
(7 ) Original antenna replaced by outside contractor through RSG Mayport  7 JUN 82  . 
In (6) , prepositions marking time phrases have been omitted  , and in ( 7 ) both time and place prepositions have been omitted  . 
Nominalizations . The increased frequency of prepositional modifiers in the equipment failure messages was traced to the frequent use of nominalizations in Navy messages  . Out of a preliminary set of 89 prepositional modifiers of nouns ,   42 were identified as arguments to nominalized verbs  ( 47% )  , the other 52% were attributive . 
Examples of argument prepositional phrases are given in  ( 8 )  , attributive in (9) . 
(8 )   ( a ) assistance from MOTU 12 ( b ) failure of amplifier ( c ) cause of casualty ( d ) completion of assistance ( 9 )   ( a ) short circuit between amplifier and power supply ( b ) short in cable ( c ) receipt NLT4 OCT 82 ( d ) burned spots on connector In these texts , in which nominalization serves as an important mechanism of text compression  , it therefore becomes important to distinguish prepositional phrases that serve as arguments of nominalizations from attributive ones  . 
The syntax of complex modifier sequences in noun phrases and the identification of nominalizations  , both characteristic of text compression , eed to be consistently defined f ~ , ~ ~ r ) roper understanding of the text being processed . By utilizing the semantic patterns that are derived from a sublanguage analysis  , it becomes possible to properly bracket complex noun phrases  . This is the subject of the next section . 
HISE MANTIC PATTER NS IN
COMPLEX NOUNSEQUENCES
Noun phrases in the equipment failure messages typically include numerous adjectival and noun modifiers on the head  , and additional modifier types that are not so common in general English  . The relationships expressed by this stacking are correspondingly complex  . The sequences are highly descriptive , naming parts in terms of their function and relation to other parts  , and also describing the status of parts and other objects in the sublanguage  . Domain specific information can be used to derive the proper bracketing  , but it is first necessary to identify the modifier-host semantic patterns through a distributional analysis of the texts  . The basis for sublanguage work is that the semantic patterns are a restricted  , limited set . They talk about a limited number of classes and objects and express a limited number of relationships among these objects  . These objects and relationships are derived through distributional analysis  , and can ultimately be used to direct the parsing procedure  . 
Complex noun sequences . Semantic patterns in complex noun phrases fall into two types : part names and other noun phrases  . Names for pieces of equipment often contain complex noun sequences  , i . e . stacked nouns . The relationships among the modifiers in the part names may indicate one of several semantic relations  . They may indicate the levels of components . For example , assembly/component relationships are expressed . In circuit diode , diode is a component of a circuit . In antenna coupler , coupler is a component part of an antenna . Part names may also describe the function of the piece of equipment  . For example , in the phrase high frequency transmitantenna , tr qln smit is the function of the antenna . 
The semantic relations among the modifiers of a part are strictly ordered are shown in  ( 10 a )  ; examples are provided in (10b ) . 
(10) ( a ) IDREPAIRSIGNAL FUNCTION PART.
( b)CU-t~O07 antenna coupler ; HFXMI Tantenna ; deflection amplifier ; UYA . 4 display system ; primary
HF receiveantenna
The component relations in part names are especially closely bound and are best regarded as a unit for processing  . Thus antenna coupler in CU-~O07 antenna coupler can be considered a unit . We would not expect to find antenna CU-~O07 coupler or coupler CU-~007 antenna . 
In other noun phrases , i . e . those that are not part names , the head nouns can have other semantic categories  . For example , looking back at the sentences in (3) , the head noun of a noun sequence can be an equipment part  ( unit , light ) , a process that is performed on electrical signals  ( cycle )  , apart function ( communica-repair ) , an assistance actions ( assistance ) , and so on . 
Only modifiers with appropriate semantic and syntactic category can be adjoined  . For example , in the phrasefuze setterezt end/retracty cle , semantic information is necessary to attain the correct bracketing  . Since only function verbs can serve as noun modifiers  , eztend/retraet can be analyzed as a modifier of cycle  , a process word . Fuzesetter , apart name , can be treated as a unit because noun sequences consisting of part names are generally local in nature  . Fuze setter is prohibited from modifying eztend /retract  , since verb modifiers do not themselves take noun modifiers  . 
Other problems , such as the omissions of prepositions resulting in long noun sequences  ( ef . (8) and (0) above ) , can also be treated in this manner . By identifying the semantic lasses of the noun in the object of the preposition less prepositional phrase and its host's class  , the occurrence of these preposition less phrases can he restricted  . The date and place strings can then be properly treated as a modifier constructions instead as head nouns  . 
IVCONCLUSION
Methods of text compression are not limited to omissions of lexical items  . They also include mechanisms for maximizing the amount of information that can he expressed within a limited time and space  . These mechanisms include increased frequency of complex noun sequences and also increased usage of nominalizations  . 
We would expect of ind similar methods of text compression in other types of scientific material and message traffic  . The semantic relationships among the elements of a noun phrase permit the proper bracketing of complex noun sequences  . These relationships are largely domain specific , although some patterns may be generalizable across domains \[ Marsh  1084 I . 
The approach taken here for Navy messages , which uses suh languages leetional patterns for disambiguation  , was developed , esigned , and implemented initially at the New York University Linguistic String Project for medical record processing \[ Friedman  1984  ; Grishman 1983 ; Hirschman 1982 I . It was implemented with the capability for transfer to other domains  . We anticipate using a similar mechanism , based partially on the analysis presented here , on Navy messages in the near future . 
References\[Baehenko1983\]Bachenko , J . and C . L . Heitmeyer . Noun Phrase Compression in Navy Messages . NRL Report 8748 . 
\[ Eastman 1981\] . Eastman , C . M . and D . S . McLean . On the Need for Parsing Ill-Formed Input . AJCL 7(1981), 4 . 
\[Friedman1984\] Friedman , C . Suh language Text Processing - Application to Medical Narrative  . In \[ Kittredge 1084\] . 
\[Grishman 10831 Grishman , R . , Hirsehman , L . and C . 
Friedman . Isolating Domain Dependencies in Natural Language Interfaces  . Proc . o / the Con / . on Applied Nat . 
Lang . Processing ( ACL).
\[Grishman 1984\] Grishman , R . , Nhan , N , Marsh , E . and L . Hirschman . Automated Determination of Suhlanguage Syntactic Usage  . Proc . COLING 84) ( current volume) . 
\[ Hirschman1082\] Hirsehman , L . Constraints on Noun Phrase Conjunction : A Domain -independent Mechanism  . Proc . COLING8~-Abstracts . 
~ it tredge 1984\]Kittredge , R . and R . Grishman . Proc . of the Workshop on Sublanguage Description add Processing held January  1920  ,  1084 , New York University , New
York , New York ), to appear.
\[Lehrberger 1982\] . Lehrberger , J . Automatic Translation and the Concept of Sublanguage  . In Kittredge and Lehrberger ( eds ) , Sublanguage : Studies of Language in Restricted Semantic Domains  . de Grnyter New York , 1082 . 
\[Levi1078\] Levi , J . N . The Syntaz and Semantics of Com-plez Nominals , Academic Press , New York . 
\[ Marsh 1982\] . Marsh , E . and N . Sager . Analysis and Pro-cussing of Compact Text . Proc . COLING82, 201-206,
North Holland.
\[ Marsh1083\] Marsh , E . Utilizing Domain-Specific Information for Processing Compact Text  . Proc . Conf . Applied Natural Language Processing , 09-103 ( ACL ) . 
\[ Marsh1084\] Marsh E . General Semantic Patterns in Different Sublanguages  . In \[ Kittredge 1084\] . 
\[ Sager1081\] Sager , N . Natural Language Information Processing . Addison-Wesley , Reading , MA . 

This research was supported by the Oflace of Naval Research and the Ofllce of Naval Technology  PE-62721N  . 
The author gratefully acknowledges the efforts of Joan Bachenko  , Judy Froseher , and Ralph Grishman in pro-ceasing the initial corpus of Navy messages  , and the efforts of the researchers at New York University in pro-cussing the medical record corpus  . 

