Conceptual and Linguistic Decisions in Generation
Laurence DANLOS
LADL ( CNRS)
Universit ~ de Paris 7
2, Place Jussieu
7S00 SParis , France

Generation of texts in natural language requires making conceptual and linguistic decisions  . This paper shows first that these cisions involve the use of a discourse grammar  , secondly that they are all dependent on one another but that there is a priori no reason to give priority to one decision rather than another  . As a consequence , a generation algorithm must not be modularized in components that make these decisions in a fixed order  . 
1. Introduction
To express in natural language the information given in a semantic representation  , at least two kinds of decisions have to be made : " conceptual decisions " and " linguistic decisions "  . 
Conceptual decisions are concerned with questions such as : in what order must the information appear in the text ? which information must be expressed explicitly and what can be left implicit ? Linguistic decisions deal with questions such as : which lexical items to choose ? which syntactic constructions to choose ? how to cut the text into paragraphs and sentences ? The purpose of this paper is to show that conceptual decisions and linguistic decisions cannot be made independently of one another  , and therefore , that a generation system must be based on procedures that promote intimate interaction between conceptual and linguistic decisions  . In particular , our claim is that a generation process cannot be modularized into a " conceptualizer " module making conceptual decisions regardless of any linguistic considerations  , passing its output to a " dictionary " module which would figure out the lexical items to use accordingly  , which would then in turn forward its results to a " grammar "  , where the appropriate syntactic constructions are chosen and then developed into sentences by a " syntactic component "  . In such generation systems ( cf . ( McDonald 1983) and ( McKeown 1982)) , it is assumed that the conceptualizer is language -free  , i . e . , need have no linguistic knowledge . This assumption is questionable , as we are going to show . Furthermore , in such modularized systems , the linguistic decisions must , clearly , be made so as to respect the conceptual ones . This consequence would be acceptable if the best lexical choices  , i . e . , the most precise , concise , evocative terms that can be chosen , always agree with the conceptual decisions . However , there exist cases in which the best lexical choices and the conceptual decisions are in conflict  . 
To prove our the oritical points , we will take as an example the generation of situations involving a result causation  , i . e . , a new STATE which arises because of one ( or several ) prior ACTs ( Schank 1975 )  . An illustration of a result causation is given in the following semantic representation  ( A ) CRIME : ACT = : SHOOTING
ACTOR-->HUMO=:3 ohn
SHOOTING : AT-->HUMI=:Mary
BODY-PART=:HEAD===>STATE=:DEAD
O B3ECT --> HUMI which is intended to describe a crime committed by a person named John against a person named Mary  , consisting of John's shooting Mary in the head , causing Mary's death . 
2 . Conceptual decisions and lexical choice Given a result causation  , one decision that a language-free conceptualizer might well need to make would be whether tO express the STATE first and then the ACT  , or to choose the opposite order . If these decisions were passed onto a dictionary  , the synthesis of ( A ) above would be texts like Mary is dead because Johnsh other in the head  . 
John shot Mary in the head . She is dead.
made up of one phrase expressing the STATE and one expressing the ACT  . But it seems more satisfactory to produce texts such as  ( Z ) Mary was killed by John . He shother in the head . 
(2) John shot Mary in the head , killing her.
built around tokill . Such texts don't follow conceptual decisions dissociating the STATE and its cause : tokill  ( in the construction NoVN 1=: John killed Mary ) expresses in the same time the death of N1 and the fact that this death is due to an action ( not specified ) of No ( McCawley 1971 )  . We showed in ( Danlos 1984 ) that a formulation embodying a verb with a causal semantics such as tokill to describe the RESULT  , and another verb to describe the ACT is , in most of the cases , preferable to a formulation composed of a phrase indicates that conceptual decisions should not be made without taking into account the possibilities provided by the language  , in the present case , the existence of verbs with a causal semantics such as tokill  , This attitude is also imperative if a generator is to produce frozen phrases  . The meaning of a frozen sentence being not calculable from the meaning of its constituents  , frozen phrases cannot be generated from a language-free conceptualizer for warding its decisions to a dictionary  \]1  . Conceptual decisions , segmentation into sentences and syntactic constructions Let us suppose that a result causation is to be generated by means of two verbs  , one with a causal semantics such as tokill for the RESULT  , and one for the ACT , and let us look at the ways to form a text embodying these two verbs  . The options available are the following :- order of the information  . There are two possibilities . Either the phrase expressing the RESUL T or the phrase expressing the ACT occurs first  . 
-number of sentences . There are two possibilities . Either combine the phrases expressing the RESULT and the ACT into a complex sentence  , as in (2) ( Johnshot Mary in the head , killing her . ) , or form a text made up of two sentences , one describing the ACT , one describing the RESULT , as in (1) ( Mary was killed by John . He shother in the head . ) . 
-choice of syntactic constructions . We will restrict ourselves to the active construction and to the passive one  . For the latter , there is the choice between passive with an agent and passive without an agent  . On the whole , for each of the two verbs involved , there are three possibilities . 
The combination of these 3 options gives 36 possibilities , but it turns out that only 15 of them are feasible . For example , texts composed of two sentences , one in a passive form with an agent , the other in a passive form without an agent , are appropriate to precedes the expressing the ( 3a ) Mary ( 3b ) Mary ( 3c ) Mary ( 3d ) * Mary express a result causation only if the RESULTACT  , or if the agent is in the first sentence
ACT : was killed by John . She was shot.
was killed . She was shot by John.
was shot by John . She was killed.
was shot . She was killed by John . 1
As another example , it is possible to combine the phrases expressing the ACT and the RESULT into a complex sentence if they are both in an active form 
Johnshot Mary , killingher.
John killed Mary by shooting her.
but it is impossible if they are both in a passive form : the following formulations are awkward * Mary was killed by being shot by John  . 
* Mary was killed by John by being shot .   2 and the only other conceivable possibilities are to use a subordination conjunction such as because  , when or as , but the resulting texts are clums y : * Mary was killed  ( because + when + as ) she was shot by John . 
* Mary was shot by John and , because of that , she was killed . 
A generation system must know for each combination whether it is feasible or not  . Either this knowledge is calculable from other data  , or it constitutes data that must be provided to the generator  . We are going to see that the second solution is better  . First , on a semantic level , one can seek to verbalize the intuitions that can be drawn  , for example , from paradigm (3) , but this activity can be only descriptive and not explicative  . In other words , the inacceptability of ( 3d ) is a fact of language that cannot be explained by semantic computations of more general import  . So the list of the 15 feasible combinations must be part of the data of the generator  . Now the following question arises : is it possible to determine the structures of the texts corresponding to the  "15 elements of this list . The answer is affirmative when the number of sentences is  2  , and negative when it is 1 . The combinations with two sentences involve only one type of linearization : juxtaposition  . On the other hand , the combinations with one sentence involve-a present participle if the ACT and RESULT are both expressed in an active form and if the ACT precedes the RESULT  , as in Johnshot Mary , killing her-ager und if if the ACT and the RESULT are both expressed in an active form and if the RESULT precedes the ACT  , as in
John killed Mary by shooting her 1 . A star ( ' ) indicates that a text is awkward but it does not necessarily mean that it is ungrammatical Or uninterpretable  . 
2 . The deletion of the agent leads to a formu \] a bon which is correct Mary was killed by being shot but which does not express the author of the crime  . 
5 02 -a relative clause if the RESULT is expressed in a passive form with an agent and precedes the ACT  , this being expressed in an active form , as in Mary was killed by John whosh other in the head-etc  . 
These types of linearization arenOt predictable . As a consequence , they must be provided to the generator . This one must embody in its data the structures of the texts corresponding to the  15 feasible combinations . These structures constitute a real discourse grammar for result causations  . The formulation of result causations must be modelled on one of the  15 discourse structures 3  . Generating a result causation thus entails selecting one of these discourse structures  . 
~.. Selection of a discourse structure
The fact that only 15 discourse structures out of 36 possibilities are feasible shows that it is not possible to make decisions about order of information  , segmentation into sentences and syntactic constructions independently of one another  . To do so could potentially result in awkward texts more than half the time  . 
Furthermore , lexical choice and selection of a discourse structure cannot be made independently of one another  . A discourse structure leads to an acceptable text if and only if the formulations of the ACT and the RESULT present the syntactic properties required by the structure  . For example , some causal verbs such as to assassinate cannot occur after a phrase describing the ACT :* John shot the Pope in the head assassinating him  . 
* John shot the Pope in the head . He assassinated him 4 . 
So , if the verb to assassinate is to be used , all of the 3 . This point is akin to an assumption supported by ( McKeown 1982 )  , except that ours discourse structures contain linguistic information contrarily to hers which indicate only the order in which the information must appear  . 
4 . These forms become acceptable if they are added adverbial phrases : John shot the Pope in the head  , thereby assassinating Aim in aspect a cular way . 
John shot the Pope in the head . Thereby heass assinated him in aspect a cular way . 
discourse structures in which the RESULT appears after the ACT are inappropriate  . On the other hand , if a discourse structure where the RESULT occurs after the ACT is selected  , the use of to assassinate is forbidden . 
At this point , we have shown that decisions about lexical choice  , order of the information , segmentation into sentences and syntactic constructions are all dependent on one another  . 
This result is fundamental in generation since it has an immediate consequence : ordering these decisions amounts to giving them an order of priority  . 
$'. Priorities in decisions
There is no general rule stating to which decisions priority must be given  . It can vary from one case to another . 
For example , if a semantic representation describes a suicide , it is obviously appropriate to use to commit suicide  . To do so , priority must be given to the lexical choice and not to the order of the information  . If the order ACT-RESULT has been selected , it precludes the use of to commit a suicide which cannot occur after the description of the act performed to accomplish the suicide : * John shot himself  , committing suicide . 
* Johnshot himself . He committed suicide.
On the other hand , if a result causation is part of a bigger story , and if strictly chronological order has been chosen to generate the whole story  , then the result causation should be generated in the order ACT-RESULT  . In other words , the order of the information should be given priority  . In other situations , there is no clear evidence forgiving priority to one decision over another one  . As an illustration , let us take the case of a result causation which occurs in the context of a crime  . It can be stated that the result DEAD must be expressed by :- to assassinate as a first choice  , tokill as a second choice , if the target is famous-tomurder as a first choice  , tokill as a second choice , if the target is not famous Moreover , the most appropriate order is , in general , RESULT-ACT if the target is famous , and ACT-RESULT otherwise . In the case of a famous target , the use of to assassinate is not in contradiction with the decision about the order of the information  . But in the case of a non-famous ? arget , the use of to murder doesn't fit the order ACT -RESULT  , for this verb cannot occur after a description of the ACT : ? Johnshot Mary in the head  , murdering her . 
? Johnshot Mary in the head . He murdered her.
Therefore , either the decision about the order of the information or the decision to use to murder has to be John murdered Mary by shooting her in the head  . 
John murdered Mary . He shother in the head.
where the order of the information is RESULT-ACT , and the latter atter one to texts such as Johnshot Mary in the head  , kilting her . 
Johnshot Mary in the head . He killed her.
using the verb tokill instead of to murder . At the current time , the choice between these two solutions can be based only on intuitions that are not sufficiently operational to be integrated in a generation system  . 
Condusion and future research
We have shown that decisions about lexical choice , determination of the order of the information , segmentation into sentences and choice of syntactic construction are all dependent one another  , the last three amounting to the selection of a discourse structure by means of a discourse grammar  . As a consequence , a generation system must be based on a complete interaction between these decisions  . In this work , we have been concerned only with the task of expressing into natural language a set of information  . In others words , we have only dealt with the generation problem of " How to say it ? "  , and not with the problem " What to say ?" . 
Some authors ( cf .   ( McGuire 1980 ) and ( Appelt 1982 ) ) have rejected the separation between " What to say " and " How to say it " on the basis that the issue of " What to say " is not independent from the lexical choice  . Thus , they have argued for generation systems involving interactions between conceptual decisions and linguistic ones  . This point is akin to ours , and therefore , our model of generation could be extended so as to treat issues such as generating different texts according to the hearer and what it is supposed that he wants and/or needs to hear  . 

Appelt , D . E . , 1982 , Planning Natural Language Uterrances to satisfy Multiple Goals  , Technical Note 259 , SRI International , Menlo Park , California . 
Danlos , L . , 1984 , Generation automatique det extes en langues naturelles  , The sed'E tat , Universit ~ de Paris 7 . 
McCawley , J . D . , 1971 , " Prelexical Syntax " in Report of the 22nd annual roundtable meeting on Linguistics and Language Studies  , O'Brien~d . , Georgetown University

McDonald , D . , 1983 , " Natural Language Generation as a Computational Problem : an introduction "  , in Computational Models of Discourse , Bradyet Berwick ads . , MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachussets . 
McGuire , R . , 1980 , " Political primaries and words of pain " , unpublished manuscript , Yale University . 
McKeown , K . R . , 1982 , Generating Natural Language Text in response to Questions about database structure  , PhDD = ssertation , University of Pensylvania . 
Schank , R . C . , 1975, Conceptual Information Processing , North
Holland , Amsterdam.

I would like to thank Lawrence Birnbaum for many valuable discussions and suggestions on this paper  . 

