QUASI-INDEXICAL REFERENCE INPROPOSITIONAL SEMANTICNET WORKS 
William J . Rapaport
Department of Philosophy , SUNY Fredonia , Fredonia , NY 14063
Departmeot of Computer Science , SUNY Buffalo , Buffalo , NY 14260
Stuart C . Shapiro
Department of Computer Science , SUNY Buffalo , Buffalo , NY 14260

We discuss how a deductive question-answering system can represent the beliefs or other cognitive states of users  , of other ( interacting ) systems , and of itself . In particular , we examine the representation of first-person beliefs of others  ( e . g . , the ~/ v . ~' ~ representation of a user ' A belief that he himself is rich  )  . Such beliefs have as an essential component "' quasi-indexical pronouns "  ( e . g . , ' he himself ') , and , hence , require for their analysis a method of representing these pronominal constructions and performing valid inferences with them  . The theoretical justification for the approach to be discussed is the representation of nested "' ded it to " beliefs  ( e . g . , the system's belief that user-I believes that system-2 believes that user-2 is rich )  . We discuss a computer implementation of these representations using the Semantic Network Processing System  ( SNePS ) and an ATN parser-generator with a question -answering capability  . 
I-INTRODUCTION
Consider a deductive knowledge-representation system whose database contains information about various people  ( e . g . , its users ) , other ( perhaps interacting ) systems , or even itself . In order for the system to learn more about these entities -- to expand its "' knowledge " base--it should contain information about the beliefs  ( or desires , wants , or other cognitive states ) of these entities , and it should be able to reason about them ( cf . Moore 1977 , Creary 1979 , Wilks and Bien 1983 , Barnden 1983 , and Nilsson 1983:9) . 
Such a database constitutes the " knowledge " ( more accurately , the beliefs ) of the system about these entities and about their beliefs  . 
Among the interrelated issues in knowledge representation that can be raised in such a context are those of multiple reference and the proper treatment of pronouns  . For instance , is the person named ' Lucy ' whom John believes to be rich the same as the person named ' Lucy ' who is believed by the system to be young ? How can the system  ( a ) represent the person named ' Lucy ' who is an object of its own belief without  ( b ) confusing her with the person named ' Lucy ' who is an object  . .of . John ' ~ belief , yet(c ) be .   . . able to merge its representations of those two people if it is later determined that they are the same ? A solution to this problem turns out to be a side effect of a solution to a subtler problem in pronominal reference  , namely , the proper treatment of pronouns occurring within belief-contexts  . 
i . OUASI-INDICATORS
Following Casta~eda (1967:85) . an indic , to t is a personal or demonstrative pronoun or adverb used to make a strictly demonst rative reference  . 
and a ouasi-indicator is an expression within a ' believes - that ' context that represents a use of an indicator by another person  . Consider the following statement by person A addressed to person at time ~ and ~ lace ~: A says  , " I am going tokilly ou here now . Person ~ , who overheard this , calls the police and says . " A said . to ~ at ~ at A that he * was going to kill him * there * then*  . " The starred words are quasi-indicators representing uses by A of the indicators'I'  . ' you ' . ' here ', and ' now ' . There are two properties ( among many others ) of quasi-indicators that must be taken into account :  ( i ) They occur only within intentional contexts , and ( ii ) they cannot be replaced salva veritate by any coreferential expressions  . 
The general question is : " How can we attribute indexical references to others ?"  ( Casta~eda 1980:794 )  . The specific cases that we are concerned with are exemplified in the following scenario  . Suppose that John has just been appointed editor of Byte  . but that John does not yet know this . Further . suppose that , because of the well-publicized salary accompanying the office of Byte ' A editor  , (1) John believes that the editor of Byte is rich . 
And suppose finally that . because of severe losses in the stock market . 
(2) John believes that he himself is not rich.
Suppose that the system had information about each of the following : John's appointment as editor  , Johnts ( lack of ) knowledge of this appointment . 
and John's belief about the wealth of the editor.
We would not want the system to infer ( 3 ) John believes that he * is rich because ( 2 ) is consistent with the system's information . The ' he himself ' in (2) is a quasi-indicator , for ( 2 ) is the sentence that we use to express the belief that John would express as ' I am not rich '  . Someone pointing to John . saying . 
65(4) He\[i . e . , that man there \] believes that he * is not rich could just as well have said  ( 2 )  . The first ' he ' in ( 4 ) is not a quasi-indicator : It occurs outside the believes - that context  , and it can be replaced by ' John ' or by ' the editor of Byte '  , salvaveri-tare . But the ' he *' in ) 4 ) and the ' he himself ' in ( 2 ) could not be thus replaced by ' the editor of Byte '- given our scenario-even though John is the editor of Byte  . And if poor John also suffered from amnesia , it could not be replaced by ' John ' either . 
~. REPRESENTATIONS
Entities such as the Lucy who is the object of John's belief are intentional  ( mental )  , hence intensional . ( Of . Frege 1892 ; Meinong 1904 ; Cas-ta~eda 1972 ; Rapaport 1978 ,  1981 . ) Moreover , the entities represented in the database are the objects of the ~ y  . ~' ~ beliefs , and , so , are also intentional , hence intensional . We represent sentences by means of propositional semantic networks  , using the Semantic Network Processing System ( SNePS ; Shapiro 1979) , which treats nodes as representing intensional concepts  ( of . Woods 1975 , Brachman 1977 , Maida and Shapiro 1982) . 
We claim that in the absence of prior knowledge of coreferentiality  , the entities within belief-contexts should be represented separately from entities outside the context that might be coreferential with them  . Suppose the system's beliefs include that a person named ' Lucy ' is young and that John believes that a  ( possibly different ) person named ' Lucy ' is rich . 
We represent this with the network of Fig.I.
Fig . I . Lucy is young ( m3 ) and John believes that someone named ' Lucy ' is rich  ( m12 )  . 
The section of network dominated by nodes m7 and m9 is the system's dedit to representation of John's belief  . That is ,   m9 is the system'~representation of a belief that John might express by ' Lucy is rich '  , and it is represented as one of John's beliefs . Such nodes are considered as being in the system ' s representation of John's i " belief space "  . Non-dominated nodes , such as ml 4 , m12 , m15 , mS , and m3 , are the system's representation of its own belief space  ( i . e . , they can be thought of as the object of an implicit ' I believe that ' case frame  ; cf . Casta~eda 1975:121-22, Kant 1787: BI31) . 
If it is later determined that the " two " Lucies are the same  , then a node of coreferentiality would be added ( m16 , in Fig .  2) . 
Fig .  2 . Lucy is young ( m3) , John believes that someone named ' Lucy ' is rich  ( mlS )  , and John's
Lucy is the system's Lucy ( m16).
Now consider the case where the system has no information about the " content " of John's belief  , but does have information that John's belief is about the ~  . 7_~/ . f . ~' E Lucy . Thus , whereas John might express his belief as , ' Linus's sister is rich ' , the system would express it as ,  ' ( Lucy system ) is believed by John to be rich ' ( where ' ( Lucy system ) ' is the system's Lucy )  . This is a dere presentation of John's belief , and would be represented by node ml2 of Figure 3 . 
The strategy of separating entities in different belief spaces is needed in order to satisfy the two main properties of quasi-indicators  . 
Consider the possible representations of sentence ( 3 ) in Figure 4 ( adapted from Maida and Shapiro 1983:316 )  . This suffers from three major problems . First , it is ambiguous : It could be the representation of  ( 3 ) or of ( 5 ) John believes that John is rich . 
But , as we have seen , (3) and (5) express quite different propositions ; thus , they should be separate items in the database . 
Second , Figure 4 cannot represent (5) . For then we would have no easy or uniform way to represent  ( 3 ) in the case where John does not know that he is named ' John ': Figure  4 says that the person ( m3 ) who is named ' John ' and who believes m 6 , believes that that person is rich ; and this would be false in the amnesia case . 

Fig . 3. The system's young Lucy is believed by
John to be rich.
Fig .  4 . A representation for " John believes that he * is rich " Third  , Figure 4 cannot represent (3) either , for it does not adequately represent the quasi -indexical nature of the ' he ' in  ( 3 ) : Nodem 3 represents both ' John ' and ' he ' , hence is both inside and outside the intentional context  , contrary to both of the properties of quasi -indicators  . 
Finally , because of these representational inadequacies , the system would invalidly "' infer " ( 6 iii ) from ( 6i ) - ( 6 ii ) :  ( 6 )   ( i ) John believes that he isrich . 
( ii ) he = John ( iii ) John believes that John is rich . 
simply because premise ( 6 i ) would be represented by the same network as conclusion  ( 6iii )  . 
Rather , the general pattern for representing such sentences is illustrated in Figure  5  . The ' he *' in the English sentence is represented by node  m2  ; its quasi-indexical nature is represented by means of node  ml0  . 

Fig .  5 . John believes that he * is rich (   m2 is the s~stem's representation of John's "' self -concept  , expressed by John as ' I ' and by the system as ' he *'  ) That nodes m2 and m5 must be distinct follows from our separation principle  . But , since m2 is the system's representation of Johnts representation of himself  , it must be within the system's representation of John's belief space  ; this is accomplished via nodes ml0 and m9 , representing
John's belief that m2 is his " self-representation " . Node m 9 , with its EGO arc to m2 , represents , roughly , the proposition ' m2 is me ' . 
Our representation of quasi-indexical dese sentences is thus a special case of the general schema for ded it to representations of belief sentences  . When a dese sentence is interpreted dere , it does not contain quasi-indicators , and can be handled by the general schema for de rerepresentations  . Thus ,   ( 7 ) John is believed by himself to be rich would be represented by the network of Figure  4  . 
~. INFERENCES
Using an ATN parser-generator with a question -answering capability  ( based on Shapiro 1982 )  , we are implementing a system that parses English sentences representing beliefs dere orded it to into our semantic-network representations  , and that generates appropriate sentences from such networks  . 
It also " recognizes " the invalidity of arguments such as  ( 5 ) since the premise and conclusion ( when interpreted ded in , o ) are no longer represented by the same network . When given an appropriate inference rule , however , the systeming : ( 81  ( i ) John believes that the editor of Byte is rich . 
( ii ) John believes that he * is the editor of

Therefore ,   ( iii ) John believes that he * is rich In this case , an appropriate inference rule would be : (9)(? x , y , z , F ) \[ x believes F ( y ) bx believes z = y -> x believes FCz ) \] In SNePS , inference rules are treated as proposi-t ions represented by nodes in the network  . Thus , the network for ( 9 ) would be built by the SNePS User Language command given in Figure  6   ( cf . 
Shapiro 1979).
(build avb ( $ x$ySz$F ) & ant ( build agent * x verb ( build lex believe ) object ( build which * y adj ( build lex*F ) ) ) & ant ( build agent * x verb ( find lex believe ) object ( build equiv * zequiv * y ) ) cq ( build agent * x verb ( find lex believe ) object ( build which * zadj ( find lex*F ) ) ) ) Fig .  6 . SNePSUL command for building rule (9) , for argument (8) . 
~. ITER ATED BELIEF CONTEXTS
Our system can also handle sentences in volv- ing iterated belief contexts  . Consider ( 10 ) John believes that Mary believes that Lucy is rich  . 
The interpretation of this that we are most interested in representing treats  ( I0 ) as the system's dedit to representation of John's dedit to representation of Mary's belief that Lucyisrich  . On this interpretation , we need to represent the system ' ~ John -- ( John system ) -- the system's representation of John ' ~ Mary-- ( Mary John system ) -- and the system's representation of John's representation of Mary ' ~ Lucy--  ( Lucy Mary John system )  . This is done by the network of Figure 7 . 
Such a network is built recursively as follows : The parser maintains a stack of " believers "  . 
Each time a belief-sentence is parsed , it is made the object of a belief of the previous believer in the stack  . Structure-sharing is used wherever possible . Thus ,   ( II ) John believes that Mary believes that Lucy is sweet Fig  .  7 . John believes that Mary believes that
Lucy is rich.
would modify the network of Figure 7 by adding new beliefs to ( John system ) 's belief space and tO ( Mary John system ) 's belief space , but would use the same nodes to represent John , Mary , and Lucy . 
~. NEW INFOR MATION
The system is also capable of handling sequences of new information  . For instance , suppose that the system is given the following infor-mation at three successive times : t l :  ( 121 The system's Lucy believes that Lucy's
Lucy is sweet.
t2: (13) The system's Lucy is sweet.
t3: (14) The system IsLucy = LucyIsLucy.
Then it will build the networks of Figures 8-I0 , successively . Attl(Fig .  8) , node m3 represents the systemts Lucy and m7 represents Lucy's Lucy . 
Att2 ( Fig .  9) , m13 is built , representing the system's belief that the system 's Lucy  ( who is not yet believed to be -- and , indeed , might not be -- Lucy's Lucy ) is sweet . \[ l\]Att3(Fig . II ) , m14 is built , representing the system's new belief that there is really only one Lucy  . This is a merging of the two "' Lucy "- nodes . From now on , all properties of " either " Lucy will be inherited by the "' other "  , by means of an inference rule for the EQUIV case frame  ( roughly , the indiscernibility of id___@enticals ) . 
It\]We are assuminB that tile system's concept of sweetness  ( node me ) is also the system's concept of ( Lucy system ) 's concept of sweetness . This assumption seems warranted , since all nodes are in the system's belief space . If the system had reason to believe that its concept of sweetness differed from Lucy's  , this could -- and would have to -- be represented . 

Fig . 8. Lucy believes that Lucy is sweet.
I \
Fig .  9 . Lucy believes that Lucy is sweet , and Lucy ( the believer ) is sweet . 
i . FUTURE WORK
There are several directions for future modifications  . First , the node-merging mechanism of the EQUIV case frame with its associated rule needs to be generalized : Its current interpretation is coreferentiality  ; but if the sequence ( 12 ) - ( 14 ) were embedded in someone else's belief-space , then coreferentiality might be incorrect . 
What is needed is a notion of " co-refere ~ tiality -within-a-belief-space '  . The relation of consoct-ation " ( Casta~eda 1972 ) seems to be more appropriate . 
Second , the system needs to be much more flexible . Currently , it treats all sentences of the form ( 15 ) x believes that F ( y ) as canonically dedicto and all sentences of the form  ( 16 ) y is believed by x to be F Fig . I0 . Lucy believes that Lucy is sweet , Lucy is sweet , and the system's Lucy is Lucy's Lucy . 
as canonically dere . In ordinary conversation , however , both sentences can be understood in either way , depending on context , including prior beliefs as well as idiosyncracies of particular predicates  . For instance , given ( I ) , above , and the fact that John is the editor of Byte , most people would infer (3) . But given ( 17 ) John believes that all identical twins are conceited  . 
(18) Unknown to John , he is an identical twin most people would not infer  ( 19 ) John believes that he * is conceited . 
Thus , we want to allow the system to make the most " reasonable " interpretations  ( dere vs . de d?c to ) of users ' belief-reports , based on prior beliefs and on subject matter , and to modify its initial representation as more information is received  . 

A deductive knowledge-representation system that is to be able to reason about the beliefs of cognitive agents must have a scheme for representing beliefs  . This scheme must be able to distinguish among the " belief spaces " of different agents  , as yell as be able to handle " nested belief spaces "  , i . e . , second-order beliefs such as the beliefs of one agent about the beliefs of another  . We have shown how a scheme for representing beliefs as either dereorded ? c to can distinguish the items in different beliefs pa ~ es  ( including nested belief spaces )  , yet merge the items on the basis of new information  . This general scheme also enables the system to adequately represent sentences containing quasi -indicators  , while not allowing invalid inferences to be drawn from them  . 


J . A . Barnden , " Intensions as Such : An Outline , "
IJCAI-83(1983) 280-286.
R . J . Brachman , " What's in a Concept : Structural Foundations for Semantic Networks  , " International Journal for Man-Machine Studies 9 ( 1977 ) 127-52 . 
Hector-Neri Casta~eda , " Indicators and Quasi-Indicators , " ~ Philosoohical Ouarterlv 4 (1967) 85-10 0 . 
__  , " Thinking and the Structure of the World " ( 1972 )  , Philosoohia 4 (1974) 3-40 . 
" Identity and Sameness , " Philoso Dhia 5~1975) 121-50 . 
__  , " Reference , Reality and Perceptual Fields , " Proceedings and Addresses of the ~ erican ~ hilosophical Association  53  ( 1980 ) 763-823 . 
L . G . Creary , " Propositional Attitudes : Fregean Representation and Simulative Reasoning  , "
IJCAI-79(1979) 176-81.
Gottlob Frege , " On Sense and Reference " (1892) , in Translations from the Philosophical Writings of ~ ott lobFre ~ e  , ed . by P . Geach and M . Black ( Oxford : Basil Blackwell , 1970):56-78 . 
Immanuel Kant , Critique of Pure Reason , 2nd ed.
(1787), trans.N . KempSmith(New York : St.
Martin's Press , 1929).
Anthony S . Maida and Stuart C . Shapiro , " Intensional Concepts in Propositional Semantic Networks  . " Cognitive Science 6 (1982) 291-330 . 
Alexius Meinong , -Ueber Gegen stands theorie " (1904) , in Alexius Meinon ~ Gesamtaus ~ ahe , Vol . 
II , ed . R . Haller ( Graz , Austria : Aka demische Druck-u . Verlagsanstalt , 1971):481-535 . 
English translation in R . Chisholm ( ed . ) , Real-ism and the Background of Phenomenolo ~ y ( New
York : Free Press , 1960):76-117.
R.C . Moore , "' Reasoning about Knowledge and
Action , " IJCAI-77(1977) 223-27.
Nils J . Nilsson , " Artificial Intelligence Prepares for 2001 , " AIMa ~ azine 4 . 4 ( Winter 1983) 7-14 . 
William J . Rapaport , " Meinongian Theories and a Russellian Paradox , " NoGs 12 (1978) 153-80; errata ,  13(1979)125 . 
__  , " How to Make the World Fit Our Language : An Essay in Meinongian Semantics  , " Grazer Philoso-nhische Studien 14 (1981) I-21 . 
Stuart C . Shapiro , " The SNePS Semantic Network Processing System , " in N . V . Findler ( ed . ) , Associative Networks ( New York : Academic Press ,  1979): 179-203 . 
__  , " Generalized Augmented Transition Network Grammars For Generation From Semantic Networks  , " ~ Journal of ~ Linguistics 8 (1982) 12-25 . 
Yorick Wilks and Janusz Bien , " Beliefs , Points of View , and Multiple Environments , " Cognitive Science 7(1983) 95-119 . 
William A . Woods , "' What's in a Link : The Semantics of Semantic Networks  , " in D . G . Bobrow and A . M . 
Collins ( eds . ) , Reuresentation and ~( New York : Academic Press ,  1975): 35-79 . 

