THEUSEOFSYNTACTICCLUESINDISCOURSEPROCESSING
Nan Decker
1844 Chase Avenue
Cincinnati , Ohio 45223, USA

The desirability of a syntactic parsing component in natural language understanding systems has been the subject of debate for the past several years  . This paper describes an approach to auto-mar ie text processing which is entirely based on syntactic form  . A program is described which processes one genre of discourse  , that of newspaper reports . The program creates summaries of reports by re lying on an expanded concept of text grounding : certain syntactic structures and tense / aspect o airs indicate the most important events in a news story  . Supportive , background material is also highly coded syntactically  . Certain types of information are routinely expressed with distinct syntactic fo rm s  . Where more than one episode occurs in a single report  , a change of episode will also be marked syntactically in a reliable way  . 

The role that syntactic structure should playin natural language processing has been a matter of debate in computational linguist ics  . While some researchers eschew syntactic p rocessing as giving a poor return on the heavy investment of a parser  ( Schank and Riesbeck ,  1981)  , others make syntactic representations the bas is from which further work is done  ( Sager , 1981; Hirschman and Sager ,  1982) . Current syntaxbased processors tend to work only within a narrow semantic domain  , since they rely heavily on word co-occur rence patterns which hold only within texts from a part ? icular sublangua & e  . Knowledgebased processors , on the other hand , can operate on a less restricted semantic f ield  , but only if sufficient knowledge in the form of scripts  , frames , and so forth , is built into the program . 
This paper describes a syntactic approach to natural language processing which is not bound to a narrow semantic field  , and which requires little or no world knowledge . This approach has been demonstrated in a computer program called DUMP  ( ~ is course Understanding model \[ rogram )  , which relies solely on syntactic structure to create summaries of one particular genre of discourse -- that of newspaper reports -- and to label the kinds of information given in them  ( Decker ,  1985) . The process for creating these summaries differs substantially from the word-llst and statistical methods used by other automatic abstractor programs  ( Borko and Beruier ,  1975) . The DUMP program therefore depends on a predic table discourse genre or style  , rather than a predictable sublanguage lex icon or body of world knowledge  . 
DUMP was developed from a corpus of over 5800 words representing twenty-three news reports from three daily newspapers : the New York T imes  , the Boston Globe , and the Providence Journal/Even in ~ Bulletin  . With one exception , each story appeared in the upper right hand column of the front page  . 
The stories in the corpus were chosen randomly and the only criterion for rejection was too large a percentage of quoted material  . Only the first two hundred words or so of each story were included in the corpus in order to allow a greater samplin ~ of reports  . The discourse principles at work are fairly represented in an excerp to ~ this length  . 
The input to the DUMP program consists of all st of  hand-~6rsed sentences making up each story . 
Ideaily, . these parse trees should be the output of a parsing program  . ~ n fact , about one-third of the sentences were passed through the RUS parser  ( Woods ,  1973) . RUS experienced difficulty with some of these sentences for a number of reasons : the parser was operating without a semantic component  , and arcs from nodes were ordered with the expectation of feedback from semantics  ; RUS lacked some rules for structures which appear with regul-arl t  7 in the news ; It attempted to give all the parses of a sentence  , where DUMP only required one , and that not necessarily the correct or complete one  ( about which more later )  ; and DUMP's rules call for certain syntactic labels which are not ordinarily assigned by parsing programs  ( negative and adversative clauses , for example ) . However , it should be stressed that none of these difficulties represents parsing problems of theoretical import  . All could here solved by extensions to existing components of the ATN and its dictionary  . 
THEDISCOURSESTRUCTUREOFNEWS REPORTS
The syntactic rules used by DUMP work because of the predictable  , almost for mu\[aic discourse structure of hard news reports ~  . Two journalistic devices above all else characterize hard news : the inverted pyramid  , and the block paragraph ( Green ,  1979) . The inverted pyramid refers to the convention of relating the most important facts of * Features  , sports reports , and so forth have their own discourse structure  . 
315 a news story in the first paragraph , followed by less important information given in descending order  ( or , it may be argued , random order ) of importance . Thus , the news differs markedly from canonical story form in which material is given in chronological order  . The block paragraph , the second device , is one which stands independent of paragraphs adjacent to it  . This unit contains no Logical connectives ( however , in addition , ~ ore-over ) which link it to preceding or following paragraphs  . The avoidance of such connectives allows the newspaper editor to quickly delete paragraphs from a story in the morning edit i ont of it into the evening edition w i thout rewriting  . 
The block paragraph is short : oversixty percent of the paragraphs in the corpus are only one sent-ence long  ; about one-half have two sentences , and less than one percent have three sentences . The effect is that most sentences of the report are presented at the same level of importance : there is no orthographic unit larger than the sentence which reliably indicates that a group of sentences is related topically or episodically  . In place of the normal paragraph , we shall see , is a highly reliable level of syntactic coding which links sentences into episodes  . 
At a lower level of organization than the inverted pyramid and block paragraph are the two discourse units which DUMP relies on : the episode  , and within the episode , the information field as found in the detached clause  . 
News reports may contain more than one episode . 
A new episode begins when the set of characters and/or setting  ( temporal or geographical ) changes . 
The detached clause is defined Intonatlonally : it is bounded by pauses  , has falling intonation at the end , or is preceded by a clause with fall-ing intonation  ( Thompson ,  1983) . This clause is almost always set off in text with commas  . So , for example , the following sentence from the ninth story in the corpus  ( " Ararat Forces Lose Key Position , " Boston Globe , November 7 , 1983) consists of four detached clauses , or information fields : (9:3) ~ Arafat's soldiers , who resisted the assault , fellback sirmiles to Beddawi , the remaining PiO strong hold in the area , and Nahrel Bared is now surrounded by Syrian soldiers  . . . .
The information fields here are : a nonrestric -tive relative clause  ( " who resisted the assault " )  , an appositive ( " the remaining PLO strong hold in the area " )  , and two main clauses ( " Arafat's soldiers fellback . . . " and " Nahrel Bared is now surrounded . . . ") . 
There are a small number of syntactic forms which reliably indicate the beginning of new episodes  . Likewise , there is a strong correlation * The first number indicates the story in the corpus  , the second the number of the sentence within that story  . 
between the category of information the Journalist conveys in each detached clause and the syntactic structures used for its expression  . For example , the nonrestrictive relative clause in 9:3 expresses background events , the appositive expresses an identification of place  , and the two main clauses express a main event and a current state  , respectively . The next two sections will Look at the syntactic correlates of the information field and the ep is ode boundary in detail  . 
Syntactic Correlates of the Information Field The syntactic rules used by DUMP reflect g rounding principles found universally in d is-course  ( Grimes ,  1975) . Certain assertional struc-tures in text deliver for eground information  , which tells the events of the narrative and moves the story forward  . These events comprise a summary of the story . Less assertional structures are used to express background  , supportive information which fleshes out the skeleton provided in the foreground but does not move the action forward  . There is a strong correlation between the syntactic form and information type of this supportive material which allows DUMP to subcategorize it into the following classes : past events and processes Leading up to the most recent development in the story  ; plans for the future ; current state of the world ; information of secondary importance ; identifications ; import of the story ; effects of actions ; comments made by participants in the story ; and collateral ( things which did not happen ) . 
This division of material into foreground vs.
background gives text its texture . A narrative in which everything is presented at the same level of prominence tends to be monotonous  . One of the chief means of distinguishing foreground from backgroundistense and aspect  , which has been called a sort off low-of-control mechanism  , allow-in K the reader to pick out the most important parts of a discourse  ( Hopper ,  1979) . Sentences with simple past verbs in the active voice are the chief convey or soff or e ground material in news  . 
This fact recalls the broader concept of transi -tivit  7 put forth by Hopper and Thompson ( 1980 )  , whereby certain properties of the verb and its arguments transfer the action from agent to patient more effectively than others  . Foregrounded clauses have high transitivity , backgrounded clauses low transitivity . 
High transitivity verbs are kinetic , relic , punctual , volitional , affirmative , and real is . 
Kinetic verbs allow easy transfer of action from subject to object  . Throw is therefore kinetic , while the copular to be is not . Telic verbs are those which express an action with a natural end-poin =  . The verb makeia " John is making a chair " is relic  , while the verbs in 5 in " John is singing " is not . Telican datelic verbs can be ~ is tin-guisned by their entailments : if John is interrup-ted while making a chair  , it is not true thache has made a chair , but if he is interrupted while singing , it is still true that he hassung ( Comrie ,  1976) . Punctual verbs ( sneeze , kick ) refer to actions with no obvious internal structure  . 
Study and carr ~ are examples of non-punctual verbs  . 

Volitional verbs ( " Twrote his name " ) have greater transitivity than non-voli tional verbs  ( " ~ forgo this name " )   ( Hopper and Thompson ,  1980 , p .  252) . 
Affirmation distinguishes collateral information from all other types  . And finally , the real is mode distinguishes events which have existed from those which only might have or would have  . Main event clauses therefore never contain modals  . The differential behavior of verbs from these semantic classes has been described by a number of taxon-omers  ( Comrie , 1976; Mourelatos , 1981; Ota ,  1963;
Vendler , 1967).
Arguments high intransitivity are those which are strong agents  , totally affected and highly individuated . Strong agents are human rather than nonhuman : " George start ledme " has more transi-tivit  7 than " The picture start led me " ( Hopper and Thompson ,  1980 , p . 252) . Objects which are wholly affected lend greater transitivity than those which are only partially affected  ( "Id rank the milk " vs . "Id rank some milk ") . Likewise , more highly individuate do--~e ~ defined as proper  , human or animate , concrete , singular , count and definite , add more transitivity than less in div iduated ones  . 
These transitivity parameters assume a good deal of semantic knowledge about verbs and the irarguments  . In fact , the affirmative and real is features are the only ones reflected LnDUMP's rules  . But in another respect , Hopper and Thompson's notion of transitiv ity must be extended  . An examination of tense and aspect alone is not sufficient to distinguish fo reground from background in the DUMP corpus  . The type of clause In which the verb appears is also crucial  . So , for example , the simple past may be used to convey both fo reground and background material  , depending on the type of clause in which it occurs : in main clauses  , it will always convey the most recent events in a story  , while in relative clauses , it will always convey past events . The first two sentences of story 6 ( "Stone Meets with Salvador Rebel Officia l  , " Boston G Lobe , August 1 ,  1983 ) illustrate the distinct uses of the two clause types  . 
(6:i ) After weeks of maneuvering and frustration , presidential envoy Richard B . Stone metface-to-face yesterday for the first time with a key Leader of the Salvador anguer ril lamovement  . 
Here , the simple past is used in a main clause to for eground information  . 
(6: Z ) " Theice has been broken , " proclaimed President Be Lisario Betancur of Co lombia  , who engineered the meeting . 
The simple past engineered in a relative clause indicates background material  . 
The information-bearing capacities of these two clause types  , when they occur with the simple , active past , are in complementary distribution in news writing . The main clause is more assertion aL than the relative clause  ; it is used to give information which the writer assumes the reader is seeing for the first time  . The relative clause , on the other hand , is more presupposition aL . The writer uses it to convey old information which is of Lesser importance or which the reader may already have knowledge of  . 
Sentences 6:i and 6:Z illustrate the way in which syntactic forms provide information which might otherwise need to be culled from world know-Ledge  . We know that the planning of a meeting precedes its occurrence  , but no such knowledge is necessary here , since the past verb form in a rel-ative c lause signals an event which occurred before the main event  . 
The socalled " hot news " present perfect i-a main clause  ( " The president has resigned " ) signals a main event if it occurs in the first sentence of a story  . Its appearance further downor in a nou-main clause signals information about past events or states  . Two sentences from story 16 ( " Peron-ists Suffer Stunning Defeat in Argentine Vote  , " New York Times , November I , 1983) illustrate this . 
(16 :1 ) The Leader of a middle-class party has swept to victory in Argent in a's presidential elections  . . . .
(16:4) Thee ~? ~ on , called by the ruling military , was a stunning defeat for the Perouists , who have dominated Argent in a ' spolitical Life since their party was founded in  1945 by Juan Domin ~ o Peron . 
In 16:1 , the present perfect has swept is used in the hot news sense  . In 16:4 , the present per-fect have dominated Ls used in a relative clause with an adverbial phrase  ( " since their party was founded in 1945 .   .   .  "  ) to describe a state that has existed for decades  . Note also that the verb dominate is a telic and non-punctual  , and therefore Low intransitivity . However , knowledge of the verb's semantic class is not necessary to identify the relative clause as supportive  . The mere fact that the verb is in a relative clause or the fact that the present perfect appears after the first sentence suffices  . 
Syntactic clues may be used to avoid the need for time programs which determine the relative timing of events by interpreting adverbials  . The following main clauses use the present perfect  , but since they are non-initial , the states and events referred to in them must have occurred before the main event in the story  ( " O'Neill Now Calls Gren-ada Invasion ' Justified ' Action  , " New York Times , 
November 9, 1983).
(19 :5 ) Pressures to pass a strict 60-day Legal limit \[ to the stay of U . S . troops in Grenada \] have eased in the past week . 
(19:6) Both houses have passed such measures , but the Senate version has been bottled up because it was attached to a debt-ceiling bill  . 
(i~:7 ) Other versions of the 60-day War Powers Resolution have been introduced but not acted upon  . 
The appearance of the present perfect this fa r past week does not have to be interpreted by a time program  . 
Likewise , the use of the passive simple past in a main c lause indicates that the event is supportive material : main events  , it turns out , are never expressed with passive voice in the corpus  . In story 14 (" U . S . Says Moscow Threatens to Quit Talks on Missiles , " New York Times , October 12 ,  1983)  , there is no need to interpret the adver-bia lin  1980 and in 1979 with a time program , unless relative ordering of background events is desired  . Theme represence of the passive marks these events as occurring before the time of the main events in the story  . 
(14 :8 ) Talks on a comprehensive test ban of nuclear devices were suspended in Geneva in  1980  , and the Geneva negotiations were suspended in 1979  . 
Main events then are expressed in main clauses w ith simple past verbs  . Events and states which existed before these main events are expressed with a greater varie ty of syntactic forms  , from main clauses , to relative and subordinate clauses , down to noun phrases ( which are not analyzed by DUMP )  . Nominalizations are perhaps the most frequent conveyors of background information In the news  . The nominalization rule transforms a sent-ence into a noun phrase which can then be inserted into another sentence  . St is a highly presupposi-tionai structure , since the subject and object of the orig in alverb are often deleted during the t ransformation and the reader must then supply these arguments from world knowledge  . An ~ xampie from the second story in the corpus ( " Lebanon Needs Israeli Troops , Shultz Told , " Boston Globe , March 14 ,  1983 ) shows the heavy use of nominaii-zations to create a very long prepositions \[ phrase which contains not a single verb:  ( Z : 2 ) In the first high-Level contacts between the two government since the start early this year of OS-Israeii-Lebanesene ~ otiat ions on the withdrawal of Israel's forces from Lebanon  ,   . . . .
We will see other uses of nominalizatlon to express other information categories and to refer to episodes with a single word  . 
The following incompletellst gives a cursory look at the strong correlation between the remaining information categories in news reports and the syntactic forms used to express them  . Most of the examples are from story 6 , about envoy Stone's meeting with a Salvadoran guerrilla Leader  , and story 16 , about the defeat of the Peronists in Argentina's elections  . The next two categories , Current States and Plans , also locate events or states in time , and therefore must occur in finite clauses . -Current States : This category describes the scale of the world at the time the report is written  . Current states are expressed with simple present or present progressive verbs used in main c lauses and in subordinate and relative c lauses  . 
(6:10 ) Stone has repeatedly sought to meet with pol itical Leaders of the Salvad or an left  , all of whom live in exile ,   .   .   .   . 
(16 = 11) The country Mr . Alfonsin is due to govern is racked by a deep economic crisis  . 
Plans : These may be expressed with appropriate modals  ( will ,  ~  , would ) in the same structures used for Current States . 
(6 :10 ) His mission is to encourage participa-t i on by the left in Salvador a nelections  , which will probably be held in March 198 ~ . 
(16:10 ) Military officials said the ruling junt a would consider it in a meeting Tuesday  . 
Certain verbs which express present planning ( come , go , leave , start ) can be used to indicate future time with the present tense : " Fiscal year  1983  , which begins Oct .  1  . . . . " . 
It seems to be a discourse principle of Jour -nalese that while non-main events may be " promo -ted " to expression by the most assertive clause type  , they may also be expressed with less assertional forms : subordinate and relative clauses  , nominailzations , etc . The converm , however , is not true . Main events may never by " demoted " to expression by any other than the most assertive form  . 
The remaining information types do not Locate actions in time  , and therefore are free to appear in constructions without finite verbs  . 
Import : This category is occasionally expressed with equative sentences of the form : NPV-be NP  . The subject and predicate NPs tend to be nomina Lizations  , with the former referring to the main episode . 
(16:4) The election . . . was a stunning defeat for the Peronists . . . .
Election refers to the main event introduced in  16 : i . 16:4 tells why that event is newsworthy . 
Nonrestrictive PPs with nominalizat ions as heads may also express Import :  ( 4 :1 ) The .   .   . Budget Committee , in a major blow to President Ronald Reagan , voted yesterday to hold the real growth in defense spending to  5 percent next year . . . . (" Senate Panel Trims Reagan Arms Budget , " Boston G Lobe , 
April 8, 1983)
Identifications : With only one exception , all identifications in the corpus are made with prenominal modifiers  ( " Prime Minister Smith " ) or with appositives , which may be embedded recur-sive Ly : (6:3) .   .   . Stone .   .   . talked with Ruben Zamora , the No .   2 Leader of the Revolutionary Demo-Marxist- led guerrillab and sfighting government fo rces here  . 
Effects : Detached participial phrases are used to tell the effects of the actions described in main clauses  . 
(16:1 ) The leader of a middle-class party has swept to victory in Argent in a's presidential elections  , hand in ~ the union-based Peronists their first election defeat ~ n nearly four decades  . 
Comments : Comments are simply quotations from people involved in an event  . While in other narra-tives , dialogue is often the chief means of tel l-ing a story and moving the action forward  , this is not the case in news writing . Mere , quotes from participants add flavor and g ive supplementary information  , but they are never the sole vehicle for informing readers of an event  . This is a lucky fact , sSnce the syntactic forms used in quoted speech are usually much less constrained than those in non-quoted portions  . 
(16:5) " We are entering a new stage , " the 56-year old Mr . Alfonsin , whose politics are Left of center , saidinate levision intervie wearly today . 
Collateral : News reports tell what did not happen in a story  , what events and processes never were , with surprising frequency . This information category is expressed by negations of clauses  , including negative existentials , negative subordinate clauses , and various negative prefixes and prenominal modifiers  . 
(6:7 ) Salvador an officials had no immediate comment on what they heard from Stone  . . . .
(6 :9 ) Stone had been unable to arrange a meeting with the Salvador an rebel leaders  .   .   . 
earlier this month.
If it were the case that the correspondence between a syntactic form and the information types it expresses was one-to-many  , this relation would not be of much help in automatic processing  . In fact , the correspondence is closer to one-to-one , so that , for example , equatives only express import and not identifications  , as would be natural in conversational English ( " Smith is mayor of the city " )  . 
DUMP was successful in creating good summaries and labeling the information types for all but two of the twenty three stories in the corpus  . These two exceptions were highly eventful , chronological accounts and DUMP had difficulty distinguishing minor events from major ones  . in addition , after the completion of the program , it performed well with a final story not from the corpus  . 
Syntactic Correlates of Episode Boundaries About one-th lrd of the stories in the DUMP corpus consist of more than one episode  . Story 17 , given here with its DUMP-derived analysis of information  , contains three minor episodes in addition to the major one introduced in the first sentence of the report  . The discussion below of syntactic forms used to indicate episode boundaries will call upon this story for examples  . 
Story 17
The New York Times , November 4 , 1983 " Senate Approves Secret U . S . Action
Against Managua "
By Martin Tolchin
Special to the New York Times
Washington , Nov . 3-i . The Senate today approved by voice vote continued aid for covert operations In Ni caragua  . Z . The approval was made contingent upon not if ication to the intelligence committee of the goals and risks of specific covert projects  . 
3 . The action would provide only $19 million of the $50 million that the Administration sought for covert operations in Central America  , mostly in Nicaragua .  4 . Those funds are expected to run out in less than six months  , when the Central Intelligence Agency would have to give an account of its activities as it sought the rest of the funds  . 
5 . The vote followed an hour Long debate that focused on covert United States activity in Nicar-agua  , which was banned in a Mouse-passed bill . 
6 . The Mouse bill would provide $50 million in open assistance to any friendly Central American government  .  7 . Mouse and Senate conferees will now seek to resolve differences in the two measures  , and the Nicaraguan dispute is expected to be a stumb-ling block in the negotiations  . 
Judge Orders Investigation 8 . In San Francisco , a Federal district judge ordered Attorney General William French Smith to conduct a preliminary investigation of charges that President Reagan and other Government officials violated the Neutrality Act by supporting the activities of paramilitary groups seeking to over-throw the Nicaraguan government  .  9 . The ruling came in a lawsuit filed by Representative Ronaid V  . DeLLums , Democrat of California \[ PageA9\] . 
I0 . Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan , the New York Democrat who is vice chairman of the Intell-igence Committee  , told the Senate that the Admin-istration had modified its covert policy Last summer  , and was not supporting the insurgents seeking to over throw the Sandinista government  . 
Summary of Main Events : The Senate today approved by voice vote continued aid for covert operations in Nicaragua  . Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan told the Senate that the Administration had ? Dump does not analyze either subtitles  , which n~t all newspapers use , or titles . 
3 19 modified its covert policy last summer and was not supporting the bnsurgents seeking to overthrow the Sandinlsta government  . 
Past Events: .   .   . which\[covertUS activity in Ni caragua \] was banned in a House-passed bill  . 
Current State : Those funds are expected to run out in less than six months  . 
.  .   . the Nicaragua dispute is expected to be a stumbling block in the negotiations  . 
Plans : Sentence 3.
.  .   . when \[ in Less than six months \] the Centra l Intel Ligence Agency would have to give an account-ing of its activities as It sought the rest of the funds  . 
Sentence 6.
House and Senate conferees will now seek to resolve differences in the two measures  . 
Secondar) , :* The approval was made contingent upon not i fication to the intelligence committee o f the goals and risks of specific covert projects  . 
Identifications : .   .   . Moynihan , the New York Democrat who is vice chairmano f the Intelligence Committee  . 
The remaining uncategorized sentences are ep is odemarkers and will be discussed below  . 

As noted earlier , orthographic paragraphs are not used in news wr itt ng to indicate episode boundaries  . In their place are a small number of const ructions which regularly introduce newep is odes  , relating them temporally to previous ep is odes  . These structures include the double conta iner sentence  , the sentence introduced with a won-restr ictive location PP  , the LinkS , and the detached time adverbial with a nomina Lizatiou in it  . 
The first four sentences of s~ovy 17 concern them = % nepisode . A new , minor episode is intro-duced by the double container in sentence  5  . This kind of structure has a verb from the small class  ( e . g . precede , follow , result in ) which may take a nominalization in both sub ject and object posi-tion  . The subject refers to an old episode and the object to a new one  . 
(17 :5  ) The vote followed an hour long debate that focused on covert United States activity in Nicaragua  .   .   .   . 
The subject vote refers back to the story ' smain event  , the Senate vote in the first sentence . 
The object , or new episode , is the nominalizatton debate . The object also tells of another episode concerning passage of a House bill  . This billepisode is developed in 17:6 and 17   :7   . 
The second minor episode is introduced with a * This category is not a very reliable one  . It includes clauses with passives and copu las  . 
simple detached PP of location in 17:8 . This structure is used to shift the set t ing from the date line location to a new p lace  . In this case , the action moves from Washington to SanF rancisco :  ( 17 :8  ) In San Francisco , a Federal district Judge ordered At to rney General William French Smithto conduct a preliminary investigation of charges that President Reagan and other Government officials violated the Neut rality 
Act . . . .
This episode is not developed any further in this report  , but is interrupted in the next sent-euce , a Link S , by the third minor episode . The
Links Is of the form:
The nominalized subject refers back to a p revious episode and the object of camere fers to a new episode  . The conjunctor ~ r - - ~ osition shows the new episode's temporal relation to the o ld  . 
(17 :9  ) The ruling came in a lawsuit filed by Representative Ronald V  . Deilums , Democrat of California . \[ Page AP . I The law suitepisode is developed el sew here in the paper  . The page reference closes this episode , and therefore , since 17:10 contains no reference to a new place or t ime  , and has a simple past main verb ( ~ oLd ) , it must by default be part of the orig inal  , main episode . This decision is supported by the eleventh sentence in the story  ( not included in the corpus ) : After this policy change , Mr . Moynihan said , the committee approved additional funds . 
There is no example of the final episode marker in story  17- -the sentence introduced by a detached time adverbial with a nominalization in a time phrase  ( "Two hours before the vote " ; "During the Pope's visit " ) ? The nomlnalization refers to a previous episode and the main sentence to which the whole adverb i alphrase is attached introduces the new episode  . Story 10 (" French Jets Keta Liate , Hit Shiite Positions , " Boston G Lobe , November 18 , L983 ) begins vith French planes bombing Iranian-backed militia in Lebanon  . A related episode starts in sentence 5: ( 10:5 ) Sixhours after the French air attacks , gunmenfire drocket-prope Lledgre nades and automatic weapons at a French peace keep in ~ post in the Shiite Moslem neighborhood of Khandik 
Ghamik in West Beirut.
Each episode in a report has the potential to contain its own main events  , background events , plans , current states , identifications , and so forth . An extension of DUMP's labeling ability would be the creation of a discourse tree for each news report  , with a root node dominating episode nodes , which in turn dominate relevant information categories  . 

THEDUM PPROGRAM
DUMP works very simply . It takes as input parsed sentences of a story and searches through them for the kinds of syntactic labels described above  ( declarative sentence , detached PP , etc .  )  . 
These labels introduce information fields , each of which is stored on a stack . A set of rules is then applied to each entry on the stack  , and assignment of each entry made Coone of the information categories on the basis of the structural label and optional tense/aspect marker  . 
DUMP does not need a full parse of a sentence to assign syntactic structures to a part lcular information category  . For example , it does not need to know anything about the attachment of clause-lnternal PPs  , a difficult problem for parsing programs . Furthermore , news writing ( with the exception of quoted portions , which DUMP does not need parsed ) does not reflect the use of a full grammar of English  . The corpus contains no question forms and a number of the " stylistic " transformations  ( pseudo-cleft , coplca Lizatlon are examples ) do not appear . The question of whether some kind of " fuzzy " parser with a limited number of rules could prov idead equate output for DUMP is one ~ or fur ther research  . 
On the other hand , whatever parser is used to prepare input for DUMP will need certain labels not ordinar i ~ y found in parse trees : sentences are not usually distinguished as equative or double container in type  . Furthermore , DUMP requires some non-standard features on words  . For example , we have seen in a number of instances how cruc i al it is to mark nouns as nominalizat ions  . 
RELATION TO OTHER WORK
The DUMP program embodies principles useful both to the processing of sublanguages and to AI research  . In the former case , these principles allow preliminary automatic processing of texts within the same genre  , regardless of the breadth of the semantic field . As noted earlier , current work with subLanguages relies on word co -occur-rence classes which result from their very constrained subject matter  . News writing covers a wide range of topics and therefore word co-occur-rence classes are not an efficient method of automatic process ing  . However , these reports do show predictable constrain ts in the use of syn-tactic constructions to express particular kinds of information and it is this regularity that DUMP depends upon  . 
In the case of AI research , DUMP can serve as a support program to knowledge -based processors  . 
The FRUMP program ( DeJong , L979) , for example , creates summaries from sketchy scripts by looking for key requests  , or main events , in the text . 
So , the script for an earthquake story might contain key requests for information about the quake's rating on the Richter Scale  , the amount of property damage It did , where the epicenter was located , and how far shock waves were felt . 
FRUMP would then look to the newspaper text for evidence of each of the key requests in the scr ipt  . 
The scripts are written by the programmer , based on his or her assumption of the most important information likely to be found in all stories about a particular topic  . DUMP is feted from reliance on such scripts because of the fact that the news reporter  , however unconsciously , encodes key requests syntactically . DUMP can locate these key requests easily and also signal the beginning of new elpsodes  , thus facilitating one of the tasks which FRUMP finds most diffl cu~t--thafi of script selection  .   ( Imaglne the confusion that could result in scot 7   17 when the Congressional script is interrupted in the eighth sentence by an episode requiring a judicial script  . ) Once all of the detached clauses and episodes in a report have been correctly ~ a be Lled by DUMP  , a knowledge-based processor could then go about building conceptual representations for each unit  . 
It is expected that DUMP's approach could be extended to other genres of writing  , since most texts achieve texture by dist inguishing foreground from background  . However , texts vary in the pro-portion of fo regrounded to backgrounded material and in their pref~ence for certain forms to convey grounding  . The literary style of a discourse will therefore influence the design of automatic text processing programs  . The style of news reports is relatively subordinated  , non-redundant , and predi-catlonaiiy dense . The sentences in the DUMP corpus average 2 . 88 predications per sentence , as compared to a high of 2 . 7 8 in the informative sections of the Brown corpus and  2  . 6 A across all genres ( Francis and Kucera , 1982) . The term predication refers coboth the fl ni Ce and non-flnl Ce types  , and therefore the 2 . 8 8 figure indicates that the news corpus is characterized by a great deal of embedd-ing of both types : finite clauses  ( relative clause ~ adverbial clauses )  , and well as non-finites ( in fin-itive complements , reduced relatives , participials ) . 
It can be hypothesized that a highly pred icated writing style such as Journalese wi ll show greater variety in its syntactics tructures than a style with few predicat ions per sentence  . This syntactic diversity will reflect a text with less foregrounded material--in short  , a text with greater texture . A further hypothesis is that in a predi-ra tionally dense style there will be as t ronger correlation between syntactic forms and the par-titular Information types expressed by these forms  . 
It seems likely that a genre which uses few pred-ications per sentence would consist ch iefl  7 of main clauses used as the work horse to express all kinds of information : background  , main events , plans , import , and so forth . Some of these information categories will be distinguishable by verb tense  , aspect , mood and voice , as in the news . But others will have to rely on world knowledge for categori-zation  . As an example , consider a revised version of the opening of story  6  , rewritten so that embedded clauses in the or iginal are expressed as main c~a uses : Richard B  . Stone metface-co-face today with a key leader of the Salvador anguer rilla movement  . He spent several frustrating weeks " The Ice has been broken  , " proclaimed President Belisario Be Cancur of Colombia  . 
He engineered the meeting.
Knowledge about the way plans are made would be needed to distinguish for e ground from background in these sentences  . 
One further metric can be hypothesized for determining discourse genres suitable for syntactic analysis  . In syntactic theory there is a well-known correlation between the flexibility of word order in a language and its use of morphosyu-tactic Inflections  . Language sllkeEnglish which have Lost most of their inflectional markers rely on rigid word order to establish syntactic relations  . On the other hand , highly inflected ~ anguage sllke Latin can afford greater flexibility in word order since inflec tions on the ends of words indicate their function in the sentence  . 
An analogy might be drawn in which syntactic structures correspond to morphosyntactic\[nflec -Lions and information order in discourse cor res-ponds to word order  . The discourse structure of news reports v iolates canonical story form  . The writer does not start at the beginn ing and relate events through to the end  . The potential confusion introduced by this unpredictability is compounded by the dens ity of new information in news reports  . 
Perhaps the great regularity in the use of di stinct syntactic forms to express the types of information conveyed in the news serves to compensate for the flexibility ~ n discourse structure  . It is as though the strong correlation between syntactic form and tn form a ~ i on type f rees the reader to process the large amount of new information being delivered  . Just as inflection alendings allow the Li stener to assign words to their functional slots regardless of the order in which they appear  , so the syntactic correlates to informat i on types allow the news reader to quickly as s ign phrases their function in the di scourse  . Stories which adhere to a standard story grammar do not need such syncact lcregularity  , since the position of the material in the text indicates its function  . 
The extension of a program Like DUMP to other d is course genres would require  , first , the identification of the information categories expressed by the kind of text  . Cookbooks , for example , convey instructions and descriptions , not main events , effects and identifications . 
Secondly , correlations between syntactic form and in formation type and the syntactic means for ~ ndicating episode boundaries must be determined  . 
The degree of correlation between syntactic form and ? nformation type in non-news genres is a matter for further investigation  . 

This research was carried ou C under grant G008101781 from the U . S . Department of Education,
Program for the Hearing Impaired.

Borko , Harold and Bernier , Charles . 1975.
Abstract in ~ Concepts and Methods . New York:
Academic Press.
Comrie , Bernard . 1976. Aspect . Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Decker , Nan .  1985 . Syntactic clues to discourse structure : A case from journalism  . 
Ph.D . dissertation , Brown University.
DeJong , Gerald .  1979 . Skimming stories in realtime : An exper iment in integrated understanding  . Research Report #158 , Depart-ment of Computer Science , Yale University . 
Francis , W . Nelson and Kucera , Henry . 1982.
Frequency Analysis of English Usage . Boston;
Hought on-Mifflin Company.
Green , Georgia .  1979 . Organization , goals and comprehensibility in narrat ives : news writing  , a case study . Technical Report #132 . The Center for the Study of Reading , University of Illinois at

Grimes , Joseph . 1975. The Thread of Dlscourse.
Janua Linguarum , Series Minor , no . 207. The
Hague : Mouton.
Hirschman , Lynette and Sager , Naomi . 1982.
Automatic information formatting of a medical subtanguage  . In R . Kittredge and J . Lehrberger ( Eds .  )  , SubLan~ua~e : Studies in Language ~ n Restri cted Semantic Domains  . New York : Walter de Gruyter . 
Hopper , Paul .  1979 . Aspect and foregrounding in discourse . In T . Glvon ( Ed . ), Syntax and and Semantics , rot .  12 . New York : Academic Press . 
and Thompson , Sandra . 1980.
Transitivity in grammar and discourse . Language 56: 251-299 . 
Mourelatos , Alexander .  1981 . Events , processes and states . In P . Tedesch ? and A . Zaenen ( Eds . ), Syntax and Semantics , vol . Z4 . New York:
Academic Press.
Ota , Akira .  1963 . Tense and Aspect of Present-Day American English . Tokyo : Kenkyusha . 
Sager , Naomi .  1981 . Natural Language Infor-mation Processing : A Computer Grammar of English and its Applications  . Reading , MA : Addison-Wesley . 
Schank , Richard and Rlesbeck , Christopher .  1981 . 
Inside Computer Understanding . Hillsdale , NJ:
Lawrence ErLO aum Associates.
Thompson , Sandra .  1983 . Grammar and discourse : The English detached participial phrase  . In F . Klein-Andreu ( Ed . ), Discourse Perspectives on
Syntax . New York : Academic Press.

Vendler , Zeno .  1967 . Linguistics in Philosophy . 
~thaca , N ?: Coruell University Press.
Woods , W ~ lliam .  1973 . An experimental parsing system for transition network grammars  . In R . Rustin ( Ed . ), Natural Language Processing . 
Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice-Hall.

