GRAMMARVIE WEDASA FUNCTION INGPARTOFA COGNITIVE SYSTEM 
Helen M . Gigley
Department of Computer Science
University of New Hampshire
Durham , NH 03824

How can grammar be viewed as a functional part of a cognitive system  ) Given a neural basis for the processing control paradigm of language performance  , what roles does ' S grammar " play ? Is there evidence to suggest that grammatical processing can be independent from other aspects of language processing ? This paper will focus on these issues and suggest answers within the context of one computational solution  . The example model of sentence comprehension , HOPE , is intended to demonstrate both representational considerations for a grammar within such a system as well as to illus-trate that by interpreting a grammar as a feedback control mechanism of a " neural-like " process  , additional insights into language processing can be obtained  . 
1. Introduction
The role of grammar in defining cognitive models that are neurally plausible and psychologically valid will be the focus of this paper  . 
While in guistic theory greatly influences the actual representation that is included in any such model  , there are vast differences in how any grammar selected is " processed " within a " natural computation " paradigm  . The processing does not grow trees explicitly ; it does not transform trees explicitly ; nor does it move constituents . 
In this type of model , a grammar is an explicit encoded representation that coordinates the integrated parallel process  . It provides the interfaces between parallel processes that can be interpreted within semantic and syntactic levels separately  . It furthermore acts as a " conductor " of a time -synchronized process  . Aspects of how a grammar might be processed within a cognitive view of sentence comprehension will be demonstrated within an implemented model of such processing  , HOPE ( Gigley , 1981; 1982a ; 1982b ; 1983; 1984; 1985) . This view of grammatical " process " suggests that neural processing should be included as a basis for defining what is universal in language  . 
2. Background
There are currently several approaches to developing cognitive models of linguistic function  ( Cottrell , 1984; Cottrell and Small , 1983; Gigley , 1981; 1982a ; 1982b ; 1983; 1984; 1985; Small , Cottrell and Shastri , 1982; Waltz and Pollack , in press ) . These models include assumptions about memory processing within a spreading activation framework  ( Collins and Loftus , 1975; Hinton , 1981; Quillian ,  1968/1980) , and a parallel , interactive control paradigm for the processing . They differ in the explicit implementations of these theories and the degree to which they claim to be psychologically valid  . 
Computational Neurolinguistics ( CN ) , first suggested as a problem domain by Arbib and Caplan  ( 1979 )  , is an Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) approach to modelling neural processes which sub -serve natural language performance  . As CN has developed , such models are highly constrained by behavioral evidence  , both normal and pathological . 
CN provides a framework for defining cognitive models of natural language performance of behavior that includes claims of validity at two levels  , the natural computation or neural-like processing level  , and at the system result or behavioral level . 
Using one implementation of a CN model , HOPE ( Gigley ,  1981 ; 1982a ; 1982b ; 1983) a model of single sentence comprehension , the remainder of the paper will illustrate how the role of grammar can be integrated into the design of such a model  . 
It will emphasize the importance of the parallel control assumptions in constraining the representation in which the grammar is encoded  . It will demonstrate how the grammar contributes to control the coordination of the parallel  , a synchronous processes included in the model . 
The HOPE model is chosen explicitly because the underlying assumptions in its design are intended to be psychologically valid on two levels  , while the other referenced models do not make such claims  . The complete model is discussed in Gigley (1982 a ; 1982b ;  1983 ) and will be summarized here to illustrate the role of the grammar in its function  . The suggested implications and goals for including neurophysiological evidence in designing such models have been discussed else -included only as they relate to the role and function of the grammar  . 
2 . I Summary of Included Knowledge and its Representation Types of representations included in the HOPE model  , phonetic , categorially accessed meanings , grammar , and pragmatic or local context , receive support as separately definable knowledge within studies of a phasia  . There is a vast literature concerning what aspects of language are independently affected in aphasia that has been used as a basis for deciding these representations  . ( See Gigley , 1982b for complete documentation . ) Information that is defined within the HOPE model is presented at a phonological evel as phonetic representations of words  ( a stub for a similar interactive process underlying word recognition  )  . Information at the word meaning level is represented as multiple representations  , each of which has a designated syntactic category type and orthographic spelling associate to represent the phonetic word's meaning  ( also a stub )  . The grammatical representation has two components . 
One is strictly a local representation of the grammatical structural cooccurrences in normal language  . The other is a functional representation , related to interpretation , that is unique for each syntactic category type . Please note that ~~ not used in the strictest sense of its use wlth lnat_~semantic system  . 
~ TIF bedes~l~n detaia T'-Ta't-e~T . Finally , the pragmatic interpretation is assumed to reflect the sentential context of the utterance  . 
Each piece of information is a thresholding device with memory  . Associational interconnections are made by using an hierarchical graph which includes a hypergraph facility that permits simultaneous multiple interpretations for any active information in the process  . Using this concept , an active node can be ambiguous , representing information that is shared among many interpretations  . Sentence comprehension is viewed as the resolution of the ambiguities that are activated over the time course of the process  . 
Within our implementation , graphs can represent an aspect of the problem representation by name  . Any name can be attached to a node , or an edge , or a space ( hypergraph ) of the graph . There are some naming constraints required due to the graph processing system implementation  , but they do not affect the conceptual representation on which the encoding of the cognitive linguistic knowledge relies  . 
Any name can have multiple meanings associated with it  . These meanings can be interpreted differently by viewing each space in which the name is reference a as a different viewpoint for the same information  . This means that whenever the name is the same for any information  , it is indeed the same information , although it may mean several things simultaneously  . An example related to the grammatical representation is that the syntactic category aspect of each meaning of a phonetic word is also a part of the grammatical representation where i t makes associations with other syntactic categories  . The associations visible in the grammatical representation and interpreted as grammatical " meanings " are not viewable within the phonetic word meaning perspective  . 
However , any information associated with a name , for instance , an activity value , is viewable from any spaces in which the name exists  . This means that any interpreted meaning associated with a name can only be evaluated within the context  , or contexts , in which the name occurs . Meaning for any name is contextually evaluable . The explicit meaning within any space depends on the rest of the state of the space  , which furthermore depends on what previous processing has occurred to affect the state of that space  . 
2.2 Summary of the Processing Paradigm
The development of CN models emphasizes process . A primary assumption of this approach is that neural-like computations must be included in models which attempt to simulate any cognitive behavior  ( Of Lavorel and Gigley ,  1983) , speci-fically natural language processing in this case  . 
Furthermore , CN includes the assumption that time is a crit ical factor in neural process in ~ mechanlsms an - ~ -d--thati can be a slgnlfl cant factor in language behavior in its degraded or " lesioned " state  . 
Simulation of a process paradigm for natural language comprehension in HOPE is achieved by incorporating a neurally plausible control that is internal to the processing mechanism  . There is no external process that decides which path or process to execute next based on the current state of the solution space  . The process is time-locked ; at each process time interval . There are six types of serial-order computations that can occur  . 
They apply to all representation viewpoints or spaces simultaneously  , and uniformly . Threshold firing can affect multiple spaces , and has a local effect within the space of fir ing  . 
Each of these serial-order computations is intended to represent an aspect of " natural computation " as defined in Lavorel and Gigley  ,  1983 . A natural computation , as opposed to a mechanistic one , is a " computation " that is achieved by neural processing components  , such as threshold devices and energy transducers , rather than by components such as are found in digital devices  . The most important aspect of the control is that all of the serial order computations can occur simultaneously and can affect any info ' ~ m-at To ~- ' that has been defined in the instantiated model  . 
Processing control is achieved using activity values on information  . As there is no preset context in the current implementation  , all information initially has a resting activity value  . 
This activity value can be modified over time depending on the sentential input  . Furthermore , there is an automatic activity decay scheme intended to represent memory processing which is has reached threshold and fired or not  . 
Activity is propagated in a fixed-time scheme to all " connected " aspects of the meaning of the words by spreading activation  ( Collins and Loftus , 1975; 1983; Hinton , 1981; Quillian ,  1968/1980) . 
Simultaneously , information interacts a synchronously due to threshold firing  . A state of threshold firing is realized as a result of summed inputs over time that are the result of the fixed-time spreading activation  , other threshold firing or memory decay effects in combination  . 
The time course of new information introduction , which initiates activity spread and automatic memory decay is parameterize due to the underlying reason for designing such models  ( Gigley , 1982b ; 1983; 1985) . 
The exact serial-order processes that occur at any time slice of the process depend on the " current state " of the global information  ; they are context dependent . The serial-order processes include : ( 1 ) NEW-WORD-RECOGNITION : Introduction of the next phonetically recognized word in the sentence  . 
(2 ) DECAY : Automatic memory decay exponentially re-e ' du'ces the activity of all active information that does not receive additional input  . 
It is an important part of the neural processes that occur during memory processing  . 
(3 ) REFRACTORY-STATE-ACTIVATION : ~--_-~ An automatic change of state that occurs after active information has reached threshold and fired  . In this state , the information cannot affector be affected by other information in the system  . 
(4 ) POST-REFRACTORY-STATE-ACTIVATION : ~ An automatic hange of state which all fired information enters after it has existed in the REFRACTORY-STATE  . The decay rate is different than before firing , although still exponential . 
(5 ) MEANING-PROPAGATION : Fixed-time spreading activation to the distributed parts of recognized words ' meanings  . 
(6) FIRING-INFOR MATION-PROPAGATION :
A synchronous activity propagation that occurs when information reaches threshold and fires  . 
It can be INHIBITORY and EXCITATORY in its effect  . INTERPRETATION results in activation of a pragmatic representation of a disambiguated word meaning  . 
Processes ( 2 ) through ( 6 ) are applicable to all active information in the global representation  , while process ( 1 ) provides the interface with the external input of the sentence to be understood  . The state of the grammar e present a-tion affects inhibitory and excitatory firing propagation  , as well as coordinates " meaning " interpretation with ongoing " input " processing  . 
It is in the interaction of the results of these asychronous processes that the process of comprehension is simulated  . 
3. The Role of a Grammar in Cognitive Processing

Within our behavioral approach to studying natural language processing  , several considerations must be met . Justification must be made for separate representations of information and  , whenever possible , neural processing support must be found . 
3.1 Evidence for a Separate Representation of

Neurolinguistic and psycholinguistic evidence supports a separately interpretable representation for a grammar  . The neurolinguistic literature demonstrates that the grammar can be affected in isolation from other aspects of language function  . 
(Cf Studies of agrammatic and Broca's aphasia as described in Goodenough  , Zurif , and Weintraub , 1977; Goodglass , 1976; Goodglass and Berko , 1960; Goodglass , Gleason , Bernholtz , and Hyde ,  1970;
Zurif and Blumstein , 1978).
In the HOPE model , this separation is achieved by including all relevant grammatical information within a space or hypergraph called the grammar  . The associated interpretation functions for each grammatical type provide the interface with the pragmatic representation  . Before describing the nature of the local representation of the currently included grammar  , a brief discussion of the structure of the grammar and the role of the grammar in the global nature of the control must be given  . 
3 . 2 The Local Representation of the Grammar The grammar space contains the locally defined grammar for the process  . The current model defined within the HOPE system includes a form of a Categorial Grammar  ( Ajdukiewicz , 1935; Lewis ,  1972) . Although the original use of the grammar is not heeded  , the relationship that ensues between a well defined syntactic form and a " final state " meaning representation is borrowed  . 
Validity of the " final state " meaning is not the issue  . Final state here means , at the end of the process . As previously mentioned , typed semantics is also not rigidly enforced in the current model  . 
HOPE a11ows one to define a lexicon within user selecte ~ syntactic types  , and a11ows one to define a suitable grammar of the selected types in the prescribed form as well  . The grammar may be defined to suit the aspects of language performance being modelled  . 
There are two parts to the grammatical aspect of the HOPE model  . One is a form of the structural cooccurrences that constitute contextfree phrase structure representations of grammar  . 
However , these specifications only make one " constituent " predictions for subsequent input types where each constituent may have additional substructure  . 

Predictions at this time do not spread to substructures because of the " time " factor between computational updates that is used  . As pread to substructures will require a refinement in time-sequence specifications  . 
The second aspect of the representation is an interpretation function  , for each specified syntactic type in the grammar definition  . Each interpretation function is activated when a word meaning fires for whateve reason  . The interpretation function represents a fir ing activation level for the " concept " of the meaning and includes its syntactic form  . For this reason , each syntactic form has a unique functional description that uses the instantiated meaning that is firing  ( presently , the spelling notation ) to activate structures and relations in the pragmatic space that represent the " meaning understood  . " Each function activates different types of structures and relations  , some of which depend on prior activation of other types to complete the process correctly  . These functions can trigger semantic feature checks and morphological matches where appropriate  . 
Syntactic types in the HOPE system are of two forms  , lexical and derived . A lexical cateqory te~xle is one which can be a category type of a calitem  . A derived cate_~o type is one which is " composed . - a ~" - ~ erlved category types represent the occurrence of proper " meaning " interpretation in the pragmatic space  . 
The current represented grammar in HOPE contains the following lexical categories : OET for determiner  , ENOCONT for end of sentence intonation , NOUN for common noun , PAUSE for end of clause intonation , TERM for proper nouns , VIP for intrasitive verb , VTP for transitive verb . As is seen , the lexical " categories " relate " grammatical " structure to aspects of the input signal  , hence in this sense ENDCONT and PAUSE are categories  . 
The derived categories in the current instantiated model include : SENTENCE  , representing a composition of agent determination of a TERM for an appropriate verb phrase  , TERM , representing a composed designated DETNOUN referent  , and VIP , representing the state of proper composition of a TERM object with a VTP  , transitive verb sense . 
TERM and VIP are examples of category types in this model that are both lexical and derived  . 
" Rules " in the independently represented grammar are intended to represent what is considered in HOPE as the " syntactic meaning " of the respective category  . They are expressed as local interactions , not global ones . Global effects of grammar , the concern of many rule based systems , can only be studied as the result of the time sequenced processing of an " input "  . Table l contains examples of " rules " in our current model  . 
Other categories may be defined ; other lexical items defined ; other interpretations defined within the HOPE paradigm  . 
Tablel : Category specification
DET := TERM/NOUN
VIP := SENTENCE/END COUNT
VTP := VIP/TERM
In Tablel , the " numerator " of the specification is the derived type which results from composition of the " denominator " type interpretation with the interpretation of the category whose meaning is being defined  . For example , DE Terminer , the defined category , combines with a NOUN category type to produce an interpretation which is a TERM type  . When a category occurs in more than one place , any interpretation and resultant activity propagation of the correct type may affect any " rule " in which it appears  . Effects are in parallel and simultaneous . Interpretation can be blocked for composition by unsuccessful matches on designated attribute features or morphological inconsistencies  . 
Successful completion of function execution results in a pragmatic representation that will either fire immediately if it is noncompositional or in one time delay if the " meaning " is composed  . 
Firing is of the syntactic type that represents the correctly " understood " entity  . This " topdown " firing produces feedback activity whose effect is " directed " by the state of the grammar  , space , i . e . what information is active and its degree of activity  . 
The nature of the research in its present state has not addressed the generality of the lin -guistic structures it can process  . This is left to future work . The concentration at this time is on initial validation of model produced simulation results before any additional effort on expansion is undertaken  . With so many assumptions included in the design of such models  , initial assessment of the model's performance was felt to be more critical than its immediate xpansion along any of the possible dimensions previously noted as stubs  . 
The initial investigation is also intended to suggest how to expand these stubs  . 
3 . 3 The Grammar as a Feedback Control System The role of the grammar as i t is encoded in HOPE is to function in a systems theoretic manner  . 
It provides the representation of the feedforward  , or prediction , and feedback , or confirmation interconnections among syntactic entities which have produced appropriate entities as pragmatic interpretations  . It coordinates the serial ordered expectations , with what actually occurs in the input signal , with any suitable meaning interpretations that can affect the state of the process in a topdown sense  . It represents the interface between the serial -order input and the parallel functioning system  . 
Grammatical categories are activated via spreading activation that is the result of word meaning activation as words are recognized  . 
Firing of an instance of a grammatical type activates that type's interpretation function which tion for it  , including the specific meaning that was fired . 
Interpretation function ~ are defined for syntactic types not specific items within each type  . Each type interpretation has one form with specific lexical " parameters " L  A11 nouns are interpreted the same ; a 11 intransitive verbs the same . What differs in interpretation is the attributes that occur for the lexical item being interpreted  . These also affect the interpretation . 
The meaning representation for a11 instances of a certain category have the same meta-structure  . General nouns ( NOUN ) are presently depicted as nodes in the pragmatic space  . The node name is the " noun meaning . " For transitive verbs , nodes named as the verb stem are produced with a directed edge designating the appropriate TERM category as agent  . The effect of firing of a grammatical category can trigger feature propagations or morphological checks depending on which category fires and the current pragmatic state of the ongoing interpretation  . 
Successful interpretation results in threshold f iring of the " meaning  . " This " meaning " has a syntactic component which can affect grammatical representations that have an activity value  . This process is time constrained depending on whether the syntactic type of the interpretation is lexical or derived  . 
3.4 Spreading Activation of the Grammar
Input to HOPE is time-sequenced , as phone-tically recognized words , ( a stub for future development ) . Each phonetic " word " activates all of its associated meanings  . ( HOPE uses homophones to access meanings . ) Using spreading activation , the syntactic category aspect of each meaning in turn activates the category's meaning in the grammar space representation  . 
Part of the grammatical meaning of any syntactic category is the meaning category that is expected to follow it in the input  . The other part of the grammatical meaning for any category type  , is the type it can derive by its correct interpretation within the context of a sentence  . 
Because each of these predictions and interpretations are encoded locally  , one can observe interactions among the global " rules " of the grammar during the processing  . This is one of the motivating factors for designing the neurally motivated model  , as it provides insights into how processing deviations can produce degraded language performance  . 
3 . 5 Grammar State and Its Effect on Processing Lexical category types have different effects than derived ones with respect to timing and pragmatic interpretation  . However , both lexical and derived category types have the same effect on the subsequent input  . This section will describe the currently represented grammar and provide example processing effects that arise due to its interactive activation  . 
Through spreading activation , the state of the syntactic types represented in the grammar affects subsequent category biases in the input  ( feedforward ) and ongoing interpretation or disambiguation of previously " heard " words  ( feedback )  . The order of processing of the input appears to be both right to left and left to right  . Furthermore , each syntactic type , on firing , triggers the interpretation function that is particular to each syntactic type  . 
Rules , as previously discussed , are activated during processing via spreading activation  . Each recognized word activates all " meanings " in parallel  . Each " meaning " contains a syntactic type . Spreading activation along " syntactic type associates "  ( defined in the grammar ) predictively activates the " expected " subsequent categories in the input  . 
In the HOPE model , spreading activation currently propagates this activity which is not at the " threshold " level  . Propagated activity due to firing is always a parameter controlled percentage of the above threshold activity and in the pre-sently " tuned " simulations always propagates a value that is under threshold by a substantial amount  . 
All activations occur in parallel and affect subsequent " meaning " activities of later words in the sentence  . In addition , when composition succeeds ( or pragmatic interpretation is finalized ) the state of the grammar is affected to produce or changes in category aspects of all active meanings in the process  . 
The remainder of this section will present instances of the feedforward and feedback effects of the grammar during simulation runs to illus -trate the role of grammar in the process  . The last example will illustrate how a change in state of the grammar representation can affect the process  . All examples will use snapshots of the sentence : " The boy saw the building  . " This is input phonetically as: ( TH-UHB-OYS-AOTH-UH

3.5.1 An Example of Feedforward , Feedback , and

This example will illustrate the feedforward activation of NOUN for the DE Terminer grammatical meaning during interpretation of the initial TERM or noun phrase of the sentence  .   At1 figures are labelled to correspond with the text . Each interval is labelled at the top , tl , t2 , etc . The size of each node reflects the activity level  , larger means more active . Threshold firing is represented as F ~ Other changes of state that affect memory are are denoted  ( ~ and ~ and are shown for coa~leteness . They indicate serial-order changes of state described earlier  , but are not critical to the following discussion . 

IIl I$14 III r-a-, boy .   .   .   . ~' z ~ i ( i ) / ~/ . 
, ' ~ , , ~', ~ l1'P/~t,v(q)--',.'/
PNOIIIT~o Ii(h)
TH-UHB '<) ? S-AO
Figure 1
On " hearing "/ TII-UH/(a ) attl , the represented meaning " OET-the " is activated as the only meaning  ( b )  . At the next time interval , t2 , the meaning of OET is activated-which spreads acti-vity to what OET predicts  , a NOUN(c ) .   A11 NOUN meanings are activated by spread in the next time interval  , t3 , in combination with new activity . 
This produces a threshold which " fires " the " meaning " selected  ( d )  . At completion of inter-pretation ( e ) , int 4 , feedback occurs to a11 instances of meaning with category types in the grammar associated as predictors of the interpreted category  . OET is the only active category that predicts NOUN so all active meanings of type OET will receive the feedback activity  . In Figure I , OET-the is ready to fire ( f ) . The increase or decrease in activity of a11 related types , competitive ones for the meaning ( inhibitory )   ( g ) as well as syntactic ones for composition ( ex-citatory )   ( f ) is propagated at the next interval after fir ing  , shown in t3 and t4 . IntS , /S-AO/enters the process ( h ) with its associated meanings . 
The effect of OET-the firing is also seen in t5 where the compositional TERM is activated ( i )   . 
NOTE : DE Terminers are not physically represented as entities in the pragmatic space  . Their meaning is only functional and has a " semantic " combosi-tional effect  . Here ' tne'requires a " one and only one " NOUN that is unattached as a TERM to successfully denote the meaning of the boy as a proper TERM  ( i )   . As this is a compositional " meaning " , the firing will affect t6 . Because there is no active TERM prediction in the grammar space  , and no competitive meanings , the topdown effect in t6 will be null and is not shown . The next exa~le will illustrate a topdown effect following TERM composition  . 
3.5.2 An Example of Feedforward , Feedback,
Composition , and Subsequent Feedback
This ex ~ , nple , shown in Figure 2 , will be very similar to the previous one . Only active information discussed is shown as otherwise the figures become cluttered  . The grammar is in a different state in Figure Z when successful TERM interpretation occurs at all  ( a )  . This is due to the activation attg of all meanings of B-UI-L-O-IH-NG  ( b )  . 
The VTP meanings of/S-AO/ and then/B-UI-L-O -IH-NG/make a TERM prediction shown as it remains in tlO  ( c )  . After composition of " the building " ( a ) shown in tel , TERM will fire topdown . It subsequently , through feedback , -activates all meanings of the category type which predicted the TERM  , all VTP type meanings in this case . This excitatory feedback , raises both VTP meanings in t12 , for saw(d ) , as well as , building(e ) . However , the activity level of " building does " not reach threshold because of previous disembiguation of its NOUN meaning  . When the VTP meaning , saw , fires(d ) in t\]2 , additional comoosition occurs . The VTP interpretation composes with a suitable TERM  ( a )  , one which matches feature attribute specifications of saw  ,   . tl0
III "
PRJU3 ~ TZC bu?1dinq f //.,:: '! : ill(:12
Figure 2.
t'O ""??~"-"-~',--, Iv ,_' . '" ~ ,,_ . , * #  0=- ~ d~------------~/~"--~"------ . "" ~ L"i-"-""~""~"~~I"~"--\L~WJ , h--
TEIm(b )
S-AO ~ ~ . , 8-ZH-L-O-Zn-,~_-- .   .   .   .   .   .   . (' o "~,- .   .   .   . 
%_.f--,m~(e)um.L ?) m , tl9.Zt3t4


Figure 3.
~ I-Ull sequently produce feedback att 14 , Neither are shown . 
3.5.3 Effect of a Oifferent Grammar State on

The final example , Figure 3 , will use one of the " lesion " simulations using HOPE  . The grammar representations remain intact . This example will present the understanding of the first three words of the sentence under the condition that they are presented faster than the system is processing  . 
Effectively , a slowdown of activation spread to the grammar is assumed  . Figures such as Figure 1 and Figure 3 can be compared a to suggest possible language performance problems and to gain insights into their possible causes  . 
In Figure 3 , when/TH-UH / is introduced at t l Ca ) , all meanings are activated ( b ) as in Figure 1 . The spread of activation to the grammar occurs in  t2   ( c )  . However , the second word , /8-OY / ( d ) is '* heard " at the same time as the activity reaches the grammar  . The predictive activation spread From the grammar takes effect at  t3  , when the new word/SN)/(e ) is " heard . " The immediate result is that the NOUN meaning , saw(f ) , fires and is interpreted at t4(g ) . 
This shows in a very simple case , now the grammar can affect the processing states of an interactive parallel model  . Timing can be seen to be critical . There are many more critical results that occur in such " lesion " simulations that better  i11ustrate such grammatical affects , however they are very difficult to present in a static form  , other than within a behaviorial analysis of the overall linguistic performance of the ent ire  made1  . This is considered an hypo-the sized patient profile and is described in Gigley  ( 1985 )  . Other exam Dles of processing are presented in detail in Gigley  ( lg 82 b ;  1983) . 
3.6 Summary
The above figures present a very simple examole of the interactive process  . It is hoped that they provide an idea of the interactions and feedback  , feedfor ~ ard processing that is cooP-dinated by the state of the grammar  . Any prediction in the grammar that is not suff iciently active affects the process  . Any decay that ac-cidently reduces a grammatical aspect can affect the process  . The timing of activation , the categorial content and the interactions between interpretation and prediction are imbortant Factors when one considers grammar as part of a func-tioning ~ ynamic system  . 
Finally , the Categorial Grammar is one form of a ContextFree  ( CF ) grammar which provides a suitable integration of syntactic and semantic processing  . In addition , it has been used in many studies of English so that instances of gr ~ ars sufficiently defined for the current implement a-tion level of processing could be found  . Other forms of grammar , such as Lexical-Functional Grammar ( Kaolan and Bresnan ,  1982 ) or Generelized Phrase Structure Grammar ( Gazdar , 1982; 1983) could be edually suitable . 
The criteria to be metal that they can be encoded as predictive mechanisms  , not necessarily unamOiguous or deterministic , and also that they specify constraints on compositionality  . The composition depends on adequate definition of interpretation constraints to assure that it is " computed " properly or else suitably marked for its deviation  . 
4. Conclusion
HOPE provides evidence for how one can view a grammar as an integrated part of a neura Ily -motivated processing model that is psychological lyvalid  . ~ uitable constraints on grammatical form that are relevant for using any grammar in the CN context are t ~ at the grammar make serial predictions and provide the synchronization information to coordinate to D-down effects of interpretation with the ongoing process  . 
This type of model suggests that universals of language are inseparable from how the are computed  . Universals of language may only be definable with inneural substrata and their processes  . Furthermore , if this view of linguistic universals holds , then grammar becomes a control representation that synchronizes the kinds of signals that occur and when they get propagated  . 
The states of the grammar in this suggested view of grammatical function area form of the rewrite rules that are the focus of much linguistic theory  . 
A neurally motivated processing paradigm for natural language processing  , demonstrates no wone can view an integrated process for language that employs integrated syntactic and semantic processing which relies on a suitable grammatical form that coordinates the processes  . 
S . Acknowledgements
The initial development of the reported research was supported by an Alfred P  . Sloan Foundation Grant for " A Training Program in Cognitive Science " at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst  . Continuing development is subported through a Biomedical Research Support Grant at the 
University of New Hamoshire.
6. References
Ajdukiewicz , O . Oie Syntaktische Konnexitat , 1935 . T . anslated as " Syntactic Connection " in Polish Loqic  , S . McCall , Oxford , 1967, 207-231 . 
Arbib , H . A . and Caplan , O . Neurolinguistics Must BeCom ! Dutational . Behavioral and Brain
Sciences , 1979, 2, 449-483.
Collins , A . M . , and Loftus , E . A . A spreading activation . theory of semantic processing . 
Psycholo2ical Review , 1975, 82:6, 407-428.

Cottre11, G . W . and Small , S . L . A Connec-tionist Scheme for Hodelling Word Sense Oisam-biguation  . Cognition and Brain Theory , 1983, 6:1, 89-120 . 
Cottrell , G . W . A model of Lexical Access of Ampiguous Words . Proceedings of AAAI--1984 . 
Gazdar , G . Phrase Structure Grammar . In P.
Jacobson and G . Pullum ( eds . ), The Nature of Syntactic Representation . Reide , T~-~ch ~, 1982 . 
Gazdar , G . Phrase Structure Grammars and
Natural Languages . Proceedings of the
International Joint Conference on A ' ~ tificia Intelligence  . Kar " ~ T ~ uhe , west German , 1983, Gigley , H . M . Neurolinguistically Based Hodeling of Natural Language Processing  . Paper present e ~ at the ACL Session of the Linguistic Society of American Heeting  , New York , Oeceed ~ er ,  1981 . 
Ggley , H . M . A computational neurol in ~ uistic approach to process ~ nq models of sentence hension  . "COINS Technic ~ o ~ SZ-'Z- , -~ , Univers ~ tyo-'~-Ha-ssachusetts , Amherst ,  1982 . 
Gigley , H . M . Neurol in ~ uistically constrained simultation of sentence comprehension :\[ nteqrat - ~  . qar ~ ific ~\] ~ ~ encea ~ ~_ ~ ai ~ theol . 
h.O . Oissertation , University of Massachusetts,
Amherst , 1982b.
Gigley , H.M . HOPE--AI and the Oynamic
Process of Lanaguage Behavior . Coqnition and
Brain Theo ~, 1983, 6, 1.
Gigley , H . M . Computational Neurolinguistics - What is it all about ? Proceed in qs of IJCAI  855  , Los Angeles , to appear . 
Gigley , H . H . Fron HOPE en I'E SPERANCE -- On the Role of Computational Neuralinguistics in CrossLanguage Studies  . Proceedings of COLING 84 . 
Stanfor ~ University , July , 1984.
Goodenough , C ., Zurif , E . and Weintraub , S.
Aphasic's attention to grammatical morphemes,
Lanqua Qeend Speech , 1977, 1119.
Goodglass , H . A grammatism . In H . Whitaker and H . A . Whitaker ( eds . ) Studies in Neurolin ~ uis-tics ,: 101, . ~, Academic Press , - s,i ', i'~ . -~37'-ZSO . 
Goodglass , H . and BerKo , J . A grammatism and inflectional mOrl~hology in English  . Journal of Speechan ~ Hearin ~ Research ,  1960 ,  3 ,  257~ . 
Goodglas ~, H . , Gleason , J . , Bernhoitz , N . and Hyde , M . Some Linguistic ; tructures in the Soeech of a Broca's A on a sic . Corte ~, 1970, 8, 191-Z12 . 
Hinton , G . E . Implementing 5e~lnticNets in Parallel Hat , are . In G . E . Hinton and J . A . 
Anaerson ( eds . ), Parallel Nodels of Associative ~ .   . Lawrence-~'r To aum ~ ate ~ Publishers,
Kaplan , R.M . and Sresnan , J . Lexical-
Functional Grammar : A Fomal System for Gr ~ a -matical ReDresentation  . In J . Bresnan ( ed . ) , The Hental " Representation of Grammatical Relation S  . 
M-'rT-P'~ess , 1982.
Lavorel , P . M . and Gigley , H . H . Elements pour une theorie generale des machines inte\]ligentes  . 
\[ ntellectica , 1983, 7, 20-38.
Lewis , O . General Semantics . In Oavidson and Harmon ( eds . ), Semantics of Natural Lanquaqe , 1972, 169-218 . 
Quillian , . M.R . Semantic Memory . In H.
Hinsky ( ed .), Semantic Information Process in q.
CaLmDri~ge , Ha .: ~s , 1980.
Small , S ., Cottrell , G ., and Shastri , L.
Toward connectionist parsing . Proceedings of the National Conference on Arti ficial Inte\]liqence  , ~ gh , PA : 1982 , ~'8-20 . 
Waltz , O . and Pollack , J . Massively Parallel Parsing : A Strongly Interactive Hodel of Natural Language Interpretation  . Cognitive Science . In press . 
Zurif , E . B . and Blumstein , S . E . Language and the Brain . In M . Halle , J . 8resnan , and G . 
Mtller , ( eds .), Linquistic Theor ~ and
Psycholoqical Rea \] it ~. MIT Press , 1978.

