TUTORIAL ABSTRACTS
Introduction to Computational Linguistics
Ralph Grishman , New York University
This tutorial provides a general overview of computational 
linguistics . Topics to be considered include the components of a natural language processing system  ; syntax analysis ( including contextfree grammars , augmented contextfree grammars , grammatical constraints , and sources of syntactic ambiguity ) ; semantic analysis ( including meaning representation , semantic constraints , quantifier analysis ) ; and discourse analysis ( identifying implicit information , establishing text coherence , frames , and scripts ) . Examples will be drawn from various application areas  , including database interface and text analysis . 
Natural Language Generation
Kathleen McKeown , Columbia University
In this tutorial , we will begin by identifying the types of decisions involved in language generation and how they differ from problems in the interpretation of natural language  . 
Several techniques that have been used for " surface " generation  ( i . e . , determining the syntactic structure and vocabulary of the generated text  ) will be examined , including grammars , dictionaries , and templates . From there , we will move on to other problems in language generation  , including how the system can decide what to say in a given situation and how it can order the information for inclusion in a text  . Here we will study the constraints that have been used for these decisions in domains such as expert systems  , database systems , scene description , and problem solving . We will also look at the interaction between conceptual decisions such as these and decisions in surface generation  , considering approaches that propose an integrated solution  . 
Structuring the Lexicon
Robert Ingria , BBN Laboratories Incorporated This tutorial will discuss the information that has been stored in the lexicon  . It will first deal with the types of information that have typically been placed in lexical entries  , detailing what sorts of lexical information is necessary for natural language systems  . The format of lexical entries and the relationships between lexical entries will be considered next  ( as in cases of irregularly inflected forms , such " go " , " went " , " gone " , abbreviations and acronyms , such as " helo " and " helicopter " , and derived forms , such as " destroy " and " destruction ") . Alternate places for storing information will also be considered  ( for example , regular morphological information might be contained in individua lexicaler ~ tries or in the grammar  )  . The tutorial will conclude with the implications of recent work in linguistic theory for the structure of lexicons for computational purposes  . 
Recent Developments In Syntactic Theory and Their
Computational Import
Anthony S . Kroch , University of Pennsylvania Syntactic frameworks currently under development in linguistics take different perspectives on several issues of computational interest  . Among these are: ( 1 ) the importance of stating linguistic theories in a well-defined and explicit formalism whose mathematical properties are known or investigable  ;   ( 2 ) the degree to which the syntatic properties of sentences can be understood independently of their semantic interpretation  ; and ( 3 ) the extent to which empirical and mathematical results on parsing and generation can illuminate linguistic issues  . We shall discuss the perspectives on these and related questions held by various current linguistic theories  , including generalized phrase structure grammar ( GPSG )  , government binding theory ( GB ) , lexical-functional grammar ( LFG ) , and tree adjoining grammar ( TAG ) . 
Current Approaches to Natural Language Semantics
Graeme Hirst , University of Toronto
This tutorial provides a survey of various computational approaches to semantics -- the process of determining the meaning of a sentence or other utterance  . Issues addressed will include definitions of meaning  ; the differences between linguistic theories of semantics and formalism suitable for computational understanding of language  ; knowledge representations that suitable for representing linguistic meaning  ; the relationship between semantic processing and syntactic parsing  ; and factors in choosing a semantic formalism for a particular computational pplication  . The approaches to semantics that will be discussed will include procedural semantics  , conceptual dependency , Montague semantics , and compositional and knowledge-based approaches . 
Machine Translation
Sergei Nirenburg , Colgate University
This tutorial will address the recent resurgence of interest in machine translation  ( MT ) in the United States , Europe , and Japan . Topics to be discussed include the variety of objectives for MT systems  ; various research and developments methodologies ; MT as an application area for theoretical linguistics  , computational linguistics , and artificial intelligence ; environments for MT research ; and selected case studies of research projects . 
