Semantic Acquisition In TELI : A Transportable,
User-Customized Natural Language Processor
Bruce W . Ballard
Douglas E . Stumberger
AT&T Bell Laboratories
600 Mountain Avenue
Murray Hill , NJ 07974

We discuss ways of allowing the users of a natural language processor to define  , examine , and modify the definitions of any domain-specific words or phrases known to the system  . An implementation of this workforms a critical portion of the knowledge acquisition component of our Transportable English-Language Interface  ( TELl )  , which answers English questions about tabular ( first normal-form ) data files and runs on a Symbolics Lisp Machine . However , our techniques enable the design of customization modules that are largely independent of the syntactic and retrieval components of the specific system they supply information to  . In addition to its obvious practical value , this area of research is important because it requires careful attention to the formalisms used by a natural language system and to the interactions among the modules based on those formalisms  . 
1. Introduction
In constructing the Transportable English-Language Interface system  ( TELI )  . we have sought to respond to problems of both an applied and a scientific nature  . Concerning the applied side of computational linguistics  , we seek to redress the fact that many natural language prototypes  , despite their sophistication and even their robustness  , have fallen into disuse because of failures ( 1 ) to make known to users exactly what inputs are allowed  ( e . g . what words and phrases are defined ) and ( 2 ) to provide capabilities that meet the precise needs of a given user or group of users  ( e . g . appropriate vocabulary , syntax . 
and semantics ) . Since experience has shown that neither users nor sv stem designers can predict in advance all the words  , phrases , and associated meanings that will arise in accessing a given database  ( cf . Tennant .  1979) . we have sought to make TELl " transportable " in an extreme sense  , where customizations may be performed ( 1 ) by end users , as opposed to the system designers , and ( 2 ) at anytime during the processing of English sentences  , rather than requiring a complete customization before 
English processing may occur.
In addition to the potential practical benefits of a user-customized interface  , we feel that well-conceived transportability projects can make useful scientific contributions to computational linguistics since single-domain systems and  , to a lesser extent , systems adapted over weeks or months by their designers  , afford opportunities to circumvent , rather than squarely address , important issues concerning ( a ) the precise nature of the formalisms the system is designed around  , and ( b ) the interactions among system modules . Although customization efforts offer no guarantee against adhoc design or sloppy implementation  , problems of the type mentioned above are less likely to go unnoticed when dealing with a system whose domain-specific information is supplied at runtime  , especially when that information is being provided by the actual users of the system  . 
By way of overview , we note that the TELI system derives from previous work on the LDC project  , as documented in Ballard (1982) , Ballard (1984) , Ballard , Lusth and Tinkham (1984) . and Ballard and Tinkham (1984) . The initial prototype of TELI . which runs on a Symbolics Lisp Machine , is designed to answer English questions about information stored in one or more tables  , ( i . e . first-normal-form relational database ) . A sample view of the displays creen during a session with TELl  . which may give the flavor of how the system operates  , is shown in Figure L Information on some aspects of knowledge acquisition not discussed in this paper  . 
particularly with regard to syntactic case frames , can be found in Ballard (1986) . 
2. Types of Modifiers Available in TELI
The syntactic and semantic models adopted for TEL1 are intended to provide a unified treatment of a broad and extendible class of word and phrase types  . 
By providing for an " extendible " class of constructs  , we make the knowledge acquisition module of TELl independent of the natural language portion of the system  , whose earlier version has been described in Ballard and Tinkham  ( 1984 ) and Ballard . Lust h . and reader should bear in mind that the acquisition modules of  TEL1  , including the menus they generate , are driven by extensible data structures that convey the linguistic coverage of the underlying natural language processor  ( NLP ) for which information is being acquired . For example , incorporating adjective phrases into the system involved adding  12 lines of Lisplike data specifications . This brevity is largely due to the use of case frames that embody dynamically alterable selectional restrictions  ( Ballard ,  1986) . 
As an initial feeling for the coverage of the NLP for which information is currently acquired  , TEL1 provides semantics for the word categories
Adjective e.g . an expensive restaurant
Noun Modifier e.g . a graduate student
Noun e.g . a pub and the phrase types
Adjective Phrase e . g . employees responsible for the planning projects
Noun-Modifier Phrase e.g . the speech researchers
Prepositional Phrase e . g . the trails on the Franconia-Region map
Verb Phrase e . g . employees that report to Brachman
Functional Noun Phrase e . g . the size of department 113 87 , the colleagues of Litman In addition to these user-defined modifier types  , the system currently provides for negation , comparative and superlative forms of adjectives , possessives , and ordinals . Among the grammatical features supported are passives for verbs  , reduced relatives for prepositional and adjective phrases  , fronting of verb phrase complements , and other minor features . One important area for expansion involves quantifiers  . 
both logical ( e . g . " all ") and numerical ( e . g . " at least 3") . 
3 . Principles Behind Semantic Acquisition As noted above  , our goal is to devise techniques that enable end users of a natural language processor to furnish all domain-specific information to by the system  . This information includes ( 1 ) the vocabulary needed for the data at hand ;   ( 2 ) various types of selectional restrictions that define acceptable phrase attachments  ; and most critically ( 3 ) the definitions of words and phrases . With this in mind , the primary criteria which the semantic acquisition component of TELI has been designed around are as follows  . 
To allow users to define , examine or modify domain-specific il ( or mation at any time . This derives from our beliefs that the needs of a user or group of users cannot all be predicted in advance  , and will probably change once the system has begun operation  . 
To enable users to impart new concepts to the system  . 
We provide more than just synonym and paraphrase capabilities and  , in fact . definitions may be arbitrarily complex , by being defined either ( a ) in terms of other definitions , which may be defined upon other definitions , or ( b ) as the conjuction of an arbitrary number of constraints  . 
English Input : . hich trails that aren't long lead to a mountain on ? ranconiaridge 
Internal Representation : ( TRAIL ( VERBINFO ( TRAILLEADNILNILTOMOUNTAIN )   ( SUBJ ? )   ( ARG ( MOUNTAIN ( QURNT = NIL )   ( NOT ( RDJLONG ) ) ) 
Algebra Querg: ( SELECT trails ( traillength-Km )   ( and ( < length-km 67
Answer : ( PREPINFO ( MOUNTAIN ONTRAIL )   ( SUBJ ? )   ( ARG ( TRAIL ( = FRANCONIA-RIDGE ) ) ) ) ) ) )   ( = trail ( SELECT ( TJOIN trails ( trail ) = mtn-trails ( trail )   )   ( trail )   ( = name ( SELECT ( TJOIN mountains ( name ) = mtn-trails ( name )   )   ( name )   ( = trail'franconia-ridge ) ) ) )  )   )   )   ( TRAILS ) 
TRAIL-LENGTH-KM
OLD-BRIDLE-PATH 4.1
LIBERTY-SPRING 4.7
What's Y our Pleasure ? , qrl : S ~ , vera QuE:st ~ Jotl
Edit the Last Input
Print Parse Tree .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Run Pieces of the NLP .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 


Begina & ~ ston-dzatior ~
Uocabula G5ynta : , .,

General Info
Clear 5,: reol
Edit Global Flags 5ave/Pet . rieve Session Figure 1: Sample Display Screen ; Top Level Menu of TEL1 modifier type . In our system , adjectives , nouns , prepositional phrases , verb phrases , and so forth are all defined in precisely the same way  . This is achieved in part by treating all modifiers as n-place predicates  . 
To allow definitions to be given at various conceptual levels  . Users are able to specify meanings ( a ) in English ;   ( b ) in terms of the meanings of previously defined words or phrases  ;   ( c ) by reference to " conceptual " relationships , which have been abstracted to a level above that of the physical data files  ; or ( d ) in terms of database columns . We strive to minimize the need for low-level database references  , since this helps ( 1 ) to avoid tedious and redundant references , and ( 2 ) to assure that most of our techniques will be applicable beyond the current conventional database setting  . 
To provide alternate modalities of specification . For example , the menu scheme described in Section 7 . 2 offers the user more assistance in making definitions  . 
but is less powerful , than the alternative English and English-like methods described in Section  7  . 3 . We prefer to let users decide when each modality is appropriate  , rather than force a compromise among simplicity , reliability , and power . 
To enable the system to proride help orguidance to the customizer  . When defining a modifier , users may view all current modifiers of . or functions associated with , the object type(s ) in question . Many other opportunities exist for cooperation on the part of the system  . To avoid unnecessary limitations , however , users are generally able to override any hints made by the system  . 
4. Semantic Processing in TELI
The semantic model developed for TELI , in which definitions are acquired from users , assumes that ( 1 ) modifier meanings will be purely extensional , and can thus be treated as n-place predicates , and ( 2 ) semantic analysis will be almost entirely compositional  . Concerning the latter assumption , we note that ( a ) some important disambiguations , including problems of word sense , will have been made during parsing by reference to selectional restrictions  ( Ballard and Tinkham ,  1984) , and ( b ) minimal reordering does occur in converting parse trees into internal representations  . 
4.1 Types of Semantics
All user-defined semantics , however acquired , are stored in a global Lisp structure indexed by the word or phrase being defined  . Single-word modifiers are indexed by the word being defined  , its part of speech , and the entity it modifies ; phrasal modifiers are indexed by the phrase type and the associated case frame  . For example , the internal references ( new adjroom )   ( prep-ph ( restaurant in county ) ) respectively index the definitions of " new " , when used as an adjective modifier of rooms , and " in " , as it relates restaurants to counties . As suggested by this indexing scheme , word meanings arise only in the context of their occurrence  , never in isolation . Thus , " newroom " and " restaurant in county " receive definitions  , not " new " or " in " . This decision lends generality to the definitional scheme  , and any additional effort thereby needed to make multiple definitions is minimized by the provisions for borrowed meanings  , as described in Section 7 . 4 . 
Although our representation strategies allow for definitions that involve relatively elaborate traversals of the physical data files  . TELI does not presently provide for arithmetic computations  . Thus , the input " Which restaurants are within 3 blocks of China Gardens ? " requires a 2-place " distance " function and , unless the underlying data files provide distances between restaurants  ( there are N-squared such distances to account for  )  . the necessary semantics cannot be supplied . 
4.2 Internal Representations
As an example of the " internal representation " ( IR ) of an input , which results from a recursive traversal of a completed parse tree  , and which illustrates preparations for compositional analysis  , the ( artificially complex ) input " Which Mexican restaurants in the largest city other than New Providence that are not expensive are open for lunch '?" will have \[ roughly \] the internal representation  ( restaurant ( not ( adj expensive ) )  ( noun mod-ph ( food restaurant )   ( noun mod ( food ( = Mexican ) ) )   ( head ? ) )  ( prep-ph ( restaurant in city )   ( subj ? )   ( arg ( city ( superlarge )   ( ! = New-Providence ) ) ) )  ( adj-ph ( restaurant open for meal )   ( subj ? )   ( arg ( meal ( = lunch ) ) ) ) ) This toplevel interpretation of the input instructs the system to find all restaurants that satisfy  ( a ) the negation of the 1-place predicate associated with " expensive " , and ( b ) the three 2-place predicates associated with the noun-noun , prepositional , and adjective phrases . Note that modifiers associated with e . g . " restaurant in city " . Within the scope of these references , case labels ( e . g . " subj " and " arg " ) indicate which slots have been instantiated and which slot has been relativized  , the latter denoted by "?" . The list of slot names associated with each phrase type is stored globally  . In most instances , the argument of a case slot can be an arbitrary IR structure  , in keeping with the recursive nature of the English inputs being recognized  . 
Since IR structures are built around the word and phrase types of the English being dealt with  , and since the meanings of words and phrases are stored globally  , IR structures should not be regarded as a " knowledge representation " in the sense of KL -ONE  , logical form . and so forth . Systems similar in goals to TELI but which revolve around logical form include TEAM  ( Grosz , 1983; Grosz , Appelt . Martin , and Pereira 1985) , IRUS ( Bates and Bobrow , 1983; Bates , Moser , and Stallard 1984) , and TQA ( Plath , 1976; Damerau ,  1985) . One system similar to TELI in building intermediate structures that contain references to language-specific concepts is 
DATALOG ( Hafner and Godden . 1985).
5. The Initial Phase of Customization
When a user asks TEL1 to begin learning about a new domain , the system spends from five to thirty minutes , depending on the complexity of the application , obtaining basic information about each table in the the database  ( see Figure 2 )  . Users are first asked to give the key column of the table  . This information is used primarily to guide the system in inferring the semantics of certain noun -noun and " of "- based patterns  . Next , users are asked which columns contain entity values as opposed to property values  . 
Typical properties are " size " , " color " , and " length " , which differ from entities in that ( a ) their values do not appear as an argument to arbitrary verbs and prepositions  ( e . g . other than " have ", " with ", etc . ) and ( b ) they will not themselves have properties associated with them  . Finally , users are asked to specify the type of value each column contains  . This information allows subsequent references to concepts  ( e . g . " color ") rather than physical column names . It also aids the system in forming subsequent suggestions to the user  ( e . g . defaults that can be overridden ) . 
Having obtained the information above , the system constructs definitions simple questions to be answered  , such as indicated that allow " What is Sally's social security number ? "" What is the age of John " Along with information freely volunteered by the user  , these definitions can be subsequently examined or changed at the user's request  . 
STUDENT-INFO-STUDENT-







SSNCLASS ADVIS 123-45-67891 IBBLLRRD 111-22-3333   3 LITMAN 321-54-9876   3 MARCUS 555-33-1234   2 JONES 314-15-9265   4 BRACH ~ RN 987-65-4321   3 BRCHENKO 333-22-4444 GBORGIDR Which is the " key " column of STUDENT-INFO ?  5TLIDENT   ( BILL , \[ IOIJI5 .   .   .   .  ) --~  . . . . . . . . . ~"1 ~_,-4J-b , . ',_ . ,9  . . . . . ) SSN (111-~-~:,_, D, . : . o . ~- ~ e-
CLASS (1, 2, .   . , ~ DUI5(BACHENKO,B,~LL,~RD . . . ) Columns of STUDEHT-IHFO Entity PrT operty
STUDENT ( BILL . . . . ) 1 ~
SSH (111-22-3333....)\[\]\[\]
CLASS (1....)\[\]\[\]
ADUIS ( BBCHENKO . . . .)\[\]\[\]
Return\[\]
IEntity Type for STUDEHT ( BILL . DOUG .   .   .   . ) I~tuder , tIIEntity Type for BDUIS ( BRCHE , KO , BBLL BRD .   .   .   .   ) 1 ins t ructor l I F igure 2: Initial Acquisitions Based upon the ans ~ crs to the questions described above  , a small number of follow up questions , mostly unrelated to the subject of this paper , will be asked . For example , the system will propose its best guess as to the morphological variants of nouns  , verbs , and other words for the user to confirm or correct  . 
6. Intermediate Customizations
Having learned about each physical relation.
TELI asks for information which , though not needed immediately , is either ( a ) more simply obtained at the outset , in a context relevant to its semantics , than at a later , arbitrary point , or ( b ) acquirable collective lv . 
thus preventing several subequent acquisitions.
Unlike the initial acquisitions described in Section  5  , intermediate customizations could be excised from the system without any loss in processing ability  . We now summarize three forms of intermediate customizations  , the last of which may be requested by the user at any time  . Allowing users to ask for the other forms as well would be a simple matter  . 
First , the system will ask which columns contain values that either correspond to or are themselves English modifiers  . In Figure 2a , the values ' T ' through " G " in the " class " column might correspond  ( respectively ) to " freshman " through " graduate student " , in which case acquisitions might continue as system constructs a definition for each user -defined modifier  ; for example the internal definition of " so phomore " will be  ( ( sophomore noun student )   ( ( class p-noun )  = 2 ) ) A second intermediate acquisition , carried out subject to user confirmation , involves the acceptability of hypothesized syntax and semantics for  ( a ) phrases based on " of " , (b ) phrases built around " have " , " with " . 
and " in ", and ( c ) noun-noun phrases . In deciding what case frames to propose . TELI considers the information it has already acquired about simple functional  ( " of " ) relationships . 
A third form of intermediate acquisition involves the system's invitation for the user to give lexical and syntactic information for one or more user-defined categories  , namely titles , adjectives . 
common nouns , noun modifiers , prepositions , and verbs . For example , the user might specify six adjectives and the entities they modify  , followed by four or five verbs and their associated case frames  . 
and so for th.
7. OnLine Customization
In general , definitions are supplied to TELl whenever ( a ) an undefined modifier is encountered during the processing of an English input  , or ( b ) the user asks to supply or modify a definition . In each case , the same methods are available for making definitions  , and are independent of the modifier type being defined  . When creating or modifying a meaning , users are presented with information as shown in Figure  4a   ; upon asking to " add a constraint " , they are given the menu shown in Figure 4b . 
Multiple " constraints " appearring in a semantic specification are presently presumed to be conjoined  . 

Nh , ich , columns contain ( er , coded ) Engli:mh ~ , 3r , ds?
SIUDEMT(BILL , DOUG , ...)=\[\]
SSM ( iii-22-3333, 12:3-4J-6789, ...)\[\]
CLASS(i , 2....)\[\]
RDVIS(BACHEMK0, BALLARD , ...)\[\]
Abort\[\]Return\[\]lU ords associated wi th the CLASS value  1 : fre~hmar , IU ords associated with the CLASS value G : 9raduatel Modif'iers in CLASSAd , ie ct lve Mounmod Houn
FRESHMRH(i )\[\]\[\]\[\]
SOPHOMORE(2)\[\]\[\]\[\]
JUMIOR(3)\[\]\[\]\[\]
SEMIOR(4) 0\[\]\[\]
GRADUATE(g )\[\]\[\]\[\]
Return\[\]
Figure 3:\[ l ) termediate Acquisitions
Semantic Specification
Adjective : FILE is LARGE\[Sample Usa . qe : Sa . qe is LARGE \] the LENGTH of Sage ::--380 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
(~dd a constraint ) ======================== \[ retur'n\]
Define tile semantics of
Verb Phrase : TRAILLEADSTOMOUNTAIIq by ...
Henu Selection
En 91 is tn(lik:e ) Re:fercnce:
Database Refet'ences gorr0vAng from an E?istin9 l'leardrbg ========================= =\[ ret  . urn \]
Figure 4: Top Level Semantics Menus
As suggested in Figure 4a and below , definitions are made in terms of sample values , which the system treats as formal parameters . In this way we avoid the problem of defining a phrase two or more of whose case slots may be fi lled by the same type of entity  ( cf . " a student is a classmate of a student if . . . ") . 
To assure that any domain value may appear as a constant  , the user is able to alter the system's choice of sample names at any time  . 
7.1 Specification at the Database Level
As noted in Section 3 , semantic specifications at the database level are primitive but useful  . As shown in Figure 5 , a database level specification comprises ( a ) a relation , possibly arrived at via a user-defined join , and ( b ) references to columns that correspond to the parameters of the phrase whose semantics is being defined  . In many cases , the system can utilize its column type information  , acquired as described in Section 5 , to predict both the relation to be used ( or pair of relations for joining ) and the appropriate columns to join over , in which case the menu ( s ) that are presented will contain boldface selections for the user to confirm or alter  . 
7.2 Specification by Menu
In our previous experience with LDC , we found that a large variety of meanings could be defined by a predicate in which the result of some function is compared using some relational operator to a specified benchmark value  . In TEL l . we provide an enhancement to this scheme where definitions  ( a ) may involve more than one argument .   ( b ) may contain more than one function reference , and ( c ) are acquired in menu form . The current internal representation of a menu specification is a triple of the form suggested by 
HEIGHT of MOUNTAIN
HOUNT , qlNS:N , ql , iE , ELEL , , ', qTION , PIAP-"~-~
C,qI,1PSITES : SITE,C,qP,qCITY,TYPE .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
\[ Join TI . ~' O Relations \] ============= = =============== [ ret  , urn \]
To find the HEIGHT of a MOUHTRIM :+ Which , : olumr ~ 9ires MOUMTFIIH : NAME ELEVATION MAP Which column 9i'v'e:5 HEIGHT : NAME ELEVATION MAP MOUHT AIMS :\[ tFI I'IE  ( NASHIHGTOM , ADAMS ,   .   .   .  )
ELEU FITIOM (1917, 1768, ...)
MAP (6,6....)
E > : it\[\]
Figure 5: Database Specification < spec > --> < term > < relop > < term > <-> < atom >\] < func >   ( < atom > ) < atom > --> < constant > I < parameter > < relop > -->= I<\[<=  I>1>- - I -= An example of how menu semantics operates is given in Figure  6  . When a semantics menu first appears , its " Function " field contains a list of all functions known to apply to at least one of the entities that the definition relates to  . This reduces the number of keystrokes required from the user and  . more importantly , helps guard against an inadvertent proli feration of concept names  . 
7 . 3 English and English-Like Specifications In addition  , to the database and menu schemes just described , users may supply definitions in terms of English already known to the system  . Some advantages to this are that ( 1 ) definitions may be arbitrarily complex , limited only by the coverage of the underlying syntactic component  , and ( 2 ) users will implicitly be learning to supply semantics at the same time they learn to use the NLP itself  . Some disadvantages are ( 1 ) a user might want to define something that cannot be paraphrased within the bounds of the grammatical coverage of the system  , and (2) unless optimizations are carried out , references to user-defined concepts may entail inefficient processing  . 
An alternative to English specification , which functions similarly from the user's standpoint  , is to provide for " English-like " specifications in which an expression supplied by the user is translated by some pattern-matching algorithm different from  . and probably less sophisticated than . the process involved in actual English parsing . The primary advantage of English-like specification  , over English specification , is that translations into internal form can be more efficient  , since definitions or parts of definitions will be handled on a case by case basis  . One probable disadvantage is that the scheme will be less general  , in terms of definable concetps , and perhaps " spotty " in terms of what it makes available  . 
In TELI , both English and English-like specification are done in terms of sample domain values  , which are treated as formal parameters . An example appears in Figure 7 . In the current implementation , English-like specifications include ( a ) any definition definable by menu , and ( b ) definitions that involve ( possibly negated ) adjective or noun references . As of this writing , only English specifications that involve no nested parameter references can be processed  . 
7.4 Specification by Borrowing
In addition to whatever mechanisms an NL system specifically provides for semantic acquisitions  , it is reasonable to allow users to define one meaning directly in terms of another  ( in addition to indirect dependence , as in the case of English specification ) . 
In TELI , users may ask to " borrow " from an existing meaning at any time  . As shown in Figure 8 , the system responds by finding all current items defined in terms of all or some of the parameters  ( i . e . entities ) of the item for which the borrowing is being done  . This assures that the entire borrowed meaning can be modified to apply to the item being defined  . After being copied , abor rowed meaning may be edited just as though it had been entered from scratch  . 
Adjective : FILE is LFIRGE\[Sample Usage : Sage is LFIRGE \] Function:CREATION-DATE  LEN6TH OWNER ( none ) other : MIL
Rr 9um ent : Sage other : MIL
Relation : != <<= > >=
Function : CREATION-DATELENG THOWNER ( none ) other : MIL
Flrgu~ent : 300 Sage other : HIL
Retain this definition : Yes No
E .-:. it\[\]
Figure 6: Menu Specification tk , e height of a dams is 9 rearer thar , 4B001
Adjective : MOUNTAIN is TALL\[SaBpleUsage : R dans is IRLL\]Iy pean English  ( like ) Reference
Figure 7: English-like Specification
STUDENT is ADVANCED related to one of the fol low in  . q ?
STUDENT is a FRESHH , qN
STUDENT is a 6R , qDU , qTE
STUDENT is a C,R,@UATESTUDENT
STUDENT is a JUNIOR
STUDENT i : saSENIOR
STUDENT is a SOPHOPIORE
STUDENT is an UNDERC , Rf~DU , qTE .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
CLflSS of STUDENT\[return \]
Figure 8: Borrowing a Meaning 8 . Relation to Similarly Motivated Systems At the most abstract level  , our approach to transportability is unusual in that we have begun by building a moderately sophisticated NLP'which  , from the outset , fundamentally includes replete customization facilities  . This contrasts with other efforts which have first built  , perhaps over a period of several years , a highly sophisticated system , then sought to incorporate some customization features  . Our work is also distinctive , though perhaps less so . in seeking to allow for customization by end users  , as opposed to ( say ) a database administrator ( cf . Thompson and Thompson ,  1975 ,  1983 , 1985; Johnson ,  1985) . 
Some of the systems which , like TEL 1 , seek to provide for user customization within the context of database query are ASK  ( Thompson and Thompson 1983 ,  1985) . formerly REL ( Thompson and Thompson , 1975) . from Caltech ; INTELLECT , formerly Robot ( Harris ,  1977) , marketed by Artificial Intelligence Corporation ; IRUS ( Bates and Bobrow , 1983; Bates . 
Moser , and Stallard 1984) , from BBN Laboratories ; TQA ( Damerau ,  1985) . formerly REQUEST ( Plath ,  1976) , from IBM Yorktown Heights ; TEAM ( Grosz . 
1983; Grosz et al 1985) . from SRI International ; and USL ( Lehmann ,  1978) , from IBM Heidleberg . Other high-quality domain-independent systems include DATALOG  ( Hafner and Godden .  1985) . from General Motors Research Labs ; HAM-ANS ( Wahlster .  1984) , from the University of Hamburg ; and PHLIQA ( Bronnenberg et al1978-1979) . from Philips Research . 
We now provide a comparison of TELI's customization strategies with those of the TEAM  , IRUS , TQA , and ASK systems ( other comparisons would also have been instructive  , time and space permitting ) . Although we have recently spoken with at least one designer of each of these systems  ( see the Acknowledgements )  , it is possible that , in addition to intended simplifications , we may have overlooked or misunderstood certain significant  , perhaps undocumented , features , in which case weapologize to the reader . Also , we note that our remarks are principally concerned with the goals and the approaches of various projects  , and should not be viewed as commenting on the accomplishments or overall quality of TEL lorany other system  . 
8.1 A Comparison with TEAM
Both TEAM and TELI represent English language interfaces that have been applied to several moderately complex relational database domains  . 
Each system provides for a variety of customizations by nonnatural language experts  , though neither system has claimed success with actual users in either customization or English processing mode  . In terms of method , each system obtains ( among other things ) information about each column of each relation ( table ) of the database . We proceed to point out some of the more significant differences between the projects  , as suggested by Grosz et al ( 1985 ) and indicated by Martin ( 1986 )  . 
To begin with , TEAM incorporates a more powerful natural language processor than does TELl  , with provisions for quantifiers , simple pronouns , elaborate comparative forms , limited forms of conjunction , and numerou smaller features . Its " sort hierarchy " provides a taxonomy more general than that of TELI  . It also incorporates disambiguation heuristics which seek to obviate the need for users to provide definitions for some phrase types  ( e . g . 
prepositional phrases based on " on " , " from " , " with " , and " in ") , and its preparations to deal with time and place references are without counterpart in TELI  . 
On the other hand , the customization features of TELl appear to offer greater sophistication  , and sometimes more power , than the respective customization features of TEAM  . In terms of sophistication , TELI always offers multiple ways of acquiring information  , provides the ability to examine and borrow existing definitions  , and is able to invoke the appropriate knowledge acquisition module when missing lexical  , syntactic , or semantic information is required . 
Copn cerning definitional power , TEL l generally provides for more complex definitions of words and phrases than does TEAM  , as described in Sections 57 . For example , whereas the SRI system typically requires a verb to map into some explicit or virtual relation  ( e . g . a join of explicit relations ) , TELl also allows an arbitrary number of properties of objects to be used in definitions  ( e . g . an old employee is one hired before I980 . or an employee admires a manager that works more hours than she does  )  . 
In TEAM , " acquisition is centered around the relations and fields in the database "  . In contrast , TELI provides several customization modes , as described in Section 3 , and discourages low-level database specifications . 

In contrast to the principles weespoused for TELI in Section  3  , TEAM couples its methods of acquisition with the type of modifier being defined  . 
For example , when seeing a " feature field " , which contains exactly two distinct values , the system asks for " positive adjectives " and " negative adjectives " associated with these values  ( e . g . " volcanic " is a positive adjective associated with the database value " Y "  )  . In TEL 1 , these relationships arise as a special case of the acquisition shown in Figures  3  . 6, and 7b . 
An interesting similarity between TEAM and TELI is that each provides for English  ( like ) definitions . For example . TEAM might be told that " avol canoer upts " , from which it infers that a mountainer upts just in case it is a volcano  . 
8.2 A Comparison with IRUS
Another recently developed facilitiy to allow user customizations of a database frontend is represented by the IRACQ component of the IRUS system  ( Ayuso and Weischedel ,  1986) . In addition to its practical value , IRACQ is intended as a vehicle that permits experimental work with sophisticated knowledge representation formalisms  . 
IRACQ is similar to TELI in shielding the user from the layout of the underlying data files  . Another similarity is that each system accepts case frame specifications in English-like form  . but IRACQ allows proper nouns as well as common nouns to be used  . 
Thus . a user might suggest he case frame of the verb " write " by saying " Jones wrote some articles "  . Since IRUS provides for quite general taxonomic relationships among defined concepts  ( e . g . nouns ) , IRACQ proceeds to ascertain which of the possibly several classes that " Jones " belongs to is the most general one that can act as the subject of " write "  . 
One important difference between TELI and IRACQ is that IRUS distinguishes conceptual information  , which resides within its KR framework , from the linguistic information that characterizes the English to be used  . Thus , while IRACQ supports definitions in terms of an arbitrary number of predicates  , as does TEL l , it assumes that any concepts needed to define a new language item have already been specified  . These representations , acquired by a separate module called KREME , involve the KL-ONE notions of " concept " and " relation "  , which are similar to , but more sophisticated than , the 1- and 2-place predicates that come into existence during a session with TELI  . 
At present , IRACQ allows users to define case frame information for verb phrases  , prepositional phrases , and noun phrases involving " of " . Its treatment of prepositional phrases is very much like that of TELI in that the head noun being modified is considered part of the the noun -preposition-noun triple for which a definition is be ine acquired  ( cf . 
Section 4, 1) . Definitions for individual words ( e . g . 
nouns and adjectives ) are not supported but are being considered for future versions of the system  , as are facilities that enable the system to inform the user of existing predicates that might be useful in defining a new language item  . This facility will be similar in spirit to TELI' sprovisions for " borrowing " definitions  . 
as described in Section 7.4.
8.3 A Comparison with TQA
Unlike most efforts at transportability , TQA has been designed as a working prototype , capable of being customizated for complex database applications by actual users  . The primary responsibility of the customization module is to acquire information that relates language concepts  , e . g . subject of a given verb , to the columns of the database at hand . 
Like TELI , TQA avoids having to copy all database values into the lexicon by constructing " shape " information to recognize numbers and similar patterns  . For example , the system might deduce that all database values referring to a department are of the form " letter followed by two digits "  , which allows for valuable disambiguations during parsing  . Thus , in a database where employees manage projects and supervisors manage departments  , the question " Who manages K34?" can be understood to be asking about supervisors without having to find "  K34" in either the lexicon or the database . 
A related problem , which TQA addresses more squarely than most systems  ( including TELI )   , concerns the appearance and possible equivalence of database values  . For example . " vaclnd " might indicate " vacantland " , " grn " and " green " might be used interchangeable  , and so forth . Many practical applications require that these sorts of issues be addressed in order for a user to obtain reliable information  . 
Another useful feature concerns the acquisition of information that enables nontrivial output formatting  . In simple cases , a database administrator might want nine-digit values appearing in columns associated with social security numbers to be printed with dashes at the appropriate points  ( e . g . 1 234 56789 becomes 123-45-6789) , In more complicated situations , values might actually need to be decoded , so that 0910 becomes " va cantland " . This provision for decoding is similar to to the form of intermediate acquisition shown in Figure  3  , though here it is being used for opposite effect . 
278.4 A Comparison with ASK
The current ASK prototypes , which run on Sun , Vax , and HP desktop systems , are derived from earlier work on the REL system , which itself derives from work on the DEACON project  , which stems from the early 1960's . Unlike most recent efforts , which have sought to incorporate customization features into an existing more-or-lessingle -domain system  , the work with REL , the " Rapidly Extensible Language " , fundamentally included definitional capabilities as early as  1969  . 
To begin with , ASK provides quite general customization facilities  , allowing English definitions at least as sophisiticated as those outlined in Section  7  . 3 . 
An example is " ships ' carry ' coalto Osloif there is a shipment whose carrier is ships  , type is coal and destination is Oslo " . Arithmetic facilities are also provided , e . g . " are a equals length times beam " . 
The most distinguishing features of ASK , however , derive from the designers ' desire to incorporate natural language technology into an intergrated information management system  , rather than provide simple sentence-by-sentence database retrieval  . One feature allows ASK to be connected to several external database systems  , drawing information from each of them in the context of answering a user's question  . A second feature allows a user to provide bulk data input  . This begins with the interactive specification of a record type  , followed by information used to populate the newly created relation  . 

The current TELI system derives from work on the LDC project  , which was carried out at Duke University by John Lusth and Nancy Tinkham  . In converting the NL portions of LDC to operate in our present context  , we have engaged infrequent discussions with several persons  , including Joan Bachenko , Alan Biermann , Marcia Derr , George Heidorn , Mark Jones . and Mitch Marcus . We also wish to thank Paul Martin of SRI , Damaris Ayuso and Ralph Weischedel of BBN , Fred Damerau of IBM Yorktown Heights , and Fred Thompson of Caltech , for their willingness to answer a number of questions that helped us to formulate the comparisons given in Section  8  . Finally , we wish to thank Marcia Derr for many useful comments on a draft of our paper  . 

Ayuso , D . and Weischedel , R . Personal
Communication , April 1986.
Ballard , B . " A ' Domain Class ' Appr Oach to Transportable Natural Language Processing "  , Cognition and Brain Theory 5 ,  3 (1982) ,  269-287 . 
Ballard , B . " The Syntax and Semantics of User-Defined Modifiers in a Transportable Natural Language Processor "  , Proc . Coling-84, Stanford
University , July 1984, 5256.
Ballard , B . " User Specification of Syntactic Case Frames in TELI  , A Transportable , User-Customized Natural Language Processor " , Proc . Coling-86, Bonn,
West Germany , August , 1986.
Ballard , B . , Lusth , J . , and Tinkham , N . "LDC-I : A Transportable Natural Language Processor for Office Environments "  , ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems 2 ,  1 (1984) ,  123 . 
Ballard , B . and Tinkham , N . "A Phrase-Structured Grammatical Framework for Transportable Natural Language Processing "  , Computational Linguistics 10 ,  2 (1984) ,  81-96 . 
Bates , M . and Bobrow , R . " A Transportable Natural Language Interface for Information Retrieval "  , Proc . 
6th Int . ACM SIGIR Conference , Washington , D . C . ,
June 1983.
Bates , M . , Moser , M . and Stallard , D . " The IRUS Transportable Natural Language Interface "  , Proc . 
First Int . Workshop on Expert Database Systems,
Kiawah Island , October 1984, 258-274.
Bronnenberg , W . , Landsbergen , S . , Scha , R . , Schoenmakers , W . and van Utteren , E . " PHLIQA-1 , a Question-Answering System for Data-Base Consultation in Natural English "  , Philip stech . Rev . 38(1978-79), 229-239 and 269-284 . 
Damerau , - F . " Problems and Some Solutions in Customization of Natural Language Database Front Ends "  , ACM Transactions on Office Information
Systems 3, 2(1985), 165-184.
Grosz , B . " TEAM : A Transportable Natural Language Interface System "  , Conf . on Applied Natural Language Processing , Santa Monica ,  1983 ,  3945 . 
Grosz , B . , Appelt , D . , Martin , P . and Pereira , F . 
" TEAM : An Experiment In The Design Of
Transportable Natural-Langauge Interfaces " , Artificial
Intelligence , in press.
Hafner , C . and Godden , C . " Portability of Syntax and Semantics in Datalog  "  . ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems 3 . 2 (1985), 141-164 . 

Harris , L . "User-Oriented Database Query with the ROBOT Natural Language System "  , Int . Journal of Man-Machine Studies 9(1977), 697-713 . 
Johnson , T . Natural Language Computing : The Commercial Applications  . Ovum Ltd , London .  1985 . 
Lehmann . H . " Interpretation of natural language in an information system "  , IBM J . Res . Dev . 22, 5(1978), pp .  560-571 . 
Martin , P . Personal communication , March 1986.
Tennant , H . " Experience With the Evaluation of Natural Language Question Answerers "  , Int . J . Conf . 
on Artificial Intelligence , 1979, pp . 275-281.
Thompson , F . and Thompson , B . " Practical Natural Language Processing : The REL System as Prototype "  , In Advances in Computers , Vol . 3, M . Rubinoff and M . 
Yovits , Eds ., Academic Press , 1975.
Thompson , B . and Thompson , F . " Introducing ASK : A Simple Knowledgeable System  "  , Conf . on Applied Natural Language Processing , Santa Monica ,  1983 .  1724 . 
Thompson , B . and Thompson . F . " A SKIs
Transportable in Halfa Dozen Ways ", ACM Trans . on Office Information Systems 3 ,  2 (1985) ,  185-203 . 
Wahlster , W . " User Models in Dialog Systems " , Invited talk at Coling-84 , Stanford University , July 1984 . 

