FORUMON MACHINE TRANS LATION
Machine Translation already does Work
Margaret King

54, rtedesAcacias
CH-1227 Geneva , Switzerland
PANELIST STATEMENT
The first difficulty in answering a question like " Does machine translation work is that the question itself is ill-posed  . It takes for granted that there is one single thing called machine translation and that everyone is agreed about what it is  . But in fact , even a cursory glance at the systems already around  , either in regular operational use or under development  , will reveal a wide range of different types of systems  . 
If we take first the dimension determined by who /what does most of the work  , the machine or the translator or revisor , at one end of the scale are systems where the human does not intervene at all during the process of translation -" batch " systems for convenience here  . Even amongst the batch systems there is considerable variety : the degree of pre-editing i ~ ermitted or required varies greatly  , as does the amount of postediting foreseen . Some systems in sist that anything translated by the machine should require no postediting  , and thus ( sometimes ) reject as unsuitable for machine treatment apart of the text  . Other stake it for granted that machine translation will normaly be postedited  , just as human translation is normally revised . Some systems aim at giving nothing more than a very rough raw translation  , to be used by the human translator only as a starting point for producing his own translation  . Some systems require that the document to be translated conform to a restricted syntax  , others leave the author relatively free . 
Next comes a class of systems that one might style " interactive " systems  , where the bulk of the work is still done by the machine  , but where the system interacts with a human to a greater or lesser degree  . Such systems may ask the human , for example , to resolve an ambiguity in the source text , to choose between a set of target language terms , to decide on correct use of prepositions , or any combination of the -~ e and other similar tasks  . 
Shifting towards the end of the scale where the bulk of the work is done by a human translator aided by a computer system  , there are . systems which will automatically insert identified technical terms  , or replace a phrase occurring repeatedly in the text by its translation wherever it appears  , leaving the rest of the translation to be done by the human translator  , systems where the translator as he produces the translation can consult specialist or general dictionaries  , either constructed by the translator himself for the particular needs of the text  , or supplied by the system manufacturer . 
Many-indeed most-such systems are allied with clever text-processing system specially designed for use by translators  . 
Finally , although perhaps not strictly machine translation systems  , but certainly of potentially great practical utility to the working translator  , are independent packages , not necessarily integrated into a translator's workstation type of environment  . These include automated terminology banks , dictionary lookup facilities , and general tools such as spelling or grammar checkers  . 
In all this , I have quite deliberately omitted consideration of machine translation systems conceived of as primarily research tools  , intended to test the validity of a particular theory or to experiment with some new proposal  , since I take it that the worry lying behind the original question - and behind the moderator's statement-concern systems which are in some way subject to external evaluation  , and which can therefore lead to dissatisfaction . The status of research and experimental systems as valuable research tools seems quite uncontentious  . 
Now , just as machine translation is not a single indivisible whole  , but rather a range of system sharing only the common characteristic that they are used in one way or another in performing the task of translation  , so the need for machine translation is different , depending on the particular characteristics of individual situations  . 
Here , so many factors come into determining what the real need is that I shall not even attemp to give an exhaustive list  , limiting myself instead to a handful of indicative  , but necessarily over simplified , examples . Take first the example of a large translation service  , translating documents essentially very similar to one another  , but in great volume and frequently at very short notice  . This is the typical situation in which what is needed is a batch service  , producing reasonable quality translation which can if necessary be revised  , where the degree of revision to be done depends on the use to which the translate document is to be put  .   ( If the point of the document is to inform its readers in very general terms of what was discussed in a particuler meeeting  , perhaps no revision at all is necessary , if it is to serve as the basis of discussion in a subsequent meeting  , it may require quite a lot of revision , if it is to serve as the basis of a treaty or an agreement  , it should never have been allowed near a machine translation system in the first place  , and the translation should be thrown away ) . In such a situation , an interactive system , on the other hand , is likely to be unsuitable , since the main problem is the bulk of work to be done  , and the translator or revisor is better occupied dealing with those documents unsuitable for machine treatment or revising where necessary than in sitting in front of a screen watching the machine at work  . 
In a different situation , however , where what is required is very high quality translation  , and where the volume of translation to be done is a less pressing problem  , so that the main concern is in rationalising the translator's work whilst contingently increasing his productivity  , an interactive system may prove to be the ideal choice  , especially if the text type is a mixture of repetitive material which it is boring  ( and time-wasting ) to translate manually each time it appears and quite delicate text requiring reat care  . 
In yet another situation the major problem may be the typical length of documents  , combined with a need for speed and a need for terminological ccuracy  , so that a single document is split over a number of translators working independently  , but all must use the same translation for certain terms  . Here , the ideal system might well be simply to provide all the translators with access to a clever text -processor from within which they could access easily a common term bank  , with all the rest being left to the translator . 
There is no need to labour the point : different setups have different problems to solve  , and therefore , whether they know it or not , need different kinds of machine translation systems  . 
Now we can return to the original question : machine translation works when the machine translation system is able to resolve in a significant measure the particuler trans -crudely  , no one should try to persuade the translator of Faust that a batch trunslation system will do him any good at all  , and no one should try to persuade the translation service that churns out several hundred invitations to meetings everyday that an automate dictionary lookup facility will solve their problems  . 
Once this is realized , the puzzle contained in people as-king questions like whether it is a good idea to work on machine translation in a world where it is demonstrably the case that machine translation systems exist and are counted satisfactory by their users begins to go away  . The succesful systems are those where what is provided by the system matches what is required to solve the real problem  , where the system developers realistically assessed what they could offer  , went ahead and provided that , and where those who commissioned the construction or purchase of a system had expectations matched by what was actually delivered  . 
A final question to those who claim that it is somehow dangerous or irresponsible to promise to produce a machine translation system  . If one promises and fails ( a part of course from the general principle that one should always try to fulfilone's promises and not to promise what one cannot deliver  )  , why is that more damaging to the field than working on speech recognition and failing ? 
