SEMANTICALLY SIGNIFICANT PATTERNSINDICT IONARY DEFINITIONS * 
Judith Markowitz
Computer Science Department
DePaul University , Chicago , IL 60604
Thomas Ahlswede
Marth ~ Evens
Computer Science Department
Illinois Institute of Technology , Chicago , Ii 606 16

Natural language processing systems
need large lexicons containing explicit in formation about lexical-semant lcrel at ionships  , selection restrictions , and verb categories . Because the labor involved in constructing such lexicons by hand is overwhelming  , we have been trying to construct lexical entr ies automatically from information availab le in the machine-readable version of Webst @ r's ~@ ve~h Col ! eglate Dictionary  . 
This work is rich in implicit information ; the problem is to make it explicit . This paper describes methods for finding taxonomy and set-membership relationships  , recognizing nouns that ordinarily represent human beings  , and identifying active and stative verbs and adjectives  . 

Large natural language processing systems need lexicons much larger than those available today with explicit information about lexl cal- semantic re % ationships  , about usage , about forms , about morphology , about case frames and selection restrict ions and other kinds of collocational information  . Apresyan , Mel'cuk , and Zholkovsky studied the kind of explicit lexical information needed by non-native speakers of a language  . Their Explanatory-Combinatory Dictionary ( 1970 ) explains how each word is used and how it combines with others in phrases and sentences  . Their dream has now been realized in a full- scale dictionary of Russian  ( Mel'cuk and Zholkovsky ,  1985 ) and in example entries for French ( Mel'cuk et al ,  1984) . Computer programs need still more explicit and detailed information  . We have discussed elsewhere the kind of lexical information needed in a question answering system  ( Evens and Smith ,  1978 ) and by a system to generate medical case reports ( Li et al . , 1985) . 
This research was supported by the
National Science Foundation under IST-85-10069.
A number of experiments have shown that relat ional thesauri can significantly improve the effectiveness of an information retr i eval system  ( Fox , 1980; Evens et al , 1985; Wang et al ,  1985) . A relational thesaurus is used to add further terms to the l query  , terms that are related to the ~ riglnal by lexlcal relations like synonymy  , taxonomy , set-membership , or the part-whole relation , among others . The addition of these related terms enables the system to identify more relevant documents  . The development of such relational thesauri would be comparatively simple if we had a large lexicon containing relational information  .   ( A comparative study of lexical relations can be found in Evens et al  ,  1980) . 
The work involved in developing a lexicon for a large subset of English is so overwhelming  , that it seems appropriate to try to build a lexicon automatically by analyzing in formation in a machine-readable dict ionary  . A collegiate level dictionary contains an enormous amount of information about thousands of words in the natural language it describes  . This information is presented in a form intended to be easily understood and used by a human being with at least some command of the language  . Unfortunately , even when the dictionary has been transcr ibed into machine-readable form  , the knowledge which a human user can acquire from the dictionary is not readily availab le to the computer  . 
There have been a number of efforts to extract in formation from machine-readable dictionaries  . Amsler (1980 ,  1981 ,  1982 ) and Amsler and John White ( 1979 ) mapped out the taxonomic hierarchies of nouns and verbs in the Merriam-Webster Pocket Dict ionary  . 
Michiels (1981, 1983) analyzed the
Longman Dictionary of C0n temporary
English ( LDOCE) , taking advantage of the fact that that dict ionary was designed to some extent to facili tate computer manipulation  . Smith ( 1981 ) studied the recurring phrases-in a selection of adjective definitions from Webster\[ sCarolynWhite  ( 1983 ) has developed a program to create entries for Sager's Linguistic String Parser  ( 1981 ) from WY . 
Chodorow and Byrd ( 1985 ) have extracted taxonomic hierarchies , associated wlth feature information , from LDOCE and W7 . 
We have parsed W7 adjective definitions ( A h l s w e d e , 1985b ) using Sager's Linguistic String Parser ( Sager ,  1981 ) in order to automatically identify lexical -semantic relations associated with defin ing formulae  . We have also ( Ahlswede and Evens , 1983) identified defining formulae in noun , verb and adverb definitions from W7 . At present we are working on three interre lated projects : identification and analys is of lexical-semantic-elations in or out of WY  ; generation of computed definitions for words which are used or referred to but not defined in WY  ; and parsing of the entire dictionary ( or as much of it as possible ) to generate from it a large general lexical knowledge base  . 
This paper represents a continuation of our work on defining formulae in dictionary defini tions  , in particular definitions from W7 . The patterns we deal with are limited to recurr ing phrases  , such as '" any of a " or " a quality or state of "  ( common in noun definitions ) and " o for relating to " ( common in adjective definitions )   . From such phrases , we gain information not only about the words being defined but also about the words used in the definitions and other words in the lexicon  . 
Specifically , we can extract selectional information , co-occurrence relations , and lexical-semantic relations . These methods of extracting information from W7 we redesigned for use in the lexicon builder described earlier by Ahls we de  ( 1985a )  . 
The computational steps involved in this study were relatively simple  . First W7 definitions were divided by part of speech into separate files for nouns  , verbs , adjectives , and others . Then a separate Keyword In Context ( KWIC ) Index was made for each part of speech . 
Hypotheses were tried out initially on a subset of the dictionary containing only those words which appeared eight or more times in the Kucera and Francis corpus  ( 1968 ) of a million words of running English text . Those that proved valid for this subset were then tested on the full dictionary  . This work would have been impossible without the kind permission of the G  . & C . Merriam Company to use the machine-readable version of  W7   ( Olney et al 1967 )  . 
NOUNTAXONOMY
Noun definitions which begin with " Any " s ignal a taxonomic relationship between the noun being defined and a taxonomic superord in ate which follows the word " Any  . " One subset of the formulae beginning with " Any " has the form : " Any "- 
NP , where the NP can be a noun , noun phrase , or a co-ordinated noun or adjective structure  . 
la . alky lany univalentaliphatic , aromatic-aliphatic , oralicy clichy drocarbon radical . 
b . ammunition any material used in attack or defense  . 
c . strep to coccus any coccus in chains d . nectar any delicious drinke . discord any harsh or unpleasant sound f . milk wort any herb of a genus ( Pol_y gala ) of the family
Polygalaceae , the milkwort family
In these definitions the taxonomic superord inate of the noun being defined is the head noun of the NP immediately following " Any "  . The superordinate of " alkyl " is " radical , " which is the head of the co-ordinated st ructure following " Any " whereas the superord inate of " ammunition " is the unmodified noun " material  . " Of the 97 examples of " Any "- NP only two failed to conta in an overt taxonomic superordinate following " Any  . "2 a . week any seven consecutive days b . couple any two persons paired together
In each of these cases there is an implicit taxonomic superordinate " set  . " The second frequently occurring subset of noun definitions containing " Any " begins with the following pattern : " Any of "- NP  . This pattern has two principal realiz at ions depending upon what immediately follows " Any of  . "In one sub-pattern a quantifier , numeric expression , or " the " follows the initial " Any of " and begins an NP which contains the superordinate of the noun being defined  . This pattern is similar to that described above for the " Any "- NP formula  . 
1133 a . doctor any of several brightly colored arti ficial flies b  . allomorph any of two or more distinct c rystalline forms of the same substance  . 
c . elder any of various church officers
The other sub-pattern expresses a biological taxonomic relationship and has the fol lowing definition structure : " Any of a/an " < optional > modifier taxonomic level "  ( " scientific name " ) "" of " taxonomic superordinate either attr ibutes or taxonomic subordinate The modifier is optional and modifies the taxonomic level of the noun being defined  ; the capitalized scientific name of the level follows in parenthesis  ; the taxonomic superordinate can be a noun or a complex NP and is the object of the second " of " in the formula  ; and the information following the superord inate is generally a co-ordinated structure  , frequently co-ordinated NPs . Of the 901 instances of the definition-initial " Any of a/an"sequence  853  , or 95 percent , were biological definitions . 
4a . antany of a family ( Formicidae ) of colonial hymenopterous insects with complex social organization and various castes performing special duties  . 
b . grass any of a large family ( Gramineae ) of monocoty ledonous mostly herbaceous plants w ith jointed stems  , slenders heathing leaves , and flowers borne in spikelets of bracts . 
c . a carld any of an order ( Acarina ) of a rach nids including mites and ticks . 
d . cerc is any of a small genus ( Cercis ) of leguminous shrubs or low trees . 
e . nematode any of a class or phylum ( Nematoda ) of elongated cylindrical worms parasitic in animals or plants or free-living in so i lor water  . 
f . archaeorn is any of a genus ( Archaeornis ) of upper
Jurassic toothed birds.
The only sequences which break from the pattern described above are non-biological defini tions  , which do not have parenthetical information following the head noun of the NP following " Any of a/an " and biological definitions where that head noun is " breed  . "5 a . globul in any of a class of simple proteins ( as myosin ) in soluble in pure water but soluble in di lutes alt solutions that occur widely in p lant and animal tissues  . 
b . rott weile rany of a breed of t all vigorous black short-haired cattle dogs  . 
c . pol and china any of an American breed of large white-marked blacks wine of the lard type  . 
The definition for " globulin " illust rates that even when a non-biological defin ition has a parenthesis  , that parenthetical information does not immediately follow the NP following " Any of a/an  . " The other definitions in ( 5 ) are instances of " breed " following " Any of a / an  . " In general , when a definition begins with " Any of a /an " it is almost certainly a biological definition and that certainty is increased if the " Any of a/an noun " is immediately followed by parenthesis unless the noun of the pattern is " breed  . "
THE MEMBER-SETRELATION
Another defining formula with an interest ing resemblance to taxonomy also occurs in noun definitions  . The pattern " A member of "- NP is similar to the basic organization of the " Any " defin itions in that the immediate superordinate of the noun being defined is the object of the preposition " of " except in this pattern the relationship is  , of course , member-set . 
6 a . h and a member of a ship's crew.
b . earl a member of the third grade of the Brit is hpeerage ranking below a marquess and above aviscount  . 
c . Frank a member of a West Germanic people enter ing the Roman provinces in A  . D .  253 , occupying the Netherlands and most of Gaul , and establishing themselves along the Rhine . 
d . republic an a member of a political e . Fox a member of an Indian people for merly liv ing in W is cons in  . 
f . Episcopalian a member of an episcopal church ( as the Protestant
Episcopal Church).
g . friar a member of a mendicant order
What we have here is a generic term for any member of the speci\[led set  . It Isperhaps best thought of as similar to the part-whole relation -- a hand is part of a crew  , a Frank is part of a tribe , a nearlis ( somewhat in elegantly ) part of a peerage . 
In our data the nouns being defined with this formula are invariably human  . 
Of the 581 definitions which begin with " A member of " only nine define nonhuman nouns and two of those areanthropomorphic  . 
7a . Jotunna member of a race of giants in Norse mythology b  . Houyhn hn mamember of a race of horses endowed with reason in 
Swift's qu ~ li ~! ~ ~ Y ~ .
Why is it important to mark nouns in a lexicon as explicitly human ? Many verbs can take only human subjects or objects  . 
Also , the choice between the relative pronouns Vb9 and which depends on whether the referent is human or not  . 
The member-set relation needs to be distingu is hed from another relation that classifies a specific individual as in  8a   . Circesorceress who changed
Odysseus'men into swine.
GENERICAGENTS
Generic agents are the typical fillers of the agent argument sot for a given verb  . They are particularly valuable in unders tanding intersentential references or gener at ing them  . On every surprising source of definitions for human nouns is the formula " One that  . " Of the 1419 examples of this pattern 694 , or 49 percent were verifiably human . That is , it was possible to determine from the defini tion itself or from associated definit ions  , such as a related verb , that the noun being defined was + human . This estimate is , therefore , conservative . It was also determined that a large portion of these definitions  ( 30 percent ) were of occupations . 
9a . gold beater one that beats gold into gold leaf b . pollster one that conducts a pollor compi les data obtained by a poll  . 
c . school master one that disciplines or directs . 
d . hatter one that makes , sells , or cleans and repairs hats . 
e . assass in one that murders either for hire or for fanatical motives  . 
f . taxpayer one that pays or isliable to pay a tax g  . telety plst one that operates a telety pew riter . 
WHATTHEPARENTHESESTELLUS
The formula " one ( . .)" of fers very d i f ferent information .   ( This formula typically occurs somewhere in the middle of a definition  , not at the beginning . ) If the f irst word of the parenthet ica l in formation is not " as "  , a definition which begins with this pat tern is a biological definition  . The parenthetical material is the scient if ic name of the noun being defined  . These definitions are sub-definitions and almost invariably follow " esp : "  . 
lOa . pimpernel any of a genus ( Anagallis ) of herbs of the primrose family ; e~P : one(A . ary ensis ) whoses car let , white , or purplish flowers close at the approach of rainy or cloudy weather  . 
b . whelk any of numerous large marines nails ( as of the genus
Buccinum ) ; esp : one ( B ~ undatum ) much used as food in Europe . 
c . turnip either of two biennial herbs of the must ard family with thick roots eaten as a vegetable or fed to stock  , one ( Brassic@rapa ) with hairy leaves and usu . flattened roots . 
d . capuch in any of a genus (~ ebus ) of So . American monkeys ; espone(C . capuc ! nas ) with the hair on its crown resembling a monk's cowl  . 
e . crotonany of a genus ( Crot0n ) of famil , one(C . @lute ~ ia ) of the Bahamas yielding cas carilla bark . 
f . bully tree any of several tropical
American trees of the
Sapodillo family ; es~one ( Manilkarabidentata ) that yields balatagum and heavy red timber . 
SUFFIXDEFINITIONS
The defining pattern " One ... (...
specific/such .   .   .   ) " is an interesting sequence which is only used to define suffixes  . The words " specific " and " such " signal this while at the same time indicating what semant ic information should be taken from the stem to which the suffix is affixed  . 
11 a . -erone that is a suitable object of ( a specified action )  . 
b . - ate one acted upon ( in a specified way).
c.-morph one having ( such ) a form.
d . -path one suffering from ( such ) an ailment . 
e . -antone that performs ( a specified action )  . 
f . -grapher one that writes about ( specified ) material or in a ( specified ) way . 
Examples associated with some of the defini tions in  ( 10 ) are " isomorph , "" psychop at h , " and " violinist . " We are in the process of analyzing all instances of parenthetical " specified " and " such " to determine whether the defining formula exemplified by  ( 10 ) is a general approach to the definition of affixes  . Clearly , the use of parentheses is very significant , signalling an important semantic distinct ion  . 
WHATNOUN DEFINITIONS TELLUSA BOUT VERBS Noun defining patterns can provide important in formation about specific verbs  . Not surprisingly , one of these is the pattern " Act of Ving " wh ich is an indicator of action verbs  . 
Action verbs differ from statl veverbs in a number of important ways  . Action verbs llke bite and Rersua de can appear in imperative sentences  , while statl veverbs like own and resemble cannot : 
Bite that man !
Persuade him to go !* Own the house !* Resemble your father ! Action verbs take the progress ive aspect  ; stative verbs do not:
She is biting the man .
She is per suading him to go.
* Sheisowning the house.
* She is resembling your father.
Action verbs can appear in a number of embedded sentences where statives cannot be used  . 
I told her to bite the man .
* I told her to own the house.
In definitions the action verb appears as the gerundive object of the preposition " of " or as the present-tense verb of the subor d inate clause  . 
12 a . plumbing the act of using a plumb.
b . for giveness the act of forgiving.
c . soliloquy the act of talking to oneself . 
d . projection the act of throwing or shooting forward  . 
e . refund the act of refunding f . protrusion the act of protruding . 
g . investiture the act of ratifying or estab lishing in office  . 
The examples in ( 11 ) indicate that the related verb is not always morphologically related  . This pattern could , therefore , be used as a means of accessing semantically related verbs and nouns or as a tool for the construction of a semantic network  . 
" The act of Ving " definitions have a subpat tern which consists of " The act of Vingor the state of being < adj >  . " There are not many examples of this subpattern , but in all but one instance the noun being def in ed  , the verb and the adjective are morphological ly related  . 
13 a . a dornment the act of a dorning or the state of be ing adorned  . 
b . popularization the act of popularizing or the state of being popularized c  . nourishment the act of nourishing or the state of being nourished  . 
116 d . intrusion the act of intruding or the state of being intruded  . 
e . embodiment the act of embodying or the state of being embodied  . 
In contrast , our data do not support the use of the cor responding formula " The state of being "- past part  . for identifying stative verbs , Many instances of this pattern appear to be pass ives or stative use of normally non-stative verbs  . This position is supported by the presence of a fair number of definitions which conjoin the two formulae  . 
14 a . displacement the actor process of displac ing : the state of being displaced  . 
b . examination the actor process of examining : the state of being examined  . 
c . expansion the actor process of expanding . The quality or state of being expanded . 
It is likely that the formula " The quality or state of being "- past part  . is a stative verb indicator when it does not cooccur with " Act of " definitions  . 
Support comes from the frequency with which that pattern alternates adjectives  , which are normally stative , with the past participle . 
SELECTIONAL INFORMATION
FOR VERBDEFINITIONS
Although the structure of verb definitions is much more limited than that of noun defini tions  , elements of verb definitions do provide in teresting insights into collocatlonal information  . 
One striking example of this is the use of parenthetical information which flags typical instantiations of case arguments for the verb being defined  . The most consistent of these patterns is " To " -V-  ( <" as "> NP ) where the NP is the typical object of the verb being defined  . 
15 a . mount to put or have ( as artillery ) in position . 
b . lay to bring for th and deposit ( an egg).
c . develop to subject ( exposed phetographic material ) to ausu . chemical treatment .   .   . 
We are in the process of determining how consis tent the parenthetical " as " is insign all ing typical case relations  . 
SELECTION ALINFOR MATION FOR ADJECTIVES
Adjective definitions differ from those of nouns and verbs in that while nouns are vir tually always defined in terms of other nouns and verbs in terms of other verbs  , only about 10 percent of adjectives are defined in terms of other adjectives -- the rest are related to nouns or sometimes to verbs  . 
Furthermore , the semantic information in an adjective de finition refers more to the noun  ( or type of noun ) modified by the adjective than it does to the adjective itself  . This is because an adjective , together with the noun it modifies , defines a taxonomic relationship--or , to put it another way , denotes a feature of the thing defined in the ad jective+noun phrase  . 
For instance , we can say either that the phrase " big dog " denotes a particular kind of  ( the more general term ) " dog " ; or that it denotes a dog with the additional feature of " bigness "  . 
A useful piece of information we would like to get from adjective definitions is select ional information -- what sort of noun the ad jective can meaningfully modify  . Selectional restrictions are harder t of in d and are largely negative -- for instance  , the formula " containing " defines adjectives that do not  ( in the senses o defined ) modify animate nouns . 
10 a . basic containing relatively littles i lica  . 
b . normal containing neither basic hydrox ylnor a cid hydrogen  . 
The same is true of some other moderately common formulae  , such as " consisting of " , " extending " and " causing " . We hope that further analysis will allow us to find more indications of selectional characteristics of adjectives  . 
RECOGNIZING ACTION VS . STATIVE ADJECTIVES
One property belonging more to adjectives themselves than to their associated nouns is an active-stative distinction similar to that found in verbs  . The test for an " active " adjective is that one may use it in a statement of the form " they are being ----" or in the command " be  . .  .   . \]" e . g . " be aggressive ! " or " be good ! " , but not * " betall ! " or * " beballistic ! " As these examples indicate  , most adjectives that can be used actively can also be used may be thought of as a state rather than as an action -- but not the other way around  . 
Contrary to our expectations , the active-stative parameter of adjectives is much easier to identify in definitions than is select lonal information  . Some of the defining formulae discussed in Smith  ( 1981 ) and Ahlswede ( 1985b ) seem to be limited to statl vead jectives . " O for relating to " , one of the most common , is one of these : fla . ballistico for relating to ballist ics or to a body in motion according to the laws of ballistics  . 
b . literary of or relating to books.
Although many adjectives defined with " of or relating to " can be used actively in other senses  , they are strictly stative in the senses where this formula is used :  12a   . civilo for relating to citizens < ~ libert i e s >  . 
b . peacefulo for relating to a state or time of peace  . 
The common formula " being . . . " , on the other hand , defines adjectives which at least lean toward the action end of the spectrum :  13a   . natural being in accordance with or determined by nature  . 
b . cursed being under or deserving a curse.
Even such a normally stative adjective as " l iquid " is relatively active in one of its senses :  14a   . liquid being musical and free of harshness in sound  . 
By no means all formulae give indications of the stative-active qualities of an adject ive  . A large family of formulae (" having " , " characterized by " , " marked by " , etc . ) denoting attribution , are completely neutral with respect to this parameter  . 

W7 contains a wealth of implicit information . We have presented methods for making some of this information explicit by focussing on speci fic formulae found in noun  , verb , and adjective definitions . Most of these formulae appear at the start of def initions  , but we have also demonstrated that important in formation can be extracted from syntactic and graphemic elements  , such as parentheticals . The information we have extracted involves lexical relationships such as taxonomy and set membership  , selectional restrictions , and special subcategories of nouns , verbs , and adjectives . This information is used by an automatic lex icon builder to create lexical entries automat ically from  W7 definitions . 

Ahiswede , Thomas . 1985a . " A Tool Kit for Lexicon Building , " Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the ACL , Chicago , pp .  268-278 . 
Ahlswede , Thomas . 1985b . " A Linguistic
String Grammar for Adjective
Definitions , " in S . Williams , ed.,
Humans and Machines : The Interface through Language  . Ablex , Norwood , NJ , pp . 

Ahlswede , Thomas and Martha Evens . 1983.
" Generating a Relational Lexicon from a
Machine-Readable Dictionary."

Amsler , Robert .  1980 . The Structure of the Merriam-Webster Pocket Dictionary  . 
Ph.D . Dissertation , Computer Science,
University of Texas , Austin.
Amsler , Robert . 1981. " A Taxonomy for
English Nouns and Verbs . " Proceedings of the 19th Annual Meeting of the ACL , 
Stanford , pp . 133-138.
Amsler , Robert . 1982. " Computational
Lexicology : A Research Program."
Proceedings of the National Computer
Conference , AFIPS , pp . 657-663.
Amsler , Robert and John White , 1979.
Development of a Computational
Methodology for Deriving Natural Language Semantic Structures via Analysis of Machine -Readable Dictionaries  . TRMCS 77-01315, Linguistics Research Center,
University of Texas.
Apresyan , Yuri , Igor Mel'cuk , and
Alexander Zholkovsky .  1970 . " Semantics and Lexicography : Towards a New Type of Unilingual Dictionary  , " in F . Kiefer , ed . , Studies in Syntax and Semantics , Reidel , Dordrecht , Holland , pp .  133 . 
Chodorow , Martin and Roy Byrd , 1985.
" Extracting Semantic Hierarchies from a of the  23rd Annual Meeting of the ACL , pp .  299-304 . 
Evens , Martha and Raoul Smith . 1978."A
Lexicon for a Computer Question-Answering
System ", American Journal of
Computational Linguistics , No . 4, pp . 1-96.
Evens , Martha , Bonnie Litowitz , Judith
Markowitz , Raoul Smith , and Oswald
Werner . 1980. Lexical-Semantic
Relations : a Comparative Survey,
Linguistic Research , Inc ., Edmonton,
Alberta , 1980.
Evens , Martha , James Vandendorpe , and
Yih-Chen Wang . 1985. " Lexical-Semantic
Relations in Information Retrieval ", in
S . Williams , ed ., Humans and Machines.
Ablex , Norwood , New Jersey , pp . 73-100.
Fox , Edward . 1980." Lexical Relations :
Enhancing Effectiveness of Information
Retrieval Systems , " ACM SIGIR Forum , 15, 3, pp .  5-36 . 
Kucera , Henry , and Nelson Francis . 1967.
Computational Analysis of Present-Day
American English , Brown University Press,
Providence , Rhode Island.
Li , Ping-Yang , Thomas Ahlswede , Carol
Curt , Martha Evens , and Daniel Hier.
198 5." A Text Generation Module for a
Decision Support System for Stroke ",
Proc . 1985 Conference on Intelligent
Systems and Machines , Rochester,
Michigan , April.
Mel'cuk , Igor , and Alexander Zholkovsky.
1985 . Explanatory-Combinatory Dictionary of Russian , Wiener Slawisticher Almanach , 

Mel'cuk , Igor , Nadia Arbatchewsky-
Jumarie , Leo Elnitzky , Lidia Iordanskaya , and Adele Lessard .  1984 . Dictlonnalre Expll catifet Combinatoire du Francais Contemporaln  , Presses del " Universite de
Montreal , Montreal.
Michiels , A ., 1981. Exploiting a Large
Dictionary Data Base . Ph.D . Thesis,
University of Liege , Belgium.
Michiels , A . , 1983 . " Automatic Analysis of Texts . " Workshop on Machine Readable
Dictionaries , SRI , Menlo Park , Ca.
Olney , John , Carter Revard , and Paul
Zeff . 1967." Processor for Machine-
Readable Version of Webster's Seven that
System Development Corporation . " The
Finite String , 4.3, pp . 12.
Sager , Naomi . 1981. Natural Language
Information Processing . Addison-Wesley,
New York.
Smith , Raoul . 1981. " On Defining
Adjectives , Part III . " In Dictionaries :
Journal of the Dictionary Society of
North America , no . 3, pp . 28-38.
Wang , Yih-Chen , James Vandendorpe , and
Martha Evens .  1985 . " Relational Thesauri in Information Retrieval " , JASIS , Vol . 
36, No.i , pp . 1527.
Webster's Seventh New Collegiate
Dictionary , 1963. G . a C . Merriam Company,
Springfield , Massachusetts.
White , Carolyn . 1983. " The Linguistic
String Project Dictionary for Automatic
Text Analysis , " Workshop on Machine-
Readable Dictionaries , SRI , April.

