COMMONSENSE METAPHYSICS
ANDLEXICAL SEMANTICS
Jerry R . Hobbs , William Croft , Todd Davies,
Douglas Edwards , and Kenneth Laws
Artificial Intelligence Center
SRI International
1 Introduction
In the TACITUS project for using common sense knowledge in the understanding of texts about mechanical devices and their failures  , we have been developing various common sense theories that are needed to mediate between the way we talk about the behavior of such devices and causal models of their operation  . Of central importance in this effort is the axiomatization of what might be called " common sense metaphysics "  . This includes a number of areas that figure in virtually every domain of discourse  , such as scalar notions , granularity , time , space , material , physical objects , causality , functionality , force , and shape . 
Our approach to lexical semantics is then to construct core theories of each of these areas  , and then to define , or at least characterize , a large number of lexical items in terms provided by the core theories  . In the TACITUS system , processes for solving pragmatics problems posed by a text will use the knowledge base consisting of these theories in conjunction with the logical forms of the sentences in the text to produce an interpretation  . In this paper we do not stress these interpretation processes  ; this is another , important aspect of the TACITUS project , and it will be described in subsequent papers . 
This work represents a convergence of research in lexical semantics in linguistics and efforts in AI to encode common sense knowledge  . Lexical semanticists over the years have developed formalisms of increasing adequacy for encoding word meaning  , progressing from simple sets of features ( Katz and Fodor ,  1963 ) to notations for predicate-argument structure ( Lakoff , 1972; Miller and Johnson-Laird ,  1976) , but the early attempt still limited access to world knowledge and assumed only very restricted sorts of processing  . Workers in computational linguistics introduced inference  ( Rieger , 1974; Schank ,  1975 ) and other complex cognitive processes ( Herskovits ,  1982 ) into our understanding of the role of word meaning  . Recently , linguists have given greater attention to the cognitive processes that would operate on their representations  ( e . g . , Talmy , 1983; Croft , 1986) . Independently , in AI an effort arose to encode large amounts of common sense knowledge  ( Hayes , 1979; Hobbs and Moore , 1985; Hobbs et al 1985) . The research reported here represents a convergence of these various developments  . By developing core theories of several fundamental phenomen and defining lexical items within these theories  , using the full power of predicate calculus , we are able to cope with complexities of word meaning that have hither to escaped lexical semanticists  , within a framework that gives full scope to the planning and reasoning processes that manipulate representations of word meaning  . 
In constructing the core theories we are attempting to adhere to several methodological principles  . 
I . One should aim for characterization of concepts , rather than definition . One cannot generally expect of ind necessary and sufficient conditions for a concept  . The most we can hope for is to find a number of necessary conditions and a number of sufficient conditions  . This amounts to saying that a great many predicates are primitive  , but primitives that are highly interrelated with the rest of the knowledge base  . 
2 . One should determine the minimal structure necessary for a concept to make sense  . In efforts to axiomatize some area , there are two positions one may take , exemplified by set theory and by group theory . In axiomatiz-ing set theory , one attempts to capture exactly some concept one has strong intuitions about  . If the axiomatization turns out to have unexpected models  , this exposes an inadequacy . In group theory , by contrast , one characterizes an abstract class of structures  . If the return out to be unexpected models , this is a serendipitous discovery of a new phenomenon that we can reason about using an old theory  . The pervasive character of metaphor in natural language discourse shows that our common sense theories of the worl dought to be much more like group theory than set theory  . By seeking minimal structures in axiomatizing concepts  , we optimize the possibilities of using the theories in metaphorical and analogical contexts  . This principle is illustrated below in the section on regions  . One consequence of this principle is that our approach will seem more syntactic than semantic  . We have concentrated more on is that the chief role of models in our effort is for proving the consistency and independence of sets of axioms  , and for showing their adequacy . As an example of the last point , many of the spatial and temporal theories we construct are intended at least to have Euclidean space or the real numbers as one model  , and a subclass of graph-theoretical structures as other models  . 
3 . A balance must be struck between attempting to cover all cases and aiming only for the prototypical cases  . 
In general , we have tried to cover as many cases as possible with an elegant axiomatization  , in line with the two previous principles , but where the formalization begins to look baroque  , we assume that higher processes will suspend some inferences in the marginal cases  . We assume that inferences will be drawn in a controlled fashion  . Thus , every out r ~ , highly context-dependent counterexamplened not be accounted for  , and to a certain extent , definitions can be geared specifically for a prototype  . 
4 . Where competing ontologie suggest hemselves in a domain  , one should attempto construct a theory that accommodates both  . Rather than commit oneself to adopting one set of primitives rather than another  , one should show how each set of primitives can be characterized in terms of the other  . Generally , each of the ontologies is useful for different purposes  , and it is convenient to be able to appeal to both  . Our treatment of time illustrates this . 
5 . The theories one constructs should be richer in axioms than in theorems  . In mathematics , one expects to state half a dozen axioms and prove dozens of theorems from them  . In encoding common sense knowledge it seems to be just the opposite  . The theorems we seek to prove on the basis of these axioms are theorems about specific situations which are to be interpreted  , in particular , theorems about a text that the system is attempting to understand  . 
6 . One should avoid falling into " black holes " . There are a few " mysterious " concepts which cropup repeatedly in the formalization of common sense metaphysics  . Among these are " relevant " ( that is , relevant to the task at hand ) and " normative " ( or conforming to some norm or pattern )  . 
To insist upon giving a satisfactory analysis of these before using them in analyzing other concepts i to cross the event horizon that separates lexical semantics from philosophy  . 
On the other hand , our experience suggests that to avoid their use entirely is crippling  ; the lexical semantics of a wide variety of other terms depends upon them  . Instead , we have decided to leave them minimally analyzed for the moment and use them without scruple in the analysis of other common sense concepts  . This approach will allow us to accumulate many examples of the use of these mysteri-ous concepts  , and in the end , contribute to their success-fill analysis . The use of these concepts appears below in the discussions of the words " immediately "  , sample " , and " operate " . 
We chose as an initial target problem to encode the common sense knowledge that underlies the concept of " wear "  , as in a part of a device wearing out . Our aim was to define " wear " in terms of predicates characterized elsewhere in the knowledge base and to infer consequences of wear  . For something to wear , we decided , is for it to lose impercepti-ble bits of material from its surface due to a brasive action over time  . One goal , which we have not yet achieved , is to be able to prove as a theorem that since the shape of a part of a mechanical device is often functional and since loss of material can result in a change of shape  , we ar of a part of a device can result in the failure of the device as a whole  . 
In addition , as we have proceded , we have characterized a number of words found in a set of target texts  , as it has become possible . 
We are encoding the knowledge as axioms in , what is for the most part a first-order logic , described int to bbs (1985a ) , although quantification over predicates i sometimes convenient  . In the formalism there is a nominalization operator "'" forreifying events and conditions  , as expressed in the following axiom schema : ( ? x ) p ( x )  -  ( 3e ) p' ( e , x ) AExist(e ) That is , p is true of x if and only if there is a conditione of p being true of z and e exists in the real world  . 
In our implementation so far , we have been proving simple theorems from our axioms using the  CG5 theorem-prover developed by Mark Stickel ( 1982 )  , but we are only now beginning to use the knowledge base in text processing  . 
2 Requirements on Arguments of
Predicates
There is a notational convention used below that deserves some explanation  . It has frequently been noted that relational words in natural anguage can take only certain types of words as their arguments  . These are usually described as selectional constraints  . The same is true of predicates in our knowledge base  . They are expressed below by rules of the form p ( x , y ) : ~( x ,  ~ ) This means that for peventomake sense applied to x and y  , it must be the case that r is true of x and y . The logical import of this rule is that wherever there is an axiom of the form  ( Vx , y ) p(x , y ) ~ q(x , y ) this is really to be read as ( Vx , y ) p(x , y ) Ar(x , y ) Dq(x , y ) as a byproduct of other logical operations : the constraint r  ( z , y ) must be beverified if anything else is to be proven from p  ( x , y ) . 
The simplest example of such an r ( : Ly ) is a conjunction of sort constraints r l ( x ) ^ re ( y )  . Our approach is a generalization of this , because much more complex requirements can be placed on the arguments  . Consider , for example , the verb " range " . If z ranges from y to z , there must be a scales that includes y and z , and z must be a set of entities that are located at various places on the scale : This can be represented as follows : range  ( x , y , z ): (3s ) scate(e )^ yGs
AzEeAset(x )
A(Vu)\[uGzD(qv)vEsAat(u , v)\]3 The Knowledge Base3 . 1 Sets and Granu lar i ty At the foundation of the knowledge base is an axiomatiza-tion of set theory  . It follows the standard Zermelo-Frankel approach , except that there is no Axiom of Infinity . 
Since so many concepts used in discourse a regrain -dependent  , a theory of granularity is also fundamental ( see Hobbs 1985b )  . A grain is defined in terms of an indist in -guishability relation  , which is reflexive and symmetric , but not necessarily transitive . One grain can be a refinement of another with the obvious definition  . The most refined grain is the identity grain , i . e . , the one in which every two distinct elements are distinguishable  . One possible relationship between two grains , one of which is a refinement of the other , is what we call an ~ Archime dean relation " , after the Archime dean property of real numbers . Intuitively , if enough events occur that are imperceptible at the coarser grain  g2 but perceptible at the finer graingl , then the aggregate will eventually be perceptible at the coarser grain  . This is an important property in phenomena subject to the Heap Paradox  . Wear , for instance , eventually has significant consequences . 
3.2 Scales
A great many of the most common words in English have scales as their subject matter  . This includes many prepositions , the most common adverbs , comparatives , and many abstract verbs . When spatial vocabulary is used metaphorically , it is generally the scalar aspect of space that carries over to the target domain  . A scale is defined as a set of elements , together with a partial ordering and a granularity  ( or an indistinguishability relation )  . The partial ordering and the indistinguishability relation are consistent with each other :  ( Vx , y , z ) x < yAy ~ zDx < zVz , ~z It is useful to have an adjacency relation between points on a scale  , and there are a number of ways we could introduce it  . We could simply take it to be primitive ; in a scale having a distance function , we could define two points to be adjacent when the distance between them is less than some ~  ; finally , we could define adjacency in terms of the grain - size:  ( Vx , y , e ) adj(x , y , e)---(3z ) z~z^z~y^~\[x~y\] , Two important possible properties of scales are connectedness and denseness  . We can say that two elements of a scale are connected by a chain of adj relations :  ( v ~ , y , s ) co . nected(z , y , e)-adj(x , y , e)V (3z ) adj(x , z , e ) ^ connected(z , ye ) A scale is connected ( e conneeted ) if all pairs of elements are connected . A scale is dense if between any two points there is a third point  , until the two points are so close together that the grain-size won'tle tustell what the situation is  . C ranking up the magnification could well resolve the continuou space into a discrete set  , as objects into atoms . 
( Ys ) dense(s ) = ( Vz , y , <) xEsAyEsAorder(< , s ) A z < y ( 3z ) (~ < z ^ z < y ) v ( 3z )   ( z ~ z^z ~ y ) This captures the common sense notion of continuity  . 
A subscale of a scale has as its elements a subset of the elements of the scale and has as its partial ordering and its grain the partial ordering and the grain of the scale  . 
( Vs , , < , , . .) order (< , e , ) Agrain ( ~ , e , )( Vs ~)\ [ subscate(ee ,   , ) = subset(sz , el ) A order (< , ez ) Agrain(~ , sz ) \] An interval can be defined as a connected subseale :  ( V i ) interval ( i )  -  ( 3s ) ecale ( s ) 
A subseal e(i , e ) ^ e connected ( i )
The relations between time intervals that Allen and Kautz  ( 1985 ) have defined can be defined in a straightforward manner in the approach presented here  , applied to intervals in general . 
A concept closely related to scales is that of a " cycle "  . 
This is a system which has a natural ordering locally but contains a loop globally  . Examples include the color wheel , clock times , and geographical locations ordered by " east of " . We have axiomatized cycles i ~ terms of a ternary between relation  , whose axioms parallel the axioms for a partial ordering  . 
The figure-ground relationship is of fundamental importance in language  . We encode this with the primitive predicate at . The minimal structure that seems to be necessary for something to be a ground is that of a scale  ; hence , this is a selectional constraint on the arguments of at  . 
233 at ( z , y ): ( Bs ) yEs ^ scale(s)
At this point , we are already in a position to define some fairly complex words  . As an illustration , we give the example of " range " as in " x ranges from y to z ":  ( V z , y , z ) range x , y , z ) - (3 s , s , , u , , u2)scale(s ) ^ subscale(sl , s ) ^ bottom(y , sl ) ^ top(z , sl )
Aul ExAat(ul , y ) ^ u2Ez ^ at ( u2 , z ) ^( v u ) I . e ? ~ Ov ) ve ~ , ^ at ( u , v ) lA very important scale is the linearly ordered scale of numbers  . We do not plan to reason axiomatically about numbers  , but it is useful in natural anguage processing to have encoded a few facts about numbers  . For example , a set has a cardinality which is an element of the number scale  . 
Verticality is a concep that would be most properly analyzed in the section on space  , but it is a property that many other scales have acquired metaphorically  , for whatever reason . The number scale is one of these . Even in the absence of an analysis of verticality  , it is a useful property to have as a primitive in lexical semantics  . 
The word " high " is a vague term that asserts an entity is in the upper region of some scale  . It requires that the scale be a vertical one , such as the number scale . The vertical-ity requirement distinguishes " high " from the more general term " very "  ; we can say " very hard " but not " highly hard " . The phrase " highly planar " sounds all right because the high register of " planar " suggests a quantifiable  , scientific accuracy , whereas the low register of " fiat " makes " highly fiat " sound much worse  . 
The test of any definition is whether it allows one to draw the appropriate inferences  . In our target texts , the phrase " high usage " occurs . Usage is a set of using events , and the verticality requirement on " high " forces us to coerce the phrase into " a high or large number of using events "  . Combining this with an axiom that says tb~t the use of a mechanical device involves the likelihood of abrasiv events  , as defined below , and with the definition of " wear " in terms of abrasiv events  , we should be able to conclude the likelihood of wear  . 
3.3 Time : Two Ontologies
There are two possible ontologies for time . In the first , the one most acceptable to the mathematically minded  , there is a timeline , which is a scale having some topological structure  . We can stipulate the timeline to be linearly ordered  ( although it is not in approaches that build ignorance of relative times into the representation of time  ( e . g . , Hobbs ,  1974 ) nor in approaches using branching futures ( e . g . , McDermott ,  1985)) , and we can stipulate it to be dense ( although it is not in the situation calculus )  . We take before to be the ordering on the time line :  ( Vti , t2) before(t ~ , tz)-(3T , <) Time-line(T )^ order (< , T )
Atl ETAt2ETAtl<t2
We allow both instants and intervals of time . Most events occur at some instant or during some interval  . In this approach , nearly every predicate takes a time argument . 
In the second ontology , the one that seems to be more deeply rooted in language  , the world consists of a large number of more or less independent processes  , or histories , or sequences of events . There is a primitive relation change between conditions  . Thus , change ( el , ez ) ^ p ' ( el , x ) Aq'(ez , x ) says that there is a change from the conditionel of p being true of z to the condition  e2 of q being true of x . 
The timeline in this ontology is then an artificial construct  , a regular sequence of imagined abstract events - -think of them a sticks of a clock in the National Bureau of Standards -- to which other events can be related  . The change ontology seems to correspond to the way we experience the world  . We recognize relations of causality , change of state , and copresence among events and conditions . When events are not related in these ways , judgments of relative time must be mediated by copresence relations between the events and events on a clock and change of state relations on the clock  . 
The predicate change possesses a limited transitivity  . 
There has been a change from Reagan being an actor to Reagan being President  , even though he was governor inbetween . But we probably do not want to say there has been a change from Reagan being an actor to Margar et Thatcherbeing Prime Minister  , even though the second comes after the first . 
We can say that times , viewed in this ontology as events , always have a change relation between them . 
( Vtl , tz ) before(tl , tz)D change(tl , t2 ) The predicate change is related to before by the axiom  ( Vel , ez ) change ( el , e2) D(3tl , tz ) at ( el , t ~)
A a t(e2, t2) A before(q , t2)
This does not allow us to derive change of state from temporal succession  . For this , we need axioms of the form ( Vet , e: , t , , t2 , z ) p'(el , z ) ^ at ( e , , t , )^ q'(e2 , x ) A at ( ez , tz ) ^ before(q , tz )
D change ( el , ez)
That is , if z is p at time t l and q at a later time t 2 , then there has been a change of state from one to the other  . 
Time arguments in predications can be viewed as abbreviations :  ( Vx , t ) p(z , t ) =-( q e ) p'(e , x ) ^ at ( e , t ) moves from y to z ' ) can then be defined equivalently in terms of change  ( Vx , y , z ) move(x , y , z ) - (3el , e2) change(el , e2)
Aat ' ( e , , z , y ) Aat ' ( e2 , x , z ) or in terms of the timeline ( Vx , y , z ) move(x , y , z ) = -- (3tl , t2) at(x , y , tl ) Aat(x , z , 12) A before ( ti , t2 ) In English and apparently all other natural languages  , both ontologies are represented in the lexicon . The timeline ontology is found in clock and calendar terms  , tense systems of verbs , and in the deictic temporal locative such as " yesterday "  , today " , " tomorrow " , " last night " , and so on . The change ontology is exhibited in most verbs , and in temporal clausal connectives . The universal presence of both classes of lexical items and grammatical markers in natural languages requires a theory which can accommodate both ontologies  , illustrating the importance of methodological principle  4  . 
Among temporal connectives , the word " while " presents interesting problems . In " el while e ~' ,   e2 must be an event occurring over a time interval ; el must be an event and may occur either at a point or over an interval  . One's first guess is that the point or interval for el must be included in the interval for  e2  . However , there are cases , such as or I trained while I was in Philadelphia . 
The electricity should be off while the switch is being repaired  . 
which suggest he reading " ez is included in el " . We came to the conclusion that one can infer no more than that el and ez overlap  , and any tighter constraints result from implicatures from background knowledge  . 
The word " immediately " also presents a number of problems  . It requires its argument e to be an ordering relation between two entities x and y on some scales  . 
immediate ( e ): (3x , y , s)less-than'(e , x  y , s ) It is not clear what the constraints on the scale are  . Temporal and spatial scales are okay , as in " immediately after the alarm " and " immediately to the left "  , but the size scale is n't :* John is immediately larger than Bill  . 
Etymologically , it means that there are no intermediate entities between x and y on s  . Thus , ( V e , x , y , s ) immediate(e ) Aless-than'(e , x , y , s)D- . (3z ) less-than(x , zs ) Aless-than(z , y , s)\[5

Figure 1: The simplest space.
However , this will only work if we restrict z to be a relevant entity  . For example , in the sentence We disengaged the compressor immediately after the alarm  . 
the implication is that no event that could damage the compressor occurred between the alarm and the disengagement  , since the text is about equipment failure . 
3.4 Spaces and Dimension : The Minimal
Structure
The notion of dimension has been made precise in linear algebra  . Since the concept of a region is used metaphorically as well as in the spatial sense  , however , we were concerned to determine the minimal structure that a system requires for it to make sense to call it a space of more than one dimension  . For a two-dimensional space , l ~ re must be a scale , or partial ordering , for each dimension . Moreover , the two scales must be independent , in that the order of elements on one scale can not be determined from their order on the other  . Formally , ( Vsp ) spaee(sp ) = -- (3 sl , s2 ,  <1 , <2) scale l(sl , sp ) Ascale z(s2 , sp)^order (<1 , sl ) horder (< 2 , sz )
A(3z ) (3y , )( z < , y , A z < 2Y , )
A (3~)( z < , y ~ A y ~ < 2 z )
Note that this does not allow <2 to be simply the reverse of <1  . An unsurprising consequence of this definition is that the minimal example of a two-dimensional space consists of three points three points determineaplane  )  , e . g . , the points A,B , and C , where
A < IB , A < IC , C < 2A , A < 2B .
This is illustrated in Figure 1.
The dimensional scales are apparently found in all natural languages in relevant domains  . The familiar three-dimensional space of common sense is defined by the three scale pairs " up -down "  , " front-back " , and " left-right " ; the two-dimensional pane of the common sense conception of the earth's surface is represented by the two scale pairs " north-south " and " east -west"  . 

The simplest , although not the only , way to define adjacency in the space is as adjacency on both scales :  ( V z , y , sp)adi(z , y , sp ) =- (3 s ~ , s2) scale l(sl , sp ) Ascale2(s  ~ , sp )
A adj(x , y , sl ) A adj(x , y , s2)
A region is a subset of a space . The surface and interior of a region can be defined in terms of adjacency  , in a manner paralleling the definition of a boundary in point-set opol-ogy  . In the following , s is the boundary or surface of a two-or three -dimensional region rembedded in a spaces p  . 
( Vs , r ) surface(s , r , sp )  =__  ( V z ) z ~ r ~\ [ zes = ( E y ) (y e sp A -~ ( yer ) ^ adi ( z , y , sp ))\] Finally , we can define the notion of " contact " in terms of points in different regions being adjacent  . 
( Vrl , r  ~ , sp ) contact(rl , r2 , sp)-disjoint(rl , r2) A(E z , y ) ( zer , Ayer2Aadj(z , y , sp ) ) By picking the scales and defining adjacency right  , we can talk about points of contact between communicational networks  , systems of knowledge , and other metaphorical domains . By picking the scales to be the real line and defining adjacency in terms of e-neighborhoods  , we get Euclidean space and can talk about contact between physical objects  . 
3.5 Material
Physical objects and materials must be distinguished  , just as they are apparently distinguished in every naturalan-guage  , by means of the count noun-mass noun distinction  . A physical object is not a bit of material , but rather is comprised of a bit of material at any given time  . Thus , rivers and human bodies are physical objects , even though their material constitution changes over time  . This distinction also allows us to talk about an object losing material through wear and still being the same object  . 
We will say that an entity b is a bit of material by means of the expression material  ( b )  . Bits of material are characterized by both extension and cohesion  . The primitive predication occupies ( b , r , ten codes extension , saying that a bit of material b occupies a region r at time t  . The topology of a bit of material is then parasitic on the topology of the region it occupies  . A part bl of a bit of material b is a bit of material whose occupied region is always a subregion of the region occupied by b  . Point-like particles ( particle are defined in terms of points in the occupied region  , disjoint bits disjoint bit ) in terms of disjointness of regions , and contact between bits in terms of contact between their regions  . We can then state as follows the Principle of Non -Joint-Occupancy that two bits of material cannot occupy the same place at the same time :  ( Vb  ~ , b2) ( disjoint bit ( b ~ , bz )
D(Vx,y , b4) interior(bs,b ~)
A interior ( b4, bz ) ^ particle(z , bs)
A particle(y , b4)
D ~( Ez ) ( at ( z,z)^a t(y , z))
At some future point in our work , this may emerge as a consequence of a richer theory of cohesion and force  . 
The cohesion of materials is also a primitive property  , for we must distinguish between a bump on the surface of an object and achipmer elying on the surface  . Cohesion depends on a primitive relation bond between particles of material  , paralleling the role of adj in regions . The relation attached is defined as the transitive closure of bond  . A topology of cohesion is built up in a manner analogous to the topology of regions  . In addition , we have encoded the relation that bond bears to motion  , i . e . that bonded bits remain adjacent and that one moves when the other does  , and the relation of bond to force , i . e . that there is a characteristic force that breaks abond in a given material  . 
Different materials react in different ways to forces of various strengths  . Materials subjected to force exhibit or fail to exhibit several invariance properties  , proposed by linger (1985) . If the material is shape-invariant with respect to a particular force  , its shape remains the same . 
If it is topologically invariant , particles that are adjacent remain adjacent . Shape invariance implies topological invariance . Subject to forces of a certain strength or degree dl  , a material ceases being shape-invariant . At a force of strengthd z_>dl , it ceases being topologically invariant , and at a force of strengthds >_d z , it simply breaks . Metals exhibit the full range of possibilities , that is , 0 < d l < d2 < d s < co . For forces of strength d < dr , the material is " hard " ; for forces of strengthd where d~<d < d ~ , it is " flexible " ; for forces of strengthd where d2 < d < ds , it is " malleable " . Words such as " ductile " and " elastic " can be defined in terms of this vocabulary  , together with predicates about the geometry of the bit of material  . Words such as " brittle " ( all = d2 = ds ) and " fluid " ( d2 = 0 , d3=~) can also be defined in these terms . While we should not expect to be able to define various material terms  , like " metal " and " ceramic " , we can certainly characterize many of their properties with this vocabulary  . 
Because of its invariance properties , material interacts with containment and motion . The word " clog " illustrates this . The predicate clog is a three-place relation : z clogs y against the flow of z  . It is the obstruction by z of z's motion through y  , but with the selectional restriction that z must be something that can flow  , such as a liquid , gas , or powder . If a rope is passing through a hole in a board , and a knot in the rope prevents it from going through  , we do not say that the hole is clogged . On the other hand , there do not seem to be any selectional constraints on z  . 
In particular , x can be identical with z : glue , s and , or molasses can clog a passage way against its own flow  . We complete , but it must be thought of as " nearly " complete . 
3 . 6 Other Domains 3 . 6 . 1 Causal Connect ion Attachment within materials is one variety of causal connection  . In general , if two entities x and y are causally connected with respect o some behavior p of x  , then whenever p happens to x , there is some corresponding behavior q that happens to y  . In the case of attachment , p and q are both move . A particularly common variety of causal connection between two entities is one mediated by the motion of a third entity from one to the other  .   ( This might be called a " vector boson " connection  . ) Photons mediating the connection between the sun and our eyes  , rain drops connecting a state of the clouds with the wetness of our skin and clothes  , a virus being transmitted from one person to another  , and utterances passing between people are all examples of such causal connections  . Barriers , openings , and penetration are all with respectopaths of causal connection  . 
3.6.2 Force
The concept of " force " is axiomatized , in a way consistent with Talmy's treatment (1985) , in terms of the predications force ( a , b , dz ) and resist ( b , a , d2 ) -- a forces against b with strength dl and b resists a's action with strength  d2  . 
We can infer motion from facts about relative strength  . 
This treatment can also be specialized to Newtonian force  , where we have not merely movement , but acceleration . In addition , in spaces in which orientation is defined , forces can have an orientation , and a version of the Parallelogram of Forces Law can be encoded  . Finally , force interacts with shape in ways characterized by words like " stretch "  , " compress " , " bend " , " twist " , and " shear " . 
3.6.3 Systems and Functionality
An important concept is the notion of a " system " , which is a set of entities , a set of their properties , and a set of relations among them . A common kind of system is one in which the entities are events and conditions and the relations are causal and enabling relations  . A mechanical device can be described as such a system--in a sense  , in terms of the planite xecutes in its operation  . The function of various parts and of conditions of those parts is then the role they play in this system  , or plan . 
The intransitive sense of " operate ", as in
The diesel was operating.
involves systems and functionality . If an entity x operates , then there must be a larger systems of which x is a part  . The entity x itself is a system with parts . These parts undergonormative state changes , thereby causing x to undergonormative state changes  , thereby causing x to produce an effect with a normative function in the larger systems  . The concept of " normative " is discussed below . 
3.6.4 Shape
We have been approaching the problem of characterizing shape from a number of different angles  . The classical treatment of shape is via the notion of " similarity " in Euclidean geometry  , and in Hilbert's formal reconstruction f Euclidean geometry  ( Hilbert ,  1902 ) the key primitive concept seems to be that of " congruent angles "  . Therefore , we first sought to develop a theory of " orientation "  . The shape of an object can then be characterized in terms of changes in orientation of at angent as one moves about on the surface of the object  , as is done invision research ( e . g . , Zahn and Roskies , 1972) . In all of this , since " shape " can be used loosely and metaphorically  , one question we are asking is whether some minimal  , abstract structure can be found in which the notion of " shape " makes sense  . Consider , for instance , a graph in which one scale is discrete , or even unordered . Accordingly , we have been examining a number of examples , asking when it seems right ~ . osay two structures have different shapes . 
We have also examined the interactions of shape and functionality  ( cf . Davis , 1984) . What seems to be crucial is how the shape of an obstacle constrains the motion of a substance or of an object of a particular shape  ( cf . 
Shoham , 1985) . Thus , a funnel concentrates the flow of a liquid , and similarly , a wedge concentrates force . Abox pushed again staridge in the floor will top ple  , and a wheel is a limiting case of continuous toppling  . 
3 . 7 Hitting , Abrasion , Wear , and Re-lated Concepts For x to hit y is for x to move into contact with y with some force  . 
The basic scenario for an abrasiv event is that there is an impinging bit of material m which hits an object o and by doing so removes a point like bit of material  b0 from the surface of o : a br-event ' ( e , m , o , b0): material(m )
A topologieally . invariant ( o ) ( re , m , o , bo ) abr-event'(e , m , o , bo ) = ---(3t , b , s , bo , el , e , , es)at(e , t ) ^ consists-of(o , b , t ) ^ surface(s , b ) ^ particle ( bo , s ) ^ change'(e , el , e ~)^ attached '( el , bo , b)^not'(e2 , el )
Acause(es , e)^hit'(es,m , bo)
After the abrasiv event , the point like bit b0 is no longer a part of the object o:A change ' ( e , el , ez ) ^ attaehed ' ( el , bo , b)^not'(e2 , el ) Aat ( ez , tz )
A consists-of(o , bz , tz)
D - ~ part(bo , bz)
It is necessary to state this explicitly since objects and bits of material can be discontinuous  . 
An abrasion is a large number of abrasiv events widely distributed through some nonpoint like region on the surface of an object :  ( V e , m , o a brade ' ( e , m , o)-(:lbs)\[(?e , )\[ e , e e::) (3 bo ) boebs ^ a br-even r(el , m , o , bo)\]^(Vb , s , t)\[at(e , t ) ^ consists-of(o , b , t ) A surface(s , b )
D(Br ) subregion(r , s)
A widely-distributed ( bs , r)\]\]
We arc an occur by means of a large collection of abrasive events distributed over time as well as space  ( so that there may be no time at which enough abrasiv events occur to count as an abrasion  )  . Thus , the link between wear and abrasion is via the common notion of abrasiv events  , not via a definition of wear in terms of abrasion . 
( re , m , o ) wear'(e , z , o )  =-- ( 3bs ) (VeO\[el E e D ( 3b0b 0 Ebs ) Aabr-event ' ( el , m , o , b0 ) \]A ( 3 i ) \[interval ( i ) A widely-distributed ( e , i ) \] The concept " widely distributed " concerns ystems  . If z is distributed in y , then y is a system and z is a set of entities which are located at components of y  . For the distribution to be wide , most of the elements of a partition of y determined independently of the distribution must contain components which have elements of x at them  . 
The word " w ~ ar " is one of a large class of other events involving cumulative  , gradualoss of material-events described by words like " chip "  , " corrode " , " file " , " erode " , " rub " , " s and " , " grind " , " weather " , " rust " , " tarnish " , " eataway " , " rot " , and " decay " . All of these lexical items can now be defined as variations on the definition of " wear "  , since we have built up the axiomatizations underlying " wear "  . We are now in a position to characterize the entire class  . We will illustrate this by defining two different types of variants of " wear "-" chip " and " corrode "  . 
" Chip " differs from " wear " in three ways : the bit of material removed in one abrasiv event is larger it need not be point-like  , it need not happen because of a material hitting agains the object  , and " chip " does not require ( though it does permit a large collection of such events : one can say that some object is chipped if there is only one chip in it  . Thus , we slightly alter the definition of a br-even to accommodate hese changes :  ( re , m , o , bo ) chip ' ( e , m , o , bo)----(3t , b , s , b0 , el , e2 , es)at ( e , t )
A consists-of(o , b , t)A surface(s,b)
Apart ( bo , s ) A change ' ( e , el , ez)
A attached '( e ~ , bo , b ) A not'(e2 , el ) " Corrode " differs from " wear " in that the bit of material is chemically transformed as well as being detached by the contact event  ; in fact , in some way the chemical transformation causes the detachment  . This can be captured by adding a condition to the abrasiv event which renders it a  ( single corrode event : corrode-event ( m , o , bo ): fluid(m)^contact(m , bo ) ( V e , m , o , bo ) corrode-event'(e , m , o , bo ) = (3t , b , s , bo , el , e2 , es)at ( e , t ) ^ consists-of(o , b , t ) ^ surface(s , b ^ particle ( bo , s ) ^ change'(e , el , ez ) ^ attached '( el , bo , b)^not'(e2 , el ) ^ cause(e3 , e ) A chemical-change ' ( es , m , bo ) " Corrode " itself may be defined in a parallel fashion to " wear "  , substituting corrode-event for a br-event . 
All of this suggests the generalization that abrasive events  , chipping and corrode events all detach the bit in question  , and that we may describe all of these as detaching events  . We can then generalize the above axiom about abrasiv events resulting in loss of material to the following axiom about detaching :  ( re , m , o , bo , bz , el , ez , tz ) detach'(e , m , o , b0)^ change'(e , el , ez ) ^ attached '( el , bo , b)^not'(e2 , el ) Aat ( ez , tz )
A consists-of(o , bz , tz)
D ~( part(bo , b2 ) )  4 Relevance and the Normative Many of the concepts we are investigating have driven us inexorably to the problems of what is meant by " relevant " and by " normative "  . We do not pretend to have solved these problems . But for each of these concepts we do have the beginnings of an account hat can play a role in analysis  , if not yet in implementation . 
Our view of relevance , briefly stated , is that something is relevant o some goal if it is a part of a plan to achieve that goal  . \[A formal treatment of a similar view is given in Davies and Russell  ,  1986 . ) We can illustrate this with an example involving the word " sample "  . If a bit of material z is a sample of another bit of materialy  , then x is a part of y , and moreover , there are relevant properties p and q such that it is believed that if p is true of x then q is true of y  . That is , looking at the properties of the sample tells us something important about the properties of the whole  . 
Frequently , p and q are the same property . In our target texts , the following sentence occurs : The oil in the sample is a part of the total lube oil in the lube oil system  , and it is believed that a property of the sample , such as " contaminated with metal particles " , will be true of all of the lubeoil as well , and that this will give information about possible wear on the bearings  . It is therefore relevan to the goal of maintaining the machinery in good working order  . 
We have arrived at the following provisional account of what it means to be " normative "  . For an entity to exhibit a normative condition or behavior  , it must first of all be a component of a larger system  . This system has structure in the form of relations among its components  . A pattern is a property of the system , namely , the property of a subset of these stuctural relations holding  . A norm is a pattern which is established either by conventional stipulation or by statistical regularity  . An entity is behaving in a normative fashion if it is a component of a system and instantiates a norm within that system  . The word " operate " given above illustrates this  . When we say that an engine is operating , we have in mind a larger system , the device the engined rives , to which the engine may bear various possible relations  . A subset of these relations is stipulated to be the norm -- the way it is supposed to work  . We say it is operating when it is instantiating this norm  . 
5 Conclusion
The research we have been engaged in has forced us to ex-plicate a complex set of common sense concepts  . Since we have done it in as general a fashion as possible  , we may expect that it will be possible to axiomatize a large number of other areas  , including areas unrelated to mechanical devices , building on this foundation . The very fact that we have been able to characterize words as diverse as " range "  , " immediately " , brittle " , " operate " and " wear " shows the promise of this approach  . 

The research reported here was funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under Omce of Naval Research contract  N00014-85-C-0013  . It builds on work supported by NIH Grant LM03611 from the National Library of Medicine , by Grant IST-8209346 from the National Science Foundation , and by a gift from the Systems
Development Foundation.

Ill Allen , James F . , and Henry A . Kautz .  1985 . "A model of naive temporal reasoning . " Formal Theories of the Common sense World , ed . by Jerry R . Hobbs and Robert C . Moore , Ablex Publishing Corp . , 251-268 . 
\[2\] Croft , William .  1986 . Categories and Relations in Syntax : The Clause -Level Organization of Information  . 
Ph . D . dissertation , Department of Linguistics , Stanford

\[3\] Davies , Todd R . , and Stuart J . Russell .  1986 . " A logical approach to reasoning by analogy . " Submitted to the AAAI-86 Fifth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . 
\[4\] Davis , Ernest .  1984 . "Shape and Function of Solid Objects : Some Examples  . " Computer Science Technical Report 137 , New York University . October 1984 . 
\[5\] Hager , Greg .  1985 . " Naive physics of materials : A re-conmission . " In Common sense Summer . " Final Report , Report No . CSLI-85-35 , Center for the Study of Language and Information , Stanford University . 
\[6\] Hayes , Patrick J .  1979 . " Naive physics manifes to . " Expert Systems in the Micro-electronic Age , ed . by Donald Michie , Edinburgh University Press , pp .  242-270 . 
\[7\] Herskovits , Annette .  1982 . Space and the Prepositions in English : Regularities and Irregularities in a Complex Domain  . Ph . D . dissertation , Department of Linguistics,
Stanford University.
\[8\] Hilbert , David .  1902 . The Foundatiov ~ of Geometry . 
The Open Court Publishing Company.
\[9\] Hobbs , Jerry R .  1974 . " A Model for Natural Language Semantics , Part I : The Model . " Research Report #36 , Department of Computer Science , Yale University . October 1974 . 
\[10\] Hobbs , Jerry R . 1985a . " Ontological promiscuity . " Proceedings , 23rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , pp . 6169.
\[11\] Hobbs , Jerry R . 1985b . "Granularity . " Proceedings of the Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Los Angeles , California , August 1985 ,  432-435 . 
\[12\] Hobbs , Jerry R . and Robert C . Moore , eds .  1985 . For-real Theories of the Common sense World , Ablex Publishing Corp . 
\[13\] Hobbs , Jerry R . et al 1985 . Common sense Summer : Final Report , Report No . CSLI-85-35 , Center for the Study of Language and Information , Stanford University . 
\[14\] Katz , Jerrold J . and Jerry A . Fodor .  1963 . " Tilestru-ture of a semantic theory . " Language , Vol . 39 ( April-
June 1963), 170-210.
239\[15\] Lakoff , G .  1972 . " Linguistics and naturalogic " . Semantics of Natural Language , ed . by Donald Davidson and Gilbert Harman , 545-665 . 
\[16\] McDermott , Drew .  1985 . " Reasoning about plans . " Formal Theories of the Common sense World , ed . by Jerry R . Hobbs and Robert C . Moore , Ablex Publishing
Corp ., 269-318.
\[17\] Miller , George A . and Philip N . Johnson-Laird .  1976 . 
Language and Pereeption , Belknap Press.
\[18\] Rieger , Charles J .  1974 . " Conceptual memory : A theory and computer program for processing and meaning content of natural language utterances  . " Stanford AIM-233 , Department of Computer Science , Stanford University . 
\[19\]S chank , Roger .  1975 . Conceptual Information Processing . Elsevier Publishing Company . 
\[20\] Shoham , Yoav .  1985 . " Naive kinematics : Two aspects of shape . " In Common sense Summer : Final Report , Report No . CSLI-85-35 , Center for the Study of Language and Information , Stanford University . 
\[21\] Stickel , M . E .  1982 . " A nonclausal connection-graph resolution theorem-proving program  . " Proceedings of the AAAI-82 National Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 
Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , 229-233.
\[22\]Talmy , Leonard .  1983 . " How language structures space . " Spatial Orientation : Theory , Research , and Application , ed . by Herbert Pick and Linda Acredolo,
Plenum Press.
\[23\] Talmy , Leonard .  1985 . " Force dynamics in language and thought . " Proceedings from the Parasession on Causatives and Agentivity  , 21st Regional Meeting , Chicago Linguistic Society , ed . by William H . Eilfort , Paul D . Kroeber , and Kareu L . Peterson . 
\[24\] Zahn , C . T . , and R . Z . Roskies .  1972 . " Fourier descriptors for plane closed curves . "IEEE Transactions on Computers , Vol . C-21, No .  3, 269-281 . March 1972 . 

