FORUMON MACHINE TRANS LATION
What Should Machine Translation Be ?
John S . White
Siemens Information Systems
Linguistics Research Center
PO Box 724 7University Station
Austin , TX 78712
MODERATORSTATEMENT
After a considerable hiatus of interest and funding  , machine translation has come in recent years to occupy a significant place in the discipline of natural anguage processing  . 
It has also become one of the most visible representations of natural language processing to the outside world  . Machine translation systems are relatively unique with respect othe extent of the coverage they attempt  , and , correspondingly , the size of the grammatical and lexica I corpora involved  . A d-ding to this the complexity introduced by multiple language directions into the same system design  ( and the enormous procedural problems imposed by simultaneous development in several sites  ) gives some clue as to the optimism which presently exists for machine translation  . 
It is obviously believed in many quarters that computer science and linguistic science have become sufficient for production-environment machine translation  . Private sector companies continue to introduce new MT systems to the marketplace worldwide  , and many more are venturing into development and implementation  . The industrial interest , meanwhile , has been instrumental in opening up possibilities for doing basic research in it  , in part because of direct interaction between industry and research  , and in part because of the overall increased awareness  . It is indeed worth speculat-ing whether renewed interest shown by governmental scientific agencies is related to the level of commercial acceptance  . 
But some feel that this visibility causes more harm than good  . The concern has been expressed that an operational failure in machine translation will be seen as a failure in natural language process in generally  , that a particular implementation rejected by users could cause as now ballultimately resulting in the demise not just of MT as in the AL-PAC aftermath  , but also of all of computational linguistics . 
Some may go so far as to suggest hat such a day of reckoning will be inevitable as long as production-level machine translation efforts continue  . 
If it is indeed the case that production machine translation is not feasible  , then machine translation is at best a heuristic environment for experimentation in linguistic theory  . And machine translation does serve such an end admirably well : the modularity of program and linguistic description of which a well-designed translation system is capable allows work on hypotheses within one linguistic theory  , or evaluation of different linguistic theories , without fundamental changes to the computing environment  . 
Two positions are identified here , whose distance from each other serves perhaps to encompass the whole range of thought on the ultimate potential of machine translation  , as well as on the best possible design of a translating device  . 
The one position holds that MT is a viable production tool whose benefit is more than worth the immense effort involved in linguistic description  , textual coverage , and coordination of multinational development . The other position holds that MT is a useful laboratory for linguistic study in a small  , easily maintainable computing environment . 
Despite the polarity , there is a common ground , which we employ as the datumpoint from which to explore the issues in machine translation today  . We have progressed from the debate about the possibility of machine translation to the debate about what machine translation should be  . This in itself is indicative of our awareness of the progress of computational linguistics as a whole  . 

