JAP ANES EPROSODIC PHRASING AND INTONATION SYNTHESIS 
Mary E . Beckman1 and Janet B . Pierrehnmbert
Linguistics and Artificial Intelligence Research
AT&T Bell Laboratories,
600 Mountain Ave , Murray Hill , NJ 07974

A computer program for synthesizing Japanese fundamental frequency contours implements our theory of Japanese intonation  . 
This theory provides a complete qualitative description of the known characteristics of Japanese intonation  , as well as a quantitative model of tone-scaling and timing precise enough to translate straightforwardly into a computation all gorithm  . An important aspect of the description is that various features of the intonation pattern are designated to be phonological properties of different types of phrasal units in a hierarchical organization  . 
This phrasal organization is known to play an important role in parsing speech  . Our research shows it also to be one reflex of intonational prominence  , and hence of focus and other discourse structures  . The qualitative features of each phrasal level and their implementation in the synthesis program are described  . 
1. INTRODUCTION
In this paper , we will present a computer program for synthesizing fundamental frequency contours for standard Japanese  . Fundamental frequency ( fO ) is the paramount physical correlate of the sensation of pitch  , and , in many languages , the time course of f0 is one of the primary phonetic manifestations of intonation  . This is especially true in Japanese , where duration and amplitude do not have the consequential role in communicating intonational structure that they do in English  ( Beckman ,  1986) . Accordingly , a program for synthesizing Japanese f0 contoursistant amount to a computational implementation fatheory of Japanese intonation  . 
The theory that we have implemented in our synthesis program is based on a review of the literature in English and Japanese  , and on the results of an extensive series of experiments in which we examined and made  f0 measurements of about 2500 intonation contours in order to resolve some of the many problems not answered in the literature  . These experiments have uncovered important facts about the hierarchical structure underlying Japanese prosody and about the manifestations of focus in Japanese  . We have incorporated these discoveries in our synthesis program  , which , we believe , covers all known qualitative characteristics of Japanese intonational melody  . Informal listening tests by Japanese speakers indicate that the  f0 contours which the program produce sound quite natural  . In some cases , the synthesized contours were even preferred to the genuine human intonation contours on which they are modeled  . 
Although the main concern of our research was to provide an accurate phonological and phonetic characterization of Japanese intonational structure that could be used in the automatic computation of  f0 contours , our description of Japanese prosodic phrasing and intonation synthesis is also of direct relevance to issues in several other areas  , including the role of prosodic1 . Present address : Ohio State University , Department of Linguistics ,  1841
Millikin Rd , Columbus , OH 43210.
phrasing in the parsing of speech , the relationship between intonational patterns and discourse phenomena such as focus  , and the development of a more accurate understanding of the phonological mechanisms of intonation as a universal component of human speech  . The computer implementation f the theory in turn should provide a practical tool for further research in these areas  . These other background issues are discussed in Sections  1  . 1-1 . 3 . Section 2 then summarizes the characteristics of Japanese intonation that we have incorporated in our synthesis program  , and Section 3 gives a detailed account of the program itself . 
1 . 1 Prosodic Phrasing and Syntactic Parsing Prosodic organization of the sort that we discovered for Japanese bears strongly on current issues in syntactic parsing  . It is wellknown that intonational phrase boundaries can play a crucial role in parsing speech  . For example , if the sentence in ( 1 ) is said without any internal phrase boundaries , it produces a garden path ; the human parser interpret several bugs as the object of left  , and then is unable to arrive at a syntactic role for the final verb phrase  . 
(1 ) When we left several bugs in the program still hadn't been corrected  . 
On the other hand , if the sentence is produced with the intonation break indicated by the comma in  ( 2 )  , several bugs is readily interpreted as the subject of the main clause  . 
(2) When we left , several bugs in the program still hadn't been corrected  . 
Intonation breaks can also be used to disambiguate sntences with ambiguous scope of negation or conjunction  . Thus in example (3) , the break represented by the comma forces the reading in which the scope of negation is the main verb clause  ( Because they were mad , they didn't leave ) , as opposed to the reading in which the scope of negation is the subordinate clause  ( It was not because they were mad that they left )  . 
(3) They didn't leave , because they were mad.
Similarly in (4) , the break aftermnemonic rhyme prevent sublime from modifying freemeter  , whereas under the alternative phrasing in (5) , sublime is taken to modify both conjuncts . 
(4) Sublimemnemonic rhyme , and freemeter.
(5) Sublime , mnemonic rhyme and freemeter.
In reviewing these examples , we have spoken as if there were only one type of intonational phrase boundary  . And the most substantial current proposal about the role of intonational phrasing in the parsing of Japanese  ( Marcus and Hindle ,  1985 ) takes into account only a single level of phrasing  . In actuality , however , Japanese and English both have several different types of intonational phrase  , which are related to each other hierarchically . ~ As Marcus and Hindle point out to us , major modifications to their proposal will be necessary to accommodate the role of the complete hierarchical intonational structure in parsing  . 
173 1.2 Focus and Discourse Structure
Another major result of our experiments was to be able to describe the manifestations of focus in terms of the phonological structures we discovered  . We use the word focus here in the sense of Chomsky  ( 1971 )  , to characterize words or phrases which are intonationally marked as prominent  . This contrasts with usage in the AI literature , where the focus space is used to describ entities which are assumed to be salient with respect o a given discourse segment  . However , the concepts are related to each other via the broader concept of the attentional structure  , as described in Grosz and Sidner (1985) . 
Broadly speaking , intonational prominence is used to modify the attentional state  . A word or phrase that is marked by intonational prominence is made phonetically more salient  ; its prosodic coloring is more attention-demanding than it otherwise would be  . One reason for a word or phrase to receive intonational prominence is that it refers to something which is being added to the focus space  . Or , if the entity referred to is already in the focus space  , the word or phrase may be made intonationally prominent because the referent is under contrast or in some other ways a marked role in the utterance  . The presence or absence of intonational prominence is thus very much analogous to the use of full referring expressions versus pronominal forms  . 
The analogy breaks down , however , when the range of possible use is considered . Pronominal forms and other sorts of anaphora can be used in place of full referring expressions only in some syntactic categories and positions  . Intonational prominence , by contrast , can be absent or present on any word . Therefore , the study of how intonational prominence is used promises to make crucial contributions to developing a theory of attentional structure  . But an accurate controlled study of the use of intonational prominence is impossible without an exact characterization f the form of intonational prominence  . A precise phonological and phonetic description of intonational structure is thus an important prerequisite to the development of theories of discourse structure  . 
We also note that it is crucial to take focus , in the linguistic sense , into account in addressing the role of intonational phrasing in parsing  . One of the main results of our experiments was the discovery that focus systematically affects prosodic phrasing in Japanese  . Any parser intended for use with real speech must be able to accommodate the way in which focus and syntactic structure interacto determine the observed phrasing  . 
1.3 Japanese and English Intonation
A final motivation for our description of Japanese was to Contribute to a more universal understanding of intonational structure  . Our work is in some sense an extension of work on an earlier model of English intonation  ( Pierrehumbert ,  1980 , 1981; Liberman and Pierrehumbert , 1984; Anderson , Pierrehumbert , and Liberman ,  1984) . We first became interested in synthesizing f0 contours in Japanese because there are known to be formal differences between Japanese and English prosody  . We wished to discover what aspects of a theory developed for English prosody would carry over to a language which differed in many ways  , and how such shared principles would interact with language-specific principles  . 
1 . 3 . 1 Basic Principles - - One principle that can be assumed to be universal is the notion that intonation is separable from the text of an utterance not just physically but also linguistically  . 
When a speaker produces an utterance with a give intonation pattern  , he is implementing two separate strings of phonological elements in parallel  . The textual string of distinctive segmental 2 . Section 2 summarizes our results on the levels of phrasing found in Japanese  . 
Beckman and Pierrehumbert ( forthcoming ) give a detailed comparison to the analogous levels of phrasing in English  . 
events that is realized in the spectral patterns of the utterance is conceptually distinct from the string of distinctive melodic events that is realized in the  f0 contour . The physical implementations of these two representational strings are coordinated by a phonological specification of the alignment between the textual events  ( phonemic segments and phrasal groups of segments ) and theme lodic events ( tones and tone configurations )  . 
1 . 3 . 2 English Tone Configurations - - In English , as is wellknown , there are two types of basic tone configurations . Sometone configurations , which are called pitch accents , are placed on especially prominent syllables in a phrase  . If the placement of the special prominences shifts because of emphasis or focus  , the pitch accents move along with them . Other tone configurations are placed at the edges of phrases without regard for the locations of the prominent syllables within the phrases  . If the phrasing changes , the set ones must also move . For both types of tone configuration , the speaker can select among several different patterns  . His choice appears to convey a message about propositional attitude  . For example , one pattern might suggest that the speaker is impatiently repeating what he feels should be obvious to the listener while another would imply that he is uncertain about the relevance of what he is saying  , as illustrated in Figure I . 
1 . 3 . 3 Stress - - Japanese phrasal prosody differs from English in several crucial ways  . First , Japanese does not have lexical stress as English does  . The prominent syllables that carry pitch accents in English are marked also by a rhythmic salience -- an extra duration and loudness that adds another sort of prosodic 


YL .
on orange bo II-gown

L*+HL*+Hono range boll-gown
Figure 1 . Fundamental frequency contours for two intonation patterns for the utterance An orange ball gown  . The tones in the melody are transcribed using the notation of Pierrehumbert  ( 1980 ,  1981) , with "*" for the tone in a pitch accent that associates to the stressed syllable and "?/ o " for a boundary tone  . Version ( a ) isa " surprise-redundancy contour " with a L * pitch accent on the stressed syllable in another  , a H*pitch accent on orange , and a L % boundary tone . Version ( b ) implies uncertainty , with as cooped rising accent ( L*+H ) on each word followed by a LH % phrase-final boundary sequence Especially prominent elements in a Japanese utterance can also be longer and louder  , but unlike in English , this rhythmic prominence is not a lexical feature  . That is , words in Japanese do not have the lexieal markings of stress that in English give a rhythmic prominence to the first syllable in seven and the second syllable in eleven even in the absence of a pitch accent  . Instead , Japanese has a lexical distinction between accented and unaccented words  . 
1 . 3 . 4 Japanese Lexlcal Accent - - Accented words have a fundamental frequency fall at some designated syllable  ; around the lexically designated location there is a sharp descent from a relatively higher pitch level to a relatively lower one  . We represent this fall as a sequence of a high tone and a low tone  , or HL , as illustrated in the following sehematization f the accented word yamaza ' kura :  ( 6 ) yamaza'kura


Here the line coming up from the H indicates that the hight one is associated to the designated syllable za '  . That is , the realization of the Htone in the resulting f0 contour must occur concurrently with the production of the syllable's segments  . The relatively lower pitch level of the L immediately following the associated H results in the pitch fall of the accent  . 
Unaccented words differ from accented words in having no syllable designated to carry the H of the accent fall  , and hence no lexically associated tone , as in: ( 7 ) murasakiiro Since the presence or absence of an accent IIL sequence is a property of the component lexical items  , an entire sentence may have no accents ; this contrasts with the situation in English , where it is impossible to utter a sentence without placing a pitch accent on at least one syllable  . 
1 . 3 . 5 Choice of Tune and Phrasing - - Another important difference is that  , utterance-internally in Japanese , there is no paradigmatic hoice among different tone patterns to express differences in meaning such as uncertainty or impatient rejoinder  . 
In other words , the shape of the accent IIL contour is a property of the lexical feature accented  , and there is nothing corresponding to the choice oft one pattern for the pitch accent in English  . At the end of the phrase , however , there is a distinction between rising and failing contours  , which can convey the sort of meanings expressed by the choice of tone patterns at the edges of phrases in English  . Because of the lexical origin of the phrase -internalt one features in Japanese  , the system of phrasal intonation is relatively impoverished compared to English  . Other than the limited choice of pattern type at the end of the phrase  , the only dimensions of variation seem to be different choices of phrasing and of pitch range  . Our experiments were designed to explore how phrasing is conveyed and what the consequences of local manipulations of pitch range are  . 
2. THEHIER ARCHYOF PHRASELE VELS
In our data , we have found evidence for three levels of phrasing marked by  f0 features . We call these three types of phrases the accentual phrase  , the intermediate phrase , and the utterance . 
2.1 The Accentual Phrase
The lowest level , the accentual phrase , is a phrasal unit containing at most one accent . This unit may be a single word . 
However , when words are combined into sentences , it is quite usual for some to lose their status as separate accentual phrases  . 
Noun-noun compounds typically form a single accentual phrase  , as do adjective-noun sequences or sequences of direct object and governing verb  . 
Apart from the possible occurrence of an accent , the hallmark of an accentual phrase is an f0 rise at its beginning . We account for this rise by positing a L % tone ( the boundary L~s marking the phrase boundary , and a Htone ( the phrasal I~associated with a designated syllable near the beginning of the phrase  . If the sample accented and unaccented words shown above in  ( 6 ) and ( 7 ) we reproduced as complete accentual phrases , they might be represented as in ( 8 ) :  ( 8 ) yamaza ' kuramurasakiiro ( L % ) HHI , L % ( L % ) HL % The tones that we have represented here are the only ones we posit for the accentual phrase  .   4 We interpret f0 patterns at places not occupied by the indicated tones as arising from a phonetic process which interpolates between the assigned target values for the set ones  . 
This notion of phonetic interpolation differs radically from more traditional representations of the accentual phrase  . Studies of Japanese in the school of modern generative phonology have asserted that the accentual phrase is the domain of a process called tone spreading  , whereby tones are copied from their originally specified places to associate to every syllable in the phrase  . Thus in accented phrases , the Ltone of the accent is made to associate with all syllables following the accent in the phrase  . The Htone , conversely , is made to associate with all syllables preceding the accent  , except possibly for the first , which might be associated instead to a Ltone ( corresponding to the L~that we take as marking the preceding phrase boundary  )  . In unaccented phrases , similarly , the phrasal Htone is though to be associated to all the syllables after the first  . These assumptions give rise to representations like those in  ( 9 )  . The phonetic prediction of such a representation is that a spread to ne will be realized as a sustained pitch level over the syllables to whieh it is copied  . 
(9) yamaza ' kuramurasakiiro

LHLLII
Our data , however , demonstrate hat Japanese actually has no such rules of tone spreading  . For example , in an utterance-medial unaccented phrase , there is a smooth fall from the phrasal Ht one near the beginning of the phrase to the L % at the boundary before the next accentual phrase  . The slope of this fall varies inversely with the separation of the two tones  , as would be expected if a simple linear interpolation between fixed endpoint values were stretched to occupy a larger and larger distance  . This generalization is illustrated in Figure 2 , which shows f0 contours for segmentally matched unaccented sentence-medial phrases with  1  ,  2 ,  3 ,  5 , and 6 syllables intervening between the phrasal H and the boundary L ~ for the next accentual phrase  . Slopes of regression lines fit over the H-L~o transition are indicated  . The inverse correlation between these slopes and the number of syllables in the phrase is not compatible with the notion that the phrasal H tone has spread to associate with all following syllables up to the boundary  L~0  . It would arise naturally , however , by a 3 . Here we use the % notation used by Pierrehumbert ( 1980 ) to designate a boundary tone . 
4 . Note that we put the first L % tone in each phrase in parentheses  , because we consider it to be an edge feature of the preceding accentual phrase rather than of the accentual phrase being represented  . 
1 75 phonetic process which interpolates linearly between the values of the H on the second syllable and the L ~  . 
The finding that Japanese has not one spreading is particularly significant  , since most modern theories of phonology assume that surface phonological representations  ( those which are interpreted phonetically ) are fully specified , meaning that a specific feature ' value must be assigned wherever a feature of some sort could be assigned a value  . There has been considerable controversy about what phonological rules are necessary to generate the correct fully specified representations  . Our result show , however , that at least for tone , the surface representations are only partially specified  . 
That is , only some of the syllables that could in theory be assigned tonal values actually have associated tones  . This is consistent with a view in which the surface representations are merely descriptions of the phonetic form  , in a spirit similar to what Marcus et al ( 1983 ) have proposed for surface syntactic representation  . 
2.2 The Intermediate Phrase
The partially specified tone patterns at the accentual phrase level are grouped together prosodically into units at the next higher level of phrasing  , that of the intermediate phrase . An intermediate phrase consists of one or more accentual phrases  ( only rarely more than three )  . An intermediate phrase boundary is often marked by a pause or  p6endo-panse   ( a pre-pausal " winding down " of production speeds unaccompanied by any actual momentary cessation of production  )  . Also , the L~boundary tone for the last accentual phrase in an intermediate phrase is markedly lower than at a medial accentual phrase boundary  . 
Perhaps the most salient and systematic haracteristic of the intermediate phrase  , however , is that it is the domain of a process known as eatathesis  . Catathesis compresses the pitch range following an accent  . This compression affects all tones up to the intermediate phrase boundary  , but it does not propagate to the tones belonging to the following intermediate phrase  .   5 If an intermediate phrase contains more than one accent  , the multiple applications of cata thesis cumulate , so that the pitch range can be extremely compressed by the end of the phrase  . 
An important finding of our experiments i that phrasing at this level is a fairly reliable indicator of focus  . Even in syntactic structures where no phrase break is normally expected in neutral renditions  , focus will introduce an intermediate phrase boundary right before the focused word or phrase  . For example , in one of our experiments , ubjects consistently introduced an intermediate phrase boundary between the words in an adjective -noun sequence when the discourse context gave the noun a contrastive mphasis  . 
Often this striking use of phrasing was accompanied by local expansion of the pitch range on the focused item  , affecting the f0 values of its phrasal H , accent tones , and boundary L ~0 . In a sizeable number of utterances , however , the change in phrasing was the only consequence of focus  . 
We suspect hat this relationship between phrasing and focus reveals something about the prominence structure internal to the intermediate phrase  . In English , the last accented item in a phrase is generally agreed to be the strongest one  . If , in Japanese , the strongest item in a phrase is instead in first position  , one strategy for marking intonational prominence would be to structure the phrasing of the utterance so as to place the focused item at the beginning of an intermediate phrase  . In English , focused items are sometimes set off by phrase boundaries in this way  , but this use of phrasing is not nearly as characteristic as the manipulation of local pitch range and of syllable duration and amplitude to put a stronger rhythmic " beat " on the lexically stressed syllable  . We believe that this contrast between English 8 . Catathesis does affect the L % at the boundary between two intermediate phrases  . This is why we consider the L % to be a property of the end of the preceding accentual phrase rather than of the beginning of the next accentual phrase  , as shown above in representation (8) . 
- i . 268376 -0 . 4200854 mnriv ~ nomawarinon ma'war ~ . q ~ n Figure 2 . Fundamental frequency contours for five segmentally matched unaccented phrases with varying numbers of syllables between the phrasal H and the boundary L %  . The dashed line in each panel is a regression curve fit to the  f0 values between the two tones , and the number in the upper right is the slope of the regression curve  . 
and Japanese is related to a difference in prosodic structure  . The focused item in Japanese cannot be made more prominent by manipulating the rhythmic prominence of the stressed syllable  , because Japanese does not have stress in the sense that English does  . 
2.3 The Utterance
Our third level of phrasing is the utterance . The phonological mark of an utterance is that it has an initial L % boundary tone  . 
It is also the type of phrase which can been ded with a question rise  , a pattern which we account for by the insertion of a H % boundary following the L % ending the last accentual phrase  . 
In our experiments , the utterance also seemed to be the domain for two phonetic processes affecting the pitch range  . One is declination , which gradually lowers the pitch range as a function of distance from the beginning of the utterance  . Unlike catathesis , it operates without regard to what tones are present  . 
The other is final lowering , which further lowers the pitch range in anticipation of the end of the utterance  . Questions exhibit declination but not final lowering  . There is some reason to suppose that they are subject to final raising  , which expands the pitch range at the end of the utterance  . In particular , the H % boundary to neending a question is considerably higher than Ht ones elsewhere in the sentence  . 
Final lowering is seen in English as well as in Japanese  , and was originally supposed to define a comparable utterance level there  . More recently , Hirschberg and Pierrehumbert ( 1986 ) have a particular phonological phrase level in English  , but rather is a more direct phonetic expression of discourse structure  . We now suspec that final lowering in Japanese is similar  , and in Beckman and Pierrehumbert ( forthcoming ) , we suggest that declination also is such a paralinguistic discourse phenomenon  . In the current implementation of the intonation synthesizer we treat final lowering and declination as utterance-level properties  . On the other hand , we do make the amount of lowering in each utterance a user-controllable variable  , so that it should not be difficult to test these more recent suggestions  . 
2.4 Other Miscellaneous Effects
In addition to the various phrase-specific f0 features discussed so far , there are certain other qualitative differences among tones  . 
For example , our experiments showed that the Htone of the lexical accent is generally higher than the phrasal H of the accentual phrase  . We account for this difference by giving the accent Hintrinsically more tonal prominence  . That is , we automatically assign it a higher target value within the local pitch range  . 
Another important effect is that when the initial syllable in the following accentual phrase is lexically long or accented  , the preceding boundary L~o is weak . That is , it undergoes a phonetic lenition that causes the tone to be realized in the  f0 contour with only a very short duration and with a target  f0 value that is relatively higher than it otherwise would be  . ( As in English , low tones are made more tonally prominent by lowering  . ) Finally , the tonal prominence of a boundary L % reflects the boundary strength  ; the L~o boundary tone is more tonally prominent ( lower ) at an intermediate phrase than at a mere accentual phrase boundary  , and still more prominent at an utterance boundary . 
3. THEF0SYNTHESIZER
The phrasal f0 features outlined thus far are generated automatically by our synthesis program from a user-provided script that identifies the locations of the appropriate phrase boundaries and lexieally determined accents in the time pattern of speech segments for an utterance  . Thus at the accentual phrase level , the synthesizer inserts the phrasal H and boundary L ~ at the appropriate places relative to the phrase ends  , and assigns the H of the accento the designated syllable along with the accent Latthe appropriate time delay  . At the intermediate phrase level , the program triggers a compression of the pitch range at each accent  , lowering the values of all subsequent tones until the end of the phrase  . And at the utterance level , it sequentially lowers the f0 values of the tones to generate the rule -prescribed time courses of declination and final lowering  . The techniques used to implementhese effects are quite similar to those used in the English synthesizer developed earlier by Anderson  , Pierrehumbert , and Liberman (1984) , and are applied in the same order . 
3.1 The Schematlzed f0 Contour
First , the input routines parse the user-provided script  , filling in system defaults for unspecified values to produce a set of values for speaker variables and phrasal structures  . Once the the script has been interpreted , the next step is to construct a schematic version of the  f0 contour in which tones appear as level stretches . 
The values that must be computed in constructing the schematic are the temporal location of each stretch and its duration and  f0 value . 
3 . 1 . 1 Timing - - The location and duration of each tone is determined by the time pattern of the speech segments  , and by our theory of the rules which alignt ones with segments  . For example , the stretch for a medial L % begins at the end of the last segment before the relevant phrasal boundary  . The difference in timing between a weak L ~ and a strong L~v  ( see Section 2 . 4 ) is accomplished by giving a weak L ~ o only a point duration and a strong L ~ othe " standard tone duration "  ( a speaker-and rate-specific value roughly the length of a short syllable  )  . The beginning of the following phrasal H can then be located immediately after the end of the L~o  . 
In the present version of the synthesizer , the " standard to neduration " is the only possible duration for at one that is not a point  . The user can specify its actual millisecond value in his script for the utterance  , or he can include it in a file of user-defined defaults for the speaker  , or , if the system-provided default is appropriate for the speaker and rate  , he can leave the vMue unspecified .   6 The locations and types of the various phrase boundaries and the location of the accent  , on the other hand , are specific to an utterance , and must be specified by the user in the utterance script  . 
3 . 1 . 2 Rules for the f0 Value - - The f0 value of each tone is determined by the interaction of relationship such as the following : High versus Low : A low tone is lower than a hight one in the same local pitch range setting  . 
Intrinsic prominence of accents : The Hinan accent is higher than the phrasal Htone  . 
Boundary to new eakening : The L~o boundary tone is higher if the first syllable of the upcoming phrase is long or accented  . 
Boundary strength : The L~o boundary tone is lower at an intermediate phrase boundary than at an accentual phrase boundary  , and lower yet at an utterance boundary . 
In the synthesizer , all of these qualitative differences have been made precise  , with numerical values for the various relations estimated from the results of our experiments  . Obviously , several rules interact to control the value for any singletone  . For instance , a boundary tone might be raised because the following phrase begins with a long syllable  , but lowered because it is at an intermediate phrase boundary  . 
3 . 1 . 3 The Tone-Scallng Domain - - The tone-scaling domain within which these rules operate is a normalized transformed hertz domain  , which reflects the overall choice of pitch range and the intonational prominence of each accentual phrase  . The lower bound of the tone-scaling domain is defined by a reference line  ( r )  , which is set to the lowest value in the speaker's range  . The upper bound of the overall pitch range is a high-tonellne for the intermediate phrase  ( h )  , which is set to the highest possible Htonev Mue in that phrase  . The size of the overall pitch range is thush- r  . By raising h , this overall pitch range is expanded for " speaking up "  ( as it would be in natural speech if the speaker is excited or projecting his voice  )  . 
Various uses of this tone-sealing domain are illustrated in Figure  3  . For example , eata thesis is realized as a proportional compression of the overall pitch range that reduces the value of hat each accent according to the formula :*- r  ) + rit < l\] ( I0 ) hnew = c ( haldNote that in this equation the proportional reduction of his normalized to the overall pitch range  , so that it can be expressed as a constant value e . 
The prominences of different accentual phrases relative to the strongest element in the intermediate phrase are also normalized to this over all pitch range  , so as to be readily interpretable and easily specified by the user  . A local tone-sealing domain is calculated for each accentual phrase on the basis of its relative prominence  .   ( This can be thought of assetting a local accentual-phrase value for the high-tone line ha  , as illustrated in Figure 3 . ) 6 . These three options are available also for other underived variables such as the position relative to the end of the utterance where final lowering should begin  . 

The relations among tones described above are then similarly expressed as prominence values normalized to this local tone-scaling domain  . In this way the relationships can be expressed as speaker-specific constants despite changes in over all pitch range and local focus  , and interactions among them can be multiplicative within the tone-scaling domain  . Within the local tone-scaling domain , Ht ones are scaled upward and Ltones are scaled downwards  . That is , prominence values for H tones increase from 0 to 1 as f0 goes up from r to h , whereas those for L tones decrease from 1 to 0 , as indicated by the different prominence scales to the right of the transformed hertz domain in 
Figure 3.
Our use of this transformed hertz domain follows broadly the conceptual structure for English tonal scaling developed in Liberman and Pierrehumbert  ( 1984 )  . Differences between the two models appear to reflect differences between Japanese and English  . For example , many English Ltones appear below the reference line whereas Japanese Ltones are all realized above it  , in the same overall region as Ht ones . 
Of the various quantitative values used intone scaling  , those of the reference line , of the high-tone line , of the cat a thesis ratio constant , and of the other constants for the relations among tones are all speaker variables like the " standard to neduration " for timing  . Therefore , they are implemented in the synthesizer as variables that can be specified in the utterance script or in a separately provided defaults file  , and which revert to the system default value if left unspecified by the user  . The prominence
HI200 ilj , ,

IBOL */* H1ffil 70
I00? = 95~f02 a3
C'~'--~'-~"C'--~~;C-P(H)P(L)-I . 0 -0  . 0 h=140-OTf-02 . 5 -05 -0 . 5-02, s-Q750 . 0 ' - 1  . 0 Figure 3 . Tone-scaling domain with f0 values computed for the first ninetones in the utterance mayumi-wa ANA'TA-niaima'sitaka ?  ( ' Did Mayumi meet YOU ?' )  . Braces at top show the accentual phrase and intermediate phrase grouping  . The reference line is 95 Hz and the high-tone line is 170 until reduced by-the catathesis at the accent in ana'ta  . Values for the y-axis are hert zonscale to left , and H-tone and L-tone prominences ( as scaled in the initial pitch range ) on scales to right . Labeled arrows illustrate the application of representative tone scaling rules  .   ( 1 ) Boundary strength at utterance-initial boundary : L ~ o  ( u ) =0 . 7 .   ( 2 ) Boundary strengthat intermediate-phrase boundary : L %  ( i ) =0 . 6 .   ( 34 ) Relationship between phrasal H and accent H : accent H = I  . 0, phrasal H = 0 . 8 . (5) Catathesis constant is 0 . 6 and reduces high-tone line to 140 Hz .   ( 6 ) Boundary strengthat accentual-phrase boundary with weak L % tone because of long initial syllable in aima's it a:L %  ( a ) =0 . 5, weak L %= 0 . 85; weak L % ( a ) = 0 . 5*0 . 85=0 . 425 .   ( 7 ) Accentual phrase aima ' Mta is subordinated to the focused accentual phrase a na'ta-ni by  P=0  . 8 , which locally compresses the tone-scaling domain by making a reduced local high-tone line : h  =131 Hz . 
value of each accentual phrase , on the other hand , is specific to its particular degree of subordination to the head of its intermediate phrase  , and must be specified in the utterance script . 
3.2 The Finished f00 ont our
When the tones have been located in time and frequency  , several adjustments are made to produce a finished natural intonation contour from the schematized  f0 contour . First , the tones are connected by linear interpolation , as shown in Figure 4a . 
Declination now applies , as well as final lowering in declaratives ( Figure 4b )  . The resulting contour is then smoothed by convolution with a square window of roughly syllable width  .   7 Step functions in f0 now appear more realistically as gradual rises ( Figure 4 e )  . Finally , a small amount of random jitter is added to prevent the occurrence of unnaturally flat sections and unnaturally smooth ramps  , and the f0 value is set to zero during portions corresponding to voiceles segments  ( Figure 4d )  . In order to listen to the results , the computed f0 contour is then substituted for the natural contour in an LPC-coded version of the utterance  , and the speech is resynthesized . 

The model of Japanese intonation implemented in the synthesis program accounts for all of the characteristics of Japanese intonational structure that we have been able to document in our experiments  . Some future modifications to the model will probably be necessary as we learn more about how the highest level of phrasing behaves in long connected passages  . For example , as noted above , we suspect on the basis of recent work on English  ( Hirschberg and Pierrehumbert ,  1986 ) that some of the characteristics that we have identified with the utterance in the present model are actually reflections of discourse structure rather than features specific to a well -defined type of unit within the hierarchy of prosodic phrases  . 
Constructing the f0 synthesizer has been useful in confirming our phonological and phonetic model of Japanese intonation  . We believe that the synthesizer will also be useful in generating controlled materials for investigating the use of intonational prominence and the role of phrasing in parsing speech  . 

Ken Church , Julia Hirschberg , and Mitch Marcus gave useful comments on earlier drafts of this paper  . 
APPENDIX : GLOSSARYeatathesis . A sudden compression of pitch range that is triggered by a particular tonal configuration  , and that lowers all tones following the trigger within some phrasal unit  . In Japanese , cata thesis is triggered by every accent , and in English , by every bitonal pitch accent . 
declination . " A gradual lowering of the pitch range that is effected as some function of time from the beginning of an utterance without regard to the tonal structure  . 
final lowering . A gradual owering of the pitch range starting at some distance from the end of the utterance  . 
fundamental frequency . The reciprocal of the period in aperiodic signal  , and the main physical correlate of pitch . 
Fundamental frequency is abbreviated fO and is measured in periods per second  ( unithertz )  . In speech ,   f0 corresponds to the frequency of vibration of the vocal cords during voiced segments  . 
H . A high to ne.
The rates of the declination and of the final lowering and the size of the smoothing window are speaker-and rate-specific variables like the reference line  , and are treated in the same way in the synthesis program  . 
178 hlgh-tonellne . In Japanese tone-scaling , the upper bound of the pitch range . Its f0 value corresponds to that of a hypothetical highest possible Ht one in that range  . 
intonational phrase . A prosodic unit delimited phonologically by some sort of intonational feature such as a boundary tone  . 
L . Alowt one.
LPC coding . A specification of the spectral characteristics of a signal in terms of sets of linear predictor coefficients at fixed 
I00 a . linear interpolation
L%HL % HHLL % HHLL % H % 1 " 75
I00-b . declination
L % HL % HHLL % HHLL % H %
C . smoothing /--../\
I00 d . adjustment for voiceless segments and jitter
L % HL % HHLL % HHLL % H % moyumi woo not to niaimo's if oko ? ~  z5 t \]
IO Ol-e . original intonation
Figure 4 . Adjustments for making a finished f0 contour from schematic tone level stretches for utterance shown in Figure  3  . 
(1 ) Linear interpolation fills in unspecified values between tones  . (2) Declination applies , but not final lowering , because the utterance is a question ending in a H % boundary tone  .   ( 3 ) The contour is smoothed by convolution with a syllable-sized square window  .   ( 4 ) Jitter is added and f0 values excised during voiceles segments It\] , Ill , and \[kI .   ( 5 ) The f0 contour of the original utterance is shown for comparison with  ( 4 )  . 
intervals . An nth-order analysis of the signal is obtained by a least squares estimation of successive samples within an analysis frame from the linear combination of the last n samples  . The set of predictor coefficients for each analysis frame can then be used as a filter for an input pulse train to synthesize a new signal with the same spectral pattern and an arbitrarily different  f0 pattern . 
pitch accent . A tonal configuration that is associated to a designated syllable in an utterance  , and that marks the syllable ( or the word containing the syllable ) as accented or intonationally prominent . In Japanese , accent consists of a pitch fall from H tone to L at a lexically designated syllable in a word  . In English , an accent is any one of sixtonal patterns ( H * , L * , H*+L , L*+H , H+L * , L+H * ) that can be associated to a lexically designated syllable  . 
pitch range . The spread of fundamental frequency between the " floor " of a speaker's voice and the highest  f0 appropriate to the occasion . Linguistic factors such as prominence or intonational focus  ( see Section 1 . 2) can locally affect pitch range , but it is determined overall by paralinguistic factors such as degree of animation and projection  ; the overall pitch range is raised or expanded when the speaker " speaksup " to project his voice  , or when he is excited . 
prosody . The rhythm and melody of speech as specified phonologically in the representation of its phrasal organization and intonational structure  , and as realized phonetically induration and loudness and pitch patterns  . 
reference line . In Japanese tone-scaling , the bottom of the pitch range , corresponding to the lowest possible f0 value for at one in a speaker's pitch range . 
standard Japanese . The speech of educated Tokyo speakers , as prescribed by the Japanese Broadcasting Corporation  . 
stress . A local non-tonal prominence on a lexically designated syllable in an English word  , which is realized phonetically in the rhythmic pattern of relative lengths and loudnesses  , and also by certain segmental patterns such as vowel and consonant lenition  . 
tone . The basic phonological element representing distinctive events in the melody--i  . e . , the melodic counterpart of a phonemic segment in the text string  . We believe that these melodic segments are target pitch level specifications such as " hiuh " and " low " rather than specifications of pitch change such as " rise " and " fall "  .   ( See Pierrehumbert and Beckman ( forthcoming ) for detailed arguments on this point . ) In both English and Japanese , there are two tone types -- H and L--and the type of each tone in an utterance  , and its temporal location and f0 value reflect the prosodic phrasing and intonational focus structure of the utterance  . 

Anderson , Mark D . , Janet B . Pierrehumbert , and Mark Y . 
Liberman .  1984 . " Synthesis by Rule of English Intonation Patterns  . " Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics  , Speech , and Signal Processing . 
Beckman , Mary E .  1986 . Towards Phonetic Criteria for a Typology of Lexieal Accent  . Netherlands Phonetic Archives
No 7, Foris Publications.
Beckman , Mary E . , and Janet B . Pierrehumbert . forthcoming . 
"Intonational Structure in Japanese and English."
Phonology Yearbook , Vol.3.
Chomsky , N .  1971 . " Deep structure , surface structure , and semantic interpretation . " In D . D . Steinberg and L . A . 
Jakohovits , eds . , Semantics : An Interdisciplinary Reader in Philosophy  , Linguistics , and Psychology . Cambridge Grosz , B . and C . L . Sidner .  1985 . " The Structures of Discourse Structure . " 6097 , BBN Laboratories and Technical Note #369 from the AIC enter , SRI International . To appear in
Computational Linguistics.
Hirschberg , Julia , and Janet Pierrehumbert .  1986 . " The Intonational Structuring of Discourse . " This volume . 
Liberman , Mark , and Janet Pierrehumbert .  1984 . "Intonational Invariance under Changes in Pitch Range and Length  . " In M . Aronoff and R . T . Oehrle , eds . , Language Sound
Structure . MIT Press.
Marcus , M . , D . Hindle , and M . Fleck .  1983 . " D-Theory : Talking about Talking about Trees . " Proceedings of the 21st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ,  129-136 . 
Marcus , M . , and D . Hindle .  1985 . "A computational ccount of extra-categorial elements in Japanese  . " Paper distributed at the SDF Japanese Syntax Workshop  , UCSD , San Diego , 
March 1985.
Pierrehumbert , Janet B .  1980 . The Phonology and Phonetics of
English Intonation . MIT dissertation.
- -  .  1981 . " Synthesizing Intonation , "Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America , 70:985-995.
Pierrehumbert , Janet B . , and Mary E . Beckman . forthcoming . 
" Japanese Tone Structure . " Paper submitted to Linguistic


