FORUMON MACHINE TRANS LATION
Machine Translation will not Work
Martin Kay
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center
3333 Coyote Hill Road
Palo Alto , CA 94304
PANELIST STATEMENT
Large expenditures on fundamental scientific research are usually limited to the hard sciences  . It is therefore entirely reasonable to suppose that  , if large sums of money are spent on machine translations  , it will be with the clear expectation that what is being purchase disprincipally development and engineering  , and that the result will contribute substantially to the solution of some pressing problem  . 
Anyone who accepts large ( or small ) sums on this understanding is either technically naive or dangerously cynical  . It may certainly be that I . machine translation could provide a valuable framework for fundamental research  ;  2 . texts in highly restricted subsets of natural language could be devised for particular puposes and texts in translated automatically  ;  3 . computers have an important role to fill in making translations  ;  4 . translations of extremely low quality may be ac -ceptible on occasions  . 
However , 1 . the fundamental research is so far from applicability  ,  2 . the language subsets are so restricted , 3 . the useful computer technologies are so different from machine translation  ,  4 . the quality of the translations that can be produced of natural texts by automatic means is so low  , and 5 . the occasions on which those translations could be useful ares or are  , that the use of the term in these cases can only result in confusion if not deception  . 
A determined attempt was made to bring machine translation to the point of usability in the sixties  . It has become fashionable to deride these as " first generation " systems and to refer to what is being done no was belonging to the second or third generation  . It should surely be possible for those who think that the newer systems can succeed where the earlier ones failed  , to point to problems that have been solved since the sixties that are so crucial as substantially to change our assessment of what can be achieved  . We know a good deal more about programming techniques and have larger machines to work with  ; we have more elegant theories of syntax and what modern linguists are pleased to call semantics  ; and there has been some exploratory work on anaphora  . 
But , we still have little idea how to translate into a closely related language like French or German  , English sentences containing such words as " he " , " she " , " it " , " not " , " and " , and " of " . Furthermore , such work as has been done on these problems has been studiously ignored by all those currently involved in developing systems  . 
Unfortunately , the sums that are being spent on MT in Europe and Japan are large enough to make virtually inevitable the production of a second ALPAC report sometime in the next few years  . This will inevitably have a devastat-ing effect on the whole field of computational linguistics  , everywhere in the world . The report will be the more devas-tating for the fact that much of the money has in fact been spent frivolously  , and much of the work has been in com-petent , even by today's limited standards . 

