Encodinl ~ and Acquiring Meanings
for-Figurative Phrases *
Michael G . Dyer
Uri Zernik
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Computer Science Department
3531 Boelter Hall
University of California
Los Angeles , California 90024
Abstract 1.1 The Task Domain
Here we address the problem of mapping phrase meanings into their conceptual representations  . Figurative phrases are pervasive in human communication  , yet they are difficult to explain theoretically . In fact , the ability to handle idiosyncratic behavior of phrase should be a criterion for any theory of lexical representation  . Due to the huge number of such phrases in the English language  , phrase representation must be amenable to parsing  , generation , and also to learning . In this paper we demonstrate a semantic representation which facilitates  , for a wide variety of phrases , both learning and parsing . 
1. Introduction
The phrasal approach to language processing \ [ Backer75  , Pawley 83 ,   Fillmore86\] emphasizes the role of the lexicon as a knowledge source  . Rather than maintaining a single generic lexical entry for each word  , e . g . : take , the lexicon contains many phrases , e . g . : take over , take it or leave it , take it up with , take it for granted , etc . Although this approach proves effective in parsing and in generation \[  Wilensky84\]  , there are three problems which require further investigation  . First , phrase interaction : the lexicon provides representation for single phrases  , such as take to task and make up one's mind . Yet it is required to analyze complex clauses such as he made up his mind to take her to task  . The problem lies with the way the meanings of the two phrases interact to form the compound meaning  . Second , phrase ambiguity :\[ Zernik86\] phrasal parsing shifts the task from single-word selection to the selection of entire lexical phrases  . When a set of lexical phrases appear syntactically equivalent  , i . e . : her an into a friend , her an into an 1986 Mercedes , her an into the store , and her an into trouble again , disambiguation must be performed by semantic means  . The conditions which facilitate phrase discrimination reside within each lexical entry itself  . Third , phrase idiosyncracy : the meaning representation of phrases such as : lay down the law VS  . put one's foot down , must distinguish the special use of each phrase . This paper is concerned in the representation f phrase meanings and the process of acquiring these meanings from examples in context  . 
* This research was supported in part by a grant from the ITA Foundation  . 
Consider the figurative phrases in the sentences below  , as they are parsed by the program RINA\[ Zernik85a\]  . 
Sh The Democrats in the house carried the water for 
Reagan's tax-reform bill . **  $2: The famous mobster evaded prosecution for years . Finally , they threw the book at him for taxevasion . 
Depending on the contents of the given lexicon , the program may interpret these sentences in one of two ways  . On the one hand , assuming that the meaning of a phrase exists in the lexicon  , the program applies that meaning in the comprehension f the sentence  . In S1 , the program under stands that the Democratic representatives did the " dirty " work in passing the bill for Reagan  . On the other hand , if the figurative phrase does not exist in the lexicon  , an additional task is performed : the program must figure out the meaning of the new phrase  , using existing knowledge : First , the meanings given for the single words carry and water are processed literally  . Second , the context which exists prior to the application of the phrase  , provides a hypothesis for the formation of the phrase meaning  . A dialog with RINA proceeds as follows:
RINA : They moved water ?
User : No . The Democrats carried the water for

RINA : They helped him pass the bill ?
Thus , RINA detects the metaphor underlying the phrase , and using the context , it learns that carry the water means helping another person do a hard job  . Consider encounters with three other phrases : Jenny wanted to go punk but her father  $3: laid down the law . 
$4: put his foot down.
$5: read her the riotact.
In all these cases , it is understood from the context that Jenny's father objected to herplan of going punk  ( aided by the word but which suggests that something went wrong with Jenny's goals  )  . However , what is the meaning of each one of the phrases , and in particular do all these phrases convey ident-ical concepts ?** This sentence was recorded off the ABet elevision program Night line  , 
December 12, 1985.
106 1.2 The Issues
In encoding meanings of figurative phrases , we must address the following issues . 
Underlying Knowledge
What is the knowledge required in order to encode the phrase throw the book ? Clearly  , this knowledge includes the situation and the events that take place in court  , namely the judge punishing the defendant . 
The phrase carry the water , for example , requires two kinds of knowledge : ( a ) Knowledge about the act of carrying water which can support he analysis of the phrase metaphor  . 
(b ) Knowledge about general plans and goals , and the way one person agrees to serve as an agent in the execution of the plans of another person  . This knowledge supports the analysis of the context  . 
While the phrases above could be denoted in terms of plans and goals  , other phrases , i . e . : rubone's nose in it , climb the walls , and have a chipon one's shoulder require knowledge about emotions  , such as embarrassment and frustration . Unless the program maintains knowledge about resentment  , the phrase have a chip on the should-er , for example , cannot be represented . Thus , a variety of knowledge structures take place in encoding figurative phrases  . 
Representing Phrase Meanings and Connotations The appearance of each phrase carries certain implications  . For example , John put his foot down implies that John refused a request  , and on the other hand , John read the riot act implies that here acted angrily about a certain event in the past  . John gave Mary a hard time implies that he refused to cooperate  , and argued with Mary since he was annoyed , while John laid down the law implies that John imposed his authority in a discussion  . The representation feach phrase must account for such implications  . 
Three different phrases in sentences $3-$5 are applied in the same context . However , not any phrase may be applied in every context . For example , consider the context established by this paragraph :  $6: Usually , Mary put up with her husband's cooking , but when he served her cold potatoes for breakfast  , she put her foot down . 
Could the phrase in this sentence be replaced by the other two phrases :  ( a ) lay down the law , or ( b ) read the riot act ? While understandable , these two phrases are not appropriate in that context  . The sentences here adhim the riot act does not make sense in the context of debating food taste  . The sentences helaid down the law does not make as much sense since there is no argument between individuals with nonequal authority  . Thus , there are conditions for the applicability of each lexical phrase in various contexts  . These conditions support phrase disambiguation , and must be included a span of a phrase meaning . 
Phrase Acquisition
Phrase meanings are learned from examples given in context  . Suppose the structure and meaning of put one's footdown is acquired through the analysis of the following sentences :  $6: Usually , Mary put up with her husband's cooking , but when he served her cold potatoes for breakfast  , she put her foot down . 
S 7: Jenny was dating a new boyfriend and started to show up after midnight  . When she came at 2am on a weekday , her father put his footdown : no more latedates . 
58: From time to time I took money from John , and I did not always remember to give it back to him  . He put his footdown yesterday when I asked him for a quarter  . 
Since each example contains many concepts , both appropriate and inappropriate , the appropriate concepts must be identified and selected  . Furthermore , although each example provides only a specific episode  , the ultimate meaning must be generalized to encompass further episodes  . 
Literal Interpretation
Single-word senses ( e . g . : the sense of the panicle into in run into another ear  )  , as well as entire metaphoric actions ( e . g . : carry the water in the Democratic representatives carried the water for Reagan's tax-reform bill  ) take pan informing the meaning of unknown figurative phrases  . Can the meaning of a phrase be acquired in spite of the fact that its original metaphor is unknown  , as is the case with read the riot act ( what act exactly ? ) or carry the water ( carry what water ) ? 2 . The Program The program RINA\[ Zernik85b \] is designed to parse sentences which include figurative phrases  . When the meaning of a phrase is given , that meaning is used in forming the concept of the sentence  . However , when the phrase is unknown , the figurative phrase should be acquired from the context  . The program consists of three components : phrasal parser  , phrasal lexicon , and phrasal acquisition module . 
2.1 Phrasal Parser
A lexical entry , a phrase , is a triple associating a linguistic pattern with its concept and a situation  . A clause in the input text is parsed in three steps :  ( 1 ) Matching the phrase pattern against the clause in the text  . 
(2 ) Validating in the context he relations specified by the phrase situation  . 
(3 ) If both ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) are successful then instantiating the phrase concept using variable bindings computed in  ( 1 ) and ( 2 )  . 

For example , consider the sentence : $9: : Fredwanted to marry Sheila , but she ducked the issue for years . Finally he put her on the spot . 
The figurative phrase is parsed relative to the context established by the first sentence  . Assume that the lexicon contains a single phrase , described informally as : phrase pattern : Personlput  Person2 on the spot situation : Person2 avoids making a certain tough decision concept : Personl prompts  Person2 to make that decision The steps in parsing the clause using this phrase are :  ( 1 ) The pattern is matched successfully against the text  . 
Consequently , Personland person2 are bound to Fred and Sheila respectively . 
(2 ) The situation associated with the pattern is validated in the context  . After reading the first phrase the context contains two concepts :  ( a ) Fred wants to marry Sheila , and ( b ) she avoids a decision . The situation matches the input . 
(3) Since both (1) and (2) are successful , then the pattern itself is instantiated , adding to the context : Fred prompted Sheilato make up her mind  . 
Phrase situation , distinguished from phrase concept , is introduced in our representation , since it help solve three problems : ( a ) in disambiguation it provides a discrimination condition for phrase selection  ,   ( b ) in generation it determines if the phrase is applicable  , and ( c ) in acquisition it allows the incorporation of the input context a span of the phrase  . 
2.2 Phrasal Lexicon
RINA uses a declarative phrasa lexicon which is implemented through GATE\[  Mueller84\] using unification \[ Kay79\] as the grammatic mechanism . Below are some sample phrasal patterns . 
PI : ? x < lay down > < the law >
P2: ? x throw < the book > < at ? y >
These patterns actually stand for the slot fillers given below : 
PI : ( subject ? x ( class person ) )  ( verb ( rootlay )   ( modifier down ) )  ( object ( determiner the ) (noun law ) )
P2: ( subject ? x ( class person ) )  ( verb ( root throw ) )  ( object ? z ( marker at )   ( class person ) ) )   ( object ( determiner the ) (noun book ) ) This notation is described in greater detail in \[   Zernik85b\]  . 
2.3 Phrase Acquisition through Generalization and

Phrases are acquired in a process of hypothesis formation and error correction  . The program generates and refines hypotheses about both the linguistic pattern  , and the conceptual meaning of phrases . For example , in acquiring the phrase carry the water , RINA first uses the phrase already existing in the lexicon  , but it is too general a pattern and does not make sense in the context  . 
? x carry : verb ? z : phys-obj < for ? y >
Clearly , such a syntactic error stems from a conceptual error  . 
Once corrected , the hypothesis : ? x carry : verb < the water > < for ? y > The meaning of a phrase is constructed by identifying salient features in the context  . Such features are given in terms of scripts , relationships , plan/goal situations and emotions . For example , carry the water is given in terms of a gency goal situation  ( ? x executes a plan for ? x ) on the background of rivalry relationship ( ? x and ? y are opponents )  . Only by detecting these elements in the context can the program learn the meaning of the phrase  . 
3. Conceptual Representation
The key for phrase acquisition is appropriate conceptual representation  , which accounts for various aspects of phrase meanings  . 
Consider the phrase to throw the book in the following paragraph :  $2: The famous mobster avoided prosecution for years . Finally they threw the book at him for tax evasion  . 
We analyze here the components in the representation f this phrase  . 
3.1 Scripts
Basically , the figurative phrase depicts the trial script which is given below :  ( a ) The prosecutor says his arguments to the judge ( b ) The defendant says his arguments to the judge ( c ) The judge determines the outcome , either : ( I ) to punish the defendant ( 2 ) not to punish the . defendant This script involves a Judge , a Defendant , and a Prosecutor , and it describes a sequence of events . Within the script , the phrase points to a single event , the decision to punish the de-fendant . However , this event presents only a rough approximation of the real meaning which requires further efinement  . 
( a ) The phrase may be applied in situations that are more general than the trial script itself  . For example: Sl0: When they caught him cheating in an exam for the third time  , the dean of the school decided to throw the book at him  . 
Although the context does not contain the specific trial script  , the social authority which relates the judge and the defendant exists also between the dean and John  . 
( b ) The phrase in $2 asserts not only that the mobster was punished by the judge  , but also that a certain prosecution strategy was applied against him  . 
108 3.2 Specific Plans and Goals
In order to accommodate such knowledge , scripts incorporate specific planning situations . For example , in prosecuting a person , there are three options , a basic rule and two deviations : ( a ) Basically , for each law violation , assign a penalty as prescribed in the book . 
( b ) However , in order to loosen a prescribed penalty , mitigating circumstances may be taken into account  . 
( c ) And on the other hand , in order to toughen a prescribed penalty , additional violations may be thrown in . 
In $2 the phrase conveys the concept hat the mobster is punished for taxevasion since they cannot prosecute him for his more serious crimes  . It is the selection of this particular prosecution plan which is depicted by the phrase  . The phrase representation is given below , phrase pattern ? x:person throw:verb < the book > < at ? y : person > situation  ( $ trial ( prosecution ? x )   ( defendant ? y ) ) concept ( act ( select-plan ( actor prosecution )   ( plan ( ulterior-crime ( crime ? c )   ( crime-of ? y ) ) ) ) )   ( result ( thwart-goal ( goal ? g )   ( goal-of?y ) ) ) where ulterior-crime is the third prosecution plan above  . 
3.3 Relationships
The authority relationship\[Schank 78 , Carbonel 179\] is pervasive in phrase meanings , appearing in many domains : judge-defendant , teacher-student , employer-employee , parent-child , etc . The existence of authority creates certain expect a-tion si if X presents an authority for Y  , then : ( a ) X issues rules which Y has to follow . 
(b ) Y is expected to follow these rules.
(c ) Y is expected to support goals of X .
( d ) X may punish Y if Y violates the rules in ( a )  . 
( e ) X cannot dictate actions of Y ; X can only appeal to Y to act in a certain way . 
( , 9 X can delegate his authority to Z which becomes an authority for Y  . 
In S10 , the dean of the school presents an authority for John  . 
John violated the rules of the school and is punished by the dean  . More phrases involving authority are given by the following examples  . 
5 11: I thought that parking ticket was unfairs oI took it up with the Judge  . 
S 12: My boss wanted us to stay in the office until 9pm every evening to finish the project on time . Everybody was upset , but nobodystood up to the boss . 
5 13: Jenny's father lald down the law : no more late dates  . 
The representation of the phrase take it up with , for example , is given below : phrase pattern ? x : person < take : verb up > ? z : problem < with ? y : person > situation  ( authority ( high ? y )   ( low ? x ) ) concept ( act ( auth-appeal ( actor ? x )   ( to ? y )   ( object ? z ) )  ( purpose ( act ( auth-decree ( actor ? y )   ( to ? x )   ( object ? z ) ) )   ( result ( support-plan ( plan-of ? x ) ) ) ) The underlying situation is an authority relationship between X and Y  . The phrase implies that X appeals to Y so that Y will act in favor of X  . 
3.4 Abstract Planning Situations
General planning situations , such as agency , agreement , goal-conflict and goal-coincidence\[ Wilensky83\] are addressed in the examples below . 
S 1: The Democrats in the house carried the water for
Reagan in his tax-reform bill.
The phrase in S1 is described using both rivalry and agency . 
In contras to expectations stemming from rivalry , the actor serves as an agent in executing his opponent's plans  . The representation f the phrase is given below : phrase pattern ? x : person carry : verb < the water ? z : plan > < for ? y : person > situation  ( rivalry ( actor l ? x )   ( actor 2? y ) ) concept ( agency ( agent ? x )   ( plan ? z )   ( plan-of ? y ) ) Many other phrases describe situations at the abstract goal/plan level  . Consider $14:   S14: I planned to domy CS20 project with Fred . I backed out of it when I heard that he had flunked  CS20 twice in the past . 
Backout of depicts an agreed plan which is cancelled by one party in contradiction to expectations stemming from the agreement  . 
S 15: John's strongest feature in arguing is his a bil it yt of all baek on his quick wit  . 
Fallback on introduces are covery of a goal through an alternative plan  , in spite of a failure of the originally selected plan  . 
5 16: Mystanding in the tennis club deteriorated since I was bogged downwlth  CS20 assignments the whole summer . 
In bogdown , a goal competition over the actor's time exists between a major goal  ( tennis ) and a minor goal ( CS20 )  . The major goal fails due to the efforts invested in the minor goal  . 
109 3.5 Emotions and Attitudes
In text comprehension , emotions\[Dyer 83 ,   Mueller85\] and attitudes are accounted for in two ways : ( a ) they are generated by goal/planning situations , such as goal failure and goal achievement , and ( b ) they generate goals , and influence plan selection . Some examples of phrases involving emotions are given below  . Humiliation is experienced by a person when other people achieve a goal which he falls to achieve  . The phrase in S17 depicts humiliation which is caused when John reminds the speaker of his goal situation :  S17: If ailed my CS20 class . My friend John rubbed nly no seln it by telling me that he got an A +  . 
Resentment is experienced by a person when a certain goal of his is not being satisfied  . This goal situation causes the execution of plans by that person to deteriorate  . The phrase in S18 depict such an attitude : S18: Since clients started to complain about John , his boss asked him if he had a chipon his shoulder  . 
Embarrassment is experienced by a person when his plan failure is revealed to other people  . The phrase in S19 , depicts embarrassment which is caused when a person is prompted to make up his mind between several bad options  . 
5 19: Ted Koppel put his guest on the spot when he asked him if he was ready to denounce appart heid in South Africa  . 
In all the examples above , it is not the emotion itself which is conveyed by the phrase  . Rather , the concept conveys a certain goal situation which causes that emotion  . For example , in $20 ( rubone's nose ) a person does something which causes the speaker to experience humiliation  . 
4. Learning Phrase Meanings
Consider the situation when a new phrase is first encountered by the program : User : The Democrats in the house carried the water for Reagan's tax -reform bill  . 
RINA : They moved watery
User : No . They carried the water for him.
P~\[NA : They helped him pass the bill.
Three sources take pan in forming the new concept , ( a ) the linguistic lues , ( b ) the context , and ( c ) the metaphor . 
4.1 The Context
The context prior to reading the phrase includes two concepts :  ( a ) Reagan has a goal of passing a law . 
( b ) The Democrats are Reagan's rivals-they are expected to thwar this goals  , his legislation in particular . 
These concepts provide the phrase situation which specifies the context required for the application of the phrase  . 
4.2 The Literal Interpretation
The literal interpretation of carried the water as " moved water " does not make sense given the goal/plan situation in the context  . As a result , RINA generates the literal interpretation and awaits confirmation from the user  . If the user repeats the utterance or generates a negation  , then RINA generates a number of utterances , based on the current context , in hypothesizing a novel phrase interpretation . 
4.3 The Metaphor
Since the action of moving water does not make sense literally  , it is examined at the level of plans and goals : Moving water from location A to B is a low-level plan which supports other high-level plans  ( i . e . , using the water in location B ) . 
Thus , at the goal/plan level , the phrase is perceived as : " they executed a low-level plan as his agents "  ( the agency is suggested by the prepositional phrase : for his tax-reform bill  ; i . e . , they did an act . for his goal ) . This is taken as the phrase concept . 
4.4 The Constructed Meaning
The new phrase contains three parts : ( a ) The phrase pattern is extracted from the example sentence : ? x carry : verb < the water > < for ? y  >   ( b ) The phrase situation is extracted from the underlying context :  ( rivalry ( actor l ? x )   ( actor 2? y ) )  ( c ) The phrase concept is taken from the metaphor : ( plan-agency ( actor ? x )   ( plan ? z )   ( plan-of ? y ) ) Thus , the phrase means that in a rivalry situation , an opponent served as an agent in carrying out a plan  . 
5. Future Work and Conclusions
The phrasal approachelevates language processing from interaction among single words to interaction among entire phrases  . Although it increases substantially the size of the lexicon  , this chunking simplifies the complexity of parsing since clauses in the text include fewer modules which interact in fewer ways  . The phrasal approach does reduce the power of the program in handling nonstandard uses of phrases  . For example , consider the situation where a mobster kidnaps a judge  , points the gunathim , and says : No funny book you could throw at me now would do you any good !*  . Our current parser would certainly fail in matching the syntactic pattern and inferring the ironic meaning  . The analysis of such a sentence would require that the program associate the two existing phrases  , the general throw something and the figurative throw the book  , and make inferences about hepun meant by the mobster  . Such example show that it is difficult to capture human behavior through a single parsing paradigm  . 
* This example is attributed to an anonymous referee . 

Parsing text is a futile task unless it addresses the ultimate objective of language processing  , namely mapping text into conceptual representation  . To this end , we have shown the structure of a lexicon which provides the association between syntactic patterns with their semantic oncepts  . However , due to the huge size of the English language , not all phrases can be given at the outset . A parsing program is required to handle unknown phrases as they are encountered in the text  . In RINA we have shown how new phrases can be acquired from examples in context  . 
Phrase acquisition from contextraises questions regarding the volume of knowledge required for language processing  . A phrase such as throw the book requires highly specialized knowledge involving sentencing strategies in court  . Now , this is only one figurative phrase out of many . Thus , in order to handle figurative phrases in general , a program must ultimately have access to all the knowledge of a socially mature person  . 
Fortunately , learning makes this problem more tractible . In the process of phrase acquisition , phrase meaning is elevated from the specific domain in which the phrase has originated to a level of abstract goal situations  . For example , once throw the book is understood as the act of authority-decree  , then knowledge of the trial situation ol onger needs to be accessed  . 
The phrase is well comprehended in other domains : my boss threw the book at me  , his parents threw the book at him , her teacher threw the book at her , etc . At that level , a finite number of goal situations can supporthe application of figurative phrases across a very large number of domains  . 
\ [Becker75\]  \[  Carbonel179\]  \[  Dyer83\]  \[  Fillmore86\]  \[  Kay79\] 

Becker , Joseph D . , " The Phrasal Lexicon , " pp .   70-73 in Proceedings Interdisciplinary Workshop on Theoretical Issues in Natural Language Processing  , Cambridge , 
Massachusets ( June 1975).
Carbonell , J . G . , " Subjective Understanding : Computer Models of Belief Systems  , "
TR-150, Yale , New HavenCT (1979).
Ph.D . Dissertation.
Dyer , Michael G . , In-Depth Understanding : A Computer Model of Integrated Processing for Narrative Comprehension  , 
MIT Press , Cambridge , MA (1983).
Fillmore , C ., P . Kay , and M.O'Connor,
Regularity and Idiomaticity in Grammatical Constructions : The Case of Let alne  , UC Berkeley , Department of Linguistics (1986) . Unpublished Manuscript . 
Kay , Martin , " Functional Grammar , " pp.
1 42-158 in Proceedings 5th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistic Society , 
Berkeley , California (1979).
\ [Mueller84\]  \[  Mueller85\]  \[  Pawley83\]  \[  Schank78\]  \[  Wilensky83\]  \[  Wilensky84\]  \[  Zernik85a  \] \[  Zernik85b  \] \[  Zernik86\] Mueller , E . and U . Zernik , "GATE Reference Manual , " UCLA-AI-84-5 , Computer
Science , AILab (1984).
Mueller , E . and M . Dyer , " Daydreaming in Humans and Computers , " in Proceedings 9th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Los Angeles CA (1985) . 
Pawley , A . and H . Syder , " Two Puzzles for Linguistic Theory : Native like Selection and Native like Fluency  , " in Language and Communication , ed . J . C . Richards R . W . 
Schmidt , Longman , London (1983).
Schank , R . and J . Carbonell , " The Gettys-burg Address : Representing Social and Political Acts  , " TR-127 , Yale University , 
Depatment of Computer Science , New
HavenCT (1978).
Wilensky , Robert , Planning and Understanding , Addison-Wesley , Massachusetts (1983) . 
Wilensky , R . , Y . Arens , and D . Chin , " Talking to UNIX in English : an Overview of UC , " Communications of the
ACM 27(6), pp . 574-593 ( June 1984).
Zernik , Lift and Michael G . Dyer , " Learning Phrases in Context , " in Proceedings
The 3rd Machine Learning Workshop,
New-Brunswick NJ ( June 1985).
Zernik , Uri and Michael G . Dyer , " Towards a Self-Extending Phrasal Lexicon , " in Proceedings 23rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , 
Chicago IL ( July 1985).
Zernik , U . and M . G . Dyer , " Disambiguation and Acquisition using the Phrasal Lexicon  , " in Proceedingsllth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , 
Bonn Germany (1986).

