DONNELLAN'SDISTINCTION
ANDACOMPUTATION ALMODEL OF REFERENCE
Amichai Kronfeld
Artificial Intelligence Center
SRI International
and 333 Ravenswood Avenue
Menlo Park , CA 94025

Center for the Study of
Language and Information
Stanford University
Stanford , CA 94305

In this paper , I describe how Donnellan's distinction between referential and attributive uses of definite descriptions should be represented in a computational model of reference  . After briefly discussing the significance of Donnellan's distinction  , I reinterpretias being three-tiered , relating to object representation , referring intentions , and choice of rehrring expression . 
I then present a cognitive model of referring , the components of which correspond to this analysis  , and discuss the interaction that takes place among those components  . Finally , the implementation f this model , now in progress , is described . 

It is widely acknowledged that Donnellan's distinction  \[7\] between referential and attributive uses of definite descriptions must be taken into account in any theory of reference  . There is not yet agreement , however , as to where the distinction fits in a theoretical model of definite noun phrases  . For Cohen\[4\] , the intention that the hearer identify a referent constitutes a crucial difference between the referential and the attributive  . Barwise and Perry\[3\] , on the other hand , treat their value-loaded/value-free distinction as the central feature of the referential versus the attributive  . However , as pointed out by Grosz et al\[9\] , this analysis ignores an essential aspect of Donnellan's distinction  , namely , the speaker's ability , when using a description referentially , to refer to an object that is independent of the semantic denotation  . 
The problem of determining the correct interpretation of Donnellan's distinction is of considerable importance  . First , Donnellan's distinction seems to violate the principle that reference to physical objects is achieved by virtue of the descriptive content of referring expressions  . This principle can be found practically everywhere -- for example  , in Frege's sense and reference , Rusell's theory of descriptions , and Searle's speech acts . In the referential use of definite descriptions , however , reference seems to be established independently of descriptive content  . If I say ~ The man over there with a glass of white wine is  . . . , ~ I may be successful in my act of referring - - regardless of whether the person over there is a manorawoman  , the glass is full of wine or grape juice , the color of the beverage is white or red , and so on . This , if accepted , has far-reaching consequences for the meaning of referring expressions  , for the logical structure of propositions , and for the theory of propositional attitudes . 
Second , the referential/attributive distinction forces us to reconsider the division between semantics and pragmatics  . It seems that a speaker's intentions in using a referring expression do make a semantic difference  . If I say ~ Smith's murderer is in sane , " meaning that whoever murdered Smith is in sane ( the attributive case )  , what I say is true if and only if the one and only murderer is in sane  . If , on the other hand , my intention is to use the definite description referentially  ( referring to , say , Tom , who is accused of being the culprit ) , what I say is true if and only if T or n is indeed in sane--whether he is the murderer or not  . Unless we understand the interaction between conventional meaning and a speaker's intentions in such cases  , we cannot hope to construct an adequate model of referring and language use in general  . 
Finally , Donnellan's distinction brings to the forethe role of identification in the speech act of referring  . Both Straws on and Searle (\[17 , 16\] ) attempted to analyze referring in terms of identification and identifying descriptions  . But Donnellan has pointed to what seems to be a clear distinction between eases in which identification is required  ( referential use ) and thor in which it is not ( attributive use )  . This calls for a new analysis of the speech act of referring  , one that does not rely on identification as a central concept  , l In this paper , I present a general framework for treating Donnellan's distinction  . In particular , I contend the following : 1 . The apparent simplicity of the referential /attributive distinction masks three aspects of the problem of reference  . 
In a sense , it is not one distinction but three : the first has to do with representations of objects  , the second -- with referring intentions , the third -- with the choice of referring expressions  . 
2 . These three distinctions are independent of one another  , and should be handled separately . Each is relevan to a different component of a plan-based model of reference : the database  , the planner , and the utterance generator , respectively . 
3 . Although the three distinctions are mutually independent  , t These comments , naturally , only touch the surface . For an extensive discussion of the significance of the referential/attributive distinction seem y thesis  \[141  . For a discussion of the role of identification in referring  , see the paper coauthored by Appelt and me on this topic  12\]  . 
186 they of course interact with one another . The notion of a conversationally relevant description provides a basis for explaining how the interaction operates  . 
In the following sections , the three aspects are presented , their interactions discussed , and an initial attemp to achieve an implementation that takes them into account is described  . 

How is the referential to be distinguished from the attributive ? 
Two criteria are usually offered : 1 . Even though , when used attributively , the description must denote the intended referent  , in the referential use this is not necessary . 
2 . In the referential use , the speaker has a particular object in mind , whereas in the attributive he does not . 
These criteria have been taken to be equivalent : any use of a definite description that is referential according to one criterion should also be classified as referential according to the other  ( and similarly for the attributive use )  . However , the equivalence of the two criteria is really an illusion : some uses of definite descriptions are referential according to one criterion  , but attributive according to the other . For example , let us suppose that John , a police investigator , finds Smith's murdered body , and that there are clear fingerprints on the murder weap on  . Now consider John's utterance : " The man whose fingerprints these are  , whoever he is , is in sane . " Note that John intended to speak of Smith's murderer  , and he may very well have been successful in conveying his intended referent  , whether or not the fingerprints indeed belonged to the murderer  . Hence , according to the first criterion , the description , " The man whose fingerprints these are , " was used refer-entially . On the other hand , John did not have any particular person in mind . Hence , according to the second criterion , the description must have been used attributively . 
Many , including Donnellan , regard the second criterion as the more significant one  . But even this criterion is given two conflicting interpretations  . On the one hand , ~ having a particular object in mind " is taken as an epistemic once pt : this view holds that one can have a particular object in mind while referring only if one knows who or what the referent is  . On the other hand , the criterion also receives what I call the modal interpretation  . According to this reading , the referential use of a definite description is simply tantamount to employing the description as arigid designator  . Obviously , the two interpre . 
tations are not equivalent . As Kaplan demonstrates \[ lll , one can use a description as a rigid designator without having any idea who the referent is  . 
Thus , there are three aspects of Dounellan's distinction that should be carefully separated  . These aspects can be represented in terms of three dichotomies : * Having knowledge of an object versus not having such knowledge  ( the epistemie distinction )  . 
, , Using a description as a rigid designator versus using it as a nonrigid one  ( the modal distinction )  . 
s Using a definite description " the ~" to refer to who ever or whatever the ~ may be  , versus using " the ~" to refer to an object z , whether or not z is indeed the ~ ( the speech act distinction )  . 
THREECOMPONENTS
The epistemic , modal , and speech act distinctions correspond to three component shataplan-based model of reference must possess  , z Any such model must contain the following : 1 . A database that includes representations of objects  2  . A planner that construct strategies for carrying out referring intentions  3  . An utterance generator that produces referring expressions Let us call these the database  , the planner , and the utterance-generator , espectively . The next three sections describe a cognitive model of referring that incorporates these components  . 
Object Representations
Objects are represented to agents by terms . These terms are grouped into individuat in 9 sets . An individuating set for an agent S is a maximal set of terms  , all believed by S to be denoting the same object . For example , for John , the police investigator , the set Smith'nmurderer , the man who ~ e fingerprints these are is an individuating set of Smith's murderer  . 
The incredibly complex cluster of internal representations under which  , for instance , John's mother would be represented to him is also an individuating set  , although it would be impractical to enumerate all the terms in this set  . 
An individuating set is grounded if it contains either a perceptual term or a term that is the value of a function whose argument is a perceptual term  . For example , a set containing the description " your father " is grounded  , since it contains a terms that is the result of applying the function FATHER-OF to a perceptual term representing you  . 
It should be emphasized that an individuating set is the result of the speaker's beliefs  , not a mirror of what is actually the case . A speaker may possess two distinct individuating sets that  , unbeknownst to him , determine the same object ( e . g . , Oedipus's representations of his mother and his wife  )  . On the other hand , a speaker may possess an individuating set containing two or more terms that actually denote different objects  . Moreover , the object that an agent believes to be denoted by the terms of some individuating set may not exist in the actual world  . 
Whether or not an agent can have knowledge of the referent  , or know who or what the referent is ( the epistemic distinction , depends on the nature of the relevant individuating set  . 
In a computational model , we can place a number of restrictions on individuating sets to reflect various epistemological intuitions  . For example , we may require that , for an agent to be able to manipulate an object , the relevant individuating set must contain a perceptual term  , or that , for an agent to knowe For a plan-based model of referring  , definite noun phrases , and speech acts in general , see articles by Appelt , Cohen , Cohen and Levesque , Cohen and Perrault (\[1 , 4 ,  . 5,6\]) . 

DISTINCTION INTERPRETATION
Epistemic Type of individuating set
Modal Type of referring intentions
Speech act Choice of definite noun phrase
ICOMPONENT


Utterance generator
Table 1: Donnellan's distinction , its interpretation \[ s ) , and the corresponding computational components . 
who a certain person is ( relative to purpose P ) , the relevant individuating set must include a privileged term determined by P  , or that , for an agent o have knowledge of an object , the relevant individuating set must be grounded , and so on . 
Since individuating sets are part of the database , this is where the epistem lc distinction belongs . 
Referring Intentions
A speaker may have two distinct types of referring intentions  . 
First , he may select a particular term from the relevant indi-viduatlng set  , and intend this term to be recognized by the hearer  . Second , the speaker may intend to refer to the object determined by an individuating set  , without intending any particular term from the set to be part of the proposition he wants to express  . Consider , for example , the following two statements : 1 The author of Othello wrote the best play about jealousy  . 
2Shakespeare was born in Stratford-upon . Avon.
In making both statements , a speaker would normally be referring to Shakespeare  . But note the difference in referring intentions between the two : in the first statement  , hespeaker selects a particular aspect of Shakespeare  , namely , the fact that he is the author of Othello , and intends the hearer to think of Shakespeare in terms of this aspect  . In the second statement , hespeaker does not select any particular aspect of Shakespeare from the relevant individuating set  . Indeed , he may not care at all how the hearer makes the connection between the name " Shakespeare " and the referent  . 
The two types of referring intentions yield two distinct types of propositions  . When the speaker does not intend any par . 
ticular aspect of the referent obe recognized by the hearer  , the proposition expressed in this way is singular  , that is , it does not contain any individual concept of the referent  . Consequently , the referring expression chosen by the speaker ( be it a proper name , a demonstrative , or even a definite description ) is used as a rigid designator , which means that it picks out the same individual in all possible worlds where the referent exists  . On the other hand , if a particular aspect of the referent is meant to be recognized by the hearer  , then the individual concept corresponding to that aspect is part of the proposition expressed and should therefore be taken into account in evaluating the truth value of what is said  . Thus , it is the speaker's referring intentions that determine whether or no the will use a definite description as a rigid designator  ( the modal distinction )  . Since referring intentions are represented in the planner  , this is where the modal distinction belongs . 
Note that the two types of referring intentions can be described as intentions to place constraints on the way the hearer will be thinking of the referent  . In Appelt and Kronfeld\[2\] , this is generalized to other referring intentions -- for example  , the intention that the hearer identify the referent  . 
Referring Expressions
Once the speaker decides what his referring intentions are  , he must choose an appropriate referring expression  . Usually , if a particular aspect of the referent is important  , a suitable definite description is employed ; otherwise a proper name or a demonstrative may be more useful  . However , such a neat correlation between types of referring expressions and referring intentions may not happen in practice  . In any case , as we shall see in the next section , the speaker's choice of a referring expression constitutes an implicit decision as to whether the denotation of the referring expression must coincide with the intended referent  ( the speech act distinction )  . The choice of referring expression is naturally made within the utterance generator  , where the speech act distinction is represented . 
By way of summary , Table I shows how Donnellan's distinction , in its reinterpreted form , is related to a plan-based model of reference . 
RELE VANT DESCRIPTIONS
Kripke and Searle\[12 , 1 5\] explain the referential use as a case in which speaker's reference is distinct from semantic reference  . This leaves an important question unanswered : why must speaker's reference and semantic reference coincide in the attributive use?s Sometimes two definite descriptions are equally useful for identifying the intended referent  , yet cannot be substituted for each other in a speech act  . The description employed , besides being useful for identification , has to be relevant in some other respect . Consider the utterance : " New York needs more policemen  . * Instead of " New York , " one might have used " The largest city in the U . S2 or " The Big Apple , " but " The city hosting the 1986 ACL conference needs more policemen " won't do , even though this description might be as useful in identifying New York as the others  . The latter statement simply conveys an unwarranted implication  . 
As a generalization , we may say that there are two senses in which a definite description might be regarded as relevant  . 
First , it has to be relevant for the purpose of letting the hearer know what the speaker is talking about  .   4 A description that is relevant in this sense may be called functionally relevant  . 
S ~ e on d , as the example above indicates , a description might exhibit a type of relevance that is not merely a referring tool  . 
~ As redefined by the ~ pcechact distinction.
4Whether the hearer is also expected to identify the referent isa seps-r~te issue  . 

A description that is relevant in this noninstrumental sense might be called conversationally relevant  . 
Every use of a definite description for the purpose of reference has to be functionally relevant  . But not every such use has to be conversationally relevant  . If indicating the referent is the only intended purpose  , any other functionally relevant description will do just as well  . 
In other cases , the description is supposed to do more than just point out the intended referent othe hearer  . Consider the following examples : 3 This happy man must have been drinking champagne . 
4 The man who murdered Smith so brutally has to be in sane  . 
B The winner of this race will get $ I0,000.
In these examples , the speaker implicates ( in Grice's sense something that is not part of what he says  . In (3) , it is implicated that the man's happiness is due to his drinking  . In (4) , it is implicated that the main motivation for believing the murderer to be in sane is that he committed such a brutal homicide  . 
The implicature in ( 5 ) is that the only reason for giving the winner $10 , 000 is his victory in a particular ace . In all these cases , what is implicated is some relationship between a specific characteristic of the referent mentioned in the description and whatever is said about that referent  . In such cases , it does matter what description is chosen , since the relevance is both functional and conversational  . No other description , even if it identifies equally well , can be as successful in conveying the intended implicature  . 
The conversationally relevant description may not be mentioned explicitly  , but rather inferred indirectly from the context . In the fingerprint example , the speaker uses the description , The man whose fingerprints these are , but the conversa-tionally relevant description is nevertheless Smith's murderer  . 
Thus , there are three general ways in which a speaker may employ a referring definite description :  1  . If the discourse requires no conversationally relevant description  , any functionally relevant one will do . This covers all standard examples of the referential use  , in which the sole function of the definite description is to indicate an object to the hearer  . 
2 . If a conversationally relevant description is needed  , the speaker may do either of the following : ( a ) Use the description explicitly . This is what is done in standard examples of the attributive use  . 
( b ) Use a different , functionally relevant description . 
The speaker can do so , however , only if the context indicates the aspect of the referent hat corresponds to the conversationally relevant description  . This explains the ambiguity of the fingerprint example  . As the definite description uttered is only functionally relevant  , its use appears to be referential . Yet , unlike the referential case , a conversationally relevant description is implied  . 
In sum , when the description used is conversationally relevant  , the speaker intends that the specific way he chose to do his referring should be taken into account in interpreting the speech act as a whole  . Consequently , if the description fails , so does the entire speech act . On the other hand , if the description is only fimctionally relevant , the context may still supply enough information to identify the intended referent  . 

When a speaker plans a speech act involving reference to an object  , he must determine whether or not a conversationally relevant description is needed  . However , the nature of the in-dividuating set , on the one hand , and constraints on choices of referring expressions  , on the other , may influence the speaker's planning in various ways  . For example , if the individuating set contains only one item , say , the shortest spy , the definite description " the shortests py " must be conversationally relevant  . 
This is true both on formal and pragmatic grounds . From a formal standpoint , the description is conversationally relevant by default : no other functionally relevant description can be substituted because no such description is available  . From a pragmatic standpoint , the description " the shortest spy " is very likely to be conversationally relevant in real discourse  , simply because all we know about the referent is that he is the shortest spy  . Thus , whatever we may have to say about that person is very likely to be related to the few facts contained in the description  . 
Even if it is clear that a conversationally relevza~t description is needed for the speech act to succeed  , constraints on choices of referring expressions may preven the speaker from using this description  . One such constraint results from the need to identify the referent for the hearer  . If the conversationally relevant description is not suited for identification  , a conflict arises . For example , in " John believes Smith's murderer to be in sane , " the speaker may be trying simultaneously to represent the content of John's belief and to identify for the hearer whom the belief is about  . Sometimes it is impossible to accomplish both goals with one and the same description  . 

This paper is part of an extensive analysis of the referen-tial/attributive distinction  , which I use in the construction of a general model of reference  \[13\]  . Myultimate research objective is to provides computational version of the reference model  , then to incorporate it into a general plan-based account of definite and indefinite noun phrases  . An experimental program that implements individuating ~ ets has already been written  . 
Called BER TRAND , this program interprets a small subset of English statements  , and stores the information in its database , which it then uses to answer questions . Individuating sets are represented by an equivalence rlation that holds among referring expressions : two referring expressions  , R1 and R2 , belong to the same individuating set if , according to the information interpreted so far , RI and R2 denote the same object . In con-strueting individuating sets , BERTRAND uses a combination of logical and pragmatic strategies  . The logical strategy exploits the fact that the relation " denote the same object " is symmetric  , transitive , and closed under substitution . Thus , it denote the same object ( belong to the same individuating set ) in one of the following ways : 51 . Directly , when the statement " Rt is Rz ~ ( or " R2 is RI ~ ) has been asserted . 
2 . Recursively using transitivity -- i . e . , when , for a referring expression Rs , it can be shown that Rl and Rs , as well as Rs and Rz , belong to the same individuating set . 
3 . Recursively using substitution -- i . e . , when Rl and Rz are identical , except that Rl contains a referring expression subRlex actly where Rz contains a referring expression subRz  , and 8ubRl and subR2 belong to the same individ-uating set . 
Note that , in the logical strategy , it is tacitly assumed that the relation of denoting the same object always holds between two identical tokens of referring expressions  . This is obviously too strong an assumption for any realistic discourse : for example  , two utterances of " The man " may very well denote two different people  . On the other hand , the logical strategy fails to capture cases in which it is implied  ( although never actually asserted ) that two distinct referring expressions denote the same thing  . For example , " Imet Marvin Maxwelly esterday . 
The man is utterly in sane ! ~
To compensate for these weaknesses , BERTRAND uses a strategy based on Grosz's notion off focus stack "  \[8  , 10\] . In conceptual terms ( and without going into details )  , it works as follows : a stack of individuating sets  , representing objects that are " in focus , " is maintained throughouthe " conversation . " When a new referring expression is interpreted , it is transformed into an open sentence D ( z ) with a single free variable z . s An individuating set I is said to subsume an open sentence S if S can be derived from I  . The first individuating set in the focus stack to subsume D  ( z ) represents the object denoted by the new referring expression  . This solves the aforementioned problems : two occurrences of the same referring expression are considered as denoting the same object only if both are subsumed by the same individuating set in the focus stack  , and two distinct referring expressions may still be considered as denoting the same object even though the logical strategy failed to show this  , provided that both are subsumed by the same individuating set  . 
Once the concept of an individuating set has been implemented  , referring intentions can be represented as intentions to activate appropriate subsets of individuating sets  . For example , the intention to use a conversationally relevant description can be represented as the plan to activate a subset of an individuating set that contains the term associated with the description  . This is the topic of a current joint research effort with D  . Appelt \[2\] to investigate the interaction that takes place between individuating sets and Appelt's four types of SWhat belongs to an individuating set  , of course , is not a referring expression but the logical structure associated with it  . For the sake of simplicity , however , I do not make this distinction here . 
6 For example , ~ The man from the city by the bay ~ is transformed into 
Man(a :) & From(z , Xi ) where Xi is an " internal symbol " associated with Clty  ( y ) &By ( y , Xi ) , and )( j is associated with Bay(z ) . 
concept activation actions\[1\] . The next stage in the development of BERTRAND-- the implementation of referring intentions -- will be based on this research  . In the final stage , individuating sets and referring intentions will be used to generate actual referring expressions  . 

This research was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant  DCR-8407238  . I am very grateful to Doug Appelt and Barbara Grosz for detailed comments on earlier drafts  , as well as to memhers of the Discourse , Intention and Action seminar at the Center for the Study of Language and Information for stimulating discussions of related issues  . 
REFERENCES\[1\]DouglasE . Appelt . Some pragmatic issues in the planning of definite and indefinite noun phrases  . In Proceedings of the ? Srd Annual Meeting , Association for Computational
Linguistics , 1985.
\[2\] Douglas E . Appelt and Amichai Kronfeld . Toward a model of referring and referent identification  . Forthcoming . Submitted to the AAAI convention , Philadelphia,
August 1986.
\[3\] Jon Barwise and John Perry . Situations and Attitudes . 
The Massachsetts Institute of Technology Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts ,  1983 . 
\[4\] Philip R . Cohen . Referring as requesting . In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics , pages 207-211, 1984.
\[5\] Philip R . Cohen and Hector Levesque . Speech acts and the recognition of shared plans . In Proceedings of the Third Biennial Conference , Canadian Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence  ,  1980 . 
\[6\] Philip R . Cohen and C . Raymond Perranlt . Elements of a plan-based theory of speech acts . Cognitive Science , 3:117-212, 1979 . 
\[7\] Kieth S . Donnellan . Reference and definite description . 
Philiosophicai Review , 75:281-304, 1966.
\[8\] Barbara J . Grosz . Focusing and description in natural language dialogues  . In A . Joshi , I . Sag , and B . Webber , editors , Elements of Discourse Understanding , pages 85-105 , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England ,  1980 . 
\[9\] Barbara J . Grosz , A . Joshi , and S . Weinstein . Providing a unified account of definite noun phrases in discourse  . In Proceedings of the Twenty-first Annual Meeting  , pages 44-50 , Association for Computational Linguistics ,  1983 . 
\[10\] Barbara J . Grosz and Candace L . Sidner . Discourse structure and the proper treatment of interruptions  . In Pro-eeedings of the Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial lntellignece  , pages 832-839 ,  1985 . 
190\[11\]David Kaplan . D that . In Peter Cole , editor , Syntaz and Semantics , Volume 9 , Academic Press , New York , New
York , 1978.
\[12\] Saul Kripke . Speake reference and semantic reference . 
In French et al , editor , Contemporary Perspectives in the Philosophy of Language  , University of Minnesota Press , 
Minneapolis , Minnesota , 1977.
\[13\]Amichai Kronfeld . Reference and Denotation : The Descriptive Model . Technical Note 368, SRI International
Artificial Intelligence Center , 1985.
\[14\]Amichai Kronfeld . The Referential Attributive Distinction and the Conceptual-Descriptive Thory of Reference  . 
PhD thesis , University of California , Berkeley ,  1981 . 
\[15\] John Searle . Referential and attributive . In Ezpression and Meaning : Studies in the Theory of Speech Acts  , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England ,  1979 . 
\[16\] John Searle . Speech Acts : An Essay in the Philosophy of Language  . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge,
England , 1969.
\[17\] Peter F . Straws on . On referring . In J . F Rosenberg and C . Travis , editors , Read in 9 in the Philosophy of Language , Prentice Hall , Englewood , New Jersey ,  1971 . 

