BRINGING NATURALL ANGUAGE PROCESSING TO THE MICROCOMPUTER MARKET 
THESTORY OF Q&A
Gary G . Hendrix
Symantec Corporation
10201 Torre Avenue
Cupertino , CA 95014

This is the story of how one of the new
natural language processing products
reached the marketplace . On the surface,
it is the story of one NL researcher-
turned-entre preneur ( yours truly ) and of one product , Q&A . But this is not just my story : It is in microcosm the story of NL emerging from the confines of the academic world  , which in turn is an instance of the old theme " science goes commercial  . "

In September of 1985 , Symante c introduced its first commercial product , Q&A . Q&A is a $299 integrated business-productivity tool for the IBM PC/XT/AT and compatibles  . 
It includes a file management system , a report generator , a word processor , a spelling checker and an " intelligent assistant " or " IA  . " The IAlets users manipulate databases and produce reports by issuing commands or asking questions in English  . 
WHYQ & AISIMPORTANT
Q&A is important to everyone with an interest in natural language processing because it is br inging NL technology to the attention of the world at large  . 
Already Q&A is the most widely used NL systemever developed  , with hundreds of people now using it on a daily basis and thousands using it occasionally  . Here is a small sampling of the reaction : * SoftSel  , the largest US distributor of microcomputer software  , publishes a biweekly " hotlist " ranking its best-selling products  . At the time of this writing , Q&A is number 3 on the list , below onlyd BASEIII and Lotus 123 , with monthly sales in the thousands . Some weeks Q&A has actually been above Lotus on the charts  . 
* Every major publication addressing the
IBM PC market in the U.S ., Europe and
Australia has written about Q&A , and their reviews have consistently been favorable  . Infoworld gave Q&A a 5 disk rating -- its highest . PCWeek has called Q&A the " quint essential management tool  . " In the New York
Times , Q&A received an unprecedented 2-part review , and it took honors as the " software product of the year " in 

In a comprehensive survey of file management systems for IBM PCs  , 
Software Digest , which is widely considered to provide the microcomputer industry's most objective testing  , gave Q&A the highest overall evaluation ever given to any product in any category  . 
WHAT'STHESTORY BEHINDQ&A
Compressing all detail , Q&A is a direct out growth of NL research conducted at SRI 
International in the 1970's.
About the time SRI's LADDER project was winding down  , the Apple Computer appeared on the scene and I got the crazy idea that it would be neat to bui ldaLADDER for the Apple  . The known problems were that there was n't an INTERLISP for the Apple  , LADDER's code was over i00 times larger than the Apple's 48K memory , the Apple was too slow , and LADDER couldn't be ported to new databases relevant to personal use  . 
These turned out to be the easy problems.
Getting Q&A off the ground eventually entailed starting two companies  , coming close to going broke on multiple occasions  , putting a number of personal friends through months or years of stress  , building a new culture for AI/micro/marketing crossfertilization  , and learning about lawyers , finance , product marketing , PCDOS , C , advertising , PR , promotions , sales , and end users . But in the end , the product happened . 

Thousands of people no wown or use NL systems , and hundreds of thousands have read about them . The world of NL has changed , and new opportunities for research and commercialization abound  . 
Acknowledgment : Major contributors to the design /implementation of Q&A's IA were Dan Gordon  , Brett Walter and Denis Coleman . 
