TEMPORAL ONTOLOGYINN A TURALL ANGUAGE

Marc Moen-~and Mark Steedmant
Centre for Cognitive Science * t and Dept . of ATt , Univ . ~Ed in b-rgh,
and Dept . of Computer and Information Science , Univ . of Pennsylvaniat

A semantics of linguisticategories like tense , aspect , and certain temporal adverbials , and a theory of their use in defining the temporal relations of events  , both require a more complex structure on the domain underlying the meaning representations than is commonly assumed  . The paper proposes an ontology based on such notions as causation and consequence  , rather than on purely temporal primitives . We claim that any manageable logic or other formal system for natural language temporal descriptions will have to embody such an ontology  , as will any usable temporal database for knowledge about events which is to be interrogated using natural language  . 
1. Introduction
It has usually been assumed that the semantics of temporal expression si directly related to the linear dimensional con-caption of time familiar from high school physics - that is  , to a model based on the number-line . However , there are good reasons for suspecting that such a conception is not the one that our linguistic a tegories are most directly related to  . 
When-clauses provide an example of the mismatch between linguistic temporal categories and a semantics based on such an assumption  . Consider the following examples : ( 1 ) When they built the 39th Street bridge . . . 
( a ) ... a local architect drew up the plans.
Co ) ... they used the best materials.
( c ) . . . they solved most of their traffic problems . 
To map the temporal relations expressed in these examples onto linear time  , and to try to express the semantics of when in terms of points or intervals  ( poss~ly associated with events )  , would appear to imply either that when is multiply ambiguous  , allowing these points or intervals to be temporally related in at least three different ways  , or that the relation expressed between main and when-clauses is one of " approximate coincidence  "  . However , neither of the setactics explains the pecu -liarity of utterances like the following :  ( 2 )  #When my car broke down , the sunset . 
The oddity of this statement seems to arise because the when-clause predicates something more than mere temporal coincidence  , that is , some contingent relation such as a causa/link between the two events  . Of course , our knowledge of the world does not easily support such a link  . This aspect of the sentence's meaning must stem from the sense-meaning of when  , because parallel utterances using just after , at approxi . 
mate/y the same t/meas , and the like , which predicate purely temporal coincidence , are perfectly felicitous . 
We shall claim that the different emporal relations conveyed in examples  ( 1 ) do not arise from any sense-ambiguity of when , or from any " fuzziness " in the relation that it expresses between the times refered to in the clauses it conjoins  , but from the fact that the meaning of when is not primarily temporal at an  . We shall argue that when has single sense-meaning reflecting its role of establishing a temporal focus  . The apparent diversity of meanings arises from the nature of this referent and the organisation of events and states of affairs in episodic memory under a relation we shall call " contingency "  , a term related to such notions as causality , rather than temporal sequenfiality . This contingent , non-temporal relation also determines the ontology of the elementary propositions denoting events and states of wl~chepisodic memory is composed  , and it is to these that we turn first . 
2. Temporal and Aspectual Categories
Utterances of English sentences can , following Vendler , be classified into temporal/a specmal types on the basis of the tenses  , aspects and adverbials with which they can cooccur  ( cf . 
Dowry , 1979) . This " espocmal type " refers to the relation to other happenings in the discourse that a speaker predicates of the particular happening that heir utterance describes  . Thus an utterance of Harry reached the top is usually typical of what we will call a " culmination " -- informally  , an event which the speaker views as accompanied by a transition to a new state of the world  . This new state we will refer to as the " consequent state " of the event  . Harryhic cupped is not usually viewed by speakers as leading to any specific change of state  . It typifies what we call " point " expressions , that is punctual events whose consequences are not at issue  . 
Similarly , Harry climbed typifies what we will call for obvious reasons a " process ": such utterances describe an event as extended in time but not characterised by any particular conclusion or culmination  . In contrast . Harry climbed to the top typically describes a state of affah ~ that also extends in time but that does have a particular culmination associated with it at which a change of state takes place  . We classify such an utterance as a " culminated process "  . Finally , Harry is at the top typically describes a state . 
Thus we can interpret Vendler assaying that a part of the meaning of any utterance of a sentence is one of a small number of temporal /aapectual profiles distinguished on a small number of dimensions  . They can be summarized as in Figure 1 . 
It is important to be clear that this claim concern sentences used in a conte ~  , sense-mear Lings of sentences or verbs in isolation are usually compatible with several  ( or even all possible ) Vendlerian profiles , as Dowry and Verkuyl have pointed out-hence the frequent use of the word " typically " above  . The details of this taxonomy and the criteria according to which utterances can be categorised are therefore less important than  1 Readen familiar with Vendler's work will realise that we have changed his terminology  . We have done so both for notational convenience and to avoid the considerable confusion that has arisen concerning the precise meaning of the old terms  . 
+ conseq-conseq
EVENTS STATES atomic extended
Harry left early
Atsix , John arrived
Sandrahi . upped
Paul winked
Suebuilt as and castle
The ice melted completely
Max worked in the garden
Alice played the piano
John knows French
He was in the kitchen
Hg~el the observation that each pri~tiventity of a given type  , such as the culmination-event of Har ~' s reaching the top  , carries intimations of other associated events and states  , such as the process by which the culmination was achieved  , and the consequent state that followed . What linguistic devices like tenses , aspects , and temporal/aspectual adverbials appear to do is to transform entities of one type into these other " contingently " related entities  , or to turn them into composites with those related entities  . 
The temporal/aspecmal ontology that underlies these phenomena can be defined in terms of the state-transition network shown in Figure  2  . The semantics of tenses , as-pecmal auxiliaries and temporal adverbials i defined in terms of functions which map categories onto other categories  , and having the important characteristic of " coez ~ ing " their argument to be of the appropriate yp e  . Both the possibilities for coercing an input proposition  , and the possibilities for the output category . 
are defined by the transition et . In addition , the felicity of a particular transition is conditional on support from knowledge and context  . 
Consider , for example , the combination of a culminated process expression with a for-adverbial  , as in (3) Sue played the so nata for a few minutes . 
A for . adverbial coerces its input to be of the process variety  . 
According to the network in Figure 2 , such a transition is feli-ci toos if the culmination point associated with the event of p /ay/ng theso nata is " stripped off '  . As a result , there is no implication in ( 3 ) that Suefln/shed playing the so nata . 
Another routz through the network is possible in order to account for examples with for-adverbials : the culminated process  , like any other event , can be viewed as an unstructured " point " . A transition to turn it into a process then results in an iteration of occurrences at which Sue plays the so nata  . This route through the network seems to be ruled out for  ( 3 ) because it finds no support in our knowledge abouts on a tas and about how long they typically last  . It does result , however , in a likely interpretation for a sentence ~ k e ( 4 ) Sue played the so nata for about eight hours . 
EVENTSJ
I atomic\[extended\[
II
J + conseq . \[~ CULMINATION CULMINATED consequences
IIA ~/ PRoczss.
t1//f_.o.s ., . -/ JJ/t "
POINT .  ,~  .   .  ,  .  _ __~ .   .   .   . ~ PROCESS~--eration ~( in progress)
JJ
I "
Figure 2
Not all a specmal/temporal adverbials expressing a times pan have the same functional type  . /n-adverbials , for example , coerce their input to be a culminated process expression  . This means that combination with a culmination expression requires the transition to be made to the culminated process node  . 
According to the aspe ~ mal network in Figure 2 this transition is a felicitous one ff the context allows a preparatmy process to be associated with the culmination  , as in (5): (5) Laura reached the top in two hours . 
The in-adverbial then defines the length of this preparatory period  . 
Since the arcs describe what the world has to be like for transition sm be made felicitously  , it is obvious that here are expressions that will resist certain changes  . For example , it will be hard to find a context in which an in -adverbial can be combined with a culmination expression Yt ke Harry accider aally spilled his coffee  , since it is hard to imagine a context in which a preparatory process can be associated with an involuntary act  . 
A similar problem arises in connection with the following example :  ( 6 ) John ran in a few minutes The process expression John ran has to be changed into a culminated process expression before combination with the in -adverbial is possible  . One way in which the network in Figure 2 will permi the change from a process to a culminated process is ff the context allows a culmination point m be associated with the process itself  . General world knowledge makes this rather hard for a sentence like John ran  , except in the case where John habitually runs a particular distance  , such as a measured mile . If the in-adverbial had conveyed a specific duration  , such as in four minutes , then the analysis would make sense , as Dowty has poimed out . However , the unspecific in a few minutes continues to resis this interpretation  . 
However , another route is also possible for ( 6 ) : the process of John running can be made into an atomic point ' and then ce into a culmination i its own right  . This culmination can then acquire a preparatory process of its own--which we can think of as preparing to run-  . to become the culminated process which the adverbial requires  . This time , there is no conflict with the content of the adverbial  , so this reading is the most accessible of the two . 
Progressive auxiliaries coerce their input to be a process expression  . The result of the application is a progressive state  , which describes the process as being in progress . This means that , when a culmination expression like reach the top is used with a progressive  , a transition path has to be found from the culmination node to the process node  . According to the transition network , this involves first adding a preparatory process to the culmination  , and then stripping off the culmination point . 
As a result , the progressive sentence only describes the preparation as ongoing and no longer asserts that the original culmination even occurred  . There would be no contradiction in continuing ( 7 ) Harry was reaching the top as in ( 8 ) Harry was roaching the top but he slipped and fell before he got there  . 
? As Moens & Steedman (1986) point out , the fact that according to the present theory , progressive scoerce their input obea process , so that any associated culmination issu'ipped away and no longer conuibutes to truth conditions  , provides a resolution of the " imperfective paradox "  ( Dowry 1979 )  , without appealing to theory-external consmaets like " inertia worlds "  . 
Aporfect , as in ( 9 ) Harry has reached the top refers to the consequent state of the culminetion  . It requires its input category to be either a culmination or a culminated process  , and maps this expression i to its consequent state  . Informal evidence that it does so can be obtained by noticing that perf~ts are in felicitous if the salient consequences are not inforce  . The most obvious of these consequences for ( 9 ) is that Hahn still beat the top , although as usual there are other possibilities . 
Since the transition et work includes loops , it will allow us to define indefinitely complex temporal/aspectoal categories  , like ti ~ one evoked by the following sentence : ( 10 ) It took metwodays to play the " Minute Waltz " in less than sixty seconds for more than an hour  . 
The culminated process expression play the Minute Waltz can combines n ' aightforwardly with the in -adverbial  , indicating how long it takes to reach the culmination point of finishing playing the Mimae Waltz  . Combination with the for . adverbial requires this expression to be mined into a process-the most obvious route through the network being that through the point node  . The resulting culminated process expression describes the iterated process of playing the MinuteWaltz in less than $ ix ~ seconds as lasting for more than an hour  . The expression it took me . . . , finally , is like an in-adverbial in that it is looking for a culminated process expression to combine with  . It finds one in the expression to play the Minute Waltz in less than sixty seconds for more than an hour but combination is hampered by the fact that there is a conflict in the length of time the adverbials describe  . In the case of (10) , the whole culminated process is instead viewed as a culmination i its own right  ( via the path through the point node )  . Knowledge concerning such musical feats then supplies an appropriate preparatory process which we can think of as practicising  . The adverbial/t took metwodays then defines the temporal extent of this prepara-tory process needed to reach the point at which repeatedly playing that piece of musics of ast for such a considerable length of time became a newly acquired skil L This basic framework thus allows for a unified semantics of a wide variety of aspectual dverbials  , the progressive , the perfect , and iterative x pressions in English . It is also used to explain the effect of bare plurals and certain varieties of negation on the overall temporal structure of discourse  ( Moens forthcoming )  . 
All of the permissible transitions between aspectual categories illustrated in Figure  2 appear to be related to a single elemen-tsry contingency-basedvent structure which we call a " nucleus "  . A nucleus is defined as a structure comprising a culmination  , an associated preparatory process , and a conse-quent state , h can be represented ~ . orially as in ~ gure 3 .   2 preparatory process consequent state IIIIII /111111111111111111111111111111111111 
I culmination
Figure 3
Any or all of these elements may be compound : the preparation may consist of a number of discrete steps  , for example the stages of climbing , having lunch or whatever , leading to the culmination of reaching the top . The consequent sate may also be compound . Most importantly , we shall see that it includes the further events , if any , that are in the same sequence of contingently related events as the culmination  . 
Similarly , the culmination may itself be a complex event- such as the entire culminated process of climbing amountain  . 
( In this case , the associated preparatory process and conse -quant state will be quite different ones to those internal to the culminated process itself  . ) The device is intended to embody the proposal that when we hear about an event like climbing a moun~a/ninconjunction with some coercive aspectuzl category which forces it to undergo a transition  , then the alternatives that are available are : a ) to decompose the core event into a nucleus and to make a transition to one of the componants  , such as the prepuratory activity of climbing or to the consequent state of having climbed the mountain  ; or b ) to treat he entire event as a culmination , to c ( m ~ oose it into a nucleus with whatever preparation and consequences the context provides for the activity of climbing amounta in  , and to make the transition to either one of those . 
We further claim that those are the on/y alternatives  . 
The concept of a nucleus not only explains the I ransitions of Figure  2  , but also provides an answer to the question raised in the introduction concerning the apparent vagaries in the meaning of when-clauses  . 
3. When-clauses
The aspects and temporal/a specmal adverbials considered above all act to modify or change the a specmal class of the core proposition  , subject o the limits imposed by the network in Figure  2  , which we claim is in turn determined by the organisation of episodic memory  . However . tenses and certain other varieties of adverbial adjuncts have a rather different character  . Tense is widely regarded as an anaphori category . 
requiring a previously established temporal referent  . The referent for a presentense is usually the time of speec  . ~ but the referent for a past tense must be explicitly established  . 
Such a referent is usually established using a second type of " temporal " adverbial  , such as once upon a time . attireo ' clock last Saturday , while I was cleaning my teeth , or when I woke up this morning . 
Most accounts of the anaphoric nature of tense have invoked Reichenbach's  ( 1947 ) trinity of underlying times , and his concept of the " positional " use of the reference time which he  2 A similar ~ ent structure is proposed by Passonneau  ( 1987 )  . 
called " R " . Under these accounts ( reviewed in Steedman ,  1982) , the adjuncts establish a reference time to which the reference lime of a main clause and subsequent same-tensed clauses may attach or refer  , in much the same way that various species of full noun phrases establish referants for pronouns  . 
However , in one respect , the past tense does not behave like a pronotm . Use of a pronoun such as " she " does not change the referent o which a subsequent use of the same pronoun may refer  , whereas using a past tense may . In the following example . the teml ~ al reference point for sentence ( b ) seems to have moved on from the time established by the adjunct in  ( a ) :  ( II ) a . At exactly five o'clock , Harry walked in . 
b . Hes at down.
This fact has caused theorist such as Dowry (1986) , Hinrichs ( 1984 ) and Partee ( 1984 ) to stipulate that the ref ~ , ~ , ce time autonomously advances during a narrative . However . such as tipulation ( besides creating problems for the theory vis-~i-v /s those narratives where reference time seems not to advance  ) seems to be unnecessmT , since the amount by which it advances still has to be determined by context  . The concept of a nucleus that was invoked above to explain the varieties of a specmal categories offers us exactly what we need to explain both the fact of the advance and its extent  . We simply need to assume that a main clause event such as Harry walked in is interpreted as an entire nucleus  , complete with consequent state , for by definition the consequent sate includes whatever other events were contingent upon Harry walking in  , including whatever he did next . Provided that the context ( or the heerer's assumptions about he world ) suppolls the idea that a subsequent main clause identifies this next contingent event  , then it will provide the temporal referent for that main clause  . 
In its ability to refer to entities that have not been explicitly mentioned  , but whose existence has merely been implied by the presence of an entity that has been mentioned  , tense appears more like a definite NP like the mus/c in the following example than like ap~o  , ~ oun , as Webber (1987) points out . 
(12) I went to a party last night . The music was wonderful . 
A similar move is all that is required to explain the puzzle concerning the apparent ambiguity of when-clauses with which the paper began  . A when-clause behaves rather like one of those phrases that are used to explicitly change topic  , like and your father in the following example from Isard  , (1975): (13) And your father , howishe ? A when-clause introduces a novel temporal referent into focus whose unique identifiability in the bearer's memory is similarly presupposed  . However , again the focussed temporal referent is an entire nucleus  , and again an event main clause can attach itself anywhere within this structure that world knowledge will allow  . For example , consider the example ( 1 ) with which we began ( repeated here ) :  ( 14 ) When they built the 39th Street bridge . . . 
( a ) ... a local architect drew up the plans.
Co ) ... they used the best materials.
( c ) . . . they solved most of their traffic problems . 
Once the core event of the when-clause has been identified in memory  , the hearer has the same two alternatives described before : either it is decomposed into a preparatory process  , a culmination and a consequent state , or the entire event is ueated as itself the culmination of another nucleus  . Either main clause has to be situated somewhere within it-the exact location being determined by knowledge of the entities involved and the episode in question  . So in example ( a ) the entire culminated process of building the bridge becomes a culmination  ( via a path in Figure 2 which passes through the " point " node ) which is associated in a nucleus with prepara -tions for  , and consequences of , the entire business , as in Figure 4: they prepare they have built to build the bridge IIIIIIII  /1111111   1 IIII / // I / // / / / / / / / / / m
I they build the bridge
Figure 4
The drawing up of the plans is then , for reasons to do with knowledge of the world , situated in the preparatory phase . 
In example ( b) , in contrast , the building of the bridge is decomposed into a quite different preparatory process of building  , a quite different culmination of completing the bridge end some consequences which we take to be also subtly distinct f ~ rom those in the previous case  , as in Figure 5 . The use of the best materials i then , as in ( a ) , situated in the preparatory process-but it is a different one this time  . 
they build they have completed the bridge I/I/ // I / // I / / I / / / / / / / / / / : / / / / / / / / / / / 
I they complete the bridge
Figure S
Example ( c ) is like ( a ) in giving rise to the nucleus in Figure 4 , but pragmatics demands that the main clause be situated somewhere in the consequent state of building the bridge  . 
Thus , a main claus event can potentially be situated anywhere along this nucleus  , subject o support f3"om knowledge about the precise events involved , But example (2) is still strange , because it is so hard to think of any relation that is supported in this way:  ( 15 )  #When my car broke down , the sunset The when-claused fines a nucleus , consisting of whatever process we can think of as leading up to the car's break down  , the break down itself and its possible or actual consequences  . It is not clear where along this nucleus the culmination of the sunset could be situated : it is not easy to imagine that it is a functional part of the preparatory process typically associated with a break down  , and it is similarly hard to imagine that it can be a part of the consequent sate  , so undermost imaginable circumstances , the utterancer mains bizarre . 
The constraints when places on possible inteq a ~ etations f the relation between subordinate and main clause are therefore quite strong  . First , general and specific knowledge about he event described in the when-clause has to supporthe association of a complete nucleus with it  . Secondly . world knowledge also has to support the contingency relation between the events in subordinate endmain clause  . As a result , many constructed example sound strange or are considered to be in felicitous  , because too much context has to be imported to make sense of them  . 
In all of the cases discussed so far , the main clause has been an event of some variety  . When the main clause is stative , as in the following examples , the effect is much the same . That is to say , the when-clause establishes a nucleus , end the stative is asserted or ,  -  , ehed wherever world knowledge permits within the nucleus  . The only difference is that statives are by definition unbounded with respect othe reference time that they are predicated of  , endout last it . It follows that they can usually fit in almost anywhere  , nd therefore tend not to coerce the when-clause , or to induce the causal/contingent interpret a -lions that we claim character is othe corresponding sentences with events as main clauses :  ( 16 ) When they built that bridge . . l was still a young lad . 
... my grandfather had been dead for several years.
... my aunt was having an affair with the milkman.
... my father used to plays quash.
However , world knowledge may on occasion constrain the relation of a stative main clause  , and force it to attach to or describe a situation holding over either the preparatory processor the consequent state of the subordinate clause  , as in the following examples ( cf . Smith 1983): (17) When Harry broke Sue'svase, . . . she was in a good mood . 
..1 he was in a bad mood.
4. Towards a Formal Representation
We have argued in this paper that a principled end unified semantics of natural language categories like tense  , aspect and aspectual/temporal adverbials requires an ontology based on contingency rather than temporality  . The notion of " nucleus " plays a crucial role in this ontology  . The process of temporal reference involves reference to the appropriate part of a nucleus  , where appropriatenessia function of the inherent meaning of the core expression  , of the coercive nature of cooccurring linguistic expressions  , end of particular end general knowledge about he area of discourse  . 
The identification f the correct ontology is also a vital preliminary to the construction and management of temporal databases  . Effective exchange of information between people and machinesie asier if the data structures that are used to orgen-ise the information i the machine correspond in a natural way to the conceptual structures people use to organize the same information  . In fact , the penalties for a bad fit between data structures and human concepts are usually crippling for any attempt to provide natural language interfaces for database systems  . Information extracted from natural language text can only be stored to the extent hat it fits the preconceived formats  , usually resulting in loss of information . Conversely . 
such data structures cannot easily be queried using natural language if there is a bad fit between the conceptual structure implicit in the query and the conceptual structure of the database  . 
The " contingency-based " ontology that we are advocating here has a number of implications for the construction admanagement of such temporal databases  . Rather than a homogeneous distinct sequences of causally or otlun ~ vise contingently related sequences of events which we will call " episodes  "  , each leading to the satisfaction of a particular goal or intention  . This partition will quite incidentally define a partial temporal ordering on the events  , but the primary purpose of such sequence simore related to the notion of a plan of action or an explanation of an event's occurrence than to anything to do with time itself  . 
It follows that only events that are conting anfly related necessarily have well defined temporal relations in memory  . 
A first at x empt to investigate this kind of system was reported by Steedman  ( 1982 )  , using a program that verified queries against a database structured according to some of the principles outlined above  . These principles can be described using Kowalski 's event-calculus  ( Kowalski & Sergot 1986 )  . In this f~amework , there are primitives called events , the occurrence of which usually implies the existence of periods of time over which states hold  . In the terms of the present paper , these " events " are either " points " or " culminations "  ( depending on whether they are in fact associated with consequent sates-see section  2  )  . For example , in the world of academic promo-lions which Kowalski and Sea ' got take as an example  , an evant description like John was promoted from the rank of lecturer to the rank of professor is a culmination which implies that there was a period of time  , ended by this event , during which John had the rank of lecturer , and there is a period of time , started by that same event , during which John had the rank of professor . 
The events in the event calculus are given unique identifiers  , but are not necessarily associated with absolute time  . Moreover , they can be partially ordered with respect to each other  , or occur simultaneously . Events themselves may also be described only partially  ;  , later information can be added when it becomes available  . These features , which they share with the corresponding primitives in a number of other formalisms  , such as those of McDermott (1982) , Allen (1984) and Lansky (1986) , an constitute an advance over temporal representation formalisms based on the situation calculus  ( McCarthy & Hayes 1969 ) o Although Kowalski's events are undecomposable points or culminations  , they can be used to describe extended events such as our processes  , in terms of a pair identifying their starting point and to the point at which they stop  ( in the case of processes ) or their culmination ( in the case of culminated processes )  . This means that a process expression like John ran will introduce two events  , one indicating the start of the process and one indicating the endpoint  . Just like the point events considered by Kowalski and Sergot  , these events have certain properties or states associated with them  . The starting-point of the process referred to by uttering John ranmarks the beginning of a progressive state that we refer to when we use a progressive like John is running  , a state which is terminated by the corresponding endpoint event  . 
This duality between events and states ( which was also exploited in Steedman ,  1982) , is very useful for representing the kind of ontology that we have argued natural language categories reflect  . But one shortcoming of Kowalski's event calculus is the absence of other than temporal relations between the events  . The best worked out eventbased model that takes into account causal as well as temporal relations is Lansky's  ( 1986 )  . The representation she presents is based on GEM ( Lamsky & Owieki 1983 )  , a tool for the specification and verification of concurrent programs  . GEM retries events and explicitly represents both their causal and temporal relations  . 
It also provides mechanisms for structuring events into socalled " locations of activity "  , the boundaries on these locations being boundaries of causal access-as in our episodes  . In Lan-sky (1986) , the GEM tool is used to build eventbased knowledge representations for use in planners  . She suggests the use of three accessibility relations : temporal precedence  ( < )  , causality or contingency (@) . and simultaneity ($) . 
These relations have the following properties : < : irreflexive  , antisymmetric , transitive @ : irreflexive , antisymmetric , nlransitive $: reflexive , symmetric , transitive Because we follow Lansky in making the causality/contingency relation@intransitive  , we avoid certain notorious problems in the treatment of when-clauses and per-fects  , which arise because the search for possible consequences of an event has to be restricted to the ftrs ~ event on the chain of contingencies  . Thus , when (18a ) and ( b ) are asserted , it would be wrong to infer ( c ) :  ( 18 )   ( a ) When Johnleft . Suecried ( b ) When Suecried , her mother gotup set ( c ) When John left , Sue's mother gotup set The reason is exactly the same as the reason that it would be wrong to infer that Sue's mother gotup set because John left  , and has nothing to do with the purely temporal relations of these events  . It should also be noted that the notion of causality or contingency used here  ( in line with Lansky's proposals ) is weaker than that used in other representation schemes  ( for example that of McDermott 1982 ) in that causality is here decoupled from eventuality : if an eventA stands in a causal relation to event B  , then an occurrence of A will not automatically lead to an occurrence of B : John laying the foundations of the house is a prereclul Sl to for or enables him to build the walls and roof but does not " cause " it in the more Iraditional sense of the word and doe ~ not automatically or inevitably lead to him building the walls  . 
5. Conclusion
Many of the apparent anomalies and ambiguities that plague current semantic accotmts of temporal expressions in natural language stem from the assumption that a linear model of time is the one that our linguistic ategories are most directly related to  . A more principled semanticsipossible on the assumption that the temporal categories of tense  , aspect , a specmal adverbi-als and of propositions themselves refer to a mental representation of events that is smJcmred on other than purely temporal principles  , and to which the notion of a nucleus or contingently related sequence of preparatory process  , goal event and consequent state is central . 
We see this claim as a logical preliminary to the choice of any particular formal representation  . However , certain properties of the eventbased calculi of Kowalski and Sergot  . and of Lan-sky . seem to offer an appropriate representation for a  3 A Prolog program incorporating the above exmnsion to the event calculus is under construction and will be presented in Moens  ( forthcoming )  . 
semantics of this kind.

We thank Ethel Schuster and Bonnie Lynn Webber for reading and commenting upon drafts  . Parts of the research were supported by : an Edinburgh University Graduate Studentship  ; an ESPRIT grant ( project 393) to CCS , Univ . Edinburgh ; a Sloan Foundation grant to the Cognitive Science Program  , Univ . 
Pennsylvania ; and NSF grant IRI-10413A02 , ARC ) grant DAA6-29-   84K-0061 and DARPA grant N0014-85-K0018 to
CIS , Univ . Pennsylvania.

Allen , L .  (1984) . Towards a general theory of action and time , Artificial Intelligence ,  23 , pp . 123-154 Dowty , D .  (1979) . Word Meaning and Montague Grwnmar . 
Durdrecht " Reidel.
Dowty , D .  (1986) . The effects of a specmal class on the tern-pored structure of discourse  . Linguistics and Philosophy 9, 37-62 Hinrichs " E .   ( 1986 ) Temporal anaphora in discourses of English . Linguistics and Philosophy 9, 63-82 . 
Kowalski , R . & M . Sergot (1986) . A logic-based calculus of events . In New Generation Computing 4, 67-95 . 
Isard , S . D .  (1975) . Changing the context In E . Keenan , ( ed . ) , Formal Semantics of Natural Language , London , Cambridge University Press . 
Lansky , A .  (1986) . A representation f parallel activity based on events  , structure and causality . In Work . shop on Plan . 
ning and Reasoning about Action , Timberline Lodge , 
Mount Hood , Oregon , 1986, 50-86.
Lansky , A . & S . Owicki (1983) . GEM : a tool for conct~ency specification and verification  . In Proceedings of the Second Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distri  . 
buted Computing , August 1983, 198-212.
McCarthy , I . & PJ . Hayes (1969) . Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of artificial intelligence  . In B . 
Meltzer & D . Michie ( eds . ) Machine Intelligence , Volume 4, 463-502 . Edinburgh , Edinburgh University Press . 
McDermott . D .  (1982) . A temporal logic for mesoning about processes and plans  . In Cognitive Science , 6, I01-155 . 
Moens , M . & M . Steedman (1986) . Temporal Information and Natural Language Processing  . Edinburgh Research Papers in Cognitive Science , r\[ , Cenlre for Cognitive Science , University of Edinburgh . 
Moens , M . ( forthcoming ) . Tense , Aspect and Temporal Refer . 
ence . PhD dissertation , University of Edinburgh.
Partee , Barbara H .  (1984) . Nominal and temporal anaphors " Linguistics and Philosophy  ,  7 , pp . PA3-286 . 
Passonnean , Rebecca J .  (1987) . Situations ~ nd intervals , paper to the 25th Annual Conference of the AC~Stanford , July 1987 . 
Reichenbach , H .  (1947) . Elements of Symbolic Logic . New
York , Free Press , 1966.
Schuster , E .  (1986) . Towards a computational model of anaphora in discourse : reference to events and actions  . Tech . 
Relx ~ CIS-MS-86-34, CIS , Univ . of Pennsylvania.
Smith , C .  (1983) . A theory of aspectual choice , Language , 59, pp . 479-501 . 
Steedman , M .  (1982) . Reference to past time . In Speech , Place and Action , R . Jarvella & W . Klein ( eds . ), 125-157 . 
New York : W Hey.
Vendler , Z .  (1967) . Verbs and times . In Linguistics in Philosophy , Z . Vendler , 97-121 . Ithaca . N . Y . : Comell University

Webber , B .  (1987) . The interpretation of tense in discourse . 
Paper to the 25th Annual Conference of the ACL , Stanford , July 1987 . 
