NOWLET'S TALKABOUTNOW :
IDENTIFYING CUEPHRASESINTONATION ALLY
Julia Hirschberg
AT&T Bell Laboratories
Murray Hill , New Jersey 07974
Diane Litman
AT&T Bell Laboratories
Murray Hill , New Jersey 07974

Cue phrases are words and phrases such as now and by the way which may be used to convey explicit information about the structure of a discourse  . However , while cue phrases may convey discourse structure , each may also be used to different effect . The question of how speakers and hearers distinguish between such uses of cue phrases has not been addressed in discourse studies to date  . Based on a study of now in natural recorded discourse  , we propose that cue and non-cue usage can be distinguished intonationally  , on the basis of phrasing and accent . 
I . Introduction
Cue phrases are linguistic expressions -- such as okay  , but , now , anyway , by the way , in any case , that reminds me--which may , instead of making a ' semantic ' ontribution to an utterance  ( i . e . , affecting its truth conditions ) , be used to convey explicit information about the structure of a discourse  \[4\]  ,  \[16\] ,  \[5\] . 1 For example , anyway can indicate a topic return and that reminds me can signal a digres-sion  . The recognition and generation of cue phrases is of considerable interestore search in natural language processing  . The structural information conveyed by these phrases is crucial to tasks such as anaphora resolution  \[6\]  ,  \[5\] ,   \[16\] and the identification of rhetorical relations among portions of a text or discourse  \[11\]  ,  \[8\] ,  \[16\] . It has also been claimed that the incorporation of cue phrases into natural language processing systems helps reduce the complexity of discourse processing  \[21\]  ,  \[4\] ,  \[10\] . 
Despite the recognized importance of cue phrases , many questions about how they are defined both individually and as a class--and how they are to be represented  , generated , and recognized--remain to be examined . For example , in the general case , each lexical item that can serve as a ' cue phrase ' also has an alternate interpretation  .   2 While the ' cue ' interpretation provides explicit  1  . Previous literature has employed the terms ' clue word '  , ' discourse marker ' or ' discourse particle ' for these items  \[16\]  ,  \[4\] ,  \[14\] ,  \[18\] . 
More recently Grosz and Sidner \[5\] have proposed the term cue phrase for these items  , which we will adopt in this paper . 
2 . If ' nonlexical ' items such as uh are classed as cue phrases  , then this generalization may not hold for all cue phrases  . However , information about the structure of a discourse , the ' non-cue ' interpretation provides quite different information  , such as conjunction ( but ) or adverbial modification ( anyway )  . Distinguishing between these two uses is critical to the interpretation of discourse  . In this paper , we address the problem of how this distinction might be made : We propose that  , in speech , this distinction is made intona-tionally . We support our hypothesis by an analysis of cue and non-cue uses of the item now in recorded naturally occurring discourse  . 
In Section 2 we discuss the general problem of distinguishing between cue and non-cue usage and consider possible alternatives to our hypothesis  . In Section 3 we present relevant aspects of the theory of English intonation assumed here for our analysis  \[13\]  ,  \[9\] . Section 4 describes our data , presents the results of our analysis , and along with Section 5 , discusses the implications of our results for the identification of cue phrases in general--both in speech and in written text  . 
2. The Problem
Previous definitions of cue phrases as a class have been extensional and definitions of particular cue phrases procedural  . For example , now signalsa ' push ' or ' pop ' \[5\] of the attentional stack or ' further development ' of a previous context  \[16\]  . Despite some recognition \[5\] that cue phrases are not always employed as cue phrases  , no attempt has been made to discover how'cue ' uses of cue phrases are distinguished from ' non -cue ' uses  . When does now , for example , function as a discourse marker and when is it deictic ? Roughly  , the non-cue or deictic use of now makes refer- ? nce to a span of time which minimally includes the utterance time  . This time span may include little more than moment of utterance  , as in I , or it may be of indeterminate length , as in 2 .   3 even uh appears to have both ' cue ' and ' non -cue ' uses  ; i . e . , it may signal a digression or interruption , or it may simply serve as a pause filler . 
3 . These and other examples are taken from a radio call-in program  , Harry Gross's " Speaking of Your Money "\[15\] . The corpus will be described in more detail in Section  4  . 

Fred : Yeah I think we'll look that up and possibly uh after one of your breaks Harry  . 
Harry : OK we'll take one now . Just hang on Bill and we'll be right back with you  . 

Harry : You know I see more coupons now than I've ever seen before and I'll bet you have too  , In contrast , the cue use of now signals a return to a previous topic  , as in the two examples of now in 3 , or introduces a subtopic , as in 4 . 

Harry : Fred what tayou have to say about this IRA problem ? Fred : Ok  . You seen ow unfortunately Harry as we alluded to earlier when there is a distribution from an IRA that is taxable  . . . discussion of caller's beneficiary status . . . 
Now the the five thousand that you're alluding to uh of the  --4  . 
Doris : I have a couple quick questions about the income tax  . The first one is my husband is retired and on social security and in  '81 he few odd jobs for a frienduharound the property and uh he was reimbursed for that to the tune of about  $640  . Now where would he where would we put that on the form ? While the distinction between cue and non -cue now seems fairly clear in the above examples  , other cases are more difficult . Consider 5: 5 , Ethel : All right I have just retired from a position that I've been in for forty some odd years  . I have -- I earned in 1981 about thirty thousand dollars . Now I have a profit sharing coming to me . My problem is shall I take the ten year averaging . . . 
From the transcription alone , either a cue or a non-cue interpretation is plausible  . The caller might have a profit sharing due her at the moment of utterance  ( non-cue )  . 
Or , she might be using now to mark profit sharing as a subtopic  ( cue ) -- leaving the time of the profit sharing unspecified  . 
How then do hearers distinguish cue from non-cue uses ? One might propose that hearers use tense to delimit cases in which deictic now is vossible  . That is , it would seem reasonable to propose that deictic now occurs only when the verb modified by now  ( or the main verb of the clauses omodified ) is temporally compatible--i . e . , non . past . 
For example , using the past tense in 1 -- we took one now--seems distinctly odd . However , we took one just now is clearly felicitous . So , both cue and non-cue now are possible when the main verb is in the past tense  . As examples 1-3 above illustrate , both are also possible when the main verb is in the present tense  . So , tense is clearly inadequate to distinguish between cue and non-cue uses of now  . 
Another possible diagnostic for non-cue now might be some notion of the general felicity of temporal reference in an utterance -- which might correspond to the felicity of substituting other temporal adverbials for now  . For example , we'll take one in an hour would be felicitous in 1  , as would I see more coupons these days in 2 . Substituting other temporals for now in either example  3   ( To day the the five thousand that you're alluding to  . . . ) or example 4 ( Monday where would he where would we put that on the form ?  ) would be in felicitous . However , this is only a necessary -- but hot a sufficient --test for deictic now  . While a temporal adverbial may be substituted for now in  5   ( e . g . , Today I have a profit sharing coming to me ) , both cue and non-cue interpretations appear equaliy plausible from the transcription  , as noted above . In fact , listeners have no hesitation in labeling this a cue now  . 
A third possibility is that hearers use surface order position to distinguish cue from non-cue uses  . In fact , most systems that generate cue phrases assume a canonical  ( usually first ) position within the clause\[16\] ,  \[21\] . However , without intonational information , surface position may itself be unclear . Consider Example 6:, Evelyn : I see . So in other words I will have to pay the full amount of the uh of the tax now what about Pennsylvania state tax ? Can you give meany information on that ? Although a cue reading is possible  , most readers would assign now a non-cue interpretation if it is associated with the preceding clause  , I will have to pay the full amount of the . . . tax now--but a cue interpretation if it is associated with the succeeding clause  , Now what about Pennsylvania state tax ? . The actual recording of 6 clearly supports the latter interpretation : the strong intonational boundary between tax and now identifies the clausal boundary -- and  , thus , indirectly , the surface position of now within its clause . Similarly , 7 would be ambiguous between a cue reading , Wellnow , you ' vegot another point , and a deictic reading , Well , now you've got another point--without intonational cues : Fred : Youst and up for your rights  . Whatever you give to charity you claim . 
Linda: ( laughs ) I don't want the hassle of an of an Fred:Well now you've got another point and Ithink at at times the service counts on the fact that people don't want the hassle--and may be weas Americans have to stand up a little bit more and claim what's dueus  . 
Here it is clear from the recording that Fred intended the deictic use  . Later , we will present evidence from our corpus that cue now can appear clause-finally  , and non-cue now , clause . initially . So , surface position also appears inadequate to distinguish cue from non-cue now  . 
Finally , hearers might use syntactic information to discriminate between cue and non-cue usage  . At least for now , this seems unlikely . Both cue and non-cue now's are commonly classed as adverbials  . So syntactic category does not differentiate . Furthermore , both can be attached at the sentence level . While non-cue now may also modify VP , it is difficult to imagine attaching cue now at that level--since  , by definition , it can make no ' semantic ' on-tribution to either Sorri P  . However , this potential attachment distinction does not provide a means of distinguishing cue from non -cue now--rather  , attachment possibilities must be based on the prior cue/non-cue distinction  . So , syntactic structure provides no useful clues to the identification of cuevers us non-cue usage in this case  . 
In summary , neither tense , nor the ' appropriateness ' of temporal modification  ( or lack thereof )  , nor surface position , nor syntactic structure provides adequate information for distinguishing between cue and non-cue now  . As we . 
will show in the remainder of this paper , however , intonational features do provide such information . 
3. Phrasing and Accent In English
The importance of intonational information to the communication of discourse structure has been recognized in a variety of studies  \[7\]  ,  \[20\] ,  \[2\] ,  \[17\] ,  \[1\] . However , just which intonational features are important and how they communicate discourse information is not well understood  . 
Under-utilization of objective measures of intonational features in empirical research and the lack of a sufficiently explicit system for intonational description have made it difficult to compare and evaluate specific claims  . For our study we have examined fundamental frequency  ( F0 ) contours produced using an autocorrelation pitch tracker developed by Mark Liberman  . As a system of intona--tional description , we have adopted Pierrehumbert's \[13\] theory of English intonation . 
In Pierrehumbert ' system , intonational contours are described as sequences of low  ( L ) and high ( H ) tones in the F0 ( fundamental frequency ) contour . A wellformed intermediate phrase consists of one or more pitch accents  , which are aligned with stressed syllables ( with alignment indicated by * ) on the basis of the metrical pattern of the text and signify intonational prominence  , and a simple high ( H ) or low ( L ) tone that represents the phrase accent . ? The phrase accent controls the pitch between the last pitch accent of the current intermediate phrase and the beginning of the next--or the end of the utterance  . Intonational phrases are larger phonological units  , composed of one of more intermediate phrases . At the end of an intonational phrase , a boundary tone , which may also be Itor L and is indicated by '% '   , falls exactly at the phrase boundary . So , each intonational phrase ends with a phrase accent and a boundary tone  . 
A phrase'stune , or melody , has as its domain the intonational phrase . It is defined by the sequence of pitch accent(s ) , phrase accent(s ) , and boundary tone of that phrase . For example , an ordinary declarative pattern with a final fall is represented as H*LL % -- that is  , a tune with H*pitch accent(s ) , aL phrase accent , and a L % boundary tone . Consider the pitch track in Figure 1 representing a simple intonational phrase composed of one intermediate phrase and with a typical declarative contour  . 
(For ease of comparison of intonational features here  , we present pitch contours of synthetic speech , produced with the Bell Labs Text-to-Speech System  \[12\]  . The analysis we will present in Section 4 is based upon recorded natural speech . ) p-I a I a ~ i , :-!- : ! i . : ~ i . I .  -~  .   .   .   .   . L _' .  _1
Z . L_~ . oet ? ~ ? k ~ hb . augaau14$I ? 9 lo1 . 1  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . E  ~ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ i . . . ~i ~' L ~"" ;'~-' r . . . . . . . . . . . . . iI .   .   .   .   .   . ~ i . . . . . . . . . . . . . i Figure 1 . A Simple Declarative Contour All the pitch accents in this phrase  , including the nuclear accent--the primary stressed syllable -- are high  ( H * )  . 
The phrase accent is L and the boundary tone is also low  ( L % )  . 
A given sentence may be uttered with considerable variation in phrasing  . For example , in Figure 1 Now let's talk about ' now ' was produced as a single intonational phrase  , whereas in Figure 2 Now is set off as a separate phrase . 
165 ~  .   .   .   .   . _ a .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . I : . , ' x . .:_ . -  . . . . . . . . . .
--~ I . \ I ~'' ~.~'" -~- i\2 ! i
V ! II'*:-~1!
I ~ . ' i ' ~ ~ .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . r : .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . T-r--T .   .   .   .   .   .   . i !-:_1 . . . . . . . . 1 : : " I ' I : I ! L L___ i _=___ \ ]
Figure 2. Two Phrases
The occurrence of phrase accents and boundary tones  , together with other phrase-final characteristics such as pauses and syllable lengthening  , enable us to identify intermediate and intonational phrases in natural as well as in synthetic speech  . 
Pitch accents , peaks or valleys in the F0 contour which fall on the stressed syllables of lexical items  , make those items intonationally prominent . In Figure 3 , the first instance of now has no pitch accent , while the second receives nuclear stress . (In our notation , the absence of a specified accent indicates that a word is not accented  . ) i!i'!i *= I- .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  ; ~ ' ~  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  1 - : - ~-~  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  :  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
i,i \ i-t . i , , , ~ i ~ .   . , , ! t , ?~? I ~, .   , ~  , ~ ~ I " ! i I ! ~ , : o ~ 3   3  '  4 ?$ II ~1o s'liIIii'i:i ! iii'i !:'': i ! ii_i__i  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . L . . . . i
Figure 3. Deaccenting ' Now '
Contrast Figure 3 with Figure 1 . In Figure 3 , the first f0peak occurs on let's ; in Figure 1 , the first peak occurred on now . 
A pitch accent consists either of a singletone or an ordered pair of tones  , such as L*+H . The tone aligned with the stressed syllable is indicated by a star  ( * )  ; thus , in an L*+H accent , the low tone ( L * ) is aligned with the stressed syllable . There are six pitch accants in English : two simple tones -- H and L--and four complex ones -- L*+H  , L+H * , H*+L , and H+L* . The most common accent , H * , comes out as a peak on the accanted syllable ( as , on Now in Figure 1) . L*accants occur much lower in the pitch range than H * and are phonetically realized as local  f0 minima . The acnant on Now in Figure 4 is a L * . 
i 1:; i "? ?', "' l " l ""," ; V ; .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . i- .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
E !?_1

V ' T -" F .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . V ; . . . . . . . . . . . . . . :~  .   .   .   .   .  ~  . .  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . i .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
1_~ .   . 2  .   .   .   .   .   .  ~  .   .   .   .   .   .   . ! Li_', .   .   .   .   .  -  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
Figure 4. Low Accent on ' Now '
The other English accents have two tones . Figure 5 shows a version of the senten ~ in Figures 14 with a L+H*accent on the first instanc , of now . 
iII !: . ,+~,_~,-__~//l .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . :  .  :  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
? " / - , '  . i ; .   .  , '  .   .   .   .   .   .   . \[!::,, ~! ii . 
t k i i .  " ~: />  . i:ie . ,  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . L_l .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
', It . . . . '#!'.; "": i
IL . ~ f , . ? .
ti ....... a......'1i.?Se~iI~e ~
E-I . . . . . . r r , : ! : =__ 2_ _L : t _i .   .   .   . t__"__ . t . ! _ : __  . '  .   .   .   .   .   .  ~  .   .   .   .   . 
Figure 5. An L+H * Accent
Note that there is a peak on now ( H * ) -- as there was in Figure 1 -- but now a striking valley ( L ) occurs just before this peak . 
While other intonational features , such as overall tune or pitch range ,   4 may also provide information about cue phrase interpretation  , so far we have found the most significant results by comparing accent and phrasing for cue and non -cue now  . 
166 4 . Intonational Characteristics of Cue and Non-Cue Now To investigate our hypothesis that cue and non-cue uses of Linguistic expressions can be distinguished intonationally  , we conducted a study of the cue phrase now in recorded natural speech  . Our corpus consisted of recordings of four days of " The Harry Gross Show : Speaking of Your Money "  , recorded during the week of IF ebruary 1982   \[1S  \] . In this Philadelphia radio call-in program , Gross offers financial advice to callers ; for the 3February show , he was joined by an accountant friend , Fred Levy . The four shows provided approximately ten hours of conversation between expert  ( s ) and callers . 
We chose now to begin our study of cue phrases for several reasons  . First , our corpus contained numerous instances of both cue and non-cue now  ( approximately 350 in all )  . In contrast , phrases such as anyway , any how , therefore , moreover , and furthermore appear fewer than ten times each  . A second reason for our choice of now is that now often appears in conjunction with other cue phrases  ( as with well in 7 , or I see now , now another thing , ok now , right now . ) This allows us to study how adjacent cue phrases interact with one another  . Third , now has a number of desirable phonetic characteristics  . As it is monosyllabic , possible variation in stress patterns do not arise to complicate the analysis  . Because it is completely voiced and introduces no segmental effects into the  f0 contour , it is also easier to analyze pitch tracks reliably  . 
4.1 Sample One
Our first sample consisted of 48 occurrences of now--all the instances from two sides of tapes of the show chosen at random  .   5 The 48 tokens were produced by fifteen different speakers  ;  22 . 9% were produced by Harry Gross and 77 . 1% by other speakers . 
We analyzed this data in the following way : First  , three people ( including the authors ) determined by ear whether individual tokens were cue or non-cue  . We then digitized and pitch-tracked the intonational phrase containing each token  , plus ( where same speaker ) the preceding and succeeding intonational phrases  . For this study we compared cue and non-cue uses along several dimensions :  1  ) We examined whether each instance of now was accented and  , if so , noted the type of accent employed . 2) We identified differences in phrasing , including in particular whether or not now represented an entire intermediate or intonational phrase  .  3 ) We noted where now occurred positionally in its intonational and its intermediate phrase  ,  4 . The pitch range of an intonational phrase is deemed by its top line-roughly  , the highest peak in the f0 contour of the phrase - and the speaker's baseline-the lowest point the speake realizes in normal speech  , measured across all utterances . Since the baseline is rarely realized in an utterance  , pitch ranges may be compared for a given speaker by comparing top lines  . 
5 . Two instances were excluded from this sample since the phrasing was unavailable due to hesitation or interruption  . 
whether first , not first but preceded only by other cue phrases , last , or none of these .  4 ) We looked at the type of intonational contour used over the phrase in which now occurred  .  5 ) We noted when now occurred with ( linearly adjacento ) other cue phrases .  6 ) We identified the position of the phrase containing now with respect to speaker turn  . Of these ,   ( 13 ) turned out to distinguish between cue and non-cue now quite reliably  . That is , accent type and phrasing distinguished between all  48 of the tokens in the sample . 
Just over one-third of our sample ( 17 ) were determined to be non-cue and just under two -thirds  ( 31 ) cue . The first striking difference between the two appeared in phrasing  , as illustrated in Table I : Of all the non-cue uses of now  , none appeared as the only item in an intonational or intermediate phrase  , while fully 42 . 0% of cue now represented entire intonational or intermediate phrases  . ( Of these 13 cue now's ,   8 we ret ~ conly lexical item in a full intonational phrase  . ) A X test of association between cue/non-cu ~ status and phrasing shows significance at the  . 005 level ( X~(I)--9 . 8) . 6So , this sample suggests that now's which
INPHRASE WHOLE PHRASE
NON-CUE 1 70
CUE 1813
Table 1 . Phrasing for Cue and Non-Cue Now are set apart as separate intermediate or intonational phrases are very likely to be cue news  . 
Another clear distinction between cue and non-cue now's in this sample emerged when we examined the position of now within its intermediate phrase  . As Table 2 illustrates , all 31 cue now's were ' first ' ( 30 were absolutely first and
FIRSTLASTOTHER
NON-CUE3I04
CUE 3 100
Table 2 . Position within Intermediate Phrase 6 . The ?2 test measures the degree of association between two variables by calculating the probability  (  . p ) that the disparity between expected and actual values in each cell is due to chance  . The value of X2 itself for ( n ) degrees of freedom ( d . f . ) is an overall measure of this disparity . The data show in Table 1 have ?2 = 9 . 8 for 1d . f . , p < . 005 . That is , there is less than a . 5% probability that this apparent association is due to chance  . Roughly . p < . 0 1 or better is generally accepted as indicating ' statistical significance '  ; p > . 01 becomes more controversial ; p > . 0 5 is generally considered not statistically significant  ; and p > . 2 is good indication of a lack of discernible association between two variables  . So , the data in Table 1 , which are significant at the . 001 level , appear very reliably associated . 
167 one followed another cue phrase ) in their phrase . Not only were these first in intermediate phrase -- they were also first in their  ( larger ) intonational phrase . Only three non-cue now's occupied a similar position  ( again , with one following a cue phrase ) . However , I0 non-cue now's (58 . 8% ) were last in their intermediate phrase--and half of these were last in their intonational phrase  . Again , the data show a very strong association (?"(2) = 36 . 0, p < . 001) . So , once intonational phrasing is determined , cue and non-cue now are generally distinguishable by position within the phrase  , with cue now's tending to come first in intonational phrase and non-cue now's last  ( at least in intermediate phrase and often in intonational phrase as well  )  . 
Finally , cue and non-cue occurrences in this sample were distinguishable in terms of presence or absence of pitch accent--and by type of pitch accent  , where accented . 
Because of the large number of possible accent ypes  , and since there are competing reasons to accent or deaccent items  ,   . /we might expect these findings to be less clear than those for phrasing  . In fact , although their interpretation is more complicated  , the results are equally striking . 
The overzll results of the 46 occurrences from this sample for which accentype could be precisely determined  8 are presented in Table 3: 
DEACCENTEDH * or COMPLEXL *
NON-CUE 21 50
CUE 13106
Table 3 . Accenting of Cue and Non-Cue Now Note first that large numbers of cue and non-cue tokens were uttered with a H * or complex accent  ( 34 . 5% of cue and fully 88 . 2% of non-cue ) , The chief similarity here lies in the use of the H * accentype  , with 9 cue uses and 8 non-cue ( and 2 other non-cue tokens are either H * or complex )  . Note also that cue now's were much more likely overall to be deaccented  ( 44 . 8% vs .  13 . 3%) . No non-cue now was uttered with a L * accent-- although  6 cue now's were . 
An even sharper distinction in accentype is found if we separate out those now's which form entire intermediate or intonational phrases from the analysis  . ( Recall that these tokens are all cue uses . These now's were always accented , since each such phrase must contain at least one pitch accent  . ) Of the 11 cue phrases representing entire phrases ( and for which we can distinguish accentype precisely  )  , 9 bore H * accents . This suggests that one similarity between cue and non-cue now  . -the frequent H * accent 7 . Such as , accenting to indicate contrastive stressor dcaccenting to indicate an item is already salient in the discourse  . 
8 .   2 cue now's were either L * or H * with a compressed pitch range--might disappear if we limit our comparison to those now's forming part of larger intonational phrases  . In fact , such is the ease , as illustrated in Table 4:
DEACCENTEDH * or COMPLEXL *
NON-CUE 21 50
CUE 1305
Table 4 . Accenting of Now's in Larger Intonational Phrases A  ain  , these results arc significant at the . 001 level , (2) = 28 . 1 . The great majority (88 . 2% ) of non-cue now's forming part of larger intonational phrases received a H * or complex pitch accent  , while the majority (72 . 2% ) of cue now's forming part of larger intonational phrases were deaccented  . Since all other cue now's forming part of larger intonational phrases received aL* accent  , only two now's forming part of larger intonational phrases are not distinguishable in terms of accent type--the two deac-cented non -cue now's  . So , those cue now's not distinguishable from non-cue by being set a part as separate intonational phrases were generally so distinguishable in terms of accenting  . Since neither of the deaccented non-cue now's appeared at the beginning of an intonational phrase -- as all cue now's did--all of the instances of now in our sample were in fact distinguishable as cue or non-cue in terms of their position in phrase  , phrasal compostion , and accent . 
We also examined whether cue and non-cue now patterned differently in terms of appearance with other cue phrases  , with the following results :
ALONEWITHCUE
NON-CUE 98
CUE 229
Table 5 . Occurrence with Other Cue Phrases Somewhat counterintuitively  , non-cue now tended to appear more frequently than cue now with other cue phrases -- although generally these other cue phrases were also used in their non-cue sense  , e . g . , right now . The co~ecurrence is not , however , statistically significant (?(1) = 1 . 6, p > . 2) , At any rate , the possibility that listeners identify cue now by its cooccurrence with other cue phrases receives no support from our data  . Examination of the intonational contour used with phrases containing cue and non-cue now  , and of the location of these phrases within speaker turn also produced no significant results  . 
So , we were able to hypothesize from this sample that cue and non-cue now are characterizable in the following ways : tends to be accented and to receive a It * or complex pitch accent  . Allnon , cue uses in the sample did form part of larger intonational phrases and all but two  . -which were deaccented -- were accented with a It * or complex accent  . 
Cue now seems to form two classes : One class is generally set apart as a separate intermediate or intonational phrase  . 
Something under half of our sample fell into this category  . 
The other class , which constituted just over half of our sample , forms part of a larger intonational phrase and is either deaccented or uttered with a L*accent  . Both classes share the property of appearing in initial intonational phrase position  . 
In summary , non-cue now is always distinct from cue now in our sample in terms of a combination of accent type  , position in intonational phrase , and overall composition of the intermediate or intonational phrase  . Thus we hypothesize that hearers might be able to distinguish between the two uses of now in three ' ways : by noting whether now formed a separate intermediate  ( or intonational ) phrase , by locating now positionally within its intonational phrase  , and by identifying the presence or absence of a pitch accent on now and the type of such accent where present  . To test the validity of these hypotheses , we replicated our study with a second sample from the same corpus  . 
4.2 Sample Two
For our second sample , we examined the first 52 instances of now taken from another four randomly chosen sides of tapes  .   9 This sample included tokens from fifteen speakers  , with exactly half produced by the host and half by others  . I0 This time , six people ( including the authors ) determined whether instances were cue or non-cue before we analyzed the intonational features  . We next examined phrasing and accent used with these tokens to test the hypotheses derived from our first sample  . 
Again , just over one third of our sample ( 20 ) were determined to be non-cue and just under two -thirds  ( 32 ) cue . 
The striking differences in phrasing noted between cue and non-cue now in sample one were again present in sample two : Again  , around 40% ( 13 ) of cue now's formed separate intermediate ( 8 ) or intonational ( 5 ) phrases ; only one of the 20 non-cue now's formed a separate intermediate phrase and none a separate intonational phrase  . These results were significant at the . 0 05 level--again strong evidence of association between cue/non-cue status and phrasal composition  . When we tested position of now within its intonational phrase in sample two  , we again found that cue now generally began the intonational phrase : All but one cue now  ( this end edits phrase ) began 9 . We excluded 2 tokens from these tapes because of lack of available information about phrasing or accent and  5 others because our informants were unable to decide whether the now was cue or non-cue  . 
10. We speak to this issue below.
its phrase ; again , most (60%) non-cue now's came last in phrase , with two first . These results were significant at the . 001 level . 
Finally , our hypotheses about accentype were also borne out by our second study : The division of all cue and non-cue now's by accentype appears even more pronounced in the second study : Of  20 non-cue now's ,   85% of non-cue were H * or complex and the rest de accented  ; while of 31 cue now's ,  58 . 1% were deaccented , 19 . 4% H * or complex , and 22 . 6% L * . So , while non-cue now's are almost identical to those in the first sample  , cue now's are more distinguished here from non - cue  . When instances of now forming entire intermediate or intonational phrases are removed  . from the second sample , the accenting of cue and non-cue now is even more distinct : All cue now's forming part of a larger phrase are deaccented  , while only 15 . 8% of non-cue now are ; the rest of the non-cue now's receive a H * or complex accent  ( p < . 001) . So , our second sample confirmed our hypotheses that cue and non-cue now can be differentiated intonationally in terms of position within intonational phrase  , composition of intermediate or intonational phrase  , and choice of accent . 
4.3 Speaker Independence
Although our second sample did confirm our initial hypotheses  , the preponderance of tokens in both samples from one  ( professional ) speaker might well be of concern . 
To test this , we compared characteristics of phrasing and accent for host and non-host data over the combined samples  ( n = lO0 )  . The results showed no significant differences between host and caller tokens in terms of the hypotheses proposed from our first sample and confirmed by our second : First  , host ( n = 37 ) and callers ( n = 63 ) produced cue and non-cue tokens in roughly similar proportions --  40  . 5% non-cue for the host and 34 . 9% for his callers ( p > . 5) . Similarly , there was no distinction between host and non -host data in terms of choice of accentype  , or accenting vs . deaccenting ( p > . I ) . Our hypothesis about the significance of position within intonational phrase holds for both host and non-host data with significance at the  . 001 level in each case . However , intendency to set cue now a part as a separate intonational or intermediate phrase  , there was an interesting distinction between host and caller : While callers tended to choose from among the two options for cue now in almost equal numbers  ( 48 . 8% of their cue now's are separate phrases ) , the host chose this option only 27 . 3% of the time . While analysis of data for callers and for all speaker shows that the relationship between cue use and separate phrase is significant at the  . 001 level , this relationship is not significant for the host data  . However , althoughost and caller data differ in the proportion of occurrences of the two classes of cue now which emerge from our data as a whole  , the existence of the classes themselves are confirmed  . Where the host did not produce cue now's set a part as separate intonational or intermediate phrases  , he always produced cue now's which were de accented or accented with a L*accent  . So , while individual speakers appear to choose from among the same limited number of options  . In sum , the hypotheses proposed on the basis of our first sample are borne out by our analysis of the second -- and remain significant even when we eliminate the host from our sample  . 
4 . 4 Distinguishing Cue and Non-Cue Usage in Text Our conclusion from this study that intonational features play a crucial role in the distinction between cue and non-cue usage in speech clearly poses problems for text  . Do readers use strategies different from hearers to make this distinction  , and , ff so , what might they be ? Are there perhaps orthographic correlates of the intonational features which we have found to be important in speech ? As a first step toward resolving these questions  , we examined the orthographic features of the transcripts of our corpus  ( which were prepared without particular consideration of intonational features  ) and made a preliminary examination of two sets of typescript interactions  . 
We examined transcriptions of all tokens of now in both our samples to determine whether phrasing was indicated orthographica Uy  . IIOf all those instances of now ( n--60 ) that were absolutely first in their intonational phrase  ,  56 . 7% (34) were preceded by punctuation -- a comma , dash , or end punctuation .  28 . 3% (17) were first in speaker turn , and thus othographica Uy'marked'by indication of speaker name  . It should be noted that these units so distinguished were not necessarily syntactically wellformed units  . So , in 85% (51) of cases , first position in intonational phrase was marked in the transcription orthographically  . No now's that were not absolutely first in . 
their intonational phrase ( in particular , none that were merely first in intermediate phrase  ) were so marked . Of those 23 now's coming last in an intermediate or intonational phrase  , however , only 60 . 9%  ( 14 ) are immediately followed by a similar orthographic clue  . Finally , of the 13 instances of now which formed separate intonational phrases  , only 2 were so marked orthographically -- by being both preceded and followed by some punctuation  . 
None of the now's forming only complete intermediate phrases were so marked  . 
These findings suggest hat only the intonational feature ' first in intonational phrase ' has any clear orthographic correlate  . However , since this feature does characterize 90 . 1% of the 63 cue now's in our spoken data ( merging both samples ) -- and since 85 . 0% of these cue now's are also orthographically marked for position as well  ( so that 80 . 1% of cue now's can be orthographically distinguished  ) -- it seems that this correlation between intonation and orthography may be a useful one to pursue  . It is also possible that a perusal of text , rather than transcribed speech , might indicate more orthographic lues to cue/non -cue disambiguation  . We are currently examining two sets of 11 . No instances of capitalization or other othographic marking of nuclear stress appear in any of the transcripts  . 
typescripts 12 of task-oriented text interactions.
5. Conclusions
Our study of the cue phrase now strongly suggests that speakers and hearers can distinguish between cue and non-cue uses of cue phrases intonation a Uy  , by making or noting differences in accent and phrasing  . Cue and non-cue now in our samples are reliably distinguished in terms of whether now forms a separate intermediate or intonational phrase  , whether it occurs first in its intonational phrase  , and whether it is accented or not--and , if accented , the type of accent it bears . In the absence of a kernate known means of distinction between cue and non-cue use  , we propose that speakers and hearers do differentiate intonationally  . Our next step is to extend our study to other cue phrases  , including anywm ) , well , first , and right . We also plan to examine the relationship between cue usage and pitch range manipulation  \[7\]  , another indicator of discourse structure . The goal of our research is both to provide new sources of linguistic information for work in plan inference and discourse understanding  , and to permit more sophisticated use of intonational variation in synthetic speech  . 

Thanks to Janet Pierrchumbert and Janvan Santen for help in data analysis  , to Don Hindle , Mats Rooth , and Kim Silverman for providing judgements , and to David Etherington , Osamu Fujimura , Brad Goodman , Kathy McCoy , Martha Pollack , and the ACL reviewers for their helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper  . 
12 . Ethel Schuster's transcripts of students being tutored in EMACS  \[19\] and transcripts of people assembling a water pump  13\]   1  . Brazil , D . , Coulthard , M . , and Johns , C . 
Discourse intonation and language teaching . Longman , London , 1980 . 
2 . Butterworth , B . Hesitation and semantic planning in speech . Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 4(1975) ,  75-87 . 
3 . Cohen , P . , Fertig , S . , and Start , K . Dependencies of discourse structure on the modality of communication : telephone vs  . telety p e . In Proceedings of the ACL , ACL , Toronto ,  1982 , pp .  2835 . 
4 . Cohen , R . A computational theory of the function of clue words in argument understanding  . In Proceedings of COLING 84 , COLING , Stanford ,  1984 , pp .  251-255 . 
5 . Grosz , B . and Sidner , C . Attention , intentions , and the structure of discourse . Computational
Linguistics 12, 3(1986), 175-204.
6 . Grosz , B . J . The Representation and use of focus in dialogue understanding  . 151, SRI International , 1977 . University of California at Berkeley PhD

7 . Hirschberg , L and Pierrehumbert , J . The intonational structuring of discourse . In Proceedings of the 24:h Annual Meeting , Association for Computational Linguistics , New York ,  1986 , pp .  136-1?4 . 
8 . Hobbs , J . Coherence and coreference . Cognitive
Science 3, 1(1979), 67-90.
9 . Liberman , M . and Pierrehumbert , J . Intonational invariants under changes in pitch range and length  . 
In Language sound structure , M . Aronoff and R.
Oehrle , Eds . MIT Press , Cambridge , 1984.
10 . Litman , D . and Allen , J . A Plan recognition . 
model for subdialogues in conversation . Cognitive
Science 11(1987), 163-200.
11 . Mann , W . C . and Thompson , S . A . Relational Pro-positions in Discourse . ISI/RR-83-115, ISI/USC,
November 1983.
12 . 0 live , LP . and Liberman , M . Y . Text to speech -- An overview . Journal of the Acoustic Society of America , Suppl . 178, Fall (1985), s6 . 
13 . Pierrehumbert , I . B . The phonology and phonetics of English intonation  . PhD Thesis , Massachusetts
Institute of Technology , 1980.
14 . Polanyi , L . and Scha , R . A Syntactic approach to discourse semantics . In Proceedings of COLING84,
COLING , Stanford , 1984, pp . 413-419.
15 . Pollack , M . E . , Hirschberg , J . , and Webber , B . 
User Participation in the Reasoning Processes of Expert Systems  . MS-CIS-82-9, University of Pennsylvania , 1982 . A shorter version appears in the AAAI Proceedings  ,  1982 . 
16 . Reichman , R . Getting computers to talk like you and me : discourse context  , focus , and semantics . 
MIT Press , Cambridge MA , 1985.
17 . Schlegoff , E . A . The relevance of repair to syntax-for -conversation  . In Syntax and semantics , 12: Discourse and syntax , T . Givon , Ed . Academic,
New York , 1979, pp . 261-288.
18 . Schourup , L . Common discourse particles in English conversation  . Garland , New York , 1985 . 
19 . Schuster , E . Explaining and Expounding . MS-CIS-82-49, University of Pennsylvania , 1982 . 
20 . Silverman , K . Natural prosody for synthetic speech . PhD Thesis , Cambridge University , 1987 . 
21 . Zukerman , I . and Pearl , J . Comprehension-driven generation of recta -technical utterances in math tutoring  . In Proceedings of the 5th National Conference , AAAI86 , Philadelphia ,  1986 , pp .  606-611 . 


