EXPERIENCES WITH ANON-LINE TRANS LATING
DIAL OGUE SYSTEM
Seiji MHKE , Koichi HASEBE , Harold SOMERS , Shinya AMANO
Research and Development Center
Toshiba Corporation
1, Komukai Toshiba-cho , Saiwai-ku
Kawasaki-City , Kanagawa , 210 Japan

An English-Japanese bidirectional machine translation system was connected to a keyboard conversation function on a workstation  , and tested via a satellite link with users in Japan and Switzerland  . The setup is described , and some informal observations on the nature of the bilingual dialogues reported  . 

We have been developing an English-Japanese bidirectional machine translation system implemented on a workstation  ( Amano 1986 , Amano et a/ .  1987) . The system , which is interactive and designed for use by a translator  , normally runs in an interactive mode , and includes a number of special bilingual editing functions  . We recently realized a realtime online communication system with an automatic translation function by combining a non -imeractiversion of our Machine Translation system with the keyboard conversation function just like talk in UNIX **  . Using this system , bilingual conversations were held between members of our laboratory in Japan and visitors to the  5th World Telecommunications Exhibition Tele-corn 87  , organized by the International Telecommunication Union  , held in Geneva from 20th to 27th October 1987 . 
In the fh-st part of this paper , we discuss in detail the configuration of this system  , and give some indications of its performance . In the second part , we report informally on what for us was an interesting aspect of the experiment  , namely the nature of the dialogues held using the system  . In * the Centre for Computational Linguistics , University of Manchester Institute of Science and
Technology , England ** UNIX is a trademark of AT&TBell Laboratories  . 
particular we were struck by the amount of meta -dialogue  , i . e . dialogue discussing the previous interchanges : ince contributions to the conversation were being translated  , this metadialogue posed certain problems which we think are of general interest  . In future systems of a similar nature , we feel there is a need for users to be briefly trained in certain conventions regarding metadialogue  , and typical system translation errors . Furthermore , an environment which minimizes such errors is desirable and the system must be ' tuned'to make translations appropriate to conversation  . 
SYSTEMCONFIGURATION
A general idea of the system is illustrated in Figure  1  . Workstations were situated in Japan and Switzerland  , and linked by a conventional satellite telephone connection  . The work stations at either end were AS3260C machines . Running UNIX , they supporthe Toshiba Machine Translation system AS-TRANSAC  . On this occasion , the Machine Translation capability was installed only at the Japanesend  , though in practice both terminals could run AS -TRANSAC  . 
The work station screens are divided into three windows  , as shown in Figure 2 , not unlike in the normal version of UNIX's talk . The top window shows the user's dialogue , the middle window the correspondenfs replies . The important difference is that both sides of the dialogue are displayed in the language appropriate to the location of the terminal  . However , in a third small window , a workspace at the bottom of the screen , the raw input is also displayed .   ( This access to the English input at the Japanese n d is significant in the case of Japanese users having some knowledge of English  , and of course vice versaif appropriate . ) The bottom window also served the purpose of indicating to the users that their conversation partners were transmitting  . 



KEY OOARO $ svalze ~
Figure 1 . General Setuptello , Takeda . My name is suzanne . 
\[ livein geneva , but I come froe California.
/es,~t ~ henI~as12 ~ arsold.
/ery interesting , Quick , and useful ! ~ ovmany languages do yous paak , Takeda?rhetisok . \]=-__'L .  ,  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  - - : _  . _-'- II
MY name is Takeda.
Please tell me your name.
Where do YOU live ?\] see.
Have you visited Japan ?
Please tell me the impression of this machir
Thank you.
I can speak only Japanese.
IS\[l\[liil~:SUZLHIII,C't,~qVI
I 1Ill = illIil\]lll ' ,   ,   , i ~ ilBIgIIIl~i \]
Switzerland / ~- , Tal<eclao ~ o ) ~ l : suzanne ~ o ~ v , , - - - - b~ , b/~'~J2~'~'~o ~ ok~1"o
That is ok,
Figure 2. Screen Display
Japan the Japanese end , the user inputs Japanese at the keyboard , which is displayed in the upper window of the workstation screen  . The input is passed to the translation system and the English output  , along with the original input is then transmitted via telecommunications liks  ( KDD's Venus-P and the Swiss PTT's Telepac in this case  ) to Switzerland . There it is processed by the keyboard conversation function  , which displays the original input in the workspace at the bottom of the screen  , and the translated message in the middle window on the screen  . The setup at the Swissend is similar to that at the Japanese end  , with the important exception that only the original input message is transmitted  , since the translation will take place at the receiving end  . 
TRANS LATION METHOD
An input sentence is translated by morphological analyzer  , dictionary lookup module , parser , semantic analyzer , and target sentence generator . 
Introducing a fullfledged semantic analyzer conflicts with avoiding increases in processing time and memory use  . To resolve this conflict , a Lexical Transition Network Grammar ( LTNG ) has been developed for this system . 
LTNG provides a semantic framework for an MT system  , at the same time satisfying processing time and memory requirements  . Its main role is to separate parsing from semantic analysis  , i . e . , to make these processes independent of each other  . In LTNG , parsing includes no semantic analysis . Any ambiguities in an input sentence remain in the syntactic structure of the sentence until processed by the semantic analyzer  . Semantic analysis proceeds according to a lexical grammar consisting of rules for converting syntactic structures into semantic structures  . These rules are specific to words in a pre -eompiled lexicon  . The lexicon consists of one hundred thousand entries for both English and 

SYSTEM PER FOR MANCE
Once the connection has been established , conversation proceeds as in UNIX's talk . An important feature of the function is that conversers do not have to take turns or wait for each other to finish typing before replying  , unlike with write . 
This has a significant effect on conversational strategy  , and occasionally leads to disjointed conversations  , both in monolingual and bilingual dialogues . For example , a user might start to reply to a message the content of which can be predicted after the first few words are typed in  ; or one user might start to change the topic of conversation while the other is still typing a reply  . 
Transmission of input via the satellite was generally fast enough not to be a problem : the real bottleneck was the physical act of input  . Novice users do not attain high speed or accuracy  , a problem exacerbated at the Swiss end by a slow screene cho  . But the problem is even greater for Japanese input : users typed either in romaji  ( i . e . using a standard transcription into the Roman alphabet  ) or in hiragana ( i . e . using Japanese-syllable values for the keys ) . In either case , conversion into kanji ( Chinese characters ) is necessary ( see Kawada et al . 1979 and Mori et al 1983 on kana . to-kanji conversion ) ; and this conversion is needed for between a third and a half of the input  , on average ( el . Hayashi 1982:211) . Because of the large hum-
AS3260 C
E2 conversation I_~function
El .,, r2.,E2

Telep ~" J2, E2
KDDE 2
Venus-PJr 3260 C\
I conversation function translation system

Figure 3. Configuration
Japan down the speed of input considerably . For example , even for professional typists , an input speed of 100 characters ( including conversions ) per minute is considered reasonable ( comparexpected speeds of up to 100 words/minute for English typing )  . It is of interest onote that this kana-to-kanji conversion  , which is accepted as a normal part of Japanese word-processor usage  , is in fact a natural form of pre-editing , given that it serves as a partial disambiguation f the input  . 
On the other hand , slow typing speeds are also encountered for English input  , one side-effect of which is the use of abbreviations and shorthand  . 
In fact , we did not encounter this phenomenon i Geneva , though in practice sessions ( with native English speakers ) in Japan , this had been quite common . Examples included contractions ( e . g . 
pls for please, . u for you , cn for can ) , omissions of apostrophes ( e . g . cant , wont , dont ) and non-capitalization ( e . g . i , tokyo , jal ) . 
The translation time itself did not cause significant delays compared to the input time  , thanks to a very fast parsing algorithm , which is described elsewhere ( Nogami et al 1988) . Input sentences were typically rather short ( English five to ten words , Japanese around 20 characters) , and translation was generally about 0 . 7 seconds per word (5000 words/hour ) . Given users ' typing speed and the knowledge that the dialogue was being transmitted halfway around the world  , what would , under other circumstances , be an unacceptably long delay of about 15 seconds ( for translation and transmission ) was generally quite tolerable , because users could observe in the third window that the correspondent was inputting something  , even if it could not read . 
TRANS LATION QUALITY
This environment was a good practical test of our Machine Translation system  , given that many of the users had little or no knowledge of the target language : the effectiveness of the translation could be judged by the extent o which communication was possible  . Having said this , it should also be remarked that the JapaneseEnglish half of the bilingual translation system is still in the experimental stage and so translations in this direction were not always of a quality comparable to those in the other direction  . To offset this , the users at the Japanese end , who were mainly researchers at our laboratory and therefore familiar with some of the problems of Machine Translation  , generally tried to avoid using difficult constructions  , and tried to ' assist ' the system in some other ways  , notably by including subject and object pronouns which might otherwise have been omitted in more natural language  . 
We recognized that the translation of certain phrases in the context of a dialogue might be different from their translation under normal circumstances  . For example , Engfish I see should be translated as naruho do rather than watashigamiru  , Japanese wakarimashita should be I understand rather than I have understood  , and so on . 
Nevertheless , the variety of such conversational fillers is so wide that we inevitably could not for esee them all  . 
The English-Japanese translation was of a high quality  , except of course where the users-being in experienced and often nonnative speakers of English-n~detyping mistakes  , e . g . ( I ) . (In these and subsequent examples , E : indicates English input , J:Japanese input , and T : translation . Translations into Japanese are not shown . 
Typing errors and mistranslations are of course reproduced from the original transmission  . )( la ) E : this moming i came frost . galle to vizite the exosition . 
E : it is v wery in yteresting to see so many apparates here  . 
(lb ) E : ( lc)E:


Iarderd " today's menu'.
i would go to like a girl.
b~9"~-?A,o
T : I don't understand.
to 1 ike~j : fSJ'C"~';~o
T : What is to like ?
These were sometimes compounded by the delay in screene choof input characters  , as in example (2) . 
(2)E : Sometimes , I chanteh the topic , suddenly . 
E : I change teh topic.
J : ~ ~ ~ o
T : I understand.
E : I had many mistakes.
J : ~ b~~:I?~-Cv-,'?~o
T : A reyoutired ?
E : A little.
E : But the main reason is the delay fo dispaying.
E : But the main reason is the delay of display.

Failure to identify proper names or acronyms often led to errors  ( by the system ) or misunderstandings ( by the correspondent )  , as in (3a ) , especially when the form not to be translated happens to be identical to a known word  , as in (3b ) . In (3b ) , ' gomen nasai'means in Japanese that I'm sorry  . 
(3a ) E : larsengvall.
J : 1atsengva 1lhtfa J "" O3'-~0
T : What is larsengvall ?
E : this is my name.
(3b )\ [ having been asked if he knows

E : How about gomen nasai ?
T :&'?,, t:5Ir__Ic.-9v-,-C~<_
Jk_na_sai.
This was avoided on the JapaneseEnglishide where proper names were typed in romaji  ( 4 )  . 
(4) J : ~ I , ?~--~ I ~ Nogami " C'"J-o
T : My name is Nogami.
As with any system , there were a number of occasions when the translation was too literal  , though even these were often successfully understood  ( 5 )  . 
(5) E :

Do you want something to drink ? ~ o
T : Yes.
E : What drink do you want ?
J : ~ w=--e--~JJC ~.3. h:w,
T : I want to drink awarm coffee.
E : warm coffee ?
E : Not a hot one ?
J : , , ~, v ,= -- e - -' e3"o
T : It is a hot coffee.
One problem was that the system must always give some output  , even when it cannot analyse the input correcdy : in this environment failure to give some result is simply unacceptable  . However , this is difficult when the input contains an unknown word  , especially when the source language is Japanese and the unknown word is transmitted as a kanji  . Our example ( 6 ) nevertheless shows how a cooperative user will make the most of the output  . Here , the non-translation of tsukima e ( fi \] ~ ) is compounded by its mistranslation as a prepositional object  . The first Japanese sentence said that I married two months ago  . But the English correspondent imagines the untranslated kanji might mean ' wives '!  ( 6 ) J : ~/ , t-J:27 J~E~L too
T : I married to 2~~-~\].
E : are married to 2 what ???.
J : ~-~? 6~t c ~ l.f co
T : I married in this year June.
E : now i under stand.
E : i thought you married 2 women.
In the reverse direction , the problem is less acute , since most Japanese users can at least read Roman characters  , even if they do not understand them ( 7 ) : this led in this case to an interesting metadialogue  . Again , the English user was cooperative , and rephrased what he wanted to say in a way that the system could translate correcdy  . 
(7 ) E : can you give meacrash course in japanese ? . 
J : crash course ~ f ~' O ~ ~ o
T : What is crash course ?
E : it means learn much in a very short time.
Mistransladons were a major source of metadi -alogue  , to be discussed below , though see particularly example (10) . 
THENATUREOF THEDIAL OGUES
There has been some interesting research recently ( at ATR in Osaka ) into the nature of keyboard dialogues ( Arita et aL 1987 ; Iida 1987 ) mainly aimed at comparing telephone and keyboard conversions  . They have concluded that keyboard has the same fundamental conversational features as telephone conversation  , notwithstanding the differences between written and spoken language  . No mention is made of what we are calling here meta-dialogue  , though it should be remembered that our dialogues are quite different from those reported by the ATR researchers in that we had a translation system as an intermediary  . No comparable experiment is known to us , so it is difficult to find ayard stick against which to assess our findings  . 
Regarding the subject matter of our dialogues , this was of a very general nature , often about the local situation ( time , weather ) , the dialogue partner ( name , marital status , interests ) or about recent news . A lot of the dialogue actually con-cemed the system itself  , or the conversation . An rephrase in the case of mistranslation , as we have seen in (6) above , though not all users seemed to understand the necessity of this tactic  ( 8 )  . 
(8) E : how does your sistem work please.
J : ~. L ~ ~ : ?~?, ~ b ~ r ) ~- ' ~- A , o
T : I don't understand a meaning of the sentence.
E : how does your sistemwork ?
Often , a user would seek clarification of a mis-or untranslated word as in  ( 9 )  , or (3) above . 
(9) E : I could have riz in the dinner.
J : riz ~ 7~:/:~-@~o
T : Isriz French ?
E : Maybe . I'm not sure.
J : ~-("3", ~ o
T : I sitrice ?
E : In my guess , you are right.
J : ~~' 9" o
T : It is natural.
E : What is natural ?
T : I understand French.
J : riz ~ : ~' C~o
T : Rizisrice.
The most interesting metadialogues however occurred when users failed to distinguish cited words-a problem linguists are familiar with- for example by quotation marks : these would then be retranslated  , sometimes leading to further confusion (10) . 
0 o ) Jl : B ~ : ? E p ~ ' ~ L . " C < ~ Wo
T : Please speak a Japanese impression.
E1: ichibana.
J2:b ~~", ~~- A , o
J3:ichibana ~1~'~'; ~ o
T : Whatisichibana ?
E2: i thought it means number one.
J4:f~~--~:'(-~o
T : What is the first ?
E3: the translation to you was incorrect.
This example may need explanation . First the translation of the Japanese question ( J 1 ) has been misunderstood : the translation should have been ' Please give meyour impressions of Japan '  , but the English user ( E-user ) has understood Japanese to mean ' Japanese language '  . That is , E-user has understood J1 to be saying ' Please speak an impressive Japanese word  . ' Then E-user confuse dichiban ( ' number 1' or ' the first ' ) and ike bana ( ' flower arranging ' )  . The word ich iban a ( El ) does not exist in Japanese . H is explanation ' number one ' was correctly translated  ( not shown here ) asichiban . But not realizing of course that the meaning of his first sentence  ( J 1 ) was incorrectly understood , the Japanese user ( J-user ) could not understand E1 ( J2 ) and asked for its sense ( J 3 )  . 
SoE-user tried to explain the meaning of/?h / bana  , which in fact was ichiban . By the answer , J-user has identified what E-userment , but since J-user still did not realized that his first sentence was incorrectly understood and hence J-user has understood  E2 to be saying that something was ' number 1'  , he tried to ask what was ' number 1'(J4) . 
But in the translation of this question , ichiban (--~) was translated as ' the fLrsf . At this point , it is not clear which comment E-user is referring to in  E3  , but anyway , not realizing what answer J-user have expected and not knowing enough Japanese to realize what has happened-i  . e . the connection between ' number one ' and ' the firsf-E-user gives up and changes the subject  . If E-user had intended to speak ikebana and explained its meaning  , J-user could have realized J1 had been misunderstood . Because it is meaningless in a sentence saying someone's impression that something is ike bana  . 
On the other hand , where the user knew a lit-de of the foreign language  ( typically the Japanese user knowing English rather than vice versa  )  , such a misunderstanding could be quickly dealt with  ( 11 )  . 
(11) E : How is the weathere in Tokyo ?
J : weatherei ' ~ weather
T : Is weathere weather ?

There are a number of things to be learnt from this experiment  , even if it was not in fact setup to elicit information of this kind  . Clearly , typing errors are a huge source of problems , so an environment which minimizes these is highly desirable  . Two obvious features of such an environment are fast screene cho  , and delete and back-space keys which work in a predictable manner in relation to what is seen on the screen  . For the correction of typing errors , the system should have a spelling-users are typing in  . The main reasons for syntax errors are ellipsis and unknown words  . Therefore , the system should have a rapid syntax-check function which can work before transmission or translation and can indicate to users that there is a syntax error so that users can edit the input sentence or reenter the correct sentence  . These are in themselves not new ideas , of course ( e . g . Kay 1980 and others) . 
Conventions for citing forms not to be trans-law , d , especially in metadialogue , must be developed , and the Machine Translation system must be sensitive to these  . The system must be ' tuned ' in other ways to make translations appropriate to conversation  , in particular in the translation of conversational fillers like I see and wakarimashita  . 
Finally , it seems to be desirable that users be trained briefly  , not only to learn these conventions , but also so that they understand the limits of the system  , and the kind of errors that get produced , especially since these are rather different from the errors occasionally produced by human translators or people conversing in a foreign language that heyk now only partially  . 

AMANOShinya , Hiroyasu NOG AMI&
Seiji MIIXE (1988) . A Step towards Telecommu-nication with Machine Interpreter  . Second International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation of Natural Languages  , June 1214 , 1988 ( CMU) . 
NOGAMI Hiroyasu , Yumiko YOS HIMU-
RA&Shinya AMANO (1988) . Parsing with lookahead in a realtime online translation system  . TO be appeared in COLING 88, Budapest . 
AMANO shin-ya , Kimihito TAKEDA,
Koichi HASEBE&Hideki HIRAKAWA (1988).
Experiment of Automatic Translation Typing Phone ( in Japanese )  . Information Processing Society of Japan (1988 . 3 . 16-18) TAKEDA Kimihito , Koichi HASEBE&Shinya AMANO (1988) . System Configuration of Automatic Translation Typing Phone  ( in Japanese )  . Information Processing Society of Japan (1988 . 3 . 16-18)
ASAHIOKAYoshimi , YumikoYOSHIMU-
RA , Seiji MIIKE & Hiroyasu NOGAMI (1988).
Analysis of the Translated Dialogue by Automatic Translation Typing Phone  ( in Japanese )  . Information Processing Society of Japan (1988 . 3 . 16-18)
ARITA Hidekazu , Kiyoshi KOGURE , Izum
NOGAITO , Hiroyuki MAEDA & Hitoshi IIDA (1987) . Media-dependent conversation manners : Comparison of telephone and keyboard conversations  ( in Japanese )  . Information Processing Society of Japan87-M ( 1987 . 5 . 22) IIDA Hitoshi (1987) . Distinctive features of conversations and inter -keyboard interpretation  . Workshop on Natural Language Dialogue Interpretation  , November 2728 ,  1987 , Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute ( ATR )  , 

AMANOShinya (1986). The Toshiba
Machine Translation system . Japan Computer Quarterly 64 " Machine Translation - Threator Tool " ( Japan Information Processing Development
Center , Tokyo ), 32-35.
AMANOShinya , Hideki HIRAKAWA &
Yoshinao TSUTSUMI (1987). TAURAS : The
Toshiba Machine Translation system . MT Machine Translation Summit , Manuscripts & Program , Tokyo : Japan Electronic Industry Development
Association ( JEIDA ), 1523.
KAY Martin (1980) . The proper place of men and machines in language translation  . Report
CSL-80-11, Xerox-PARC , Palo Alto , CA.
HAYASHIOoki ( kanshuu ) (1982) . ~ ~ k : (~1982) . ~ lH ~ r ~ . 
KAWADAT sutomu , Shinya AMANO,
Kenichi MORI & Koji KODAMA (1979).
Japanese word processor JW-10 . Compcon 79 ( Nineteenth IEEE Computer Society International
Conference , Washington DC ), 238-242.
MORI Kenichi , Tsutomu KA WADA &
Shinya AMANO (1983) . Japanese word processor . In T . KITAGAWA(Ed . ) Japan Annual Reviews in Electronics , Computers & Telecommunications Volume 7: Computer Sciences & Technologies , Tokyo : Ohmsha ,  119-128 . 
APPENDIXA.
Overall Performance Datasessions 78 times utterances 1429 times ( 100% )  18 . 3 time/session utterances that were successfully translated  1289 times ( 90% ) utterances that were mistranslated 140 times ( 10% ) metadialogues 31 times 0 . 4 time/session
Subject Matter in Utterances total utterances greeting and self introduction response signals about weather about imeothers  1429 times ( 100% ) 470 times ( 33% ) 154 times ( 11% ) 92 times ( 6% ) 56 times ( 4% ) 657 times ( 46% ) 
APPENDIXC.
Type of Expressions in Metadialogue total metadialogues  31 times repetition of a part of partner's utterances  ( e . g . What is ichibana ? ) 22 times ( English users ' are 2 and Japanese users ' are 20 ) telling typing errors or mistranslations ( e . g . Error in Translation . ) 9 times ( English users ' are 6 and Japanese users ' are 3 ) APPENDIXD . Distribution of Utterances ( ia ) , ( lb ) ,   ( 2 ) and so on are corresponding to examples in the text  . Those numbers are put in the area in which main utterances in the examples are involved  . 
:: , , i!iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii ! i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i ii i i l l i i ! i ?: total  1429 utterances
I ': 1289 utterances that were successfully translated : 140 utterances that were mis-~ranslated : 31 utterances that caused metadialogues
A : by typing errors (7 times)
B : by mistranslations (5 times)
C : by unknown words to the partner and so on ( 19 times ) 
