A COMPUTATIONAL THEORY OF PERSPECTIVE AND REFERENCE IN NARRATIVE 
Janyce M . Wlebe and William J . Rapaport
Department of Computer Science
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo , NY 14260
wiebe ~ s.buffalo.edu , rapapurt~s.buffalo.edu

Narrative passages told from a character's perspective convey the character's thoughts and perceptions  . We present a discourse process that recognizes characters ' thoughts and perceptions in third -personar rative  . An effect of perspective on reference In narrative is addressed : references in passages told from the perspective of a characte reflect the character's beliefs  . An algorithm that uses the results of our discourse process to understand references with respecto an appropriate set of beliefs is presented  . 
1 . INTRODUCTION . A narrative is often told from the perspective of one or more of its characters  ; it cam also contain passages that are not told from the perspective of any character  . We present a computational theory of how readers recognize the current perspective in thix d-person n ~- rative  , end of the effects of perspective on the way readers understand references in third-person narrative  . We consider published novels and short stories , rather than m . ificially constructed narratives . 
2 . BANFIELD'STHEORY . Our notion of perspective in narrative is based on Ann Bardield's  ( 1982 ) c~t_egorization of the sentences of narration into subjective and objective sentences  . Subjective sentences include those that portray a character's thoughts  ( represented thought ) or present a scene a ~ a character perceives it ( represented perception )  . Objective sentences present hestory directly , rather than through the thoughts or perceptions of a character  . The language used to convey thoughts and perceptions is replete with linguistic elements that make no sense unless they are interpreted with respecto the thinking or perceiving character's consciousness  . Banfield calls them subjective elements ; they appear only in subjective sentences and cannot appear within objective sentences  . Banfield identifies perspective in narrative with subjectivity  , which is expressible via subjective elements . We call the thinking or perceiving character of a subjective sentence the subjective character  . 
3 . ADISCOURSE-LEVEL APPROACH . Our task of recognizing the currant perspective is  , therefore , to recognize subjective sentences and the subjective characters to whom they are attributed  . However , we cannot take aumtence-by-sentence approach , deciding independently for each sentence whether it is objective or subjective  , and , if subjective , who the subjective character is . First , although thoughts and perceptions are often reported  ( as by sentences beginning with " He thought that .   .   . " or " She saw .   .   .  ") , end thoughts are often accompsnied by narrative parert the tica Ls  ( such as " he thought " or " he realized " )  , many thoughts and perceptions are not marked in these ways  . Second , subjective sentences do not always explicitly indicate who the subjective character is  . For example : (1) 1"1 He wanted to talk to Dennys .   1"2How were they going to be able to get home from this strange desertland into which they had been cast and which wash caven knew wherein all the countlessolar systems in all the countless galaxies ?\[ L'Engle  , Many Waters , p .  91\]  ( 2 ) ~lBut what\[Muhammad\]had seen in those few moments m~ehim catch his breathinamazement  . 
z ~ On the floor of the cave , which curved back in an almal fault in the rock , there were several large cylindrical objects sumd in  8 in a row . \[ John Allegro,
The DeadSeaScrolls\]
Sentence (1 . 2) is are presented thought , and (2 . 2) is a represented perception , presenting what the character sees as hesees it ; yet neither is explicitly marked as such . Also , neither indicates who the subjective character is  . Finally , although a subjective lement marks a santence as subjective  ( cf . Section 4 . 2) , not all subjective sentences contain subjective alements  , and subjective lements do not in general indicate who the subjective character is  . 
However , subjective sentences that are not marked as such , or that do not indicate who the subjective character is  , usually appear in the midst of other subjective sentences attributed to the same subjective character  . That is , once a clearly marked subjective sentence appears for which the subjective character can be deternfined " unmarked subjective sentences auributed to the same subjective character often follow  . Thus , to recognize subjectives mumces in general we need to consider subjectivity at the level of the discourse  . 
For this reason , we extend the nodons of subjective and objective sentences to the notions of subjective and objective contexts  , which consist of one or more subjective sentences attributed to the same subjective character  , or one or more objective sentences , respectively . 
Our algorithm for recognizing the current perspective is a discourse process that looks for the boundaries of subjective contexts  . During narrative understending , it main-ta ~ a stack , called the current per specdve ( CP ) . At the beginning of a narrative , the CP is initialized to be the reader . When a new subjective context is recognized , its a subjective context is recognized , a character is popped from the CP . More precisely , since SNePS ( Shapiro 1979) , our knowledge representation system , is fully in tmsional , only the reader's concepts of the characters are represented  ( Msida and Shapiro 1982 , Shapiro and Rapaport 1987) . So , it is actually the re ~_~__--'s concepts of the char ~ ters that ~ e pushed onto the CP  . 
4 . RECOGNIZING SUBJECTIVE CONTEXTS . To recognize subjective contexts , our discourse process relies exclusively on linguistic signals of subjective contexts  . In this , it is incomplete : If a subjective cml text appears in which these linguistic signals are not present  , then the subjective context is not recognized . 
4 . 1 . Psychological Verbs , Actions , Adjectives , and Perceptual Verbs . Reports involving psychological vorbs ( e . g ~' think ' , ' wonder ' , ' realize ' , ' went ' , ' remember ') or perceptual verbs ( e . g . . ' see ' , ' hear ' ) signal that a subjective coatext will follow . So do predicate-adjective sntences with psychological djectives  ( e . g . , ' delighted ' , ' happy ' , ' jealous ' , ' scared ') ( cf . Banfield (1982) . Cohn (1978) . Dole ~ el (1973)) . 
In addition , we have identified what we call psychological actions -- e  . g . , " he smiled to himself " , " she gasped " , " she winced "-- which function in the same way as psychological verbs  . 
A sentence of one of these types is a typical way of establish i ~ a subjective context  . Exemples (1) and (2) , above , and (3) , below , exhibit hisl~n ~*- n:O )   3"1She \[ Hannah \] wince dass he heard them crash to the platform  .   3"~he lovely little mirror that she had brought for Ellen  , and the gifts for the baby\[\[F ~ at ~- chere , Hannah Herse ~ p . 3\] In each example , the first smtence is a psycholosical or perceptual report  , end the second is are presented thought or represented perception  , respectively ; the subjective character of the second sentence is taken to be the subject of the firs LIn our discourse process  , the subject of a porcept m dor psychological report  , or of a In ~ Aicete-adjective sentenco with a psychological adjective  , is pushed onto the CP if a character is n't already on the top of it  . If a character is already on the top of the CP , then no change is made , and the sentence is understood to be part of the already established subjective ccnteXL  4  . 2 . Subjective Elements . Many subjective lements mark a sentence in third -personar rative as subjective because they are expressive in nalme  . Some that Banfield identifies are ect clanmt/ons , which express emotion ; que ~ on s , which express wonder ; , ep/?hets , such as ' the bastard ' , which express some qualification of the refeie ~ t ; and certain k/n-ship terms , e . g . , ' Daddy ' , ' Morn ' , and ' Aunt Margaret ' , which express a relationship to the referee . She also identifies evaluative adjec?/ves , which express an attitude toward the referent , e . g . , ' ghastly ' , ' surprising ' , poor ' , and ' dasrmed ' , although some evaluative adjectives , such as ' poor ' and ' damned ' , have their evaluative meanings only when they occ ~ in certain parts of the sentence  . Intensifiers such as ' too ' , ' quite ' , and ' so ' are also evaluative ( Banfield 1982) , as in: ( 4 ) He could tell they were tears because his eyes were tooshiny  . To or ound . \[ Bddgers , All Together Now , p . 92\] So are emphasizers , uchas'really ' and ' just ' . An example is ' really ' in (5 . 3) : O ) Xt Jody managed afrails mile , s2 she was a little bit a shamed . SzShe should really try to be more cheerful for Aunt Margaret's ake  . S ~* After all , At mtMargare thad I mubles of her own--she was the mother of that ghastly Dill  . \[Gage , Miss Osborne-the-Mop , p . 1617\] Modal verbs of obligation , possibility , and necessity are also expressive . For example , ' should ', in (5 . 3), is a modal verb of obligation . So are many content ( or atti:udinal ) disjunct ~ which comment on the conumt of the utterance  ( Quirk et al 1985 )  . For example , " l~ely ' , ' may be ' , ' probably ' , and ' perhaps ' expres some degree of doubt : ( 6 ) Something jingled---cerkeys probably . \[ Oneal , War
Work , p . 132\]
Conjoncts , which comment on the connection between items ( Quirketel . 1985), can also be expressive . For example , ' any how ' , ' anyway ' , ' still ' , and ' after all ' express concession ( Quirketai .  1985) . An example is ' Afteran ' in (5 . 4) . 
Other subjective element sam sentence fragments ( Benfieki 1982 )  , such as (7 . 2) ,   ( 7 )   7"1His brain worked slowly through what he knew about this person  . ~David'skid . \[Bridgers , All
Together Now , p . 91\] and the uses of ' this ' , ' that ' , ' these ' , and ' those ' that Robin Lakoff ( 1974 ) has identified as emotional dei . xb . In conversation , they are " generally linked to the speaker's emotional involvement in the subject-matter of his utterance "  ( Lakoff 1974:347 )  ; in th lrd-perso narrative , they are linked to the subjective character's emotional involvement in the subject matter of his thoughts or perceptions  . Examples are ' this ' in (8 . 1 ) and ' That'in 0:2 ) :  ( 8 ) S'llb rahim could remember every time this godless pighad patronized lOzn  ,   .   . \[Clancy , Red Dawn Rbing , p . 13\] her .   9-2'rhat in sufferable stranger who had passed them on the road was receiving the welcome that she had been dreaming of all the way from Connecticut  . 
\[Franchere , Hannah Herself , p . 15\]
In speech , the emotion , evaluation , etc , expressed by a subjective lement is always attributed to the speaker  ; in third-persunnar rative , it is auributed to a character , lC learly , many types of language-understanding abilities are needed munderstand the range of subjective lements  . Our purpose here is to show how our discourse process uses them as markers of subjective contexts  , and how it determ in ~ the subjective character whose thoughts or perceptions they mark  . However , recognizing the subjective character is always required before a subjective lement can be understood  . 
When a subjective lement is m ~ . ountered in the narrative , our discourse processuIxiates the CP according to the following algoriflun :  ( A 1 ) If there is currently a character on the CP . 
X then do not change the CP else if there is an actor focus at the start of the current sentence who is a character in the scene  2then push him or herc ~ to the CP 3else create a new and in detennina ~ concept and push it onto the CP  . 
4 . 2,1, Discussion of branch 1 . Branch I is taken when a subjective lement continues the current subjective context  . 
For example , the exclamation iO . 2) , which is a subjective element , continues the subjective context esteblished by ( 3 . 1) . The subjective lements ' should ' and * really ' in  ( 5 . 3) and ' After all ' , ' Aunt Margaret ' , ' that ' , and ' ghastly ' in (5 . 4 ) continue the subjective context established in ( 5 . 1) . 
4 . 2 . 2 . Discussion of branch 2 . The actor focus used in branch 2 is one of the foci that need to be maintained for the comprehension of definites naphora  ( Sidner 1983 )  . It is whoever is the agent of the current sente : r . e . ( Note that quoted speech has its own foci . which must be maintained separately . In this sense , quoted speech constitutes a separate discourse segment  ( cf . Grosz and Sidne ~(1986) . )
Consider the following example : ( 10 ) le ~ XIn the kitchen she\[Jody\]set the basket down on the table  ,   m'2She put the thermos and the cups in the sink and filled them with cool water to soak  . xo-"rhen Instone third-penc novels , panicularly in the 19th century , an overt narrator ( Chamum 1978 ) rues mbjective lemems . We do not consider novels with overt narrators . 
shetip to edup stairs to her room . l ? ~ Perhaps Aunt Margaret was taking an ap . m3It wouldn't do to dis-nu'b her . \[Gage , Miss Osborne-the-Mop, . 2 5\] Since Jody is the actor focus at the beginning of  ( 10 . 4) ( she is the actor focus of (10 . 1)-(10 . 3)) , and she is a character in the scene , them bjective lement ' Perhaps ' is attributed m her when it is encountered  , and she is pushed onto the CP . 
Sidner (1983) has shown that , in anaphora comprehension , the current actor or discourse focus can he rejected as the co-a pedfier of an anaphor on the basis of pragmatic factors  . Similarly . the actor focus may be rejected as the subjective character to whom the subjective lement is mributed  , in favor of another character in the scene . The pragmatic factors involved appear to be which characters have been subjective characters in the past and whose thoughts or perceptions the sentence containing the subjective dement is likely to be reflecting  . Consider the following example , in which Adr~el , aseraph , has just appeared before Lemech and Sandy : ( 11 ) n'S Le mechgreeted him\[Adnarel\]respectfully . 
" Adnarel , we thank you . " n : ~ rhen he said to S and y , " These raph will be able to help you . Seraphim know much about healing . " n ~ So this was a seraph . \[L'Engle " Many Wmers , p . 39\] Lmnach is the actor focus of (11 . 1) and (11 . 2) . However , it would be clear to someone who had read the novel up to this point that  ( 11 . 3) is S and y's thought . First , S and y is a visitor to as l range world , of which Lemech is an inhabitant ; so it is S and y , not Lemech , who is likely not to have known what aseraph is . Second , Irior to this passage , subjective contexts have been attributed to Sandy  , but not to Lemech . We are investigating the reasoning required by the re~d_~in reject-ins the cm'remactor in favor of another character  . 
4 . 2 . 3 . Discussion of branch 3 . Branch 3 is taken when the reader cannot identify the subjective character and must read further in the text in order to do so  . In this case , an indemr-minate , inta ~ ional concept is pushed onto the CP . When there ~_d ~ finally identifies the subjective character  , the information that this character and the in determinate one are co-extensional is built  ( that is , it is asserted that they are concepts of the same individual  ; cf . Malda and Shapiro (1982) , Shapiro and Rapaport (1987)) . Naicong Li ( 1986 ) uses this approach in her pronoun resolution algorithm if the infonna ~ needed to resolve a lmmoun is supplied after the pronoun is encountered  . 
Often , the subjective charact ~ is identified by a narrative parenthetical  , s in the following example : ( 12 )   12JWhat was holding Washingtonup ? the colone lasked himself  . Iz 2Ail he needed was a simple yes or no . \[ clancy , Red Storm Rising , p . 170\] element . It occurs just after a shift in scene , so it does not continue a current subjective context  , and there is no actor focus . When ' What'is encountered in (12 . 1) , branch 3 pushes a new concept onto the CP : At this point , the reader has recognized someone's thought'but does not yet know whose  . When the reader encounters the parenthetical , she identifies the subjective character as the colonel  , and builds a proposition that the colonel and the new concept are co-extemsional  ( that is , she comes to believe that the question was the colonel's thought  )  . 
4 . 2 . 4 . Comparison of evaluative and psychological adjectives  . Before leaving oor discussion of subjective le -ments  , it will be useful to concas the ways that predicate-adjective sentences with psychological and with evaluative adjectives are treated by our discotwse process  . Compare the following sentences : ( A ) Jody was delighted . 
( B ) Jody wasg hastly.
Sentence ( A ) contains the psychological adjective'delighted  '  , and ( B ) contains the evaluative adjective ' ghastly ' . In ( A )   ( assuming no previou subjective context )  , Jody is pushed onto the CP , and ( A ) establishes a subjective context atlributed to Jody  . In ( B ) ' algorithm ( A 1 ) determines whose atti_-_~a_etoward Jody is being expressed  , and it does not choose the subject of the sentence  . Thus , psycbological adjectives can establish the perspective of the subject  , whereas evaluative adjectives express an altitude toward the subject  . 
$ . RECOGNIZING ENDING BOUNDARIES OF SUB-JECTIVE CONTEXTS  . Recognizing the ending boun-d&ies of subjective contexts is a more difficult problem than recognizing the beginning boundaries  . While not all subjective contexts are signaled in the ways discussed in Section  4  , it is very common that they are . However , we have not found equally reliable or common signals for the ending boundaries  . It appears that the reader often has to reason about he content of the current sentence and confirm that it can continue the subjective context  ; if it cannot , then the ending boundary has been found . 
Nevertheless , we have identified two reliable ways of recognizing the ending boundaries of subjective contexts  . 
One way subjective contexts are ended is by a shift in scene  , as in the following example : ( 13 ) He\[S and y\]wanted to talk to Dennys . How were they going to be ablem get home from this storage desertland into which they had been cast and which was heaven knew wherein all the countless solar sys-tears in a Ll the countless galaxies ? < Chapter Break > Dennys was sleeping fit fully when he heard the tent flap move  . \[L'Engle , Many Waters , pp .   91-92\] Dannys and S and y are not at the same place . The shift in scene at the chapter break ends the subjective context attributed to S and y  . 
A second way is by a negated perceptual report whose subject is the subjective character and whose object is something in the scene  . For example ,   ( 14 )   x4"xSbe \[ Yalith \] was not sure whys he was hesitant . 
x4~' he breathed in the strangeod or of his wings , smelling of stone , of the cold , dark winds which came during the few brief weeks of w inter  . 
X ~ Envelopod in Eblis's wings , she did not hearther hydmtic thud as a great liong alloped toward them across the desert  , roaring as it neared them .   14~rhan both Yalith and Eblisturned and sawthelion rising to its hindlegs  .   .   . \[L'Engle , Many Wooers , p .   47\] The subjective context in the first paragraph is ended by the negated perceptual verb in  ( 14 . 3) . Sentence (14 . 4 ) then establishes a new subjective context attributed to Yalith and Eblis  . In a similar way , subjective contexts can be ended by negated factive verbs  , as in " He did not realize that .   .   .  " . 
6 . BELIlC ~ FANDSUBJECTIVE CONTEXTS . Since subjective contexts portray thoughts and perceptions  , the reader understands that the information they convey reflects the subjective character's beliefs  ( cf . Fillmore (1974) ' Banfield (1982) , Usponsky (1973)) . Whatever else the reader may infer that the characters believe  , she has to attribute the informa fi . __on i subjective contexts to the subjective ch & acter  . Brian Reiser ( 1981 ) showed that one of the effects of perspective on are ad_~'s understanding is that it focuses in ec  . essing . In particular , he showed that the read & primarily infers the goals and plans of the ch&acter whose perspective the narrative is taking  . In a similar way , perspective focuses the reader's atm'bution of beliefs to the characters  . 
References in subjective contexts reflect just what the subjective character believes  . ( CLClark and Marshall (1981) , Cohen , Perranlt , and Allen (1982) , and Wilks and Bien ( 1983 ) for discussions of belief and reference in conversation  . ) The subjective charecter might be mistaken , o~knowless about the referent hant he reader or the other characters know  , or know more than the other characters . 
The remainder of this paper addresses the auribution of beliefs to ch&acte~s in order to understand references in subjective contexts  . 
6 . 1 . An Algorithm for Understand in 8 References Using the CP . Ore-belief representation , described in Rapalx ~ and Shapiro (1984) , Rapaport ( 1986 ) ' and Wiebe and Rapa-port ( 1986 ) ' is based on the notion of belief spaces . A be // ef space is accessed by a stack of individuals  , and consists of what the bottom member of the stack believes that  .   . , the top member believes . The re~__aer_is always the bottom member of the stack  , and the belief space corresponding to a stack consisting only of the re~_d ~ contains the set of tions in the knowledge base appear in at least one belief space  , and a single proposition can appear in more than one belief space  . This occurs , for example , if the reader believes a proposition and believes that a character believes it  , too . 
The CP determines the current belief space with respect to which references are understood  . So far , our analysis extends only to nonanaphoric , specific ref ~ er ~ ces . 
The following is our algorithm for understanding a nonanaphoric  , specific reference ' X ' in third-person mmmive ( there may actually be more then one proposition found or built in order to understand ' X '  , for example , if ' X' is plural or a possessive ) :  ( A2 ) If ' X'isart indefinite noun phrase of the form ' aY '  , t then create a new concept , N ; build in the CP's belief space the proposition that N is a Y  ; return N else if ' X' is a definite noun phrase or proper name  , then if a proposition that N is X can be found in the CP's belief space  ,   2then return N else if a proposition that N is X can be found in a belief space other than the CP's  ,   3then add the found proposition to the CP's belief space  ; remmN 4 else create a new concept , N ; build in the CP's belief space the proposition that N is X  ; ret m ' nN . 
6 . 1 . 1 . Discussion of branch 1 . In definite references introduce new individuals into the CP's belief space  . We discuss this in Section 6 . 3, below . 
6 . 1 . 2 . Discussion of branches 2 and 3 . The search for the referent of a non-enaphoric definite noun phrase or proper name starts in the CP's belief space  . Branch 2 is taken if the referent can be found there . 
If the test in branch 2 falls , then the rest of the knowledge base must be searched  . To see why this is so , suppose that the reference is ' Ellen ' and that it occurs in a subjective context  . It is possible that Ellen has been referred to previously in the narrative but not under any cir -cumstences that would have required the reader to explicitly a mibute the belief that she is named ' Ellen ' to the subjective character  . Perhaps he has only been referred to in objective contexts  , for example . So , to find the referent , other belief spaces than the CP's must be searched  . 
Branch 3 is taken if the search is successful , and , before the referent is returned , the proposition that the referent is X is A_dded to the CP's belief space  . In the case just discussed , the fact that the reference occurs in a subjective context indicates that the belief that the referent is named ' Ellen ' should now be attributed to the subjective character  . 
6 . 1 . 3 . Discussion of branch 4 . Branch 4 is taken in order to understandefinite noun phrases and proper names that refer to individuals who have not been previously introduced into the narrative  . Fur example , in (3 . 2) , above , neither the mirror , the gifts , the baby , nor Ellen have been mentioned before in the novel  . A new referent for each is introduced into the CP 's belief space  ; that is , by virtue of understanding the references in (3 . 2), the reader comes to believe that Hannah . the subjective character , believes that there is a mirror , some gifts , ababy , and a person named ' Ellen ' . 
6 . 1A . An example . We now illustrate our algorithms on a passage that reflects a character's mistaken belief  . The passage is f~oma novel in which a character , Dwayne , mistakenly believes that another character , Casey . is a boy : 05 ) L ~' IH is\[Dwayne's\]brain worked slowly through what he knew about this person\[Case y \]  . tS'2 David's kid . 
~ The name stumbled into place . Is ~ n is was David's boy . ~ S-SDavid was in the war , and here was his kid in the arc ~_ descared of something  . \[Bridgers,
All Together Now , p . 91\]
Note that (15 . 1) end (15 . 3) are psychological reports that employ metaphor , ather than psychological verbs , to report the character's psychological experience  ( (9 . 1), above , employs metaphor in a similar way ) . Memphur is beyond the scope of this work . so , before applying our algorithm to this passage , we paraphrase it as follows: ( 15 a ) L ~ He\[Dwayne \] thought of what he knew about this person\[Casey\]  . tX2David'skid . XS ~ He remembered the name . ls~*\]'his wasDavid's boy . lkSDavid was in the war , and here was his kid in the arca descared of something  . 
Fn'st , consider the operation of our discourse process . 
Sentence (15 a . 1) is a psychological report , and so Dwayne , its subject , is pushed onto the CP ; this establishes a subjec-five context , auributad to Dwayne , which is continued throughout the passage . Note that when the sentence fragment ( which is a subjective lement ) is encotmtered , no change is made to the CP because there is already a character on the top of it  . Similarly , no change is made to the CP when (15 a . 3) , a psychological report , and the second con-jun ~ of (15a . 5), a predicate-adjective umtew . e with a psychological adjective , are encountered , since there is already a character on the top of the CP  . 
Now , consider the refe ~ e4-c . e to D av id in (15 a . 2) . The reader knows that David is Case y's father . If , before reading (15L2) , the reader didn't explicitly believe that Dwayne knew about David too  , then branch 3 of algorithm ( A2 ) would be taken to understand this reference ; the result is that the reader now explicitly believes that Dwayneknows about 

135' David's boy'in(15 a . 4) reflects Dwayne's mistaken belief about Casey , and branch 2 of algorithm ( A2 ) is taken in order to understand it . To illustrate that information in subjective contexts is at u ' ibuted to the subjective character  , suppose that (15 a . 4) were " This was David's girl "; in that case . the reader would have to infer that Dwayne had somehow found out that Case y is a girl  . 
6 . 1 . 5 . Further discussion of algorithm ( A2) . .Note that if a reference is a subjective lemertt , such as ' the bastard ' , it may be a non-class if w . atory noun ( Banfield 1982); that is , it carmot be understood entirely propositionally , since it expresses subjectivity . How it should be undemtood depends on the particular subjective lmnmt  . Thus , specific algorithms for nouns that are subjective elemants must supersede algorithm  ( A2 )  . 
As mentioned above , algorithm ( A2 ) is enable to understand anaphoric references . However , mmphor comprehension can he affected by perspective  . Consider the following passage : ( 16 ) mt Theman had mined , x t ' ~ He started to walk away quickly in the direction of the public library  . 
le?"O . K . , " said Joe , " get Rosie . " x6 ~ Zoe crept back to the blinker , xt ~ She felt hollow in her sm much .   1~She'd nevereally expected to see the Enemy again . \[ Ones\], War Work , p . 64\]In (16 . 6) , ' the Enemy'is mana ~ oric reference that occurs in a subjective context  ( established by ( 16 . 5) , which is a psychological report ) ; it co-specifies ' the man ' in (16 . 1) and ' He ' in (16 . 2) . It reflects Zoe's belief that the raan is an enemy spy  , although it is not at all clear to the reader , at point ' that he is . 
Personal pronouns can also reflect the beliefs of a character  . The following passage is a continuation of passage  ( 15 )   ( italics ours ) :  ( 17 ) He\[Dwayne\]wasn't sure of what . What in the arcade coulds care a boy like that ? He rubbed his head under his baseball cap  . He could see tears in Casey's eyes . He could tell they were tearsh/seyes were too shiny  . To or ound . Wel Lit was all right to cry . He'd cried when they took him to that place a few years back  . Now Casey was in a new place , too , feeling may be the same as him . If he just knew what to do about it . 
" let's don't play that game any more , " he said . " I don't like that one . " Case y wiped her face on her sleeve .   .   . \[Bridgers,
All Together Now , p . 92\]
Both italicized pronouns refer mCesey ; the first occurs in a subjective context attributed to Dwayne  , and the second occurs after the subjective context has ended  ( in this passage , the subjective context is ended by direct speech ) . 
6 . 2, Assertive Indefinite Pronouns . Assertive in definite pronouns -- e . g . , ' someone ' , ' something ' , ' somebody ' - - - - are specific , though unspecified ( Quirk et al1985); that is , they generally refer to particular people , things , etc . , without identifying them . When referring to a particula referent , a speaker typically uses an assertive indefinite pronoun if  ( 1 ) she doesn't know the identity of the referent ,   ( 2 ) she doesn't want the addressee to know the identity of there read-a  , or ( 3 ) she doesn't believe that the identity of the referent is relevan to the conversation  . A cheract ~' s thoughts end perceptions are not directed toward an addressee  , and so the first of these uses is the predominant one in subjective contexts  . Used in this way , they express a lack of knowledge , and so are subjective lements . When one of them appears in a subjective context , the r~d~onder stands that the subjective character does not know who or what the refermt is  . 
Often . the pronoun is the only source of this information  . 
Consider the following example : ( 18 ) ma Suddenly she\[Zoe\]gasped , n ~ She had touched some body !\ [ Oneal , War Work . , p .   129\] The ~ is no explicit statement in the novel that Zoe does not know whom she touched  ; this has to be inferred from the use of ' somebody '  . Sentences (6) and (15 . 5) provide fm'ther examples . 
6 . 3 . In definite Referene as . In conversation , definite refer-ances are used only if the speaker believes that the addressee has enough inform ~ on to intexprethem  . As mentioned above , thoughts and perceptions are not directed toward maddressee  , and so the use of definite references in subjective contexts is not subject to this conslraint  ; as illustrated by (3 . 2) , they me used to refer to referents familiar to the subjective character  , whether or not the r- , ~ler has been told about them before . So , when a specific indefinite reference appears in a subjective context  , the reader understands that the refer ont is unfamiliar to the subjective character  ;  , otherwise , a defmlte reference would have appeared ( Fdlmore 1974 )  . 
However , the referent may not be unknown to the reader or to the other characters  . For example ,   ( 19 ) There they\[the King and his men \] saw close beside them a great rubble heap  ; and suddenly they were aware of two small figures lying on it at their ease  , grey-cled , hardly to be seen among the stones . \[ Tol-kien , The Two Towers , p .   206\] The reader knows that the King and his men have come upon two hobbits  , Menvend Pippin . The King and his men do not know the hobbits , but other characters also present in the scene do know them  . When the King and his man are on the top of the CP  ( after'saw ' and continued by ' were aware of ' )  , the hobbits are not referred to by name , but as ' two small figures ' . Branch 1 of algorirl un ( A2 ) crea~new referents and , in the belief space of the King and his men , referants can be asserted to be co-exteusional with the concepts who the reader and other characters believe are named ' Merry ' and ' Pippin '  . 
In definite references can sometimes indicate that the subjective character doesn'tevank now what the refermt is  . 
This occurs when the head noun is a SUlZ ~ ordinate , rather than a basic-level , term ( Rosch and Lloyd 1978) . The basic level is the preferred level at which people identify things  . 
If a superordinate , rather than a basic-level , term appears in an indefinite refarance in a subjective context  , the reader understands that the subjective character can't even idantify the referant at the basic level  . In example (19) , the hobbits are referred to as ' two small figures '  , because the King and hisman have never seen hobbits before  . Here is an example that is not from a fantasy novel:  ( 20 ) Slowly Hannahraised her head and blinked her eyes  . 
Small dots of purple coveted the ground around h ~ and she reached out to explore  . V io let sl\[F x ~ . -~che~,
Hannah Herse ~, p . 25\]
Whan she first sees the violets , Hannah can only identify them as ' small dots of purple '  . Another occurs in (2 . 2 ) : The fact that the reference'several large cylindrical objects ' includes the ~ dinate term ' objects ' indicates that Muhamma doesn't know what the referents are  . Another example is ( 21 ) :  ( 21 ) He feltfirm reslralnts of somes ortholding him in place  . \[ Wu , Cyborg , p . 141\] Peters and Shapiro ( 1987 ab ) describe a SNePS represantation for natural category systems in which superordinate categories can be distinguished from basic-level and subordinate categories  . After an indefinite reference with a superord in a term in a subjective context has been parsed  , the fact that the subjective character was able to identify the referent only at a supemrdinate level is represented in the knowledge base by using their represcntatio ~  7  . CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURERESE ARCH . Many problems remain to be solved . Our discourse process cannot recognize subjective contexts that are not established by the linguistic signals it relies on  , and general principles are needed to explain how readers recognize the ending boundaries of subjective contexts  . We are investigating how tense , deictic terms ( cf . Bruder et a L (1986) , Bantield (1982)) , the characters ' goals ( cf . Wilansky (1983)) , and the argumant structure ( of . Cohen ( 1987 ) ) often exhibited by thoughts might be used to recognize the boundaries of sub-jectlve contexts  . Branches 2 and 3 of algorithm ( A 1 ) need to be expanded to determine who the subjective character is if the actor focus is n't a reasonable candidate and no paranthetical ppea  ~  . We are investigating how focus of attention ( cf . Grosz (1981) , Sidner ( 1983 ) ) can be incorporated into algorithm ( A2 ) in such a way that anaphoric references reflecting the beliefs of a character can be understood  . Finally , there is the general problem of revision . Our algorithms assume that signals occur at the beginning of subjective contexts  . However , there are cases when a subjective context cannot be recognized until some of it has already been parsed  . A difficult case is inustrated by the following : " Ca Jody was rich and famous  , c2 why was n't she happy ? B in wondered . " Only after reading ( C2 ) can the reade recognize that ( C1 ) is are presented thought . 
We have erguad that a discourse-level approach must be taken to the problem of recognizing character's thoughts and perceptions in third -personar rative  . Our discourse process , which is implemented in an ATN grammar interfaced to SNePS  , recognize subjective contexts that are linguistically signaled in ways frequantly employed in naturally-occurring arratives  . By using the results of the discourse process to determine the belief context needed monderstand refermces  , our reference algorithm demonstrates how perspective affects referance in third-person narrative  . 
8, ACK NOW LEDG MENTS . We are indebted to Mary Galbraith , David Zubin , Sandra Peters , Stuart Shapiro , and the other members of the SUNY Buffalo Graduate Group in Cognitive Science and the SNePS Research Group for many discussions end ideas  . This research was supported in part by NSF grauts  IST-8504713  , IRI-8610517 . 

Banfield , Arm (1982) , Unspeakable Sentences : Narratwn and Representation in the Language of Fiction  ( Boston :
Roufledge & Kegan Paul).
Bruder , Gail A . ; Duchan , Judy F . ; R~papmt,W'dliamJ . ; Sagal , Erwin M . ; Shapiro , Smart C . ; and Zubin , David A . 
(1986) , "Deictic Canters in Narrative : An Interdisciplinary Cognitive-Sciance Project  , " Technical Report 86 . 20 ( Buffalo : SUNY Buffalo Dept . of Computer Science ) . 
Chamm ~ Seymour (1978) , Story and Discourse : Narrative Structure in Fiction and Film  ( Ithaca , NY : Comell University Press) . 
Clark , Herbert H . end Marshall , Catharine R .  (1981) , " Definite Ref ~ , w , ce and Mutual Knowledge , " in A . Joshi , B . Webber , and L Sag ( eds . ) , Elements of Discourse Under-~and/ng ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) : 10-63 . 
Cohen , Philip R . ; Perrault , C . Raymond ; and Allen , James F . 
(1982), " Beyond Question Answering , " in W . Lchnert and M . Ringle ( eds . ) , Strategies for Natural Language Process-/ng ( Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbamn):245-274 . 
Cohen , Robin (1987) , " Analyzing the Structure of Argumentative Discourse  , " Computational Linguistics 13: 11-24 . 
Cohn , Dorrit (1978) , Transparent Minds : Narrative Modes for Representing Consciousness in Fiction  ( Princeton :
Princeton University Press).

Dole ~ el , Lubomir (1973) ' Narrative Modes in Czechl . .itera . 
tare ( Toronto : University of Toronto Press).
Fillmore , Charles ( 1974 ) '" pragmatics and the Description of Discourse , " in C . Fillmore , G . Lakoff , and R . Lakoff ( eds . ) , Berkeley Studiea in Syntax and Semantics I ( Berkeley : University of California Dept . of Linguistics and Institute of
Human I . e.aming ): VI-V21.
Grosz , Barbara J .   ( 1981 ) ' " Focusing and Description in Natural Language Dialogues  , " in A . Joshi , B . Webber , and L Sag ( eds . ) , Elements of Discourse Understanding ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) : 84-105 . 
Grosz , Barbara J . and Sidner , Candace L . (1986), " Amm-tion . Intantions , and the Slructure of Disoom's e , " Computational Linguistics ,  12: 175-204 . 
Lakoff , Robin (1974) ' " Remarks on ' this ' and ' that ' , " Papers from the Tenth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society  ( Chicago : Chicago Linguistic Society ) : 345-356 . 
Li , Nalcong (1986) . " Pronoun Resolution in SNePS . " SN e . RG Technical Note 18 ( Buffalo : SUNY Buffalo Dept . of
Computer Science).
Maida , Anthony S . and Shapiro , Smart C .   ( 1982 ) ' " Intensional Concepts in Propositional Semantic Networks  , " Cog-hi:ire Science 6: 291-330 . 
Quirk . Randolph ; Greenbaum . Sidney ;, Le_ec . h , Geoffxe ~ end Svartvik . Jan (1985) ' A Comprehensive Grammar of the
English Language ( New York : Longuum).
Peters , S ~ adra L . and Shapiro , Stuart C . (1987a ) , " A Relxesentation for Natural Category Systems , " Proceedings of the 9th Annual Conferotce of the Cognitive Science Society  ( Seattle )   ( Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlhaum ): 379-390 . 
Peters , Sandra L . and Shapiro , Smart C .  (19871)) , " A Representation for Natural Category Systems , " Proc~d'mgs of the lOth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intel  . 
ligence (1JCAI-87; Milan ) ( Los Altos , CA : Morgan Kanf-mann ): 140-146 . 
Rapaport , William J . endShapiro , Stuart C .   ( 1984 ) ' " Quasi-Indexical Reference in Propositional Semantic Networks  , " Proceedings of the lOth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING-84 ; Stanford Univ . ) ( Monistown , NJ : Assoc . for Computational L , ingulstics ): 65-70 . 
Rapaport , William L ( 1986 ) ' " Logical Foundations for Belief Representation , ' " Cognitive Science 10:371-422 . 
Reise ~, Brian J .  (1981) , " Character Tracking and the Understanding of Narrative  , " Proceedings of the 7th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( IJCAI-81 ; Van . 
couver ) ( Los Altos , CA : Morgan Kanfmarm ): 209-211 . 
Rosch , Eleanor and Lloyd , B3 . (1978)' Cognition and Categorization ( Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates) . 
Shapiro , Smart C .   ( 1979 ) ' " The SNePS Semantic Network Processing System , " in N . V . Findler ( ed . ), Associative Net . 
worka ( New York : Acedomic ): 179-203.
Shapiro , Smart C . and Rapapo ~ William J .  (1987) , " SNePS Comidered as a Fully Intensional Propositional Semantic Network  , " in N . Cerc~m and G . McCalla ( eds . )' The Knowledge Frontier ( New York : Springer-Verlag ) : 262-315 . 
Sidner , Cmdaze L .   ( 1983 ) ' " Focusing in the Comprehension of Definite Anaphora  , " in M . Brliymd R . Berwick ( eds . ) , Computational Models of Discourse ( Cambridge , MA : The
Mrr Press ): 267-330.
Uspemky . Boris (1973) , A Poetics of Composition ( Berke-le ~ University of California Press )  . 
Wiebe , Janyce M . and Rapalx ~ W'dliamJ , (1986) . 
" Representing DeRe and DeDic to Belief Reports in Discourse and Nan'a five '" Proc  . IEEE 74:1405-1413 . 
Wilemky , Robert ( 1983 ) ' Planning and Understanding ( Reading , MA : Addison-Wesley) . 
Willm , Yorick and Bien , Janusz (1983) , " Befiefs , Points of View , and Multiple Environments , " Cognitive Science 7: 95-119 . 
CITEDTEXTS
Allegro , John (1977) , The DeadSeaSc rolls ( Harmon & - worth , Eng . : Panguin ) . 
Bridgers , Sue Ellen (1979)' . AII Together Now ( New York:

Clarity , Tom (1986) , Red Storm Rising ( New York : G . P . 
Pumam's Sons).
Franchere " Ruth ( 1964 ) ' Hannah Herself ( New York : Tho-rues Y . Crowell ) . 
Gage , Wilson (1963)' Miss Osborne-the-Mop(Clevel and :
World Publishing).
L'Engle . Madeleine (1986)' Many Waters ( New York , Dell

Oneal . Zibby (1971) ' War Work ( New York . Viking Press) . 
Tolkian . LR . R .   ( 1965 ) ' The Two Towers ( New York : Bal-lantine Books )  . 
Wu , William (1987) , Cyborg ( New York : Ace Books) . 

