ONREPRESENTING GOVERNED PROSITIONS AND
HANDLING " INCORRECT " ANDNOVEL PREPOSITIONS
Hatte R . Blejer , Sharon Flank , and Andrew Kchler
SRA Corporation
20001 5th St . North
Arlington , VA 22201, USA

NLP systems , in order to be robust,
must handle novel and ill-formed input.
One common type of error involves the use of nonstandard prepositions to mark arguments  . In this paper , we argue that such errors can be handled in a systematic fashion  , and that a system designed to handle them offers other advantages  . We offer a classification scheme for preposition usage errors  . Further , we show how the knowledge representation employed in the SRANLP system facilitates handl ing these data  . 
1.0 INTRODUCTION
It is wellknown that NLP systems , in order to be robust , must handle ill-formed input . One common type of error involves the use of nonstandard prepositions to mark arguments  . In this paper , we argue that such errors can be handled in a systematic fashion  , and that a system designed to handle them offers other advantages  . 
The examples of nonstandard prepositions we present in the paper are taken from colloquial language  , both written and oral . The type of error these examples represent is quite frequent in colloquial written language  . The frequency of such examples rises sharply in evolving sublanguages and in oral colloquial language  . In developing an NLP system to be used by various U  . S . government customers , we have been sensitized to the need to handle variation and innovation in preposition usage  . Handling this type of variation or innovation is part of our overall capability to handle novel predicates  , which arc frequent in sublanguage . Novel predicates created for sublanguages arc less " stable " in how they mark arguments  ( ARGUMENT MAPPING ) than general English " core " predicates which speakers learn as children  . It can be expected that the eventual advent of successful speech understanding systems will further emphasize the need to handle this and other variation  . 
The NLP system under development at SRA incorporates a Natural Language Knowledge Base  ( NLKB )  , a major part of which consists of objects representing 
SEMANTIC PREDICATECLASSES . The system uses hierarchical knowledge sources ; all general " class-level " characteristics of a semantic predicate class  , including the number , type , and marking of their arguments , are put in the NLKB . This leads to increased efficiency in a number of system aspects  , e . g . , the lexicon is more compact and easier to modify since it only contains idiosyncratic information  . This representation allows us to distinguish between Icxically and semantically determined ARGUIVIENT MAPPING and to formulate general class -level constraint relaxation mechanisms  . 
I . ICLASSIFYING PREPOSITION

Preposition usage in English in positions governed by predicating elements  , whether adjectival , verbal , or nominal , may be classified as ( I ) lexically determined , (2) syntactically determined , or (3) semantically determined . Examples are:
LEXICALLY DETERMINED : laughat , afraid of
SYNTACTICALLY DETERMINED : by in passive sentences
SEMANTICALLY DETERMINED : move to ~ from
Preposition usage in idiomatic phrases is also considered to be lexically determined  , e . g . , ~ respect to . 
1.2 ATY POLOGY OF ERRORSIN
PREPOSITION USAGE
We have classified our corpus of examples of the use of nonstandard  ( 1 ) substitution of a semantically appropriate preposition -- either from the same class or another -- for a semantically determined one  ,   ( 2 ) substitution of a semantically appropriate preposition for a lexically determined one  , (3) false starts , (4) blends , and ( 5 ) substitution of a semantically appropriate preposition for a syntactically determined one  . A small percentage of the nonstandard use of prepositions appears to be random  . 
1.3 COMPUTATION ALAPPLICATIONS
OFTHISWORK
In a theoretical linguistics forum ( Blejcr and Flank 1988 )  , we argued that these examples of the use of nonstandard prepositions to mark arguments  ( 1 ) represent the kind of principled variation that underlies language change  , and ( 2 ) support a semantic analysis of government that utilizes thematic roles  , citing other evidence for the semantic basis of prepositional case marking from studies of language dysfunction  ( Aitchison 1987:103 )  , language acquisition ( Pinker 1982:678 ; Mcnyuk 1969:56) , and typological , cross linguistic studies on case-marking systems . 
More theoretical spects of our work ( including diachroni?change and arguments for and against particular linguistic theories  ) we recovered in that paper ; here we concentrate on issues of interest to a computational linguistics forum  . First , our natural language knowledge representation and processing strategies take into account the semantic basis of prepositional case marking  , and thus facilitate handling nonstandard and novel use of prepositions to mark arguments  . The second contribution is our typology of errors in preposition usage  . We claim that an NLP system which accepts naturally occurring input must recognize the type of the error to know how to compensate for it  . Furthermore , the knowledge representation scheme we have implemented is an efficient representation for English and lends itself to adaptation to representing non-English case-marking as well  . 
There is wide variation in computational strategies for mapping from the actual natural language x pression to some sort of PREDICATE -ARGUMENT representation  . At issue is how the system recognizes the arguments of the predicate  . 
At one end of the spectrum is an approach which allows any marking of arguments if the type of the argument is correct for that predicate  . This approach is inadequate because it ignores vital information carried by the preposition  . At the other extreme is a semantically constrained syntactic parse  , in many ways a highly desirable strategy . 
This latter method , however , constrains more strictly than what humans actually produce and understand  . Our strategy has been to use the latter method , allowing relaxation of those constraints , under certain well-specified circumstances . 
Constraint relaxation has been recognized as a viable strategy for handling ill-formed input  . Most discussion centers around orthographic errors and errors in subject verb agreement  . Jensen , Heidorn , Miller , and Ravin ( 1983:158 ) note the importance of " relaxing restrictions in the grammar rules in some principled way  . " Knowing which constraints to relax and avoiding a proliferation of incorrect parses however  , is a nontrivial task . Weischedel and Sondheimer . (1983:163ff ) offer cautionary advice on this subject . 
There has been some discussion of errors similar to those cited in our paper  . 
Carbonell and Hayes ( 1983:132 ) observed that " problems created by the absence of expected case markers can be overcome by the application of domain knowledge " using case frame instantiation  . We agree with these authors that the use of domain knowledge is an important element in understanding ill-formed input  . However , in instances where the preposition is not omitted  , but rather replaced by a nonstandard preposition , we claim that an understanding of the linguistic principles involved in the substitution is necessary  . 
To explain how constraint relaxation is accomplished  , a brief system description is needed . Our system uses a parser based on Tomita (1986) , with modifications to allow constraints and structure-building  . It uses contextfree phrase structure rules , augmented with morphological , contextual , and semantic constraints . Application of the phrase structure rules results in a parse tree  , similar to a Lexical-Functional Grammar ( LFG ) " c-structure " ( Bresnan 1982 )  . The constraints are unified at parse time to produce a functionally labelled template  ( FLT )  . The FLT is then input to a semantic translation module  . Using ARGUMENT oper and semantic rules , semantic translation creates situation frames ( SF )  . 
SFs consist of a predicate and entity frames ( EF )  , whose semantic roles in the situation are labeled  . Other semantic objects are relational frames ( e . g . prepositional phrases ), property frames ( e . g . adjective phrases ) , and unit frames ( measure phrases ) . 
During the semantic interpretation and discourse analysis phase  , the situation frame is interpreted , resulting in one or more instantiated knowledge base  ( KB ) objects , which are state or event descriptions with entity participants  . 
2.0 REPRESENTING ARGUMENT
MAPPINGIN ANNLP SYSTEM
In our lexicons , verbs and adjectives are linked to one or more predicate classes which are defined in the Natural Language 
Knowledge Base ( NLKB) . Predicates typically governone or more arguments or thematic roles  . All general , class-level information about the thematic roles which a given predicate governs is represented at the highest possible level  . Only idiosyncratic information is represented in the lexicon  . When lexicons are loaded the idiosyncratic information in the lexicon is unified with the general information in the 
NLKB . Our representation scheme has certain implementational advantages : lexicons are less error-prone and easier to modify  , the data are more compact , constraint relaxation is facilitated , etc . 
More importantly , we claim that such semantic lasses are psychologically valid  . 
Our representation scheme is based on the principle that ARGUMENT MAPPING is generally determined at the class-level  , i . e . , predicates group along semantic lines as to the type of 
ARGUMENT MAPPING they take . Our work draws from theoreticalinguistic studies of thematic relations  ( e . g . , Gruber 1976, Jackendoff 1983, and Ostler 1980) . 
We do not accept the " strong " version of localism  , i . e . , that all form mirrors function -- that ARGUMENT MAPPING classes arise from metaphors based on spatial relations  . Unlike case grammar , we limit the number of cases or roles to a small set  , based on how they are manifested in surface syntax  . We subsequently " interpret " roles based on the semantic class of the predicate  ,   . g . , the GOAL of an ATTITUDE is generally an animate " experiencer '  . 
For example , in the NLKB the
ARGUMENT MAPPING of predicates which denote a change in spatial relation specifies a GOAL argument  , marked with prepositions which posit a GOAL relation  ( to , into , and onto ) and a SOURCE argument , marked with prepositions which posit a SOURCE relation  ( from , out of , off of ) . A subclass of these predicates , namely Vendler's (1967) achievements , mark the
GOAL argument with prepositions which posit an OVERLAP relation  ( at , in ) . 

MOVE to/into/onto from/out of/off of
ARRIVE at/in from
The entries for these verbs in SRA's lexicon merely specify which semantic lass they belong to  ( e . g . , SPATIAL-RELATION ) , whether they are stative or dynamic , whether they allow an agent , and whether they denote an achievement . Their
ARGUMENT MAPPING is not entered explicitly in the lexicon  . The verb reach , on the other hand , which marks its GOAL idiosyncratically , as a direct object , would have this fact in its lexical entry . 
2.1 GROUPING SEMANTICROLES
Both on implementation aln dontheoretical grounds  , we have grouped certain semantic roles into superclasses  . 
Such groupings arc common in the literature on case and valency  ( see Somers 1987 ) and are also supported by crosslinguistic evidence  . Our grouping of roles follows previous work . For example , the
AGENT SUPER CLASS covers both animate agents as well as inanimate instruments  . A
GROUND SUPER CLASS(as discussed in
Talmy 1985) includes both SOURCE and
GOAL , and a GOALSUPERCLASS includes GOAL , PURPOSE , an'd

Certain semantic roles , like GOAL and SOURCE , as well as being sisters are " privatives " , that is , opposite semantically . 
Our representation scheme differentiates between lexically and semantically determined prepositions  . We will show how this representation facilitates recognition of the type of error  , and therefore principled relaxation of the constraints  . Furthermore , a principled many instances on knowing the relationship between the nonstandard and the expected prepositions : are they sisters  , privatives , or is the nonstandard preposition a parent of the expected preposition  . 
In the following section we present examples of the five types of preposition usage errors  . In the subsequent section , we discuss how our system presently handles these errors  , or how it might eventually handle them . 
3.0 THEDATA
We have classified the variation data according to the type of substitution  . 
The main types are: ( 1 ) semantic for semantic ( Section 3 . 1), (2) semantic for lexical ( Section 3 . 2), (3) blends ( Section 3 . 3), (4) false starts ( Section 3 . 4), and (5) semantic for syntactic ( Section 3 . 5) . 
The data presented below are a representative sample of a larger group of examples  . The current paper covers the classifications which we have encountered so far  ; we expect hat analysis of additional data will provide further types of substitutions within each class  . 
3.1 SEMANTICFORSEM ANTIC 3.1.1 To/From
The substitution of the goal marker for the source marker crosslinguistically is recognized in the case literature  ( e . g . , lkegami 1987) . In English , this appears to be more pronounced in certain regional dialects  . Common source/go allternations cited by Ikegami ( 1987:125 ) include : averse from/to , different from/to , immune from/to , and distinction from/to . The majority of examples involve to substituting for from in lexical items which incorporate a negation of the predicate  ; the standard marker of GROUND in this class of predicates is a SOURCE marker  , e . g . , different from . The " positive " counterparts mark the GROUND with GOAL  , e . g . , similar to , as discussed in detail in Gruber (1976) . Variation between to and from can only occur with verbs which incorporate a negative  , otherwise the semantic distinction which these prepositions denote is necessary  . 
(1 ) The way that he came on to that be reaved brother completely alienated me TO Mr  . Bush . 
9/26/88 MCS ( 2 ) At this moment I'm different TO primitive man . 10/12/88 The Mind , PBS 3 . 1 . 2 To/With
Communication and transfer of knowledge can be expressed either as a process with multiple  , equally involved participants , or as an asymmetric process with one of the participants as the " agent " of the transfer of information  . Our data document he substitution of the GOAL marker for the CO-THEME marker  ; this may reflect the tendency of English to prefer " agent " focussing  . The participants in a COMMUNICATION situation are similar in their semantic roles  , the only difference being one of " viewpoint . " By no means all communication predicates operate in this way : e  . g . , EXPLANATION,
TRANSFEROFKNOWLEDGE are more clearly asymmetr ic  . The system differentiates between " mutual " and " asymmetric " ommunication predicates  . 
(3) The only reason the y'llch at TO you is , you ' reeither pretty , or they need something from your husband . 9/30/88 MCS ( 4 ) 171 have to sit down and explore this TO you .  10/16/88 3 . 2 SEMANTICFORLEXICAL 3 . 2 . 1 Goal Superclass ( Goal /

Goal and purpose are frequently expressed by the same case-marking  , with the DIRECTION marker alternating with these at times  . The standard preposition in these examples is lexically determined  . In example (6) , instead of the lexically determined to , which also marks the semantic role GOAL , another preposition within the same superclass is chosen  . In example ( 5 ) the phrasally determined for is replaced by the GOAL marker  . There is abundant crosslinguistic evidence for a
GOAL SUPER CLASS which includes
GOAL and PURPOSE ; to a lesser extent
DIRECTION also patterns with these crosslinguistically  . 
(5) It's changing TO the better . 8/3/88 MCS (6) Mr . Raspberry is almost 200 years behind Washingtonians a piring FOR full citizenship  . 
10/13/88 WP
Several examples involve lexical items expressing knowledge or cognition  , for which the standard preposition is lexically determined  . This preposition is uniformly replaced by on , also a marker of the semantic role of REFERENT . 
Examples include a breast of , grasp of , an idea of , and knowledge of . We claim that the association of the role REFERENT with knowledge and cognition  ( as well as with transfer-of-information predicates  ) is among the more salient associations that language learners encounter  . 
(7) Terry Brown ,  47 , a truck d river , agreed ; " with eight years in the White House , " he said , " Bushought to have a better grasp ON the details  . "9/27/88 NYT p . B8 ( 8 ) I did get an idea ON the importance of consistency as far as reward and penalty are concerned  . 11/88 ETM journal 3 . 2 . 3 With/From/To In this class , we believe that " mutual action verbs " such as marry and divorcer outinely show a CO-THEME marker with being substituted for either to or from  . 
Such predicates have a SECONDARY-
MAPPING of PLURAL-THEME in the
NLKB . Communication predicates are another class which allows a PLURAL- 
THEME and show alternation of GOAL and CO-THEME ( Section 3 . 1 . 2) . 
(9 ) Today Robin Givens said she won'task for any money in her divorce WITH Mike 
Tyson . 10/19/88ATC 3.3 FALSE STARTS
The next set of example suggests that the speaker has " retrieved " a preposition from a dif ferent ARGUbIENT MAPPING for the verb or for a di fferent argument than the one which is eventually produced  . For example , confused with replaces confused by in (10) , and say to replace say about in (11) . Such examples are more prevalent in oral language . 
Handling these examples is difficult since all sorts of contextual information--linguistic and nonlinguistic--goes into detecting the error  . 
(10 ) They didn't want to be confused WITH the facts . 11/14/88 DRS ( 11 ) The memorial service was really well done . The rabbid id a good job . What do you say TO akid who died fike that ? 11/14/88   3  . 4 BLENDS
Here , a lexically or phrasally determined preposition is replaced by a preposition associated with a semantically similar lexical item  . In (12) Quayle says he was smitten about Marilyn , possibly thinking of crazy about . In ( 13 ) he may be thinking of on the subject/topic of . The questioner in ( 14 ) may have in support/favor of in mind . In ( 15 ) Quayle may have meant we learn by making mistakes  . In (16) , the idiomatic phrase in support of is confused with the 
ARGUlVlENT MAPPING of the noun support , e . g . , " he showed his support for the president ' . 
(12) I was very smitten ABOU Ther . . . Is awagood thing and I responded rather quickly and she did too  . 10/20/88 WP , p . C8 ( 13 ) ON the area of the federal budget deficit . . . . 10/5/88 Sen . Quayle invp debate (& NYT10/7/88p . B 6 )   ( 14 ) You made one of the most eloquent speeches IN be half of contra aid  . 10/5/88 Questioner in VP debate (& NYT10/7/88p . B6) (15) We learn BY our mistakes . 10/5/88 Sen . 
Quayle invp debate (& NYT10/7/88p.
B6 )   ( 16 ) We testified in support FOR medical leave . 10/22/88 FFS 3 . 5 SEMANTICFORSYNTACTIC - -

In the majority of the following examples , the syntactically governed by marking passives is replaced by WITH  . 
This alternation of with and by inpassives has been attested for hundreds of years  , and we hypothesize that English may be in the process of reinterpreting by  , as well as replacing it with with in certain contexts  . 
On the one hand , by is being reinterpreted as a marker of " archetypal " agents  , i . e , those high on the scale of AGENTIVITY(i . e . , speaker ? human ? animate ? potent ? non -animate  , non-potent ) . On the other hand , a semantically appropriate marker is being
We analyze the WITH in these examples either as the less agentive 
AGENT ( namely the INSTRUlVlENT ) in example (18) , or the less agentive CO-THEME in example (17) . The substitutions are semantically appropriate and the substitutes are semantically related to 
AGENT . ?(17) All of Russian Hfew as accompanied
WITH some kind of singing . 8/5/88 ATC ( 18 ) Audiences here are especially enthused
WITH Dukakis's description of the
Reagan-Bush economic policies . 11/5/88 ATC 4 . 0 THE COMPUTATIONAL

Of the five types of errors cited in
Section 3 , substitutions of semantic for semantic ( Section 3 . 1), semantic for lexical ( Section 3 . 2), and semantic for syntactic ( Section 3 . 5) are the simplest to handle computationally . 
4.1 SEMANTICFORSEMANTICOR

The representation scheme described above ( Section 2 ) facilitates handling the semantic for semantic and semantic for lexical substitutions  . 
Semantic for semantic substitutions are allowed if  ( i ) the predicate belongs to the communication class and the standard CO- 
THEME marker is replaced by a GOAL marker , or ( ii ) the predicate incorporates a negative and GOAL is substituted for a standard 
SOURCE , or vice versa.
Semantic for lexical substitutions are allowed if ( iii ) the nonstandard preposition is a non-privative sister of the standard preposition  ( e . g . , in the GOAL SUPERCLASS ) ,   ( iv ) " the nonstandard preposition is the NLKB -inherited  , " default " preposition for the predicate ( e . g . , REFERENT for predicates of cognition and knowledge  )  , or ( v ) in the NLKB the predicate allows a
SECONDARY-MAPPING of PLURAL-
THE lvIE(e . g . , marital predicates as in the divorce with example  )  . 
Handling the use of a nonstandard preposition marking an argument crucially involves " type checking '  , where in the " type " of the noun phrase is checked  , e . g . for membership in an NLKB class such as animate -creature  , time , etc . Type-checking is also used to narrow the possible senses of the preposition in a prepositional phrase  , as well as to prefer certain modifier attachments . 
Prepositional phrases can have two relations to predicating expressions  , i . e . , a governed argument ( PREP-ARG ) or an
ADJUNCT . During parsing , the system accesses the ARGUMENT MAPPING for the predicate  ; once the preposition is recognized as the standard marker of an argument  , an ADJUNCT reading is disallowed . The rule for PREP-ARG is a separate rule in the grammar  . When the preposition does not match the expected preposition  , the system checks whether any of the above conditions  ( iv ) hold ; if so , the parse is accepted , but is assigned a lower likelihood . If a parse of the PP as an
ADJUNCT is also accepted , it will be preferred over the ill-formed PREP-ARG . 
4.2 SEMANTICFORSYNTACTIC
The substitution of semantic marking for syntactic  ( WITH for BY ) is easily handled : during semantic mapping by phrases in the ADJUNCTS are mapped to the role of the active subject  , assuming that " type checking " allows that interpretation f the noun phrase  . It is also possible for such a sentence to be ambiguous  , e . g . , " he was seated by the man ' . We treat with phrases similarly , excep that ambiguity between CO-THEME and PASSIVE SUBJECT is not allowed  , based on our observation that with for by is used for noun phrases low on the animacy scale  . Thus , only the CO-THEME interpretation is valid if the noun phrase is animate  . 
4.3 FALSESTARTS ANDBLENDS
False starts are more difficult , requiring an approach similar to that of case grammar  . In these examples , the preposition is acceptable with the verb , but not to mark that particular argument . The " incorrect " preposition must be quite inconsistent with that sense of the predicate for the error even to be noticed  , since the preposition is acceptable with some other sense  . We are assessing the frequency of false starts in the various genres in which our system is being used  , to determine whether we need to implement a strategy to handle these examples  . We predict that future systems for understanding spoken language will need to accomodate his phenomenon  . 
We do not handle blends currently.
They involve a form of analogy , i . e . , smitten is like mad , syntactically , semantically , and even stylistically ; they may shed some light on language storage and retrieval  . Recognizing the similarity in order to allow a principled handling seems very difficult  . 
In addition , blends may provide evidence for a " topdown " language production strategy  , in which the argument structure is determined before the lexieai items are chosen/inserted  . Our data suggest that some people may be more prone to making this type of error than are others  . Finally , blends are more frequent in genres in which people attemptous eastyle that they do not command  ( e . g . , student papers , radio talk shows) . 
5.0 DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE WORK
In this paper we have described a frequent type of ill-formed input which NLP systems must handle  , involving the use of nonstandard prepositions to mark arguments  . We presented a classification of these errors and described our algorithm for handling some of these error types  . The importance of handling such nonstandard input will increase as speech recognition becomes more reliable  , because spoken input is less formal . 
In the near term , planned enhancements include adjusting the weighting scheme to more accurately reflect the empirical data  . A frequency-based model of preposition usage , based on a much larger and broader sampling of text will improve system handling of those errors  . 

We would like to express our appreciation of our colleagues ' contributions to the SRANLP system : 
Gayle Aycrs , Andrew Fan G , Ben Fine,
Karyn German , Mary Dee Harris , David
Reel , and Robert M . Simmons.
REFERENCES 1 . Aitchison , Jean .  1987 . Words in the Mind . 
Blackwell , NY.
2. Blejer , Hatte and Sharon Flank . 1988.
More Evidence for the Semantic Basis of
Prepositional Case Marking , delivered
December 28, 1988, Linguistic Society of
America Annual Meeting , New Orleans.
3. Bresnan , Joan , cd . 1982. The Mental
Representation of Grammatical Relations.
MIT Press , Cambridge.
4. Carbonell , Jaime and Philip Hayes . 1983.
Recovery Strategies for Parsing
Extragrammatical Language . American
Journal of Computational Linguistics 9 ( 3-4 ) : 123-146 . 
5 . Chierchia , Gennaro , Barbara Partee , and Raymond Turner , eds .  1989 . Properties,
Types and Meaning . Kluwer , Dordrecht.
6. Chomsky , Noam . 1981. Lectures on
Government and Binding . Foris , Dordrecht.
7. Croft , William . 1986. Categories and
Relations in Syntax : The Clause-Level
Organization of Information . Ph.D.
Dissertation , Stanford University.
8. Dahlgren , Kathleen . 1988. Naive
Semantics for Natural Language
Understanding . Kluwer , Boston.
9. Dirven , Rene and Gunter Radden , eds.
1987. Conceptso/Case . Gunter Narr,

10. Dowry , David . 1989. On the Semantic
Content of the Notion of ' Thematic Role'.
In Chierchia , et al II : 69-129.
11. Foley , William and Robert Van Valin Jr.
1984. Functional Syntax and Universal
Grammar . Cambridge Univ . Press,

11612. Gawron , Jean Mark . 1988. Lexical
Representations and the Semantics of
Complementation . Garland , NY.
13. Gazdar , Gerald , Ewan Klein , Geoffrey
Pullum , and Ivan Sag . (GKPS ) 1985.
Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar.
Harvard Univ . Press , Cambridge.
14. Gruber , Jeffrey . 1976. Lexical
Structures in Syntax and Semantics . North-
Holland , Amsterdam.
15 . Haiman , John .  1985 . Natural Syntax : lconicity and Erosion . Cambridge
University Press , Cambridge.
16. Hirst , Graeme . 1987. Semantic
Interpretation and the Resolution of
Ambiguity . Cambridge University Press,

17. Ikegami , Yoshihiko . 1987.' Source'vs.
' Goal':a Case of Linguistic Dissymetry , in
Dirven and Radden 122-146.
18. Jackendoff , Ray . 1983. Semantics and
Cognitwn . MIT Press , Cambridge.
19 . Jensen , Karen , George Heidorn , Lance Miller and Yael Ravin .  1983 . Parse Fitting and Prose Fixing : Getting a Hold on Ill-formedness  . American Journal of Computational Linguistics 9 ( 3-4 ) : 147-160 . 
20. Menyuk , Paula . 1969. Sentences Children
Use . MIT Press , Cambridge.
21. Miller , Glenn and Philip Johnson-Laird.
1976. Language and Perception . Harvard
University Press , Cambridge.
22. Ostler , Nicholas . 1980. A Theory of
Case Linking and Agreement . Indiana
University Linguistics Club.
23. Pinker , Steven . 1982. A Theory of the
Acquisition of Lexical Interpretive
Grammars , in Bresnan 655-726.
24. Shopen , Timothy , ed . 1985. Language
Typology and Syntactic Description.
Cambridge University Press , Cambridge.
25. Somers , H . L . 1987. Valency and Case in
Computational Linguistics . Edinburgh
University Press , Edinburgh.
26 . Talmy , Leonard .  1985 . Lexicalization Patterns : Semantic Structure in Lexical 
Forms . In Shopen III : 57-149.
27 . Tomita , Masuru .  1986 . Efficient Parsing for Natural Language . Kluwer , Boston . 
28. Vendler , Zeno . 1967. Linguistics in
Philosophy . Cornell University Press,

29. Weischedel , Ralph and Norman
Sondheimer . 1983. Meta-rules as a Basis for
Processing Ill-Formed Input . American
Journal of Computational Linguistics 9 ( 3-4 ) :161-177 . 
APPENDIXA . DATASOURCES
ATC : National Public Radio news program , " All Things Considered "
ME : National Public Radio news program , " Morning Edition "
WE : National Public Radio news program , " Weekend Edition "
MCS : WAM Uradio , Washington D . C . , interview program , " The Mike Cuthbert

DRS : WAM Uradio , Washington D . C . , interview program , " Diane RehmShow "
FFS : WAM Uradio , Washington D . C . , interview program , " Fred Fiske Saturday "
AIH : Canadian Broadcasting Company radio news program  , " As It Happens "
NYT : The New York Times
WP : The Washington Post
ETM_:Student journal for " Effective
Teaching Methods , " ajunior undergraduate course
