CONVERSATION ALLY RELEV ANT DESCRIPTIONS
Amlchai Kronfeld
Natural Language Incorporated
2910 Seventh St.
Berkeley , CA 94710
iAb stract
Conversationally relevant descriptions are definite descriptions that are not merely tools for the identification of a referent  , but are also crucial to the discourse in other respects  . I analyze the uses of such descriptions in assertions as conveying a particular ~ ype of conversational implicatures  . Such implics-tures can be represented within the framework of possible world semantics  . The analysis is extended to non-assertive illocutionary acts on the one hand  , and to indefinite descriptions on the other . 
2 Introduction
In an earlier paper \[ Kronfeld 1986 bI have introduced the distinction between /unctionagiy and conversationally relevant descriptions  . All uses of definite descriptions for the purpose of referring are functional in the sense that they are supposed to identify the referent  . But some uses of definite descriptions exhibit a type of relevance  ( or irrelevance ) that goes beyond identification purposes . Consider the following example . As part of his effort to re = cruit more young people into the police force  , the mayor of New York proclaims in a public speech :  1 New York needs more policemen . 
Instead of gNew York " he might have used U The Big Apple  , sor ~ The city by the Hudson , ~ or some such description . It would not do , however , to say that 2 The city with the world's largest Je wish community needs more policemen even though this description might be useful enough in identifying New York for the audience  . It is simply irrelevant in this context . On the other hand ,   5O this same description might be quite relevant in a different context  . For example , suppose the may or were giving a speech at a reception in honor of Is-rael's Prime Minister  . Under those circumstances , the statement $ The city with the world's largest Jewish community welcomes Israel's Prime 

would make perfect sense . The difference , of course , is in the relevance of the description to the state = ment in  ( 3 )  , and its irrelevance to the one in (2) . 
Uses of definite descriptions such as illustrated in example  ( 3 )  , are what Ic all conversationally relevant . 
The distinction between functionally and conver -sationally relevant descriptions is part of a general model of referring that is based on what I have termed the  dea4:riptlve approach to reference \[ Kron-reid 1990\]  . An ellucidation of the speech act of referring cannot be complete without understanding the role of conversationally relevant descriptions in the larger discourse  . My hypothesis in \[ Kronfeld 1086\] was that conversationally relevant descriptions function as part of implicatures of a particular type  . The problem is to specify what this type is . An outline of a solution is the topic of the present paper  . 
3 Implicature
Why should we think that whenever a conversation -ally relevant description is used an implicature always exists ? The reason for this has to do with the fact that discourse is something more than a simple sum of the isolated sentences that constitute its parts  . Discourse consists of a sequence of utterances that are tied together in ways that makes ere  . Typically , there are m~o ~ uf why a speaker says what he says in the order and manner that he says it  , and in general ahearer must have a clue as to what these reasons are  ( this is why plan recognition is so important for plan-based theories of speech acts  )  . Of course , the hearer cannot hope to know or even guess all of the reasons that led the speaker to participate in the discourse  , but he can , indeed must , recognize aome of them . As AL len , Cohen , Gross , Perranlt , and Sidner have pointed out \[ Allen 1978 ; Perranlt and Cohen 1978 ; Alien and Perranlt 1978 ; Allen and Perranlt 1980 ; Gross and Sidner 1986 ; Sidner 1983 ; Sidner 1985\] , the recognition of what the speaker is " up to e contributes to coherence and comprehensibility of the discourse and is essential for the hearer's generation of an appropriate response  . 
Now , the unstated reasons whose recognition is required for discourse coherence are by de ~ nition implicated  , since they must be inferred in order to preserve the assumption that the speaker is being cooperative  . This is precisely what an implicature is . Moreover , turning to conversationally relevant descriptions  , we should observe that by their very nature , they cannot be merely functionally relevant . 
That is , the assumption that they are intended merely as tools for identification is not enough to make the discourse coherent  . This , after all , is pre . 
cisely what distinguishes functionally relevant de -scriptious from the conversationally relevant ones  . 
Hence , additional assumptions are required in order to make sense of the way the speaker uses the latter descriptions  . These assumptious themselves must be implicated . 
Thus , in using a conversationally relevant description , the speaker implicate something . The content of implicatures that accompany such descriptions depends on circumstances  , but they all share a rather specific form . My method in uncovering this form is this: taking the heater's perspective  , I begin by postulating that if the referring expremion used by the speaker is merely functionally relevant  , the speaker must be viewed as uncooperative . I then outline a sequence of deductions that eliminate the apparent conflict between what the speaker says and the assumption of his cooperation  . 
3.1 Recognition
The general mechanism for the recognition of a conversationally relevant description follows the familiar Gricean path  . The hearer begins by assuming that the referring expression is only functionally relevant  , and then gets into diflic nlties . An obvious strategy is illustrated by Example ( 3 ) above . 
At first glance it appears that the may or violated the third maxim of manner  ( ' Bebriei ~ ) : he used the large at Jewish couunltym )  , although a much shorter and functionally superior one is available  ( ' New York ' . However , a hearer can easily make sense of the mayor's behavior by assuming that the referring expression is not merely a tool for identification  . That is , it must be conversationally relevant . 
Another strategy for letting the hearer recog-a conversationally relevant description is illustrated by " Smith's murderer ~  ( interpreted " attributively ' )  . There , the assumption that the description is only functionally relevant would lead to a ninex -plicable violation of the second maxim of quality  . 
It is obvious that no one knows yet who murdered Smith  . Thus , if the description is only functionally relevant , the hearer would be pussled as to how the speaker could form an opinion about the sanity of a person whose identity is unknown to him  . 
3.2 Asserted universality
When a conversationally relevant description is used  ( or implied )  , the proposition which the speaker is trying to express lends itself to the Russellian analysis  . Thus , if a speaker asserts a statement of the form 4 The DisF , and " The D ~ is a conversationally relevant description  , then the proposition expessed by the speaker is this:  5   ( 3x ) (D ( x )  &  ( VY ) CD ( Y ) --* x = y ) & F ( x ) ) . ~ Note that ( 5 ) is equivalent to the conjunction of two propositions  . The first one is the uniqueness condition : 6 ( U'niquenels )   ( 3z ) CDCz ) ~ C V y ) (DCy ) ~ z = y ) ~ )  . 
The second is a universal generalization : . v , ( u ~ - . .er,~ztx ) (' v'z)(D ( . , . )--, F ( .  , ) )  . 
Both the uniqueness and the universality conditions have to be satisfied if what the speaker means is to be true  . But from this it does not follow that the speaker  ~   sert8 these conditions . Both Straw-son 11971\] and following him Searle \[1969  , 157 E . \] have argued in their criticism of Russell's theory of descriptions that the uniqueness condition  , though presupposed , is not ~ erted . For example , when a speaker says that the Queen of England is ill  , he does not ~ ert that there is one and only one Queen SContextu ~ linformation may be needed to augment the descriptive content of " The D  . " of England . This , no doubt , is true of the uniqueness condition , but I think that when a conversa-tionally relevant description is used  , the un~eerm6/-/ty condition is indeed asserted , or at least strongly implied . In a sense , what the speaker attempts to convey is that any object that is denoted by the description " the D thas the property F  , and this is why it is so natural to insert " who ever he is " in the classical examples of attributive uses of definite descriptious  . By saying " Smith's murderer , who-ever he is , is in sane " the speaker obviously means that for any person  , if that person is Smith's murderer , that person is in sane , which has the exact same form as (7) . Note that the convention for using definite descriptions to express universal statements already exists in the language  ( ' The whale is a mammar'i . e . , for any z , if z is a whale , then z is a mammal ) . Moreover , very frequently , when a conversationally relevant description is used  , the speaker would maintain that the universality condition is true even if uniqueness fails  . Suppose it turns out that not one but two culprits are responsible for Smith's orry state  . If our speaker asserted that Smith's murderer , whoever he is , is in sane , he is very likely to say now that both are in sane  , rather than withdraw his judgment altogether . All in all , it seems to mevery plausible to assume that when conversationally relevant descriptions are used  , the universal claim is not only part of the truth condi-tious  ( together with uniqueness )  , but part of what is asserted as well . 
3.3 Justification
A rational speaker who follows the Gricean maxims is expected  , among other things , to obey the second maxim of quality . That is , he is expected to have " adequate evidence ~ for what heasserts  . What counts as a dequate vidence obviously depends on context : we have di~erent standards for assertions in a scientific article and in a gossipy chat  . Nevertheless in all verbal exchanges , a speaker is expected to be able to provide reasonable justification for what he says  . He must be able to answer questions such as " how do you know ? " " why do you think so ?" and so on  . If he cannot , the assumption about his cooperation cannot be maintained  . 
If a universal statement such as ( 7 ) is part of what the speaker asserts , he must be able , then , to justify it . The hearer may not know exactly what the speaker 's evidence is for believing this general is a-tl on but the hearer can reason about the type of evidence or justification that the speaker is expected to have  . In particular , I want to draw a distinction between ezte ~ on a / and inten  . 5 ~ oaal justifications of universal statements . This distinction will help us see what sort of justification a speaker can offer relevant description is used  . 
The distinction between extensional and intensional justification of universal statements i based on a familiar distinction in the philosophy of science between accidental and law \ ] ike general  ; ffiations ( See Waiters 1967) . Not all universal generalls ~- tions are scientific laws  . For example , the following statement , although true , is not a law of nature : 8 All mount ~; n , on Eartharele ~ than 30 , 000 feet high . 
On the other hand , this next statement is: 9 All basketballs are attracted to the center of Earth  . 
What is the difference ? We\]\] , there are several , but two related ones are specifically relevant o us  . 
First , the latter generalization , but not the former , supports counter/actual statement . If a mountain on Earth were to be examined a billion years from now  , would it still be less than 30 , 000 feet high ? We don't know . Changes in the surface of the earth occur all the time  , and Mount Everest needs a mere 972 additional feet to make ( 8 ) false . On the other hand , if a player were to make a jump shot a bi\]H on years from now the basketball would still find its way down to the ground  . A law of nature does not lose its v'aHdity over time  . 
Second , there is a crucial difference in the manner in which statements  ( 8 ) and ( 9 ) are ju , ~t~fied . 
The gener 2 l ; tation about mountains one arth is supported by observation : all mountain  , one arth were measured and found to be less than 30  , 000 feet high . 
I do not know why this is so . As far as I am concerned this is just one more accidental fact about the world Illvein  . The generalization about bas-ket balk , on the other hand , is derived from a more general principle that explains why things such as basketballs behave the way they do  . Such a derivation is an essential part of an explanation of why  ( 9 ) is true . It also contributes to the coherence of our experience : what science provides us with  , among other things , is there auuring knowledge that natural phenomena do not just happen to occur  , but follow a general scheme that provides the basis for both explanation and prediction  . Thus , our confidence in the truth of ( 9 ) is not merely the result of examining a large sample of basketballs  . We also have a theory that explains why they do not just happen to come down whenever dropped  , but , in a sense , mu . ~ t do so . 
Given these two ditrerences between accidental and law l~estatements  , letezten ~ onal and ~ nten-a ~ oas/justifications of universal generalizations be defined as follows  . An extensional justification of a generalization such as " AllA's are F " would rely on the fact that a Ll  , or most , or a good sample of the things with the property A have been examined and were found to have property F  . In such a case there would not be any attempto explain why this is so  , only a claim that as things stand , all A's do , in fact , have the property F . An intensional justification of a universal genera Ksation  , on the other hand , would attempt to show that anything with the property of being Am~t have the property of being P  , because of a more general principle or theory from wld ch the gsneral ~ ation can be derived  .   2 The distinction I have just described is obviously not restricted to science  , nor am I interested in elu-cidating different scientific methods of corroboration  . Rather , I want to apply this distinction to the kind of justification that a speaker is expected to have for what he says  , in view of Grice's second maxim of quail W . In a sense , what I am after is a " folk theory " of justification  , not the foundation of knowledge . Thus , the extensional/intensional distinction between types of justification is in different to the question whether the evidence for a statement is good or bad  , as an intensional justification can be either silly or brilliant  . Moreover , the distinction applies to all sorts of judgments  , not merely theoretical ones . The biggotted justification for holding stereotypic beliefs would presumably be extensional  ( ' Look , I don't know why they are all such dirty cowards , but I have met enough of them to know that they are : '  )  . On the other hand , when the notorious fundamentalist preacher Jimmy Swaggart states that all adulterers are sinners  , he does not intend us to believe that he has examined all  ( most , enough ) adulterers and found that they happen to be sinners  . If someone who is not an adulterer now would become one  , he would have to be a sinner as well , and the reason for that is simple . Within $ waggart's world view , adulterers rn~t be sinners simply because the bible says so  , and whatever the bible says is true . The same distinction applies to the most mundane generalisations that can appear in discourse  .  "  A11 the nursery schools in our area are simply unacceptable ~ my friend tells me  . I assume the justification for what he says is extensional  ( he has checked out each and everyone )  , but then head ds : " . .  . they are all Montessori schools , " and an intensional justification is revealed . 
Clearly , extensional and intensional justification are not mutually exclusive  . Nor do they exhaus the types of justification one can use  . Thus , the justification of the most fundamental principles of any theory  ( scientific or otherwise )  , although clearly not extensional , would not be intensional either , since ~ Statisticai correlations belong to the extension alreal m  . 
Causal explanatiorm to the intension alone.
6 3 by definition they are not derivable from any other principles  ( they would still support counterfactuak , though ) . However , apart from such fundamental ax/oms , the justification of any universal generalisation  , if it is not extensional , must be intenaion a LN ow back to the unive reali W condition that the speaker asserts when he uses a conversationally re\]-evant description  . As mentioned already , the hearer may not know why the speaker believes the generalisation  , but from the heater's point of view it stands to reason that the speaker's justification is inten -donul  , because of the uniqueness condition . If the uniquene ~ condition is presupposed , an extensional justification of the universal generalization amounts to no more than this : there is evidence that the referent happens to have the property F  . But if this were all that the speaker had in mind  , it would be very misleading to give the impression that a universal generalization was meant  . To see why , consider a case in which an author tells you that all his books are published by Cambridge University Press  . If later you are to find out that he has publi -qhed only one book  , you would surely be pusaled , although as things are , his statement was technically true . 
In other words , if the uniqueness condition is presupposed , it makes little sense to assert a universal generalization  , unless the speaker believes that the gsneralisation m~t be true whether the uniqueness condition is true or not  . Thus , if the speaker has intensional justification for what he says  , the unique-ncss conditiono longer interferes with universality  . 
If the author tells you that he has just signed a lifetime contract with Cambridge University Press  , and therefore all his booksm~t be published there  , the fact that he has written only one book ( so far ) does not matter any more . In view of the contract , if he were to write others , they would be published by

For the speech act to be coherent , therefore , the speaker must have an interjional justification for  ( 7 )  . This is why frequently when a conversation-all y relevant description is used  ( for example , in the paradigmatically " attributive ~ uses of definite de-scriptious  )  , it is natural to replace the auxiliary verb with an appropriately tensed occurrence of " mnst  .  ~
For example , 10The inventor of the sewing machine , wa every whoever he or she was , ntuethue been smart . 
11If mypolitical ~ nalysis is correct , the.
Democratic andidate in 1992 will ~ . aveb V to be a conservative . 
12 The thief whost oley our diamond ring , knewmu , t ~ we known how valuable it was . 
My hypothesis , therefore , is that conversationally relevant descriptions are used to assert universal generalizations for which the speaker has inteusional justification  . Therefore , when a speaker says " The DisF " and " The D " is conversationally relevant  , a first approbation of what is usually being implicated is this:  13 Any D must be F . 
When the modal verb is actually added , the speaker simply makes ( part of ) the implicature explicit . 
3.4 The meaning of " must "
As it stands , the implicature expressed by ( 13 ) is hopelessly vague . The problem is with the modal verb ~ must . " How is it to be interpreted ? Compare , for example , the following uses : 14 ( a ) The birdm~t have entered through the attic . 
(b ) Whether I like it or not , Im~t paymy taxes . 
(?) The Butcher of Lionm , ~ tpay for his crimes.
If I do not paymy taxes , I will be punished . This is why I feel that I must do it . But if the bird did not enter through the attic , or if the Butcher of Lion does not pay for his crimes  , neither bird nor beast will be punished as a result of that  . Moreover , if the bird did not enter through the attic , the speaker uttering 14 ( a ) would simply be wrong . But whether or not the Butcher of Lione verpays for his crimes  , the speaker uttering 14 ( c ) would nevertheless be right . 
Thus , in each case , the intended interpretation of the modal verb is radically different  . 
Is the word " must " multiply ambiguous then ? Not necessarily  . As Angelika Kratser has argued \[1977 ;  1979 ;  1981\] , the force of modal verbs such as " must " is relative to an implied contextual element  . 
The examples in 14 are elliptical pronouncements whose full meaning can be given by the following :  15   ( a ) In view of what we know , the bird must have entered through the attic . 
( b ) In view of what the law is , I must paymy taxes , whether I like it or not . 
(?) In view of our moral convictions , the
Butcher of Lion must pay for his crimes.
The interpretation of " must " in each example is indeed different  , but there is , Kratzer argues , a core of meaning which is common to al LT his core is lated within the framework of possible -world semantics  . Schematically , Kratser's suggestion is that the meaning of " must " is given by the function m~t-in-dew-o /  , which accepts two arguments . One argument is the proposition within the scope of the modal verb  ( e . g . , The bird came through the attic in 14 ( a)) . Values for the other argument are phrases such as " what is known  , "a what the law is , "" our moral convictions , " etc . Thus , for example , sentence 15 ( a ) is interpreted as 16 Must = In-View-Of ( What is known , The bird entered through heattic ) The sentence is true in possible worl duJ just in case the proposition expressed by " The bird entered through the attic " logically follows from what we know in w\[K ratzer  1977  ,  346\] .   3 Kratser's suggestion can be used in the elucid a -tion of the implicature conveyed by a conversation-ally relevant description  . Let f stand for phrases such as " what is known , "" What the law is , " etc . 
Applying Kratser's analysis to ( 13 ) we get 17In view of / , any D must be F . 
or more accurately : lSMust = In-View-Of (/ , any D/aF ) . 
(18) , then , is the implicature conveyed by a typical use of a conversationally relevant description  . How " in view of . f " is to be interpreted is up to the hearer to find out  , but we may assume that possible values for fcome from a list that is scanned by the hearer until a particular item on the list provides a satisfactory interpretation  . Such a list may contain the following ( see Kratzer 1981 ,  44-45 , for possible-world interpretation ) : ? Factuo J : In view of facts of such and such kinds  . .  .   ( including institutional facts such as what the law is  )  . 
a Phrases such as " what is known , ~" our moral convictions , n " what the facts are , ~ and so on are represented by Krat ~ eru functions from possible worlds to sets of propositions  . For example , " what is known ~ is represented as a funotion J " which assign sets of propositions to possible worlds such that for each possible world w  , f ( w ) contains all the propositions that are known in that world  . According to Kratser's first suggestion , for any function/from worlds to sets of propositions  , and for every proposition P , " It must be the case that P in view off ' is true into just in case /  ( to ) entails P . As Kratlernotes , this is only the first step in the elucidation of the meaning of modal verbs  , and it works only when . f ( to ) is guaranteed to be consistent ( as is indeed the case when f is " what is known ~   )  . When/(to ) can be inconsistent ( e . g . , when \[ is , d ~ the / , L w / e ) , problems arise , which Kratzer solves using the concept of the set of all consistent subsets  . 
? E piatemi ?: In view of what is known . . . ( or alternatively , what is believed , assumed , hypothesised , and so on ) . 
? Stereotypical : In view of the normal course of events  . . . 
? Deontic : In view of what is the right thing to do  .   .   . 
? Teleoloqical : In view of our objectives .   .   . ( or alternatively , our wishes , our intentions , and
SO on).
While the l~t may turn out to be much longer , there is no reason to assume that it will be infinite  . 
The assumption that a conversationally relevant description is used to implicate a modal operator provides a formal reason why in paradigmatically attributive uses  , if nothing fits the description , the speech act as a whole must fail . If ( 18 ) is part of what the speaker means in these cases , the description is within the scope of a modal operator  , hence , within an intensional context in which substitution is not guaranteed to be a valid form of  ; nference . 
Suppose that Ralphasserts that in view of what we know about the normal human propensity for violence  , Smith's murderer , whoever he is , must be in sane ; and suppose Ralph thinks that Smith's murderer is Jane ' suncle  . Substituting " Jane's uncles for ~ Smith's murderer " yields the wrong result : it is not the case that in view of what we know about the normal human propensity for violence  , Jane ' suncle , whoever he is , must be in sane . Since in general substitution is not allowed in intensional contexts  , when the description fads ( i . e . , no one murdered Smith ) , Ralph's speech act must fail too . The fact that he may know quite well whohe though the culprit was does not matter  . 
By way of summary , here are the steps that a hearer might go through in calculating the implicature that is typically intended when a conversation-ally relevant description is used :  1  . Recognising a conversationally relevant description  2  . Identifying the universal generalization 3 . Postulating an intensional justification 4 . Locating an appropriate set of propositions relative to which the modal operator is interpreted Of course  , this mechanism is much more flexible than I make it out to be  , and a speaker can use it to satisfy various other goals  . For example , a definite description can be used to provide information \[ Appelt  1985\]  , or to highlight shared knowledge , or simply to avoid mechanical repetition of a proper name  . The following quotation illustrates how a conversationally relevant description can achieve all these goals simultaneously : who is considered along shot for the Vice-Presidential nomination  , received more than seven million votes . The J6-year-old Okie a goele ~ yman has not said whether he wants the second spot on the Democratic ticket  . . . ( New York Times , June 28 ,  1988 ) Since the name " Jackson " is already available as the best functionally relevant referring expression  , it should be obvious to the reader that the description " the  46-year-old Chicago clergyman ~ is conversationally relevant . But if the reader were to go through the steps outlined above  , he would reach a dead end . There is nothing in view of which it m~t be the case that any  46 year old Chicago clergyman has not said whether he wants the second spot on the democratic ticket  . Thus , the implicature that usually accompanies a conversationally relevant description is ruled out  . Nor is there an obvious implicit description that is used to convey a similar implicature  . The reader is then forced to search for other explanations  , and one obvious possibility is that the author wants to inform the reader  ( or remind him ) that Jackson is a 46 year old clergymanf Tom Chicago . 
4 iNon-assertives
So far I have assumed that the conversationally relevant description is used within the context of an assertion  , and I have relied , in my derivation of the im-pU cature , on the fact that in assertions the speaker is expected to have a dequate vidence for what he says  . In other speech acts , however , evidence and justification play a completely different role  , if any . 
For example , a speaker who asks a question is not expected to have X evidence ~ for it  . Still , the use of conversationally relevant descriptions i clearly not restricted to assertions  . Consider the following: 20 \[After the verdict is pronounced , the Mayor to the District Attorney \]
Congratulations on nailing then togt fear some criminal in recent Ai ~ tory  . 
21\[While the serving plate is passed around , a guest to the host JI am not very hungry . Could I have the sntalle ~ t ~ teak please ? 22 \[A young cop to his superior , as the chase he ~\] Onething I can promise you: I will not let 
Smith's murderer getaway !
A detailed description of how my account can be extended to cover these cases would take us too far a field  . In general , however , the same analysis can apply to non-assertions such as the above as wel LC oherence is no leas important in discourse containing requests  , warnings , promises , etc . than in one containing assertives . The hearer must understand the reasonstuhy a congratulation  , a request , or a promise are being performed , and the role of conver-sationally relevant descriptions in such speech acts would be similar to their roles in assertives  , with similar impficatures . As rough approximations , the implicatures involved in the three examples above are expressed by the following statements  , respectively : ? In view of the danger that criminals pose to society  , nailing the most fear some criminal in recent history is an act that must be congratu-lated  . 
? In view of my wish to stay both slim and polite,
I must have the smallest steak.
? In view of mymoral convictions , I should try my best to bring Smith's murderer to justice  . 
5 Indefinite descriptions
In this paper I take referring exp~ssious to be uses of noun phrases that are intended to indicate that a particular object is being talked about  . Hence , indefinite descriptions can obviously serve as referring expressions  , and the distinction between functional and conversational relevance should apply to them as well  . Usually , a use of an indefinite description as a referring expression signals to the hearer that the identity of the referent is not important  ( e . g . , IA police man gave measpeeding ticket J ) . Some uses of indefinite descriptions , however , are clearly made with the intention that the hearer identify whom the speaker has in mind  . For example ,   23 A person I know did not take out the garbage as he had promised  . . . 
Here , identification is obviously required , but it does not matter at all how the referent is identified  . The indefinite description is , therefore , only functionally relevant . In contrast , consider the following 24 A cardio ea a cuclars ~ ci ~ t told me that I exercise too much  . 
Although the identity of the physician is not important  , the fact that he is a cardiovascular specialist surely is  . The indefinite description is , therefore , con~ersatiqnally relevant . 
Deborah Dalai discusses interesting cases in which an indefinite description is both spe?if ~  ( i . e . , used with the intention that the hearer know the identity of the referent  ) and attributive ( that is , conversa-tionally relevant ) . Here is one of her examples : 25 Dr . Smithtold me that exercise helps . Since I heard it from a doctor , I'minclined to believe it\[Dahl1984\] . 
Clearly , an accurate interpretation of a a doctor ~ would connect he referent with Dr  . Smith . At the same time , the use of the indefinite description highlights a property of Smith which is conversationally relevant  . Note that the indefinite description is used to implicate a universal general iffiation  , namely , that in view of what doctors know , any doctor who gives you an advice , should ( other things being equal ) be listened to . This is very similar in structure to the impl kature that is typically associated with conver-sationally relevant definite descriptions  . 
As is the case with definite descriptions , uch uses of indefinite descriptions can accomplish other purposes besides  ( or instead of ) implicating a universalgs neralization . For example , 26 In fact , the Dewey-Truman match up illustrates the point . Mr . Truman was though to be a weak leader who could not carry outhis strong predecessor's program  . 
Hi selection prospects were bleak . The pund its were against him and a highly successful Northe~ts rnG over nor was poised to sweep into the White House  . 
( New York Times , May 26, 1988)'
The calculation of the impll cature conveyed by the in definite description is left as an exercise for the reader  . 

Allen , J . F .  1978 . Recogn/~/ng Intention in Dialogue . Ph . D . di~s . , University of Toronto . 
Allen , J . F . and C . R . Perrault .  1978 . Participating in dialogues : understanding via plan deduction  . In Proceedings , Canadian Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence  . 
ALlen , J . F . and C . R . Perrault .  1980 . Analyzing intention in dialogues . Artificial Intelligence , 15(3):143-178 . 
Appelt , D . E . 1985. Planning Engl~h Sentences.
Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge.
Dahl , Deborah A .  1984 . Recognizing sepcific attributes , presented at the 59th Annum Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America  . Baltimore . 
4In this oped , piece the author argues that polls showing Michael Dukakis leading George Bush in the race for the pres-idency do not mean much  . Note that in May 1988 , Dukakis is the Governor of Mauachusetts , a Northeastern state . 

Gross , B . J . and C . L . Sidner .  1986 . Attention , in-tantions , and the structure of discourse . Computational I , infuiatics , 12(3):175-204 . 
Krat~r , A .  1977 . What ' must ' and ' can ' must and can mean . Linguia 64:s and Philosophy , 1(1):337-335 . 
Kratser , A .  1979 . Conditional necessity and pos-ed bility . In U . Egli R . l ~ uerle and A . Von Ste . 
chow , editors , Semantics for Different Point 8 of Fie , o , pp . 117-147, Spriager-Verlag , Berlin . 
Krat~r , A .  1981 . The notional category of modality . In H . J . Eikmeyer and H . Rieeer , stil-ton , Words , Worlds , and Contexts : New Approaches in Word Semantlcs , pp . 38-74, Walter de Gruyter , Berlin . 
Kronfeld , A .  1986 . Donnellan's distinction and x computational model of reference  . In Proceed-infs of the P~th Annual Meeting , pp .  186-191 , AJmociation for Computational Linguistic & Kroafeld  , A .  1990 . Reference and Computation : an Ees all in Applied Philosophy of Language  . 
Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge.
Perranlt , C . R . , J . F . Alien , and P . R . Cohen . 
1978 . Speech acts as a basis for understanding dialogue coherence  . In TINI , AP-?, pp . 125-132, University of m~nois , Urbana ~ Champaign . 
Searle , J . R .  1969 . Speech Ac~:An Essay in the Philosophy of Language  . Cambridge Univ . 
Press , Cambridge.
Sidner , C . L .  1983 . What the speaker means : the recognition of speakers ' plans in discourse  . In . 
ternational Journal of Computers and Mathe.
rustics , 9(1):71-82.
Sidner , C . L .  1985 . Plan parsing for intended response recognition i discourse  . Computational
Intelligence , 1(1):1-10.
Strawson , P . F .  1971 . On referring . In J . F Rosenberg and C . Travis , editors , Reading in the Philosophy of Language , Prentice Hall , Englewood , N . J . 
Waiters , R . S .  1967 . The Encyclopedia of Philos-ophy , pp .  410-414 . Volume 4, Macmillan , New York . s . v . " laws of science and law like statements ' . 

