LEXICAL ACCESSINCONNECTED SPEECHRECOGNITION
Ted Briscoe
Computer Laboratory
University of Cambridge
Cambridge , CB2 3QG , UK.

This paper addresses two issues concerning lexical access in connected speech recognition :  1  ) the nature of the prelexical representation used to initiate lexicalook-up  2  ) the points at which lexica look-up is triggered off this representation  . The results of an experiment are reported which was designed to evaluate a number of access trategies proposed in the literature in conjunction with several plausible prelexical representations of the speech input  . The experiment also extends previous work by utilising a dictionary database containing a realistic rather than illustrative English vocabulary  . 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
In most recent work on the process of word recognition during comprehe ~ ion of connected speech  ( either by human or machine ) a distinction is made between lexical access and word recognition  ( eg . 
Marslen-Wilsun & Welsh , 1978; Klan , 1979) . Lexlcal access is the process by which contact is made with the lexicon on the basis of an initial a constlo-phonetl corphonological representation of some portion of the speech input  . The result of lexical sccess is a cohort of potential word candidates which are compatible with this initial analysis  .   ( The term cohort is used de__ccriptively in this paper and does not represent any commitment to the perticular account of lexical access end word recognition provided by any version of the cohort theory  ( e . g . 
Marslen-Wilsun , 1987) . ) Most theories assume that the candidates in this cohort are successively whittled down both on the basis of further acoustic-phonetic or phonological information  , as more of the speech input becomes available , end on the basis of the candidates ' compatibility with the linguistic and extralingulstie context of utterance  . When only one candidate remains , word recognition is said to have taken place . 
Most psycholinguist lc work in this area has focussed on the process of word recognition after a cohort of candidates has been selected  , emphasising the role of further lexical or ' higher-level ' linguistic on straints such as word frequency  , lexical semantic relations , or syntactic and semantic ongruity of candidates with the linguistic on text  ( e . g . Bradley & Forster , 1987; Marslen-Wilson & Welsh .  1978) . The few explicit and well-developed models of lexical access and word recognition in continuous speech  ( e . g . TRACE , McCleli and & Elman , 1986) have small and tm realistic lexicons of . at most , a few hundred words and ignore phonological processes which occur in fluent speech  . Therefore , they tend to ove ~ . stlmatz the amount and reliability , of acoustic information which can be directly extracted from the speech signal  ( either by human or machine ) and make unrealistic and overly-optimistic assumptions concerning the size and diversity of candidates in a typical cohort  . This , in turn , casts doubt on the real efficacy of the putative mechanisms which are intended to selec the correct word from the cohort  . 
The bulk of engineering systems for speech recognition have finessed the issues of lexical access and word recognition by attempting to map directly from the acoustic signal to candidate words by pairing words with acoustic representations of the canonical pronunciation of the word in the lexicon and employing pattern -matching  , best-fit techniques to select the most likely candidate  ( e . g . Sakoe & Chiba , 1971) . However , these techniques have only proved effective for isolated word recognition of small vocabularies with the system trained to an individual speaker  , as , for example , Zue & Huuonlocher (1983) argue . Furthermore , any direct access model of this type which does not incorporate a prelexical symbolic representation f the input will have di?ficulty capturing many rule-governed phonological processes which affect the ~ on unciation of words influent speech  . 
since these processes can only be chazacter is ~ adequately in terms of operations on a symbolic  , phonological representation of the speech input ( e . g . 
Church . 1987; Frazier , 1987; Wiese , 1986).
The research reported here forms part of an ongoing programme to develop a computationally explicit account of lexical access and word recognition in connected  s1~e-~_~  , which is at least informed by experimental results concerning the psychological processes and mechanisms which underlie this task  . To guide research . 
we make use of a substantial lexical database of English derived from machine-readable versions of the Longman Dictionary of Conton porary English  ( see BoguracvetaL , 1987; Boguraev & Briscoe ,  1989 ) and of the Medical Research Council's psycholinguistic database  ( Wilson ,  1988) , which incorporates word frequency information . 
This specialise database system provides flexible and powerful querying facilities into a database of approximately  30  , 000 English word forms ( with 60 , 000 separate entries ) . The querying facilities can be used to explore the lexical structure of English and simulate different approaches to lexical access and word recognition  . Previous work in this area has often relied on small illustrative lexicons which tends to lead to overestimation of the effectiveness of various approaches  . 
There are two broad questions to ask concerning the process of lexical access  . Firstly , what is the nature of the initial representation which makes contact with the lexicon ? Secondly  , at what points during the ( continuous ) analysis of the speech signal is lexical lookup triggered ? considering an example like  ( 1 )   ( modified from Klanvia
Church . 1987).
(1 ) a ) Did you hit it to Tom ? b ) \[ dlj ~' ~ dI ? mum~\] ( Where ' I ' represents a high , front vowel , ' E's chwa , ' d ' a flapped or neutralised stop , and '?' a glottal stop . ) The phonetic trmmcriptlon of one possible utterance of  ( la ) in ( lb ) demonstrates some of the problems involved in any ' dL  , ~ ct ' mapping from the speech input to lexical enu ' ies not mediated by the application of phonological rules  . 
For example , the palatalisation ffinal/d/before/y/in /did/means that any attempt to relate that portion of the W ' ~ e?___hinput to the lexicel entry for d/dish'kely to fail  . 
Sitrfi/arpoints can be made about the flapping and glottal is a don of the B/phonemes in/hit/and/It  /   , and the vowel reductions to schwa . In addition .   ( 1 ) illustrates the wen-known point that there are no  100% reliable phonetic or phonological cues to word boundaries in connected speech  . Without further phonological and lexical analysis there is no indication in a transcrilx lonlike  ( lb ) of where words begin or end ; for example , how does the lexical accessy stem distinguish word  . initial / I/ in/17/fzom word-in lernal/I/in/hid /? In this paper , I shall argue for a model which splits the lexical access process into a prelexical phonological parsing stage and then a lexicel  enn7 retrieval stage . The model is simil ~ to that of Church (1987) , however I argue , firstly , that the initial phonological representation recovered from the speech input is more variable and often less detailed than that assumed by Church and  , secondly , that the lexical entry retrieval stage is more directed and ~  . in order to ~ ce the number of spurious lexical enuies accessed and to cer np ~ z~te for likely in detenninacies in the initial representation  . 
THE PRE-LEXICAL
PHONOLOGICAL REPRESENTATION
Several researchers have argued that phonological processes  , uc has the palatall sationf/d/in(1) , create problems for the word recognitions ysmn because they ' distort ' the phonological form of the word  . Church ( 1987 ) and Frazier ( 1987 ) argue persuasively that , far fxom creating problems , such phonological processes provide imporu ~ clues to the correct syllabic segmentation of the input and thus  , to the locad on of word bounderies . However , this argument only goes through on ~ assump6on that quire derailed ' narrow ' phonetic information is recovered from the signal  , such as aspiration of Min/rE/and/tam/in ( 1 ) in orderm recoguise t impreceding syllable botmdsrles  . It is only in . 
terms of this represer ~ , tion that phonological processes c~m be recuised and their effects ' undone ' in order to allow correct matching of the input agains the canonical phonological represen U ~ ons contained in lexical entries  . 
Other researchers ( e . g . Shipman & Zne ,  1982 ) have argued ( in the context of isolated word recogu/tion ) that the initial representation which contacts the lexicon should be a broadmmmer-class transcription of the stressed syllables in the speech signal  . The evidence in favot ~ of this approach is , firstly , that extraction of more detailed information is nouniously diffic ~ dt and  , secondly , that a broad transcription of this type appears to be vexy effective in part it/oning the English lexicon into small cohom  . For example , Huttenlocher ( 1985 ) reports an average cohort size of 21 words for a 20  , 0 00 word lexicon using a six-camgory manner of articulation transcription scheme  ( employing the categories : Stop , Strong-Fricative , Weak-Fricative , Nasal , Glide-Liquid , and Vowel ) . 
This claim suggests that the English lexicon is functionally organised to favour a system which initiates lex/cal access from a broadmanner class prelexical representation  , because most of the discriminatory iv . formation between different words is concentra ~ i in the manner articulation of stressed syllables  . Elsewhere , we have argued that these ideas are mis-~d ; _ngly presented and that there is , in fact , no significant advantage for manner information insuessed syllables  ( e . g . Carter et al , 1987; Caner , 1987, 1989) . We found that there is no advantage pers ~ to a manner class analysis of stressed syllables  , since a similar malys is of unstressed syllables is as discriminatory and yields as good a partitioning of the English lexicon  . However , concantrating on a full phonemic malys is of stressed syllables provides about  10% more information them a similer analysis of tm stressed syllables  . This research suggests , then , that the prelexical represenw . ion used to initiate lexical access can only affordm concentramex clusively on stressed syllables ff these are analysed  ( at least ) phonemically . None of these studies consider the extracud ~ ility of the classifications fxom speech input however  , whilst there is a g~m ~ ral belief that it is easier to extract infonnation from stressed portions of the signal  , the ~ is little reason to believe that mariner class in fm'mation is  , in general , more or less accessible than other phonologically relevant features  . 
A second argument which can be made against he use of broad represmUstions to contact he lexicon  ( in the context of conn~speech ) is that such representations will not supporthe phonological parsing n~essary to ' undo " such processes a spalatall sation  . For example , in ( 1 ) the final/d/ofd/d will be realised as / j / and camgurised as as a rong-fricative followed by liquid-glide using the proposed broadmanner ~ rans or ip fion  . 
Therefore . palamlisad on will needmbe recoguised before the required stop-vowel-stop represenr ~ ion can be recovered and used to initiate lexical access  . However , applying such phonological rules in a constrained and useful manner requires a more detailed input transcription  . Palamll sation in ustra ~ es this point very cle ~ ly ; not all sequences which will be transcribed as strong-fl'l cative followed by liquid-glide can undergo this process by any means  ( e . g .  /81/) , but there will be no way of preventing the rule oven-applying in many inappropriate conmxts and thus presumably leading to the get  . ration of many spurious word candidates . 

A third argument against the use of exclusively broad representations is that these representations will not support the effective recognition of syllable-boundaries and some word -boundaries on the basis of phonotactic and other phonological sequencing constraints  . For example , Church ( 1987 ) proposes an initial syllabification of the input as a prerequisite to l ~ d cal access  , but his sylla " bifica fion of the speech input exploits phonotactic constraints and relies on the extraction of all ophonic features  , such as aspiration , to guide this process . Similarly , Harringmn et al ( 1988 ) argue that approximately 45% of word boundaries are , in principle , recognisable because they occur in phoneme sequences which are rare or forbidden word -internally  . 
However , exploitation of these English phonological constraints would be considerably impaired if the prelexical representation f the input is restricted to a broad classification  . 
h might seem self-evident that people are able to recognise phonemes in speech  , but in fact the psychological evidence suggests that this ability is mediated by the output of the word recognition process rather than being an essential prerequisite to its success  . 
Phoneme-monimrin 8 experiments , in which subjects listen for specified phonemes in speech  , are sensitive to lexical effects such as word frequency  , semmfic association , and so forth ( see Cutler et al ,   1987 for a summary of the expemnen ~ literature and putative explmation of the effect  )  , suggesting that information concemm 8 at least some of the phonetic contain of a word is not available until after the word is recoguised  . 
Thus , people's ability to recognise phonemes tells us very little about then an n ~ of the representation used to initiate lexical access  . Better ( but still indire oO evidence comes from mispronunciation monitoring and phoneme confusion experiments  ( Cole , 1973; Miller & Nicely , 1955; Sheperd ,  1972 ) which suggest hattlstener seer elikdy to confuse or ~ phonemes along the dimensions predicted by distinctive feature theory  . Most e~rcn result in reporting phonemes which differ in only one feanu ~ from the target  , This result suggests that listenexs are actively considering detailed phonetic information along a munber of dimemions  ( rather than simply , say , manner of articulation ) . 
Theoretical and experimental considerations suggest then that  , regardless of the current capabilities of automated acoustic-phonetic fxont-ends  , sysmms must be developed to extract as phonetically detailed apm-lexical phonological represemation as possible  . Without such a representation , phonological processes cannot be effectively recoguL ~ i and compensated for in the word recognition process and the ' extra ' information conveyed in stressed syllables cannot be exploited  . Nevertheless in fluent connected speech , unstressed syllables often undergo phonological processes which render them highly in demmlinam  ; for example , the vowel reductions in ( I ) . Therefore , it is implausible m assume that my ( human or machine ) frontend will always output an accurate narrow phonetic  , phonemic of perhaps even broad ( say , manner class ) mm scription of the speech input . For this reason , fur~er processes involved in lexical access will need to function effectively despim the very variable quality of information extracted from the speech signal  . 
This last point creates a serious difficulty for the design of effective phonological parsers  . Church (1987) , for example , allows himself the idealisation of an accurate ' nsrmw'phonetic transcription  . It remains to be demonstramd that any parsing mcl miques developed for determl nam symbolic input will transfer effectively to real speech input  ( and such a test may have to a wait considerably better automated front-ends  )  . For the purposes of the next section . I assume that some such account of phonological parsing can be developed and that the prelexical representation used to initiate lexical access is one in which phonological processes have been ' undone ' in order to consuuct a representation close to the canonical  ( phonemic ) representation of a word's pronunciation . However , I do not assume that this representation will necessarily be accuram to the same degree of detail throughout the input  . 
LEXICAL ACCESSSTRATEGIES
Any theory of word recognition must provide a mechanism for the segmentation of connected speech into words  . In effect , the theory must explain how the process of lexical access is triggered at appropriate points in the speech signal in the absence of completely reliable phonetic/phonologicalues to word boundaries  . 
The various theories of lexical access and word recognition in conneomd speech propose mechanisms which appear to cover the full specumm of logical possibilities  . Klan ( 1979 ) suggests that lexicai access is triggered off each successive spectral frame derived from the signal  ( i . e . approximately every5msecs . ) , McClell and & Elman ( 1986 ) suggest each successive phoneme , Church (1987) suggests each syllable on set , Grosjean & Gee ( 1987 ) suggest each stressed syllable on set , aud Curler & Norris ( 1985 ) suggest each pm so diceliys mmg syllable on set . Finally , Maralan-Wilson & Welsh ( 1978 ) suggest that segmentation f the speech input and recognition of word boundaries is an indivisible process in which the endpoint of the previous word defines the point at which lexical access is 
I riggered again.
Some of these access strategies have been evaluated with respect to three input transcriptions  ( which are plausible candidates for the prelexical represen ~ ui on the basis of the work discussed in the previou section  ) in the context of a realistic sized lexicon . The experiment involved one sentence taken from a reading of the ' Rain bow passage ' which had been analysed by several phoneticians for independent purposes  . This sentence is reproduced in ( 2a ) with the syllables which were judged to be strong by the phoneticians underlined  . 
(2) a ) The rain bow is a divis . ._ion of whim light into many beautiful col . __oursb ) WF-Vreln bEuV-SF VS Vv ISF-V-NV-SF walt Idt VNS Vmen Vbju : SV WF-V-GK^I 
V-SF phonemic U-ensoription throughout ; 2) mid class , using phonemic transcription of strong syllables and a six-category intoner of articulation tranm ' ip don of weak syllables  ; 3) broad class , as mid class but suppressing voicing disK , ations in the strong syllable transcriptions . 
(2b ) gives the mid class transcription of the utterance  . In this transcription , phonemes are represented in a manner compatible with the scheme employed in the Longman Dictionary of Conton porary English and the manner class categories in capitals are Stop  , Strong-Fricative , Weak-Fricative , Nasal , Glide-liquid , end Vowel as in Hunmlocher (1982) endelse whe = e . The terms , fine , midend broad , for each transcription scheme are intended purely descriptively and are not necessarily related to other uses of these terms in the literature  . Each of the schemes is intended to represent a possible behaviour of an acoustic-phonetic frontend  . The less determinate transoriptions can be viewed either as the result of transcription errors and in daterml nacies or as the output of a less ambitious frontend design  . The definition of syllable boundary employed is , of necessity , that built into the syllable parser which acts as the interface to the dictionary d~t-_bese  ( e . g . Carter , 1989) . The parser syllabifies phonemic Iranscriptions according to the phonotactiz constraints given in Ghnson  ( 1980 ) emdutilis ~ the maximal on set principle ( Selkirk , 1978) where this leads to ambiguity . 
Each of the three transcriptions was used as a putative prelexical representation to test some of the different access slrategies  , which were used to initiate lexieal lookup into the dictionary database  . The four access strategies which were tested were  :   1  ) phoneme , using each mr . .eessive phoneme to trigger an access amnnp ~ 2 ) word . using the offset of the previous ( correct ) word in the input to control access attempts ; 3) syllable , attempting lookup at each syllable boundary ; 4) strong syllable , attempt in 8 lookup at earh strong syllable boundary . That is , the first smuegy assumes a word may begin at any p *' u meme boen dary  , the second that a word may only begin , attlmend of the previous one , the third that a word may begin at any syllable boundary  , end the fourth that a word may begin at a ser on 8 syllable boundary . 
The strong syllable strategy uses a separate lookup process for typically urmt reimad grammatical  , cor , ad-clus vocabulary end allows the possibility of extending lookup ' backwards ' over one preceding weak syllable  . It was assumed , for the purposes of the experiment , hat lookup off weak syllables would be restricted to closed-class vocabulary  , would not extend into a strong syllable , and that this process would precede attempts to incorporate a weak syllable * backwards ' into an open-class word  . 
The direct access approach was not considered because of its implausibility in the light of the discussion in the previous section  . The stressed syllable account is v = yslmilar to the strong syllable approach  , but given the problem of stresshift influent speech  , a formulation in unms of strong syllables , which are defined in terms of the absence of vowel reduction  , is preferable . 
Work by Marslen-Wilson and his colleagues ( e.g.
Marslen-Wilson & Warren . 1987) suggests that , whatever access strategy is used , there is node lay in the availability of information derived fi ' om the speech signal to furth=select from the cohort of word candidates  . This suggests that s model in which units ( say syllables ) of the prelexical representation are ' prepackaged ' and then used to wlgser a lookup attempt are implausible  . Rathe ~ the lookup process must involve the continuous integration of information from the prelexical representation immediately it becomes available  . Thus the question of access strategy concerns only the points at which this lookup process is initiated  . 
In order to simulate the continuous aspect of lexlcel access using the dictionary database  ,   d~:__M3_ase lookup queries for each strategy were initiated using the two phonemes/segments Horn the trigger point and then again with three phonemes/segmonts and so on until no hu~er English words in the database were compatible with the lookup query  ( except for closed-class access with the strong syllable strategy where a strong syllable boundary terminated the sequence of accesses  )  . The size of the resulting cohorts was measured for each successively larger query  ;  , for example , using a fine class transcription and triggering access from the/r/of rain bow yields an initial cohort of  89 cm didams compatible with/r e // . This cohort drops to 12 words when/n/is added and to 1 word when/b/is also included and finally goes to  0 when the vowel of/sis-dO , ' d = Each sequence of queries of this type which all begin at the same point in the signal will be refened to as an access path  . The differ , tee between the accesstrategies i mostly in the number of distinct access paths they generate  . 
Simulating access attempts using the dictionary d ~tn bascinvolves generating database queries consisting of partial phonological representatious which return sere of words and enlries which satisfy the query  . For example , Figure 1 relxesents the query corresponding to the complete broad-class trenscription of appoint  . This qu = y matches 37 wordforms in the database . 
\[\[ pron\[nsylls2\]\[el\[peak?\]\[- . 2\[etree e2\]\[ on zet ( ORbdgkpt ) \]\[ peak?\]\[coda ( ORmnN )   ( ORbdgkpt ) \]\]\]\] Figure 1-Da'-bue query for ' aR?omt ' . 
The ex~riment involved 8enera~8 s~uen ~ of queries of this type and recording the number of words found in the database which matched each query  . Figure 2 shows the partial word lattice for the mid class trauscription of th  , era/nbow/s . using the strong syllable access strategy . In this lattice access paths involving r~o ' ~sively arger portions of the signal are illustrated  . 
The m = n be run dereach access attempt represents the size of the set of words whose phonology is compatible query which forms part of an access path  , adding a further segment to the query above it . 
Tho---I---I--I-I 89   59   5   8 ">-I>---I 12   3 > --- I>-I 1 o > -- II 1   0 > - -- Io
Fisum2-PartialWordLmi ? ~
The corresponding complete word lattice for the same portion of input using a mid-class tr ~cription and the strong syllable strategy is shown in Figure  3  . In this lattice , only words whose complete phonology is compatible with the input are shown  . 
The rain bow is a
I--II--II--II-II 141258
I .... I
Ir ~ re3-Complete Word
The different strategies w are evaluated relative to the  3   trensc6ption schemes by summing the total number of partial words matched for the tests cm tence under each strategy and trans=ip donad also by looking at the total number of complete words matched  . 

Table 1 below gives a selection of the more important results for each strategy by transcription scheme for the test umtence in  ( 2 )  . Column 1 shows the total number of access paths initiated for the test sentence under each strategy  . Columns 2 to 6 shows the number of words in all the cohorts produced by the particular access strategy for the test sentence after  2 to 6 phonemes/segments of the transcription have been incorporated into each access path  . Column 7 shows the total number of words which achieve a complete match during the application of the particular access strategy to the test sentence  . 
Table 1 provides m index of the efficiency of each access strategy in terms of the overall number of candidate words which appear in cohorts and also the overall number of words which receive a full match for the test sentence  . In addition , the relative performance of each strategy as the ~ p tion scheme becomes less determinate is clear  . 
The test sentence contains 12 words , 20 syllables , end 45 phonemes ; for the purposes of this experiment the word a in the test sentence does not trigger a lookup attempt with the word strategy because cohort sizes were only recorded for sequences of two or more phonemes/segments  . A suming a fine classtrmls = iption serving as lxe -lexical input  , the phoneme strategy produces 41 full matches as compared to 20 for the strong syllable strategy . This demonstrates that the strong syllable strategy is more effective at ruling out spurious word candidates for the test sentence  . Furthermore , the total number of candidates considered using the phoneme strategy is  1544   ( after 2 phonemes/segments ) but only 720 for the strong syllable strategy , again indicafng the greater effectiveness of the lanef strategy  . When we
A_c ? ~___-Access
Strategy Paths
Fine Class
Phoneme 45
Word 11
Syllable 20
Strong S 17
MldClass
Word 11
Synable 20
Strong S 17
Broad Class
Syllable 20$trongS 17
No . of words after x segments : 2   3   4   1544   251   46   719   193   32   1090   210   36   720   105   24   4701   1738   802   54   12995   3221   1530   103   760   232   89   13   13744   3407   1591   140   1170   228   100   18 
Table I
Complete 5   6 Matches 6   2   41   5   2   25   6   2   28   5   2   20   8   249   9   380   4   80   9   117 even clearer that only the strung syllable slrategy remains reasonably effective and does not result in a ma~ive increase in the rmmber of spurious candidates accessed and fully matched  .   ( The phonmne strategy resets are not reporud for midend broad class tramcrlpt lons because the cohort sizes were too large for the database query facilities to cope reliably  . ) The word candidates recovered using the phoneme strategy with a fine class transcription i clude  10 full matches resulting from accesses triggered at non-syllabic boundaries  ; for example arraign is found using the second phoneme of the andrain  . This problem becomes considerably worse when moving to a less determinate transcription  , illustrating very clearly the undesirable consequences of ignoring the basic linguistio constraint that word boundaries occur at syllable boundaries  . 
System such as TRACE ( McClell and & Elman .  1986 ) which use this strategy appear to compensate by using a global best-fit evaluation metric for the entire utterance which s ~ rongly disfavours ' unattached ' input  . However . 
these models still make the implausible claim that c and id ~_! e ~ llke arraign will be highly -activated by the speech input  . 
The results concerning the word based strategy presume that it is possible to determinately recognise the endpuint of the preceding word  . This essmnption is based on the Cohort theory claim  ( e . g . Marslan-Wilsun & Welsh ,  1978 ) that words can be recogulsed before their acoustic offset  , using syntactic and semantic expectations to filter the cohort  . This claim has been challenged experimentally b Grosjean  ( 1985 ) and Bard et al ( 1988 ) who demcmstrate hat many mono syllabic words in context are not recognised until after their acoustic offset  . The experiment reported here supports this expesimental result because ven with the fine class transcription there are  5 word c and M~t_~which extend beyond the correct word boundary end  11 full matches which end before the correct boundary  . With the midclamt ran . un'iption,~e ~ numbers rise to 849 end 57 . 
respectively . It seems implausible that expectation-based corm ~ainm could be powerful enough to correcdy select a unique candidate before its acoustic offset in all contexts  . Therefore , the results for the word strategy reported here are overly-optim  . is dc , because in order to guarantee that the correct sequence of words are in the cohorts recovered from the input  , a lexical accessys tem based on the word strategy would need to operate non-demr ministically  ; that is , it would need to consider several pumndal word boundaries in most cases  . 
Therefore , the results for a practic Msyr . em based on Ot is approach amlikely to be significantly worse  . 
The syllable strategy is effective under the assumption of ? determinate and accurate phonemic pre-lexieal representation  , but once we aband on this idealisation , the effectiveness of this strategy declines ~ trply  . Under the plaus ~ leassumption that the prelexical input reprmemation is likely to be least accurate /deanminate for tmslressed/weak syllables  , the sw~ng syllable strategy is far more robust . This is a direct consequence of triggering lookup attempts off the more determinate parts of the prelexical representation  . 
Further theoretical evidence in support of the strong syllable strategy is provided by Cutler & Carter  ( 1987 ) who demmmt rate hat a listener is six times more likely to e~mter a word with a prosodically strong initial syllable than one with a weak initial syllable when listening to English speech  . Experimental evidence is provided by Cutler & Norris  ( 1988 ) who report results which suggest hat listeners tend to treat strong  , but not weak , syllables as appropriate points at which to undertake prelexical segmentation f the speech input  . 
The architecture of a lexical access system based on the syllable strategy can be quite simple in terms of the organisation of the lexicon and its access routines  . It is only n~essary to index the lexicon by syllable types  ( Church ,  1987) . By contrast , the strong syllable strategy requires a separate closed  . class word lexicon end access system , indexing of the open-class vocabulary by strong syllable and a more complex matching procedure capable of inhering preceding weak syllables for words such as d/v/s/on  . Nevertheless , the experimental results reported here suggest that the extra complexity is warranted because the resulting system will be considerably more robust in the face of inacct ~ rate or indeterminate input concerning the nature of the weak syllables in the input utterance  . 

The experiment reported above suggests that the strong syllable access strategy will provide the most effective technique for producing minimal cohorts gu ~ anteed to contain the correct word candidate from a prelexical phonological representation which may be partly inaccurate or indeterminate  . Further work to be undertakenic ludes the rerunning of the experiment with further input transcriptions containing pseudor and om typical phoneme perception errors and the inclusion of further test sentences designed to yield a ' phonetically-balanced ' corpus  . In addition , the relative internaldls criminability ( in tmmm of further phonological and ' higher -lever syntactic and semantic on straims  ) of the word candidates in the varying cohorts generated with the different strategies should be ex and ne d  . 
The importance of mai~ng use of a dictionary database with a realistic vocabulary size in order to evaluate proposals concerning lexl cal access and word recognition systems is hlghligh ~ d by the results of this experiment  , which demonstrate the theoretical implausibility of many of the proposals in the literature whea we consider the consequences in a simulation involving more than a few hundred illustrative words  . 


I would like to thank Longman Group Ltd . for making the type setting tape of the Longmcat Dictionary of Contemporary English available to m for research purposes  . Part of the work reported here was supported by SER Cgram  GR/D/4217  . I also thank Anne Cuder , Francis Nolan and Tun Sholicar for useful comments and advice  . All erroPs remain my own . 

Bard , E . , Shillcock , R . & Altmann , G .  (1988) . The recognition of words after their acoustic offsets in spontaneous peech : effects of subsequent context  . 
Perception & Psychophysic $, 44, 395-408.
Boguraev , B . & Briscoe , E .  (1989) . Computational Lexicography for Natural Language Processing  . 
Longman Limited , London.
Boguraev , B . , Carter , D . & Briscoe , E .  (1987) . A multipurpose interface to an online dictionary . 3rd Conference of Eur . Assoc . for Computational Linguistics,

Bradley , D . & Forster , K .  (1987) . A reader's view of listeff mg . Cognition , 25, 103-34 . 
Carter , D .  (1987) . An information-theoretic analysis of phonetic dictionary access  . Computer Speech and
Language , 2, 111.
Carter , D . , Boguraev , B . & BrL~oe , E .  (1987) . Lexicals Uess and phonzfiz information : which szSments are most informative  . Proc . of ? ur . Conference on Speech
Technology , Ed in hoxgh.
Carter , D .  (1989) . LIX ) CE and speech recognition . In
Boguraev & Briscoo (1989) pp . 135-52.
Church , K .  (1987) . Phonological parsing and lexical muieva L Cognition  ,  25 ,  53-69 . 
Cole , R .  (1973) . Listening for mispronunciations : a measure of what we hear during speech  . Perception &
Psychophysic ~, 1, 153-6.
Cutler , A . & Carter , D .  (1987) . The Ira:dominance of smm 8 initial syllables in the English vocabulary . 
Computer Speech and Language , 2, 133-42.
Cuder , A . , Mehler , J . , Norris , D . & Segui , J .  (1987) . 
Phoneme identification and the lexicon . Cogni:ive
Psychology , 19, 141-77.
Cuder , A . & Norris . D .  (1988) . The role of slxong syllables in segmentation for lexical access  . J . of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and
Performance , 14, 113-21.
Frazier , L .  (1987) . Slrucmre in auditory word recognition . Cognition , 25, 15% 87 . 
Gimson , A .  (1980) . An Introduction to the Pronunciation of English . 3rd F . ~ tion , Edw~l Arnold , London . 
Gmsjean , F . & Gee , L (1987) . Prosodicsu-ucmre and spoken word recognition . Cognition , 25, 135-155 . 
Harrington , J . , Watson , G . & Cooper , M .  (1988) . Wordhound ~ y identification from phoneme sequence ~mtraims in automatic ~ dnuon speech recognition  . 
Proc . of 12th Int . Co ~ . on Computational Linguistics,
Budapest , pp . 225-30.
Huttanlocher , D .  (1985) . Exploiting sequential phonetic constraints in recognizing spoken words  . MIT . AI . Lab . 
Memo867.
Klatt , D .  (1979) . Speech perceptiom a model of acoustic-phonetic analysis and lexical access  . Journal of
Pho~t/es , 7, 279-312.
Maralen-Wi Lson , M .  (1987) . Functional parallelism in spoken word recognition  . Cognition , 25, 71-i02 . 
Marden-Wi Lson , W . & Warren , P .  (1987) . Continuous uptake of acoustic cues in spoken word recognition  . 
Perception & Psychophy $ ics , 41, 262-75.
Marslen-Wilson , W . & We Lsh , A .  (1978) . Processing interactions and lexical access during word recognition i continuous speech  . Cognitive Psychology , 10, 29-63 . 
Mcclell and , J . & Elman , I .  (1986) . The TRACE model of speech perception . Cognitive Psychology , 18, 1-86 . 
Miller . G . & Nicely , P .  (1955) . Analysis of some perceptual confusions among some English consonants  . 
Journal of Acoustical Society of America ,  27 ,  338-52 . 
Sakoe , H . & Chiba , S .  (1971) . A dynatrd c programming optimization for spoken word recognition  . IEEE Transactions , Acoustics , Speech and Signal Processing , 
ASSP-26, 43-49.
Selkirk , E .  (1978) . On prosodic structure and its relation to syntactics u ' ucmre  . Indiana University Linguistics
Club , Bloomington , Indiana.
Sheperd , R .   ( 1972 ) Psychological representation of speech sounds . In David , E . & Denes , P . Human Communication : A Unified View , New York : McGraw-

Shipman , D . & Zue , V .  (1982) . Properties of large lexicons : implications for advanced isolated word reco ~ donsystan ~  . IEEE ICASSP , Paris , 546-549 . 
Wiese , R .  (1986) . The role of phonology in speech processing . Proc . of llthInt . Conf . on Computational
Linguistics , Bonn , pp . 608-11.
Wi Lson . M .  (1988) . MRC psycholinguisfic database : machine-usable dictionary  , version 2 . 0 Behaviour Research Methods , Instrumentation & Computers ,  20 ,  610 . 
Zue , V . & Huttenlocher , D .  (1983) . Computer recognition of isolated words from large vocabularies  . 
IEEE Conference on Trends and Applications.

