Two Constraints on Speech Act Ambiguity
Elizabeth A . Hinkelman and James F . Allen
Computer Science Department
The University of Rochester
Rochester , New York 14627

Existing plan-based theories of speech act interpretation do not account for the conventional aspect of speech acts  . We use patterns of linguistic features ( e . g . mood , verb form , sentence adverbials , thematic roles ) to suggest a range of speech act interpretations for the utterance  . These are filtered using plan-bused conversational implicatures to eliminate inappropriate ones  . Extended plan reasoning is available but not necessary for familiar forms  . Taking speech act ambiguity seriously , with these two constraints , explains how " Can you pass the salt ?" is a typical indirect request while " A reyouable to pass the salt ?" is not  . 
1. The Problem
Full natural language systems must recognize speakers ' intentions in an utterance  . They must know when the speaker is asserting , asking , or making a social or official gesture \[ Searle 69  , Searle 75\] , in addition to its content . For instance , the ordinary sentence ( I ) Can you open the door ? . 
might in context be a question , a request , or even an offer . Several kinds of information complicate the recognition process  . Literal meaning , lexical and syntactic choices , agents ' beliefs , the immediate situation , and general knowledge about human behavior all clarify what heordinary speaker is after  . 
Given an utw . xance and context , we model how the utterance changes the hearer's tate  . Previous workfalls roughly into three approaches  , each with characteristic weaknesses : the idiom approach  , the plan based approach , and the descriptive approach . 
The idiom approach is motivated by pat phrases like:  ( 2 ) a : Can you please X7 b : Would you kindly X ? c:I'd like X . 
d:May IX?e : How about X ?
They are literally questions or statements , but often used as requests or in ( e ) , suggestions . The system could look for these particular strings  , and build the corresponding speech act using the complement as a parameter value  . But such sentences are not true idioms , because the literal meaning is also possible in many contexts  . Also , one can respond to the literal and nonliteral acts : " Sure  , it's the 9th . " The idiom approaches are too inflexible to choose the literal " r ~ ding or to accommodate ambiguity  . They lack a theory connecting the nonliteral and literal readings  . 
Another problem is that some classic examples are not even pat phrases :  '212   ( 3 ) a : It's cold in here . 
b : Do you have a watch on ?
In context , ( a ) may be a request to close the window . 
Sentence Co ) may be asking what time it is or requesting to borrow the watch  . The idiom approach allows neither for context nor the reasoning connecting utterance and desired action  . 
The plan based approach \[ Allen 83 , McCafferty 86 , Perrault 80 , Sidner 81\] presumes a mechanism modelling human problem solving abilities  , including reasoning about other agents and inferring their intentions  . The system has a model of the current situation and the ability to choose a course of action  . It can relate uttered propositions to the current situation : being cold in here is a bad state  , and so you probably want me to do something about it  ; the obvious olution is forme to close the window  , so , I understand , you mean forme to close the window . The plan based approach provides at idy , independently motivated theory for speech act interpretation  . 
It does not use language-specific information , however . Consider ( 4 ) a : Can you speak Spanish ? b : Can you speak Spanish  , please ? Here the addition of a word alters an utterance which is a yes/no question in typical circumstances to a request  . This is not peculiar to " please ": ( 5 ) a : Can you open the door ? b : A reyouable to open the door ? Here two sentences  , generally considered to have the same semantics , differ in force : the first may be a question , an offer , or a reques L the second , only a question . Further , different languages realize speech acts in different ways : greetings  , for example ( or see\[Hem84\]) . 
(6) a : You want to cook dinner.
b : Youwanna toss your coats in there ?
The declarative sentence ( a ) can be a request , idiomatic to Hebrew , while the nearest American expression is interrogative Co  )  . Neither is a request in British English . The plan based approach has nothing to say about hese differences  . Neither does it explain the psycholinguistic\[ Gibbs  84\] finding that people access idiomatic interpretations in context more quickly than literal ones  . Psycholinguistically plausible models cannot derive idiomatic meanings from literal meanings  . 
Descriptive approaches cover large amounts of data . 
\[ Brown 80\] recognized the diversity of speech act phenomena nd included the first computational model with wide coverage  , but lacked theoretical claims and did not handle the language-specific cases well  . \[Gordon 75\] expresses some very nice generalizations , but lacks motivation and sufficient detail . It does not account for examples like numbers 3 ,  4 , 6 or 7 . In number 3 , for example , one asks a question by asking literally whether the hearer knows the answer  . A plan-based approach would argue that knowing the answer is a precondition for stating it  , and this logical connection enables identification of the real question  . But Gordon and Lakoff write off this one , because their sincerity conditions are inadequate . 
We augment the plan-based approach with a linguistic component : compositional rules associating linguistic features with partial speech act descriptions  . The rules express linguistic conventions that are often motivated by planning theory  , but they also allow for an element of arbitrariness in just which forms are idiomatic to a language  , and just which words and features mark it . 
For this reason , conventions of use cannot be handled directly by the plan reasoning mechanism  . They require an interpretation process paralleling syntactic and semantic interpretation  , with the same provisions for merging of partial interpretations and postponement of ambiguity resolution  . The compositionality of partial speech act interpretations and use of ambiguity are both original to our approach  . 
Once the utterances have been interpreted by our conventional rules to produce a set of candidate conventional interpretations  , these interpretations are filtered by the plan reasoner  . Plan reasoning processes unconventional forms in the same spirit as earlier plan-~models  , finding non-conventional interpretations and motivating many convention alones  . We propose a limited version of plan reasoning , based on an original claim about conversational implicatare  , which is adequate for filtering conventional interpretations  . 
Section 2 will explain the linguistic computation which interprets linguistic features as speech act descriptions  . Section 3 describes plan reasoning techniques that are useful for speech act interpretation and presents our view of plan reasoning  . Section 4 presents the overall process combining these two parts  . 
2. Linguistic Constraints
Speech act interpretation has many similarities to the plan recognition problem  . Its goal is , given a situation and an utterance , to understand what the speaker was doing with that utterance  , and to find a basis for an appropriate response . In our case this will mean identifying a set of plan structures representing speech acts  , which are possible interpretations of the utterance  . In this section we show how to use compositional , language-specific rules to provide evidence for a set of partial speech act interpretations  , and how to merge them . Later , we use plan reasoning to constrain , supplement , and decide among this set . 
2.1. Notational Aside
Our notation is based on that of \[ Allen87\] . Its essential form is ( category < slot filler > < slot filler > . . . ) . Categories may be syntactic , semantic , or from the knowledge base . A filler may be a word , a feature , a knowledge base object ( referent ) or another ( category . . . ) structure . 
Two slots associated with syntactic ategories may seem unusual : SEN and RgF  . They contain the unit's semantic interpretation , divided into two components . The SEM slot contains a structural-semantic representation f this instance  , based on a small , finite set of thematic roles for verbs and noun phrases  . It captures the linguistic generalities of verb subcategorization and noun phrase structure  . 
Selectional restrictions , identification of referents , and other phenomena involving world knowledge are captured in the ~ slot  . It contains a translation of the SEN slot's logical form into a frame like knowledge representation language  , in which richer and more specific role assignments can be made  . 
SF . ~ thematic roles correspond to different knowledge base roles according to the event class being described  , and in REF file corresponding e . v ~ nt and argument instances are identified ff possio e  . 
Distinguishing logical form from knowledge ~ p resentafion is an experiment in  . tended to clarify enotion of semantic roles in logt calform  , and to reduce the complexity of the interpretation process  . 
The senten ~" Can you speak Spanish ?" is shown below  . 
( SMO ODYES-NO-Q
VOICE ACT
SUBJ(NPHEAD you
SEM(HUMAN hl )
REF Suzanne )
AUXS can
MAIN-V speak
TENSEPRES
OBJ ( NP HE AD Spanish
SEM ( LANGIDsl)
REFIsl )
SEM(CAPABLE
TENSEPRES
AGENT hl
THEME ( SPEAKOBJECT si))
REF ( ABLE-STATE
AGENT Suzanne
ACTION ( USE-LANG UAGE
AGENT Suzanne
LANG isl )))
The outermost category is the syntactic ategory , sentence . It has many ordinary syntactic features , subject , object , and verbs . The subject is a noun phrase that describes a human and refers to a person semantic structure concerns the capability of the person to speak a language  . In the knowledge base , this becomes Suzanne's ability to use Spanish as a language  . 
2.2. Evidence for Interpretations
The utterance provides clues to the hearer , but we have already seen that its relation to its purpose may be complex  . We need to make use of lexical and syntact t cas well as semantic and referential information  . In this section we will look at rules using all of these kinds of information  , introducing the notation for rules as wego . Rules consist of a set of features on the lefthand side  , and a set of partial speech act descriptions on the other  . The rule should be interpreted as saying that any structure matching the lefthand side must be interpreted as one of the speech acts indicated on the right hand side  . The speech act descriptions themselves are also in  ( category < slot filler > . . . < slot filler >) notation . Their categories are simply their types in the knowledge base's abstraction hierarchy  , in which the category SP gZCH-ACT abstracts all speech act types  . Slot names and filler types also are defined by the abstraction hierarchy  , but a given rule need not specify all slot values  . Here is a lexical rule : the adverb " please " occurring in any syntactic unit signals a request  , command , or other act in the directive class . 
(? ADV please )  - ( 1 ) =>  ( DIRECTIVE-ACT ) ? ~ a though this is a very simple rule , its correctness has been ~ tablished by examination of some  43 million words of Associated Press news stories . This corpus contains several hundred occurrences of " please "  , the most common form being the preverbal adverb in a directive utterance  . 
A number of useful generalizations are based on the syntactic mood of sentences  . As we use the term , mood is an aggregate of several syntactic features taking the values DECLARATIVE  , IMPERATIVE , YES-NO-Q , WHQ . Many different speech act types occur with each of these values  , but in the absence of other evidence an imperative is likely to be a command and a declarative  , an Inform . An interrogative sntence may be a question or possibly another speech act  . 
( SMO ODYES-NO-Q )  = ( 2 ) =>  (   ( ASK-ACTPROPV ( REF )   )   ( SPEECHACT ) ) The value function v returns the value of the specified slot of the sentence  . Thus rule 2 has the proposition slot PROP filled with the value of the REF slot of the sentence  . It matche sentences whose mood is that of a yes /no question  , and interprets them as asking for the truth value of their explicit propositional content  . Thus matching this rule agains the structure for " Can you speakSpanish ?" would produce the interpretations  ( ( ASK-ACT
PROP ( ABLE-STATEAGENT Suzanne
ACTION ( USE-LANG UAGE
AGENT Suzanne
LANGlsl ))) ( SPEECHACT ))
Interrogative sentences with modal verbs and a subject " you " are typically requests  , but may be some other act : ( SMO ODYES-NO-Q = ( 3 ) =>
VOICE ACT
SUEJ ( NP PRO you)
AUXS can could will would might
MAIN-V+action )   ( ( REQUEST-ACT ACTION V ( ACTION REF ) )  ( SPEECHACT ) ) Rule 3 interprets " Can you . . . ?" questions as requests , looking for the subject " you " and any of these modal verbs  . Lists in curly brackets ( e . g . can could will would might ) signify disjunctions ; one of the members must be matched . In this rule , the value function v follows a chain of slots to find a value  . 
ThUSV ( ACTION REF ) iS the value of the
ACTION slot in the structure that is the value of the REF slot  . Note that an unspecified speech act is also included as a possibility in both rules  . This is because it is also possible that the utterance might have a different interpretation  , ot suggested by the mood . 
Some rules are based in the semantic level . For example , the presence of a benefactive case may mark a request  , or it may simply occur in a statement or question . 
( SMAIN-V+action
SEM ( ? BENEF ? ) ) = ( 4 ) =>  (   ( DIRECTIVE-ACTACTV ( REF )   )   ( SPEECHACT )   ) Recall that we distinguish the semantic level from the reference level  , in as much as the semantic level is simplified by a strong theory of thematic roles  , or cases , a small standard set of which may prove adequate to explain verb subcategorization phenomena\[ Jackendoff  72\] The reference level , by which very specific domain roles are possible . To the extent that referents can be identified in the knowledge base  ( often as skolem functions ) they appear at the reference lvel . This rule says that anyway of stating a desire may be a request for the object of the want  . 
( SMOODDECL = (5) = >
VOICE ACT
TENSEPRES
REF(WANT-ACTACTOR!s )) ( REQUEST-ACT
ACTV(DESIDWANT-ACTREF))
It will match any sentence that can be interpreted as asserting a want or desire of the agent  , such as (7) a:I need an apkin . 
b : I would like two ice creams.
The object of the request is the WANT-ACT's desideratum  .   ( The desideratum is already filled by reference processing  . ) One may prefer an account that handles generalizations from the REF level by plan reasoning  ; we will discuss this point later . For now , it is sufficient to note that rules of this type are capable of representing the conventions of language use that we areafter  . 
2.3, Applying the Rules
We now consider in detail how to apply the rules.
For now , assume that the utterance is completely parsed and semantically interpreted  , unambiguously , like the sentence " can you speak Spanish ? " asi t appeared in Sect  .  2 . 1 . 
Interpretation f this sentence begins by finding rules that match with it  . The matching algorithm is a standard unification or graph matcher  . It requires that the category in the rule match the syntactic structure gaven  . All slots present in the rule must be found on the category  , and have equal values , and so on recursively . Slots not present in the rule are ignored . 
If the rule matches , the structures on the righthand side are filled out and become partial interpretations  . 
We need a few general rules to fill in information about he conversation :  (  ?  )  =  (  6  )  =>  (   ( SPEECHACTAGENT ! s )   ) Rule 6 says that an utterance of any syntactic category maps to a speech act with agent specified by the global variable is  .   ( The processes of identifying speaker and heater are assumed  , to be contextually defined . ) The partial interpretation it yields for the Spanish sentence is a speech act with agent Mrs  . de
Prado : (( SPEECHACTAGENT Mrs . de Prado )) The second rule is analogous , filling in the hearer . 
(?) = (7) ffi >(( SPEECHACTHEARER!h))
For our example sentence , it yields a speech act with hearer Suzanne . 
(( SPEECHACTHEARERSuzanne))
Ruleno . 2 given earlier , for yes/no produces these interpretations : questions  , (( ASK-ACT

AGENT Suzanne
ACTION ( USE-LANG UAGE
AG ~% "2 Suzanne
LANGlsl ))) ( SPEECHACT ))
The indirect request comes from rule no.3 above.
To apply it , we match the subject " you " and the modal auxialiary " can*  , and the features of yes/no mood and active voice . 
(( REQUEST-ACT
ACTION ( USE-LANG UAGE
AGENT Suzanne
LANGlsl ))) ( SPEECHACT ))
We now have four sets of partial descriptions , which must be merged . 
2.4. Combining Partial Descriptions
The combining operation can be thought of as taking the crossproduct of the sets  , merging partial interpretations within each resulting set  , and returning those combinations that are consistent internally  . We expect hat psycholinguistic studies will provide additional constraints on this set  , e . g . 
commitment to interpretations triggered early in the sentence  . 
The operation of merging partial interpretations is again unification or graph matching  ; when the operation succeeds the result contains all the information from the contributing partial interpretations  . The crossproduct of our first two sets is simple  ; it is the pair consisting of the interpretation for speaker and hearer  . These two can be merged to form a set containing the single speech act with speaker Mrs  . de Prado and hearer Suzanne . 
The crossproduct of this with the results of the mood rule contains two pairs  . Within the first pair , the ASK-ACT is a subtype of SPEECHACT and proper speaker and hearer  . The second pair results in no new information , just the SPEECHACT with speaker and hearer .   ( Recall that the mood rule must allow for other interpretations of yes/no questions  , and here we simply propagate that fact . ) Now we must take the cross product of two sets of two interpretations  , yielding four pairs . One pair is inconsistent because REQUEST-ACT and ASK-ACT do not unify  . The REQUEST-ACT gets speaker and hearer by merging with the SPEECHACT  , and the ASK-ACT slides through by merging with the other SPEECHACT  . Likewise the two SPEECH-ACTs match , so in the end we have an
ASK-ACT , . REQUEST-ACT , and the simple

(( REQUEST-ACT
AGENT Mrs . de Prado
HEARER Suzanne
ACTION ( USE-LANG UAGE
AGENT Suzanne
LANG is 1))) ( ASK-ACT
AGENT Mrs . de Prado
HEARER Suzanne
PROP ( ABLE-STATE
AGENT Suzanne
ACTION ( USE
AGENT Suzanne
OBJECT is 1))) ( SPEECHACTAGENT Mrs . de Prado)
HEARER Suzanne))
At this stage , the utterance is ambiguous among these three interpretations  . Consider their classifications in the speech act hierarchy  . The third abswaets the other two , and signals that there may be other possibilities  , those it also abstracts . Its significance is that it allows the plan reasoner to suggest hese further interpretations  , and it will be discussed later . 
If there are any expectations generated by topdown plan recognition mechanisms  , ay , the answer in a question/answer pair , they can be merged in here . 
2 . 5 . Further Linguistic Considerations We have used a set of compositional rules to build up multiple interpretations of an utterance  , based on linguistic features . They can incorporate lexieal , syntactic , semantic and referential distinctions . Why does the yes/no question interpretation seem to be favored in the Spanish example ? We hypothesize that for utterances taken out of context  , people make pure frequency judgements . And questions about one's language ability are much more common than requests to speak one  . Such a single-utterance request is possible only in contexts where the intended content of the Spanish-speaking is clear or subcategorize for this crucial information  . ( cf . " Can youread Spanish ? I have this great article  . . . . " ) The statistical base can be overridden by lexical information  . Recall 5 ( b ) " Can you speak Spanish , please ? " The " please " rule ( above ) yields only the request interpretation , and fails to merge with the ASK-ACT . It also merges with the SPEECHACT , but the result is again a request , merely adding the possibility that the request could be for some other action  . No such action is likely to be identified . The " please " rule is very strong , because it can override our expectations . The final interpretations for " Can you speak Spanish  , please ?" do not include the literal interpretation :  (   ( REQUEST-ACT
AGENT Mrs . de Prado
HEARER Suzanne
ACTION ( USE-LANG UAGE
AGENT Suzanne
LANG isl ))) (( REQUEST-ACTAGENT Mrs . de Prado
HEARER Suzanne )
Here S , _ , -~ , nne is probably being asked to continue the present dialogue in Spanish  . 
Some linguistic features are as powerful as " please "  , as can be seen by the incoherence of the following  , where each sentence contains contradictory features  . 
(8) a :* Should you go home , please ? b :* Shouldn't you go home , please ? c :* Why not go home , please ? Modal verbs can be quite strong , and intonation as well . Other features are more suggestive than definitive  . The presence of a benefactive case ( rule above ) may be evidence for an offer or request , or just happen to appear in an inform or question . 
Sentence mood is weak evidence : it is often overrid den  , but in the absence of other evidence it it becomes important The adverbs " kindly " and " possibly " are also weak evidence for a request  , and large class of sentential adverbs is associated primarily with Informacts  . 
(9) a :* Unfortunately , I promise to obey orders . 
b : Surprisingly , I'm leaving next week.
c : Actually , I'm pleased to see you.
Explicit performative utterances \[ Austin 62\] are declarative , active , utterances whose main verb identifies the action explicitly  . The sentence meaning corresponds exactly to the action performed  . 
( SMOODDECL
VOICE ACT
SUBJ(NPHEADi)
MAIN-V+performatire
TENSEPRES ) = (8) => v(~')
Note that the rule is not merely triggering off a keyword  . Presence of a performative verb without the accompanying syntactic features will not satisfy the pefformative rule  . 
2.6. The Limits of Conventionality
We do not claim that all speech acts are conventional  . There are variations in convention across languages  , of course , and dialects , but idiolects also vary greatly . Some people , even very cooperative ones , do not recognize many types of indirect requests . Too , there is a form of request for which the generalization is obvious but only special cases seem idiomatic :  ( 10 ) a : Gotalight ? b : Gotadime ? c : Gota do nut ?  ( odd requesOd : Do you have the time ? e : Do you have a watch on ? There are other forms for which the generalization is obvious but no instance seems idiomatic : if someone was assigned a task  , asking whether it's done is as good as a request . 
( II ) Did you wash the dishes ?
In the next examples , there is a clear logical connection between the utterance and the requested action  . We could write a rule for the surface pattern , but the rule is useless because it cannot verify the logical connection  . This must be done by plan reasoning , because it depends on world knowledge . 
The first sentences can reques the actions they are preconditions of  . The second set can request actions they are effects of  . Because these requests operate via the conditions on the domain plan rather than the speech act itself  , they are beyond the reach of theories like Gordon & Lakoff's  , which have very simple notions of what a sincerity condition can be  . 
(12 ) a : Is the garage open ? b : Did the dryerstop ? c : The mail mancame  . 
d : Are you planning to take out the garbage ? ( 13 ) a : Is the earfixed ? b : Have you fixed the ear ? c : Did you fix the car ? Plan reasoning provides an account for all of these examples  . The fact that certain examples can be handled by either mechanism were gard as a strength of the theory : it leads to robust natural anguage processing systems  , and explains why " Can you X ?" is such a successful construction  . Both mechanisms work well for such utterances , othe hearer has two ways to understand it correctly  . These last examples , along with " It's cold in here " , really require plan reasoning . 
3. Role of Plan Reasoning
Plan reasoning constitutes our second constraint on speech act recognition  . There are four roles for plan reasoning in the recognition process  . Specifically , plan reasoning 1 ) eliminates speech act interpretations proposed by the linguistic mechanism  , if they contradict known intentions and beliefs of the agent  . 
2 ) elaborates and makes inferences based on the remaining interpretations  , allowing for non-conventional speech act interpretations  . 
3) can propose interpretations of its own , when there is enough context information to guess what the speaker might do next  . 
4 ) provides a competence theory motivating many of the conventions we have described  . 
Plan reasoning rules are based on the causal and structural links used in plan construction  . For instance , in planning start with a desired goal proposition  , plan an action with that effect , and then plan for its preconditions . There are also recognition schemas for attributing plans : having observed that an agent wants an effect  , believe that they may plan an action with that effect  , and so on . For modelling communication , it is necessary to complicate these rules by embedding the antecedent and consequent in one -sided mutual belief operators \[ Allen  83\]  . In the Allen approach , our Spanish example hinges on the acts " preconditions : SnT ~ rme will not attribute a qkn Uestion to Mrs  . de Prado if she believes heal read yows the answer  , but this knowledge could be the basis for a request  . Sentences like " It's cold in here " are also interpreted by extended reasoning about he intentions an agent could plausibly have  . We use extended reasoning for difficult cases , and the more restricted plan-hased conversational implicature heuristic \[ Hinkelman  87\]  , \[ Hinkelman forthcoming \] as a plausibility filter adequate for most common eases  . 
4. Two Constraints Integrated
Section 2 showed how to compute a set of possible speech act interpretations compositionally  , from conventions of language use . Section 3 showed how plan reasoning , which motivates the conventions , can be used to further develop and restrict the interpretations  . The time has come to integrate the two into a complete system  . 
4.1. Interaction of the Constraints
The plan reasoning phase constrains the results of the linguistic omputation by eliminating interpretations  , and reinterpreting others . The linguistic omputation constrains plan reasoning by providing the input  ; the final interpretation must be in the range specified  , and only if there is no plausible interpretation is extended inference explicitly invoked  . Recall that the hand side of the rule must express all the possibilities for this pattern  , a single rule can limit the range of interpretations sharply  . Consider ( 14 ) a : I here by in form you that it's cold in here . 
b : It's cold in here.
The explicit performative rules , triggered by " here by " and by a pefform a five verb in the appropriate syntactic on text  , each allow for only an explicit perform adve interpretation  . ( a ) is unambiguous , and if it is consistent with context no extended reasoning is needed for speech act identification purposes  .   ( In fact the hearer will probably find the formality implausible  , and try to explain that . ) By contrast , the declarative rule proposes two speech acts for  ( b )  , the In form and the generic speech act . The ambiguity allows the plan reasoner to identify other interpretations  , particularly if in context the Inform interpretation is implausible  . 
The entire speech act interpretation process is now as follows  . Along with the usual compositional linguistic processes  , we build up and merge hypotheses about speech act interpretations  . The resulting interpretations are passed to the implicature module  . The conversational implicatures are computed , discounting interpretations if they are in conflict with contextual knowledge  . If a . plausible , non-contradictory interpretation results , ~ t can be accepted . Allen-style plan reasoning is invoked to identify the speech act only if remaining ambiguity interferes with planning or if no completely plausible interpretations remain  . After that , plan reasoning may proceed to elaborate the interpretation r to plan a response  . 
Consider the central example of this paper . Three interpretations were were proposed for " Can you speak Spanish ?"  , in Section 2 . 
As they become available , the next step in processing is to check plausibility by attempting to verify the act's conversational implicatures  . We showed how the Askact is ruled out by its implicatures  , when the answer is known . Likewise , in circumstances where Suzanne is known not to speak Spanish  , the Request is eliminated . 
The genoric speech act is present undermost circumstances  , but adds little information excepto allow for other possibilities  . Because in any of these contexts a specific interpretation is acceptable  , no further inference is necessary for idendfying the speech act  . If it is merely somewhat likely that Suzanne speaks Spanish  , both specific interpretations are possible and both may even be intended by Mrs  . 
de Prado . Further plan reasoning may elaborate or eliminate possibilides  , or plan a response . But it is not required for the main effort of speech act identification  . 
218 c~4.2. The Role of Ambiguity
If no interpretations remain after the plausibility check  , then the extended plan reasoning may be invoked to resolve a possible misunderstanding or mistaken belief  . If several remain , it may not be necessary to disambiguate . Genuine ambiguity of intention siquite common in speech and often not a problem  . For instance , the speaker may mention plans to go to the store , and leave unclear whether this constitutes a promise  . 
In cases of genuine ambiguity , it is possible for the hearer to respond to each of the proposed interpretations  , and indeed , politeness may even require it . Consider ( b ) -( g ) as responses to ( a) . 
(15) a : Do you have our grades yet ? b : No , not yet . 
c : Yes , I'm going to announce them in class.
d : Sure , here's your paper . ( hands paper . ) e : Here yougo . ( hands paper . ) f :* No . 
g :* Yes.
The mainthing to note is that it is in felicitous to ignore the Request interpretation  ; the polite responses acknowledge that hespeaker wants the grades  . 
Note that within the framework of " speaker-based " meaning  , we emphasize the role of the hearer in the fin . ~ understanding of an utterance . An important point is that while the speech act attempted depends on the speaker's intentions  , the speech act accomplished also depends on the hearer's ability to recognize the intentions  , and to some extent their own desires in the matter  . Consider an example from \[ Clark 88\]: ( 16 ) a : Have some as paragus . 
b : No , thanks-.
(17) a : Have some as paragus.
b : OK , if I have to . . . .
The first hearer treats the sentence as an offer , the second as a command . If the speaker intended otherwise , it must be corrected quickly or be lost . 
4.3. The Implementation
Our system is implemented using common lisp and the Rhetorical knowledge representation system\[ Miller  87\]  , which provides among other things a hierarchy of belief spaces  . The linguistic speech act inte ~ retadon module been implemented  , with merging , as well as the implicature calculadon and checking module  . So given the appropriate contexts , the Spanish example runs . Extended plan reasoning will eventually be added . 
There are of course open problems . One would like to experiment with large interpretation rule sets  , and with the constraints from other modules . The projection problem , both for conversational ~ mplicature and for speech act interpretation  , has not been examined directly . If a property like conversational implicature or presupposition is computed at the clause level  , one wants to know whether the property survives negation  , conjunction , or any other syntactic embedding . \[ Horton 87\] has a result for projection of presuppositions , which may be generalizable . The other relevant work is \[ Hirschberg 85\] and \[ Gazdar 79\]  . Plan recognition for discourse , and the processing of cue words , are related areas . 
5. Conclusion
To determine what an agent is doing by making an utterance  , we must make use of not only general reasoning about actions in context  , but also the linguistic features which by convention are associated with specific speech act types  . To do this , we match patterns of linguistic features as part of the standard linguistic processing  . The resulting partial interpretations axemerged , and then filtered by determining the plausibility of their conversational implicatures  . Assuming no errors on the part of the speaker , the final interpretation is constrained to lie within the ranges ospecified  . 
If there is not a plausible interpretation , full plan reasoning is called to determine the speaker's intentions  . Remaining ambiguity is not a problem but simply a more complex basis for the heater's planning processes  . Linguistic patterns and plan reasoning together constrain speech act interpretation sufficiently for discourse purposes  . 

This work was supported in part by NSF research grants no  . DCR-8502481 , IST-8504726 , and USArmy Engineering Topographic Laboratories research contract no  . DACA76-85-C-0001 . 
References\[Allen83\]Allen , J . , " Recognizing Intentions From Natural Language Utterances  , " in Computational Models of Discourse , Brady , M . and Berwick , B . 
( ed . ), MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1983, 107-166 . 
\[Allen87\] Allen , J . , Natural Language Understanding , Benjamin Cummings Publishing Co . , 1987 . 
\[ Austin62\] Austin , J . L . , How to Do Things with Words , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA ,  1962 . 
\[Brown80\] Brown , G . P . , " Characterizing Indirect Speech Acts , " American Journal of Computational Linguistics6:3-4  , July-December 1980 ,  150-166 . 
\[Clark88\] Clark , H . , Collective Actions in Language Use , Invited Talk , September 2I ,  1988 . 
\[Gazdar79\]Gazdar,G . , Pragmatics : Implicature , Presupposition and Logical Form , Academic Press , 
New York , 1979.
\[Gibbs84\] Gibbs , R . , " Literal Meaning and Psychological Theory , " Cognitive Science 8 ,  1984 ,  275-304 . 
\[Gordon75\]Gordon , D . and Lakoff , G . , " Conversational Postulates , " in Syntax and Semantics V . 3, Cole , P . and Morgan , J . L . ( ed . ), Academic
Press , New York , 1975.
\[ Hinkelman87\] Hinkelman , E . , " Thesis Proposal : A
Plan-Based Approach to Conversational
Implicature , " TR202, Dept . Computer Science,
University of Rochester , June 1987.
\[I-Iirschberg85\] Hirschberg , J . , " A Theory of Scalar of Implicature , " MS-CIS-85-56 , PhD Thesis , Department of Computer and Information Science , University of Pennsylvania , December 1985 . 
\[ Horn84\]Horn , L . R . and Bayer , S . , Short-Circuited Implicature : A Negative Contribution  , Vol .  7, 1984 . 
\[ Horton87\] Horton , D . L . , " Incorporating Agents ' Beliefs in a Model of Presupposition  , " Technical Report CSRI-201 , Computer Systems Research Institute , University of Toronto , Toronto , Canada , 
August 1987.
\[ Jackendoff 72\] Jackendoff , R . S . , Semantic Interpretation i Generative Grammar , MIT Press , 
Cambridge , 1972.
\[ McCafferty 86\] McCafferty , A.S ., Explaining
Implicatures , 23 October 1986.
\[ Miller87\] Miller , B . and Allen , J . , The Rhetorical Knowledge Representation System : AUser's Manual  , forthcoming technical report , Department of Computer Science , University of Rochester ,  1987 . 
\[' Perrault80\]Perrault , C . R . and Allen , J . F . , " A Plan-Based Analysis of Indirect Speech Acts , " American Journal of Computational Linguistics 6:3-4  , July-December 1980 ,  167-82 . 
\[Searle 69\] Searle , J . , in Speech Acts , Cambridge
University Press , New York , 1969.
\ [ Searle 75\] Searle , J . , " Indirect Speech Acts , " in Syntax and Semantics , v3: Speech Acts , Cole and Morgan ( ed . ), Academic Press , New York , NY , 1975 . 
\[ Sidner81\] Sidner , C . L . and Israel , D . J . , " Recognizing Intended Meaning and Speakers ' Plans  , " Proc . IJCA 1'81,198 1, 203-208 . 

