NORMAL STATE IMPLICATURE
Nancy L . Green
Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Delaware
Newark , Delaware 19716, USA

In the right situation , a speaker can use an unqual-ified indefinite description without being misun-derstood  . This use of language , normal slate implicature , is a kind of conversational implicature , i . e . a non-truth-functional context-dependent i- ference based upon language users ' awareness of principles of cooperative conversation  . I present a convention for identifying normal state implicatures which is based upon mutual beliefs of the speaker and hearer about certain properties of the speaker's plan  . A key property is the precondition that an entity playing a role in the plan must be in a normal state with respect o the plan  . 
1 Introduction
In the right situation , a speaker can use an unqualified indefinite description without being misunderstood  . For example , a typical customer in a typical pets hop who said  ( la ) in response to the clerk's question in ( 1 ) would expect o be understood as meaning ( lb )  . The goal of this paper is to formally describe such uses of language  .   1   1A similar use of language is noted in \[ McC87\]  . McCarthy ( pp .  2930 ) discusses the problem of brid~ng the gap between a " rather direct\[translation \] into first order logic " of a statement of the Missionaries and Cannibals puzzle  , and a representation suitable for devising a solution to the puzzle  . For example , if the puzzle statement mentions that '% row boat that seats two is available " and doesn't say that anything is wrong with the boat  , the problem-solver may assume that the boat does n ' tleak  , hasoars , etc . McCarthy proposes a general-purpose method for formalizing common sense reasoning  , " circumscription " , to solve the problem . 
Also , a similar use of language is described in \[ GriT5\]   ( p . 
51 ) : " A is standing by an obviously immobilized car and is approached by B  ; the following exchange takes place :
A : I am out of petrol.
B : There is a garage round the corner.
. . . \[ B \] implicates that the garage is , or at least may be open , \[ haspetrol to sell \] , etc . " That t iffs use of language a . ( Customer B :) I'd like to see a parrot . 
b . I\[the speaker \] would like to see a live parrot  . 
c . 3 p:PARROTREQUEST(B,A,SIIOW(A,B,p )) d . 3q:\[Ap:PARROTLIVE(p)\]REQUEST(B,A,

One problem is that ( la ) ( i . e . its putative representation in ( lc ) ) does not entail ( lb )   ( i . e . its putative representation in ( ld )) .  2
Another problem is the context-dependence , both spatiotemporal and linguistic , of the relationship of ( lb ) to ( la ) . 
In a different spatic ~ temporal context , such as in a china shop , a speaker might use ( la ) to convey ( 2 ) rather than ( lb )  . 
2 . I\[the speaker \] would like to see a porcela in parrot  . 
In a different linguistic context , such as if the customer had said ( 3a ) following ( la )  , she would not involves the use of language I have illustrated in  ( 1 ) can be seen by considering a situation identical to the above except that the dialogue consists of just A's saying " I need a garage  . "In other words , Grice's example is of a situation where B has ant icipated a request from A which is the same kind of request as  ( la )  . 
2 The customer's use of ( la ) is an indirect speech act , namely , a request to be shown a parrot ; other possible realizations of this request include " Show meap arrot " and " Can you show meaparrot ? "  .   ( The derivation of representations of indirect speech acts has been treated elsewhere\[  PAS0\] and is not a concern of this paper . )  ( Ic ) is intended to represent that request by means of a first order language extended with hlgher-order operators such as REQUEST  . 
Also , in definite descriptions are represented as in \[ Web83\]  . 
The status of the existence of the parrot in the realworld or discourse context  ( and the related question as to the proper scope of the existential quantifier  )  , is not relevazlt to the concerns of this paper . My point is that the usual treatments employing a one-to-one translation from surface structure to logical form without consideration of other information will no the able to explain the relationship of  ( lb ) to ( 1@ normally expect he clerk to think she had meant  ( lb )  . A related question is why it would be appropriate  ( nonredundant ) for the customer to say ( 3b ) following ( la ) if the customer believed that the clerk might mistakenly believe that the customer wanted to see a dead parrot  . 
2 Scalar Impl icature tIirschberg proposes the following set of six necessary and sufficient conditions for identifying conversational implicatures  ( p .  38) .   3 A speaker S conversationally implicates Q to a hearert I by saying U  ( where U is a realization of a proposition
P ) in a context C iff : 3 . a .   .   .   . a dead one b .   .   .   . a live one A third problem is that in order to derive  ( lb ) from ( la ) it is necessary to consider the beliefs of speaker  ( S ) and hearer ( H ) : e . g . S's and H's beliefs about why each said what they did  , and about the appropriate state of the parrot . 
Grice\[ Gri75\] described conversational implicature , a kind of non-truth-functional context-dependent inference based upon a speaker's and hearer's awareness of principles of cooperative conversation  . In this paper , I claim that a speaker's use of ( la ) may conversationally implicate ( lb )  . 
In order to formally describe this kind of conversational implicature  , which I have termed ' normal state implicature ' , I adopt the methodology used by Hirschberg\[ Hir85\] for the identification of another kind of conversational implicature  , scalar implicature . 
In section 2 , I present a brief description of scalar implicatures and Hirschberg's methodology for identifying them  . In section 3 , I present a convention for identifying normal state implicatures  . Informally speaking , the convention is that if speaker Smakes a request hathearer H perform an action A on an entity E  , and if S and t t mutually believe that S has a plan whose success depends on the Ebeing in a certain state N  ( which is the normal state for an E with respect o that plan  ) and that S's request is a step of that plan , then S is implicating a request for S to do A on an 
E in state N .
In section 4 , I clarify the notion of normal state with respect to a plan by distinguishing it from the notions of stereotype and plan-independent normal state  . Next , in section 5 , I show how states can be represented in the lexicon  . 
In section 6 , I compare scalar and normal state implicature ; in section 7 , survey related work ; and , in section 8 , present my conclusions . 
1 . S in tends to convey Q to H via U ; and 2 . S believes that S and H mutually believe that
S is being cooperative ; and.



S and H mutually believe that S's saying U in C , given S's cooperativity , licenses Q ; and Qiscance lable ; i . e . , it is possible to deny Q without denying P ; and Q is nondetachable ; i . e . , the choice of a realization U of P does not affect S's implicating Q  ( except in certain situations where Q is licensed via Grice's Maxim of Manner  )  ; and Q is reinforceable ; i . e . , it is possible to affirm
Q without seeming redundant.
Instead of using these conditions to identify particular scalar implicatures  , Hirschber gargues that it is sufficient o provide a means of identifying instances of a class of conversational implicature  , such as scalar implicatures . Then , she provides a convention for identifying instances of scalar implicature  . 
Informally speaking , scalar implicature is based on the convention that  ( pp .  1 - 2 ) " cooper-ative speakers will say as much as they truthfully can that is relevant o a conversational exchange "  ; and distinguished from other conversational implicatures by " being dependent upon the identification of some salient relation that orders a concept referred to in an utterance with other concepts "  ; e . g . by saying (4a ), B has scalar implicated (4b ) . 4(4) A : How was the party last night ? a . B : Some people left early . 
b . Not all people left early.

The convention for identifying scalar implicature proposed by Hirschbergis of the form : if  3Her conditions are ~ revision of Grice's . Also , I have changed the names of her variables to be consistent with usage in the rest of my paper  . 
4(4) is example (1) in \[ Hir85\].
there exists a partial order O such that S and H mutually believe that O is salient in context C  , and utterance U realizes the proposition that S af-firms/denies/isgnorant of some value in O  , then by saying U to H in C , Slicenses the scalar implicature that S has a particular belief regarding some other value of O  . 
In the next section , I will apply Hirschberg's methodology to the problem of identifying normal state implicatures  . 
3 Normal State Implicature
In this section , I will argue that ( lb ) is a conversational implicature and propose a convention for identifying instances of that class of implicature  , which I will call ' normal state implicature ' . 
First , I claim that a speaker S conversa-tionally implicates  ( lb ) to a hearer H by saying ( la ) in the context described above ; i . e . that ( lb ) is a conversational implicature according to the six conditions described in section  2  . Condition 1 is met since S intends to cause H to believe ( lb ) by saying ( la )  ; condition 2 since S believes that it is a mutual belief of S and H that S is being cooperative  ; condition 3 will be satisfied by providing a convention for normal state implicature below  . The previous discussion about ( 3a ) and ( 3b ) provides evidence for cancelability ( condition 4 ) and reinforce ability ( condition 6 )  , respectively ; and ,   ( lb ) is nondetachable ( condition 5 ) since alternate ways of saying ( la )  , in the same context , would convey ( lb ) . 
Next , in order " to motivate the general convention ( (6 ) below ) for identifying normal state implicatures , I'll present the instance of the convention that accounts for the implicature in  ( 1 )  . Let S , H , U , and C be constants denoting speaker , hearer , utterance , and context , respectively . Let b0 , bl , and g be first order variables over parrots ( PARROT )  , live par-rots ( the lambda expression ) , and plans ( PLAN ) , respectively . 5 HAS-PLAN ( Agent , Plan , Entity ) is 5The model of plans used here is that of STRIPS\[ FN71\] with minor extensions . A plan includes preconditions which must hold in order for the plan to succeed  , and a sequence of actions to be carried out to achieve some goal  . 
One extension to this model is to add a llst of entities playing a role in the plan either as instruments  ( e . g . aboat which is to be used to cross a river ) or as the goal itself ( e . g . a parro to be acquired for a pet ) . The second exten-true if Agent has a plan in which Entity plays a role  ; PRECOND(Plan , Proposition ) is true if Plan has Proposition as a precondition  ; STEP ( Plan , Action ) is true if Action is a step of Plan . Also , BMB(A , B , Proposition ) is true if A believes that A and B mutually believe that Proposition  ; REALIZE ( Utterance , Proposition ) is true if Utterance expresses Proposition ; REQUEST(S , H , Action ) is true if S requests H to perform Action ; and SAY(S , H , U , C ) is true if S says U to H in C . 6SHOW(A,B,C ) is true if A shows C to B . IN-STATE ( Entity , State ) is true if Entity is in the given State ; and NORMAL-STATE ( State , Plan , Entity ) is true if State is the normal state of Entity with respect to Plan  . 7 Finally , NORMAL-STATE-IMP ( Speaker , Hearer , Utterance , Proposition , Context ) is true if by use of Utterance in Context , Speaker conveys Proposition to Hearer . 
Now , to paraphrase (5) below , if S and H mutually believe that S has a plan in which a par-rot plays a role and that a precondition of S's plan is that the parrot should be a live  , which is its normal state with respect to the plan  , and that S's saying U is a step of that plan ; and , if U is a request to be shown a parrot , then S normal state implicates a reques to be shown a live parrot  . 
5. Vb0:PARROT
Vbl:\[Ab2:PARROTLIVE(b2)\]?g:PLAN
BMB(S,H,~HAS-PLAN(S,g,b0)A
PRECOND(g,IN-STATE(b0,LIVE )) A
NORMAL-STATE(LIVE , g , b0)A
STEP(g , SAY(S,H,U,C ))) A
REALIZE(U , REQUEST(S , H , SHOW(H , S , b0))) NORMAL-STATE-IMP(S , H , U , REQUEST(S , H , 
SHOW(H,S , bl )), C)
It is possible to generalize (5) as follows.
Let K , N , and A be higher order variables over classifications  ( CLASSIF )  , states ( STATE ) , and actions that may be performed as a step in a plans loE  , suggested in \[ Car88\] , is to distinguish preconditions which can be achieved as subgoa is from those which are unreasonable for the agent otry to bring about  ( " applicability conditions " )  . In (5) and (6) , preconditions are meant in the sense of applicability conditions  . 
eBMB , REALIZE , REQUEST , and SAY are from \[ Hir85\] . 
7I will discuss what is meant by state and normal state in section  4  . 
91 ( ACT ), respectively . Then ,   ( 6 ) is the general convention for identifying normal state implicature  . 
6. VK:CLASSIFVN:STATEVA : ACT

Vbl:\[~b2:KN(b ~)\]
Vg : PLAN
BMB(S,H,HAS-PLAN(S,g,b0)A
PRECOND(g,IN-STATE(b0,N )) A
NORMAL-STATE(N , g , b0)A
STEP(g , SAY(S , It , U , C ))) A
REALIZE(U , REQUEST(S,H,A(b0))) ? ~
NORMAL-STATE-IMP(S,H,U,
REQUEST(S,II , A(bl )), C)
Unfortunately , if (6) is to be of maximum use , there are two problems to be solved . First , there is the problem of representing all preconditions of a plan  , s and , second , is the problem of plan inference , i . e . , how does H come to know what S's plan is ( including the problem of recognizing that the saying of U is a step in S's plan  ) ?  9 Both problems are outside the scope of this paper . 
4 States and Normal States
First , what I mean by a state of an entity E is , adopted from \[ Lan87\] , a history of related events involving E . In Lansky's ontology , events may be causally or temporally related . Temporal precedence is transitive . Causality is not transitive and does not necessitate occurrence but does imply temporal precedence  . A strong prerequisite constraint (-- , ) can be defined such that " each event of type E ~ can be caused by exactly one event of type El  , and each event of type E1 can cause at most one event of type E2"   ( \[ Lan87\] , p .  142) . 
Many classifications expressed as nouns denote a class of entity whose state varies over the period of existence during which it is aptly characterized by the classification  . For example , Figure 1 and Figure 2 depict causal event chains l ? of parrots and vases  , respectively . 
(Nodes represent events and directed arcs represent causality  . ) The state of being dead or
SE.g ., see\[McC87\].
9E.g ., see\[Car88\].
1?I don't mean ' causal chain ' in the sense that philosophers have recently used it \[  Sch77\]  , nor in the sense of \[ SA 77\] , nor do I mean'chain ' in the mathematical sense of a total order  . 
broken can be defined in terms of the occurrence of an event type of dying or breaking  , respectively . 
Live is the state of an entity who has been born but has not yet died  ; ready-to-use is the state of an artifact between its creation or repair and its destruction  . 11Note that , paradoxically , language users would agree that a dead parrot or a vase with a crack in it is still aptly characterized as a parrot or vase  , respectively . 12 Next , what I mean by a normal state of E is a state that E is expected to be in  . For example , in the absence of information to the contrary , live or ready-to-use is expected by language users to be a state of parrots or vases  , respectively . Note , however , that NORMAL-STATE in ( 6 ) represents a normal state of an entity with respect o some plan  . That is , I am not claiming that , in the absence of information about S's plan , S's use of ( la ) conversationally implicates ( lb )  . 
The reason for stipulating that NORMAL-
STATE be relative to S's plan is that use of ( la ) in the context of a different plan could change what S and H consider to be normal  . For example , in at axider mist's plan , dead could be the normal state of a parrot . Also , consider ' coffee ': a speaker's use of ( 7 ) in the context of a coffee farm could be used to request coffee beans  ; in a grocery store , a jar of instant ; and in a restaurant , a hot beverage . 
7. I'd like some coffee.

Note that more than one precondition of
S's plan may be relevant o interpreting S's use of an expression  . For example , a typical restaurant customer uttering ( 7 ) expects to be understood as not only requesting coffee in its hot-beverage state  , but also in its safe-to-drink state . Also , more than one of S's plans may be relevant , Returning to the pet shop example , suppose that S and H mutually believe that S has plans to acquire a parrot as a pet and also to study its vocalizations  ; then it would be inappropriate for H to show Sa parrot that H believed to be incapable of making vocalizations  . 
Normal states differ from stereotypes . A stereotype is a generalization about prototypes of a category  , 13 e . g .  (8) .   14   11Examples of how state predicates can be defined in Lansky 's formal anguage will be given later  . 
12 The cracked vase example is from \[ Her87\].
la The prototype-stereotype distinction is described  in\[HH83\]  . 
1 4Note that stereotypes may be relative to a state of the  8  . Unripebananas are green . 
Qualifying an expression in a way which contradicts a stereotype may have a different effect on H than doing so in a way which specifies a nonnormal state  . For instance , if S says ( 9 ) after saying ( la ) in the above pets hop scenario , H may doubt S's sincerity or S's knowledge about parrots  ; while S's use of ( 3a ) after saying ( la ) may causet I to have doubts about S's sincerity or It's knowledge of S's plan  , but not S's knowledge about par-rots . 
9.... a 100 pound one
Another difference between stereotypes and normal states is that stereotypes are not affected by S 's and H's mutual beliefs about S's plan  , whereas I have just demonstrated that what is considered normal may change in the context of S ' splan  . Finally , anothe reason for making the distinction is that I am not claiming that  , in the above pets hop scenario , S's use of ( la ) licenses (10); i . e . , S does not intend to convey (10) .  15 10 . I\[the speaker \] would like to see a large , green , talking bird . 
5 The Role of Events in certain Lexical Representations Now I will show how the notion of state presented in the previous section can be represented in the lexicon via state predicates based on causal event chains  . The purpose of this is to clarify what counts as a state and hence  , what is prototype ; e . g . contrast (8) with " Ripebanan as are yellow " . A statement of a stereotype in which the state of the prototypes is unspecified may describe prototypes in the plan-independent or mal state for the category  ; e . g . consider " Bananas are yellow " . Also , note that stereotypical properties may be used to convey the state  ; e . g . consider " I want a green banana " used to convey " I want an unripe banana "  . 
1 5I recognize that it is possible for a speaker to exploit mutual beliefs about stereotypes or p lan-independent or-real states to convey conversational implicatures  . E . g . , consider the conversation : A says , " Is your neighborich ? " B replies , " He's a doctor . " However , this kind of implicature does not occur under the same conditions as those given for normal state implicature  , and is outside of the scope of tiffspaper . 
9 3 to be identified by the convention for normal state implicature  . This way of representing states has benefits in other areas  . First , entaihnent relationships between states of an entity are thereby represented  . Second , certain scalar implicatures may be based on the event ordering of a causal event chain  . 
For example , Figure 3 contains pictorial and formal representations of a causal event chain for the ripening of fruit  . Definitions of states are given as state predicates  ; e . g . the expression ' un-ripe ' is used to denote a state such that no event of ripening  ( R ) has occurred ( yet )  . Note that , as (11) shows , ' ripe'may be used to scalar implicate but not to entail ' no to verripe '  ; the event ordering of the causal event chain serves as the salient order for the scalar implicature  . The expected entailments follow from the constraints represented in Figure  3  . 
ll . a . It's ripe . In fact , it's just right for eating . 
b . It's ripe . In fact , it's overripe/to oripe.
6 Comparison of Scalar and
Normal State Implicature
These two classes of conversational implicature have some interesting similarities and differences  . 
First , licensing a scalar implicature requires the mention of some specific value in an ordering  , while licensing a normal state implicature requires the absence of the mention of any state  . For example , consider a situation where S is a restaurant customer  ; H is a waiter ; S and H have mutual belief of the salience of an ordering such that warm precedes boiling hot  ; and , S and H have mutual belief of S's plan to make tea by steeping a tea bag in boiling hot water  . 
14. a . I'd like a pot of water.
b . I'd like a pot of warm water.
c.I'd like a pot of boiling hot water.
d . I'd like a pot of warm but not boiling hot water . 
In this situation , use of ( 14 a ) would license the normal state implicature ( 14 c ) but no scalar implicature . I Iowever , use of ( 14 b ) would license the scalar implicature ( 14 d ) but not the normal state implicature ( 14 c )  . ( In fact , use of ' warm ' in (14b ) would cancel (14c ) , as well as be confusing to H due to its inconsistency with H's belief about S's intention to make tea  . ) Thus , at least in this example , scalar and normal state implicature are mutually exclusive  . 
Second , saliency and order relations play a role in both . Scalar implicature is based on the salience of a partially ordered set  ( from any domain )  . Normal state implicature is based on the salience of a plan  ; one of a plan's preconditions may involve a normal state  , which can be defined in terms of a causal event chain  . 
normal state implicature , while the presence of a qualification ( the marked case )  , blocks it ( thereby allowing the scalar implicature to be conveyed  )  . 
Finally , Herskovits\[ Her87\] addresses the problem that the meaning of a locative expression varies with the context of its use  . Her approach is to specify " a set of characteristic constraints-constraints that must hold for the expression to be used truly and appropriately under normal conditions  . "( p .  20 ) Her constraints appear to include stereotypes and plan-independent or mal states  ; normal is distinguished from prototypical ; and the constraints may include speaker purpose . 
7 Related Work
This work is related to work in several different areas  . 
First , one of the goals of research on nonmonotonic reasoning  16 has been the use of default information . The classic example , that if something is a bird then it can fly , appears to involve all three notions that I have distinguished here  ; namely , stereotype , plan-independent or-mal state , and normal state with respectoap lan . 
(It is a stereotype that birds are genetically suited for flight  ; a plan-independent normal state that a bird is alive or uninjured  ; and a normal state with respectoa plan to send a message via carrier pi-ge on that the bird be able to fly  . ) Also , I have shown that the calculation of normal state implicature is based only on the third notion  , i:e . , that certain " defaults " are context-dependent . 
In another area , work has been done on using knowledge of a speaker's plans to fill in missing information to interpret in complete utterances  , e . g . sentence fragments\[ AP80\] and ellipsis\[ car89\]  . 
As for related work on conversational implicature , both \[ iior84\] and \[ ALS1\] describe pragmatic inferences where what is conveyed by an utterance is more precise than its literal meaning  . They claim that such inferences are based on a principle of speaker economy and exploit the speaker's and hearer'shared beliefs about stereotypes  . Also , Horn points out that an unmarked expression tends to be associated with the stereotype of an extension and its marked counterpart with the non -stereotype  . Roughly , this corresponds to my observation regarding (14) , that the absence of a qualification ( the unmarked case ) licenses al OF or a survey , see\[G in S7\] .   94   8 Conclusions This paper has provided a convention for identifying normal state implicatures  . Normal state implicature permits a speaker to omit certain information from an indefinite description in certain situations without being misunderstood  . The convention is that if S makes a reques that tt perform an action A on an E  , and if S and H mutually believe that S has a plan whose success depends upon the Ebeing in the normal state N with respect to that plan  , and that S's request is a step of that plan , then S is implicating a request for S to do A on an E in state N  . 
In order to specify the convention for normal state implicature  , I distinguished the notions of stereotype , plan-independent normal state , and normal state with respectoap lan . This distinction may prove useful in solving other problems in the description of how language is used  . Also , a representation for states , in terms of causal event chains , was proposed . 
The convention I have provided is important both in natural language generation and interpretation  . In generation , a system needs to consider what normal state implicatures would be licensed by its use of an in definite description  . 
These implicatures determine what qualifications may be omitted  ( namely , those which would be implicated ) and what ones are required ( those which are needed to block implicatures that the system does not wish to convey  )  , lr In interpretation , a system may need to understand what a user has 17This latter behavior is an example of Joshi's revised Maxim of Quality : " If you  , the speaker , planto say anything which may imply for the hearer something you believe to be false  , then provide further information to block it . " \[  JosS2\] implicated in order to provide a cooperative response  . For instance , if during a dialogue a system has inferred that a user has a plan to make an immediate delivery  , and then the user says (15a ) , then if the system knows that the only truck in terminal A is out of service  , it would be uncooperative for the system to reply with  ( 15 b ) alone ;   ( 15 c ) should be added for a more cooperative r-sponse . 
15 . a . User : Is there a truck in terminal A ? b . System : Yes , there is one c . but it's out of service . 
This work may be extended in at least two ways . First , it would be interesting to investigate what plan inference algorithms are necessary in order to recognize normal state implicatures in actual dialogue  . Another question is whether the notion of normal state implicature can be generalized to account for other uses of language  . 
9 Acknowledgments
An earlier version of this work was done at the University of Pennsylvania  , partially supported by DARPA grant N00014-85-K0018  . My thanks to the people there , particularly Bonnie Webber and Ellen Prince . Thanks to my colleagues at SAS Institute Inc . , Cary , N . C . , for their moral support while much of this paper was being written  . The final draft was prepared at the University of Delaware  ; thanks to the people there , especially Sandra Carberry and K . Vijayashanker . 
References\[ AL81\] Jay David Atlas and Stephen C . Levinson . It-clefts , informativeness , and logical form : radical pragmatics ( revised standard version )  . In Peter Cole , editor,
Radical Pragmatics , pages 1-62 , Academic Press , N . Y . , 1981 . 
lAP80\] James F . Allen and C . Raymond Perrault . Analyzing intention in utterances . 
Artificial Intelligence , 15:143-178, 1980.
\[c~881 Sandra Carberry . Modeling the user's plans and goals . Computational Linguistics , 14(3):23-37, 1988 .   95  \[  Car80\]  \[  FN71\]  \[  Gin87\]  \[  Gri75\]  \[  Her87\]  \[  HH831  \[  Hir85\]  \[  Hot84\]  \[  JosS2\]  \[  Lan87\]  \[  McC87\] 
Sandra Carberry . A pragmatics-based approach to ellipsis resolution  . Computational Linguistics , 15(2):75-96, 1989 . 
R . E . Fikes and N . J . Nilsson . Strips : a new approach to the application of theorem proving to problem solving  . Artificial Intelligence , 2:189-208, 1971 . 
Matthew L . Ginsberg . Readings in Nonmonotonic Reasoning . Morgan Kaufmann , Los Altos , California , 1987 . 
H . Paul Grice . Logic and conversation.
In P . Cole and J . L . Morgan , editors,
Syntax and Semantics III : Speech Acts , pages 4158 , Academic Press , N . Y . , 1975 . 
Annette Herskovits . Language and Spatial Cognition . Cambridge University
Press , Cambridge , England , 1987.
J . Hurford and B . Heasley . Semantics :
A Coursebook . Cambridge University
Press , Cambridge , England , 1983.
Julia Bell Hirschberg . A Theory of Scalar Implicature . Technical Report MS-CIS-85-56 , Department of Computer and Information Science , University of Pennsylvania ,  1985 . 
Larry Horn . Toward a new taxonomy for pragmatic inference : q -based and r-based implicature  . In D . Schiffrin , editor , GURT'84 . Meaning , Form and
Use in Context : Linguistic Applications , pages 11--42 , Georgetown University Press , Washington , D . C . , 1984 . 
Aravind K . Joshi . Mutual beliefs in question-answer systems . In N . Smith , editor , Mutual Beliefs , pages 181-197,
Academic Press , New York , 1982.
Amy Lansky . A representation of parallel activity based on events  , structure , and causality . In M . P . Georgeff and A . Lansky , editors , Reasoning about
Actions and Plans : Proceedings of the 1986 Workshop , pages 123-160 , Morgan
Kaufmann , 1987.
John McCarthy . Circumscription - a form of nonmonotonic reasoning  . In
Matthew L . Ginsberg , editor , Readings in Nonmonotonic Reasoning , pages 145-152 , Morgan Kaufmann ,  1987 . 
\[ PASO\]\[SA77\]\[Sch77\]\[Web83\]
R . Perrault and J . Allen . A plan-based analysis of indirect speech acts . American Journal of Computational Linguistics ,  6(3-4):167-182 ,  1980 . 
Roger C . Schank and Robert P . Abel-son . Scripts , Plans , Goals and Understanding . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Hinsdale , New Jersey , 1977.
Stephen P . Schwartz . Introduction . In
Stephen P . Schwartz , editor , Naming,
Necessity , and Natural Kinds , pages 13-41 , Cornell University Press ,  1977 . 
Bonnie L . Webber . So what can we talk about now ? In Jones K . S . Grosz , B . and B . L . Webber , editors , Readings in Natural Language Processing , Morgan Kaufmann , Los Altos , California ,  1983 . 
unborn,~live,~dead
Figure 1: Causal event chain for parrot unfinished ~ ready-to -use~ 
Figure 2: Causal event chain for vase\Y
Yripe
Fruit-for-eating = elementy pe events
R\[Ripen\] 0 \ [ Become Overripe \] constraints 1  . R - - . O end element y peun ripe(x ) = -- , (3 r : x . R ) occurred(r ) just-ripe(x ) = -(3 r : x . a ) occurred ( r)A-~((5o:x . O ) occurred ( o ) Ar--*o ) overripe ( x )  --  ( 3 o : x . O ) occurred ( o ) ripe(x )_(3r : x . R ) occurred ( r ) Figure 3: Causal event chain for fruitripening
