A Compositional Semantics for Focusing Subjuncts
Daniel Lyons *

3500 West Balcones Center Drive
Austin , TX 78759, USA

Graeme Hirst
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto , Canada MSS 1A4


A compositional semantics for focusing subjuncts - -words such as only  , even , and also--is developed from Rooth's theory of association with focus  . By adapting the theory so that it can be expressed in terms of a frame-based semantic formalism  , a semantics that is more computationally practical is arrived at  . This semantics captures pragmatic subtleties by incorporating a two-part representation  , and recognizes the contribution of intonation to meaning  . 
1 Introduction
Focusing subjuncts such as only , even , and also area subclass of the sentence-element class of adverbials  ( Quirk et al ,  1985) . They draw attention to a part of a sentence the focus of the focusing subjunct--which often represents ' new ' information  . 
Focusing subjuncts are usually realized by adverbs  , but occasionally by prepositional phrases . Focusing subjuncts emphasize , approximate , or restrict their foci . They modify the force or truth value of a sentence  , especially with respect oits applicability to the focused item  ( Quirk et al ,  1985 ,  ?8 . 116) . 
1 . 1 The prob lem wi th focusing sub juncts There are several reasons why developing any semantics for focusing subjuncts is a difficult task  . 
First , focusing subjuncts are ' syntactically promiscuous '  . They can adjo into any maximal projection . They can occur at almost any position in a sentence  . 
Second , focusing subjuncts are also'semantically promiscuous '  . They may focus ( draw attention to ) almost any constituent . They can precede or follow the item that they focus  , and need not be adjacent to this item . The focus need only be contained somewhere within the syntactic sister of the focusing subjunct  . Because of this behavior , it is difficult to determine the intended syntactic argument  ( adjunct ) and focus of a focusing subjunct . Sentences * The work described in this paper was done at the University of Toronto  . 
such as those in (1) can be ambiguous , even when uttered aloud within to national effects  .  1 (1) 1 . John could also ( SEE ) his wife from the door way ( as well as being able to talk to her )  . 
2 . John could also see ( his WIFE ) from the door way ( as well as her brother )  . 
3 . John could also see his wife ( from the DOOR way )   ( as well as from further inside the room )  . 
4. John could also ( see his wife from the
DOOR way )   ( as well as being able to do other things )  . 
Third , the location of intonational stress has an important effect on the meaning of a sentence containing a focusing subjunct  . Sentences may be partly disambiguated by intonational stress : interpretations in which stress falls outside the intended focus of the focusing subjunct are impossible  . For example , the sentence ( 2 ) * John could also see ( his wife ) from the

is impossible on the indicated reading , since stress on door cannot confer focus on his wife  . On the other hand , stress does not help to disambiguate between reading such as  ( 1 . 3) and (1 . 4) . 
Fourth , focusing subjuncts don't fit into the slot-filler semantics that seem adequate for handling many other sentence lements  ( see Section 1 . 3) ~ At best , their semantic effect is to transform the semantic representation f the constituent they modify in some predictable composition alway  ( Hirst ,  1987 , p .  72) . 
Finally , focusing subjuncts carry pragmatic " baggage " . The meaning of a focusing subjunct includes distinct asserted and non-asserted parts  ( Horn ,  1969) , ( Karttunen and Peters ,  1979) . For example , 1In the example sentences in this paper , small capitals denote intonational stress . Angle brackets 0 enclose the focus of a focusing subjunct and square brackets\[\]set off the constituent to which the focusing subjunct adjoins  . Unacceptable sentences are preceded by an asterisk  . 
54(3) asserts (4 . 1) but only presupposes (4 . 2) ( Horn , 1969): (3) Only Muriel voted for Hubert . 
(4) 1. No one other than Muriel voted for Hubert.
2. Muriel voted for Hubert.
Analogously , (5) asserts (6 . 1) and presupposes (6 . 2) ( Karttunen and Peters , 1979): (5) Even Billlikes Mary . 
(6) 1. Billlikes Mary.
2 . Other people besides Bill like Mary ; and of the people under consideration , Bill is the least likely to like Mary . 
The precise status of such pragmatic inferences i controversial  . We take no stand here on this issue , or on the definition of " presupposition " . We will simply say that , for example , (4 . 1) is due to the asserted meaning of only , and that (4 . 2 ) is produced by the non-asserted meaning of only . 
1 . 2 Requirements of a semantics for focusing subjuncts We desire a semantics for focusing subjuncts that is compositional  ( see Section 1 . 3) , computationally practical , and amenable to a conventional , structured , near-first-order knowledge representation such as frames  . It must cope with the semantic and syntactic problems of focusing subjuncts by being cross -categorial  , being sensitive to intonation , and by distinguishing asserted and non-asserted meaning  . By cross-categorial semantics we mean one that can cope with syntactic variability in the arguments of focusing subjuncts  . 
We will demonstrate he following : ? Intonation has an effect on meaning  . A focus feature is useful to mediate between intonational information and meaning  . 
? It is desirable to capture meaning in a multipart semantic representation  . 
? An extended frame-based semantic representation can be used in place of higher-order logics to capture the meaning of focusing subjuncts  . 
1.3 Syntactic and semantic frameworks
In this paper , we will use a composition M , frame-based approach to semantics . Focusing subjuncts have been thought difficult to fit into a compositional semantics because they change the meaning of their matrix sentences in ways that are not straightforward  . 
A compositional semanticsic haracterized by the following properties : ? Each word and wellformed syntactic phrase is represented by a distinct semantic object  . 
? The semantic representation of a syntactic phrase is a systematic function of the representation of its constituent words and/or phrases  . 
In a compositional semantics , the syntax drives the semantics . To each syntactic phrase construction rule there corresponds a semantic rule that speci-ties how the semantic objects of the constituents are  ( systematically ) combined or composed to obtain a semantic object for the phrase  . Proponents of com-position M semantics argue that natural language itself is for the most part compositional  . In addition , using a composition semantics in semantic interpretation has numerous computational advantages  . 
The particular in carnation of a compositional semantics that serves as the semantic framework for this work is the frame-based semantic representation of Hirst's Absity system  ( Hirst ,  1987 ,  1988) . 
Absity's underlying representation f the world is a knowledge base consisting of frames  . A frame is a collection of stereotypical knowledge about some topic or concept  ( Hirst ,  1987 , p .  12) . A frame is usuMly stored as a named structure having associated with it a set of slots or roles that may be assigned values or fillers  . Absity's semantic objects belong to the types in a frame representation language called Frail  ( Charniak ,  1981) . Absity uses the following types of semantic object : ? a frame name ? a slot name ? a frame determiner ? a slot-filler pair ? a frame description  ( i . e . a frame with zero or more slot-filler pairs ) ? ei L her an instance or frame statement ( a tomor frame determiner with frame description ) A frame determiner is a function that retrieves frames or adds them to the knowledge base  . A frame description describes a frame in the knowledge base  . 
The filler of a slot is either an atom , or it is an instance , specified by a frame statement , of a frame in the knowledge base . In order to capture the meaning of sentences containing focusing subjuncts  , we will augment Absity's frame-representation language with two new semantic objects  , to be described in
Section 3.3.
The notation Hirst uses for frames is illustrated in Figure  1  , which is a frame statement translation of the sentence  ( 7 ) Ross washed the dog with a news hampoo . 
The semantics we will outline does not depend on any particular syntactic framework or theory  . However , we choose to use Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar  ( GPSG )   ( Gazdar et al ,  1985) , because this formalism uses a compositional semantics that  ( agent = ( the ? x ( person ? X ( proper name--Ross ) ) ) )  ( patlent = ( the ? y ( dog ? y ) ) )   ( instrument = ( a ? z ( shampoo?z ( age=new ) ) ) )  ) )
Figure 1: An Absity frame statement resembles Montague grammar  ( Montague ,  1973) . A central notion of GPSG that we will make use of is that of the features of a syntactic phrase  . A feature is a piece of linguistic information , such as tense , number , and bar level ; it may be atom-valued or category-valued . 
1.4 Previous research
The ground work for the analysis of focusing sub -juncts was laid by Horn  ( 1969 )  . ttom describes only ( when modifying an NP ) as a predicate taking two arguments , "thetermix \] within its scope " and " some proposition \[ Pz\]containing that term "  ( Horn ,  1969 , p .  99) . The meaning of the predicate is then to presuppose that the proposition P is true of z  , and to asser that x is the unique term of which P is true : -  , ( ~ y ) ( y#z&P y ) . Even takes the same arguments . It is said to presuppose ( q y ) (y # x & Py ) and to assert Px . Horn requires a different formulation of the meaning of only when it modifies a VP  . 
Since his formulation is flawed , we do not show it here . 
Jackendoff's (1972, p .  242 ) analysis of even and only employs a semantic marker F that is assumed to be present in surface structure and associated with a node containing stress  . He calls the semantic material associated with constituents marked by F the focus of a sentence  . Fie proposes a rule that states that even and " related words " are associated with focus by having the focus in their range  . Differences between the ranges of various focusing adverbs account for their different distributions  ( Jackendoff ,  1972 , pp .  249-250) . For example : Range of even : If even is directly dominated by a node X  , then X and all nodes dominated by X are in its range  . 
Range of only : If only is directly dominated by a node X  , then X and all nodes that are both dominated by X and to the right of only are in its range  . 
That is , only cannot precede its focus ( nor can just , which has the same range ) , but even can : (8) 1 .  * ( JOHN ) only gave Mary a birthday present ( no one else did )  . 
2 .   ( JOHN ) even gave Mary a birthday present ( and so did everyone else , but John was the person least expected to ) . 
We will employ several aspects of Rooth's ( 1985 ) domain selection theory . A key feature of the theory is that only takes the VP adjacent oit in S-structure as its argument  ( an extension of the theory allows only to take arguments other than VPs  )  . 
Rooth describes technical reasons for this arrangement  ( 1985 , p .  45) . Among these is the fact that focusing subjuncts can draw attention to two  ( or more ) items that , syntactically , do not together constitute a wellformed phrase : ( 9 ) John only introduced ( BILL ) to ( SUE )  . 
The prevailing linguistic theories allow a node ( such as a focusing subjunct ) only one argument in the syntactic or logical ( function-argument ) sructures of a sentence . 
According to Rooth , the asserted meaning of ( 10 ) John only \[ vP introduced BILL to Sue\] . 
is " if John has a property of the form ' introduce y to Sue ' then it is the property ' introduce Bill to Sue '"  ( Rooth ,  1985 , p . 44, p .  59) . Rooth's theory would produce the same translation  , shown in (11 . 2), for both sentence (10) and sentence (11 . 1) . 
(11) 1. John only introduced Bill to SUE.
2 . VP\[\[P ( john ) & P6C\]--*P=^introduee' ( bill , sue )\] Pranges over propositions , o(11 . 2) is a quantification over propositions . C is bound 2 to the p-set of the VP of whichever sentence's meaning  ( 11 . 2) is intended to capture . This p-set is " a set of properties , which we think of as the set of relevant properties "  ( Rooth ,  1985 , p .  43) . 
Different truth conditions for the two sentences ( 10 ) and ( 11 . 1 ) obtain because their VPs have different p-sets : the computation of p-sets is sensitive to intonational stress  ( actually to focus , which is signalled by stress ; see below ) . The desired value for C in the translation of ( 10 ) is the set of propositions of the form " introduce y to Sue "  , namely propositions satisfying (12 . 1) . For the translation of (11 . 1) , C is the set of propositions of the form " introduce Bill to y "  , that is , those satisfying (12 . 2) . 
(12) 1 . AP3y\[P=^introdued(y , sue)\]2 . AP3y\[P=^introduee ' ( bill , y )\] These result in the final translations (13 . 1) and (13 . 2) respectively for sentences (10) and (11 . 1): (13) 1 . Vy\[introducd(john,y,sue)--+y=bilO2 . Vy\[introduce'(john , bill , y ) --+ y=sue\] 2 The mechanism of this binding relies on the translation being a formula of which  ( 11 . 2) is a reasonable simplification ; see ( Rooth ,  1985 , p .  59) . 

The formula (13 . 1 ) corresponds to the gloss of the meaning of ( 10 ) given above .  (13 . 2 ) is to be interpreted as meaning : " if John has a property of the form ' introduce Bill to y ' then it is the property ' introduce Bill to Sue '"  . 
The p-set of a complete sentence is a set of " relevant propositions "  . Rooth defines it recursively , from the p-sets of its constituents ( Rooth ,  1985 , p .  14 )   ( the " model " is a Montague-style formal model ) :  ( 14 ) Let a be a constituent with translation a ~ . The p-set of a is : 1 . if a bears the focus feature , the set of objects in the model matching a ~ in type  ;  2 . if a is a non-focused non-complex phrase , the unit set a '; 3 . if a is a non-focused complex phrase , the set of objects that can be obtained by picking one element from each of the p-sets corresponding to the component phrases of a  , and applying the semantic rule for a to this sequence of elements  . 
In other words , the p-set of a sentence consists essentially of all propositions that are " like " the proposition that it asserts  , except that the focused constituent in the proposition is replaced by a variable  .   3 We will adopt Rooth's definition of the meaning of only : A sentence containing only that  ( without only ) has logical form a: ( 15 )  1 . asserts that any " contextually relevant " proposition P whose extension is true is the proposition a  ;  2 . has a as part of its non . asserted meaning . 
( Rooth , 1985, p . 120).
Our analogous definition of even is this : A sentence containing even that  ( without even ) has logical form a: ( 16 )  1 . asserts a ; 2 . conveys the non-asserted inference that there are other " contextually relevant " propositions  , besides a , that are true . 
2 Dev ices used to so lve the prob lems Our semantics  ( which is described in more detail by Lyons ( 1989 ) ) employs devices described in the following sections  . 
2.1 The focus feature
Following Jackendoff , we propose that focus is a binary feature , similar to ( say ) gender and number , a The notion that the meaning of only and even can be defined in terms of a baseform  ( such as " John introduced y to Sue " ) was also noted by Kaxttunen and Peters ( 1979 ) and McCord ( 1982 )  . 
that is either present or absent on every constituent at surface structure  .   4 Focus is initially instantiated onto the leaves of the tree that represent intona-tionally stressed words  . The only realization of the focus feature that we accommodate is intonational accent  ; however , our theory can easily be extended to allow for other overt realizations of focus  , including other intonational effects ( e . g . ( Hirschberg and Pierrehumbert , 1986)) . Focus is optionally and nondeterministically percolated up the syntax tree  , to any node from its rightmost daughter ( rightmost because stress manifests itself only at the end of the focused constituent  ( Anderson ,  1972)) . The nondeterminism of the percolation of focus is responsible for ambiguity in the interpretation of sentences with focusing subjuncts  . How far the focus feature percolates up determines how wide a focus is attributed to the focusing subjunct :  ( 17 )  1 . John also read the book ( from the
LIBRARY ) ( as well as the one from the store).
2. John also read ( the book from the
LIBRARY ) ( as well as the newspaper).
3. John also I read the book from the
LIBRARY ) ( as well as completing his assignment).
The ambiguous interpretations of a sentence with a focusing subjunct belong to an ordered set in which each reading has a wider focus for the focusing sub-junct than the previous one  . 
2.2 Relevant propositions
Our semantics employs a computational nalogue of Rooth's p-sets for a frame representation  . Our p-set for a constituent is computed compositionally  , along with the semantic representation , in t and em with the application of the syntactic rule used to build the constituent  . The p-set turns out to be an object in the frame representation that is like the semantic assertion derived for the constituent  , but lacking restrictive information associated with any focused components  . 
2.3 Two-part semantics
In addition top-sets , two semantic expressions are computed for each constituent during the interpretation of a sentence  . One expression represents asserted meaning , and the other , non-asserted meaning . 
4 This feature iswhat Jackendoffcalls the F marker  , but is different from what he calls " focus " . Note that we use the term focus of a focusing subjunct to stand for a distinct concept : the item to which a focusing subjunct draws attention to  , or focuses . This is the semantic material that corresponds to a stressed word or to a constituent containing one  . 
57 2.4 Linguistic features
Focus is marked as a binary feature on all syntactic constituents  . The semantic rules use this information when constructing semantic expressions for constituents  . Because the focus feature need not percolate all the way up to the level of the constituent that is adjacent to the focusing subjunct in the syntax tree  , we have found it useful to employ a second feature  , focus . in , that indicates whether or not any subphrase is focused  . The restriction that a focusing subjunct adjoins only to a phrase containing focus is implemented by requiring the adjunct phrase to be  ( focus-in + )  . 
Range ( see Section 1 . 4) is implemented as two binary features , range-right and range-left , that indicate whether or not a given focusing subjunct can adjoint ophrases to its right and left  , respectively . 
( Some words , like even , have both features . ) 2 . 5 Sentential operators Rooth applies his even and only operators to the logical form of the constituent that is the syntactic sister of the focusing subjunct  . So , for example , in the VP (18 . 1) , only transforms the expression wash'(dog ) , which is the translation of the VP argument of only  , into the A-expression (18 . 2) . 
(18) 1 . only\[vp washed the ( DOG)\]2 . AxVP\[\[VP&PeC'\]
P = ^ wash'(x , dog)\]
For each focusing subjunct , Rooth must define a separate transformation for each different semantic type of phrase that it may take as an argument  . He defines a basic sentential operator for each focusing subjunct  , and then derives the other operators from these ( Rooth ,  1985 , pp .  120-121) . 
Our approach is to insteade fine a single operator for each focusing subjunct  , essentially Rooth's basic sential operator . This operator takes the semantic representation f a sentence as an argument and produces another semantic representation fsential type  . When sentential objects are not available , as in the interpretation f\[vp only VP\] , we delay the application of the operator until such a point as fully developed propositions  , the semantic objects of sen-tenees , are available . To do this , the grammar rules " percolate " focusing subjunct operators up the syntax tree to the S node  . Our grammar employs the feature fs to carry this latent operator  . When the interpretation fa sentence is otherwise completed  , a final step is to apply any latent operators , producing expressions for the sentence's asserted and non-asserted meanings from expressions for its assertion and its p-set  . 
Several pieces of evidence motivate this approach : ? As Rooth observed  , in order to define a family of cross-categorial operators for  ( say ) only , a basic operator must be defined that operates on an expression of sential type  . The semantics of focusing subjuncts actually seems to take place at the sentence lvel  . 
Focusing subjuncts normally occur at most once per sentence  . Even granting the acceptability of sentences containing several focusing subjuncts  , such sentences are clearly semantically complicated  . 
The principal advantage of our approach is that it constructs essentially the same final translation of a sentence as Rooth's  , but avoids using the A-operator during the derivation of a semantic representation that does not itself contain aA-operator  . 
This is desirable , as A-expressions would make the frame representation languagels stractable  . 
3 Details of the semantics 3 . 1 Semant ic features Three semantic objects are computed for and attached to each syntactic on stituent  , in parallel with the syntactic processing . The objects are of the types defined in an Absity -like frame representation  . 
They are attached to a node as values of the following features  ( an approach motivated by Shieber ( 1986 ) ): Assert : The asserted meaning of the constituent  , is contribution to the sentence's asserted meaning  . The value is computed the same way that a Montague-style grammar would construct a constituent's logical form from those of its daughters  . Figure 2 shows examples of the rules to compute this value . 
Presupp : The constituent's contribution to the sen-tence's non-asserted meaning  . For all rules but sentence rules , the presupp feature on the parent node is undefined  . In order not to commit ourselves to the status of the non-asserted meanings of focusing subjuncts  , we reserve this feature for the non-asserted meanings introduced by focusing subjunct operators  ( see below )  . 
P-set : A prototype of the semantic objects in the node's p-set  . All objects that match this object are in the node's p-set  . The algorithm for computing p-sets distinguishes between two cases : Case  1: If the parent node X ( being constructed ) is ( focus + )  , its p-set is a variable of the same type as the assert object  . 
Case 2: Otherwise , the p-set of X is constructed from the p-set values of the constituent phrases in a manner exactly paral-leling the construction of the assert feature  . 

Syntax rule Semantic rule
S--*XP\[(assert(agent=a ))\] , S = S\[ ( assert ( frame ~ ( agent=4 ) sf-pairs ) )\]
VP\[(assert(frameflsf-pairs ))\]
VP---*V\[2(assert(frame?t ~))\] , VP = V\[(assert(frame?a(slotfl = ~))) 1
NP\[obj(assert(slot ~=?))\]
PP--*P\[38 ( assert slot a)\] , PP = PP\[(assert(slots = fl )) l
NP\[(assertfi)\]
Figure 2: Examples of semantic rules for the assert feature  3  . 2 Application of the focus ing sub junct operators There is a syntactic rule whose sole purpose is to support of the application of a sentential operator :  09  ) sH\[ ( fs4 ) 1 S\[fs 4\] is specified as a non-initial category in the grammar  , if a ?"-" . Therefore , the rule ( 19 ) must apply in the derivation of any wellformed sentence containing a focusing subjunct  . The corresponding semantic rule ( 20 ) applies a focusing subjunct operator to the semantic representation of the sentence  . 
(20) 1. Input:
S\[(asserta ), ( p-set ~/), ( fs7)\]2 . Output : ? If 7= "-" then
S\[(asserta ), ( p-setfl)\]?else
S\[(asser to plv(t  ~ , f i )) , ( presuppop2 , ( tr , f l )) ,   ( p-setfl ) \] where oplv and op2v are the sentential operators for the focusing subjunct  7   ( see below )  . 
3.3 The sentential operators
The sentential operators for only and even are given below  . ( The one for too is the same as that for even , and those for the other focusing subjuncts are similar  . ) (21) 1 . oplontu(A,P ) = if P then A2 . op2 only(A,P ) = A3 . opl ~, e , ( A , P ) = A4 . op2 ~ ven ( the ? x frame-descrA) ,   ( the ? y frame-descrP )  =  ( a new ? y ? ? z ( frame-descrP ) ) The form if P then A is a directive to the underlying knowledge base to insert the rule that any frame matching P is just the frame A  , that is , A is the unique frame matching P . This directive is a frame implication . It is similar in character to a frame determiner ( Hirst ,  1987) , in that it is a function that manipulates the underlying knowledge base  . 
The form ( a new ? y~?X frame-descrP ) is also a new type of entity in the semantics . We treat it as a frame determiner . It is a directive to the knowledge base to retrieve or create a frame instance  , ? y , that matches frame-descrP but is not the frame instance identified by the variable ? x  . As with the frame determiner ( the ? x ) , such a frame instance ? y should be inserted if not already present in the knowledge base  . 
For example , the sentence (22 . 1) yields the expression (22 . 2) as its assertion and (22 . 3 ) as its non-asserted meaning ( other readings are possible as well )  . 
(22) 1. Ross only washed the DOG.
2 . if ( wash ? x ( agent = Ross ) ) then ( wash ? x ( agent = Ross )   ( patient = dog ) ) )  3 .   ( the ? x ( wash ? x ( agent = Ross )   ( patient = dog ) ) ) The frame instance ( 22 . 3 ) captures the semantic on-tent of the sentence " Ross washed the dog "  . The frame implication (22 . 3 ) is to be interpreted as the rule that any wash frame in the knowledge base having Ross as its agent must in addition have dog as its patient  . 
A second example : sentence (23 . 1) yields assertion (23 . 2) and non-asserted meaning (23 . 3) . 
(23) 1. Ross washed even the DOG.
2 .   ( the ? x ( wash ? x ( agent = Ross )   ( patient = dog ) ) )  3 .   ( a new ? y~?x ( wash?y ( agent = Ross ) ) ) The expression ( 23 . 3 ) affirms the existence of a wash instance ? y having agent Ross but that is a distinct washing from ? zin  ( 23 . 2), which has do gas its patient . 
4 The implementation
IDEO ( Interpreter Designed for Even and Only ) is a limited semantic interpreter that incorporates the The implementation is in Edinburgh C-Prolog  , running under UNIX on a Sun-4 computer . Because the authors did not have access to a working version of Frail  ( see Section 1 . 3) , IDEO runs on top of a toy knowledge base , also implemented in C-Prolog , whose retrieval language is ( unfortunately ) a syntactic variant of Absity's . 
A sample session with IDEO is follows below . In this trace , output generated by the program or typed by the user is shown in type writer font  . As the example shows , IDEO accepts a sentence typed at the keyboard and outputs four different hings  . Firstly , itechoes the sentence in its internal Prolog format  . 
Secondly , the GPSG category obtained for the sentence , which incorporates a parse tree for the sentence , is displayed . For the sake of readability , IDEO prints a simplified version of the category . Then , it prints separately the semantic representation f the sentence  , which consists of several of the feature-value pairs of the sentence category  . Lastly , it displays a message about the successor failure of each knowledge base function call resulting from processing the semantic representation f the sentence  . In a question-and-answer system , these messages would be replaced by generated English answers  . 
Please enter a sentence , follo . ed by a carriage return , after the " I : " prompt . 
J : Ross only washed the : dog.
The colon preceding the word dog tells IDEO that the word is intonationally stressed  . 
>>> Sa ~ the sentence :\[ ross . only . , ashed . the . stress ( dog ) . 
period \] > > > The category for this sentence is: \[ Omitte due to space ~ mitations  . \] The significant piece of information in the GPSG category is that the noun phrase \[ NP the stress  ( dog ) \] is ( focus + )  , but the verb phrase that contains it is not . 
>>> The semantic representation is : assert ( if frame ( X ,   . ash ) k slot(X , agent , ross ) then frame(X, . ash ) k slot(X , agent , ross ) slot(X , patient , Y ) k frame det ( the . Y , frame(Y , dog ))) presupp(framedet(a , X , frame(X . .ash ) k slot(X , agent , ross ) k slot(X , patient . Y ) k frame det ( the , Y , frame(Y , dog )))) p-set(framedet(a . X , frame(X , . ash ) k slot(X , agent , ross ) ) ) fs ( only ) >>> OK?no This semantic representation corresponds to the reading in which the speaker means to assert that Ross washed nothing else but the dog  . The user replies no to the prompt OK ? to indicate that this is not the reading he intends  . 
>>> The category for this sentence is : \[ Omitted ue to space limitations  . \] This time , a parse is returned in which the feature ( focus + ) percolates up the parse tree to the entire verb phrase\[NP  . a shed the stress ( dog )\] , >>> The semantic representation is : assert ( if slot ( X , agent , ross ) then frame(X ,   . ash ) k slot(X , agent , ross ) k slot(X , patient , Y ) k frame det ( the , Y , frame(Y , dog ))) presupp(framedet(a , X . 
frame(X , . ash ) k slot(X , agent , ross ) slot(X , patient , Y ) k frame det ( the , Y , frame(Y , dog )))) p-set(framedet(a , X . 
slot(X , agent , ross ) ) ) fs ( only ) >>> OK ? yes The user approves this semantic representation  , which corresponds to the reading in which the speaker asserts that Ross did nothing but wash the dog  . 
>>> Retrieved frame " dogl " frame(dog1 . dog ) >>> Found frame " wash l " frame ( wash1, . ash ) slot ( . ash l , agent , ross ) slot ( . as hl , patient , dogl ) > > > Inserted rule " rule l " if slot(X , agent , ross ) then
X = . a shl
The knowledge base now is constrained by the rule rule l  . This says that iraframe X satisfies the frame description slot  ( X , agent , ross ) ( i . e , its agent is ross ) , then it must be the frame , ash l(a , ash frame whose patient slot is filled by dogl ) . 
60 5 Conclusions
This paper summarizes work , details of which can be found in ( Lyons ,  1989) . The work represents a step towards better understanding of focusing subjuncts and of compositional semantics in general  . The semantics we have proposed allows focusing subjuncts to be covered by a frame-based approach to semantic interpretation  , by virtue of its being compositional , computationally practical , able to differentiate between asserted and non -asserted meaning  , sensitive to intonation , and eross-categorial . We have found that : ? Focus and stress information can be used to advantage in a semantic interpreter  . 
? The hypothesis that focus may be optionally percolated to a parent node from a daughter explains the scope ambiguities observed in the interpretation of focusing subjuncts  . 
? Rooth's method of obtaining the translation of a focusing subjunct by using p-sets to select " domains of quantification " can be adapted to translating a sentence into a frame represents -tion  . 
? Treating focusing subjuncts as operators on sentential semantic forms makes this translation possible  . 
? Semantically , focusing subjuncts are not just passive objects for composition  . We have shown extensions to standard frame representations that are required for the translation of focusing subjuncts  . 

Both authors acknowledge the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada  . 
We are also grateful to Diane Horton , Brendan Gillon , Barb Brunson , and Mark Hyan for discussions , comments on earlier drafts , and general encouragement . 

Anderson , Stephen R .  (1972) . How to get even . Lan . 
guage , 48:893-906.
Charniak , Eugene (1981) . A common representation for problem-solving and language-comprehension information  . Artificial Intelligence , 16(3):225-255 . Also published as technical report CS-59 , Department of Computer Science , Brown University , July 1980 . 
Gazdar , Gerald , Klein , Ewan , Pullum , Geoffrey K . , and Sag , Ivan (1985) . Generalized Phrase Structure
Grammar . Harvard University Press.
Hirschberg , Julia and Pierrehumbert , Janet (1986) . The intonational structuring of discourse . In 24 th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Proceedings of the Conference . pages 136143 . 
Hirst , Graeme (1987) . Semantic Interpretation and the Resolution of Ambiguity  . Cambridge University

Hirst , Graeme (1988) . Semantic interpretation and ambiguity . Artificial Intelligence , 34(2):131-177 . 
Horn , Laurence R .  (1969) . A presuppositional naly-sis of only and even . In Binnick , Robert I . , Davison , Alice , Green , Georgia , and Morgan , Jerry , editors , Papers from the Fifth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society  . Chicago Linguistic Society , pages 98107 . 
Jackendoff , Ray S .  (1972) . Semantic Interpretation in
Generative Grammar . The MIT Press.
Karttunen , Lanri and Peters , Stanley (1979) . Conventional implicature . In Oh , Choon-Kyu and Din-neen , David A . , editors , Presupposition , volume 11 of Syntaz and Semantics . Academic Press , pages 1-56 . 
Lyons , Dan (1989) . A computational semantics for focusing subjuncts . Master's thesis , Department of Computer Science , University of Toronto . Also published as technical report CSRI-234 . 
McCord , Michael C .  (1982) . Using slots and modifiers in logic grammars for natural anguage  . Artificial
Intelligence , 18:327-367.
Montague , Richard (1973) . The proper treatment of quantification in ordinary English  . In Hin-tiklm , Kaarlo Jaakko Juhani , Moravcsik , Julius Matthew Emil , and Suppes , Patrick Colonel , editors , Approaches to Natural Language : Proceedings of the  1970 Stanford workshop on grammar and semantics . D . Reidel , pages 221-242 . Also in Thoma ~ son , Richmond Hunt ( ed . ) , Formal philosophy : Selected papers of Richard Montague  . Yale University
Press (1974):247-270.
Quirk , Randolph , Greenbaum , Sidney , Leech , Geoffrey , and Svartvik , Jan (1965) . A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language . Longman . 
Rooth , Mats Edward (1985) . Association with Focus . 
PhD thesis , Department of Linguistics , University of Massachusets . 
Shieber , Stuart M .  (1986) . An Introduction to Unification-Based Approaches to Grammar  . Center for the Study of Language and Information . 

