Asymmetry in Parsing and Generating with Unif ication Grammars : 
Case Studies From ELU
Graham Russell , * Susan Warwick , * and John Carroll ?
* ISSCO , 54rte . desAcacias ? Cambridge University Computer Laboratory 
1227 Geneva , Switzerland New Museums Site , PembrokeStreetrussell@divmm . onige . ch Cambridge CB 23 QG
Abstract
Recent developments in generation algorithms have enabled work innnifica fion-based computational linguistics to approach more closely the ideal of grammars as declarative statements of linguistic facts  , neutral between analysis an 0_synthesis , x -" ~- ouith is perspective , however , the situation is still far from perfect ; all known methods of generation impose constraints on the grammars they assume  . 
We briefly consider a number of proposals for generation  , outlining their consequences for the form of grammacs  , and then report on experience arising from the addition of a generator to an existing unification environment  . The algorithm in question ( based on that of Shieber et al ( 1989 ) ) , though among the most permissive currently available  , excludes certain classes of parsable analyses . 
1. Introduction
Parsing and generation me both concerned with the relation between texts and representations  , and insofar as a grammar defines this relation without reference to direction  , it may be regarded as rever-sible . Yet , in practice , the program which ' applies ' a grammar for the purpose of parsing is quite distinct from the one which performs generation  . t The essential difference between parsing and generating lies in the nature of the input  . The text , as a string of words , traditionally establishes the starting point of parsing  ; whether the processing is topdown or bottom-up , the basis for selecting grammar roles is information associated with words in the lexicon  . In the case of generation , there is in general no guarantee that the constituents of an input representation correspond to words  ; a portion of the input may be relate directly to a given word  , or it may be the result of combining representations associated to some sequence of rules  , portions of which meultimately related to lexical items  . For example , if the sentence John kicked the bucket receives the semantic representation die  ( John )  , it is iParsing and generation eed not employ different algorithms or control strategies  ; ee Shieber (1988) for discussion . However , a truly reversible gram would be an entirely different undergoking what is described here  . One such project is currently underway at New Mexico State University  ( Yorick Wilk ~ , p . c . ) .   205 relatively easy to see how during parsing the recog-uilion of kicked and the bucket will provide the necessary information  ( from the lexical entry for kick ) to build that represemo ~ on . " l ' nere presentation and the lexical items are in general related not dhectly  , but rather via intennediate syntactic rules , any of which is able to manipulate the representation in arbitrary ways  ; in generation , it is not possible to identify the correct lexical item without considering the syntactic rules which may intervene  . 
The generation problem , then , consists in how to build a syntactic structure faom an initial representation  , taking it as the root , and extending the structure ' downward ' to the lexicon by selecting rules from the grammar and attaching them at the appropriate points  . 
Though unification based systems have been in use for parsing for a number of years  , generation has until recently not attracted comparable attention  ; We det-lnd (1988) , Dymetmaun & lsabelle ( 1988 ) and Shieber ( 1988 ) describe tlue e systems of note . Not surprisingly , given the relative infancy of these explorations , none of these systems is without problems . The most permissive of the current proposals appears to be Shieber et al's  ( 1989 ) revision of the Shieber ( 1988 ) algorithm , yet several plausible grammatical nalyses handled by the parser me beyond the capacity of even approach  . 
This paper reports on experience arising from the addition of a generator component to the FLU  2 environment ; the algorithm is a variant of that proposed in Shieber et al  ( 1989 )  . We first consider general aspects of adapting unification grammars initially developed for parsing to their use in generation  . A brief description of the generator in ELU highlights the differences and improvements we have adopted  . We then demonstrate shortcomings 2 " Environnement Linguistiqued ' Unification " . 
Cf . Johnson & Rosner ( 1989 ) for a description of UD ( Unification Device ) which includes the parser and facilities such as procedural abswactions and extended at a types  ( lists and trees ) and Estival et al .   ( 1989 ) for a description of the extended ELU system which incorporates the ori ~ ml UD plus a generation and translation component  . 
of this class of generation algorithms on the basis of two case studies  . 
2 . Generating with Unification Grammars The goal of employing a single  , minimally augmented , grammar for both parsing and generation has become more accessible with the introduction of declaratve grammar formalisms  ( cf . Kay , 1985) . 
In the context of machine translation , for which the ELU system has been developed , the use of the same grammar for both tasks is highly desirable  ; indeed much of the work on bidirectional grammars has been carried out in centres working on MT  ( cf . 
Busemann , 1987; van Nonrd , to appear ; , Dymet-mann & Isabelle , 1988; and Wedekind ,  1988) . 
Regardless of the application , however , the ability to generate with a grammar is extremely useful as a method of checking its adequacy  . 
Despite the objective of reversibility , all of the systems mentioned here impose generation-specific restrictions on their grammars  , either by limiting the form of possible rules or by augmenting them with annotations  . DymeUnann & Isabelle ( 1988 ) require the grammar writer to specify for each role the order in which daughters should be generated  ; however , an order that might be correct when generating from one structure can lead to non-terminating search with another  . Busemann ( 1987 ) and Saim-Dizier ( 1989 ) describe methods of generation which rely on the parsing of a control structure using a specialized grammar to build the syntax of a sentence  ; it is question able to what extent the latter two systems can be considered to operate with bidirectional grammars  . 
Constraints imposed by Wedekind ( 1988 ) and van Noord ( to appear ) exclude certain linguistic analyses from generation  . In ordert O overcome the high degree of nondeterminism inherent in the topdown approach  , We dekind stipulates that a daughter of a rule must be ' connected '  ( i . e . that its semantics must be instantiated ) before it can be generated from . Less restrictively , van Noord stipulates similar constraints on rules  , i . e . that if the semantics of the mother node is known  , then the semantics of the head daughter is instantiated  , and additionally that if the syntax of the semantic head is known  , then the semantics of each daughter is known . These restrictions limit the class of possible analyses  , excluding accounts appropriate to LFG ( Kaplan and Bresnan ,  1982) , HPSG ( Pollard & Sag , 1987) and UCG (7_eevat et al ,  1987) . 
The disparate state of progress in parsing and generation raises important issues concerning the adequacy of grammatical descriptions and the computational tools that interprethem  . A situation exists in which a grammar may be ' correct ' for analysis  , but ' incorrect ' for generation . 
Significantly , this may be the case even when the restrictions and annotations mentioned above are taken into account  . Grammatical analyses developed in a purely parsing environment cannot mat suitable for generation  . Two types of conclusion may be drawn from this : failures may be ascribed to inadequacies of current generator technology  , or the grammatical analyses in question may be reevaluated  . Practical remedies will involve two related strands of research  ; improving methods of generation so as to IDinimi Te restrictions on the form of grammars that can be generated fzom  , and identifying problematic properties of grammars  . It is the second of these which the present paper chiefly addresses  , though we also remark , in the next section , on some enhancements to the Shieber et al ( 1989 ) algorithm that have been incorporated in the ELU generator  . 
3. The Generator in ELU
In this section we describe the generation algorithm in ELU  , and discuss in what respects it differs from that described by Shieber et al  ( 1989 )  .   3 Two notions central to this method of generation are that of the ' pivot '  , and that of partitioning the grammar in tO ' chaining ' and ' no D-chaining ' rules  . Loosely , the ' pivot ' of a structure to be generated from is the lowest node in a pathdown semantic heads of rules at which the semantics of the current generation root structure remain ~ unchanged  . A ch ~ inlnglille is one in which the semantics of the object associated with the righthand side category that has been declared as the head unifies with that of the lefthand side category  . Other rules are non-chaining roles . Rules that apply between the root and the pivot are  , by definition , chaining rules ; further , any rule which can be attached below the pivot is  , by definition , a non-chaining rule . Rules are partitioned into these two groups drain  8 grammar com-pilaton . 
Once the chaining rules have been identifed , the grammar compiler computes the possible sequences of such rules alon  8 a path through their mothers and semantic heads . The result is a ' teach ability table ' , each of whose element si a pair of restrictor value  sets4 representing classes of FSs which can occur at the top and bouom of such a path  ; in each case , the ' bottom ' restrictor set characterizes a pivot  . A res-trictor set is also computed for each lexical stem  , in order to retrieve words efficiently during generation The generation algorithm uses the distinction between chaining and non-chaining rules as well as  3 Our discussion will therefore assume familiari-ty with this paper  . 
4 Restrictors are attributes selected by the writer of a grammar as being maximally distinctive  ; when two FSs are to be unified , their respective restrictor values axe first checked for compatibility  , so as to eliminate the cost of an attempted nnificaton which is bound to fail  . See Shieber (1985) . 
that between head and nonhead auglzers , the reachability table for chaining rules , the semantic portion of the FS to be generated fi ~ m  5  , and the restrictors for lexicon stems . The algorithm is : 1 . Take all grammar rules declared as ' initial ' ( or all rules in the grammar if no such declaration has been made  )  ; for each of these rules whose mother unifies with the input FS  , apply the role topdown , building FSs for each of the daughters , and , starting with the head daughter , execute step 2 for each one . If generation firom the daughter si successful , compute all possible word forms ( as constrained by the locally available syntactic nformation  ) for each lexical stem generated . 
2 . Create a pivot COn Sisting of just the semantic portion of the current FS  . Non-determiniejc-ally perform steps 2a and 2b : a . Fmd a lexical stem which unifies with the pivot , making sure Coy checking with the reachability table  ) that he FS resulting from the unification can be linked through semantic heads of just chaining rules up to the current FS  . 
b . Fm da non-chaining rule which can have the pivot as mother  , similarly making sure that the FS resulting from the unification of the pivot and the mother can be linked up to the current FS  . Recursively ( through 2 ) generate the rule's daughters , tarting with the headaughter . 
3 . Link the pivot up to the current FS through semantic beads of just chaining rules  ( at each stage , before adding a new rule in the chain , checking with the teach ability able that further linking will be possible  ) and then recursively ( through 2 ) generate the non-bead Os , ghters of these rules . 
In this algorithm non-cbaining roles are used topdown  , while chaining rules are used bottom-up . 
Linking information is used both to check the applicability of a lexical stem or a non-chainlng role when generating topdown from a pivot  , and also to control search when generating bottom -up  , by ensuring that the lefthand side of any role considered still lies on a possible path through chaining rules to the current FS  . 
One innovation of the ELU generator is that the notion ' semantic bead ' is interpreted rather differently  ; whereas the earlier work simply defines the semantic bead of a rule as the daughter whose semantics unifies with that of the lefthand side  , and thus leaves the notion undefined for non -chalnlng rules  , that described here permits the grammar writer to identify one daughter in each rule as the  5 The relevant paths being determined by the user's declaration semantic head  . A role in which a O~ghtersluues the semantics of the mother can thus be made into a chaining rule or a non-chaining rule  , according to whether that daughter is identified as the semantic head  , and a rule that would otherwise have multiple semantic heads can be assigned just one  .   6 A rule in which there is no such daughter will remain a non-chaining rule  , but may nevertheless be annotated with a similar specification  . The rationale is twofold : the ability to coerce what would otherwise be a chaining rule to a non -chaining rule grallts the grammar writer more control over generation  , and the ability to specify one daughter as semantic ~ dlymore si?nlf ~ mnt than the others may be exploited in order to direct the attention of the generator towards ! hat daughter  . 
A second difference is the order of events in bottom-up generation  . Instead of generating firom the nonhead aughters of each chaining rule as it is attached  , the pivot is firm linked to the root , so that , if backtracking is forced , effort will not have been spent on processing StrU~h-e that must be discarded  . 
Finally , on each occasion that op-down generation is initiated  , an auempt is made to add a lexical item below the current root  , rather than extending the path by application of non-chainlng rules until no such rule is applicable  . Here , the motivation is that lexical information may be made available as soon as possible without forcing the grammar writer to adopt analyses that will produce bottom-up generation  . This is important because global syntactic properties of a sentence are ofteu determined by lexical information  . 
4 . Grammars for Generation 4 . 1 . Introduction In this section we examine more closely interactions between generator and grammar  . These fall under two headings : ( i ) the presence of now deter w in i . ~m in the grammar , and ( ii ) the role of lexicalism . 
One aspect of non-detet min i . qmin generation , that of the ordering of role application , is partially overcome in FLU by the user specification of the bead daughter  . Non-determinism with respect othe order of solving constraint equation siless well understood  . The use of restrictors helps to reduce the number of feature structures to be considered  . 
6 Thus circumventing a problem noted by
Shieber et al (1989 , f~4) in connection with such rules . Van Noord(p . c . ) stipulates that any daughter which has the same semantics as the mother  , but is not the semantic bead , may not branch : this constraint is clearly too strong  , precluding , among other things , linguistically motivated accounts of coordination . 

However , in FLU , the use of relational abstractions as a generalization of temj ~ late facilities increases the problem considerably/Relational abstractions permit the grammar writer to augment the phrase structure rules with statements which may receive multiple definitions in terms of constraint equations  ; the ' Linear Precedence ' definition in ( 2 ) below is an example . This facility is a standard ELU device for collapsing what would in an unex-tended PATR-like formal Lqr ? he several distinct rules  , thereby capturing linguistic generalizations that would otherwise goun expressed  . 
It is particularly impoRant to control nondeterminism in generation  , since , at least when processing is initiated , there is relatively little information available to direct he search  . Expanding multiple definitions as they are encountered would give rise to an n ~ c ceptable number of alternatives  , many of which might he identical , and often the information from the abstraction is not required until all but one of the alternatives have been excluded by other factors  . This is not always the case , however , and when exceptions occur their effect may be drastic  . We now describe one such exception to demonstrate how an elegant analysis for parsing is unsuitable for generation  . 
4.2. A grammar for French clitics
A common technique in modem lexically-oriented grammars  , and one which reflects and extends the traditional notion of ' valency '  , is to encode infor-marion about he various phrases with which a verb combines in items on a subcategorization list  . The grammar then enforces a match between a member of the list and a phrase which is to combine with some projection of the verb and removes the item from the list  . When a sentence is complete , i . e . the verb has ' found ' all necessary phrases , a grammar may require that the l is the empty , or perhaps that any remaining item is in some way specified as optional  . See e . g . Shieber ( 1986 ) and Pollard and Sag ( 1987 ) for applications of this method . 
A complete grammar of French must account for the position and ordering of clitic pronouns  . 
These precede the verb , while other complement phrases follow . Moreover , they appear in a fixed order , as shown in ( 1 ) :  ( 1 ) meleluiyent elaleur seles nous vons Up to three clitics may occur  , but for the sake of this discussion , we consider only the simpler case 7Cf . Johnson & Rosuer ( 1989 ) for a fuller description of relational abstractions  . 
of two critics as complement phrases to the verb . s There are of course many ways of accounting for their distribution  ;   9 the subcategorization list device seems a natural solution  , since any complement phrase may be realized as a critic  . The grammar rule in ( 2 ) introduces up to two clitics before the verb , their relative order determined by a relational abstraction which is defined by a number of clauses  , each clause licensing one of the possible clitic sequences  . 
(2) vplus->CI1C12I-IV

List=<HV subcat > -- CII < vplusub cat >= List--  C12 
Precede(X , Y ) < X person >= first/second < Y person > -- third
Ptecede(X , Y ) < X case >= accusative < Y case >= dative Some remarks on notation will be helpful : calls to relational abstractions are indicated by the exclamation mark  , feature-value disjunction is indicated by the slash  , and an equation of the form ' X = Y--Z' , where X and Y are lists , nnifies X non-detenninistically with the result of extracting one instance of Z from Y  . 
The effect of this rule , then , is to associate a pair of clitics with a verb , checkln ~ that they are correctly ordered , and unifying the subcategorization list of the lefthand side category with a copy of that of the head verb from which objects unifying with each of the clitlcs have been removed  . 
The problem emerges when information assumed to he held in the subcategoriza fion list of ' v plus ' is required in order to control further generation  . For example , if ' v plus ' appears as sister to another complement phrase  , and the same procedure of unifying the latter with an item on the list takes place  , then because the generator has suspended expansion of non-determin i  . ~ ticabstrac-lions , the subcategorization list itself will he uninstantiated  , and therefore no information regarding the semantics of the complement phrase will he available to restrict op-down generation  . 
s This is something of an oversimplification , as not only complement phrases , but also adverbials and parts of complement phrases are realized as clitics  . See Grimshaw ( 1982 ) for a partial LFG account of these phenomena . We also ignore the issue of negation , which considerably complicates the clitic-aux -verb structure  . 
9 The categorial treatment proposed in Baschung et al  ( 1987 ) not only makes use of order of arguments , but also codes each clitic for all possible combinations  . 

Modifications to the syntactic constituency assumed be redo not affect he principle  ; as long as the instanfiation of so central an element of the grammar as the subcategorization list is delayed  , the problem will remain . An alternative type of analysis would remove the nondeterminism from the grammar by factoring it out into a larger nomber of rules  . This solution is not without its own disadvantages  ; the number of distinct rules needed by a full treatment of French critics  , integrated with the placement of the various negative panicles and auxiliaries  , hould not be underestimated . We postpone further discussion of non-determini . ~m and delay until the conclusion and turn now to the problem of empty semantic heads  , an important problem for bead-driven generation algorithms  . 1 o 4 . 3 . Empty Semantic Heads In German and Dutch , there are two positions in a sentence where tensed verbs may appear : in second position of a main clause  , and infinal position of a subordinate clause . Once again , a multitude of analyses are possible within ELU grammars  . One approach is to control the distribution of verbs with grammar rules specific to clause - type  ; this solution gives rise to what might be felt to be an unacceptable degree of duplication i the grammar  . A more elegant approach , successful for parsing , exploits the possibility of assoc/ating a word or phrase appearing in one position within a sentence with a ' gap ' elsewbere  . 
The latter analysis will be recognized as a variant of a standard Govermnent-Binding treatment  , in which a tensed verb in a main clause is ' raised'froman ' underlying ' sentence-final position to a ' surface ' second position  ( see e . g . Haider (1985) , Platzack ( 1985 ) for discussion of this class of analyses )  . The dependency may be implemented by the use of a feature  , say'v2' , whose value in a verb-second construction is a feature structure representing the verb to be raised  , and in other con-stmctions an atomi constant such as ' none '  , which serves to block the dependency . At the extraction site , any value of ' v2' other than ' none ' may be cashed out as an empty production  . Information regarding the various syntactic properties of the raised verb is passed in the normal fashion between the verb's true position and the extraction site  , wbere it is able to exert the same constraints upon complement phrases that a lexically-realiTed verb would  . 
The simplified ruleset given in ( 3 ) will serve as a basis for discussion . Recall that the generator operates by partitioning the rules of the grammar  1o This problem is alluded to in Shieber et al ( 1989 , f n . 4 ) and is discussed in a draft of an expanded version of the paper  . 
209 into classes to be applied topdown ( non-ch ~ inlng rules - here ' S-gap ' and ' V2' ) and bottom-up ( chaining rules-here ' TOP ' , ' S ' and ' V ') . 
Bottom-up generation is only practical if the input structure to that phase of generation contains sufficient information  , e . g . the verb with its subcategorization list . 
(3)  #Rule TOP
TOP->XPI-I_S <* cat >= top <* head >= < H_S head > < XP cut > = np < H_S subcat >=\[ XP\]< H_S cat >= sbar#Rule  V2 
Sbar -> H_V2 S <* cat >= sbar < H_V2 cat>-v<S cat >= s<*subcat >= < Ssuboat > < S  v2>  =  H_V2 <* bead >= < S be a d > < H_V2 head synvfonn >= finite#Rule S
S->XPH_S < Scat > ff is < XP cat >= ap < H_S cat >= s <*  v2> =< H_S v2> <* subcat >= < H_S subcat > -- XP <* head >= < I-IShead >  #Rule V 
S->H_V < Scat >= s<*head >= < H_V bead > < H_V cat >= v <* subcat >= < H_V subcat > #Rule S-gap 
S ->-< Scat >= s < S bead >= < V2 head > < S v2> ffi V2 < Ssubcat >= < V2 subcat > The verb-raising analysis sketched here has the unfortunate property of supplying the generator with a semantic bead  ( the verb gap ) about which nothing is known . At the stage when topdown processing has identified the verb gap as the starting point fog boUom-up generation  , the input feat m'e structure is underspecified . In particular , the subeategorization list of the missing verb is -ninstalltiated  , and in the grammar in question , it is the length of this list which controls invocation of the recumive role'S'  . No bindings can be found , and the generator suspends evaluation of that equation in the hope  , in-founded on this occasion , that information not yet present will later allow its solution  . The result is that'S'is repeatedly added above ' S-gap '  , in a non-term l nating attemp to ensure completeness of the search  . 
Van Noord ( 1989 ) describes two solutions to this problem , both of which are additions to the original program  , and whose only motivation ( so far ) is to overcome this specific problem . The first , somewhat ad hoc , solution allows the verb to have as one of its morphological realizations the empty string  . Since wordforms are generated at the end of processing by a morphological frontend  , the generator can posit the same word in both positions  ( for the purpose of relrieving its subcategoriza fion behaviour f ~ om the lexicon  , for example ) . The morphological component then generates one empty string and one full word according to the position of the verb  ( i . e . in a main or subordinate clause ) . "\[' nismechani . ~ n is not available in ELU . 
The second solution adds an additional ' connect ' clause in the Prolog program  , specific to gaps , in order to assure that the gap is first instanfiated before further processing  ; this solution raises the issue of I~ming programs to treat specific problems as they are encounten xLT here are other constructions which raise the same kind of problem  ; the fronting of apparently non-constitnent verbal sequences in German  ( Ner-boone , 1986) introduces more complex dependencies , while in English the phenomena of Gapping and Verb-Phrase Ellipsis both manifest themselves syntactically in the absence from a sentence of a verb and possibly other material  . Here , the difficulty is , if anything , greater , as the dependencies in question are anaphoric in nature  , rather than syntactic . 
5. Conclusion
We have seen , in the preceding section , how in order to write grammar suitable for use with the generator  , one must either modify the technical aspects of the grammar or dispense with cemfin classes of grammatical nalysis  ( losing the benefits of relational abstraction on one hand  , and lexicalism on the other , for example ) . Both of these may be interpreted as restricting the freedom of the grammar writer  . The problematic case illustrated in section 4 . 2 raises the issue of non-deterrol ni ~ m , a potential pitfall for all unification-based systems  . 
In parsing , the result may belong processing limes , but when generating with algorithms of this class  , the consequence is often non-tern ~ in a fion . As Shieber et al (1989, fn . 4) observe , failure to choose the right daughter as the starting point for recursive generation may prevent tenuinafion  . 
The desire to exploit he power of unification by using the lexicon as a repository of essentially syntactic  ( beyond pure semantic ) information is natural , and has been encouraged by the success in theoretical linguistics of grammatical formalisms which employ such techniques  . Yet the use of these techniques in grammar writing  , which are highly attractive from the point of view of economy and expressive power  , deprives the generator of information that is , strictly speaking , syntactic . 
Semantic heads alone are not sufficient to drive the generation process  , if syntactic information cannot also be made available  . Our interim conclusion is that strong versions of the lexicalist position do not appear to be compatible with our current generator  , at least for a number of cases . This is not to say that it should be abandoned- the benefits in terms of clarity and economy are probably too great-but some care is needed if it is to be exploited effec-  210 lively . 
Given that work on this type of generation is in its early stages  , it is to be hoped that confimfing research will enable less restricted grammars to be written  . Nevertheless , the currently available facilities have been employed successfully in general  , mJking it possible to envisage defining the ' adequacy ' of a grammar in terms of its behavior both in parsing and in generation  . 

Baschung , K , G . G . Bes , A . Corluy , and T . Guillotin ( 1987 ) " Auxiliaries and Critics in French UCG Grammar " . Proceedings of the Third Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Copenhagen , Denmark , Aprillst-3rd 1987:173-178 . 
Bmsnan , J . ( ed . )  ( 1982 ) The Mental Representation of Grammatical Relations  . Cambridge , MA:
MIT Pmm.
Busemann , S . (1987) " Generienmgmit GPSG ".
KIT-Report 49, Techni ~ che Universit ~ tBerlin.
Dymelman , M . & P . Isabelle ( 1988 ) " Reversible Logic Grammars for Machine Translation "  . 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Theoretical nd Methodological Issues in Machine Translation of Natural Languages  , Camegie-Mellon Uiversity , Pittsburgh , USA . 
Estival , D . , A . Ballim , G . Russell , and S . Warwick ( 1989 ) " A Syntax and Semantics for Feanue-
Structu ~ Transfer ". MS , ISSCO.
Grimshaw , J .   ( 1982 ) " On the Lexical Representation of Romance Reflexive Clitics "  , in Bresnan ( ed . ): 87- 148 . 
Haider , H . (1985) " V-Second in German ", in H.
Haider and M . Prinzhom ( eds . ) Verb Second Phenomena in Germanic Languages : 49  -  75  . 
Dordrecht : Foris.
Johnson , R . and M . Rosner (1989) " A Rich
Environment for Experimentation with
Unification Grammars " . Proceedings of the Fourth Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , 
Manchester , UK , April 10th-12th 1989:182-189.
Kaplan , R . M . and J . Breanan (1982) " Lexical-Functional Grammar : . A Formal System for Grammatical Representation " , in Bresnun ( ed . ): 173-281 . 
Kay , M .   ( 1985 ) " Parsing in Functional Unification Grammar " , in D . Dowry , L . Kamunen , and A . 
Zwicky ( eds .) Natural Language Parsing.
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press : 251-278.
Nerbonne , J .   ( 1986 ) "' Phantoms ' and German Fronting : Poltergeist Constituents ? "  . Linguistics 24 - 5,857 - 87 0 . 
van Noord , G .   ( to appear ) " Bottom Up Genemtinn in Unification-based Formalisms "  , in C . Mell-ish , R . Dale , and M . Zock ( eds . ) Proceedings of the Second European Workshop on Natural 
Language Generation.
Platzack , C .   ( 1985 ) " A Survey of Generative Analyses of the Verb Second Phenomenon in Germanic "  . Nordic Journal of Linguistics 8: 49-73 . 
Pollard , C . and I . A . Sag ( 1987 ) Information-Based Syntax and Semantics , Volume 1: Fundamen . 
ta/s . CSLI Lecture Notes no . 13
Saint-Dizier , P .   ( 1989 ) " A Generation Method Based on Principles of Government-Binding Theory "  . Paper presented at the Second Euro-
Edinburgh , April 1989.
Shieber , S . M .   ( 1985 ) " Using Restriction to Extend Parsing Algorithms for Complex-l~ttme-BuedForfoali ~ ms "  . Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics : . 145-152.
Shieber , S.M . (1986) An Introduction to
Unifration-Based Approaches to Grammar.
CSLIl ., ~ tu ~ Notes no . 4.
Shieber , S . M .   ( 1988 ) " AUniform Ardfiteotme for Prosing and Generation "  . Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computa . 
tionai Linguistics , Budapest , Hungary : 614--619 . 
Shieber , S . M . , van Noord , G . , R . C . Moore , and EC . N . Pexeira ( 1989 ) " A Semantic-Head-Driven Algorithm for Unification-Based Formalisms "  . Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguis ~ cy .717.
Wedekind , J .   ( 1988 ) " Generation as St moture-Driven Derivation " . Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , Budapest , Hungmy : 732-737 . 
Zeevat , IL , E . Klein , and J . Calder (1987) " Unification Categorial Grammar " . Categorial Grammar , Unification Grammar , and Parsing , Edinburgh Working Papers in Cognitive Science , Volume 1 . Cenue for Cognitive Science,
University of Edinburgh : 195-222
