DESIGNER DEFINITESIN LOGICAL FORM
Mary P . Harper *
School of Electrical Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette , IN 47907
Abstract
In this paper , we represent singular definite noun phrases as functions in logical form  . This representation is designed to model the behaviors of both anaphoric and nonanaphoric  , distributive definites . 
It is also designed to obey the computational constraints suggested in Harper\[  Har88\]  . Our initial representation fade finite places an upper bound on its behavior given its structure and location in a sentence  . Later , when ambiguity is resolved , the precise behavior of the definite is pinpointed  . 
1 Introduction
A goal of natural language research is to provide a computer model capable of understanding English sentences  . One approach to constructing this model requires the generation of an unambiguous internal representation for each sentence before attempting to represent subsequent sentences  . Natural language systems that attemptoguess the intended meaning of a sentence without considering subsequent sentences usually make no provision for recovery from incorrect guesses ince that would require storing information about the ambiguity of the sentence  . Hence , this approach may require the processing of several sentences before enough information is available to determine the intended meaning of the sentence being represented  . However , in order to make the inferences necessary to resolve some ambiguities  , ome internal representation is needed for both the current sentence as well as subsequent sentences  . A more powerful approach is to leave the ambiguity unresolved in an intermediater presentation until the necessary information has been processed  . We adopt this second approach , which advocates mapping parsed sentences into an intermediate level of representation called logical form * This paper contains results from the author's thesis in the Computer Science Department at Brown University  . The paper has benefited from discussions with Eugene Charniak  , Kate Sanders , Leora Morgenstern , Tom Dean , Paul Harper and Frederic Evans . The work was supported in part by the NSF grants IST  8416034 and IST 8515005  , ONR grant N00014-79-C-0529 , and
AFOSR grant F49620-88-c-0132.
62\[SP84; All 87; Har88\] . Logical form partially specifies the meaning of a sentence based on syntactic and sentence-level information  , without considering the effect of pragmatics and context  . Later , as more information becomes available , the representation f the sentence is incrementally updated until all ambiguities have been resolved  . 
In the literature , two sources of ambiguity have been handled using logical form  , quantifier scoping ( see\[SP 84 ; Al187\]) and pronoun resolution ( see\[Har 88 ; Har 90\]) . In this paper , we will discuss the use of logical form for handling the ambiguities in the meanings of singular definite noun phrases  . But first , it will be useful to briefly review the logical form for pronouns  . 
2 Pronouns in Logical Form
Pronouns are a source of underspecification in a sentence which can be handled in logical form  . The antecedent of a pronoun cannot be immediately determined when the sentence containing it is parsed  . 
Contextual and syntactic on straints combine to allow a listener/reader to decide on the antecedent for a certain pronoun  . In Harper\[Har88; Har90\] , we devised a logical form representation for pronouns  . 
This representation divides the process of determining the meaning of a pronoun into two phases  . 
First , the representation for the pronoun is determined using only syntactic and sentence-level information  . Then , once the antecedent is determined , a feat which often requires pragmatic and contextual information available in subsequent sentences  , we provide a way to update our logical form to indicate this information  . 
Our logical form representation for pronouns was designed with two goals in mind  . First , we required our representation to be compatible with the goal of devising a computational model of language comprehension  . In fact , we defined three constraints for using logical form in a computational framework  ( from\[Har88\] and\[Harg0\] )  . 
1 . Compactness Constraint : Logical form should compactly represent ambiguity  . 
2 . Modularity Constraint : Logical form should be initially computable from syntax and local  ( sentence-level ) semantics . In particular , logical form should not be dependent on pragmatics  , which requires inference and hence , internal representation . 
3 . Formal Consistency Constraint : Further processing of logical form should only disambiguate or further specify logical form  . Logical form has a meaning . Any further processing must respect hat meaning . 
First , the compactness constraint captures the spirit of logical form as presented by Allen\[  Al187\]  . Second , if the modularity constraint is violated , the value of computing logical form is lost . Finally , the formal consistency constraint keeps us honest  . Initially , logical form provides a composite representation for a sentence  . However , as more information becomes available , then the meaning of the sentence will be incrementally updated until all ambiguity is resolved  . We cannot modify logical form in any way that contradicts its original meaning  . 
The second goal of our approach was to accurately model the linguistic behavior of pronouns while obeying our logical form constraints  . Since pronouns have a range of behaviors between variables on the one hand and constants on the other  , the initial logical form for a pronoun must be compatible with both extremes  ( to model the range of pronoun behaviors and to be consistent with the compactness and formal consistency constraints  )  . 
Hence , we provided a composite representation for a pronoun  , one compatible with any possible antecedentican have given its position in a sentence  . 
Pronouns in a sentence are represented as part of the process of providing logical form for that sentence  . We enumerate the important features of a sentence 's representation  . 
1 . A sentence is represented as a predicate-argument structure  , with subjects lambda abstracted to handle verb phrase ellipsis  . 
Lambda operators are necessary for handling examples of verb phrase ellipsis  . The second sentence in Example 1 is a sentence with verb phrase ellipsis ( also called an elided sentence )  . 
Example 1
Trigger Sentence : Frediloves his i wife.
Elided Sentence : Georgej does too.
Meanings : a . George loves Fred's wife.
b . George loves George's wife.
Assuming that the meaning of the elided verb phrase is inherited from the representation f the trigger sentence's verb phrase  , then the the pronoun his in the trigger verb phrase must be able to refer indirectly to the subject Fred intence  ( i . e . , George loves George's wife ) to be available . All sentences are potentially trigger sentences ; hence , we lambda abstrac the syntactic subjects of all sentences  ( following
Webber\[Web78\] and Sag\[Sag76\]).
2 . The logical roles of all noun phrases in a sentence are identified by position in logical form  ( logical subject first , logical object second , logical indirect object third , etc . ) . 
3 . We represent universal noun phrases as universally quantified  ( and restricted ) variables and indefinite noun phrases as existentially quantified  ( and restricted ) variables ( following Web-her\[Web78\] )  . 
4 . Quantifier scope ambiguity is handled in the same way as in Allen\[  All87\]  . Initially , we place quantifiers in the predicate-argument structure  ( except for subjects )  . Later , when information becomes available for making scoping decisions  , quantifier scoping is indicated ( discussed in Harper\[Har90\] )  . 
A composite representation for a pronoun is provided once the parse tree for the sentence containing it is available  . When the parse tree is provided , we can determine all of the quantified noun phrases that are possible antecedents for a pronoun in the sentence  ( seel ~ einhart \ [ Rei83\] )  . Hence , we represent a pronoun initially as a function of all of the variables associated with noun phrases that are possible antecedents for or distribute over possible antecedents for the pronoun  . To handle verb phrase ellipsis , the argument list must also include the lambda variables corresponding to syntactic subjects  . A pronoun is represented as a uniquely-named function of all lambda variables  ( associated with subjects ) which have scope over it in logical form , any non subject quantified variables corresponding to noun phrases that c-command the pronoun  ( following Reinhart \ [ Rei83\] )  , and any quantified noun phrase not embedded in a relative clause but contained in a noun phrase that c-commands the pronoun  . The lambda variable of a quantified subject subsumes the subject's quantified variable because the lambda operator abstracts the quantified variable  . Our logical form representation for pronouns summarizes all of the operators that can directly affect their final meanings  . Hence , the representation is useful for limiting the possible antecedents of a pronoun  . For example , a pronoun function can take a universal noun phrase as its antecedent if and only if the universal variable  ( or the variable corresponding to the lambda operator that abstracts the universal variable  ) is included in the function's argument list . 
Consider a simple example to demonstrate the initial representation f the following sentence  . 
Example 2
Every teacher gave every studen this paper.
Y x : ( teacher x ) x , A ( y ) (give y ( paper-of ( hisay z ) ) \[ Vz : ( student z ) z \] ) The syntactic subject of the sentence is universally quantified  , and the restriction on the quantifier is indicated after the colon  1  . The syntactic subject of the sentence is abstracted from the predicate-argument structure representing the sentence  . Hence , the verb phrase , represented as a lambda function , is separable from the subject . The subject's position is maintained in the lambda function by the lambda variable  . Notice that the definite noun phrase his paper is represented here as a function of the pronoun  . Shortly , we will provide a more general representation for definite noun phrases  . Notice that the pronoun his is represented as a function of subject's lambda variable plus the universal variable corresponding to every student  . 
This list of arguments corresponds to the operators for noun phrases that can be antecedents for the pronoun given the syntactic on straints or can distribute over possible definite antecedents  . Notice that the subject's lambda variable subsumes the subject's universal variable  . The reader should note that quantifier scoping is not indicated in our initial logical form  ( following Allen\[Al187\] )  . 
The representation for the pronoun in 2 is a composite representation , that is it indicates all of the operators that can affect its final meaning  . In fact , before the final meaning of the sentence can be given  , the antecedent for the pronoun must be determined and made explicit in our logical form  . 
Though the process of determining antecedents for pronouns is beyond the scope of this paper  , when a pronoun's antecedent is known ( requiring additional pragmatic information )  , the logical form containing it must be updated in away compatible with its initial representation  ( because of the formal consistency constraint )  . Suppose that we decide that the antecedent for his in example  2 is every student , then the logical form is be modified as shown in 3  . 
1The colon following the quantifier is syntactic sugar which expands the restriction differently depending on the type of quantifier  . If a sentence is represented as 3x : ( Rx )   ( Px )  , then the meaning is 3x ( and ( Rx ) ( Px )) . 
If a sentence is represented as Vx : ( Rx )   ( Px )  , then it is expanded as v x ( if ( Rx ) ( Px )) . 
Example 3
Every teacherl gave every student./hisj paper.
VX:(teacher x)x , A ( y ) ( and ( give y ( paper-of ( his1yz ) ) \[ Vz : ( student z ) z \] )   ( =  ( hisly z ) z ) ) This update is compatible with the pronoun's initial representation  . We are indicating that the function ( his1yz ) is really the identity function on z . In Harper\[Har88\] , we fully specify how logical form is updated when a pronoun's antecedent has been determined  . 
3 Definites : Behaviors to

In the rest of this paper , we develop our logical form representation for singular definite noun phrases  . 
As for pronouns , we wish to obey our computational constraints while providing a good model of definite behavior  . Consider the behaviors of definit . es we wish to cover . 
Like pronouns , definite noun phrases can be anaphoric . Anaphoric definites can either depend on linguistic antecedents  ( in either the same or previous sentences ) or can denote salient individuals in the environment of the speaker/hearer  ( also called deictic use )  . Because of our logical form constraints , in particular because of the compactness and formal consistency constraints  , the initial representation for a definite noun phrase must be compatible with the representations of its possible antecedents  . 
Definite noun phrases can have intrasentential n -tecedents as in example  4  . 
Example 4
Everyboy ~ saw ( hisl dog ) j before the beast j saw himi . 

In this case , the definite noun phrase acts like a universally quantified variable  ( adopting the behavior of its antecedent in much the same way as a pronoun  )  . 
Definites , unlike pronouns , can also have a complex syntactic structure . Pronouns and other noun phrases can be attached to a definite noun phrase in different ways  . First , consider the effect embedded pronouns have on definite noun phrases  . 
While simple definites ( which are not intrasentential anaphors ) seem to act like constants when they occur in a sentence with a universal noun phrase  ( e . g . , 5a ) , definite noun phrases with embedded pronouns often cannot be described as constants  ( e . g . , 5b ) . 
Example 5a . Every boy loves the woman.
b . Every boy loves his mother.
The meaning of his mother depends on how the pronoun is resolved  . If the antecedent for his is found in another sentence  , then his mother could be represented as a constant  . In contrast , if every boy is the antecedent for his , then the universal quantifier corresponding to every boy distributes over his mother  . When a quantifier distributes over a definite , the definite changes what it denotes based on the values assigned to the quantified variable  . 
Embedded quantified noun phrases can also distribute over a definite noun phrase  , preventing it from acting like a constant . For example , the universal possessive noun phrase distributes over the definite in the following sentence  . The definite in this case cannot be described as a constant  . 
Example 6
George loves every man's wife.
However , not all embedded quantified noun phrases can distribute over a definite  . When quantified noun phrases are embedded in relative clauses attached to a definite noun phrase  , they cannot distribute over that noun phrase . This constraint ( related to the complex noun phrase constraint , first noted by \[ Ros 67\] ) prohibits quantifiers from moving out of a relative clause attached to a noun phrase  . For example:
Example 7
George saw them other who cares for every boy.
In this case , the mother who cares for every boy denotes one specific mother  . In such cases , the universal cannot distribute over the definite it is attached to or have scope over other quantified noun phrases outside of the relative clause  . 
Thus , the meaning of a definite noun phrase is affected by its structure  , whether it contains pronouns , and whether or not it is used anaphorically . 
If used anaphorically , it should behave in a way consistent with its antecedent  , just like a pronoun . If it contains pronouns , then its meaning should depend on the antecedents chosen for those pronouns  . If it contains embedded quantified noun phrases ( not subject othe relative clause island constraint  )  , then those embedded noun phrases may distribute over the definite  . 
In the remainder of this paper , we introduce our logical form representation for definites  . We discuss the initial representation f definites  , which must be able to encompass all of the above definite behaviors  . We also describe the ways this logical form is updated once ambiguity is resolved  . 
4 Our Representation of
Definite Noun Phrases
In this section , we develop a representation for definites in logical form  . The logical form representation for a definite noun phrase presents a challenge to our approach  . To be consistent with the modularity constraint , we must provide an initial representation for a definite noun phrase that can be generated before we know the antecedents for any embedded pronouns or before we know the def-inite's antecedent  ( if it is anaphoric )  . To obey the compactness and formal consistency constraints  , we must initially represent a definite so it is consistent with all the ways it can possibly act  . As more information becomes available about the meaning of the definite noun phrase  , we must be able to update logical form in a way compatible with its initial representation  . Our logical form for a definite must be a composite representation compatible with its possible behaviors  . We cannot provide different initial representations for a definite depending on use  , otherwise we violate the compactness constraint . Additionally , unless our initial representation is compatible with all possible behaviors  , we could violate the formal consistency constraint when we update logical form  . 
We represent a definite as a named function of all of the variables associated with operators that can affect its meaning  . This representation satisfies our constraints by combining the advantages of definite descriptions  ( discussed in Harper\[Har90\] ) with the functional notation we introduced to represent pronouns  . Each definite function is defined by a unique name  ( i . e . , defwith a unique integer appended to it ) , a list of arguments , and a restriction . 
The restriction of a definite function is derived from the words following the determiner  . The argument list of the function consists of the variables associated with lambda operators that have scope over its position  , any variables associated with nonsubject quantified noun phrases that could bind a pronoun in that position  , and any quantified variables associated with embedded quantified noun phrases that are not embedded in a relative clause attached to a noun phrase  2  . Because a definite function has a unique name , we can differentiate two occurrences of the same definite noun phrase  , in contras to definite descriptions \[ RusT1\] ( for more information on the shortcomings of definite descriptions and definite quantifiers  , see\[Harg0; Hin85\]) . 
2We should also add that a sententially attached PP with a quantified object can quantify over a definite as well  ( as in , In every car , the driverturned the steering wheel . This sentence is tricky because we seem to be attaching the PP to both of the NPs while leaving the quantifier to distribute over both definites  )  . 

Consider the initial representation of a sentence containing a definite noun phrase before the antecedent of an embedded pronoun is known : 
Example 8
Everyman showed every boy his picture.
VX:(manX)x , A ( y )   ( showy ( ( defl y z ) I ( and ( picture ( delly z ) )  ( possess ( his2yz )   ( delly z )   ) ) ) \[ Vz : ( boyz ) z \] ) The representation of this sentence is very similar to example  2 except for the representation of the definite noun phrase  . Notice that his picture is represented as a function called defl  . The restriction of the function is the conjunction of statements following the vertical bar  . The vertical bar is syntactic sugar and should be expanded like the colon in an existential's restriction  ( but not until the definite's final meaning is determined  )  . The argument list of the function consists of the variables y and z  3  . Notice that the pronoun his is also represented as a function of y and z  . Anything that can affect the pronoun his picture will also affect the meaning of the definite noun phrase  . 
Because a definite function is a composite representation for all possible meanings of a definite noun phrase  , we must restrict the function in certain ways before a final interpretation for the sentence is available  ( or before deriving the meaning of an elided sentence from a trigger verb phrase containing a definite function  , as discussed in\[Har90\]) . 
The initiM representation of a definite places an upper and lower bound on the definite's behavior  . The lower bound is a constant , while the upper bound is the initial representation  . These bounds must be tightened to settle on a final interpretation for the definite  . We provide two methods top in point a definite function  . If the definite is used anaphorically , we equate the definite function with some value consistent with its antecedent  . Otherwise , we apply a constrain that limits the argument list of the function to include only necessary variables  . 
If a definite is used anaphorically , it can be equated with some value depending on its antecedent  ( just like pronoun functions in \[ Har88\] )  . 
For example , if the antecedent of a definite noun phrase occurs in another sentence  , we would equate the definite function with a discourse entity  . Antecedents for definite noun phrases can also occur  3As in the representation of pronouns , we omit the variable x from the argument list because the lambda operator for y abstracts x  , so y is the more general argument . 
within the same sentence . An intrasentential reference to an antecedent requires the definite function to have an argument list compatible with the representation of the antecedent  4  . Consider the initial representation of a sentence containing a potentially anaphoric definite shown in  9  . 
Example 9
Every mantold his mother's psychiatrist about the old lady's diary  . 
Vx : ( man x)x,A(y ) ( tell
Y ( ( defl y ) i ( and ( psychiatrist ( defly ) )  ( possess (   ( def2y )   ( and ( mother ( def2y ) )  ( possess ( his3y )   ( def2y ) ) ) )  ( defly ) ) ) )  ( about ( ( def4 y ) I ( and ( diary ( def4y ) )  ( possess ( ( defs y ) l ( old-lady ( def5y ) ) )   ( def4y ) ) ) ) ) ) Suppose the antecedent for his is every man and the antecedent for the old lady is his mother  . Then we can augmen the logical form , as shown in 10 . 
6 6   4It is unusual for a definite to have an antecedent corresponding to one of its arguments unless the variable corresponds to a quantified noun phrase which is not embedded in a relative clause but is embedded in another noun phrase  . When the antecedent is represented as a function , its argument list must be a subset of ( or it must be possible to limit it to be a subset of  ) the arguments of the anaphoric definite for the equality to be asserted  . 
Example 10
Every manj told ( his ) mother's ) ip sychiatrist about the old lady's ~ diary . 
Vx : ( man x)x,A(y ) ( tell
Y ( ( dell y ) I ( and ( psychiatrist ( delly ) )  ( possess ( ( def2 y ) I ( and ( mother ( def2y ) )  ( possess ( hisay )   ( def2y ) )  ( or ( =  ( hisay ) y )   ( =  ( his3y ) x ) ) ) )  ( delly ) ) ) )  ( about ( ( def4 y )  \[  ( and ( diary ( def4y ) )  ( possess ( ( def5 y ) I ( old-lady ( def5y ) ) )   ( def4y ) )  ( =  ( def5y )   ( def2y ) ) ) ) ) ) This example would be very difficult for an approach that uses either definite descriptions or definite quantifiers  . Either approach would represent the old lady in a way equivalent ore placing the representation by a constant  , because of uniqueness . 
Hence , any update of those representations to indicate the anaphora would violate formal consistency  . 
Our approach , however , can easily handle the example . 
The other way top in point a definite function applies once antecedents for embedded pronouns are known and once we know whether quantifiers corresponding to embedded quantified noun phrases  ( not embedded in relative clauses attached to noun phrases  ) should distribute over the definite . Consider the initial representation of the sentence in  8  . 
The definite function defl is a function of all of the variables that can potentially cause it to change  . 
However , once we know the antecedent for its embedded pronoun  , the argument list of the function should be limited  . To limit the argument list , we make use of the insights gained from definite descriptions  . Because of the uniqueness assumption , any definite description that does not contain variables bound by outside quantifiers acts like a constant  . On the other hand , if a pronoun embedded in a definite description adopts the behavior of a universally quantified variable  , then the definite description will change what it denotes depending on the instantiation of that variable  . Hence , we conclude that a definite function should only change as a function of those variables bound by operators outside of its restriction  ( ignoring its own argument list )  . 

Once antecedent and embedded quantifier information is available  , we can limit the argument list to precisely those arguments that are bound by operators outside of the restriction  . If a pronoun function in the restriction of the definite function is equated with a variable bound outside its restriction or with another function which must be a function of a certain variable  ( based on its own restriction )  , then the argument must be retained . Additionally , other arguments that are free in the restriction must be retained  ( these correspond to embedded quantified noun phrases whose quantifiers are moved out of the restriction  )  . Once we know the necessary arguments , we replace the original function by a new function over those arguments  . By using this argument reduction constraint , we limit the initial composite representation of a definite noun phrase to its final meaning  ( given pronoun and quantifier information )  . 
Consider how we would limit the function ( deflyz ) from example 8 following pronoun resolution . If we decide that the antecedent of his is every boy  , then we would update the logical form , as shown in 11 . 
Example 11
Everyman showed every boyihisi picture.
Vx : ( manx ) x , A ( y ) (show y ( ( defl y z )  \[  ( and ( picture ( delly z ) )  ( possess ( his2yz )   ( deflyz ) )  ( =  ( his2yz ) z )   )   ) \[ Vz : ( boyz ) z \] ) By using our argument reduction constraint , we can replace the function ( deflyz ) by a function of z ( since ( his2yz ) is replaced with the variable z )  , as shown in 12 . 
Example 12
Everyman showed every boylhisi picture.
Vx : ( man x)x,A(y ) ( and ( show
Y ( ( defl y z )  \]  ( and ( picture ( deflyz ) )  ( possess ( his2yz )   ( delly z ) )  ( =  ( his2yz ) z ) ) ) \[ Vz : ( boyz ) z \] )   ( =  ( delly z )   ( def3z ) ) ) Equality here is equivalent ore placing the first function with the second value  . Because of this fact and because of the meaning of the vertical bar in the restriction of the function  , this representation can be simplified as shown in  13  . 
Example 13
Everyman showed every boyihisi picture.
Vx : ( manx ) x , A ( y ) ( and ( showy ( def3z ) \[ Vz : ( boyz ) z \] )   ( picture ( def3z ) )  ( possess z ( def3z ) ) ) To handle the readings where his is anaphorically dependent on other noun phrases  , our approach would be similar . 
Our representation of pronouns has several strengths  . First , the representation provides useful information to a semantic routine concerning possible intrasentential ntecedents for the definite  . Ai'-gument lists limit what can be the antecedent along with other factors like number and gender agreement and antecedent limitations particular to deft-nites  . To demonstrate a strength of this approach , consider the initial representation of the following sentence : 
Example 14
Fred told the teacher who discusses every student with his mother to record her response  . 
(( dell)\](name(dell)Fred )),
A ( x )   ( tell x ( ( def2 x ) I ( and ( inst ( def2x ) teacher )   ( def2x )   , 
A(y ) ( discuss
Y\[V ( z )  :  ( in stz student ) z \] ( with ( ( def3 X y Z ) I ( and ( inst ( def3xyz ) ? mother )   ( possess\[ ( def2x )   , 
A ( w )   ( record w (   ( def5xw )  \[  ( and ( inst ( defsxw ) response )   ( possess ( her 6xw )   ( defsxw ) ) )   )   )  \ ]  ) antecedent for her . If the antecedent for his is every student , then his mother cannot be the antecedent for her . This accessibility problem results because the universal in the relative clause  ( i . e . , every student ) cannot have scope over her response , hence , his mother is not a good antecedent for her 5 . Notice that ( her 6xw ) is not immediately compatible with the representation for his mother  ( i . e . , ( def3xyz )) . 
Before we can assert that his mother is the antecedent for her we must pinpoint the meaning of that noun phrase  , that is , we must determine the antecedent for his . Then depending on our choice , the final meaning of his mother may or may not be accessible to the pronoun  . Hence , we can explain why some definites in relative clauses are accessible to pronouns in the matrix sentence and others are not  . C-comman does not accurately predict when definites are accessible as antecedents for anaphoric expressions  . This is not surprising , given the fact that the final meaning of a definite determines its accessibility  , and determining this meaning may require resolving pronouns and scoping ambiguities  . 
In this paper , we have introduced a composite representation for definite noun phrases with two ways to update their meaning as more information becomes available  . This approach is consistent with the three compntational constraints discussed in section  2  , and also provides a good model of deft-nite behavior  . We refer the reader to Harper\[ Har90\] for discussion of a wider variety of examples . In particular , we discuss examples of verb phrase ellipsis , Bach-Peter sentences , and definited on key sentences\[Gea62\] . Our approach has been implemented and tested on a wide variety of examples  . 
The logical form for pronouns and definites is provided as soon as a parse tree for the sentence is available  . Then , the logical form for the sentence is incrementally updated until all ambiguities have been resolved  . Logical form is very useful in the search for pronoun and definite antecedents  . For more on the implementation see\[Harg0\] . 
(his4 x y z ) One shortcoming of our approach is our in a bil- ( def3xyz )   )   )   )   )   )   )   ) it y to provide a single logical form for a sentence with structural ambiguity  . One possible solution to this problem ( which we are currently investigating ) is to store partial logical forms in a parse forest  . As more information is processed this intermediate rp-resentation will be incrementally updated until the parse forest is reduced to a single tree containing Here the meaning of her response depends on the antecedent for her  . What then a relegal antecedents for her in this sentence ? Certainly  , the teacher is a fine candidate , but what about his mother . We cannot tell immediately whether his mother can be the  5Strictly speaking , universal noun phrases cannot bind across sentences  . However , speaker sometimes allow a universal to be the antecedent for a singular pronoun outside of its scope  . Such pronouns are not usually understood as giving a bound variable reading  . See Webber\[ Web78\] for a discussion of this issue . A similar treatment can apply to definites which change as a function of a universal  . 
68 one logical form.
5 Past Approaches
Our work has benefited from the insights gained from other approaches to definite noun phrases in the literature  . We considered both definite descriptions introduced by Russell\[  Rus05\] and definite quantifiers ( used by many including \[ Web83\] ) for representing definite noun phrases . Neither representation allows us to handle intrasentential anaphoric definites while obeying our computational constraints  . However , the in-place definite description is excellent for modeling definite subjects in verb phrase ellipsis and for capturing the behaviors of distributive definite noun phrases  . On the other hand , a definite quantifier is not a good representation for a definite subject in verb phrase ellipsis  ( the strict meaning of The cat wants its to y . The dog does too cannot be provided because quantifiers do not have scope across sentences  )  . In fact , to make the definite quantifier a feasible representation  , we would have to make the binding properties of a definite quantifier different han the binding properties of a universal  . Hornstein \ [ Hor84\] suggests that definite quantifiers have different binding properties than universals  . His approach fails to consider how the process of pinpointing the meaning of a definite affects its ability to bind a pronoun  . For more discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of these approaches  , ee Harper\[Har90\] . 
Other approaches to handling definites include the work of \[  Hei82  ; Kam 81 ; Rob 87 ; Kle 87 ; PP88\] . 
Each approach differs from ours both in scope and emphasis  . We build an intermediate meaning for a sentence using only the constraints dictated by the syntax and local semantics and incrementally update it as we process contextual information  . The work of Pollack and Periera \ [ PP88\] also attempts to gradually build up a final interpretation of a sentence using their semantic and pragmatic discharge interpretation rules  . However , our representation of a definite noun phrase locally stores information about those quantifiers in the sentence that can potentially quantify over it  , while Pollack and Periera's representation does not  . The approaches of \[ Hei82 ; Kam 81 ; Rob 87 ;   Kle87\] require a large amount of contextual information before the representation fa sentence can be given  ( leading to a violation of our constraints )  . 
References\[Al187\] James Allen . Natural Language Understanding . The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing
Company , Menlo Park , CA , 1987.
\[Gea62\]Peter T . Geach . Reference and Generality . 
Cornell University Press , Ithaca , 1962.
6 9  \[  Har88\]  \[  Har90\]  \[  Hei82\]  \[  Hin85\]  \[  Hor84\]  \[  Kam81\]  \[  Kle87\]  \[  PP88\]  \[  Rei83\]  \[  RobS7\]  \[  Ros67\]  \[  Rus05\]  \[  Rus71\]  \[  Sag76\]  \[  SP84\]  \[  Web78\]  \[  Web83\] Mary P . Harper . Representing pronouns in logical form : Computational constraints and linguistic evidence  . In The Proceedings of the 7th National Meeting of AAAI ,  1988 . 
Mary P . Harper . The representation of noun phrases in logical form  . PhD thesis , Brown
University , 1990.
Irene Heim . The Semantics of Definite and Indefinite Noun Phrases  . PhD thesis , University of Massachusetts , 1982 . 
Jaakko Hintikka . Anaphora and Definite
Descriptions : Two applications of Game-
Theoretical semantics . D . Reidel Publishing
Oompany , Boston , 1985.
Norbert Hornstein . Logicas Grammar : An
Approach to Meaning in Natural Language.
MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 1984.
Hans Kamp . A theory of truth and semantic representation . In Jeroen Groenendijk , Theo Janssen , and Martin Stokhof , editors , Formed Methods in the Study of Language , volume 1 . 
Mathematische Centrum , Amsterdam , 1981.
Ewan Klein . VP ellipsis in DR theory . In J . Groenendijk , D . de Jongh , and M . Stokhof , editors , Studies in Discourse Representation and the Theory of Generalized Quantifiers  . 
Foris , Dordrecht , 1987.
Martha E . Pollack and Fernando C . N . Pereira.
An integrated framework for semantic and pragmatic interpretation  . In The Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computastional Linguistics  ,  1988 . 
Tanya Reinhart . Anaphora and Semantic Interpretation . Croom Helm , London , 1983 . 
Craige Roberts . Modal Subordination,
Anaphora , and Distributivity . PhD thesis,
University of Massachusetts , 1987.
John R . Ross . Constraints on Variables in
Syntax . PhD thesis , MIT , 1967.
Bertr and Russell . On denoting . Mind , 14:479-493, 1905 . 
Bertr and Russell . Reference . In J . F . Rosenberg and C . Travis , editors , Readings in the Philosophy of Language . Prentice-Hall , Inc . ,
Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey , 1971.
Ivan A . Sag . Deletion and Logical Form . PhD thesis , MIT , 1976 . 
L . K . Schubert and F . J . Pelletier . From English to Logic : Context-flee computation of ' conventional ' logical translations  . American Journal of Computational Linguistics ,  10:165-176 ,  1984 . 
Bonnie L . Webber . A Formal Approach to Discourse Anaphora . PhD thesis , Harvard , 1978 . 
Bonnie L . Webber . So what can we talk about now ? In M . Brady and R . Berwick , editors , Computational Models of Discourse . MIT
Press , Cambridge MA , 1983.
