PROSODY , SYNTAX AND PARSING
John Bear

Patti Price
SRI International
333 Ravenswood Avenue
Menlo Park , California 94025
Abstract
We describe the modification of a grammar to take advantage of prosodic information provided by a speech recognition system  . This initial study is limited to the use of relative duration of phonetic segments in the assignment of syntactic structure  , specifically in ruling out alternative parses in otherwise ambiguous sentences  . Taking advantage of prosodic information in parsing can make a spoken language system more accurate and more efficient  , if prosodic-syntactic mismatches , or unlikely matches , can be pruned . We know of no other work that has succeeded in automatically extracting speech information and using it in a parser to rule out extraneous parses  . 
1 Introduction
Prosodic information can mark lexical stress , identify phrasing breaks , and provide information useful for semantic interpretation  . Each of these aspects of prosody can benefit a spoken language system  ( SLS )  . 
In this paper we describe the modification of a grammar to take advantage of prosodic information provided by a speech component  . Though prosody includes a variety of acoustic phenomena used for a variety of linguistic effects  , we limit this initial study to the use of relative duration of phonetic segments in the assignment of syntactic structure  , specifically in ruling out alternative parses in otherwise ambiguous sentences  . 
It is rare that prosody alone disambiguates otherwise identical phrases  . However , it is also rare that any one source of information is the sole feature that separates one phrase from all competitors  . Taking advantage of prosodic information iparsing can make a spoken language system more accurate and more efficient  , if prosodic-syntactic mismatches , or unlikely matches , can be pruned out . Prosodic structure and syntactic structures are not  , of course , completely identical . Rhythmic structures and the necessity of breathing influence the prosodic structure  , but not the syntactic structure ( Gee and Grosjean 1983 , Cooper and Paccia-Cooper 1980) . Further , there are aspects of syntactic structure that are not typically marked prosodically  . Our goal is to show that at least some prosodic information can be automatically extracted and used to improve syntactic analysis  . Other studies have pointed to possibilities for deriving syntax from prosody  ( see e . g . , Gee and Grosjean 1983 , Briscoe and Boguraev 1984 , and Komatsu , Oohira , and Ichikawa 1989 ) but none to our knowledge have communicated speech information directly to a parser in a spoken language system  . 
2 Corpus
For our corpus of sentences we selected a subset of a corpus developed previously  ( see Price et aL 1989 ) for investigating the perceptual role of prosodic information in disambiguating sentences  . A set of 35 phonetically ambiguous sentence pairs of differing syntactic structure was recorded by professional FM radio news announcers  . By phonetically ambiguous sentences , we mean sentences that consist of the same string of phones  , i . e . , that suprasegmental rather than segmental information is the basis for the distinction between members of the pairs  . Members of the pairs were read in disambiguating contexts on days separated by a period of several weeks to avoid exagger-ation of the contrast  . In the earlier study listeners viewed the two contexts while hearing one member of the pair  , and were asked to select the appropriate context for the sentence  . The results showed that listeners can , in general , reliably separate phonetically and syntactically ambiguous sentences on the basis of prosody  . The original study investigated seven types of structural ambiguity  . The present study used a subset of the sentence pairs which contained ticle/preposition ambiguities  ( see Appendix )  . 
If naive listeners can reliably separate phonetically and structurally ambiguous pairs  , what is the basis for this separation ? In related work on the perception of prosodic information  , trained phoneticians labeled the same sentences with an integer between zero and five inclusive between every two words  . These numbers , ' prosodic break indices , ' encode the degree of prosodic decoupling of neighboring words  , the larger the number , the more of a gap or break between the words . We found that we could label such break indices with good agreement within and across labelers  . 
In addition , we found that these indices quite often disambiguated the sentence pairs  , as illustrated below . 
* Marge 0 would 1 never 2 deal 0 in 2 any 0 guys ? Marge 1 would 0 never 0 deal 3 in 0 any 0 guise The break indices between ' deal ' and ' in ' provide a clear indication in this case whether the verb is ' deal-in ' or just'deal  . ' The larger of the two indices ,  3 , indicates that in that sentence , ' in ' is not tightly coupled with ' deal ' and hence is not likely to be a particle  . 
So far we had established that naive listeners and trained listeners appear to be able to separate such ambiguou sentence pairs on the basis of prosodic information  . If we could extract such information automatically perhaps we could make it available to a parser  . We found a clue in an effort to assess the phonetic ambiguity of the sentence pairs  . We used SRI's DECIPHER speech recognition system , constrained to recognize the correct string of words  , to automatically a bel and time-align the sentences used in the earlier referenced study  . The DECIPHER system is particularly well suited to this task because it can model and use very bushy pronunciation et-works  , accounting for much more detail in pronunciation than other systems  . This extra detail makes it better able to time -align the sentences and is a stricter test of phonetic ambiguity  . We used the DE-CIPHER system ( We intraub et al 1989 ) to label and time-align the speech , and verified that the sentences were , by this measure as well as by the earlier perceptual verification  , truly ambiguous phonet-ically . This meant that the information separating the member of the pairs was not in the segmental information  , but in the suprasegmental information : duration , pitch and pausing . As a byproduct of the labeling and time alignment  , we noticed that the durations of the phones could be used to separate members of the pairs  . This was easy to see in phonetically ambiguous entence pairs : normally the structure of duration patterns is obscured by intrinsic duration of phones and the contextual effects of neighboring phones  . In the phonetically ambiguous pairs , there was no need to account for these effects in order to see the striking pattern in duration differences  . If a human looking at the duration patterns could reliably separate the members of the pairs  , there was hope for creating an algorithm to perform the task automatically  . This task could not take advantage of such pairs , but would have to face the problem of intrinsic phone duration  . 
Wordbreak indices were generated automatically by normalizing phone duration according to estimated mean and variance  , and combining the average normalize duration factors of the final syllable coda consonants with a pause factor  . Let di = ( di-~j ) /o'j be the normalize duration of the ith phoneme in the coda  , where pj and ~ rj are the mean and standard deviation of duration for phone j  . dp is the duration ( in ms ) of the pause following the word , if any . A set of word break indices are computed for all the words in a sentence as follows:  1 n = + d , ,/70 The term dp/70 was actually hard-limited at 4 , so as not to give pauses too much weight . The set . A includes all coda consonants , but not the vowel nucleus unless the syllable ends in a vowel  . Although the vowel nucleus provide some boundary cues  , the lengthening associated with prominence can be confounded with boundary lengthening and the algorithm was slightly more reliable without using vowel nucleus information  . These indices n are normalized over the sentence , assuming known sentence boundaries , to range from zero to five ( the scale used for the initial perceptual labeling  )  . The correlation coefficient between the hand -labeled break indices and the automatically generated break indices was very good :  0  . 85 . 
3 Incorporating Prosody Into
A Grammar
Thus far , we have shown that naive and trained listeners can rely on suprasegmental information to separate ambiguou sentences  , and we have shown that we can automatically extract information that correlates well with the perceptual labels  . It remains to be shown how such information can be used by a parser  . 
In order to do so we modified an already existing , and in fact reasonably large grammar . The parser we
Cambridge ( Alshawi et al 1988).
Much of the modification of the grammar is done automatically  . The first thing is to systematically change all the rules of the form A--*BC to be of the form A - -  . BLink C , where Link is a new grammatical category , that of the prosodic break indices . 
Similarly all rules with more than two right hand side elements need to have link nodes interleaved at every juncture : e  . g . , a rule A--*BCD is changed into
A--~BL ink 1CLink2D .
Next , allowance must be made for empty nodes . It is common practice to have rules of the form NP--* and PP~~in order to handle wh-movement and relative clauses  . These rules necessitate the incorporation into the modified grammar of a rule Link --* e  . 
Otherwise , a sentence such as a wh-question will not parse because an empty node introduced by the grammar will either not be preceded by a link  , or not be followed by one . 
The introduction of empty links needs to be constrained so as not to introduce spurious parses  . If the only place the empty NP or PP etc . could fit into the sentence is at the end , then the only place the empty Link can go is right before it so there is no extra ambiguity introduced  . However if an empty wh-phrase could be posited at a place somewhere other than the end of the sentence  , then there is ambiguity as to whether it is preceded or followed by the empty link  . 
For instance , for the sentence , "What did you see_on Saturday ?" the parser would find both of the following possibilities : ? What Ldid Lyou L see Lempty-NP empty-L on L Saturday ? ? What Ldid Lyou L see empty-Lempty -NPL on L Saturday ? Hence the grammar must be made to automatically rule out half of these possibilities  . This can be done by constraining every empty link to be followed immediately by an empty wh -phrase  , or a constituent containing an empty wh-phrase on its left branch  . It is fairly straightforward to incorporate this into the routine that automatically modifies the grammar  . The rule that introduces empty links gives them a feature-value pair : empty_link = y  . 
The rules that introduce other empty constituents are modified to add to the constituent the feature-value pair : trace_on_left_branch--y  . The links zero through five are given the feature -value pair empty_link--n  . 
The default value for trace_on_left_branch is set to n so that all words in the lexicon have that value  . 
Rules of the form Ao-~A1 Link 1 .   .   . An are modified to insure that A0 and A1 have the same values enti . d . 
lalb2 a2 b3 a3 b4 a4 b5 a5 b6 a6 b7a7b

 #parses no prosody  #parses with prosody parse time no prosody parse time with prosody  10   4   5  . 3 5 . 3 10 10 5 . 3 7 . 7 3 . 6 3 . 6 2 . 3 3 . 2 3 . 2 4 . 3 4 . 0 2 . 7 3 . 7 4 . 7 5 . 5 1 1 . 7 2 . 5 2 1 . 6 2 . 9 1 2 . 5 2 . 8 2 2 . 5 4 . 1 1 0 . 8 1 . 3 2 0 . 8 1 . 5 46 38 . 7 53 . 0
Table 1: The seconds ) with mation.
number of parses and parse times ( in and without the use of prosodic infor-for the feature trace_on_left_branch  . Additionally , if Linki has empty_link---y then Ai+x must have trace_on_left_branch--y  . These modifications , incorporated into the grammar-modifying routine , suffice to eliminate the spurious ambiguity . 
4 Setting Grammar Parameters
Running the grammar through our procedure , to make the changes mentioned above , results in a grammar that gets the same number of parses for a sentence with links as the old grammar would have produced for the corresponding sentence without links  . 
In order to make use of the prosodic information we still need to make an additional important change to the grammar : how does the grammar use this information ? This area is a vast area of research  . The present study shows the feasibility of one particular approach  . In this initial endeavor , we made the most conservative changes imaginable after examining the break indices on a set of sentences  . We changed the rule N--~NL in kPP so that the value of the link must be between  0 and 2 inclusive ( on a scale of 05 ) for the rule to apply . We made essentially the same change to the rule for the construction verb plus particle  , VP--*VL ink PP , except that the value of the link must , in this case , be either 0 or 1 . 

After setting these two parameters we parsed each of the sentences in our corpus of  14 sentences , and compared the number of parses to the number of parses obtained without benefit of prosodic information  . For half of the sentences , i . e . , for one member of each of the sentence pairs , the number of parses remained the same . For the other members of the pairs , the number of parses was reduced , in many cases from two parses to one . 
The actual sentences and labels are in the appendix  . The incorporation of prosody resulted in a reduction of about  25% in the number of parses found , as shown in table 1 . Parse times increase about 37% . 
In the study by Price et al , the sentences with more major breaks were more reliably identified by the listeners  . This is exactly what happens when we put these sentences through our parser too  . The large prosodic gap between a noun and a following preposition  , or between a verb and a following preposition provides exactly the type of information that our grammar can easily make use of to rule out some readings  . Conversely , a small prosodic gap does not provide a reliable way to tell which two constituents combine  . This coincides with Steedman's ( 1989 ) observation that syntactic units do not tend to bridge major prosodic breaks  . 
We can construe the large break between two words , for example a verb and a preposition/particle , as indicating that the two do not combine to form a new slightly larger constituent in which they are sisters of each other  . We cannot say that no two constituents may combine when they are separated by a large gap  , only that the two smallest possible constituents , i . e . , the two words , may not combine . 
To do the converse with small gaps and larger phrases imply does not work  . There are cases where there is a small gap between two phrases that are joined together  . For example there can be a small gap between the subject NP of a sentence and the main VP  , yet we do not want to say that the two words on either side of the juncture must form a constituent  , e . g . , the head noun and auxiliary verb . 
The fact that parse times increase is due to the way in which prosodic information is incorporated into the text  . The parser does a certain amount of work for each word  , and the effect of adding break indices to the sentence is essentially to double the number of words that the parser must process  . We expect that this overhead will constitute a less significant percentage of the parse time as the input sentences become more complex  . We also hope to be able to reduce this overhead with a better understanding of the use of prosodic information and how it interacts with the parsing of spoken language  . 
5 Corroboration From Other

After devising our strategy , changing the grammar and lexicon , running our corpus through the parser , and tabulating our results , we looked at some new data that we had not considered before  , to get an idea of how well our methods would carry over  . The new corpus we considered is from a recording of a short radio news broadcast  . This time the break indices were put into the transcript by hand  . There were twenty-two places in the text where our attachment strategy would apply  . In eighteen of those , our strategy or a very slight modification of it , would work properly in ruling out some incorrect parses and in not preventing the correct parse from being found  . In the remaining four sentences , there seem to be other factors at work that we hope to be able to incorporate into our system in the future  . For instance it has been mentioned in other work that the length of a prosodic phrase  , as measured by the number of words or syllables it contains  , may affect the location of prosodic boundaries . 
We are encouraged by the fact that our strategy seems to work well in eighteen out of twenty-two cases on the news broadcast corpus  . 
6 Conclusion
The sample of sentences used for this study is extremely small  , and the principal test set used , the phonetically ambiguous sentences , is not independent of the set used to develop our system  . We therefore do not want to make any exaggerated claims in interpreting our results  . We believe though , that we have found a promising and novel approach for incorporating prosodic information into a natural anguage processing system  . We have shown that some extremely common cases of syntactic ambiguity can be resolved with prosodic information  , and that grammars can be modified to take advantage of prosodic information for improved parsing  . We plan to test the algorithm for generating prosodic break indices on a larger set of sentences by more talkers  . Changing from speech read by professional speakers to spontaneous speech from a variety of speakers will no doubt require modification of our system along several dimensions  . The next steps in this research will include : ? Investigating further the relationship between prosody and syntax  , including the different roles of phrase breaks and prominences in marking syntactic structure  , incorporating intonation and syntactic/semantic information  , ? Incorporating the automatically labeled information in the parser of the SRI Spoken Language System  ( Moore , Pereira and Murveit 1989) , ? Modeling the break indice statistically as a function of syntactic structure  , ? Speeding up the parser when using the prosodic information  ; the expectation is that pruning out syntactic hypotheses that are incompatible with the prosodic pattern observed can both improve accuracy and speed up the parser overall  . 
7 Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation under NSF grant number  IRI-8905249  . 
The authors are indebted to the co-Principle Investi-gators on this project  , Mart Ostendorf ( Boston University ) and Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel ( MIT ) for their roles in defining the prosodic infrastructure on the speech side of the speech and natural language integration  . We thank Hy Murveit ( SRI ) and Colin Wightman ( Boston University ) for help in generating the phone alignments and duration normalizations  , and Bob Moore for helpful comments on a draft . 
We thank Andrea Levitt and Leah Larkey for their help  , many years ago , in developing fully voiced structurally ambiguous entences without knowing what uses we would put them to  . 
This work was also supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under the Office of Naval Research contract  N00014-85-C-0013  . 
\[3\]W . Cooper and J . Paccia-Cooper (1980) Syntax and Speech , Harvard University Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts . 
\[4\] J . P . Gee and F . Grosjean ( 1983 ) " Performance Structures : APsy cholinguistic and Linguistic Appraisal  , " Cognitive Psychology , Vol . 15, pp . 

\[5\] J . Harrington and A . Johnstone ( 1987 ) " The Effects of Word Boundary Ambiguity in Continuous Speech Recognition  , " Proc . of XIInt . Cong . 
Phonetic Sciences , Tallin , Estonia , Se 45 . 5 . 1-4 . 
\[6\]A . Komatsu , E . Oohira and A . Ichikawa ( 1989 ) " Prosodic M Sentence Structure Inference for Natural Conversational Speech Understanding  , "
ICOT Technical Memorandum : TM-0733.
\[7\] R . Moore , F . Pereira and H . Murveit ( 1989 ) " Integrating Speech and Natural Language Processing  , " in Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop  , pages 243-247 , 
February 1989.
\[8\]P . J . Price , M . Ostendorf and C . W . Wightman (1989) " Prosody and Parsing , " Proceedings of the DARPA Workshop on Speech and Natural 
Language , Cape Cod , October , 1989.
\[9\] M . Steedman ( 1989 ) " Intonation and Syntax in Spoken Language Systems  , " Proceedings of the DARPA Workshop on Speech and Natural Language  , Cape Cod , October 1989 . 
\[10\]M . Weintraub , H . Murveit , M . Cohen , P . Price , J . Bernstein , G . Baldwin and D . Bell ( 1989 ) " Linguistic Constraints in Hidden Markov Model Based Speech Recognition  , " in Proc . IEEE Int . Conf . Acoust . , Speech , Signal Processing , pages 699-702 , Glasgow , Scotland , May 1989 . 
References\[1\]H . Alshawi , D . M . Carter , J . van Eijck , R . C . 
Moore , D . B . Moranl F . C . N . Pereira , S . G . 
Pulman , and A . G . Smith (1988) Research Pro.
gramme In Natural Language Processing : July 1988 Annual Report , SRI International Tech
Note , Cambridge , England.
\[2\]E . J . Brisco and B . K . Boguraev ( 1984 ) " Control Structures and Theories of Interaction in Speech Understanding Systems  , " COLING 1984 , pp .  259-266 , Association for Computational Linguistics , Morristown , New Jersey . 
8 la .



I 1 read Oa 0 review 2 of 1 nasality 4 in 0 German . 
I 0 read 2 a 1 review 1 of 0 nasality 1 in 0 German . 
Why0 are 0 you 2grinding 0 in 3 the 0 mud.
2b . Why1 are 0 you 2grinding 3 in 0 the 1 mud.
3a . Raoul2murdered1 the 0man4 with 0 a1 gun . 
3b . Raoul1 murdered 3 the 0 man 1 with 0 a 0 gun . 
4a . The 0 men1 won3 over 0 their 0 enemies.
4b . The 0 men2won 0 over 1 their 0 enemies.
215 a . Marge 1 would 0 never 0 deal 3 in 0 any 0 guise . 
5b . Marge 0 would 1 never 2 deal 0 in 2 any 0 guys . 
6a . Andrea 1 moved 1 the 0 bottle 3 under 0 the 0 bridge . 
6b . Andrea 1 moved 3 the 0 bottle 1 under 0 the 0 bridge . 
7a . They0 may 0 wear4 down 0 the 0 road.
7b . They 0 may 1 wear 0 down 2 the 0 road.

