ASYSTEMFORTRANS LATING LOCATIVE PREPOSITIONS
FROMENGLISH INTOFRENCH*
Nathalie Japkowicz
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
New Brunswick , NJ 08903

Janyce M . Wiebe
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto , Canada M5S 1A4


Machine translation of locative prepositions is not straightforward  , even between closely related languages . This paper discusses a system of translation of locative prepositions between English and French  . The system is based on the premises that English and French do not always conceptualize objects in the same way  , and that this accounts for the major differences in the ways that locative prepositions are used in these languages  . This paper introduces knowledge representations of conceptualizations of objects  , and a method for translating prepositions based on these conceptual representations  . 
1 Introduction
This paper presents an analysis of the differences in the uses of locative prepositions in two languages  , and then describes an automatic system of translation that is based on this analysis  . 
Our research originated from the observation that even between two closely related language such as English and French  , locative prepositions of even simple sentences do not seem to be translated from one language to the other in a clearly systematic and coherent way  . However , the translation becomes more coherent if we introduce Herskovits ' idea of the ideal meaning of a preposition  ( Herskovits 1986 ) and Lakoff's idea of Idealized Cognitive Models ( ICM's )   ( Lakoff 1987 )  . A central part of our research was to design entities based * The research described in this paper was conducted at the Uxfivez ~ ity of Toronto  . 
on Lakoff's ICM's . We call these entities cor . -ceptual representations of objects . The main thesis of this paper is that , even though the ideal meanings of the locative prepositions we studied are the same in English and in French  , these two languages do not always conceptualize the objects involved in sscene in the same way and that this leads to differences in the translation of locative prepositions  . This theory seem suitable to pairs of languages other than English and French  , as well . 
In addition , we will also desccibe how the system detects abnormalities and ambiguities using knowledge required for the translation task  . 
This paper is organized as follows : section 2 presents an analysis of and a solution to the problem of translating locative prepositions from English into French  , section 3 presents the conceptual representations of objects  , section 4 presents the algorithm we designed and implemented for translating locative prepositions  , section 5 discusses the detection of abnormalities and ambiguities  , and section 6 is the conclusion . 
2 Translating Locative
Prepositions
We now describe the differences between English and French locative x pressions and give a possible analysis of the problem  . Specifically , we concentrate on the translation of the three locative prepositions ' in '  , ' on ' , and ' at ' , into the French prepositions ' dana ' , ' surf , and '&' , in the context of simple sentences or expressions of the form:  ( reference object )   ( located object ) (locative preposition )   ( reference object )  2 . 1 Examples o f the prob lem While in the most representative uses of locative prepositions  , there is a direct correspondence between English and French  ( ' in ' corresponding to ' dans ' , ' on'to'sur ' , and ' at ' to'tL') , in many cases , this correspondence does not hold . 
The following pairs of sentences illustrate cases in which the correspondences hold :  ( 1 ) The boy is in his room . 
Legar conest dazes a chambre.
(2) The glass is on the table.
Leverreest surlatable.
(3) The secretary is ather desk.
Lase cr ~ taireest ds on bureau.
Senten(4) ,  (5) , and (6) , in contrast , trate cases in which the correspondences do not hold :  ( 4 )   ( 5 ) 
My friend is in the picture.
Mon and ( e ) ests urla photo.
The lounge chair is in the shade.
La chaise longue est dl ' ombre.
(6) Our professor is on the bus.
Not reprofes seurest danlebus.
At first sight , the correspondence btween English and French locative prepositions may seem arbitrary  . Our analysis , however , reveals that coherence might be found . 
2.2 Analysis of the problem
Our analysis takes its principal sources in the works of Herskovits  ( 1986 ) and Grimaud ( 1988 )  . 
2.2.1 Herskovits'contribution
Herskovits ( 1986 ) contributed to the solution to our problem by introducing the concept of the ideal meaning of a locative preposition  . 
This concept is inspired by Rosch's ( 1977 ) prototype theory , in which human categorization of objects is viewed as organized around prototypes  ( best instances of the category ) and distances from these prototypes ( the shorter the distance of an object away from a prototype  , the more representative of the category the object is  )  . In the case of prepositions , ? ro-to~ypical or ideal meanings are geometrical relations between the located object  , the object whose location is being specified in the sentence  , and the reference object , the object indicating the location of the located object  . 
A second contribution of Herskovitsisher case study of the three locative prepositions ' in '  , ' on ' , and ' at ' . Our own study of 35 different cases is heavily based on this part of
Herskovits ' work.
2.2.2 Grimaud's contribution
Grimaud ( 1988 ) presents a linguistic analysis of locative prepositions in English versus French  . H is theory is based on Lakoff & Johnson ( 1980 ) and Lakoff ( 1987 ) and uses the notion of com : eptua // zatio as f objects  . A conceptualization is a mental representation f an object or an idea which takes into consideration not only the = objective truth ~ about that object or idea  , but also human biological perception and experience  . 
In his theory , Grimaud suggests that the cases in which the correspondences described in section  2  . 1 do not hold are not simply exceptional but rather are due to differences in the ways that English and French conceptualize the objects involved in the relation  . 
The reason why the same object can be conceptualized as different geometrical objects in different languages  , given a particular situation , is that objects have several properties ( or aspects ) and different languages might not choose to highlight and hide the same properties  ( or aspects ) of a given object in a given situation . This happens in (6) , for example ( under the interpretation i which the professor is riding the bus rather than being located on the roof of the bus  ) -- English concept u-alizes the bus as a surface that can support entities  , by highlighting only its bottom platform , while French conceptualizes the busa volume that can contain entities  , by highlighting its bottom surface , its sides , and its roof altogether . This leads to a difference in the way that English and French express the spatial relation : English uses ' on '  , the preposition a point and a surface , and French uses ' dans ' ( the French equivalent of ' in ' )  , the preposition appropriate for expressing a relation between a point and a volume  . The appropriateness of a preposition for expressing a certain relation is determined by its ideal meanings  . 
2.2.3 Our synthesis
Our task consisted of synthesizing Herskovits ' and Grim and's contributions and making this synthesisuitable for a computational system  , since both Herskovits and Grimaud's analyses are mainly linguistic and not directly geared towards computation  . 
Our first task was to define the ideal meanings of each preposition : 
AT/k : ? relation between two points.
ON/SUIt : ? relation between a point and a surface whose boundaries are irrelevant  . 
? relation between a point and a line.
IN/DANS : ? relation between a point and a bounded surface  . 
? relation between a point and an empty volume.
? relation between a point and a full volume . ~ Our next task was to develop a knowledge representation of a conceptualization of an object  , that is , a representation f the way an object can be conceptualized  , given a particular language , a particular situation , etc . Typically , in our application , these conceptualizations are geometrical objects , such as points , lines , surfaces , and volumes . 
1 Note that Herskovlts ' notion of ideal meaning involves more information than ours : rather than the vague term ' relation '  , Herskovits identifies the specific sort of relation that holds between the two objects  , such as coincidence , support , and containment . For the specific problem in translation that we address  , such specifications axe unnecessary . They would be necessary , however , in a system designed for a deeper understanding than ours is designed to achieve  . 
Our final task was to design a system of translation  . Our system works as follows : given the source -languages ntence  , its objective meaning ( i . e . , its language-independent meaning ) is derived . This is done by first using the ideal meanings of the source-language preposition to find the conceptualization that applies to the reference object  , and then deriving the objective meaning of the sentence from this conceptualization  .   ( Because each conceptualization f an object used as a reference object corresponds to some objective meaning  , this last step is easily performed . ) Given the objective meaning of the sentence , the conceptualization f the reference object that should be used in the target language is then found  . Finally , using the list of ideal meanings of the target . language prepositions together with the target -language conceptualization  , the system derives the preposition to be used in the target-language sentence  . 
2.2.4 Other work
Independently , Zelinsky-Wibbelt (1990) took an . approachs in ~ larto ours to the problem of translating locative prepositions  . She worked on translation between English and German rather than English ~ and French  . This supports our hypothesis that the theory we use can be extended to pairs of languages other than English and French  . 
In addition to the types of expressions our system translates  , her system translate sen-tences with verbs other than ' to be '  . The reason why we chose not to process sen-fences using verbs other than ' to be ' was to study the prepositions themselves in detail  , before addressing the more complicated problem of their interactions with verbs  . Zelinsky-Wibbelt does not refer to any preliminary detailed study of the prepositions themselves  . 
We carried on a detailed bilingual study of locative prepositions by adapting and expanding the case studies of Herskovits  ( 1986 )  . 
3 The Conceptual Representation of Objects The central entity in our research is the conceptual representation of objects  ( or conceptual representation )  , which represents a conceptualization together with information ceptualization to hold  . 
A conceptual representation f an object is composed of a conditional part and a descriptive part  . The conditional part is a list of properties of the object and of its situation in the sentence  . The former kind of property is objective information about the object  , such as its shape , the parts it is made of , and its function . The latter properties are whether the object is a located or reference object  , and whether the sentence is in English or French . The descriptive part is a description of a conceptualization f that object  . This part is conceptual , rather than objective . Here follows a detaile description of conceptual representations  .  2 3  . 1 The cond i t iona l par t The conditional part is made up of the following types of properties : * The ro/e in the sentence of the object being considered  ( located or reference object )  . 3* The/gnguage in which the sentence is uttered ( English or French )  . This condition is crucial to the system because not all conceptu-aiizations are possible in both languages  , and these differences account for differences in use of the prepositions  . This point is important , for example , for pairs of sentences (4) , where a picture is conceptualized as a volume in English and as a surface in French  ; for pairs of sentences (5) , where the shade is conceptualized as a Volume in English and as a point in French  ; and for pairs of sentences (6) , where a bus is conceptualized as a surface in English and as a volume in French  . 
* The properties of the reference object that are relevan to the objective spatial relation expressed in the sentence  ( these properties are ~ Certaine ~ pects of the conceptual representations were implemented for extensihillty or for the purposes Of ' Lmhlg Ulty and error detection  . For the sake of com-pletez~ss , we describe all aspects in this section , even those not directly related to tr~nA ~ tion ( see Japkowlcz 1990 for furthe?explanation of these aspects )  . 
a Note that a located object is cd ways conceptualized as a point  . This is so because the conceptualization of the located object has no impact on the use of the prepositions  . It is the conceptualization of the reference object hat is relevant  . 
language independent ) . This part of the conceptual representation specifies the objective situation in which the object being concept u-alized is involved  . It is central to the system because it is common to English and French  ( since it describes an objective situation ) and is the part of the conceptual representation that allows a matching between English and French  . For example , consider (4) . The properties of a picture that are relevant given the objective meaning of the sentence are the fact that it is the re-creator of an environment  , with entities included in that environment , and that it is an object with a very small , almost nonexistent , width . These properties are common to English and French  . What differs are the conceptualizations : English highlights the first property  , conceptualizing the picture as a volume , while French highlights the second , considering the width to be nonexistent and conceptualizing the picture as a surface  . 
* World-lmowledge conditions involving the located object of the sentence  ( for ~ mple , whether the located object can be supported by the reference object  )  . These conditions are used to check the plausibility of a sentence with respect othe located object  . For ~ Y , ~ rn . 
pie , the sentences in (6) are plausible , while the sentence ( 7 ) The elephant is on the bus is not , since an elephant is too heavy to be supported by abus  . In general , this condition is used to check for abnormalities within one language rather than to account for differences between English and French  . Section 5 describes how the system detect such abnormalities  . 
* Ez 4 ra-sentential constraints . Extrasentential constraints are pragmatic constraints  , derived from the context in which the sentence is uttered  , that can influence the choice of preposition . For example: ( 8 ) The gas station is at the freeway . \[ Herskovits 1986, p .   138\] This sentence is valid only when the speaker pictures himsel for herself as being on a trajectory intersecting the reference object at the tem deals solely with isolated sentences  , so it is unable to perform this checking . 
3.2 The descriptive part
The descriptive part of a conceptual representation includes the following three types of information about the conceptualization : its d i  . 
mension , its fullness , and its width.
* Its dimension is the main information about the conceptualization  . The possible values of the dimension field include point  , line , surface , and volume . 
* Its fullness can take the values empty or ful/ . Fullness is important when , for example , the dimension is volume . Consider the following sentences . 
(9) The girl is in the tree.
(10) The nailis in the tree.
One needs to differentiate between the situation of  ( 9 )  , in which the located object ( the girl ) is located in the tree , and the one of (10) , in which the located object ( the nail ) is embedded in the tree . This distinction , however , is not needed to translate between English and French  ( it might be needed with other languages , though ); rather , it is needed to understand the sentence . 
* Its width takes the values ezistent or non ~ -ezistent  .   4 Width is important for sentences such as those in  ( 4 )  , where the width is conceptualized as being nonexistent in French  , and existent in English , this difference leading to a difference in the use of the locative prepositions  ( French uses ' sur ' and English uses ' in ' )  . 
4Remember that the descriptive part describes conceptualizations  . Therefore , when we describe the width to be existent or nonexistent  , it is the width in the conceptualization that is in question  , not that of the real object . Objectively , for example , a picture has a width , but this width is so small that it is ignored in some of its conceptualizations  . Objectively also , a picture is the re-creator of an environment . The conceptualizations i which this objective property is highlighted have an existent width  , since environments can contain 3-clJmensional entities . 
4 The Algorithm 4.1 Overview
Our method of translation first transforms the source-language sentence into a source-language representation  ( the English conceptual level )  , and then translates the source-language representation into a target-language representation  ( the French conceptual level )  . This target-language representation is finally used to generate the target-language sentence  . The algorithm works in four phases : i . Initialization 2 . Derivation of the objective meaning of the sentence  3  . Derivation of the target-language preposition 4 . Finalization 4 . 2 Phases In the description that follows , each step is explained and illustrated with example  ( 6 )  . 
4.2.1 IntiAH catlon
The initialization phase is composed of two steps . The first consists of parsing the input sentence and returning some information about each noun  , such as its role in the sentence ( located or reference object )  , its French translation , and certain useful French morphological and syntactic information about it  . 
In sentence (6) , for example , this information is that ' Our professor ' is the located object  , that its French translation is ' Not repro -fesseur '  , and that'professeur ' is a masculine common noun in French  ; and also that ' bus ' is the reference object , that its French translation is ' bus ' , and that ' bus ' is a masculine common oun in French  . 
The second step consists of building the conceptual representations of the located and reference objects  ( see Japkowicz 1990 and
Japkowicz & Wiebe 1990) . All possible conceptual representations are built at this point--the discrimination of those that are relevant to the sentence from the others is clone in the next phase  . 
157 4 . 2 . 2 Der ivat ion o f the ob jec t ive mean ing o f the sentence This phase is also performed in two steps  . The first step identifies the English conceptual representations relevan to the sentence  , according to the preposition used . That is , given the ideal meaning of the preposition used in the English sentence  , certain conceptual representations that were built in the previous phase are discarded  . In example (6) , the only conceptual representation fabus that will remain is that of a surface  , since the ideal meaning of ' on ' allows the reference object to be a surface or a line and  , while a bus is sometimes conceptualized as a surface  , it is never conceptualized as a line . 
The second step discards even more conceptual representations  , this time based on the type and/or properties of the located object  . 
In sentence (6) , no conceptual representation is discarded at this point  . This is so because the only condition on the located object is that it can be supported by the reference object  , and this condition is verified for ( 6 ) because a human being can be supported by abus . In sentence (7) , however , the conceptual representations of a bus as a surface are discarded because an elephant c~n not be supported by a bus  . 
The second step also builds the objective meaning of the sentence  . The objective meaning of a sentence is derived from the conceptual representation chosen in the first step of this phase  . Its main component is the proper-~iesfield . This properties field has the same type of content as the properties field of the conceptual representations  . It is this shared field that allows a matching between the English conceptual representation ad an objective meaning  . 
In certain cases , in this step , several objective meanings can be derived . In these cases , the sentence is ambiguous ( see section 5) . 
4 . 2 . 3 Der ivat ion o f the ta rget - language prepos i tion This phase has  , once again , two steps . The first consists of matching the objective meaning of the sentence to a French conceptualization  . This can be done in a way similar to that of the previou step : by matching the properties field of the objective meaning of the sentence with the properties field of the French conceptual representation f the reference object  . 
The second step consists of matching a
French preposition to the French conceptual representation derived by the previous step  . 
This is done in a straightforward way , using a lookup table . In example (6) , the French conceptualization is matched to the preposition ' dans '  . 
4.2.4 Finalization
The Finalization phase consists of only one step : that of generating the French sentence  . 
In example (6) , it is at this point that the French version , " Not reprofes seurest darts lebus " , is generated , s4 . 3 Coverage We implemented the system on a large number of cases  , where each case is an " objective situation ~ , such as an object being on a horizontal support or an object being in a closed environment  . There are 35 cases , which can be divided into the following three categories : ? Specific  , i . e . , cases in which the reference object is a given object  ; the expressions ' on the wall ' ( meaning against the wall )  , ' at sea ' , and ' in the air ' are the specific cases in the system  . 
? Semi-genera ~ i . e . , cases in which the reference object belongs to a well defined category of objects  . Examples are being in a country ( e . g . , ' in England ' and ' in France ' ) and being in a piece of clothing ( e . g . , ' in a hat ' , ' in a shirt ' , and ' in a pair of shorts') . 
? Genera ~ i . e . , cases in which the reference object belongs to an abstract ea ~ egory of objects  . Examples are being on a planar surface ( e . g . , ' on the table ' , ' on the floor ' , ' on the chair ' , and ' on the roof ' ) and being at an artifact with a given purpose ( e . g . , ' at the door ' , ' a this books ' , ' at his desk ' , and ' a this type writer') . 
S Note that we are not taking ambiguity into con -aider at lonhere  . If we were , then the sentence " Not reprofes seurest Burle bus  . " would also be generated ( mearfing that our professor is on the roof of the bus  )  . 
This ca~e will be discussed in section 5.

Of the 35 cases , only 3 are in the specific category . Of the remaining ,   18 cases are in the semi-general category and 14 are in the general category . 
5 Error and Ambiguity
Detection
The conceptual representations that were designed for the purpose of translation can also be used to detect certain kinds of errors and ambiguities  . Below , we describe two kinds that can be detected by the system : conceptual errors and conceptual ambiguity  . 
5.1 Conceptual errors
The system can detectwo types of conceptual errors : conceptualization errors and usage errors or abnormalities  . 
5.1.1 Conceptualization errors
Conceptualization errors occur when the preposition requires the reference object to be conceptualized in a way that it cannot be in the language considered  . An example of a sentence where such an error occurs is  ( 11 ) * The boy is at the shade . 
This sentence is erroneous because'at'requires ' shade ' to be conceptualized as a point  , but's hade ' used as a reference object can never be conceptualized as a point in English  . 
This error can be detected by the system because no conceptual representation fshade as a reference object is built whose conceptualization is point  . This error is detected in the first step of the second phase of the system  . 
5 . 1 . 2 Usage er rors and abnormal i t ies Usage errors and abnormalities occur when the demands of the preposition are satisfied by the reference object  , but the conditious required of the located object by the conceptual representation  , or general conditions required of all types of relations  , are not . Such an error occurs in the following : ( 12 ) * The man is in the board . 
The use of ' in ' is fine , considering just the reference object ; for example , an ail can be located in a board . The problem is that the located object is ' man ' , and a man cannot be embedded in a board under normal circumstances  . This error is detected by the system because the condition on the located object  ( in the conditional part of the conceptual representation  ) is not verified . This error is detected in the second step of the second phase of the system  . 
5.2 Conceptual ambiguities
Conceptual ambiguity is ambiguity where the English preposition has several meanings in French  . The system can detect two types of conceptual ambiguities : simple and complex  . 
Both are detecte during the first step of the second phase of the system  . 
5.2.1 Simple conceptual amblgulty
In the case of simple conceptual mbiguity , an ambiguous English preposition is translated into a single French preposition that is ambiguous in the same way  . For example : (18) The boy is at the supermarket . 
Sentence ( 13 ) can be understood to mean either that the boy is shopping at the supermarket  , or that he is on a trajectory going by the supermarket  , and is currently located at the supermarket . Its French translation is ( 14 ) Legar conestau supermarch ~ , which carries the same ambiguity as the English sentence  . This type of ambiguity is detected when several English conceptual rep-resentatious can be iustantiated for a single sentence  . All instantiated English conceptual representations have : identical descriptive parts  . In the case of simple conceptual ambiguity , all the French conceptual representations happen to have the same descriptive part  . 
5.2.2 Complex conceptual ambiguity
The difference between simple and complex conceptual ambiguity is the following : in the former  , the French sentence carries the same ambiguity as the English sentence  , but in the latter , the ambiguity is not carried through the translation  ( so the English sentence has two different French translations  )  . Complex conceptual ambiguity is present in (6) , which is repeated here as sentence ( 15 ) : As discussed earlier , this sentence is ambiguous in that the professor could be riding the bus  , or he could be located on the roof of the bus . This sentence is translated into two French sentences  , one for each case : e ( 16 ) Not reprofes seurest dausle bus . 
(17) Not reprofesseurest sur lebus.
In (16) , the professor is riding the bus , while in (17) , he is located on the roof of the bus . 
This type of ambiguity is detected in the same way as simple conceptual mbiguity  , the only difference being that in the complex case  , all the French conceptual representations do not have the same descriptive parts  . 
6 Conclusion
In this paper , we have described a system of translation for locative prepositions that uses Herskovits'idea of the ideal meaning of prepositions and Lakoff's idea of ICM's  . While our work does not prove the linguistic and psychological theories on which it is based  , it suggests that they can be useful in machine translation  . We chose to use conceptual knowledge to deal with the translation of locative prepositions  , first , because it provides an elegant solution to the problem  , and second , because we believe that conceptual knowledge of the sort that we use could be useful in other cognitive tasks such as story understanding  , vision , and robot planning . 
7 Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Graeme Hirst for invaluable comments and detailed readings of many versions of this work  , and to gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Department of Computer Science  , University of Toronto , and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada  . 
and French , " Journal of the American Socieiy of G colinguistics  , vol . 14, pp .  54-76, 1988 . 
\[ Herskovits1986\]A . Herskovits , Zanguage and Spatial Cognition : An Interdisciplinary Study of the Prepositions in English  , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , MA ,  1986 . 
\[Japkowicz1990\]N . Japkowicz , " The Translation of Basic Topological Prepositions from English into French  , " M . S . Thesis , published as Technical Report CSRI-~3 , University of
Toronto , 1990.
\[3apkowics & Wiebe 1990\]N . Japkowics & J . Wiebe , " Using Conceptual Information to Translate Locative Prepositions from English into French  , " Current Treads in SNePS--Proceediugs of the 1990 t  #or ~ hop , Ali , Chalupsky , Kumar ( eds . ), forthcoming . 
\[Lakoff & Johnson1980\]G . Lakoff & M.
Johnson , Metaphors we Zireby , University of
Chicago Press , Chicago , 1980.
\[Lakoff1987\]G . Lakoff , Women , Fire , and Dangerous Things : What Categories Reveal about the Mind  , University of Chicago Press , 
Chicago , 1987.
\[ Rosch1977\]E . Rosch , " Human Categorization , " in Advances in Cross-Cultural Psychology , vo L1 , N . Warren ( ed . ), pp . 1-49, Academic Press , London , 1977 . 
\[ Zelinsky-Wibbelt 1990\] C . Zelinsky-Wibbelt , " The Semantic Representation of Spatial Configurations : a conceptual motivation for generation in Machine Translation  , " Proceedings of the l Sth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , vol . 3, pp .  299-303, 1990 . 
8 References \[ Grimaud 1988\]M . Grimaud , ' ~ roponyrns , Prepositions , and Cognitive Maps in English S in sections 1 ,  2 , and 3 , ody the fu'st case was considered . 

