Current Research in the Development of a Spoken Language 
Understanding System using PARSEC *
Carla B . Zoltowski
School of Electrical Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette , IN 47907
February 28, 1991
1 Introduction
We are developing a spoken language system which would more effectively merge naturalan-guage and speech recognition technology by using a more flexible parsing strategy and utilizing prosody  , the suprasegmental information in speech such as stress  , rhythm , and intonation . 
There is a considerable amount of evidence which indicates that prosodic information impacts human speech perception at many different levels  \[5\]  . Therefore , it is generally agreed that spoken language systems would benefit from its addition to the traditional knowledge sources such as acoustic -phonetic  , syntactic , and semantic information . A recent and novel approach to incorporating prosodic information  , specifically the relative duration of phonetic segments  , was developed by PattiPrice and John Bear\[1 ,  4\] . 
They have developed an algorithm for computing break indices using a hidden Markov model  , and have modified the contextfree grammar rules to incorporate links between nonterminals which corresponded to the break indices  . Although incorporation of this information reduced the number of possible parses  , the processing time increased because of the addition of the link nodes in the grammar  . 
2 Constraint


Instead of using contextfree grammars , we are using a natural language framework based on the * Parallel Architecture Sentence Constra Jner Constraint Dependency Grammar  ( CDG ) for-realism developed by Maruyama\[3\] . This framework allows us to handle prosodic information quite easily  , Rather than coordinating lexical , syntactic , semantic , and contextual modules to develop the meaning of a sentence  , we apply sets of lexical , syntactic , prosodic , semantic , and pragmatic rules to a packed structure containing a developing picture of the structure and meaning of a sentence  . The CDG grammar has a weak generative capacity which is strictly greater than that of contextfree grammars and has the added advantage of benefiting significantly from a parallel architecture  \[2\]  . PARSEC is our system based on the CDG formalism . 
To develop a syntactic and semantic analysis using this framework  , a network of the words for a given sentence is constructed  . Each word is given some number indicating its position relative to the other words in the sentence  . Once a word is entered in the network , the system assigns all of the possible roles the words can have by applying the lexical constraints  ( which specify legal word categories ) and allowing the word to modify all the remaining words in the sentence or no words at all  . Each of the arcs in the network has associated with it a matrix whose row and column indices are the roles that the words can play in the sentence  . Initially , all entries in the matrices are set to one , indicating that there is nothing about one word's function which prohibits another word's right to fill a certain role in the sentence  . Once the network is constructed , additional constraints are introduced to limit the role of each word in the sentence to a single function  . In a spoken language system which may contain several possible candidates for each word  , constraints would also dates . 
? We have been able to incorporate the durational information from Bear and Price quite easily into our framework  . An advantage of our approach is that the prosodic information is added as constraints instead of incorporating it into a parsing grammar  . Because CDG is more expressive than contextfree grammars  , we can produce prosodic rules that are more expressive than Bear and Price are able to provide by augmenting contextfree grammars  , Also by formulating prosodic rules as constraints  , we avoid the need to clutter our rules with nonterminals required by contextfree grammars when they are augmented to handle prosody  . Assuming O(n4/log(n )) processors , the cost of applying each constraint is O ( log ( n ) )\[2\] . Whenever we apply a constraint to the network , our processing time is incremented by this amount  . In contrast , Bear and Price , by doubling the size of the grammar are multiplying the processing time by a factor of  8 when no prosodic information is available ( assuming ( 2n ) 3=8 n3 time )  . 
3 Current Research
Our current research effort consists of the development of algorithms for extracting the prosodic information from the speech signal and incorporation of this information into the PARSEC framework  . In addition , we will be working to interface PARSEC with the speech recognition system being developed at Purdue by Mitchell and Jamies on  . 
We have selected a corpus of 14 syntactically ambiguou sentences for our initial experimentation  . We have predicted what prosodic features humans use to disambiguate he sentences and are attempting to develop algorithms to extract those features from the speech  . We are hoping to build upon those algorithms presented in  \[1  ,  4 ,  5\] . Initially we are using a professional speaker trained in prosodics in our experiments  , but eventually we will test our results with an untrained speaker  . 
Although our current system allows multiple word candidates  , it assumes that each of the possible words begin and end at the same time  . It currently does not allow for nonaligned word boundaries  . In addition , the output of the speech recognition system which we will be utilizing will consist of the most likely sequence of phonemes for a given utterance  , so additional work will be required to extract he most likely word candidates for use in our system  . 
4 Conclusion
The CDG formalism provides a very promising framework for our spoken language system  . 
We believe its flexibility will allow it to overcome many of the limitations imposed by natural language systems developed primarily for textbased applications  , uchas repeated words and false starts of phrases  . In addition , we believe that prosody will help to resolve the ambiguity introduced by the speech recognition system which is not present in textbased systems  . 
5 Acknowledgement
This research was supported in part by NSF IRI-9011179 under the guidance of Profs . Mary P . 
Harper and Leah H . Jamies on.
References\[1\]J . Bear and P . Price . Prosody , syntax , and parsing . 
In Proceedings of the ~8th annual ACL , 1990.
\[2\]R . Helzerman and M . P . Harper . Parsec : An architecture for parallel parsing of constraint dependency grammars  . In Submitted to The Proceedings o/the ~9th Annual Meetingo . fACL , June 1991 . 
\[3\]H . Maruyama . Constraint dependency grammar . 
Technical Report #RT0044 , IBM , Tokyo , Japan ,  1990 . 
\[4\]P . Price , C . Wightman , M . Ostendorf , and J . Bear . 
The use of relative duration in syntactic disambiguation  . In Proceedings o\]1 CSLP , 1990 . 
\[5\]A . Waibel . Prosody and Speech Recognition . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Los Altos , CA ,  1988 . 

