Event-building through Role-filling and Anaphora Resolution 
Greg Whittemore
Electronic Data Systems Corp.
5951 Jefferson Street N.E.
Albuquerque , NM 87109-3432

Melissa Macpherson
Electronic Data Systems Corp.
5951 Jefferson Street N.E.
Albuquerque , NM 87109-3432
melissa@edsr.eds.eom
Greg Carlson
Linguistics Program , University of Rochester
Rochester , NY
grca ~ u or vm . bitnet

In this study we map out a way to build event representations incrementally  , using information which may be widely distributed across a discourse  . An enhanced Discourse Representation ( Kamp ,  1981 ) provides the vehicle both for carrying open event roles through the discourse until they can be instantiated by NPs  , and for resolving the reference of these otherwise problematic NPs by binding them to the event roles  . 

The computational linguistics literature includes a wide variety of ideas about how to represent events in as much detail as is required for reasoning about their implications  . Less has been written about how to use information in text to incrementally build those event representations a discourse progresses  , especially when the identification of event participants and other details is dispersed across a number of structures  . We will be concerned here with providing a representational framework for this incremental event-building  , and with using that representation to examine the ways in which reference to the internal structure of events contributes to discourse cohesion  . That is , we will be interested both in the process of gleaning fully-specified event descriptions from continuous text  , and in showing how individual elements of an event's internal structure can behave anaphorically  . 
Examples of the kinds of linkages that must be dealt within building representations of events from text follow : la  ) He was believed Cobealiar . 
b ) We promised him to be truthful.
c ) He tried to keep his mouth shut.
2a ) Joegave Petea book to read.
b ) Joegave Petea book to impress him.
c ) Joe asked Pete for a book to read.
d ) I asked Joe for a book to impress Sam.
e ) Joegave Pete the message to save his skin.
3a ) Joet old Pete that to erris human.
b ) He told us that to quite ould besilly . 
4a ) GM will broaden collaboration with
Lot us to make a new car.
b ) Mary thought that an argument with herself would been tertaining  . 
c ) Mary thought that a conference with himself would make John looks illy  . 
The examples in ( 1 ) are familiar cases of syntactically obligatory control  ; we will consider their behavior to be straightforwardly and locally resolved  . 
The sentences of (2) show infinitival relatives , purpose , and ' in-order-to'clauses in which control of the infinitive  ( and hence of its implicit subject ) is sometimes clear , sometimes ambiguous . In (3) , a subject infinitival phrase receives an unavoidably generic reading in one case and a non -generic but ambiguous reading in the other  . Finally , the examples of ( 4 ) indicate that nominalizations of events also have roles whose reference must be determined  , and whose existence and identity has consequences for subsequent discourse  . 
Aside from the sentences in (1) , in which control is unambiguously sorted out within the sentence on the basis of verb type  , all the examples above can structions in which the facts of referent-assignment are identical  . Even more extended is courses , including dialogue such as that in (5) , show the influence of an instantiated situation or event over the assignment of referents to entities introduced later in the discourse  . 
5 ) A : John has been hobbling around for two weeks with as prained ankle  . 
B : So what did the nurse say yesterday ?
A : She said that it would not be smart to run so so on after in juring himself  . 
( adapted from Nishigauchi's 48 , cited as a modification of Chao's 28 ) The distribution of event participants across multi-sentence discourses is sufficientolay to restany idea that the linkage is syntactically governed  , even though the entities which provide cohesion in these examples are arguments which are typically bound syntactically  . That is , it seems that initially unfilled thematic roles play a part intying one sentence to the next  . Event roles left unfilled after the operation of local syntactic processing are apparently still ' active '  , in some sense , and they appear to be able to attract participants from external structures to fill them  . Carlson and Tanenhaus ( 1988 ) provide psycholinguistic evidence that this is indeed the case  ; open thematic roles do appear to be effective as cohesion devices  .   1 Previous theories about how open roles become filled  ( mostly intra-sententially ) have been based on notions ranging from strictly syntactic to more pragmatic  , knowledge-based approaches . Obviously wherever we do have what appears to be invariant and obligatory control  , we want to exploit a syntactic explanation . However , these cases 1Whether it is just thematic roles , or those plus certain types of highly predictable adjuncts  , or a wide variety of other types of slots which can provide the type of linking we are talking about is still an open question  . We do assume that for each event we will encode not only THAT it expects certain arguments obe filled  , but HOW it expects them to be filled ; for instance it should be perceived that the noun ' salesman ' is a highly suitable Agent for a sale event  . We may need to know about more than that . In particular , we may require metonymical devices that make discourses like the following possible  . 
I had a hard time shopping.
First , the parking lot was all full ....
Coherence in this exampled early depends on being able to associate ' the parking lot ' with ' store ' and ' store ' with the Location of the ' shopping ' event  . This extension is no different in kind , however , from the core of what we are proposing here . 
do not account for much of the ground that we need to cover  . As the examples above show , even the syntactic position PRO often defies straightforward control assignment  , and in the case of nominal references to events , Williams ' ( 1985 ) arguments against a strictly syntactic account of referent-assignment are convincing  . Of course , there are no syntactic means for linking arguments with event descriptions intersententially  . Appeals to underlying thematic role notions and /or more pragmatically governed operators then seem to hold more promise for the kinds of situations we are describing  . 
Given their currency above and below the sentence level  , and the fact that they seem to be sensitive to both syntactic and pragmatic on straints  , the behavior of unfilled event roles will best be explained at the discourse level  . Like other discourse anaphoric elements , open roles cannot only receive their reference from distant structures  , but they also seem to be used productively to create links between linguistic structures and to extend focus in both forward and backward directions  . 
To machine-build representations of events whose essential components are dispersed across multiple structures  , two keying redients are necessary . First , the system must have knowledge about events and their expected participants and other characteristics  . Given this , one can make predictions about the expectancy of arguments and the underlying properties they should hold  . The second ingredient required is a means for assessing the mutual accessibility of discourse entities  . As has been pointed out by various researchers , en-tential structure , thematic relationships , and discourse configurations all may play apart in determining which entities must  , might , and cannot be associated with others , and a discourse framework must make it possible to take all these factors into account in assigning reference and building representations of events  . 
Our intent in this paper is to provide a prototype model of event building which is effective across clauses  , both intra - and intersententially . We will incorporate into this representation of events a means for assessing accessibility of events and event participants for anaphoric reference  , and we will use the representation to examine the anaphoric behavior of open roles  . 
Event-Building Representation : We have chosen DRT as an overall representation scheme  , though we will be modifying it to some extent . 
DRT has been designed to perform a variety of events in an overall discourse representation and making it possible to indicate which event entities are available for future anaphoric referencing and what constraints hold over those entities  . A typical DR for a simple sentence is given in ( 6 )  . The sentence , ' John gave Billa dollar ' is designated by the variable  E1 and has associated with it a predicate calculus statement that contains the predicate  , give , and argument variables V1 , V2 , and V3 . 
The give event specification and other constraints  , again in predicate calculus form , are contained in the lower portion of the DR . In the top half of the DR , any entities , including events , which are available for subsequent anaphoric referencing are listed by their variable names  . 
Vl , V2 , V3 , E1 ( John V1) ( Bill V2) ( Dolla ~ V3)
El : ( give(agent Vl ), ( goal V2), ( theme V3)) 6 . ADR for John gave Billadollar . 
Our representation departs in some ways from the way in which the binding of anaphors is usually shown in DRT  . Inversions of DRT with re-altime processing , whenever an NP is being processed , two things can happen : i ) either the NP can be linked with a previously occurring NP and become anaphorically bound to it  , or ii ) a new referent can be generated for the NP and posted when no antecedent can be found  . For our purposes , it is convenient o include in the DR an extra tier which contains items which have not yet found a referent  . ~ To designate the three parts of our DRs , we will use the following tier labels :
Available Referents-AR
Unbound Referents-UR , and
Constraints on Referents-CR.
For processing purposes , we will not attempto immediately bind anaphors as they are encountered in sentences  , beyond what we can get for free from syntactic analysis  . Rather , we will initiate a twostage process , with the first DR having unbound anaphors and the second attempting representation of binding  . In the first representation , we will 2 A buffer of this sort may be implicit in other treatments of anaphora resolution  ; our extension is just to add it explicitly to the DR representation  . Without some such buffer it is not clear how one would handle sentences like ' When he was a kid  , John was pretty go of y . ' post unbound anaphors in UR . We will also postconstraints for unbound items within CR to reflect their type  , e . g . ( PROXl ), ( DEFINITEX2), and ( HEX3) . When items in UR become bound ( or when their referents are found )  , their bindings will be represented in AR , they will be crossed off from within UR , and a new DR will be created to reflect the change in status  . 
We will also revise the representation of event descriptions in CR  , by including in the mimplicit arguments for each event as well as ones which are explicitly realized in the sentence  . Every event will have its underlying thematic and highly expected adjunctive roles posted in CR  , whether the roles have been filled or not . These unfilled or implicit roles are posted as entities requiring binding  , in UR . The constraint ( IMPLICITX ) will be included for any open role , and for each event variable we will note in CR whether it was a verbal or other-than-verbal description  . 
Example ( 7 ) contains an instance of what we intend . The nominalized form of an investigate event , marked with El , has two open slots : Agent and Theme , V1 and V2 , respectively . E1 is posted as a possible referent in AR ; its two implicit arguments V1 and V2 are posted in UR . Similarly , E2 , the launch event is posted in AR , while its open agent role , designated by V3 , is shown in UR ; its explicit Theme is already posted in AR as El . 
AK : El , E2
UR : V1, V2, V3
CR:El:(investigate(AgentV1)CTheme V2))
E2: ( launch(AgentV3) ( Theme El )) 7 . ADR of the sentence An investigation was launched  . 
We will show that because of the inclusion of open roles in the representation of events and on the UR tier  , this framework for discourse representation makes it possible to link arguments that appear in a variety of structures to their respective events  , and thus provides more predictive power for anaphoric resolution processes  . 
Verb-based Event References : We will demonstrate how DRs can be used to build inter -clausal events by providing various examples  . We will move from the easiest examples , those that have much syntactic support , to the hardest , those whose resolution is mostly based on pragmatic grounds  . 

We treat the binding of the PRO subject of embedded infinitive as a case of open role filling  , and for our purposes , such binding is fundamentally the same in both obligatory and non-obligatory environments  , since in every case the result is that open event roles are filled by arguments from external sources  . That is , even where control is generated entirely within syntax  , the links are construed as being the result of a cross-claus event-building process  . The operational difference is just that wherever control CAN be reliably determined syntactically  , as in the case of obligatory control verbs , indices between controllers and PROs will be in place when initial DRs are generated  .   3 A typical DR with a controller-controllee relationship would appear as in  ( 8 )  . 
AR : Xl , El , E2
CR:(John , Xl)
El : ( try(AgentXl ) ( GoalE2))
E2 : ( leave(AgentXl )) 8 . The DR for John tried to leave . 
In the event-building examples that we show in the remainder of the paper  , the aim is the construction of DRs that ultimately link events and arguments in this same way  . What is different about the more complicated cases is just the means of accomplishing the linking  . In the case of non-obligatory control of PRO , such results may often require information from several evels of processing  , and an adequat event-building representation must be able to accommodate here presentation fall factors which are shown to be effective in predicting that control  . 
Nishigauchi (1984) , for example , demonstrates that choice of controller can often be determined through knowledge of thematic roles  ( see also Bach ,  1982 , and Dowty and Ladusaw ,  1988 , for their accounts ) . In Nishigauchi's account , control of infinitival purpose clauses and infinitival relative clauses is primarily dependent on the presence of one of three thematic roles from his socalled Primary Location hierarchy  ; the idea is that a controller can be assigned if a Goal  , Location , or Source is present in the sentence . Where a Goal is present , its refer-3Dowty and Ladusaw ( 1988 ) believe that control is generally established via pragmatic means  . They claim that it is pragmatic knowledge of events that enables one to generate links between participants and events  . They also believe , however , that there are a large number of situations for which control has become grammaticized  , and that there does not need to be any internal analysis in these situations to comprehend argument-to-event liks  . 
ent has precedence as controller ; where Goal is not present , Location or Source can take control . 
The examples in ( 9 ) are indicative of the kinds of links that can be made via this hierarchy  . In example (9a ) , the Goal'Mary'controls the infinitival relative  . 4In (9b ) , John ends up with the book , so ' John ' is Goal , while in (9c ) , John as the possessor of the book is its Location  ; in both cases ' John ' controls the infinitive . 
(9)a ) John bought Ha.ry a book PRO to read.
b ) John bought a book PRO to read.
c ) John has a book PRO to read.
To handle examples like (9a-c ) , we begin with initial DRs that include the kind of information that can be expected from a syntactic/semantic parser that produces initial logical forms  . For instance , we know that ' John ' is the Agent and ' Mary ' the Goal of a buy event  , and that the PRO subject of ' read ' ( the Agent of the read event ) has no binding . The object of ' read ' is identified in syntax as ' book '  . 5 An initial DR for (9a ) is illustrated in (10) . 
AR : X1 X2 X3 E1 E2
UR : X4

El : ( buy ( Agent Xl ) (0bjeet X2) ( Goal X3))
E2: ( read ( Agent X4 ) (Object X2 ) )  ( John X1 )   ( book X2 )   ( Mary X3 )   ( PROX4 )   ( 10 )  . The initial DR for John bought Mary a book to read  . 
At this stage , a positive check for Goalin E1 results in the binding of the unbound variable X4 to X3 in AR ; X4 is then canceled out of UR . We rethereno Goalin El , a Location or Source would have the same effect . In a case where none of these roles is specified explicitly  , as in example (11) ( from Bach ) , it must be filled by default and/or from 4 ' Mary ' is more typically interpreted as Beneficiary in this sentence  , but Nishig auchiclaims that since Mary ends up with the book  , she is the Goal . Bach's (1982) explanation is similar ; it is that entity which the matrix verb puts in a position to do the VERB ing which controls the infinitive  . 
S This analysis assumes that the infinitive is recognized as an infinitival relative on ' book  '  , so that it does have an Object gap . The infinitive could also of course hean ' in -order-to'clause with intransitive'read '  , in which case the controller is the Agent of ' buy '  . 
20 context before it can bind the infinitive . In this case the default Goal for ' brought'is " present company "  , and so the PRO subject of ' enjoy ' is first person plural inclusive  . 
(11 ) I brought this miserable Morgon to enjoy with our dinner  . 
Nominal Descriptions of Events : Much discussion has focused on the extent o which the internal structure of NPs that have nominalized events as heads  , e . g . ' the destruction of the city by the Ro-mans , ' carries over the internal structure of the associated verb-headed structure  , as in ' the Romans destroyed the city ' . The consensus i that such deverbal noun phrases , while obviously semantically parallel in some ways  , are not equivalent over bal descriptions . In particular , semantic arguments associated with the nominalized form are held to be syntactically adjunctive in nature and entirely optional  , even where they would be expressed as obligatory complement so the associated verb  . 
We are interested here in cases in which nominals representing events are linked with arguments that are not part of the same immediate syntactic environment  . Several examples are provided in (12) and (13) . As Higgins (1973, cf . Dowty , 1986) has discussed , in sentences like ( 12 a ) the subject of the matrix verb ' make ' can be associated with the Agent position of an embedded nominal  ; therefore we understand ' Romans ' to be the Agent of ' attack '  . It is apparently the nature of the verb ' make ' that permits this association  ; ' perform ' behaves similarly . The verbs ' suffer ' and ' undergo ' , on the other hand , link their subjects to the Theme or Experiencer of a nominalized event  ( that is , to what would be the expected object of the associated verb  )  , as shown in (12b ) . 
12a ) The Romans made an attack on the

b ) The Romans suffered a crippling defeat.
Williams ( 1985 ) makes use of the notion that a matrix verb can impose an association between its own arguments and any implicit arguments of a controlled event noun  . However as the following example show , not all verbs impose association of arguments to the degree that'perform ' and ' undergo'do  . A verb may show some tendency toward association between Agents  , as'schedule ' does in (13a ) , but be open to a realignment of matrix subject with some other more focused role in other environments  , as in (13b ) . Some may have such a slight tendency to associate arguments in a particular way that it can be disrupted by syntactic structure  , as in (13c ) and (13d ) . In ( 13 c ) Sammay or may not be a party himself to the agreement  , but in (13d ) he is probably not involved . 
(13a ) John scheduled a take over/meeting.
b ) John scheduled a haircut/a checkup.
c ) Sam negotiated an agreement.
d ) An agreement was negotiated by Sam.
What is necessary in order to sort this out is a working framework within which these tendencies can be represented and their interactions with other factors tracked  . Where the tendency towards association is as strong as it is for ' make '  , which is considered to be semantically " bleached " in such constructions as make an attempt  , make a narrangement , make a promise , make an attack ( that is , it could be said to have become just a mechanism for linking matrix subject to object event  )  , our representation will allow for a nearly linking at the level of syntax  . For the general run of cases where an event noun is the object of a matrix verb  , as in (13a-d ) , we must rely on our knowledge of typical interactions between events in order to decide what the linking between matrix subject and embedded event might be  . The interaction between the AR and the UR tiers of the DR  , along with constraints on variables of both types  , allows us to manipulate the association as may seem appropriate  , with as much knowledge as we have at the time of linking  . 
Cross-Sentence Event-building : As we mentioned earlier  , the linking phenomena we are examining hold across  , as well as within sentences . 
Discourse ( 14 ) is provided as an example of a discourse in which an open role is filled in a subsequent sentence  . In the first sentence , there are actually several open roles . Left unfilled are ( at least ) the roles Source and Exchange . With the DR structuring we have chosen , an initial DR for the first sentence of ( 14 ) would be built as in ( 15 )  . The mainthing to note in ( 15 ) is that the open role variables , are Z1 and Q1 , the Source and the Exchange , have been posted in UR . 
(14 a ) Pete bought a car.
b ) The salesman was a real jerk.
21 ( ls )
AR : EI , XI , YI
UR : ZlO1
CR : ( PeteXl ) ( car Y 1)
El : ( buy ( Agent Xl) , ( The meY 1) , ( Source ZI ) ,   ( Exchange Ol ) )  ( implicit Z1 )   ( implicit ql ) The initial DR . for the second sentence of (14) is in (16a ) . The variable X2 , representing ' the salesman ' , has been posted in the unresolved NP buffer , and X2 will be the first thing to be resolved by way of anaphora operators  . 
The anaphoric processes invoked at this point would be much like what has been promoted elsewhere  . A variety of factors would come into play , including looking at basic semantic haracteristics  , centering , etc . We would also want to provide a means for ordering available referents as they are placed in AR  . in terms of their forward focusing character ( Grosz , Joshi , and Weinstein ,  1983) . 
For ' the salesman ' , the previously occurring discourse entities that are available as referents are El  , Xl , and Y1 in the previous AR . , and Z1 and Q1 in the previous UR . The possible referent Xl , ' Pete ' , ranks as a possible candidate but not a very likely one  , since if Pete were to be referred to in a subsequent sentence it would more likely be done via a personal pronoun  . The other available referent , Y 1 , the ' car ' , is semantically unlikely and is not considered a good choice  . A search is then made into the previous UR . . The Source Z1 , in this instance , would be a highly likely choice , since any semantic qualities that would accompany ' the salesman ' would fit those of the Source of a buy event  . 
It has been reported in previou studies that definite NPs often have no clear antecedent  . For instance ,   363 out of 649 definite NPs found in a study of corpus of dialogues  ( Brunner , Ferrara , and Whit-temore , 1990) had no direct linguistic antecedents . 
5 3% of the 363 definite NPs had semantically in-ferrable antecedents  , where definite NPs were used to refer to attributes of antecedents and the like  , but not to antecedents themselves . Apparently , definite NPs function to focus on some partial aspect of an antecedent or topic and not necessarily to refer directly to it as a whole  .   6 Following the 6The other 47% were reported to have no clear antecedents , and were only ' topically ' tied to the context . It might prove beneficial to reexamine these true or phans and see if any of these refer back to open roles  . 
line of reasoning that one could take from these findings  , it could be the case that there is actually a preference for definite NPs to refer back to open roles  , since they represent particular points of focus or subcomponents of events  . 
' Salesman ' , via the variable X2 , would then get bound to the buy event and a second DR  . with noun resolved anaphor a would be returned , as shown in (16b ) . 

AR : E2
UR : X2
CR:(Salesman X2) ( definite X2)
E2: ( ISX2 real-jerk ) (16b)
AR : X2,E2

CR:(Salesman X2) ( definite X2)
E2: ( ISX2 real-jerk)
Similarly , the DR for the first sentence would need modification since now the open Source role  , represented as Z1 , would need to be bound to X2 , ' the salesman ' ( this updated binding is not shown )  . 
Limits on Linking : There are limits on the kinds of linking that can be effected between event descriptions and fillers for open roles  . For instance , note that the open slot in the example above does not seem to be available for pronominal reference  . 
If (14b ) is replaced with ' He was a real jerk , ' the sequence of sentences makes no sense ( or at least we would have to say that the same role is not accessed  )  . This restriction appears to be true in general for pronominal reference into event descriptions  , as the following example show : ? I was attacked . * He was enormous . 
? We unloaded the car . * They\[the suit cases \] were very heavy . 
? This borrowing has got to stop . * They\[the borrowed things \] get left all over the place  . 
An event description itself , as a whole , nominal or verbal , may function as an antecedent for inal reference ( ' I went swimming . It was horrible . ') . 
It is just pronominal reference INTO an event description  , especially a verb alone , which seems to be blocked . The event described in ( 17 a ) below cannot typically be elaborated upon by ( l ? ai )  . However , (17 ai ) is fine as a continuation if (17 aii ) , in which the event is nominalized , comes between . (17b ) , in which the agree event is referred to nominally  , can be followed by (17 bi ) , (17 bii ) or both . 
(17) a ) Bob finally agreede ith Joe.
i ) * It was to not fight any more.
ii ) The agreement , as negotiated by Sam.
b ) Bob and Joefinally made an agreement.
i ) It was to not fight any more.
ii ) It/The agreement was negotiated by Sam.
c ) * It was between Bob and Sam.
In our representation the posting of event descriptions  , verbal and nominal , in AR , accounts for the fact that each can be linked to by a subsequent pronominal element  . Our intuition is that in order to be completely accessible as a referent  , however , an entity must have not only a semantic but also a phonological realization  ; since open roles are merely implicit until they are bound  , it is predictable that there would be a difference in their accessibility  . For this reason we post open roles only in UR , not in AR , and in our framework this blocks pronominal access to them  . 
As for the fact that nominalizing an event seems to ease the restrictions on referring into it by means of a pronoun  ( as in the ( 17 ai-ii ) examples )  , our guess is that in these cases the pronominal reference is actually to the event as a thing  , and that the apparent elaboration of roles is allowed by the same mechanisms that allow addition of other adjuncts to nominals  , as in ' I really enjoyed my vacation . It was in Texas in July . ' In any case our tagging of event variables in CR as nominal or verbal allows this distinction to be taken into account  . 
The idea of role slots which are canceled from UR as they are bound explains another restriction on the ways in which events can be elaborated  .   ( 17 c ) above cannot appropriately follow either ( 171 ) or ( 17 b )  , because we already know from either that the agreement was between Bob and Joe  . Further , if (17 bii ) follows (17b ) , then we know that Sam is not himself a participant in the agreemen the negotiated  , because we already know from ( 17 b ) that the agreena ent was between Bob and Joe . In each of these cases , the open role in question will have been canceled out of UR by binding to other entities before the new anaphoric elements come along  , and so there is no possibility of filling a role twice  . 
Hard Cases : Finally , we offer a few comments on a " pretty hard " and a " really hard " example  , given in (18) and (19) . These are revised versions of the discourse given in  ( 5 )  . The task in both cases is to bind the referent ' John '  , which appears in the first sentence , to the Agent slot of ' run ' , which is in the second sentence . 

John has been hobbling around on as prained ank le  . 
Today , the nurse said it would be best not to run for teoweeks  . 

John has been hobbling around on as prained ank le  . 
Today , the nurset old his mother it would be best not to run for two weeks  . 
To resolve these examples , we can employ two tactics . First , we will impose a thematic role association between the Addressee of asay event and the Agent of embedded agentless verbs that denote advice  . Secondly , we will use the notion of open implicit roles in DtLs to obtain a filler for the open Addressee role in the say/tell event  . 7 With these two notions in place , we can easily resolve (18) .   ( 18 ) 's context provides only one possible candidate for the open Addressee role  , namely ' John ' ( that is , if we disregard the speaker of the utterance ) . Once ' John ' is used to fill that role , we can link ' John also , through the default thematic role association , to the Agent slot for ' run ' . 
(19) , however shows that the situation can be more complicated  . There is no open Addressee role in (19) ; the explicit Addressee is ' his mother ' . 
By the process above , then , ' his mother ' would be linked to the Agent slot of ' run '  , which of course is incorrect . We do not have a perfect explanation for why ( 19 ) is different from ( 18 )  , other than that John's mother is not the ult imate Addressee  . That is , a mechanism is needed that can determine that John's mother transfers the advice onto the person who needs it  , namely the ailing person , namely John . Even if such a complicated scenario is the ZA more general form of the first step would be a thematic role reasoning device that permits PROs to be linked with those entities which are most eligible to carry out the action of the subject less infinitive  . This formulation would be in the spirit of Bach ,  1982 . 
23 correct one , we believe that our combined thematic role /discourser presentation would provide a platform upon which one could make use of such pragmatic information  . 
Conclusion : Our stated task was to provide a vehicle for constructing event representations which have roles that are not filled by local syntactic means  . DRT is a natural vehicle for ~ this kind of exercise  , given certain extensions . The major extension is the posting of open event ( thematic ) roles as potential anchors for subsequent reference  . In other words we are treating open roles as a type of anaphor  . Where roles integral to an understanding of an event are not immediately filled on the basis of local syntax  , we hypothesize that they should be posted nonetheless a not-yet-instantiated slots  . 
We have addedatier to the conventional notion of a DR to accommodate this posting  . 
Our experiments with this representation have shown how information from various levels of processing can be brough together in event building  . 
This framework also allows us to discover limits on linking phenomena  ; in particular , it naturally illustrates the inaccessibility of open roles to pronominal reference  , and the tendency for definite NPs to link to substructures within an event  . 

We would like to note that the idea of using DRs as a means for building events across clauses came from a comment by Rich Thomason  , cited in Dowty (1986:32): " Rich Thomason(p . c . ) has suggested to me that a very natural way to construct a theory of event anaphora would be via Discourse Representation Theory  . " Thomason was addressing ( we think ) the notion of referring to events via nominalizations  . We just extended the idea of using DRT to construct events across clauses to also include those denoted by verbs  . 
\[3\] Dowty , D . and Ladusaw , W .  1988 . Toward a Nongrammatical Account of Thematic Roles  , in Volume 21 of SYNTAXAND SEMANTICS , p g s . 

\[4\] Grosz , B . , Joshi , A . , and Weinstein , S .  1983 . 
Providing a Unified Account of Definite Noun Phrases in Discourse  . SRI Technical note ~292 . 
\[5\] Kamp , H .  1981 . A Theory of Truth and Semantic Representation , in J . Groenendijk , T . 
Jannsen , and M . Stokhof , ( eds.). FOR MAL
METHODSINTHESTUDY OF LANGUAGE.
\[6\]Nishigauchi , T .  1984 . Control and the Thematic Domain . LANGUAGE , Volume 60, no . 2, pgs . 

\[7\] Williams , E .  1980 . Predication . LINGUISTICINQUIRY , Volume 11, no . 1, pgs .  203-238 . 
\[8\]Williams , E . 1985. PRO and Subject of NP.
NATURALL ANGUAGE ANDLINGUISTIC
THEORY , Volume 3, no.3, pgs . 297-315.
References\[1\]Carlson , G . and Tanenhaus , M .  1988 . Thematic Roles and Language Comprehension . THE-
MATIC RELATIONS , VOLUME21 OFSYN-
TAXANDSEMANTICS , pgs . 263-291.
\[2\] Dowty , D .  1986 . On the Semantic Content of the Notion " Thematic Role "  . paper presented at the University of Massachusetts conference on Property Theory  , Type Theory , and Semantics , 
March 1316, 1986.

