Collaborating on Referring Expressions
Peter A . Heeman
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto , Canada , M5S 1A4
heeman@ai.toronto.edu
Abstract
This paper presents a computational model of how conversational participants collaborate in making referring expressions  . The model is based on the planning paradigm . It employs plans for constructing and recognizing referring expressions and meta-plans for constructing and recognizing clarifications  . This allows the model to account for the generation and understanding both of referring expressions and of their clarifications in a uniform framework using a single knowledge base  . 
I , Introduction
In the dialogue below 1 , person A wants to refer to some object and have person B identify it  . Person A does this by uttering a referring expression  ; however , A's expression fails to allow B to uniquely identify the object  . PersonB then tries to clarify A's referring expression by expanding it  . A rejects B's clarification and replaces it , which allows B to identify the referent of the refashioned referring expression  . 
A : 1See the weird creature
B : 2In the corner ?
A:3 No , on the television
B:4 Okay.
This paper presents a computation model of Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs's work on how conversational participants collaborate in forming referring expressions  \[2\]  . Our model takes the role of one of the participants  , either the participant who initiates the referring expression  , the ini-tiator , or the one who is trying to identify the referent  , the responder . It accounts for how the initiator constructs the initial referring expressions and howshe and the responder then collaborate in clarifying the referring expression until it is acceptable  . Each step of the collaboration consists of a clarification of the referring expression and a subsequent understanding of the clarification  . 
This work is based on the planning paradigm . The knowledge that is needed to choose the content of a referring expression is encoded in plans  . This allows an agent to use the same knowledge base for both constructing and recognizing initial referring expressions  . Furthermore , the ITh is example is a simplified version of \[6\] S . 2 . 4 a (18) . 
knowledge needed to clarify a referring expression is encoded as plans  . These are meta-plans that take an instantiated plan corresponding to a referring expression as a parameter  . The meta-plans reason about the failed constraints or effects of the instantiated plan in order to clarify it  . These repairs can subsequently be understood by performing plan recognition  . This approach allows the entire collaborative process to be expressed in a uniform framework with a single knowledge base  . 
II . Referring as Action
Plansen code a relationship between goals and the primitive actions that will accomplish these goals  . Hence , a set of primitive actions is needed that is relevant in the domain of referring expressions  \[1\]  . We use the primitive actions - refer and s-at tr  . S-refer is performed by the initiator to signal to the responder that she is referring to an object  , and that she intends him to identify the object . 
S-attrascribe some attribute to an object , for instance its category , color , or shape . 
III . Initial Referring Expression
Constructing : When an initiator wants to refer to an object  , she can do so by constructing a refer plan . This plan consists of two steps , the actions - refer , mentioned above , and the subplan describe . Describe , through its subplans head noun and modifiers , constructs a description of the object that is intended to allow the responder to identify the object  . He ad noun decomposes in to an s-attraction that ascribes to the object the head noun chosen by the constraints of the plan  . The modifier splan is more complicated . Through its constraints , it ensures that the referring expression is believed to allow the responder to uniquely identify the object  . The modifiers plan achieves this by decomposing into the modifier plan a variable number of times  ( through recursion )  . Each instance of the modifier plan constructs an individual component of the description  , such as the object's color , shape , or location ( throughans-attraction ) . 
Recognizing : The responder , after hearing the initial referring expression , tries to recognize the intention behind the initiator's utterance  . Starting with the set of primitive actions that he observed  , the responder employs plan This process will lead him to ascribe the refer plan to the initiator  , including the intention for the responder to identify the referent of the description  . Plan recognition , by analyzing the constraints and effects of the inferred plan  , lets the responder attempto identify the referent of the description  . 
There are two reasons why the responder might be unable to identify the referent  . Either the responder is unable to find any objects that satisfy the referring expression or he is able to find more than one that satisfies it  . This situation might arise if the initiator and responder have different states of knowledge or belief about the world  . For instance , in the dialogue above the responder might think that several objects are " weird "  . The constraint or effect that was violated in the inferred plan is noted by the plan recognizer  , and this knowledge is used to repair the plan . This approach is motivated by Pollack's treatment of ill-forme domain plans  \[5\]  . 
IV . Clarifications
Constructing : If the responder was unsuccessful a tin-ferring the referent of the referring expression  , he will plan to inform the initiator that her referring expression was not successful  . As Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs\[2\] point out , the responder will try to refashion the referring expression in order to minimize the collaborative effort  , and hence he will prefer to replace or expand the referring expression rather than just rejecting it or postponing the decision  . 
The responder has several different clarification plans  \[4\] a this disposal and they take as a parameter the inferred plan corresponding to the referring expression  . These plans correspond to Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs 's analysis of the repair process  . One of these plans is reject-replace . 
This plan rejects the step of the inferred referring expression plan that has a constraint violation and replaces it by a similar step but with the violated constraint relaxed  ( relaxing a description is due to \[3\] )  . A second plan is postpone-expemd , which is used to further qualify a referring expression that a participant found to match several objects  . This plan is used by the responder in ( 2 ) in the dialogue above . 
Recognizing : If the responder clarifies the referring expression  , the initiator will have to infer that the responder is unable to identify the referent of the expression  . 
Furthermore , the initiator must determine how the clarification will affect he underlying referring expression  . The responder might have rejected or postponed his decision  , as well as proposed a correction to the underlying referring expression by replacing or expanding it  . Following Litman's work on understanding clarification subdialogues  \[4\]  , this process is achieved through plan recognition . 
Continuing On : Clarification subdialogues might extend beyond the responder's clarification of the initial referring expression  . For instance , in the above dialogue , after the initiator inferred the responder's clarification  , she found the resulting referring expression plan ill-formed  . 
Hence , she constructed a subsequent clarification --" No , n the television " . Then , the responder had to infer this clarification . In general , this process will continue until both participants accep the referring expression  . The analysis involved with these subsequent turns of the dialogue is sim-ilar to the analysis given in the preceding two subsections  . 
There may be differences between how the initiator and responder clarify a referring expression  , since the initia-torknows the identity of the referent  . Also , there may be differences between a clarification following the initial referring expression and one following another clarification  , since , in the latter case , the referring expression may have already been partially accepted  . 
V . Belief Revision
As was mentioned earlier , the initiator and responder might have different states of knowledge or belief about the world  , and these differences will be a cause of clarification subdialogues  . In the process of collaborating to make referring expressions  , these differences in belief will arise in the replacements and expansions that the two participants propose  . Hence , they will need a way of resolving their differences in beliefs about the world if they are to both accep the referring expression  . Hence the model proposed in this paper will need to incorporate belief revision  . 
VI . Conclusion
This paper has presented a computational model of how conversational participants collaborate in making referring expressions  . However , it is hoped that the ideas presented in this paper are of relevance to a much larger range of collaborative processes  . 
The work outlined in this paper is in progress . At present , a computer system has been implemented in Prolog that can construct and recognize initial referring expressions  , and that can construct clarifications . In terms of the dialogue above , the system can model both the ini-tiator and responder for the first line and can model the responder for the second  . 
References\[1\]D . E . Appelt . Planning English referring expressions . Ar~ificlal
Intelligence , 26(1):1-33, April 1985.
\[2\]H . H . Clark and D . Wilkes-Gibbs . Referring as a collaborative process . Cognition , 22:1-39, 1986 . 
\[3\] B . A . Goodman . Repvh'ing reference identification failures by relaxation  . In Proceeding so \] the ~3 rd Annual Meetingo \] the Association \] or Computational Linguistics  , pages 204-217 ,  1985 . 
\[4\] D . J . Litman and J . F . Allen . A plan recognition model for subdlalogues in conversations  . Cognitive Science , 11(2):16, 3-200,
April-June 1987.
\[5\] M . E . Pollack . Inferring domain plans in question-answerlng . 
Technical Note 403, SRI Interx ~ tional , 1986.
\[3\] J . Svartvik and R . Quirk . A Corpuso \] English Conversation . 
Ltmd Studies in English .  56 . C . W . K . Gleerup , Lund , 1980 . 

