Association-based Natural Language Processing
with Neural Networks
KIMURA Kazuhiro SUZUOKATakashi
AMANOS in-ya
Information Systems Laboratory
Research and Development Center
TOSHIBA Corp.
1 Komukai-T6 siba-ty 6 , Saiwai-ku , Kawasaki 210 Japan

Abstract
This paper describes a natural anguage processing system reinforced by the use of association of words and concepts  , implemented as a neural network . Combining an associative network with a conventional system contributes to semantic disambiguation i the process of interpretation  . The model is employed within a kana-kanji conversion system and the advantages over convention alones are shown  . 
1 Introduction
Currently , most practical applications in natural language processing  ( NLP ) have been realized via symbolic manipulation engines  , such as grammar parsers . However , the current trend ( and focus of research ) is shifting to consider aspects of semantics and discourse as part of NLP  . This can be seen in the emergence of new theories of language  , such as Situation Theory \[ Barwise 83\] and Discourse Representation Theory \[ Kamp 84\]  . 
While these theories provide an excellent theoretical framework for natural language understanding  , the practical treatment of context dependency within the language can also be improved by enhancing underlying component technologies  , uch as knowledge based systems . In particular , alternate approaches to symbolic manipulation provided by connectionist models \[ Rumelhart  86\] have emerged . 
Connectionist approaches enable the extraction of processing knowledge from examples  , instead of building knowledge bases manually . 
The model described here represents the unification of the connectionist approach and conventional symbolic manipulation  ; its most valuable feature is the use of word associations using neural network technology  . 
Word and concept associations appear to be central in human cognition \[ Minsky  88\]  . 
Therefore , simulating word associations contributes to semantic disambiguation i the computational process of interpreting sentences by putting a strong preference to expected words  ( meanings )  . 
The paper describes NLP reinforced by association of concepts and words via a connectionist network  . The model is employed within a NLP application system for kana-the system and advantages over conventional systems are presented  . 
2 A brief overview of kana-kanji conversion Japanese has a several interesting feature in its variety of letters  . Especially the existence of several thousand of kanji  ( based on Chinese characters ;  ~ ,  111 ,  . . ) made typing task hard before the invention of kana-kanji conversion\[Amano  79\]   . No with as become a standard method in inputting Japanese to computers  . It is also used in word processors and is familiar to those who are not computer experts  . It comes from the simpleness of operations . By only typing sentences by phonetic expressions of Japanese  ( kana )  , the kana-kanji converter automatically converts kana into meaningful expressions  ( kanji )  . The simplified mechanism of kana-kanji conversion can be described as two stages of processing : morphological analysis and homonym selection  . 
? Morphological Analysis
Kana-inputted ( fragment of ) sentences are morphologically analized through dictionary lookup  , both lexicons and grammars . There are many ambiguities in word division due to the agglutinative nature of Japanese  ( Japanese has no spaces in text )  , Each partitioning of the kana is then further open to being a possible interpretation of several alternate kanji  . 
The spoken word douki , for example , can mean motivation , pulsation , synchronization , or copper ware . All of them are spelt identically in kana ( k ? 5-~ )  , but have different kanji eharacters ( ~ , ~' t -~ ,  ~\ ]  ,   ~1   1 Many commercial products use kana-kanji conversion technology in Japan  , including the TOSHIBATos word-series of Japanese word processors  . 
~-~, respectively ) . Some kana words have 10 or more possible meanings . Therefore the stage of Homonym Selection is indispensable tokana-kanji conversion for the reduction of homonyms  . 
Homonym Selection
Preferable semantic homonyms are selected according to the cooccurrence restrictions and selectional restrictions  . 
The frequency of use of each word is also taken into account  . Usually , the selection is also reinforced by a simple context holding mechanism  ; when homonyms appear in previous discourse and one of them is chosen by a user  , the word is automatically memorized in the system as in a cache technology  . Then , when the same homonyms appear the memorized word is selected as the most preferred candidate and is shown to the user  . 
3 Assoc iat ion-based kana-kanji convers ion The above mechanisms are simple and effective in regarding kana-kanji converter as a typing aid  . However , the abundance of homonyms in Japanese contributes to many of the ambiguities and a user is forced to choose the desired kanji from many candidates  . To reduce homonym ambiguities a variety of techniques are available  ; however , these tend to be limited from a semantic disambiguation perspective  . In using word cooccurrence restrictions , it is necessary to collect a large amount of cooccurrence phenomena  , a practically impossible task . In the case of the use of selectional restrictions  , an appropriate thesaurus is necessary but it is known that defining the conceptual hierarchy is difficult work \[ Lenat  89\]\[EDR   90\]  . Techniques for storing previous kanji selections ( cache )   .   . . . . . . . . .   . . . . . . j ',,'- . . / ~ \ ~ ~ \ ',, " t . . ~ 2"~J ~ ' , , " - ~ Figure 1: Kana-Kanji Conversion with a Neural Network are too simple to disambiguate between possible previou selections for the same homonym with respect othe context or between context switches  . 
To avoid these problems without increasing computational costs  , we propose the use of the associative functionality of neural networks  . 
The use of association is a natural extension to the conventional context holding mechanism  . 
The idea is summarized as follows . There are two stages of processing : network generation and kana-kanji conversion  . 
A network representing the strength of word association is automatically generated from real documents  . Real documents can be con-sidered as training data because they are made of correctly converted kanji  . Each node in the network uniquely correspond to a word entry in the dictionary of kana-kanji conversion  . Each node has an activation level . 
The link between nodes is a weighted link and represents the strength of association between words  . The network is a Hopfield-type network\[Hopfield 84\]  ; links are bidirectional and a network is one layered  . 
When the user chooses a word from homonym candidates  , a certain value is inputted to the node corresponding to the chosen word and the node will be activated  . The activation level of nodes connected to the activated node will be then activated  . In this manner , the activation spreads over the net-the network can be considered as the associative words in that context  . In kana-kanji conversion , the converter decides the preference of word order for homonyms in the given context by comparing the node activation level of each node of homonyms  . An example of the method is shown in Figure 1 . 
Assume the network is already built from certain documents  . A user is inputting a text whose topic is related to computer hardware  . 
In the example , words like clock(~t ~ . ~ ~  ) and signal ( 4~'-~- ) already appear in the previous context , so their activation levels are relatively high . When the word DOUKI ( ~" )  ~ ) is inputted in kana and the conversion starts , the activation level of synchronization ( ~J  ~ ) is higher than that of other candidates due to its relationship to clock or signal  . The input douk is then correctly converted into synchronization  ( \[~ jtj\] )  . 
The advantages of our method are : * The method enables kanji to be given based on a preference related to the current context  . Alternative kanji selections are not discarded but are just given a lower context weighing  . Should the context switch , the other possible selections will obtain a stronger context preference  ; this strategy allows the system to capably handle context change  . 
* Word preferences of a user are reflected in the network  . 
? The correctness of the conversion is improved without high-cost computation such as semantic /discourse analyses  . 
4 Implementation
The system was built on Toshiba AS-4000 workstation ( Sun4 compatible machine ) using C . The system configuration is shown in Figure 2 . 
The left hand side of the dashed line represents an offline network building process  . The right hand side represents a kana-kanji conversion process reinforced with a neural network handler  . The network is used by the neural network handler and word associations are done in parallel with kana-kanji conversion  . The kana-kanji converter receives kana-sequences from a user  . It searches the dictionary for lexical and grammatical information and finally creates a list of possible homonym candidates  . Then the neural network handler is requested for activation levels of homonyms  . 
After the selection of preferred homonyms , it shows the candidates in kanji to a user . When the user chooses the desired one , the chosen word information is sent to the neural network handler through a homonym choice interface and the corresponding node is activated  . 
The roles and the functions of main components are described as follows  . 
* Neural Network Generator
Several real documents are analyzed and the network nodes and the weights of links are automatically decided  . The documents consist of the mixture of kana and kanji  ; homonyms for the kanji within the given context are also provided  . The documents , therefore , can be seen as training data for the neural network  . The analysis proceeds through the following steps . 
1 . Analyze the documents morphologically and convert into a sequence of words  . Note that particles and demonstratives are ignored because they have no characteristics in word association  . 
2 . Count up the frequency of the all combination of co-appeared word pair in a paragraph and memorize 



Lex . lcons ?1 ~ ammarshiragana sequelt ce 4
IKana . Kaq/i -! activation levels o1" neurons homonym candl dates fink an J $ ) act lvet ~ ng choeen neurons
Figure 2: System Configuration ! ~.. j
I , u . #' ~ i them as the strength of connection.
A paragraph is recognized only by a format information of documents  . 
3 . Sum up the strength of connection for each word pair  . 
4 . Regularize the training data ; this involves removing low occurrences ( noise ) and partitioning the frequency range in order to obtain a monotonically decreasing  ( infrequency ) training set . 
Although the network data have only positive links and not all nodes are connected  , non-connected nodes are assumed to be connected by negative weights so that the Hopfield conditions\[Hopfield  84\] are satisfied . 
As described above , the technique used here is a morphological and statistical analysis  . Actually this module is a pattern learning of co -appearing words in a paragraph  . 
The idea behind of this approach is that words that appear together in a paragraph have some sort of associative connection  . By accumulating them , pairs without such relationships will be statistically rejected  . 
From a practical point of view , automated network generation is inevitable . Since human word association differ by individ -ciative network is not realistic  . Because the training data for the network is supposed to be supplied by users ' documents in our system  , automatic network generation mechanism is necessary even if the generated network is somewhat inaccurate  . 
? Neural Network Handler
The role of the module is to recall the total patterns of co-appearing words in a paragraph from the partial patterns of the current paragraph given by a user  . 
The output value Oj for each node j is calculated by following equations  . 
Oj = f ( nj ) nj = ( 1 - 5 ) n j+6 ( ZwjiOi-11-Ij ) i where f : a sigmoidal function : a real number e presenting the inertia of the network  ( 0 < ~ < 1 )  . 
nj : input value to nodej.
Ij : external input value to nodej.
wjl : weight of a link from node i to node j ; Wji----Wij , Wii . ~ O . 
The external input value Ij takes a certain positive value when the word corresponding to node j is chosen by a user  . 
Otherwise zero.
Although the module is software implemented , it is fast enough to follow tile typing speed of a user  .   2 ? Kana-Kanji Converter 2A certain opt infization technique is used respect -ing for the spm-seness of the network  . 
Tile basic algorithm is almost same as the convention alone  . The difference is that holnonym candidates are sorted by the activation levels of the corresponding nodes in the network  , except when local constraints such as word cooccurrence restrictions are applicable to the candidates  . The associative information also affects the preference decision of grammatical ambiguities  . 
5 Evaluation
To evaluate tile method , we tested the implemented sytem by doing kana -kanji conversion for real documents  . The training data and tested data were taken from four types of documents : business letters  , personal et-ters , news articles , and technical articles . The amount of training data and tested data was over  100  , 000 phrases and 10 , 000 phrases respectively , for each type of document . The measure for accuracy of conversion was a reduction ratio  ( RR ) of the homonym choice operations of a user . For comparison , we also evaluated the reduction ratio ( RR  ~ ) of the kana-kanji conversion with a conventional context holding mechanism  . 
RR = ( A-B)/A
RR '=( A-C)/A whe1:e
A : number of clmice operations required when an untrained kana-kanji converter was used  . 
B : number of choice operations required when a NN -trained kana-kanji converter was used  . 
C : n unlber of choice operations required when a kana-kanji converter with a conventional context holding mechanism was used  . 
Tile result is shown in Table 1 . The advantages of our method is clear for each type document-type RR  ( % ) RR ' ( % ) business letters 41 . 8 32 . 6 personal letters 20 . 7 12 . 7 news articles 23 . 4 12 . 2 technical articles 45 . 6 40 . 7 of documents . Especially , it is notable that the advantages in business letter field is prominent  , because more than 80% of word processor users write business letters . 
6 Discussion
Although the result of conversion test is satisfactory  , word associations by neural network are not humanlike ones yet  . Following is a list of improvements that many further enhance the system : ? Improvements for generating a network 
The quality of the network depends on how to reduce noisy word occurrence in the network from the point of view of association  . The existence of noisy words is inevitable in automatic generation but plays a role to make unwanted associations  . One approach to reducing noisy words is to identify those words which are context independent and remove them from the network generation stage  . The identification can be based on word categories and meanings  . In most cases , words representing very abstract concepts are noisy because they force unwanted activations in unrelated contexts  . Therefore they should be detected through experiments  . Another problem arises because of the ambiguity of morphological analysis  . Word extraction from real documents is not always correct because of the agglutinative nature of the Japanese language  . Other possibility for network improvement is to consider a syntactic relationship or cooccurrence rlationship while deciding link weights  . In addition , there are keywords in a document in general which play a central role in association  . They will be reflected in a network more in consideration of technical terms  . 
Preference decision in kana-kanji conversion The reinforcement of associative information complicates the decision of homonym preference in kana-kanji conversion  . We already have several means of semantic disambiguation of homonyms : cooccurrence restrictions and selectional restrictions  . As building a complete thesaurus is very difficult  , our thesaurus is still not enough to select the correct meaning  ( kanfi-conversion ) of kana-written word . So selectional restrictions should be weak constraints in homonym selection  . In the same vein , associative information should be considered a weak constraint because associations by neural networks are not always reliable  . Possible conflict between selectional restrictions and associative information  , added to tile grammatical mbiguities remaining in the stage of homonym selection  , make kanji selection very complex . The problem of multiply and weakly constrained yet found the best solution  . 
7 Conclusion
This paper described an association based natural language processing and its application to kana  . kanji conversion . We showed advantages of the method over the convention alone through the experiments  . After the improvements discussed above , we are planning to develop a neuro-word processor available in commercial use  . We are also planning the application of the method to other fields including machine translations and discourse analyses for natural anguage interface to computers  . 
References \[ Amano 79\] \[Barwise 83\] \[ EDR 90\] \[ Hopfield 84\] \[ Kamp 84\] 
Kawada , T . and Amano , S . , " Japanese Word Processor , "
Proc . IJCAI-79, pp . 466-468, 1979.
Barwise , J . and Perry , J . , " Sit-uations and Attitudes , " MIT
Press , 1983.
Japan Electronic Dictionary
Research Institute , " Concept Dictionary , " Tech.
Rep . No . 027, 1990.
Hopfield , J ., " Neurons with
Graded Response Have Collective Computational Properties Like Those of Two-State 
Neurons , " Proc . Natl . Acad.
Sci . USA 81, pp . 3088-3092, 1984.
Kamp , H .," A Theory of
Truth and Semantic Representation , " in Groenen dijket\[Lenat 89\] \[ Minsky 88\] \[ Rumelhart 86\] \ [ Waltz 85\] al ( eds . ) " Truth , Interpretation and Information ", 1984 . 
Lenat , D . and Guha , R . , " Building Large Knowledge-
Based Systems : Representation and Inference in the Cyc Project  , " Addison-
Wesley , 1989.
Minsky , M ., " The Society Of
Mind , ", Simongz Schuster
Inc ., 1988.
Rumelhart , D ., McClell and,
J ., and the PDP Research
Group , " Parallel Distributed
Processing : Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition  , " MIT Press ,  1986 . 
Waltz , D . and Pollack , J . , " Massively Parallel Parsing:
A Strongly Interactive Model of Natural Language Interpretation  , " Cognitive Science , pp . 


