ONTHEINTONATION OF MONO-AND DI-SYLLABICWORDS WITHINTHE 
DISCOURSE FRAME WORKO FCON VERS ATION ALGAMES
Jacqueline C . Kowtko *
Human Communication Research Centre
University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh EH89 LWSCOTLAND
Internet : J . Kowtko@edinburgh.ac.uk
Abstract
Recent studies on the analysis of intonational function examinear an ~ of materials from cue phrases in monologue  ( Litman and Hirschberg , 1990) and dialogue ( Hirschberg and Litman , 1987; Hockey ,  1991 ) to longer utterances in both monologue and dialogue  ( McLemore ,  1991) . Results match specific intonational tunes to certain discourse functions which are more or less well defined  . Although these results make a convincing case that intonation does signal a change in discourse structure  , the specification of discourse function remains vague  . A suitable taxonomy is needed to finetune the relationship between intonation and discourse function  . A recent analysis of dialogue ( Kowtko et al ,  1991 ) provides a framework of conversational games which allows more finegrained examination of prosodic function  . The current paper introduces an intonational nalysis of mono - and disyllabic words based upon such a framework and compares results in progress with previous work on intonation  . 
Introduction
Recent approaches to the analysis of intonational function within dialogue include an examination f the tunes carried by single-word cue phrases  ( e . g . 
now ( Hirschberg and Litman ,  1987) , okay ( Hockey ,  1991) , and others ( Litman and Hirschberg , 1990)) across different discourse situations . The literature also includes a more sweeping approach toward classifying phrase-final tunes which presents broadly generalized discourse functions for each of three types of intonational tune : phrase-final r/se  , level , and fall ( McLemore ,  1991) . Since there is currently no workable grammar of discourse  , these studies devise their own relevant discourse categories  . Hockey (1991, p . 1) reflects upon the problem , with reference to cue phrases . She states that * AUK Overseas Research Student Award provides partial support  . Thanks to my advisors Stephen Isaxd and D . Robert Ladd for comments on drafts . 
cue phrases . . . convey information about the structure of a discourse rather than contributing to the semantic ontent of a sentence  .   .   .   . Context and prosody are major factors contributing to differences in interpretation among various instances of a cue phrase  . In order to investigate the connection between prosodic features and uses of a cue phrase  , uses must be identified . 
The above is partly a response to Himchberg and Litman  ( 1987 ; Litman and Hirschberg ,  1990 ) who limit their description to a binary discourse /sentential distinction  . Litman and Hirschberg ( 1990 ) leave the analysis of cue phrase function to the interpretation of various specific discourse approaches and instead focus on validating their  ( 1987 ) prosodic model of cue phrase use with additional data from monologue  . The model specifies that a cue phrase in discourse use will occur either alone in a phrase  ( with unspecified tune ) or initially in a larger phrase ( de accented or with a low tone )  . Thus , Litman and Hirschbergleave open the question of how their prosodic model could further specify discourse function  . 
McLemore ( 1991 ) approaches discourse as structured by topics and interruptions  . Her data includes announcements given at Texas sorority meetings and conversation between members  . She finds that phrase-final tunes indicate certain general functions : rising tune connects  , level tune continues , and falling tune segments . The specifics about how each of these tunes operates depends upon the context  . For instance , phrase-final rise which indicates non-finality or connection manifests itself as turn-holding in one context  , phrase subordination i another , and intersentential cohesion in yet another context  . Likewise , the other tunes performs light variations on the function of continue and segment according to context  , which is left up to the reader to determine . 
Hockey ( 1991 ) admits to settling upon an arbitrary discourse classification and letting her data tem of analysis based upon a somewhat similar set of speech data  1  . She focuses on task oriented i-alogue and attempts to specify discourse function of the cue phrase okay  . She presents her results in terms of intonational contours and their corresponding discourse categories  , finding that they correlate with McLe more's ( 1991 ) results : 89% of rising contour occurs where the speaker was passing up a turn and letting the other person continue  ;   86% of level contour serves to continue an instruction  ;   88% of falling contour marks the end of a subtask . Buther categorization f discourse is still weak . 
Admittedly , there are a limited number of intonational tunes ( low rise , highrise , level , fall , etc . ) . But limitation in intonational tune should not force a limitation in discourse category  . Detailed understanding of intonational function is necessarily linked to a more robust view of discourse structure  . These previou studies provide good intonational analysis but within weak discourse structures  . 
Conversational Games in Dialogue
The analysis offered by Kowtko , Isard , and Doherty ( 1991 ) provides an independently defined taxonomy of discourse structure which allows a closer examination of how intonation signals speaker intention within task oriente dialogue  . In the analysis , linguistic exchanges termed conver-sational games  ( from a tradition of literature originating in Power  ( 1974 ) ) embody the initiation-response-feedback patterns which relate to underlying nonlinguistic goals  . It is through the framework of games and their components  , conversational moves , that the intonation of mono - and disyllabic words can be compared with their discourse function  , as intended by the speaker . 
A conversational game is defined as consisting of the turns necessary to accomplish a conversational goal or subgoal  . The initiating utterance determines which game is being played and is similar to the core speech act in Traum and Allen  ( 1991 )  . The ensuing response and feedback moves function as presentation and acceptance phases  , in the terms of Clark and Schaefer (1987) . Implicit , mutually agreed rules dictate the shape of a game and what constitutes an acceptable move within a game  . These rules embody procedural , as opposed to declarative , knowledge which speakers employ in everyday conversation  . 
~ Hockey had hoped to map discourse categories of okay based upon data collected from conversation at a library reference desk to that arising from a task in which one person described a design for another person to make out of paper clips  . 

The repertoire of games and moves in Kowtko , Isard and Doherty ( 1991 ) is based upon a map task ( see Anderson et al ,  1991 , for a detaile de-scription ) : One person is given a map with a path marked on it and has to tell another person how to draw the path onto a similar map  . Neither participant can see the other's map . 
The nature of the map task is such that from the conversations the speaker's intentions remain fairly obvious  . Kowtko , Isard , and Doherty ( 1991 ) report that one expert and three naive judges agree on an average of  83% of the moves classified in two map task dialogues  . Six games appear in the dialogues : Instruction , Confirmation , Question-YN , Question-W , Explanation , and Alignment . They are initiated by the following moves : INSTRUCT  ( Provides instruction )  , CHECK ( Elicits confirmation of known information )  , QUERY-YN ( Asks yesno question for unknown information )  , QUERY-W(Asks content , wh- , question for unknown information ) , EX-PLAIN ( Gives unelicite description ) , and ALIGN ( Checks alignment of position in task ) . 
Six other moves provide response and additional feedback : CLARIFY  ( Clarifies or rephrases given information )  , REPLY-Y ( Responds affirmatively) , REPLY-N ( Responds negatively) , REPLY-W ( Responds with requested information ) , AC-KNOWLEDGE ( Acknowledges and requests continuation )  , and READY ( Indicates intention to begin a new game )  . 
Since the map task involves in structing one player on how to draw a path  , the conversation naturally consists of many Instruction games  . The structure of games allows for nesting of games and looping of response and feedback moves within games ~ The prototypical game consists of two or three moves : Initiation  , Response , and optionally Feedback . The large majority of games ( 84% from a sample of 3 dialogues , n = 65) match the simple prototype . Games that do not match the prototype are still wellformed  , having extra response-feedback loops , nested games , or extra moves . 
Very few games ( less than 2% ) break down as a result of a misunderstanding or other problem  . 
Here is an example of a prototypical Instruction game  . The vertical bar indicates the boundary of a move: 
A : Right ,\[\[ just draw round it.
READYI\[INSTRUCT
B : Okay.
ACK NOW LEDGE 2As a comparison with Clark and Schaefer ( 1987 ) embedded games often coincide with instances of embedded contributions in the acceptance phase  . 
Conversational game structure , offers a taxonomy which specifies both the function and context of an utterance  , as movez within game y . This facilitates the study of the function of intonational tune  , since the tune reflects an utterance's conversational role  . 
Intonation in Games
Using data from map task dialogues ( Andersone tat . , 1091) , I have been analyzing mono - and disyllabic words which compose single moves within themselves : right  , okay , yes , no , mmhmm , and nh-huh . In addition , I am categorizing the cases where these words form part of a move  . They typically surface as 5 of the 12 moves in the games analysis ( Kowtko et at . , 1991): READY , ACK NOWL-EDGE , ALIGN , REPLY-Y , and REPLY-N . The current dataset consists of 68 utterances spoken by 3 of the 4 conversants in 2 dialogues . 
In order to comparemy results with those of McLemore  ( 1991 ) and Hockey ( 1991 )  , I have tried to collapse moves and their contexts into the three general categories : ACKNOWLEDGE move following INSTRUCT serves to connect  ; READY , ACK NOW LEDGE ( and other ) moves which interrupt an INSTRUCT ( i . e . precede a continued INSTRUCT move ) continue ; REPLY-Y , REPLY-
N , ACKNOWLEDGE after EXPLAIN , and AC-
KNOWLEDGE after a response move ( specifically elicited moves ) segment . 
The data yield the following results s : 42% of rises ( 5 of 11 ) appear as connecting moves , 30% of levels (13 of 44) as continuing moves , and 69% of falls (9 of 13) as segmenting moves . 
Only one category approaches a match to other published results  . It is possible that my decisions of which moves collapse together would not be corroborated and cause some of the disagreement  . It is also possible that dialectal variation would account for some of the difference  ( The map task contains Scott is has opposed to American English  )  , but it would be folly to wave such a hand of dismissal  . These results reflect an intonation-based approach  . Information may be lost in the process of collapsing various discourse contexts into three intonational categories  ( McLemore ,  1991 ) and then limiting discourse categories to match those three existing intonational categories  ( Hockey ,  1991) . Separate discourse categories , in a discourse-based approach , should facilitate cleare results . 
When categorized according to move and discourse context  , the data begins to speak on its 3p > . 20 for each result , according to the Kolmogorov-Smirnov One-sample Test  , indicate sta-tistical non-significance . 
284 own . Granted , the numbers for each category are currently small and not statistically reliable  , but some trends are striking and sugges that more data will prove to yield interesting results  . For example , of 15 REPLY-Y/N moves ,  12 , or 80% , are levels , the 3 others being falls in a single category , REPLY-Yafter QUERY-YN . All 4 cases of REPLY-Y after ALIGN are high levels , while REPLY-Y/N after QUERY-YN are mostly low levels  ( 6 of 8 )  . 
Work is progressing on other dialogues , a mass-ing enough pitch trace data to allow clear patterns to emerge for each type of move in each game context  . The goal is , given a discourse context , to be able to predict an utterance's function or move  , given the intonation , and , conversely , predict intonational tune , given the type of move . 
References
Anderson , Anne H . , Miles Bader , Ellen G . Bard , Elizabeth Boyle , Gwyneth Doherty , Simon Car-rod , Stephen Isard , Jacque Une Kowtko , Jan Me Allister , Jim Miller , Catherine Sotillo , Henry Thompson , and Regina Weinert (1991) . The HCRC Map Task Corpus . Language and Speech , 34(4):351-366 . 
Clark , Herbert H . and Edward F . Schaefer (1987) . 
Collaborating on contributions to conversations.
Language and Cognitive Processes , 2(1):19-41.
Hirsehberg , Julia and Diane Litman (1987) . Now let's talk about no ~ Identifying cue phrases intonationally  . Proceedings of the ~5th annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , 
Stanford , 163-171.
Hockey , Beth Ann (1991) . Prosody and the interpretation of " okay " . Presented at the AAAIF all
Symposium , Monterey , CA , November.
Kowtko , Jacqueline , Stephen Isard and Gwyneth Doherty (1991) . Conversational games within dialogue . Proceedings of the ESPRIT Workshop on Discourse Coherence  , Edinburgh , April . To appear as an HCRC Research Report , Human Communication Research Centre , Edinburgh ,  1992 . 
Litman , Diane and Julia Hirschberg (1990) . Disambiguating cue phrases in text and speech . 
COLING90 Proceedings , Helsinki , 251-256.
McLemore , Cynthia A (1991) . The Pragmatic Interpretation of English Intonation : Sorority Speech  . Ph . D . dissertation , University of Texas at Austin . 
Power , Richard (1974) . A Computer Model of Conversation . Ph . D . dissertation , University of

Traum , David R . and James F . Allen (1991) . Conversation Actions . Proceedings of the AAA1 Fall Symposium , Monterey , CA , November ,  114-119 . 
