CONNECTION RELATIONS AND QUANTIFIERS COPE
Long-in Latecki
University of Hamburg
Department of Computer Science
Bodenstedtstr ~16 , 2000 Hamburg 50 , German yemail : latecki@rz . informatik . uni-hamburg . dbp . de

A formalism will be presented in this paper which makes it possible to realise the idea of assigning only one scope-ambiguous representation to a sentence that is ambiguous with regard to quantifier scope  . The scope determination results in extending this representation with additional context and world knowledge conditions  . If there is no scope determining information , the formalism can work further with this scope -ambiguous representation  . Thus scope information does not have to be completely determined  . 
0. INTRODUCTION
Many natural language sentences have more than one possible reading with regard to quantifier scope  . The most widely used methods for scope determination generate all possible readings of a sentence with regard to quantifier scope by applying all quantifiers which occur in the sentence in all combinatorically possible sequences  . These methods do not make use of the inner structure and meaning of a quantifier  . At best , quantifiers are constrained by external conditions in order to eliminate some scope relations  . The best known methods are : determination f scope in LF in GB  ( May 1985 )  , Cooper Storage ( Cooper 1983 , Keller 1988 ) and the algorithm of Hobbs and Shieber ( Hobbs/Shieber 1987 )  . These methods assign , for instance , six possible readings to a sentence with three quantifiers  . Using these methods , a sentence must be disambiguated in order to receive a semantic representation  . This means that a scope-ambiguous sentence necessarily has several semantic representations  , since the formalisms for the representation do not allow for scope-ambiguity  . 
It is hard to imagine that human beings disambiguate scope-ambiguous sentences in the same way  . The generation of all possible combinations of sequences of quantifiers and the assignment of these sequences to various reading seems to be cognitively inadequate  . 
The problem becomes even more complicated when natural language quantifiers can be interpreted distributively as well as collectively  , which can also lead to further readings . Let us take the following sentence from Kemps on /Cormack  ( 1981 ) as an example:
Two examiners marked six scripts.
The two quantifying noun phrases can in this case be interpreted either distributively or collectively  . The quantifier two examiners can have wide scope over the quantifier six scripts  , or vice versa , which all in all can lead to various readings . Kempson and Cormack assign four possible readings to this sentence  , discussion will follow . ) No one , however , will make the claim that people will first assign all possible representations with regard to the scope of the quantifiers and their distribution  , and will then eliminate certain interpretations according to the context  ; but this is today's standard procedure in linguistics  . In many cases , it is also almost impossible to determine a preferred reading  . 
The difficulties that people have when they are forced to disambiguate such sentences  ( to explicate all possible readings ) point to the fact that people only assign an under determined scope-ambiguous representation in the first place  . 
Such a representation of the example sentence would only contain the information that we are dealing with a marking-relation between examiners and scripts  , and that we are always dealing with two examiners and six scripts  . This representation does not contain any information about scope  . On the basis of this representation e may in a given context derive a representation with a determined scope  . But it may also be the case that this information is sufficient in order to understand the sentence if no scope-defining information is given in the context  , since in many cases human beings do not disambiguate such sentences at all  . They use under determined , scopeless interpretations , because their knowledge often need not be so precise  . If a disambiguation is carried out , then this process is done in a very natural way on the basis of context and world knowledge  . This points to the assumption that scope determination by human beings is performed on a semantic level and is deduced on the basis of acquired knowledge  . 
I will present a formalism which works in a similar way  . This formalism will also show that it is not necessary to work with many sequences of quantifiers in order to determine the various readings of a sentence with regard to quantifier scope  . 
Within this formalism it is possible to represent an ambiguous sentence with an ambiguous representation which need not be disambiguated  , but can be disambiguated at a later stage . The readings can either be specified more clearly by giving additional conditions  , or they can be deduced from the basic ambiguous reading by inference  . Here , the inner structure and the meaning of quantifiers play an important role  . The process of disambiguation can only be performed when additional information that restricts the number of possible readings is available  . As an example of such information , I will treat anaphoric relations . 
Intuitively speaking , the difference between assigning an under termined representation to an ambiguou sentence and assigning a disjunction of all possible readings to this sentence corresponds to the difference between the following statements *:" Peter owns between  150 and 200 books . " and " Peterowns 150 or 151 or 152 or . . . or 200 books . "
It goes without saying that both statements are equivalent  , since we can understand "150 or 151 or . . . or 200" as a precise specification of " between 150 and 200"  . 
Nevertheless , there are procedural differences in processing the two pieces of information  ; and there are cognitive differences for human beings  , since we would never explicitly utter the second sentence  . If we could represent " between 150 and 200" directly by a simple formula and not by giving a disjunction of  51 elements , then we may certainly gain great procedural and representational advantages  . 
The deduction of readings in semantics does not of course exclude a consideration of syntactic restrictions  . They can be imported into the semantics , for example by passing syntactic information with special indices  , as * The comparison stems from Christopher

242 described in Latecki (1991) . Nevertheless , in this paper I will abstain from taking syntactic restrictions into consideration  . 
1. SCOPE-AMBIGUOUS
REPRESENTATION ANDSCOPE

The aims of the representation presented in this paper are as follows:  1  . Assigning an ambiguous semantic representation to an ambiguous sentence  ( with regard to quantifier scope and distributivity  )  , from which further readings can later be inferred . 
2 . The connections between the subject and objects of a sentence are explicitly represented by relations  . The quantifiers ( noun phrases ) constituter strictions on the domains of these relations  . 
3 . Natural language sentences have more than one reading with regard to quantifier scope  ( and distributivity )  , but these readings are not independent of one another  . The target representation makes the logical dependencies of the readings easily discernible  . 
4 . The construction of complex discourse referents for anaphoric processes requires the construction of complex sums of existing discourse referents  . In conventional approaches , this can lead to a combinatorical explosion ( cf . Eschenbach et al . 1989 and 1990) . 
In the representation which is presented here , the discourse referents are immediately available as domains of the relations  . 
Therefore , we need not construe any complex discourse referents  . Sometimes we have to specify a discourse referent in more detail  , which in turn can lead to a reduction in the number of possible readings  . 
I now present the formalism.
The representational language used here is second -order pedicate logic  . However , I will mainly use set-theoretical notation ( which can be seen as an abbreviation of the corresponding otation of second-order logic  )  . I choose this notation because it points to the semantic ontent of the formulas and is thus more intuitive  . 
Let R ~ X x Y be a relation , that means , a subset of the product of the two sets X and Y . 
The domains of R will be called DomR and
Range R , with
DomR = x~X : 3y ~ YR(x , y ) and
Range R = y ~ Y : 3x ~ XR(x , y).
I make the explicit assumption here that all relations are not empty  .   ( This assumption only serves in this paper to make the examples simpler  . ) In the formalism , a verb is represented by a relation whose domain is defined by the arguments of verbs  . Determiners constitute restrictions on the domains of the relation  . 
These restrictions correspond to the role of determiners in Barwise's and Cooper's theory of generalized quantifiers  ( Barwise and Cooper 1981 )  . This means for the following sentence : (1 . 1) Everyboys awamovie . 
that there is a relation of seeing between boys and movies  . 
In the formal notation of second-order logic we can describe this piece of information as follows  :   ( 1 . 1 . a ) 3X2 ( Vxy(X2(x , y ) ~ Saw(x , y)&
Boy(x ) & M0 vie(y )))
X 2 is a second-order variable over the domain of the binary predicates  ; and Saw , Boy , and Movie are second-order constants which represent a general relation of seeing  , the set of all boys , and the set of all movies , respectively . We will abbreviate the above formula by the following set-theoretical formula : In this formula  , we views a was a sorted variable of the sort of the binary seeing-relations  . The variable saw corresponds to the variable X2 in ( 1 . 1 . a) . 
(1 . 1 . b ) describes an incomplete semantic representation of sentence  ( 1 . 1) . Part of the certain knowledge that does not determine scope in the case of sentence  ( 1 . 1 ) is also the information that all boys are involved in the relation  , which is easily describable as : Dom saw=Boy . We obtain this information from the denotation of the determiner every  . 
In this way we have arrived at the scope-ambiguous representation f  ( 1 . 1): (1 . 1 . c ) 3 saw(saw ~ Boyx Movie &
Domsaw = Boy)
It may be that the information presented in (1 . 1 . c ) is sufficient for the interpretation of sentence ( 1 . 1) . A precise determination of quantifier scope need not be important at all  , since it may be irrelevant whether each boys awa different movie  ( which corresponds to the wide scope of the universal quantifier  ) or whether all boys saw the same movie ( which corresponds to the wide scope of the existential quantifier  )  . 
Classic procedures will in this case immediately generate two readings with definite scope relations  , whose notations in predicate logic are given below  . 
(1 . 2 . a)Vx(boy(x)--~3y(movie(y ) & saw(x,y ))) (1 . 2 . b)3y ( movie(y ) & Vx ( boy(x)--~saw(x , y ) ) ) We can also obtain these representations iour formalism by simply adding new conditions to  ( 1 . 1 . c ), which force the disambigiuation of (1 . 1 . c ) with regard to quantifier scope . To obtain reading (1 . 2 . b ) , we must come to know that there is only one movie  , which can be formaly writen by IR angesaw I = 1 , where I . I denotes the cardinality function . To obtain reading (1 . 2 . a ) from (1 . 1 . c ) , we do not need any new information , since the two formulas are equivalent . This situation is due to the fact that (1 . 2 . b ) implies (1 . 2 . a ), which means that (1 . 2 . b ) is a special case of (1 . 2 . a ) . This relation can be easly seen by comparing the resulting formulas  , which correspond to readings (1 . 2 . a ) and (1 . 2 . b ) : (1 . 3 . a ) 3 saw ( saw cBoyxMovie &
Dom saw=Boy ) (1.3.b ) 3 saw(saw ~ Boyx Movie &
Dom saw = Boy & I Range saw I = 1)
So , we have (1.3.b ) => (1.3. a).
As I have stated above , however , it is not very useful to disambiguate representation  ( 1 . 1 . c ) immediately . It makes more sense to leave representation (1 . 1 . c ) unchanged for further processing , since it may be that in the development a new condition may appear which determines the scope  . For instance , we can obtain the additional condition in (1 . 3 . b ), when sentence (1 . 1 ) is followed by a sentence containing a pronoun refering to a movie  , as in sentence (1 . 4) . 
(1.4) It was " Gone with the Wind ".
Since it refers to a movie , the image of the saw-relation ( a subset of the set of movies ) can contain only one element . Thus , the resolution of the reference results in an extension of representation  ( 1 . 1 . c ) by the condition IR angesawI=1 . Therefore , we get in this case only one reading (1 . 3 . b ) as a representation f sentence (1 . 1) , which corresponds to wide scope of the existential quantifier  . Thus in the context of (1 . 4) we have disambiguated sentence (1 . 1 ) with regard to quantifier scope without having first generated all possible readings  ( in our case these were ( 1 . 2 . a ) and (1 . 2 . b)) . 

Let us now assume that sentence (1 . 5) follows (1 . 1) . 
(1.5) All of them were made by Walt Disney

Syntactic theories alone are of no help here for finding the correct discourse referent for them in sentence  ( 1 . 1) , since there is no number agreement between them and a movie  . 
The plural noun them , however , refers to all movies the boys have seen . This causes great problems for standard anaphora theories and plural theories  , since there is no explicit object of reference to which them could refer  ( cf . 
Eschenbach et al1990; Link 1986) . Thus , the usual procedure would be to construe a complex reference object as the sum of all movies the boys have seen  . With my representation , we do not need such procedures because the discourse referents are always available  , namely as domains of the relations . In the context of (1 . 1) and (1 . 5), the pronoun them ( just as it in (1 . 4)) refers to the image of the relation saw , which additionally serves the purpose of determining the quantifier scope  . 
Here , just as in the preceding cases , the representation (1 . 1 . c ) has to be seen as the " starting representation " of  ( 1 . 1) . The information that them is a plural noun is represented by the condition IR angesaw I >  1  , which in turn leads to the following representation :  ( 1 . 6)3 saw(saw ~ BOyx Movie &
Dom saw = Boy & I Range saw I > 1)
The representation (1 . 6 ) is not ambiguous with regard to quantifier scope . The universal quantifier has widescope over the whole sentence  , due to the condition IR angesaw I > 1 . 
The reading presented in (1 . 6) is a further specification of (1 . 3 . a ), which at the same time excludes reading (1 . 3 . b ) . Thus (1 . 6) contains more information that formula (1 . 2 . a ), which is equivalent to (1 . 3 . a) . 
A classical scope determining system can only choose one of the readings  ( 1 . 2 . a ) and (1 . 2 . b ) . However , if it chooses (1 . 2 . a ) , it will not w in any new information , since (1 . 2 . b ) is a special case of (1 . 2 . a ) . So , quantifier scope cannot be completely determined by such a system  . 
In order to indicate further advantages of this representation formalism  , let us take a look at the following sentence ( cf . Link 1986): (1 . 7) Everyboy saw a different movie . 
Its representation is generated in the same way as that of  ( 1 . 1) , the only difference being that the word different carries additional information about the relation saw  . different requires that the relation be injective  . 
Therefore , the formula (1 . 1 . c ) is extended by the condition's aw is 11' . The formula (1 . 8) thus represents the only reading of sentence (1 . 7) , in which scope is completely determined ; the universal quantifier has wide scope . 
(1.8)3 saw ( saw ~ Boyx Movie &
Domsaw=Boy & saw is 11) 2. SCOPE-AMBIGUOUS
REPRESENTATIONFOR
SENTENCES WITH NUMERIC
QUANTIFIERS
So far , I have not stated exactly how the representation fsentence  ( 1 . 1) was generated . 
In order to do so , let us take an example sentence with numeric quantifiers :  ( 2 . 1) Two examiners marked six scripts . 
It is certainly not a new observation that this sentence has many interpretations with regard to quantifier scope and distributivity  , which can be summarized to a few main readings . However , their exact number is controversial . While Kempson and Cormack also Lakoff 1972) , Davies (1989) assigns eight readings to it . I quote here the readings from ( Kempson/Cormack 1981 ) :

Replace " ( Vx ~ Xn ) (3Y ) " by " ( 3Y ) (Vx ~ Xn ) "10 There were two examiners , and each of them marked six scripts ( subject noun phrase with wide scope )  . This interpretation could be true in a situation with two examiners and  12 scripts . 
20 There were six scripts , and each of these was marked by two examiners ( object noun phrase with wide scope )  . This interpretation could be true in a situation with twelve examiners and six scripts  . 
30 The incomplete group interpretation :
Two examiners as a group marked a group of six scripts between them  . 
4 0 The complete group interpretation : Two examiners each marked the same set of six scripts  . 
Kempson and Cormack representhese readings with the help of quantifiers over sets in the following way:  10   ( 3X2 ) (Vx ~ X2 ) (3S6 ) (Vs ~ S6 ) M xs 20 ( 3S6 ) (Vs ~ S6 ) (3X2 ) (Vx ~ X2 ) M xs 30 ( 3X2 ) (3S6 ) (Vx ~ X2 ) (Vs ~ S6 ) M xs 40 ( 3X2 ) (3S6 ) (Vx ~ X2 ) (3s ~ S6 ) M x s & ( Vs ~$6 ) (3x ~ X2 ) Mxs
Here , X 2 is a sorted variable which denotes a two-element set of examiners  , and S 6 is a sorted variable that denotes a six-element set of scripts  . 
Kemps on and Cormack derive these readings from an initial formula in the conventional way by changing the order and distributivity of quantifiers  . This fact is discernible from their derivational rules and the following quotation : 

Replace " ( 3x ~ Xn ) " by " ( Vx ~ Xn ) "" What we are proposing , then , as an alternative to the conventional ambiguity account is that all sentences of a form corresponding to  ( 42 ) \[ here:2 . 1\] have a single logical form , which is then subject to the procedure of generalising and uniformising to yield the various interpretations of the sentence in use  . "(Kempson/Cormack (1981), p .  273 ) Only in reading 40 the relation between examiners and scripts is completely characterized  . For the other formulas there are several possible assignments between examiners and scripts which make these formulas valid  . 
At this point I want to make an important observation  , namely that these four readings are not totally independent of one another  . Iam , however , not concerned with logical implications between these readings alone  , but rather with the fact that there is a piece of information which is contained in all of these readings and which does not necessitate a determinated quantifier scope  . This is the information which-cognitively speaking-can be extracted from the sentence by a listener without determining the quantifier scope  . The difficulties which people have when they are forced to disambiguate a sentence containing numeric quantifier such as  ( 2 . 1 ) without a specific on text point to the fact that only such as copeless representation is assigned to the sentence in the first place  . On the basis of this representation e can then , within a given context , derive a representation with a definite scope . We can describe the scopeless piece of information of sentence  ( 2 . 1) , which all readings have in common , as follows . We know that we are dealing with a marking - that we are always dealing with two examiners or with six scripts  . In the formalism described in this paper this piece of information is represented as:  ( 2 . 2 ) 3 mark ( markcExaminerxScript & ( I Dommark l = 2 vIRange markl--6 ) ) It may be that this piece of information is sufficient in order to understand sentence  ( 2 . 1) . 
If there is no scope-determining iformation i the given context  , people can understand the sentence just as well . If , for example , we hear the following utterance ,  (2 . 3) In preparation for our workshop , two examiners corrected six scripts . 
it may be without any relevance what the relation between examiners and scripts is exactly like  . The only important thing may be that the examiners corrected the scripts and that we have an idea about the number of examiners and the number of scripts  . 
Therefore , we have assigned an under determined scope -ambiguous representation  ( 2 . 2) to sentence (2 . 1) , which constitutes the maximum scopeless content of information of this sentence  . The lower line of (2 . 2 ) represents a scope-neutral part of the information which is contained in the meaning of the quantifiers two examiners and six scripts  . This fact indicates that the meaning of a quantifier has to be structured internally  , since a quantifier contains scope-neutral as well as scope-determining information  . Distributivity is an example of scope-determining iformation  . 
Then what happens in a context which contain scope -determining formation ? This context just provides restrictions on the domains of the relation  . These restrictions in turn contribute to scope determination  . We may , for instance , get to know in a given context hat there were twelve scripts in all  , which excludes the condition I Range mark I=6 in the disjunction of ( 2 . 2) . We then know for certain that there were two examiners and that each of them marked six different scripts  . 
Consequently , the quantifier two examiners acquires wide scope , and we are dealing with a distributive reading . Thus , in this context we have completely disambiguated sentence  ( 2 . 1) with regard to quantifier scope ; and that simply on the basis of the scopeless , incomplete representation (2 . 2) . On the other hand , standard procedures ( the most important were listed at the beginning ) first have to generate all representations of this sentence by considering all combinatorically possible scopes together with distributive and collective readings  . 
3. CONCLUDING REMARKS
A cognitively adequate method for dealing with sentences that are ambiguous with regard to quantifier scope has been described in this paper  . An under determined scope-ambiguous representation is assigned to a scope-ambiguous sentence and then extended by additional conditions from context and world knowledge  , which further specify the meaning of the sentence  . Scope determination in this procedure can be seen as a mere by product  . The quantifier scope is completely determined when the representation which was generated in this way corresponds to an interpretation with a fixed scope  . Of course , this only works if there is scope-determining information  ; if not , one continues to work with the scope-ambiguous representation  . 
I use the language of second-order predicate logic here  , but not the whole second-order logic , since I need deduction rules for scope derivation  , but not deduction rules for second-order p edicate logic  ( which cannot be completely stated )  . One could even use the formalism for scope determination alone and then translate the obtained readings into a first-order formalism  . However , the formalism lends itself very easily to semantic knowledge as well  . 

I would like to thank Christopher Habel,
Manfred Pinkal and Geoff Simmons.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barwise , Jon/Cooper , Robin (1981):
Generalized Quantifiers and Natural
Language . Linguistics and Philosophy 4, 159-219.
Cooper , Robin (1983): Quantification and Semantic Theory . D . Reidel , Dordrecht:

Davies , Martin ( 1989 ) ~" Two examiners marked six scripts . " Interpretations of Numeric-ally Quantified Sentences  . Linguistics and Philosophy 12, 293-323 . 
Eschenbach , Carola/Habel , Christopher /
Herweg , Michael/Rehk/imper , Klaus (1989): Remarks on plural anaphora . 
Proceedings of the EACL in Manchester,

Eschenbach , Carola/Habel , Christopher /
Herweg , Michael/Rehk/imper , Klaus (1990): Rekonstruktion fiir plurale
Diskurs anaphern . In S . Felix at al.
( eds . ): Sprache und Wissen . Westdeutscher Verlag , Opladen . 
Habel , Christopher (1986): Prinzipiender
Referential it/it . Imformatik Fach-berichte 122 . Springer-Verlag , Berlin . 
Habel , Christopher (1986a ): Plurals,
Cardinalities , and Structures of Determination . Proceedings of COLING-86 . 
Hobbs , Jerry R . /Shieber , Stuart M . (1987): An
Algorithm for Generating Quantifier
Scopings . Computational Linguistics,
Volume 13, Numbers 12.
Kadmon , Nirit (1987): Asymmetric
Quantification . In Groenendijk , J./
Stokhof , M ./ Veltman , F . ( eds.):
Proceedings of the Sixth Amsterdam

Keller , William R . (1988): Nested Cooper
Storage : The Proper Treatment of
Quantification in Ordinary Noun
Phrases . In U . Reyle and C . Rohrer ( eds . ) , Natural Language Parsing and Linguistic Theories ,  432-447 , D . Reidel,

Kempson , Ruth M./Cormack , Annabel (1981):
Ambiguity and Quantification.
Linguistics and Philosophy 4, 259-309.
Lakoff , George (1972): Linguistics and Natural
Logic . In Harman , G . and Davidson , D.
( eds .): Semantics of Natural Language.
Reidel , 545-665.
Latecki , Longin ( 1991 ) : An Indexing Technique for Implementing Command Relations  . 
Proceedings of the EACL in Berlin.
Link , Godehard ( 1983 ) : The logical analysis of plurals and mass terms : A lattice-theoretical pproach  . In Baeuerle , R . et al . ( eds . ), Meaning , Use , and Interpretation fLanguage . de Gruyter,
Berlin , 302-323.
Link , Godehard (1986): Generalized
Quantifiers and Plurals . In G/irdenfors,
P . ( ed .): Generalized Quantifiers:
Studies in Lingusitics and Philosophy.
Dordrrecht , The Netherlands , Reidel.
May , Robert (1985): Logical form . Its Structure and Derivation . Linguistic Inquiry
Monographs . The MIT Press : Cambridge


