INFERRING DISCOURSERELATION SINCONTEXT*
Alex Lascarides
Human Communication
Research Centre,
University of Edinburgh,
2 Buccleuch Place , Edinburgh
alex@cogsc ?, ed.ac.uk
Nicholas Asher
Center for Cognitive Science,
University of Texas,
Austin , Texas 78712
asher@cgs , utex as , edu
: I on Oberlander
Human Communication
Research Centre,
University of Edinburgh,
2 Buccleuch Place , Edinburgh
jonecogec ?, ed.ac.uk

We investigate various contextual effects on text interpretation  , and account for them by providing contextual constraints in a logical theory of text interpretation  . On the basis of the way these constraints interact with the other knowledge sources  , we draw some general conclusions about the role of domain-specific information  , topdown and bot-tom-up discourse information flow  , and the usefulness of formalisation in discourse theory  . 
Introduction : Time Switching and Amelior at i on T wo essential parts of discourse interpretation i-volve  ( i ) determining the rhetorical role each sentence plays in the text  ; and ( ii ) determining the temporal relations between the events described  . 
Preceding discourse context has significant effects on both of these aspects of interpretation  . For example , text ( 1 ) invacuo may be a non-iconic explanation ; the pushing caused the falling and so explains why Max fell  . But the same pair of sentences may receive an iconic  , narrative interpretation i the discourse context provided by  ( 2 ) : John takes advantage of Max's vulnerability while he is lying the ground  , to push him over the edge of the cliff . 
(1) Maxfell . John pushed him.
(2) John and Maxcame to the cliff's edge . John applied a sharp blow to the back of Max's neck  . Maxfell . John pushed him . Maxrolled over the edge of the cliff . 
a The support of the Science and Engineering Research Council through project number  GR/G22077 is gratefully acknowledged . HCRC is supported by the Economic and Soci M Research Council  . We thank two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments  . 
Moreover , the text in (3) invacuo is incoherent , but becomes coherent in (4)'s context . 
(3) (4) ? Maxw on the race in record time . He was home with the cup . 
Max gotupearly yesterday . He had a little bite to eat . He had a light work out . He started the tournament in good form . He wonther a ce in record time . He was home with the cup . He celebrated until late into the evening . 
So we can see that discourse context can time switch our interpretation of sentence pairs  , ( cf . 
(1) and (2)); and it canamelior ateit , ( cf . (4)'s improvement of (3)) . The purpose of this paper is twofold : we attempt ocapture formally these aspects of discourse context's impact on clausal attachment  ; and in the process , we assess whether the structure of the domain being described might be sufficient alone to account for the phenomena  . 
Of course , the idea that discourse context constrains the discourse role assigned to the current clause is by no means new  . Reference resolution is influenced by discourse structure  ( cf . Grosz and Sidner 1986:188 for a very clear case) ; and it in turn influences discourse structure . Now , on the one hand , Polanyi and Scha (1984) , Hobbs (1985) , and Thompson and Mann ( 1987 ) have argued that ' genre ' or ' rhetorical schemata ' can influence the relations used in discourse attachment  . On the other hand , Sibun ( 1992 ) has recently argued that domain-specific nformation  , as opposed to domain-independent rhetorical information  , plays the central role . Both ideas are intriguing , but so far only the latter has been specified in sufficient detail to assess how it works in general  , and neither has been applied to time switching or amelioration in particular  . 
We limit our discussion to temporal aspects of discourse interpretation  ; our strategy here is to explore two possible contextual constraints  ; these state how the discourse context filters the set of discourse relations and temporal relations which may be used to attach the current clause to the representation f the text so far  . We then frame contextual constraints in a logical theory of text interpretation  , where their effects and interactions can be precisely calculated  . We therefore first introduce a domain-specific contextual constraint  , following Sibun , and then place it in a formal theory of discourse attachment called DICE  , developed in Lascarides and Asher (1991a ) . We then show how the proposed domain-constraint is insufficient  , and demonstrate how it can be augmented by adding arhetorical  , or presentational constrain to the theory . 
Constraints from the
Domain Context
In the field of NL generation , Sibun ( 1992 ) has recently argued that coheren text must have a structure closely related to the domain structure of its subject matter  ; naturally , her remarks are also relevant oNL interpretation  . She pursues a view that task structure , or more generally , domain structure , is sufficient o account for many discourse phenomena  ( but cf . Grosz and Sidner 1986:182) . She examines in detail the generation of paragraph-lengthexts describing the layout of a house  . Houses have structure , following from a basic relation of spatial proximity  , and there are also hierarchical levels to the structure  ( rooms can be listed without describing what's in them  , or the objects within each room can be detailed ) . 
Either way , one constraint on text structure is defined in terms of the description'strajectory : the spatial direction the description moved in the domain  , to get from the objects already described to the current one  . The constraint is : don't change trajectory . Sibun argues that in the temporal domain , the basic relation is temporal proximity . 
But Lascarides and Oberlander ( 1992a ) urge that the temporal coherence of text is characterised in terms of  , among other things , the stronger basic relation of causal proximity . So in the latter domain , Sibun's domain constraint precludes textual descriptions which procede from a cause to an effect to a further cause of that effect  , or from effect to cause to effect . 
This Maintain Causal Trajectory ( MCT ) con-straint has two important attributes : first  , it is domain-specific ; secondly , it introduces into discourse interpretation an element of topdown processing  . To investigate these properties , and see how far they go towards explaining discourse times witch  , and discourse a melioration , we now incorporate MCT into DICE's formal model of discourse structure  , where its interaction with other causal information and strategies for interpretation can be precisely calculated  . 
Discourse Interpretation and
Common sense Entailment
DICE ( Discourse and C_ommon sense Entailment ) starts with traditional discourse representation structures  ( cf . Kamp 1981) , but goes on to assume with Grosz and Sidner ( 1986 ) that candidate discourses possess hierarchical structure  , with units linked by discourse relations modelled after those proposed by II obbs  ( 1979 , 1985) ( cf . 
also Thompson and Mann 1987 , Scha and Polanyi 1988) . 1 Lascarides and Asher (1991a ) use Narration , Explanation , Background , Result and Elaboration . These are the discourse relations central to temporal import and they are the only ones we consider here  . Full coverage of text would require a larger set of relations  , akin to that in Thompson and Mann (1987) . 
DICE is a dynamic , logical theory for determining the discourse relations between sentences in a text  , and the temporal relations between the eventualities they describe  . The logic used is the nonmonotonic logic Common sense Entailment  ( CE ) proposed by Asher and Morreau ( 1991 )  . 
Implicatures are calculated via default rules . The rules introduced below are shown in Lascarides and Asher  ( 1991a ) to be manifestations of Gricean-style pragmatic maxims and world knowledge  . 
Discourse Structure and Implicature A formal notation makes clear both the logical structure of these rules  , and the problems involved in calculating implicature  . Let (% ~ , fl ) be the update function , which means " the represent a-XL as caxides and Asher  ( 1991a ) introduces the general framework and applies it to interpretation  ; Oberlander and Lascaxides ( 1992 ) and Lascarides and Oberlander ( 1992b ) use the framework for generation . 
tion r of the text so far ( of which a is already apart ) is to be updated with the representation fl of the current clause via a discourse relation with a "  . Letag / ~ mean that a is a topic for f l ; let e ~ beaterm referring to the main eventuality described by the clause a  ; and let fall ( m , e ~) mean that this event is a Max falling . 
Let el-~e2 mean the eventual it yet precedes e ~ , and cause ( el , ei ) meanel causes ei . Finally , we represent he defeasible connective as in Asher and Morreau  ( 1991 ) as a conditional > ( so ? > ? means ' if ? , then normally ?' ) and --* is the material conditional . The maxims for modelling implicature are then represented as schemas:  2 ? Narration : ( r , a , fl ) > Narration(a , fl ) ? Axiomon Narration :
Narration ( a , fl ) ---* ea-qe#?Explanation : ( r , ^ caus ( ,  >
Ezplanation(a , fl ) ? Axiom on Explanation :
Explanation ( a , fl ) ~ ~ ea-~e ~ ? Push Causal Law : ( r , a , 1 ~)^ fall(m , ca ) ^ push(j , m , ca ) > cause(ea , ec , ) ? Causes Precede Effects : cause ( ei , el ) --- ,  "- , st-~e2 ? States Overlap : ( r , a , fl ) ^ state(e#) > overlap(ca , e#) ? Background : (% a , fl ) ^ overlap(e  ~ , ca ) >
Background ( a , fl ) ? Axiom on Background : Background ( a , fl ) --- . overlap(ca , c #) The rules for Narration , Explanation and Background constitute defeasible linguistic knowledge  , and the axioms on them in defeasible linguistic knowledge  . In particular , Narration and its axiom convey information about the pragmatic effects of the descriptive order of events  ; unless there is information to the contrary , it is assumed that the descriptive order of events matches their  2Discourse structure and c~~ t/3 are given model theoretical interpretations in Asher  ( in press )  ; e(~abbreviates me(c ~) , which is formally defined in Lascarides and Asher  ( 1991b ) in an intuitively correct way . For simplicity , we have here ignored the modal nature of the in defeasible knowledge  ; in fact , an indefeasible rule is embedded within the necessity operator  1:3  . 
3 temporal order in interpretation . The Push Causal Law is a mixture of linguistic knowledge and world knowledge  ; given that the clauses are discourse-related somehow  , the events they describe must normally be connected in a causal  , part/whole or overlap relation ; here , given the events in question , they must normally stand in a causal relation . That Causes Precede their Effects is indefeasible world knowledge  . 
We also have laws relating the discourse structure to the topic structure  ( Asher , in press ): for example , A Common Topic for Narrative states that any clauses related by Narration must have a distinct  , common ( and perhaps implicit ) topic : ? A Common Topic for Narrative
Narration(a , fl ) -*^^/3)^
The hierarchical discourse structure is similar to that in Scha and Polanyi  ( 1988 ) : Elaboration and Explanation are subordinating relations and the others are coordinating ones  . Equally , this structure defines similar constraints on attachment : the current clause must attach to the previous clause or else to the clauses it elaborates or explains  . In other words , the open clauses are those on the right frontier . We do not directly encode the nucleus/satellite distinction used in RST  ( Thompson and Mann ,  1987) . 
Interpretation by Deduction cE and the defeasible rules are used to infer the discourse and temporal---structures of candidate texts  , cE represents nonmonotonic validity as ~ . Three patterns of nonmonotonic inference are particularly relevant : ? Defeasible Modus Ponens : ~> ~ b  , ~ b~?e . g . Birds normally fly , Tweety is a bird ; so
Tweety flies ? The Pengu in Principle : e . g . Penguins are birds , birds normally fly , penguins normally don't fly , Tweety is a penguin ; so Tweety doesn't fly . 
? Nixon Diamond:
Not : ? > X , ?>-~ X , ?, ? ~ X ( or - ~ X)e . g . Not : Quakers are pacifists , Republicans are not , Nixon is both a quaker and republican Nixon is a pacifist/Nixon is a non-pacifist  . 
Iconic and Non-lconic text : In interpreting text  ( 5 ) we attemp to attach the second clause to the first  ( so ( a , c  ~ , fl ) holds , where a and fl are respectively the logical forms of the first and second clauses  )  . 
(5) Maxstoodup . John greeted him.
(1) Maxfell . John pushed him.
In the absence of further information , the only rule whose antecedent is satisfied is Narration  . 
So we infer via Defeasible Modus Ponens that the Narration relation holds between its clauses  . 
This then yields , assuming logical omniscience , an iconic interpretation ; the standing up precedes the greeting . In contrast , text ( 1 ) verifies the antecedents to two of our defeasible laws : Narration and the Push Causal Law  . The consequents of these default laws cannot both hold in a consistent KS  . By the Pengu in Principle , the law with the more specific antecedent wins : the Causal Law  , because its antecedent logically entails Nar -ration's  . Hence ( 1 ) is interpreted as : the pushing caused the falling  . In turn , this entails that the antecedent to Explanation is verified  ; and whilst conflicting with Narration , it's more specific , and hence its consequent--Explanation--follows by the Penguin Principle  .   3 Notice that deductions about event structure and discourse structure are interleaved  . 
Incoherence and popping : Consider the incoherent ext  ( 3 )  . 
(3) ? Maxw on the race in record time . He was home with the cup . 
The WinLaw captures the intuition that if Max wins the race and he is at home  , then these events normally don't temporally overlap--regardless of whether they're connected or not  . 
? Win Law : win ( max , race , ex ) A at home ( max , e2) > - ~ overlap(ex , e2 ) The appropriate knowledge base in the analysis of  ( 3 ) satisfies States Overlap , the WinLaw and Narration . The first two of these conflict , but their antecedents aren't logically related . They 3The formal details of how the logic CB models these interpretations are given in Lascarides and Asher  ( 1991b )  . 
Although the double application of the Pengu in Principle  , as in (1) , is not valid in general , they show that for the particular case considered here  , GE validates it . 
4 therefore form a pattern out of which a Nixon Diamond crystallises : no temporal or discourse relation can be inferred  . We stipulate that it is incoherent to assume that  ( % a , /3 ) if one can't infer which discourse relation holds between a and f t  . 
So the assumption that the clauses are connected must be dropped  , and hence no representation f(3) is constructed . 
DICE exploits this account of incoherence in its approach to discourse popping  . When a Nixon Diamond occurs in attempting to attach the current clause to the previous one  , they don't form a coherentext segment . So the current clause must attach to one of the other open clauses  , resulting in discourse popping ( Lascarides and
Asher , 1991a).
Trajectory in DICE
It should be clear DICE's devices , while formal , are also quite powerful . However , the maxims introduced so far cannot actually explain either discourse times witching  ( cf . (1) vs (2)) or a me-lioration ( cf . (3) vs (4)) . Incorporating some form of contextual constraint may be one way to deal with such cases  . Because DICE makes essential use of nonmonotonic nference  , adding contextual constraints will alter the inferences without requiring modification of the existing knowledge representation  . We now investigate the consequences of adding MCT . 
Maintain Causal Trajectory
Suppose R(a , ~) holds for some discourse relation R ; then a appears in the text before/3 , and we use this fact to define MCT . The default law below states that if the existing discourse context is one where a cause/effect relation was described in that order  , then the current clause should not describe a further cause of the effect : ? Maintain Causal Trajectory:  ( r , fl , 7) AIn using this rule , an interpreter brings to bear ' topdown ' information  , in the following sense . 
Up to now , discourse and temporal relations have been determined by using the input discourse as data  , and predicting the relations using general linguistic and world knowledge  . Now , the interpreter is permitted to ' remember ' which prediction they made last time  , and use this to constrain the kind of relation that can be inferred for attaching the current clause  ; this new prediction needs no data to drive it . Of course , incoming data can preven the prediction from being made  ; MCT is just a default , and (6) is an exception . 
(6) Max switched off the light . The room went pitch dark , since he had drawn the blinds too . 
TimeSwitching
MCT says how the event structures predicted for preceding context can affect the temporal relations predicted for the current clause  . But how does it interact with other causal knowledge in DICE ? Does it account for time switching ? Since MCT is a contextual constraint  , it will only interact with causal knowledge in a discourse context  . 
So consider how it affects the attachment of ( 2c ) and ( 2d )  . 
(2) a . John and Maxcame to the cliff's edge.
Otb . John applied a sharp blow to the back of Max's neck  . flc . Maxfell . 7d . John pushed him . 6e . Maxrolled over the edge of the cliff . 
Suppose that the logical forms of the clauses ( 2a-e ) are respectively o ~ to e , and suppose that the discourse structure up to and including  3" has been constructed in agreement with intuitions : 
Narration Narration (29~'~"" r
Furthermore , assume , in line with intuitions , that the interpreter has inferred that e  #caused e  7  . 
Consider how 6 is to be attached to the above discourse structure  . 3' is the only open clause ; so (% 3' , 6) must hold . The antecedent so three defeasible laws are verified : the Push Causal Law and Narration just as before  , and also MCT . The consequents of the Push Causal Law and MCT conflict  ; moreover , their antecedents aren't logically related . So by the Nixon Diamond , we can't infer which event--or discourse- -relation holds  . 
Accordingly , the discourse is actually incoherent . 
Yet intuitively , a relation can be inferred : the push happened after the fall  , and the clauses 3" and 6 must be related by Narration . 
On its own , MCT cannot account for time switching ( or , indeed , amelioration ) . In one sense this isn't surprising . Causal knowledge and MCT were in conflict in (2) , and since both laws relate to the domain , but in incommensurable ways , neither logic nor intuition can say which default is preferred  . This suggests that using domain structure alone to constrain interpretation will be insufficient  . It seems likely that presentational issues will be significant in cases such as these  ; where domain-specific knowledge sources are in irresolvable conflict  , aspects of the existing discourse structure may help determine current clause attachment  . Since MCT has some motivation , it would be preferrable to let presentational information interact with it  , rather than replace it . 
Constraints from the
Presentational Context
To what degree does existing rhetorical structure determine clause attachment ? It's plausible to suggest hat a speaker-writer should not switch genre without syntactically marking the switch  . 
Thus , if the preceding context is narrative , then a hearer-reader will continue to interpret he discourse as narrative unless linguistic markers indicate otherwise  ; similarly for non-narrative contexts ( cf . Caenepeel 1991, Polanyi and Scha 1984) . 
This constraint relies on the continuation of a characteristic pattern of discourse relations  , rather than on maintaining trajectory on some domain relation  . Let's call this a presentational constraint ; it may be able to get the right analyses of ( 2 ) and ( 4 )  . In (2) , for example , the context to which John pushed him is attached is narrative  , so according to the constrain this clause would be attached with Narration in agreement with intuitions  . But clearly , this constraint must be a soft one , since discourse pops can occur without syntactic markers  , as can interruptions ( Polanyi 1985:306) . Both of these cause a change in the discourse ' pattern ' established in the preceding context  . 
Patterns in DICE
Can we use presentational constraints without accidentally blocking discourse popping and interruptions ? The problem is to represent in formal terms exactly when an interpreter should try to preserve the pattern of rhetorical structure stab-lished in the context  . Because DICE provides a formal account of how discourse popping occurs -- the Nixon Diamon dis the key--we are in a good position to attempt his  . 
Discourse Pattern and Inertia
First , we define the discourse pattern established by the context in terms of a function DP  . This takes as input the discourse structure for the preceding context  , filters out those discourse relations which would break the pattern  , and outputs the remaining set of relations . This is similar to Hobbs ' ( 1985:25-26 ) notion of genre , where , for example ( in his terms ) a story genre requires that the type of occasion relation can be only problem-solution or event -outcome  . 
How much of the preceding discourse context does DP take as input ? At one extreme  , it could be just the discourse relations used to attach the previous clause  ; the output would be those same discourse relations  . At the other extreme , the whole discourse structure may be input ; DP would have to establish the regularity in the configuration of discourse relations  , and evaluate which discourse relation would preserve it when the new clause is added  . We leave this question open ; for the examples of timeswitching and a melioration we consider here  , DP would produce the same result whatever it takes as input--Narration  . 
Using DP , we can represent the discourse pattern constraint  . The intuition it captures is the following . If the sentence currently being processed can't attach to any of the open nodes because there's a Nixon Diamondo fir resolvable conflict  , then assume that the discourse relation to be used is defined by DP  . In other words , discourse pattern preservation applies only when all other information prevents attachment at all available open nodes  . To express this formally , we need a representation of a state in which a Nixon Di-amond has formed  . IncE , we use the formula ? ( meaning contradiction ) and the connective & , whose semantics is defined only in the context of default laws  ( of . Asher and Morreau 1991b ) . 
Intuitively ,   ( A&B )  >  _1_ means ' A and B are antecedents of default rules that lead to a conflict that can't be resolved '  . 
We use this to represent cases where the information provided by the clauses ~ and  /3   ( which are candidates for attachment ) form a Nixon Di-amond . Let Info ( a ) be glossed'the information Info is true of the clausea '  . It is an abbreviation for statements such as fall ( max , ea ) , cause(e ~ , ep ) , and so on . If a Nixon Diamond occurs when attempting to attach a  to/3 on the basis of information other than DP , the following holds : ? Info (   ) Alnfo ( /3 ) A^Z n/o O ) )& ( 7 . , > ?) We will use ND(a , /3) as a gloss for the above schema , and open (7 . , a ) means a is an open clause in the discourse structure  7-  ; assume that DP (7 . ) returns some discourse relation R . So the presentational constraint for preserving discourse pattern is defined as follows :  4 ? Inertia : ( Vot ) (open ( 7 . , a ) AND(a , /3)) > (3a ') ( open(r , a ') ADP (7 . )(a' , /3 ) ) The antecedent to Inertia is verified only when all the information availablccx cept for the preceding discourse pattern--yields a Nixon Diamond in attempting the attachment  of/3 at all open nodes . In ertia thus won't prevent discourse popping , because there a Nixon Diamon disaverte data higher-level open node  . The model of text processing proposed here restricts the kind of information that's relevant during text processing : the discourse pattern is relevant only when all other information is insufficient  . Like MCT , In er-tia is topdown , in the sense that it relies on earlier predictions about other discourse relations  , rather than on incoming data ; but unlike MCT , the ' theory-laden'predictions are only resorted to if the data seems recal citrant  . 

TimeSwitching
We now look at text (2) in detail . Suppose as before that the discourse structure 7- for the first three clauses in ( 2 ) is ( 2' )  , and the task now is to attach 6 ( i . e . John pushed him ) . The only open clause is 7 , because the previous discourse relations are all Narration  . Moreover , DP(v ) is Narration . As before , a Nixon Diamond forms between MCT and the Push Causal Lawin attempting to attach  6 to 3'- Where Area is the antecedent to MCT , and Apcl the antecedent to the Push Causal Law substituted with  7 and 6:   4Inertia features an embedded default connective . Only two nonmonotonic logics can express this : Circumscrip-tion and Or  . .
? Area A ApaA (( Apct & Ama ) > I)
SoND (7 , 8) is verified , and with it , the antecedent to Inertia ; substituting in the Inertia schema the value of DP  ( r )  , the Nixon Diamond , and the open clauses yields the following : ? Inertia for  ( 2 ) :  ( Area A Apa A ( ( Apet&Ama )  >  . L )) >
Narration (7, 6)
The antecedent to Inertia entails that of Maintain Trajectory  ( Area ) and that of Push Causal Law ( Apcz )  . In cE the most specific law wins . So the discourse context in this case determines the relation between the fall and the push : it is Narra-lion  . Hence even though WK yields a causal preference for the pushing causing the falling  , given the discourse context in which the pushing and falling are described in  ( 2 )  , Narration is inferred after all , and so the falling precedes the push . 
In this way , we can represent the presentational , and domain-specific , information that must be brough to bear to create a times witch  .  5
Amelioration
Now consider texts (3) and (4) . A Nixon Dia-mondformed between Narration , States Overlap and the WinLaw in the analysis of  ( 3 ) above , leading to incoherence . Now consider attaching the same clauses ( 4e ) and ( 4f )  . 
(4) a .






Max gotup early yester day.
He had a little bite to eat.
He had a light work out.
He started the tournament in good form.
He wonther a ce in record time.
He was home with the cup.
He celebrated until late into the evening.
Given the discourse (4a-e ) ,   ( 4e ) is the only open clause to which ( 4f ) can attach . Moreover , as in (3) , attempting to attach ( 4f ) to ( 4e ) results in a Nixon Diamond . So the antecedent to Iner-tia is verified . DP delivers Narration , since the discourse context is narrative . So(4e-f ) is interpreted as a narrative . Compare this with (3) ,   5If a speaker-writer wanted to avoid this contextual inference pattern  , and sustain the non-iconic reading , then they could switch to the pluper fect , for example . 
where no discourse relation was inferred , leading to incoherence . 
Inertia enables discourse contexto establish coherence between sentence pairs that  , in isolation , are incoherent . It would be worrying if Iner-tia were so powerful that it could a meliorate any text  . But incoherence is still possible : consider replacing  ( 4f ) with ( 4 if ) : f . ? Mary's hair was black . 
If world knowledge is coded as intuitions would suggest  , henno common topic can be constructed for ( 4e ) and ( 4g )  ; and this is necessary if they are to be attached with Narration or Background -- the only discourse relations available given the defeasible laws that are verified  . Moreover , In ertia wo n't improve the coherence in this case because it predicts Narration  , which because of Common Topic for Narration cannot be used to attach  ( 4t * ) to ( 4 0  . So the text is incoherent . 
Hobbs et al ( 1990 ) also explore the effects of linguistic and causal knowledge on interpretation  , using abduction rather than deduction . Now , Konolige ( 1991 ) has shown that abduction and nonmonotonic deduction are closely related  ; but since Hobbs et ald on't attemp to treat time -switching and a melioration  , direct comparison here is difficult . However , the following points are relevant . First , weighted abduction , as a system of inference , is n't embeddable in CE , and vice versa . 
Secondly , the weights which guide abduction are assigned to predicates in a contextfree fashion  . 
Hobbs et al observe that this may make the effects of context hard to handle  , since ' the abduc-tion scheme attempts to make global judgements on the basis of strictly local information '\[  p48\]  . 


We examined instances of two types of contextual constraint on current clause attachment  . These were Maintain Causal Trajectory , a domain constraint ; and Inertia , a presentational constraint . 
We argued that domain constraints seemed insufficient  , but that presentational constraints could constructively interact with them  . This interaction then explains the two discourse interpretation phenomena we started out with  . Context can switch round the order of events ; and it canameliorate anotherwise incoherent interpretation  . 
Both of the constraints allow predictions about new discourse relations to be driven from previous predictions  . But MCT simply adds its prediction to the datadriven set from which the logic chooses  , whereas discourse pattern and Inertia are only relevant o interpretation when the logic can otherwise find no discourse relation  . 
This formalisation has also raised a number of questions for future investigation  . For example , the discourse pattern ( or Hobbsian ' genre ' ) function is important ; but how much of the preceding discourse structure should the DP function take as input ? How do we establish--and improve -- the linguistic coverage ? What is the relation between communicative intentions and contextual constraints ? How do we actually implement contextual constraints in a working system ? The idea of contextual constraints is a familiar and comfortable one  . In this respect , we have merely provided one way of formally pinning it down  . Naturally , this requires a background logical theory of discourse structure  , and we have used DICE , which has its own particular set of discourse relations and implicature patterns  . However , the process of logically specifying the constraints has two important and general benefits  , independent of the particular formalisation we have offered  . First , it demands precision and uni-formity in the statement both of the new constraints  , and of the other knowledge sources used in interpretation  . Secondly , it permits a program-independent assessment of the consequences of the general idea of contextual constraints  . 

Asher , Nicholas\[inpress\]Reference to Abstract Objects in English : A Philosophical Semantics for Natural Language Metaphysics  . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers . 
Asher , Nicholas and Morreau , Michael \[1991\] Common Sense Entailment : A Modal Theory of Nonmonotonic Reasoning  . In Proceedings of the 1Pth International Joint Conference on Artiflcial Intelligence  . 
Caenepeel , Mimo \[1991\] Event Structure versus Discourse Coherence . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Discourse Coherence  , Edinburgh , 46 April ,  1991 . 
Grosz , Barbara and Sidner , Candy\[1986\]Attention , Intentions , and the Structure of Discourse . Computational Linguistics , 12, 175-204 . 
Hobbs , Jerry\[1979\] Coherence and Coreference.
Cognitive Science , 3, 67-90.
Hobbs , Jerry \[1985\] On the Coherence and Structure of Discourse . Report No . CSLI-85-37 , Center for the Study of Language and Information . 
Hobbs , Jerry , Stickel , Martin , Appelt , Doug and Martin , Paul\[1990\] Interpretation as Abduction . Technical Note No . 499, Artificial Intelligence Center , SRI
International , Menlo Park.
Kamp , Hans \[1981\] A theory of truth and semantic representation . IGroenendijk , : i . A . G . , Janssen , T . 
M . V . and Stokhof , M . B . : i . ( eds . ) Formal Methods in the Study of Language , Volume 136 , pp 277-322 . 
Amsterdam : Mathematical Centre Tracts.
Konolige , Kurt\[1991\] Abduction vs . Closure in Causal Theories . Technical Note No .  505 , Artificial Intelligence Center , SRI International , Menlo Park . 
Lascarides , Alex and Asher , Nicholas \[1991a \] Discourse Relations and Defensible Knowledge . In Pro-eeedings of the ~gth Annual Meeting of Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp 55-63 . 
Lascarides , Alex and Asher , Nicholas \[1991b \] Discourse Relations and Common Sense Entailment  . D?-XI~A deliverable 2 . 5B , available from Centre for Cognitive Science , University of Edinburgh . 
Lascarides , Alex and Oberlander, . : ion \[1992a \] Temporal Coherence and Defensible Knowledge . Theoretical Linguistics , 18 . 
Lascarides , Alex and Oberlander , Jon\[1992b \] Ab-ducing Temporal Discourse . In Dale , R . et al(eds . ) Aspects of Automated Natural Language Generation  , pp 167-182 . Berlin : Springer-Verlag . 
Polanyi , Livia and Scha , Remko \[1984\] A Syntactic Approach to Discourse Semantics . In Proceedings of the $$ nd Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics , pp 413-419.
Polanyi , Livia \[1985\] A Theory of Discourse Structure and Discourse Coherence  . In Papers from the General Session at the Twenty -First Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society  , pp 2527 . 
Oberlander , : Ion and Lascarides , Alex \[1992\] Pre-venting False Temporal Implicatures : Interactive De-faults for Text Generation  . In Proceedings of COL-

Scha , Remko and Polanyi , Livia \[1988\] An augmented contextfree grammar . In Proceedings of the $$th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp 573-577 . 
Sibun , Penelope\[1992\] Generating Text without Trees . To appear in Computational Intelligence : Special Issue on Natural Language Generation  ,  8 . 
Thompson , Sandra and Mann , William \[1987\] Rhetorical Structure Theory : A Framework for the Analysis of Texts  . In IPRA Papers in Pragmatics , 1, pp79-105 . 

