GENERATING ASPECIFICCLASS OF MET APHORS
Mark Alan Jones1
Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Delaware , Newark DE 19716
Internet : jones@udel.edu
1 Introduction
Although some progress has been made in the area of metaphor understanding  , little has been made in metaphor generation . Current solutions rely upon a rather direct encoding of alternatives  . 
There is no computational theory that can account for metaphor generation from basic principles  . Although generating all types of metaphors from basic principles is very difficult  , there is a subset of metaphors that are prevalent in natural expressions and perhaps more amenable to computational approaches  . We call these transparently-motivated ( TM ) metaphors ( Jones and McCoy 1992 )  . Interestingly , metaphors in general , as well as the class described here , can be used to achieve important textual goals ( e . g . , brevity , conceptual fit , focus , perspective) . 
Metaphorical expressions often reflect conceptual models which are the basis for how we understand the world  . Mark Johnson ( 1987 ) has made some important observations about the building blocks of thought  , most notably that they are tied closely to our bodily experience  . Among the building blocks he has described are attraction  , block-age and containment . Consider describing the purchase of shares of stock as  , " I took $2500 out of my money market account and put it into Exxon common stock  . " The speaker did not literally put money into the stock  , but rather bought stock with the money . This metaphor is based on the simplifying concepts that represent investments a containers which can hold money  . When we write and talk we automatically use nonliteral expressions that reflect our common conceptual groundings  . These lead to very natural and easily understood expressions because we  ( speaker and audience ) share these common conceptual groundings . 
2 Transparently-Motivated Metaphor
All metaphors have a mapping between two domains . The more literal domain is called the ten or domain  , the less literal is the metaphorical domain . In the stock example these are the financial domain and the containment domain respectively  . TM metaphors are similar to conventional metaphors  ( Lakoff and Johnson 1980 , Lakoff 1987 ) in that they are both based upon familiar conceptual motivations  . However , conventional metaphors are also defined in contrast on ovel and dead metaphors  . This distinction appeals to 1This work is supported by Grant # H133E80015 from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research  . Support has also been provided by The Nemours

321 knowledge about he history of expressions . In this sense , TM metaphors are broader in scope , however , in other ways they are more constrained . 
Several qualities how that the stock example above is transparently-motivated  . It is based on the bodily grounding of containment  . It conveys the verb phrase action message of a purchase being conducted  , which is more than merely the mapping from containment to purchase  . This mapping is not even highlighted , rather it is merely used to convey the purchase message  . 
Consider two counterexamples . The expression , " Menare wolves " ( Black 1962) , is not a transparently-motivated mtaphor . Most importantly , its meaning is primarily the mapping itself ; the mapping is not employed transparently to yield another specific meaning  . 
Consider describing the starting of a business in terms of gardening  . " You must plant the seed infertiles oil , give it plenty of water . . . " Suchal-legorical metaphors are not TM because they do not have a referent from the ten or domain which remains unchanged by the metaphor  ( e . g . , " shares of stock ") . The scope of this work is further constrained to metaphors that convey a verb = phrase meaning  . The bounds of TM metaphors that primarily convey other meanings  , uchas reference , are less clear . 
So , transparently-motivated metaphors : 1 ) Are based on universal groundings that are often linked to bodily experience  ;  2 ) Convey a message ( via the mapping ) that is something more than the mapping ;  3 ) Are subtle in the way that they do not draw attention to themselves as bla-tant metaphors  . In fact , at first glance , these metaphors are often not recognized as nonliteral  ; 4) Retain a referent from the ten or domain . 
3 Uses of Metaphor
Metaphor is not merely a device that adds a flowery flavor to text  . Rather , metaphor can be harnessed to achieve textual goals that may be difficult to achieve with literal statements  . A simple goal that metaphor can achieve is that of being concise  . More complex uses are explained below . 
3.1 Conceptual Fit
We noted that the building blocks of thought may lead us to speak metaphorically  . It is reasonable to conclude that metaphors based on such building blocks are easier to understand because they reflect human conceptualizations  . 
Two observations are salient . People naturally tend to describe things in a more concrete manner  , even when the issue at hand is rather abstract . 
Such behavior generall yields more natural and understandable txt  . This explains why expressions like , " grasping an idea " are common . Second , it is natural to talk about hings in the light of basic building blocks of though that are commonly shared by a community  . Therefore , describing a stock transaction as putting a token in a container may be more intuitive to the audience  . 
3.2 Focus of Attention
The traditional view of focus of attention is that it is something that is accomplished syntactically  , such as by making the desired focus the subject of the sentence  ( as can be done with a passive construction )  . However , further inspection reveals that there is a relationship between semantic types and level of focus  . 
Jones and McCoy ( 1992 ) show evidence for the intuitive proposition that the semantic types of words/concepts affect the perceived level of focus attributed to those words/concepts  . We introduce a simple focus hierarchy to model the effects of semantic types on focus levels  . Items at the top of the focus hierarchy , because of their semantic qualities , are more likely to be focused upon than those below  . Generally , concepts which are very concrete and volitional are toward the top while more a morphous and abstracthings are below  . 
Given the focus hierarchy which explains inherent focus level according to the semantic type of an object  , it is interesting to note that one effect of metaphorical statements can be to alter the perceived semantic type of an object  ( and therefore potentially raise the perceived focus level  )  . Consider the metaphorical statement " AI is no stranger to object-oriented paradigms "  ( Elliot 1991 )  . Notice that the phrase " is no stranger " has the effect of conceptually personifying the objects involved  ( i . e . , AI and object-oriented paradigms ) since it is a phrase that , literally , can only be used with humans ( or perhaps other animate objects )  . Compare the perceived focus level with that in a more literal rendition of the sentence such as : " AI and object-oriented paradigms have previously been incorporated together  . " In the traditional view of focus of attention a word is treated as having a static semantics  . However metaphor can make the semantic type of objects more flexible  . By using a verb that only applies to humans , as above , the objects are pushed up the focus hierarchy towards the position that humans occupy  . 
3.3 Perspective
While the notion of perspective on an item is related to focus  , they are distinct . Rather than concentrating on which object is focused on  , perspective has to do with how an object is viewed  . 
A given perspective on an item causes certain aspects of that item to be highlighted  ( and not others )   ( McCoy 1989 )  . 

Consider a couple with young children attending a party with all of their children's parapher-nalia into w  . One tells the other " It is time for us to pull upstakes  . " Here , the leaving is metaphorically described via the camping domain  , where leaving is an involved process . This use of metaphor has highlighted or put a particular perspective on the leaving that emphasizes the work involved  . 
4 Approach to a Solution
TM metaphors are a promising subclass of metaphors in which to work  , because they carry special requirements that restrict the possible search space from which they can be generated  . 
We have begun preliminary work to specify the basic structures and methodologies that together can generate good metaphors  . Input to the system has two parts . The first part is the literal statement of what should be expressed  , in a formal form . For example , describe the leave role of the object party . The second part of the input to the system is a specification of the goal that the metaphor is to achieve  . 
4.1 General Approach
The idea behind the approach is to identify related domains of the ten or domain that are appropriate as metaphorical domains  . Both the tenor and metaphorical domain share some roles that are defined by their common ancestor in the " isa " hierarchy  . Specifically , we require that they share the role that is the focus of the metaphor  ( that aspect of an action which is being referred to metaphorically  )  . We can identify an ancestor of the ten or domain from which the ten or domain inherits the role in question  . The metaphorical domain also will share this ancestor  . 
In addition to sharing the common ancestor , a reasonable metaphorical domain must have the following qualities : ? Be universal  , or considered very familiar ( with respect othe user model . If the audience is ignorant of the metaphorical domain  , there is little hope of the expression's success . 
? Have the potential to achieve additional goals ( e . g . , focus ) . 
? Have specialize diexical expressions in the metaphorical domain for the role being described  . This is necessary because the lexical expression used to describe the role is the only information that conveys the mapping  . 
This restriction would not apply to nonliteral expressions that explicitly state the mapping  . 
Without the specialized lexical expression , a
TM metaphor cannot be generated.
These specifications constrain what potential metaphorical domains will be considered  . By limiting the candidate domains , the space and search time requirements will be held down  . 
Consider how we can generate the metaphorical expression conveying " leave the party  , " while at the same time emphasizing the effort that it takes to leave  ( as in section 3 . 3) . Aparty can be described , via " isa " links of the abstraction hierarchy , as a human process . Such a process can have a termination . For partying , leaving and saying good bye to everyone can be considered part of the termination of this process  . 
After ascending the " isa " hierarchy to the proper level of abstraction  , where the key role ( termination ) is specified , we can search for a candidate metaphorical domain that shares this ancestor  . There are several possible metaphorical domains that meet this criteria  . To narrow this choice several considerations come into play  . 
One of these considerations is whether the possible metaphorical domains have specialized expressions available for the role that the metaphor involves  ( termination )  . Two possible metaphorical domains that meet this criteria are camping  , with " pulling ups takes , " and electrical equipment , with " pull the plug . " Both domains are potential candidates . However , now the constraints imposed by the goal of the metaphor must be considered : emphasize the complexity of the termination  . Will an allusion to camping rhetorically make leaving the party appear more involved ? Here we must appeal to more detailed knowledge about the termination of the camping experience  . In this case we find that the termination of a camping experience is not trivial  , it requires a moderate amount of work ( compared to the party and electrical domains )  . Therefore the camping domain may be chosen . Other metaphorical goals ( e . g . , focus ) will cause different reasoning to be done in this final stage  . 
4.2 Specific Conceptual Mappings
The previous approach may work well for some TM metaphors  , but notice there is a severe restriction on the relationship between the tenor and metaphorical domains - they must have the role involved in the expression in common  . Here we discuss how the previous method can benefit from additional information  , which can link two very different domains . 
Recall from section 3 . 1 that conceptual fit is a motivation for metaphor generation  . The method introduced here helps implement the principle that it is useful to describe things in terms of shared conceptual roots  . If a system is to generate metaphors that follow from conceptual roots  , those roots must be represented in the system . We will need metaphorical domain selection rules and related mapping information to capture the conceptual roots by reflecting such common metaphorical behaviors as those pointed to in Lakoff and John-son's work  ( Lakoff and Johnson 1980 , Lakoff 1987) . 
Selection rules will encode such familiar patterns as " describe progress in terms of a vehicle moving toward a goal " and " describe securities in terms of containers for money  . " Consider describing the progress with a publication or career  , with the intention of being as
Tenor Domain Met . Domain progress . . . . . . . forward negative progress . . . . . . . backward no progress . . . . . . . still unsatisfactory progress . . . . . . . slow intuitive as possible ( conceptual fit ) . A rule encoding the notion " describe progress in terms of a vehicle moving toward a goal " would be triggered  . 
Closely attached to this rule is information about how the mapping from ten or domain to metaphorical domain should relate  . Such information would include the mappings in Table  1  . 
Notice that these expressions for progress in the domain of physical motion are natural and probably-more frequent hanthe " literal " forms found on the left side of Table  1  . This may be because people understand progress in terms of motion  . In this way metaphor generation can yield a more conceptually appropriate x pression  , which may actually be easier to understand than its literal counterpart  . 
There is potential for abstracting the information in the table  . Note that the moving object has some starting point  , some goal and some points on its path . With time involved , it also has speed . 
With a sophisticated model of this behavior in the metaphorical domain available  , the four mappings in Table 1 could be derived . Interestingly , a more general structure matched with reasoning in the metaphorical domains could derive other expressions  . With the knowledge that energy is required to move objects  , and given that a prototypical moving object is a car that run song as  , we could hope to generate " My career is running out of gas " from general knowledge and principles  . 

MaxBlack (1962). Models and Metaphors . Cornell
University Press , Ithica , NY.
Lance B . Elliot (1991). Theb and wag on blues . AI
Expert , 6(5):11-13.
Mark Johnson (1987) . The Bodyin the Mind : The Bodily Basis of Reason and Imagination  . University of Chicagopress , Chicago , IL . 
Mark A . Jones and Kathleen F . McCoy (1992).
Transparently-Motivated Mtaphor Generation.
In R . Dale , E . Hovy , D . Rosner and O . Stock , eds . , Aspects of Automated Natural Language Generation : The  6th International Workshop on Natural Language Generation Proceedings  , 
Trento , Italy . 231-246.
George Lakoff (1987) . Women , Fire and Dangerous Things What Categories Reveal About the Mind  . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL . 
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson (1980).
Metaphors we live by . University of Chicago
Press , Chicago , IL.
Kathleen F . McCoy (1989) . Generating context sensitive responses to object -related misconceptions  . Artificial Intelligence , 41:157-195 . 
