UNDERST ANDING REPETITION INN A TURALL ANGUAGE
INSTRUCTIONS-THESEM ANTICSOFEXTENT
Sheila Rock
Department of Artificial Intelligence , Edinburgh University *
80 South Bridge , Edinburgh EH 11 HN , Scotland , United Kingdom

Introduction
Natural language instructions , though prevalent in many spheres of communication  , have only recently begun to receive attention within computational  linguistics\[5\]  . Instructions are often accompanied by language intended to signal repetition of the action that they instruct  . In order to develop a system that is able to understand instructions  , with the goal of executing them , it is necessary to investigate what is meant by various types of repetition  , and the different ways in which repetition can be expressed  . 
We focus on sentences that are instructing that some action is to be performed and that this action is to be performed more than once  1  . There are two aspects to consider-scope ( what part of the action that is instructed in the dialogue is to be repeated  ) and extent ( how much repetition is to be done )  . 
This is illustrated by examples (1) and (2).
Place a chunk of rhubar bin to each tart .   ( 1 ) Continue to layer in this way until all the ( 2 ) fruit is used . 
The repetition in ( 1 ) has scope on place a chunk of rhubar b ( into at art ) and extent across all tarts . 
(2 ) has scope over layer in this way and extent until all the fruit used  . Within this framework of scope and extent that I have described only informally  , I discuss the issue of extent in more details . 
Karlin\[3\] , presents a semantic analysis of verbal modifiers in the domain of cooking tasks  . Much of this is pertinent to an examination of extent  , in par-tieular the relation of different modifiers to the as-peetual category of an event  ( according to Moens & Steedman \[4\] )  . This has formed an important starting point for my work in understanding instructions for repetition  . However , there are aspects where a different approach to Karlin's is required  , and some of these are discussed in the rest of this paper  . 
Semantics of verbal modifiers
In analysing the semantics of verbal modifiers , Karlin\[3\] identifies three kinds of modifiers , which are themselves divided further . The primary cate-gorisations are * Thanks to Chris Mellish  , Robert Dale and Graeme Ritchie for discussion about the ideas in this paper  . 
1 This paper deals only with instructions , and uses the words sentence and instruction interchangeably  . 
2A central theme of my thesis is that both scope and extent must be accounted for in a full t reatment of repetit ion  , but a discussion of scope is out with the scope of this paper  . 
2791 The number of repetitions of an action.
2 The duration of an action.
3 The speed of an action.
It is clear that Karlin's first two primary categories describe modifiers that are concerned with the repetition of an action  3  , and these are examined in detail in the next sections  . First , though , it is useful to consider that with any action , we have a time interval , during which the action is to be performed-once or more than once  . We can then characterise the extent of repetition in terms of this time interval  . Modifiers of Karlin's category 2 tell us how long the time interval is , while modifiers of category 1tell us how to carve up the time interval . 
One instruction may give information for both categories  , but this usually is for two different actions , such as Roast for 45 minutes , basting twice .   ( 3 ) Number of repetitions - carving the interval In this category  , Karline numerates classes of modifier as follows : ? cardinal count adverbials-turn the fish twice ? frequency adverbials-turn the fish occasionally ? plural objects-turn the pieces of fish In the discussion of frequency adverbials  , Karl in describes frequency as a continuous scale with gradable terms  , such as occasionally , often . This class should include explicit frequency in time units  , as in every 5 minutes . 
Duration of an action-delimiting the interval Here  , Karline numerates the following kinds of modifier : ? explicit duration in time intervals-fry the fish for  10 minutes ? duration given by gradable terms-fry the fish brie/Ty?duration coextensive with the duration of another action-continue to fry the millet  , stirring , until the water boils ? duration characterized by ast'~techange-fry the fish until it is opaque ? disjuncts of explicit durations and state changes-fry the fish for  5 minutes or until it becomes opaque 3I will not consider the third , which contributes to " quality " of execution of an action  , and does not pertain to extent of repetition . 
In this category , Karlin does distinguish between " explicit duration " and " durationing radable terms "  , whereas in the ' Trequency adverbials " classification  , there are not seperate classes for vague and explicit frequency  ( say turn the fish every 5 minutes and turn the fish often )  . To be more consistent , here should be one class within the category " number of repetitions of an action " that contains frequency adverbials  4  , and only one class within the cat ~ gory " duration of an action " that contains duration in terms of time  5  . In both classes there should be the possibility of being explicit or vague  . It is also preferable to call Karlin's second category " duration of repetition of an action "  . The name " duration of an action " conflates the concept of the basic action and its repetition  . The separation is pertinen to the view that repetition has scope and extent  . 
Karlin analyses the remaining three classes in category  2 explicitly in the context of cooking tasks . 
In particular , the analysis is related to the view that all processes in the cooking domain must have culminations  . The validity of this approach is discussed in the next section  . However , before doing that we examine Karlin's final class  , " disjuncts of explicit durations and state changes "  . This is a class of instructions found mainly in the cooking domain  . The example used by Karlin is (4) . 
Steam forg minutes or until the mussels (4) open.
Karlin asserts that ' the meaning of sentences in this category is not the same as that of logical  disjunction'\[3  , pg 64\] , and claims that the meaning of the disjunction is that ' the state change  ( the mussels are open ) is to be used to determine the duration of the action  ( 2 minutes ) '\[ ibid\] ( my parentheses ) s . 
I agree that the meaning is not simply that of logical disjunction  , but we need to examine the issue further . Data that I have collected gives evidence that the use of the or is not significant  . There are many examples where a recipe book will give the same instruction  , both with and without it . For example, . . . at least 10 minutes or until the flour is ( 5 ) well browned\[2 , pg120\] Bake for about ghours , until the rabbit and lentils are tender\[2 , pgll9\] ( 6 ) Bake for 45 minutes or until the rabbit is ( 7 ) tender\[2 , pgll8\]In all of these , we have an instruction describing one of the following scenarios T : Do some action until an expected state change occurs  . This should take the du-(8) ration specified . 
4This is as Kar l in ' s classif icat ion 5Th is is different from Karlin's class if ication  6Kar linsees these as metalinguistic disjunction , which Ibe-lieve is similar to part of my view  . 
7I make no c la ims about exact ly which of these scenarios is being described  . 

Do some action for a specified duration . If the expected state change does not occur during this time  , then it is likely that some- ( 9 ) thing has go new rong . 
What is really being given is a way to decide when to stop the action  , and the use of two clauses provides a way of deciding whether the stop state is successful or a failure  . For success , if the state change has occured , then we will expect that the duration has also passeds  . If the duration has passed but the state change has no to ecured  , or if the state change has occurred but the duration has not passed  , we still reach the stop state , but in the failed mode . We then have disjunction for stopping ( we stop if either the duration or the state change is true  ) but conjunction for success ( stop and a normal outcome is only true if both the clauses are true  )  . We note that often domain knowledge will allow the hearer to determine whether the duration is given as a minimum or maximum time  , and what the effect of failure is . The analysis presented here does not take the use of domain knowledge into account  , to give a more general analysis . 
From the point of view of repetition , what we are given is a stopping condition , that is coded in terms of two alternatives . Using an informal notation , what is being expressed with and without or respectively  , are the following , which are equivalent : should-stop(action , t ) *--( difference ( start , t , x ) , x >_ duration ) V ( state(q , t )) should-stop(action , t ) *-( difference ( start , t , x ) , x >_ duration ) A should-stop(action , t ) , ---( state(q , t ) ) Thus ( 7 ) art d ( 6 ) can be represented as should-stop ( bake , t ) ~---( differenee ( start , t , x ) , x > 45-minutes)
V(tender(rabbit , t )) should-stop(bake , t ) , ---( difference ( start , t , z ) , av >_ about . 2-hours ) A shoutd-stop ( bake , O , --( tender ( rabbit-and-lent ils , t )) Sometimes , the order of the two modifiers is different 9 indicating that the positioning of the clauses is not important  . 
. . . until the meat is tender , about 45 min'llO~t)utes\[2 , pg119\] . . . until theme at is meltingly tender-- ( 11 ) about 30 minutes\[2 ,   pgll9\] Karlin proposes that the duration modifier is only an approximation  , and that it is the state change modifier that determines the truth of the sentence  1?  . Most durations , however , in the domain of cooking tasks , are approximations . Deciding whether a state change has been reached is also  8This in fact seems closer to logical conjunction than logical disjunction  . 
9The exchanged order is usual ly used wi thout the or  . 
l ? The terms left disjunct and right disjunct are used by Kar-lin  , but in sentences like ( 10 ) and ( 11 ) these are not helpful indicators . 
approximate . In a domain where durations and evidence of state change are less approximate  ( say in chemistry )  , it is not clear that it is always one of the clauses that is performing the role of establishing the truth of the sentence  . 
Aspectual category and verbal modifiers Karlin's discussion is given in the context of the aspectual category of an event  ( according to Moens & Steedman \[4\] )  . This is useful as it gives a way of extracting semantic information  . 
Karlin claims that points , culminations and culminated processes ( but not process type events ) can have a number of repetitions associated with them  ( category 1 )  . An expression whose aspectual type is a process or culminated process can cooccur with a duration modifier  ( category 2 )  . This second claim requires closer examination . 
First , Moens & Steedman say that ' culminated processes . . . ( do not combine readily ) with a for-adverbial ' . Yet for-adverbials are one of the classes of duration modifier ennumerated by Karlin  . We look at two of the examples presented by Karlin  . 
Stirfor I minute . (12)
Saute over high heat until moisture is evaP- ( 13 ) orated . 
The expressions in both of these ( without their modifiers - that is Stir and Saute over high heat  ) are processes , but not culminated processes . An essential part of a culmination is that there is a consequent state  \[4  , pg16\] . None of the examples Karlin uses has a culminated process as the aspectual type of the action expressed  .   ( 13 ) could be seen as culminated processes if viewed together with the duration modifier  ( in other words , if it already cooccurs with a duration modifier ) , while (12) is a process , even with the modifier . Thus , the view of Moens & Steedman holds and is in fact useful in extracting semantic information  . An until-clause signals a culmination , thus making a process into a culminated process . A for-adverbial does not change the aspectual type of a process  . 
We now look at the assertion that ' Each process in the cooking domain must have a culmination  . . . '\[3, pg62\] . This is accompanied by a claim that a verb may contain inherent information about the endpoint of the action it describes  , as in
Choptheonion . (14) which , according to Karlin , describes a culminated process whose endpoint is defined by the state of the onion  . This seems quite feasible , even if it does require that some world knowledge is required  . 
However , if we consider instead the example
Stirthesoup . (15) this does not describe any culmination , as there is no consequent sate . Yet it is a process , as it may be extended in time . 

Karlin's justification for the above assertion is that cooking tasks involve a sequence of steps with the goal of bringing about a state change  . 
There are also instructions for preventing a state change though  , for example stirring ( to prevent sticking ) . We could argue that stirring brings us to the changed state " stirred "  . But then , if we look back to the Moens & Steedman analysis , where he climbed has no culmination , we could claim that this has the changed state " has climbed "  . This is not the spirit intended by the Moens & Steedman analysis  , and it is more useful to see some actions in cooking as not having culminations  . We can then examine what kinds of modifiers change aspectual category and in what manner  , as presented above for the for - and until -adverbials  . 

The semantics of repetition in instruction si more clearly understood if we view repetition as having scope and extent  . Within this framework , Karlin's work on the semantics of verbal modifiers provides a useful starting point  . In particular , relating this to the aspectuai category of an instruction according to Moens & Steedman  \[4\] is important . We can make use of Moens & Steedman's schema for the way aspect changes when modifiers are added to expressions  , to extract semantic information . This will allow a fuller treatment of extent , for use in the development of a semantics for repetition that treats both scope and extent more completely  . 
References\[1\]Ball , C . N . " On the Interpretation of Descrip-tive and Metaiinguistic Disjunction "  , unpublished paper , University of Pennsylvania , August 1985 . 
\[2\] Floyd , Keith Floydon Britain and Ireland,
BBC Books , London , 1988.
\[3\] Karlin , Robin " Defining the semantics of verbal modifiers in the domain of cooking tasks  . " Proc .   26th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Buffalo NY , 
USA , June 1988, pp . 61-67.
\[4\] Moens , Marc & Steedman , Mark " Temporal Ontology and Temporal Reference . " Computational Linguistics 14:2, Junei 988, pp . 1528\[5\]Webber , Bonnie . Course description for Instructions as Discourse , 3rd European Summer School in Language , Logic & Information , 
Saarbrucken , August 1991.
