SOME PROBLE MATICCASES OF VPELLIPSIS
Daniel Hardt
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , PA 19104
Internet : hardt~linc.cis.upenn.edu

It has been widely assumed that VP ellipsis is governed by an identity condition : the elided VP is interpreted as an identical copy of another expression in surrounding discourse  . For example , Sag ( 76 ) imposes an identity condition on Logical Form representations of VP's  . A basic feature of this account is the requirement that a syntactic VP be available as the antecedent  . This requirement is reflected in most subsequent accounts as well  . In this paper I examine three cases of VP ellipsis in which the antecedent cannot be identified with any VP  . 
These cases , which are illustrated using naturally-occurring examples  , present a fundamental problem for any of the standard approaches  . I will argue that they receive a natural treatment in the system I have developed  , in which VP ellipsis is treated by storing VP meanings in a discourse model  . 
I will address the following three problems : ? Combined Antecedents : The antecedent may be a combination of more than one previous property  . 
? Passive Antecedents : the antecedent in a passive clause may not be associated with any VP  , but , rather , the property associated with the active counterpart of that clause  . 
? NP Antecedents : the antecedent may be a property associated with an NP  . 
In what follows , I sketch my general approach to VP ellipsis , after which I show how each of the above phenomena can be treated in this approach  . 

VP ellipsis , I suggest , is to be explained along the lines of familiar accounts of pronominal anaphora  ( e . g . , Kamp 80, Heim 81) . A discourse model is posited , containing variou semantic objects , including ( among other things ) entities and properties that have been evoked in preceding discourse  . Typically , entities are evoked by NP's , and properties by VP's . The interpretation fapro noun involves a selection among the entities to red in the discourse model  . Similarly , the interpretation of an elliptical VP involves a selection among the properties stored mentation along these lines in Hardt  91  , based on some extensions to the Incremental Interpretation 
System ( Pereira and Pollack 91).
There are two rules governing VP ellipsis : one allowing the introduction of properties into the discourse model  , and another allowing the recovery of properties from the discourse model  . 
These two rules are given below . In general , I assume the form of grammar in Pereira and Pollack  91  , in which all semantic rules take the input and output discourse models as arguments  . That is , all semantic rules define relations on discourse models  , or " file change potentials " , in Heim's terms . 
The ( simplified ) rule for recovering a property from the discourse model is: 
AUX = ~ P where PeDMi , , .
That is , an auxiliary verb is replaced by some property P stored in the input discourse model  . 
Secondly , properties are introduced into the discourse model by the following rule : Upon encountering a property-denoting semantic object of the form : 
P (- , al ) that is , a predicate with the first argument slot empty , we have:
DMout = DM in UP (-, at)
This indicates that the property is added to the output discourse model  . Typically , the property-denoting expression is associated with a VP  , although other types of expressions can also introduce properties into the discourse model  . 
I have argued elsewhere ( Hardt 91 , 91 a ) that such a system has certain important advantages over alternative approaches  , uchas those of Sag (76) and Williams (77) . 21 To be precise , it is not properties that are stored as VPE antecedents  , but relations involving an input and output discourse context as well as a property  . 
2 The DRT-based account of Klein ( 87 ) essentially du-In what follows , I will briefly examine the phenomena listed above  , which present fundamental problems for all accounts of VP ellipsis of which I am aware a  . For each problem , I will suggest that the current approach provides a solution  . 
COMBINED ANTECEDENTS
There are cases of VP ellipsis in which the antecedent is combined from two or more separate VP's  . This presents a problem for most accounts of VP ellipsis  , since there is no syntactic object consisting of the combination of two separate VP's  . If antecedents are stored in the discourse model , as I am suggesting , this is not surprising . For example , it is wellknown that combinations of entities can become the antecedent for a plural pronoun  . Consider the following example : After the symmetry between left-handed particles and right -handed anti-particles was broken by the kaons in the  1960s   , a new symmetry was introduced which everybody swears is unbreakable  . This is between left-handed particles moving forwards in time  , and right-handed anti-particles moving backwards in time  ( none do , in any practical sense , but that does not worry the orists too much ) . 
From : The Economist , ~ August 1990, p . 69.
Bonnie Webber , p.c.
The meaning of the elided VP (" none do ") is , I take it , " none do move forwards or move back- . wards in time " . So the antecedent must consists of a combination of properties associated with two VP's : " moving forwards in time " and " moving backwards in time "  . 
Such an example indicates the necessity for a rule allowing the set of properties in the discourse model to be expanded  , as follows : P . . . Q . . . : ~ P . . . Q . . . \[POPQ\]That is , if the discourse model contains two properties P and Q  , it may also contain the property resulting from a combination of P and Q by some operator  ( I assume that the operators include AND and OR )  . 
Another example is the following :
So I say to the conspiracy fans : leave him alone . Leave us alone . But they won't . 
From : The Welcomat , 5Feb92, p .25
Here the meaning of the elliptical VP is : " they wo n't leave him alone or leave us alone "  . 
plicates the Sag/Williams approach in DRT . Of partic-ulax relevance here is Klein's requirement that the antecedent be a DRT -representation fasyntactic VP  . 
3 The recent account of Dadrymple , Shieber and Pereira ( 91 ) does treat the " Passive Antecedent " problem . However , no treatment of the " Combined Antecedent " or " NPA ntecedent " problems i given  . 

This phenomenon has been noted in the literature , in particular by Webber (?8) , in which the following examples were given :
I can walk , and I canchew gum . Gerry can too , but not at the same time . 
Wendy is eager to sail around the world and Bruce is eager to climb KiHmanjaro  , but neither of them can because money is too tight  . 
By the rule given above , this example could be given the interpretation " neither of them can sail around the world or climb Kilimanjaro "  . 
It is clear that the combining operation is highly constrained  . In all the examples mentioned , either P and Q have the same subject , or the subject of the elliptical VP refers to the two subjects of P and Q  . In future work , I will attempt of ormulate constraints on this operation  . 
PASSIVE ANTECEDENTS
The next problem is illustrated by the following example  , cited by Dalrymple , Shieber and Pereira ( 91 ) : A lot of this material can be presented in a fairly informal and accessible fashion  , and often
Ido.
From : Noam Chow_sky on the Generative Enterprise , For is Publications , Dordrecht .  1982 . 
The antecedent for the elliptical VP is " present a lot of this material in a fairly informal and accessible fashion "  . This is not associated with a VP , although the active counterpart of the sentence would contain such a VP  . This is not surprising from a semantic point of view  , since it is traditionally held that a ' passive transformation'preserve semantic equivalence  . 
Another example of this is following :
Business has to be developed and defended differently than we have in the past  . 
From : NPR interview , 24May 91
The most straightforward treatment of such phenomena in the current framework is to assume that the syntactic derivation of a passive antecedent such as " this material can be presented " corresponds to a semantic object present  ( _ , this material ) More generally , for a syntactic expression
SUBJ be VP + en the corresponding semantic object is
VP'(-, SUB:V )
That is , the denotation of the " surface subject " becomes the second argument of the VP-denotation  . 
This semantic object , then , satisfies the condition on the rule for introducing properties given above  . 
Thus , under such a treatment of the passive , these examples are accommodated in the present system without further stipulations  . 
NPANTECEDENTS
In many casgs ~ the antecedent property is introduced by a NP rather than a VP  . This would be difficult to explain for a syntactic or logical form theory  . From a semantic point of view , it is not surprising , since many NP's contain a common noun which is standardly analyzed semantically as denoting a property  . Consider the following ( naturally occurring ) example : We should suggest oher that she officially appoint us as a committee and invite fac-ulty participation/input  . They won't , of course, . . . 
From : email message . ( Bonnie Webber , p . c . ) In this example , the meaning of the elided VP is '% heywon't participate "  . The source is the NP " faculty participation " . 
Another example is the following : \[ Many Chicago -area cab drivers \] say their business is foundering because the riders they depend on- business people  , downtown workers and the elderly-are opting for the bus and the elevated train  , or are on the unemployment line . Meanwhile , they sense a drop invisitors to the city . Those who do , they say , are not taking cabs . 
From : Chicago Tribune front page , ~/6/92.
Gregory Ward , p.c.
Here , the meaning of the elided VP is % hose who do visit "  , where the source is the NP " visitors " . 
In the current framework , such examples could be treated as follows . Assume , following Chierchia (84) , that there is a class of nouns that are semantically correlated with properties  . For any such noun , the associated property can be added to the discourse model  , just as is done for verbs . 

The cases investigated constitute strong evidence that VP ellips is must be explained at a seman-tic /discourse lvel  . I have argued that the examples can be dealt with in the system I have developed  . 
In future work , I will formulate constraints on the operations described here  . 

Thanks to Aravind Joshi , Shalom Lappin , Gregory Ward , and Bonnie Webber . This work was supported by the following grants : ARODAAL  03-89-C-0031  , DARPAN 00014-90-J-1863 , NSF IRI90-16592 , and Ben Franklin 91 S . 3078C-1 .  278

Gennaro Chierchia . Formal Semantics and the Grammar of Predication . Linguistic Inquiry , Vol . 
16, no . 3. Summer 1984.
Mary Dalrymple , Stuart Shieber and Fernando Pereira . Ellipsis and Higher-Order Unification . Linguistics and Philosophy . Vol . 14, no . 4, August 1991 . 
Daniel Hardt . A Discourse Model Account of VP Ellipsis . Proceedings AAAI Symposium on Discourse Structure in Natural Language Understanding and Generation  . Asilomar , CA . , November 1991 . 
Daniel Hardt . Towards a Discourse Model Ac-count of VP Ellipsis  . Proceedings ESCOL 1991 . 
Baltimore , MD.
Irene Heim . The Semantics of Definite and Indefinite Noun Phrases  . Ph . D . thesis , University of
Massachusetts-Amherst . 1981.
Hans Kamp . A Theory of Truth and Semantic Representation . In Groenendijk , JJanssen , T . M . V . 
and Stokhof , M . ( eds . ) Formal Methods in the Study of Language , Volume 136 , pp .  277-322 .  1980 . 
Ewan Klein . VP Ellipsis in DR Theory . In J . Groenendijk , D . de Jongh and M . Stokhof , eds . 
Studies in Discourse Representation Theory and the Theory of Generalized Quantifiers  , For is Publications . Dordrecht , The Netherlands .  1987 . 
Fernando Pereira and Martha Pollack . Incremental Interpretation . Artificial Intelligence . Vol . 
50. no . 1, pp . 37-82. June 1991.
Ivan A . Sag . Deletion and Logical Form . Ph.D.
thesis , MIT . 1976.
Bonnie Lynn Webber . A Formal Approach to Discourse Anaphora . Ph . D . thesis , Harvard University .  1978 . 
Edwin Williams . Discourse and Logical Form.
Linguistic Inquiry , 8(1):101-139.1977.
