METONYMY : REASSESSMENT , SURVEY OF ACCEPTABILITY,
ANDITSTREAT MENTINA MACHINE TRANS LATION SYSTEM
Shinichiro Kamei * & Takahiro Wakao
Computing Research Laboratory
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces , New Mexico 88003
Tel:505-646-5466 Fax:505-646-6218
Interact : skame i@nmsu . edu & twakao@nmsu . edu * visiting researcher fom NEC Corporation in Japan 

In this article we outline a basic approach to treating metonymy properly in a multil-ingual machine translation system  . This is the first attempt at treating metonymy in an machine translation environment  . The approach is guided by the differences of acceptability of metonymy which were obtained by our comparative survey among three languages  , English , Chinese , and
Japanese . The characteristics of the approach areas follows:  ( 1 ) Influences of the context , individuals , and familiality with metonymy are not used . 
(2 ) An actual acceptability of each metonymic expression is not realized directly  . 
(3 ) Grouping metonymic examples into patterns is determined by the accepta-bility judgement of the speaker sur-veyed as well as the analysts ' intuition  . 
(4 ) The analysis and generation components treat metonymy differently using the patterns  . 
(5 ) The analysis component accepts a wider range of metonymy than the actual results of the survey  , and the generation component treats meto-nymy more strictly than the actual results  . 
We think that the approach is a starting point for more sophisticated approaches to translation in a multilirt gual machine translation environment  . 

Among others , both Lakoff and Johnson (1980) , and Fass ( 1991 ) divide metonymic expressions into several fixed pattern such as Part-For-Whole and Container -For- 
Content . Sentence (1) is a typical
Container-For-Content metonymy and " this glass " is replaced with " the liquid in this glass " in its metonymic reading  . 
(1) " He drank this glass."
One of the things that has been less focused on in previous literature on meto-nymy is the problem of generation typically in a machine translation system  . For example , even though the analysis component of a machine translation system produces a correct metonymic reading for sentence  ( 1 )  , i . e . " the liquid in this glass " for " this glass " , if the result of the analysis component is translate directly in word-for-word manner  , such an output sentence may not be natural in the target language  . On the other hand , it may not be appropriate either for the generation component to produce a sentence which is a direct translation of the original metonymy if the target language does not allow such expression  . 
We think it is necessary for a multil-ingual machine translation system to have not only understanding of metonymy which most previous works on metonymy have focused on  , but also proper ways to handle generation of metonymy  . In order to find out ways to treat metonymy properly in a multilingual environment  , we have conducted a survey on acceptability of various examples of metonymy among English  , Chinese , and Japanese . The patterns of previous works ( Fass 1991 , Lakoff and be obtained from the intuition of the analysts  . However , we think that the patterns which are based on the analysts ' intuition to begin with should be supported and determined more precisely by the result of this kind of survey  . An analysis based on actual data allows us to establish a clear set of patterns and subgroups  , for example to decide whether we require either Producer-For-Product  ( Lakoff and Johnson 1980 ) or Artist-for-Art form ( Fass 1991 )  , or both of them . 
A SURVEY OF METONY MY
A comparative survey on acceptability of metonymic expressions in English  , Chinese and Japanese has been conducted . All of the 25 sentences which are used in the survey are taken from metonymy examples in 
English in previous works ( Lakoff and
Johnson 1980, Fass 1991, Yamanashi 1987) . We asked native speakers of the three languages to score the acceptability of each sentence  . Direct translations were used for Chinese and Japanese  . The different languages show differences in accep -tability  ( for the details , Kamei and Wakao 1992) . 
Based on both intuitive analyses and the result of the  . survey , we have esta , blished four major patterns , and several subgroups for the first pattern ( Locating ) as shown in Appendix A . The patterns are 1) Locating , 2) Emphasis of one aspect ,  3 ) Abstract and collective entity for its consisting concrete items  , and 4) Information conveyer for information giver . 
For example , sentence ( 2 ) belongs to the second group of Locating pattern ( Pro-ducer for Product )  . Examples of " Ford " , " Picasso " , " Steinbeck " and " Bach " also belong to this group  ( see Appendix A1 . 2) . 
These sentences are fully acceptable in
English and Japanese , however , their acceptability is low in Chinese and sentence  ( 2 ) is completely unacceptable . 
(2) " Heread Mao."
On the other hand , sentence (3) belongs to the fourth pattem , information conveyer and giver . The tendency of the pattern is that those examples in this pattern are acceptable in English and Chinese  , but not in Japanese . 
(3) " The sign said fishing was prohibited here."
ANAPPROACH TO TRANS LATING

An important point to realize is that actual computational treatment of metonymic expressions idetermined by the accepta-bility of the pattern to which the expression belongs  . Another important point is that the analysis and generation components of a machine translation system should treat metonymy differently  . 
We believe that the main factors for treating metonymy correctly in a multil-ingual machine translation system are  1  ) its universality , which can be a guideline for the analysis component  , 2) language dependency , which can be used for generation , and 3) others such as the context , culture , and familiarity . We think that it seems unrealistic to expect an actual machine translation system to cope well with the third of these factors at present  . Given the lack of such knowledge , our basic heuristics for treating metonymy areas follows: 
Even if some language shows the tendency of unacceptability  , if one or more languages how acceptance in the group to which the expression belongs to in the result of the survey  , the system should accept it for analysis , and come up with some metonymic reading using its inference mechanism  ( Iverson and Helmreich 1992 , Fass 1991) . Given such information , the generation component should look at the tendency of each language  . If the target language allows a metonymic expression which corresponds to the original form  , then the system should produce a direct translation since the translation preserves the naturalness  . However , if thenymic expression which corresponds to the original form  , then the system should use the result of the metonymic inference and come up with an acceptable translation  . 
We think that these basic heuristics are a good starting point for more sophisticated approaches to translation in a multilingual environment  . We intend as our next step to implement our ideas using existing system such as the ULTRAMT system  ( Wilks and Farwell 1990 ) and the
Metallel metonymic analysis program ( Iverson and Helmreich 1992 )  . 
APPENDIXA
Some of the metonymic sentences used in the survey . 
1. Locating 1.1 Container for Content
Daved rank the glasses.
The kettle is boiling.
1.2 Producer for Product
He bought a Ford.
He's gota Pi cas so in his room.
Anneread Steinbeck.
Ted played Bach.
Heread Mao.
2. Emphasis of one aspect
We need a couple of strong bodies for our team.
There are a lot of good heads in the university.
3. Abstract entity for concrete entity
Exxon has raised its price again.
Washington is insensitive to the needs of the people  . 
4 . Information conveyer for information giver The T . V . said it was very crowded at the festival . 
The sign said fishing was prohibited here.

Fass , Dan . (1991). met *: A Method for
Discriminating Metonymy and Metaphor by Computer . Computational
Linguistics , 17(1):49-90.
Iverson , Eric and Helmreich , Stephen.
(1992). Metallel : An Integrated
Approach to Nonliteral Phrase
Interpretation . Memoranda in Computer and Cognitive Science , MCCS-92-231 Computing Research Laboratory , New Mexico State University , 
Las Cruces NM.
Kamei , Shinichiro and Wakao , Takahiro.
(1992) . Metonymy : reassessment , survey of acceptability , and its treatment in a machine translation system . 
Memoranda in Computer and Cognitive Science , MCCS 92-236 Computing
Research Laboratory , New Mexico
State University , Las Cruces , NM.
Lakoff , George and Johnson , Mark . (1980).
Metaphor We Live By . London : Chicago University Press . 
Wilks , Yorick and Farwell , David . (1990).
A White Paper on Research in
Pragmatic-based Machine Translation.
Memoranda in Computer and Cognitive Science , MCCS-90-188 Computing Research Laboratory , New Mexico
State University , Las Cruces NM.
Yamanashi , Masa-aki .  (1987) . Metonymic interpretation and associative processes in natural language  . In
Language and Artificial Intelligence,
Makoto Nagao ( ed):77-86 . Amsterdam : Elsevier Science Publishers B . V . 

