ANAL GORITH MFORV PELLIPSIS
Daniel Hardt
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , PA 19104
Internet : hard t@linc.cis.upenn.edu

An algorithm is proposed to determine antecedents for VP ellipsis  . The algorithm eliminates impossible antecedents , and then imposes a preference ordering on possible antecedents  . The algorithm performs with 94% accuracy on a set of 304 examples of VP ellipsis collected from the Brown Corpus  . The problem of determining antecedents for VP ellipsis has received little attention in the literature  , and it is shown that the current proposal is a significant improvement over alternative approaches  . 

To understand an elliptical expression it is necessary to recover the missing material from surrounding context  . This can be divided into two subproblems : first , it is necessary to determine the antecedent expression  . Second , a method of reconstructing the antecedent expression at the ellipsis site is required  . Most of the literature on ellipsis has concerned itself with the second problem  . In this paper , I propose a solution for the first problem , that of determining the antecedent . I focus on the case of VP ellipsis . 
VP ellipsis is defined by the presence of an auxiliary verb  , but no VP , as in the following example 1: (1) a . It might have rained , any time ; b . only-it did not . 
To interpre the elliptical VP " did not " , the antecedent must be determined : in this case , " rained " is the only possibility . 
The input to the algorithm is an elliptical VP and a list of VP's occurring in proximity to the elliptical VP  . The algorithm eliminates certain VP's IAll examples are taken from the Brown Corpus unless otherwise noted  . 
9 that are impossible antecedents . Then it assigns preference lvels to the remaining VP's  , based on syntactic on figurations as well as other factors  . 
Any VP's with the same preference level are ordered in terms of proximity to the elliptical VP  . 
The antecedent is the VP with the highest preference level  . 
In what follows , I begin with the overall structure of the algorithm  . Next the subparts of the algorithm are described , consisting of the elimination of impossible antecedents  , and the determination of a preference ordering based on clausal relationships and subject coreference  . I then present the results of testing the algorithm on  304 examples of VP ellipsis collected from the Brown Corpus  . Finally , I examine other approaches to this problem in the literature  . 
THEALGORITHM
The input to the algorithm is an elliptical VP ( VPE )  , and VP list , a list of VP's occurring in the current sentence , and those occurring in the two immediately preceding sentences  . In addition , it is assumed that the parse trees of these sentences are available as global variables  , and that NP's in these parse trees have been assigned indices to indicate coreference and quantifier binding  . 
The antecedent selection function is:

VP list := remove-impossible(VP list,VPE)
VP list := assign-levels(VP list,VPE ) antecedent . := select-highest ( VP list , VPE ) First , impossible antecedents are removed from the VP list  . Then , the remaining items in VP list are assigned preference lvels  , and the item with the highest preference lvel is selected as the antecedent  . If there is more than one item with the same preference level  , the item closest to the VPE , scanning left from the VPE , is selected . 
The definition of the function remove-impossible is as follows : remove-impossible  ( VPlist , VPE)
For all v in VP list if ACD(v , VPE ) or
BE-DO-conflict(v , VPE ) then remove ( v , VP list ) There are two types of impossible antecedents : the first involves certain antecedent-containment structures  , and the second involves cases in which the antecedent contains a BE-form and the target contains a DO-form  . These are described in detail below . 
Next , preference lvels are assigned to remaining items in VP list by the assign-levels function  . 
(All items on VPlist are initialized with a level of  0  . ) assign-levels ( VP list , VPE)
For all v in VP list if related-clause ( v , VPE ) then v . level := v . level+1 if coref-subj(v,VPE ) then v . level := v . level + iAn antecedent is preferred if there is a clausal relationship between its clause and the VPE clause  , or if the antecedent and the VPE have coreferential subjects  . The determination of these preferences i described in detail below  . 
Finally , the select-highest function merely selects the item on VP list with the highest preference level  . If there is more than one item with the highest preference level  , the item neares to the
VPE(s canning left ) is selected.
IMPOSSIBLE ANTECEDENTS
This section concerns the removal of impossible antecedents from VP list  . There are two cases in which a given VP is not a possible antecedent  . 
The first deals with antecedent-containment , the second , with conflicts between BE-forms and DO-forms . 
ANTECEDENT CONTAIN MENT
There are cases of VP ellipsis in which the VPE is contained within the antecedent VP : 
IV\[...VPE . . . \]\] vP
Such cases are traditionally termed antecedent -contained dletion  ( ACD )  . 
They are highly constrained , although the proper troversial . It was claimed by May ( 1985 ) and others that ACD is only possible if a quantifier is present  . May argues that this explains the following contrast :  ( 2 ) a . Dulles suspected everyone who Angelt on did . 
b . * Dulles suspected Philby , who Angelt on did.
However , it has been subsequently noted ( cf.
Fiengo and May 1991 ) that such structures do not require the presence of a quantifier  , as shown by the following examples : (3) a . Dulles suspected Philby , who Angelt on did too . 
b . Dulles suspected Philby , who Angelt on didn't.
Thus the algorithm will allow cases of ACD in which the target is dominated by an NP which is an argument of the antecedent verb  . It will not allow cases in which the target is dominated by a sentential complement of the antecedent verb  , such as the following : ( 4 ) That still leaves you a lot of latitude . And
I suppose it did.
Here , " suppose " is not a possible antecedent for the elliptical VP  . In general , configurations of the following form are ruled out: 
IV\[... VPE.--\]s-..\]vP
BE/DOCONFLICTS
The auxiliary verb contributes various teatures to the complete verb phrase  , including tense , aspect , and polarity . There is no requirement that these features match in antecedent and elliptical VP  . 
However , certain conflicts do not appear to be possible . In general , it is not possible to have a DO-form as the elliptical VP  , with an overt BE-form in the antecedent . Consider the following example : ( 5 ) Norcan anyone be certain that Prokofief would have done better  , or even as well , under different circumstances . H is fellow-country man , Igor Stravinsky , certainly did not . 
In this example , there are two elements on the VP list : " be certain  . . . ", and " do better " . The target " did not " rules out " be certain " as a possible antecedent  , allowing only the reading " Stravinsky did not do better "  . If the elliptical VP is changed from " did not " to " was not "  , the situation is reversed ; the only possible reading is then " Stravin-sky was not certain that Prokofief would have done better  . . . " . 
A related conflict to be ruled out is that of a c -tive/passive conflicts  . A passive antecedent is not possible if the VPE is a DO-form  . For example: ( 6 ) Jubal did not hear of Digby's disappearance when it was announced  , and , when he did , while he had a fleeting suspicion , he dismissedit ; In this example , " was announced " is not a possible antecedent for the VPE " did "  . 
One possible exception to this rule involves progressive antecedents  , which , although they contain a BE-form , may be consistent with a DO-form target . The following ( constructed ) example seems marginally acceptable : ( 7 ) Tom was cleaning his room today . Harry did yesterday . 
Thus a BE-form together with a progressive does not conflict with a DO-form  . 
PREFERENCELEVELS
If there are several possible antecedents for a given VPE  , preferences among those antecedents are determined by looking for other relations between the VPE clause and the clauses containing the possible antecedents  . 
CLAUSAL RELATIONS HIPS
An antecedent for a given VPE is preferred if there is a configurational relationship between the antecedent clause and the VPE clause  . These include comparative structures and adverbial clauses  . 
Elliptical VP's ( VPE ) in comparative constructions are of the form \[ VP Comparative\[NP VPE \]\] where Comparatives are expression such as " as well as "  , " better than " , etc . In constructions of this form there is a strong preference that VP is the antecedent for VPE  . For example : (8) Now , if Morton's newest product , a corn chip known as Chip-o's , turns out to sell as well as its stock did . . . 
Here , the antecedent of the VPE " did " is the
VP " sell " .
The next configuration ivolves VPE's within adverbial clauses  . For example , (9) But if you keep a calendar of events , as we do , you noticed a conflict . 
Here the antecedent for the VPE " do " is " keep a calendar of events "  . In general , in configurations of the form : VP is preferred over other possible antecedents  . 
It is important to note that this is a preference rule  , rather than an obligatory constraint . Although no examples of this kind were found in the Brown Corpus  , violations of this constraint may well be possible  . For example: ( 10 ) John can walk faster than Harry can run . 
Bill can walk faster than Barry can.
If a reading is possible in which the VPE is " Barry can run "  , this violates the clausal relationship preference rule  . 
SUBJECT COREFERENCE
Another way in which two clauses are related is subject coreference  . An antecedent is preferred if its subject corefers with that of the elliptical VP  . 
An example: ( 11 ) He wondered if the audience would let him finish . They did . 
The preferred reading has " they " coreferential with " the audience " and the antecedent for " did " the VP " leth imfinish "  . 
Subject " coreference " is determined manually , and it is meant to reflect quantifier binding as well as ordinary coreference - that is  , standard instances involving coindexing of NP's . 
Again , it must be emphasized that the subject coreference rule is a preference rule rather than an obligatory constraint  . While no violations were found in the Brown corpus  , it is possible to construct such examples . 
INTERACTION OF PREFERENCE

There are cases where more than one preference rule applies  . The antecedent selected is the item with the highest preference level  . If more than one item has the same preference level  , the item neares to the VPE is selected , where nearness is determined by number of words encountered scanning left from the VPE  . 
In the following example , two preference rules apply : (12) usually , this is most exasperating to men , who expect every woman to verify their preconceived notions concerning hersex  , and when she does not , immediately con-demn her a seccentric and unwomanly  . 
The VPE clause is an adverbial clause modifying the following clause  . Thus the VP " condemn her a seccentric and unwomanly " receives a preference level of  1  . The subject " she " of the VPE is coindexed with " every woman "  . This causes the VP " verify their preconceived notions concerning hersex " to also receive a preference level of  1  . 
Since both of these elements have the same preference level  , proximity is determined by scanning left from the VPE  . This selects " verify their preconceived notions concerning hersex " as the antecedent  . 
TESTING THE ALGORITHM
The algorithm has been tested on a set of 304 examples of VP ellipsis collected from the Brown Corpus  . These examples were collected using the UNIX grep pattern-matching utility  . The version of the Brown Corpus used has each word tagged by part of speech  . I defined search patterns for auxiliary verbs that did not have verbs nearby  . These patterns did not succeed in locating all the instances of VP ellipsis in the Brown Corpus  . However , the 304 examples do cover the full range of types of material in the Brown Corpus  , including both " Informative " ( e . g . , journalistic , scientific , and government texts ) and " I maginative " ( e . g . , novels , short stories , and humor) . I have divided these examples into three categories  , based on whether the antecedent is in the same sentence as the VPE  , the adjacent ( preceding ) sentence , or earlier (" Long-Distance ") . The definition of sentence is taken from the sentence divisions present in the Brown Corpus  . 

The algorithm selected the correct antecedent in 285  , or 94% of the cases . For comparison purposes , I present results of an alternative strategy ; namely , a simple linear scan of preceding text . In this strategy , the first verb that is encountered is taken to be the head of the antecedent VP  . 
The results of the algorithm and the " Linear Scan " approach are displayed in the following table  . 





Algorithm
No . Correct 193 (96%) 85 (92%) 7(47%) 285 (94%)
Linear Scan
No . Correct 172 ( 88% )  72 ( 77% )  2 ( 13% )  247 ( 81% ) The algorithm performs considerably better than Linear Scan  . Much of the improvement is due to " impossible antecedents " which are selected by the Linear Scan approach because they are closest to the VPE  . A frequent case of this is containing antecedents hat are ruled out by the algorithm  . Another case distinguishing the algorithm from Linear Scan involves coreferential subjects  . 
There were several cases in which the coreferential subject preference rule caused an antecedent to be selected that was not the nearest to the VPE  . 
One example is : (13) a . But , darn it all , why should we help a couple of spoiled snobs who had looked down their noses at us ? b  . But , in the end , we did . 
Here , the correct antecedent is the more distant " help a couple of  . . . ", rather than " looked down their noses . . . " . There were no cases in which Linear Scan succeeded where the algorithm failed  . 
(14) a .
SOURCE SOFERROR
I will now look at sources of errors for the algorithm  . The performance was worst in the Long Distance category  , in which at least one sentence intervenes between antecedent and VPE  . In several problem cases in the Long Distance category  , it appears that intervening text contains some mechanism that causes the antecedent to remain salient  . For example : " . . . in Underwater Western Eye I'd have a chance to act  . I could show what I can do " . 
b . As far as I was concerned , she had already and haddandily shown what she could do  . 
In this case , the elliptical VP " had already " means " had already had a chance to act "  . The algorithm incorrectly selects " show what I can do " as the antecedent  . The intervening sentence causes the previous antecedent to remain salient  , since it is understood as " ( If I hadachance to act then ) I could show what I can do . " Furthermore , the choice made by the algorith might perhaps be eliminated on pragmatic grounds  , given the oddness of " she had already shown what she could do and haddandily shown what she could do  . " Another way in which the algorithm could be generalized is illustrated by the follow example :   ( 15 ) a . " I didn't ask you to fight for the ball club ",
Phil said slowly.
b . " Nobody else did , either " .
Here the algorithm incorrectly selects ' ~ fight for the ball club " as the antecedent  , instead of " ask you to fight for the ball club " . The subject coreference rule does not apply , since " Nobody else " possible antecedents . However , its interpretation is dependent on the subject ' T'of " ask you to fight for the ball club "  . Thus , if one generalized the subject coreference rule to include such forms of dependence  , the algorithm would succeed on such examples . 
Many of the remaining errors involve an antecedent that takes a VP or S as complement  , often leading to subtle ambiguities . One example of this is the following : (16) a . Usually she marked the few who did thank you , you didn't get that kind much in a place like this : and she played a little game with herself  , seeing how downright rude she could act to the others  , before they ' d take of fense , threaten to call the manager . 
b . Funny howseldom they did : used to it , probably . 
Here the algorithm selects " call the manager " as antecedent  , instead of " threaten to call the manager " , which I determined to be the correct antecedent . It may be that many of these cases involve a genuine ambiguity  . 
OTHERAPPROACHES
The problem addressed here , of determining the antecedent for an elliptical VP  , has received little attention in the literature . Most treatments of VP ellipsis ( cf . Sag 1976 , Williams 1977 , Webber 1978 , Fiengo and May 1990 , Dalrymple , Shieber and Pereira 1991 ) have focused on the question of determining what readings are possible  , given an elliptical VP and a particular antecedent  . For a computational system , a method is required to determine the antecedent , after which the possible readings can be determined  . 
Lappin and McCord ( 1990 ) present an algorithm for VP ellipsis which contains a partial treatment of this problem  . However , while they define three possible ellipsis -antecedent configurations  , they have nothing to say about selecting among alternatives  , if there is more than one VP in an allowed configuration  . The three configurations given by Lappin and McCord for a VPE-antecedent pair < V  , A > are : 1 . V is contained in the clausal complement of a subordinate conjunction SC  , where the SC-phrase is either ( i ) an adjunct of A , or ( ii ) an adjunct of a noun N and N heads an NP argument of A  , or N heads the NP argument of an adjunct of A . 
2 . V is contained in a relative clause that modifies a head noun N  , with N contained in A , and , if in At , then Ap is an infinitival complement of A or a verb contained in A  . 
3 . V is contained in the right conjunct of a sentential conjunction S  , and A is contained in the left conjunct of S . 
An examination of the Brown Corpus examples reveals that these configurations are incomplete in important ways  . First , there is no configuration that allows a sentence intervening between antecedent and VPE  . Thus , none of the Long-Distance xamples ( about 5% of the sample ) would be covered . Configuration ( 3 ) deals with antecedent-VPE pairs in adjacent S's . There are many such cases in which there is no sentential conjunction  . For example : (17) a . All the generals who held important commands in World War  2  , did not write books . 
b . It only seems as if they did.
Perhaps configuration ( 3 ) could be interpreted as covering any adjacent S ' s  , whether or not an explicit conjunction is present  .  9 . 
Furthermore , there are cases in which the adjacent categories are something other than S  ; in the following two examples , the antecedent and
VPE are in adjacent VP's.

The experts are thus forced to hypothesize sequences of events that have never occurred  , probably never will-but possibly might . 
The innocent malfeasant , filled with that supreme sense of honor found in bars  , in-sisted upon replacing the destroyed mona-cle- and did  , over the protests of the former owner-with a square monacle  . 
In the following example , the adjacent category is S ' . 
(20 ) I remember himpointing out of the window and saying that he wished he could live to see another spring but that he wouldn't  . 
Configurations ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) deal with antecedent-VPE pairs within the same sentence  . 
In Configuration (1) , the VPE is in a subordinate clause , and In(2) , the VPE is in a relative clause . 
In each case , the VPE is c-commanded by the antecedent A . While the configurations cover two 2However , a distinction must be maintained between VPE and related phenomena such as gapping and " pseudo -gapping "  , in which an explicit conjunction is required . 
quite common cases , there are other same sentence configurations in which the antecedent does not c-command the VPE  . 

In the first place , a good many writers who are said to use folk lore , do not , unless one counts an occasional superstition or tale  . 
In reply to a question of whether they now tax boats  , airplanes and other movable property excluding automobiles  , nineteen said that they did and twenty that they did not  . 
In sum , the configurations defined by Lappin and McCord would miss a significant number of cases in the Brown Corpus  , and , even where they do apply , there is no method for deciding among alternative possibilities  .  3

To interpret an elliptical expression it is necessary to determine the antecedent expression  , after which a method of reconstructing the antecedent expression at the ellipsis site is required  . While the literature on VP ellipsis contains a vast array of proposals concerning the proper method of reconstructing a given antecedent for an elliptical VP  , there has been little attention to the question of determining the antecedent  . 
In this paper , I have proposed a solution to this problem ; I have described an algorithm that determines the antecedent for elliptical VP's  . It was shown that the algorithm achieves 94% accuracy on 304 examples of VP ellipsis collected from the Brown Corpus  . Many of the failure cases appear to be due to the interaction of VPE with other anaphoric phenomena  , nd others may be cases of genuine ambiguity . 

Thanks to Aravind Joshi and Bonnie Webber.
This work was supported by the following grants : ARODAAL  03-89-C-0031  , DARPAN 00014-90-J-1863 , NSF IRI90-16592 , and Ben Franklin 91 S . 3078C-1 . 

Susan E . Brennan , Marilyn Walker Friedman , and Carl J . Pollard . A Centering Approach to Pro-3While the problem of antecedent determination for VP ellipsis has been largely neglected  , the analogous problem for pronoun resolution has been addressed  ( cf . Hobbs 1978 , Grosz , Joshi , and Weinstein 1983 and 1986 , and Brennan , Friedman and Pollard 1987) , and two leading proposals have been subjected to empirical testing  ( Walker 1989 )  . 
\]4 nouns , Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the ACL ,  1987 . 
Mary Dalrymple , Stuart Shieber and Fernando Pereira . Ellipsis and Higher-Order Unification . Linguistics and Philosophy . Vol . 14, no . 
4, August 1991.
Robert Fiengo and Robert May . Ellipsis and Anaphora . Paper presented at GLOW 1990 , Cambridge University , Cambridge , England . 
Robert Fiengo and Robert May .ndices and
Identity . ms . 1991.
Barbara Grosz , Aravind Joshi , and Scott We-instein . Providing a Unified Account of Definite Noun Phrases in Discourse  . In Proceedings , 2 Ist Annual Meeting of the ACL , pp . 44-50, Cambridge , MA , 1983 . 
Barbara Grosz , Aravind Joshi , and Scott We-instein . Towards a Computational Theory of Discourse Interpretation  . ms .  1986 . 
Isabelle Haik . Bound VP's That Need To Be.
Linguistics and Philosophy 11:503-53 0.1987.
Jerry Hobbs . Resolving Pronoun References,
Lingua 44, pp . 311-338.1978.
Shalom Lappin and Michael McCord.
Anaphora Resolution in Slot Grammar , in Computational Linguistics , vol 16 , no 4 .  1990 . 
Robert May . Logical Form : Its Structure and Derivation , MIT Press , Cambridge Mass .  1985 . 
Ivan A . Sag . Deletion and Logical Form.
Ph.D . thesis , MIT . 1976.
Marilyn Walker . Evaluating discourse processing algorithms . In Proceedings , 27th Annual Meeting of the ACL , Vancouver , Canada .  1989 . 
Bonnie Lynn Webber . A Formal Approach to Discourse Anaphora . Ph . D . thesis , Harvard University .  1978 . 
Edwin Williams . Discourse and Logical Form.
Linguistic Inquiry , 8(1):101-139.1977.
