ANLR CATEGORY-NEUTRAL PARSER WITHLEF TCORNER

Paola Merlo
University of Maryland/Universit ~ de Gen~ve
Fs cult ~ des Lettres
CH-1211 Gen~ve 4
merlo@divsun ., nige.ch
Abstract
In this paper we present a new parsing model of linguistic and computational interest  . Linguistically , the relation between the paxsez and the theory of grammar adopted  ( Government and Binding ( GB ) theory as presented in Chomsky ( 1981 , 1986 a , b ) is clearly specified . Computationally , this model adopts a mixed parsing procedure , by using left corner prediction in a modified LR parser  . 
ONLINGUISTICTHEORY
For a parser to be linguistically motivated , it must be transparent to a linguistic theory , under some precise notion of transparency ( see Abney 1987 ) ~GB theory is a modular theory of abstract principles  . A parser which encodes a modular theory of grammax must fulfill apparently contradictory demands : for the parser to be explanatory it must maintain the modularity of the theory  , while for the paxser to be efficient , modularization must be minimized so that all potentially necessary information is available at all times  , x We explore a possible solution to this contradiction  . We observe that linguistic information can be classified into  5 different classes , as shown in (1) , on the basis of their informational content . These we will ca\]\]IC

(1) a . Configurations : isterhood , c-command , m-command , : t : maximal projection . .  . 
b . Lexical features : ~ N , ? V , ? Funct , ? c-selected , : t : Strong Agr .   .   . 
c . Syntactic features : ? Case , ~8, ?7, ~ baxrier . 
d . Locality information : minimality , binding , antecedent government . 
e . Referential information : + D-linked , ? anaphor , ? pronominal . 
IOn efficiency of GB-based systems tad (1990) , Kashkett (1991) . 
see RJs-cisely the amount of modularity in the parser  . 
Berwick ( 1982:400ff ) shows that a modulax system is efficient only if modules that depend on each other axe compiled  , while independent modules axe not . We take the notion of dependent and independent to correspond to ICClasses  , in that primitives that belong to the same IC Class axe dependent on each other  , while primitives that belong to different IC Classes axe independent from each other  . We impose a modularity requirement that makes precise predictions for the design of the parser  . 
Modularity Requirement ( MR ) Only primitives that belong to the same ICClass can be compiled in the parser  . 
RECOVERING PHRASE

According to the MR , notion such as headedness , directionality , sisterhood , and maximal projection can be compiled and stored in a data structure  , because these notions belong to the same IC Class  , configurations . These features are compiled into contextfree rules in our parser  . These basic X rules axe augmented by A rules licensed by the part of Trace theory that deals with configurations  . The crucial feature of this grammar is that nontermin a \] s specify only the X projection level  , and not the category . The full contextfree gram-max is shown in Figure 1  . 
The recovery of phrase structure is a crucial component of a parser  , as it builds the skeleton which is needed for feature annotation  . It must be efficient and it must fail as soon as an error is encountered  , in order to limit backtracking . AnLR ( k ) parser ( Knuth 1965 ) has these properties , since it is deterministic on unambiguous input , and it has been proved to recognize only valid prefixes  . In our parser , we compile the grammar shown above into an LALR ( 1 )   ( Aho and Ullma ~ n1972 ) parse table . The table has been modified
X " ~ Y " X'
X "--' X'Y "
X '--' XY "
X '--+?" X
X ' --* Y " X'
X '--' X'Y "
X " - - ~ Y " X "
X "--' X"Y "
X --, empty
X "--, empty
Figure 1: specification complementation modification adjunction empty heads empty X maxs 
Category-Neutral Grammar in order to have more than one action for each table entry  .   2 Three stacks are used : a stack for the states traversed so far  ; a stack for the semantic attributes associated with each of the nodes  ; a tree stack of partial trees . The LR algorithm is encoded in a parse predicate , which establishes a relation between two sets of 5-tuples   , as shown in (2) . s(2)Tix$ixA~xCixPT~--*T~xSjxA . ~ xCjxPT ~ Our parser is more elaborate and less restrictive than a standard LR parser  , because it imposes conditions on the attributes of the states and it is nondeterministic  . In order to reduce the amount of nondeterminism , some predictive power has been introduced . The cooccurenee restrictions between categories , and subcategorization if ormation of verbs is compiled in a table  , which we call Left Corner Prediction Table ( LC Table )  . By looking at the current token , at its category label , and its subcategorization frame , the number of choices of possible next states can be restricted  . 
For instance , if the current token is a verb , and the LR table allows the parser either to project one level up to V ~  , or it requires to create an empty object NP , then , on consulting the subcategorization information , the parser can eliminate the second option as incorrect if the verb is intransitive  . 
RESULTS AND COMMENTS
The design presented so farembo dies the MR , since it compiles only dependent features in two tables offline  . Compared to the use of partially or fully instantiated contextfree grammars  , this 2This modification is necessary because the grammar compiled into the LR table is not an LR grammar  . 
S in ( 2 ) T ~ is an element of the set of input tokens , Ss is an element of the set of states in the LR table  , At is an element of the set of attributes associated with each state in the table  , C~i  San element of the set of chains , i . e . displaced element , and PTki San element of the set of tokens predicted by the left corner table  ( see below )  . 

Grammar Instantiated
Number of Rules 51
Number of States
Shift/reduce conflicts
Reduce/reduce conflicts 270

Figure 2: Numbers organization of the parsing algorithms has been found to be better on several grounds  . 
Consider again the X grammar that we use in the parser  , shown in Figure 1 . One of the crucial features of this grammar is that the nonterminals are specified only for level and headedness  . This version of the grammar is a recent result . In previous implementations of the parser , the projections of the head in a rule were instantiated : for instance NP--~YPIV '  . Empirically , we find that on compiling the partially instantiated grammar the number of rules is increased proportionately to the number of categories  , and so is the number of conflicts in the table . Figure 2 shows the relative sizes of the LALR ( 1 ) tables and the number of conflicts . Moreover , on closer inspection of the entries in the table , categories that belong to the same level of projection show the same re-duce/reduce conflicts  . This means that introducing unrestricted categoriM information increases the size of the table without decreasing the number of conflicts in each entry  , i . e . without reducing the nondeterminism in the table . 
These findings confirm that categorial information can be factored out of the compiled table  , as predicted by the MR . The information about cooccurreneer strictions , category and subcategorization frame is compiled in the Left Corner  ( LC ) table , as described above . Using two compiled tables that interact online is better than compiling all the information into a fully instantiated  , standard contextfree grammar for several reasons . 4 Computational \] y , it is more efllcient , s Practically , manipulating a small , highly abstract grammar is 4Fully iustantiated grammars have been used , among others , by Tomita (1985) in an LR parser , and by Doff (1990) , Fong (1991) in GB-based parsers . 
sit has been argued elsewhere that for contextfree parsing algorithms  , the size of the graxrtrnsr ( which iS a constant factor ) can easily become the predominant factor for a11 useful inputs ( see Berwick and Weinberg 1982 )  . Work on compilation of parsers that use GPSG seems to point in the same direction  . The separation of strnctu ~ al information from coocct trencer strictions iS advocated in Kilbury  ( 1986 )  ; both Shieber ( 1986 ) and Phi\]Hps ( 1987 ) argue that the combinatorial explosion ( Barton 1985 ) of a fully expanded ID/LP formalism can be avoided by using feature variables in the compiled gxammar  . See also Thompson 1982 . 
much easier . It is easy to maintain and to embed in a fullfledged parsing system  . Linguistically , a fully-instantiated paxser would not be transpaxent to the theory and it would be language dependent  . 
Finally , it could not model some experimental psy -choling nistic evidence  , which we present below . 
PSYCHOLINGUISTICSUPPORT
A reading task is presented in F~azier and Rayner 1987 where eye movements are monitored : they find that in locally ambiguous contexts  , the ambiguous region takes less time than an unambiguous e o unterpaxt  , while a slowdown in processing time is registered in the disambiguating region  . This suggests that selection of major categorial information in lexically ambiguous sentences i delayed  , eTh is delay means that the parser must be able to operate in absence of categorial information  , making use of a set of category-neutral phrase structure rules  . This separation of item-dependent and item -independent information is encoded in the grammax used in our paxser  . A parser that uses instantiated categories would have to store categorial cooccurence rstrictions in a different data structure  , to be consulted in case of lexically ambiguous inputs  . Such design would be redundant , because categorial information would be encoded twice  . 

The module described in this paper is implemented and embedded in a parser for English of limited coverage  , but it has some shortcomings , which axe currently under investigation . Refinements axe needed to compile the LC table automatically  , to define ICClasses predictively instead of by exhaustive listing  . Finally , a formal proof is needed to show that our definition of independent and dependent is always going to increase efficiency  . 

This work has benefited from suggestions by Bonnie Doff  , Paul Gorrell , Eric Wehrli and Amy Weinberg . The author is supported by a Fellowship from the Swiss-Italian Foundation  . 
eFor instance , in the sentences in (3) ,   ( from F ~ azier and Rayner 1987 ) the ambiguous target item , shown in capitals in (3) a , takes less time than the unambiguous control in ( 3 ) b , while there is a slow down in the disambiguating material  ( in italics )  . 
(3) a . The warehouse FIRES numerous employees each year . 
b . That warehouse fixes numerous employees a chyear . 

Abney Steven 1987 , "GBPaxsing and Psychological Reality " in MIT Paxsing Volume  , Cognitive
Science Center.
AhoA . V . and J . D . Ullman 1972 , The Theory of Parsing , Translation and Compiling , Prentice-
Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ.
Barton Edward 1985, " The Computational
Difficulty of ID/LP Parsing " in Proc . of the ACL . 
Berwick Robert 1982 , Locality Principles and the Acquisition of Syntactic Knowledge  , Ph . D
Diss ., MIT.
Berwick Robert and Amy Weinberg 1982 , " Paxsing Efficiency , Computational Complexity and the Evaluation of Grammatical Theories "  , 
Linguistic Inquiry , 13: 165-191.
Chomsky Noam 1981 , Lectures on Government and Binding , For is , Dordrecht . 
Chomsky Noam 1986a , Knowledge of Language : Its Nature , Origin and Use , Praeger , New

Chomsky Noam 1986b , Barriers , MIT Press,
Cambridge MA.
Dorr Bonnie J .  1990 , Lezical Conceptual Structure and Machine Translation  , Ph . D Diss . , MIT . 
Fong Sandiway 1991 , Computational Properties of Principle-based Grammatical Theories  , 
Ph.D Diss ., MIT.
Frazier Lyn and Keith Rayner 1987 , " Resolution of Syntactic Category Ambiguities : Eye Movements in Parsing Lexically Ambiguous Sentences " in Journal of Memory and Language  ,  26:505-526 . 
Kashkett Michael 1991, A Parameterised
Parser for English and Warlpiri , Ph.D Diss.,

Kilbury James 1986 , " Category Cooccurrence Restrictions and the Elimination of Metaxules "  , in
Proc . of COLING , 5055.
Knuth Donald 1965 , " On the ' I ~ anslation of Languages from Left to Right "  , Information and
Control , 8.
Phillips John 1987 , " A Computational Representation for GPSG " , DAI Research Paper 316 . 
Ristad Eric 1990, Computational Strnc ~ ure of
Human Language , MITAILab , TR1260.
Shieber Stuart 1986 , " A Simple Reconstruction of GPSG " in Proc . of COLING , 211-215 . 
Thompson Henry 1982 , " Handling Metaxules in a Parser for GPSG " in Proc  . of COLING . 
Tomita Masaru 1985, E~cien ~ Parsing for
Natural Language , Kluwe I , Hingham , MA.

