ACCGAPPROACH TO FREE WORDOR DERL ANGUAGES
Beryl Hoffman "
Dept . of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , PA 19104
( hoffman@linc.cis.upenn.edu )

In this paper , I present work in progress on an extension of Combinatory Categorial Grammars  , CCGs ,   ( Steedman 1985 ) to handle languages with freer word order than English  , specifically Turkish . The approach I develop takes advantage of CCGs ' ability to combine the syntactic as well as the semantic representations of adjacent elements in a sentence in an incremental manner  . The linguistic claim behind my approach is that free word order in Turkish is a direct result of its grammar and lexical categories  ; this approach is not compatible with a linguistic theory involving movement operations and traces  . 
A rich system of case markings identifies the predicate-argument structure of a Turkish sentence  , while the word order serves a pragmatic function . The pragmatic functions of certain positions in the sentence roughly consist of a sentence -initial position for the topic  , an immediately preverbal position for the focus , and postverbal positions for backgrounded information  ( Erguvanli 1984 )  . The most common word order in simple transitive sentences iSOV  ( Subject-Object-Verb )  . However , all of the permutations of the sentence seen below are grammatical in the proper discourse situations  . 
(1) a . Ay ~ egazete yiokuyor.
Ay~e newspaper-accread-present.
Ay~e is reading the newspaper.
b . Gazeteyi Ay ~ eokuyor.
c . Ay ~ eokuy orgaze teyi.
d . Gazeteyiokuy or Ay~e.
e . Okuy orgaze teyi Ay~e.
f . Okuyor Ay ~ egazeteyi.
Elements with overt case marking generally can scramble freely  , even out of embedded clauses . This suggest a CCG approach where case-marked elements are functions which can combine with one another and with verbs in any order  . 
* I thank Young-Suk Lee , Michael Niv , Jong Park , Mark Steedman , and Michael White for their valuable advice . 
This work was partially supported by ARt DAAL03-89-C-0031  , DARPAN 00014-90-J-1863 , NSF IRI90-16592 , 
BenFranklin 91S . 3078C-1.
Karttunen ( 1986 ) has proposed a Categorial Grammar formalism to handle free word order in Finnish  , in which noun phrases are functors that apply to the verbal basic elements  . Our approach treats case-marked noun phrases as functors as well  ; however , we allow verbs to maintain their status as functors in order to handle object-incorporation ad the combining of nested verbs  . In addition , CCGs , unlike Karttunen's grammar , allow the operations of composition and type raising which have been useful in handling a variety of linguistic phenomena including long distance dependencies and nonconstituent coordination  ( Steedman 1985 ) and will play an essential role in this analysis . 
ANOVER VIE WOF CCGs
In CCGs , grammatical categories are of two types : curried functors and basic categories to which the functors can apply  . A category such as X/Y represents a function looking for an argument of category Y on its right and resulting in the category X  . A basic category such as X serves as a shorthand for a set of syntactic and semantic features  . 
A short set of combinatory ules serve to combine these categories while preserving a transparent relation between syntax and semantics  . The application rules allow functors to combine with their arguments  . 
Forward Application (>):
X/Y Y ~ X
Backward Application (<):
Y X\Y ~ X
In addition , egGs include composition rules to combine together two functor syntactically and semantically  . If these two functors have the semantic interpretation F and G  , the result of their composition has the interpretation AzF  ( G ,  ) . 
Forward Composition (> B ): x/vv/zx/z
Backward Composition (< B ): v\zx\vx\z
Forward Crossing Composition (>\]3 . r): . ', IVv\z . \\z Backward Crossing Composition ( < B : r ) : v/zx/z
Representing Verbs:
In this analysis , we represent both verbs and case-marked noun phrases as functors  . In Karttunen's analysis (1986) , although a verb is a basic element rather than a functor  , its arguments are specified as subcategorization features of its basic element category  . We choose to directly represent a verb's subcategorization in its functor category  . An advantage of this approach is that at the end of a parse  , we do not need an extra process to check if all the arguments of a verb have been found  ; this falls out of the combination rules . 
Also , certain verbs need to act as active functors in order to combine with objects without case marking  . 
Following a suggestion of Mark Steedman , I define the verb to be an uncurried function which specifies a set of arguments that it can combine within any order  . For instance , a transitive verb looking for a nominative case noun phrase and an accusative case noun phrase has the category SINn  , Na . The slash I in this function is undetermined in direction  ; direction is a feature which can be specified for each of the arguments  , notated as a narrow above the argument , e . g . S\]~, . Since Turkish is not strictly verb final , most verbs will not specify the direction features of their arguments  . 
The use of uncurried notation allows great freedom in word order among the arguments of a verb  . 
However , we will want to use the curried notation for some functors to enforce a certain ordering among the functors ' arguments  . For example , object nouns or clauses without case-marking cannot scramble at all and must remain in the immediately preverbal position  . Thus , verbs which can take a socalled incorporated object will also have a curried functor category such as SINn  , Ndl ~ forcing the verb to first apply to a noun without case-marking to its immediate left before combining with the rest of its arguments  . 
Representing Nouns:
The interaction between case-marking and the ability to scramble in Turkish supports the theory that case-marked nouns act as functors  . Following Steedman (1985) , order-preserving typeraising rules are used to convert nouns in the grammar into functors over the verbs  . The following rules are obligatorily activated in the lexicon when case-marking morphemes attach to the noun stems  . 
Type Raising Rules : >
N + case(vl . . . ) IvlN ' aae .   .   .   . < N + case ~( vl . . . ) Ivl N case . . . .  The first rule indicates that a noun in the presence of a case morpheme becomes a functor looking for a verb on its right  ; this verb is also a functor looking for the original noun with the appropriate case on its left  . After the noun functor combines with the appro -priam verb  , the result is a functor which is looking for the remaining arguments of the verb  . v is actually a variable for a verb phrase at any level  , e . g . the verb of the matrix clause or the verb of an embedded clause  . The notation . . . is also a variable which can unify with one or more elements of a set  . 
The second typeraising rule indicates that a case -marked noun is looking for a verb on its left  . Our CCG formalism can model a strictly verb-final language by restricting the noun phrases of that language to the first typeraising rule  . Since most , but not all , case-marked nouns in Turkish can occur behind the verb  , certain pragmatic and semantic properties of a Turkish noun determine whether it can type-raise using either rule or is restricted to only the first rule  . 
The Extended Rules :
We can extend the combinatory rules for uncurried functions as follows  . The sets indicated by braces in these rules are order-free  , i . e . Y in the following rules can be any element in the set  . x
Forward Application '(>):
X l . . . . Y
Backward Application '(<):
Y .... = xl ...
Using these new rules , a verb can apply to its arguments in any order , or as in most cases , the case-marked noun phrases which are type -raised functors can apply to the appropriate verbs  . 
Certain coordination constructions ( such as SO and SOV , SOV and SO ) force us to allow two type-raised noun phrases which are looking for the same verb to combine together  . Since both noun phrases are functors , the application rules above do not apply . The following composition rules are proposed to allow the combining of two functors  . 
Forward Composition '(>/3): ---- Jlxlr .   .   .   . , Yl , . .  .   .  -,
Backward Composition '( </3): t,--
YI . . . 1xlr . . . . 2Xl ..., ....
The following example demonstrates these rules in analyzing sentence  ( 1 ) b in the scrambled word order
Object-Subject-Verb : 2   1We assume that a category Xl where is the empty set rewrites by some cleanup rule to just X  . 
2The bindings of the first composition axe e ~ - v  ~  ,   . . . 2-- Na . . . . , . 

Gazeteyi Ay~evll .   .   . 1lvalffa . .  .   . a v = l . .  . ~ lv21 ffn . . . .~  > B > ( v,l . . . ~) lvllNn , Na . . . . 1  >

LONG DIST ANCE SCRAMBLING
In complex Turkish sentences with clausal arguments  , elements of the embedded clauses can be scrambled to positions in the main clause  , i . e . long distances crambling . Long distances crambling appears to be no different hanlocal scrambling as a syntactic and pragmatic operation  . Generally , long distances crambling is used to move an element into the sentence-initial topic position or to background it by moving it behind the matrix verb  . 
(2) a .
Fauna\[Ay~e'mngittigini \] biliyor.
Fauna\[Ay~e-gengo-ger-3sg-acc\]know-prog.
Fa Unaknows that Ay~ewent away.
b . Ay~e'nm Fa Una\[gittigini \] biliyor.
Ay~e-genFatma\[go-ger-acc\]know-prog.
c . Fauna \ [ gittigini \] biliy or Ay ~ e'mn.
Fauna \ [ go-ger-acc\]know-progAy~e-gen.
The composition rules allow noun phrases to combine regardless of whether or not they are the arguments of the same verb  . The same rules allow two verbs to combine together  . In the following , the semantic interpretation of a category is expressed following the syntactic ategory  . 
go-nominal-acck nows.
S  ~ , :( go'y)lNg:yS:(know'p =) IN n:z , SN , : p < Bokuyor . 

S : ( kno'w'(go'y)x)lNg:y,Nn : " ~
AS the two verbs combine , their arguments collapse into one argument set in the syntactic representation  . 
However , the verbs ' respective arguments are still distinct within the semantic representation f the sentence  . The predicate-argument structure of the subordinate clause is embedded into the semantic representation of the matrix clause  . 
Long distances crambling in Turkish is quite free ; however , there are many pragmatic and processing constraints  . A syntactic restriction may be needed to explain why elements in certain adjunct clauses  ( though not all ) are very hard to long distances cramble . To account for these clauses , we can assign the head of the restricted adjunct clause a curried functor category such as XIX largurn  . ents . . . rather than XIX , arguments . . . . The curried category forces the adjunct head to combine with all of its arguments in the adjunct clause before combining with the con-stituent it modifies  . This blocks long distances crambling out of that adjunct clause  . 

As mentioned before , another use for curried functions is with object nouns or clauses without case marking which are forced to remain in the immediately preverbal position  . A matrix verb can have a category such as SINnIS2 to allow it to combine with a subordinate clause without case-marking  ( $2 ) to its immediate left . However , to restrict a type-raised Nn from interposing in between the matrix verb and the subordinate clause  , we must restrict typeraised noun phrases and verbs from composing together  . A language specific restriction , allowing composition only if ( X~vl . . . ) or ( Y = v l . . . ) , is proposed , similar to the one placed on the Dutch grammar by Steedman  ( 1985 )  , to handle this case . 

What I have described above is work in progress in developing a CCG account of free word order languages  . We introduced an uncurried functor notation which allowed a greater freedom in word order  . Cur-ried functors were used to handle certain restrictions in word order  . Auniform analysis was given for the general inguistic facts involving both local and long distances crambling  .   1have implemented a small grammar in Prolog to test out the ideas presented in this paper  . 
Further research is necessary in the handling of long distances crambling  . The restriction placed on the composition rules in the last section should be based on syntactic and semantic features  . Also , we may want to represent subordinate clauses with case-marking as type-raised functions over the matrix verb in order to distinguish them from clauses without case-marking  . 
As a related area of research , prosody and pragmatic information must be incorporated into any account of free word order languages  . Steedman ( 1990 ) has developed a categorial system which allows intonation to contribute information to the parsing process of CCGs  . Furthere search is necessary to decide how best to use intonation and pragmatic information within a CCG model to interpret Turkish  . 
References\[1\]Erguvanli , Eser Emine .  1984 . The Function of Word Order in Turkish Grammar . University of
California Press.
\[2\] Karttunen , Lauri .  1986 . ' Radical Lexicalism ' . Paper presented at the Conference on Alternative Conceptions of Phrase Structure  , July 1986 , New

\[3\] Steedman , Mark .  1985 . 'Dependency and Coordination in the Grammar of Dutch and English '  , 
Language , 61, 523-568.
\[4\] Steedman , Mark .  1990 . ' Structure and Intonation ' , MS-CIS-90-45 , Computer and Information
Science , University of Pennsylvania.
