WOULDILIETOYOU ?
MODEL LING MISRE PRESENTATION AND CONTEXTIND IALOGUE 
Carl Gutwin
Alberta Research Council 1
68158 thStreetN.E.
Calgary , Alberta T2E 7H7, Canada
Internet : gutwin@skyler.arc.ab.ca
Gordon McCalla
ARIES Laboratory , University of Saskatchewan2 Saskatoon , Saskatchewan S7 N0 W0 , Canada

In this paper we discuss a mechanism for modifying context in a tutorial dialogue  . The context mechanism imposes a pedagogically motivated misrepresentation  ( PMM ) on a dialogue to achieve instructional goals . In the paper , we outline several types of PMMs and detail a particular PMM in a sample dialogue situation  . While the notion of PMMs are specifically oriented towards tutorial dialogue  , misrepresentation has interesting implications for context in dialogue situations generally  , and also suggests that Grice's maxim of quality needs to be modified  . 
1. INTRODUCTION
Most of the time , truth is a wonderfulthing.
However , this research studies situations where not saying what you believe to be the truth can be the best course of action  . Intentional misrepresentation of a speaker's knowledge appears to be a common and highly pragmatic process used in many different kinds of dialogue  , especially tutorial dialogue . 
We use imperfect or incomplete representations i response to constraints and demands imposed by the situation : for example  , many models of the realworld are extremely complex  , and misrepresentations are often used as useful , comprehensible approximations of complicated systems  . People use idealized Newtonian mechanics , the wave ( or particle ) theory of light , and rules of default reasoning stating that birds fly  , penguins are birds , and penguins don't fly . Some systems which cannot be simplified are purposefully ignored : for example  , higher order .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
1 This research was completed while C . Gutwin was a graduate student at the University of Saskatchewan  . All correspondence should be sent to the first author  . 
2 Visiting scientist , Learning Research & Development Centre , University of Pittsburgh ,   1991-92 differential equations are left out of engineering classes because of their complexity  . Simplified and imperfect representations are often found in tutoring discourse  . 
M is representation as a pedagogic strategy holds promise for extending the capabilities of intelligent tutoring systems  ( ITSs )  , but the concept also affects computational dialogue research : it builds on the idea of discourse focus and context  , extends work on adapting to the user with multiple representations of knowledge  , and challenges Grice's maxims of conversation . 
2. MOTIVATION AND BACKGROUND
M is representations are alterations to a perceived reality  . When they have sincereped a gogic purposes , we name them Pedagogically Motivated M is representations  , or PMMs . PMMs can reduce the complexity of the dialogue and of the concepts to be learned  , provide focus in a busy environment , or facilitate the communication fessential knowledge  . 
PMMs share themes with research into computational dialogue and ITS  . PMMs are intimately connected to ideas of instructional and dialogue focus  , the latter of which was explored by Grosz \[1977\]  , who stated that task-oriented dialogue could be organized into focus spaces  , each containing a subset of the dialogue's purposes and entities  . The collection of focus spaces created by the changing dynamics of a dialogue could be gathered together into a focusing structure which assisted in interpreting new utterances  . 
Adaptation to the hearer is also a concern in dialogue research : beliefs about he hearer or about he situation can be used to vary the structure  , complexity , and language of discourse to optimally suit the hearer  . Several projects ( e . g . \[McKeown et al1985\] , \[ Moore & Swart out 1989\] , \[Paris1989\]) have to a user's needs . Paris's\[1989\]TAILOR system varies its output ( descriptions of complex devices ) depending upon the hearer's expertise . 
Another concern in both dialogue research and ITS research is multiple representations of domain knowledge  . TAILOR , for example , uses two different models of each device to construct is explanations  . 
Tutoring systems like SMITHTOWN\[Shute and Bonar  1986\] and MHO\[Lesgold et al 1987\] organize different representations around distinct pedagogic goals  ; in the domain of electrical circuits , QUEST\[Frederiksen & White 1988\] provides progressively more sophisticated representations  , from a simple qualitative model to quantitative circuitheory  . 
Lastly , any discussion of misrepresentation n dialogue is bound to reflect on Grice's first maxim of quality  , " do not say that which you believe to be false . " The conversational maxims of H . Paul Grice \[1977\] are a wellknown set of observations about human discourse frequently used in computational dialogue research  ( for example\[Joshi et al1984\] , \[Moore and Paris 1989\] , \[Reichman 1985\]) . 
However , people sometimes accept the truth of Grice's maxims too easily  . A close examination reveals difficulties with a literal interpretation of the first maxim of quality  . While this maxim seems a reasonable rule to use in dialogue  , examination of human discourse shows many instances where uttering falsehoods is legitimate behaviour  . For example , in some first year computer science courses , students are told that a semicolon is the terminator of a Pascal statement  . This utterance misrepresents reality ( a semicolon actually separates statements )  , but the underlying purpose is sincere : the misrepresentation allows students to begin programming without forcing them to learn about syntax charts  , parsing algorithms , or recursive definitions . Grice's maxims have avoided major criticism by the computational dialogue community  , and the maxims have been successfully used in limited domains to help dialogue systems interact with their users  . Realizing that misrepresentations often occur in tutorial discourse  , however , provides us with a context for investigating limits to the Grice an approach  . 
3. OVERVIE WO FPEDAGOGICALLY
MOTIVATED MISREPRESENTATIONS
We have identified and characterized several types of PMM that can occur in tutorial discourse  . We define each type as a computational structure that  , when invoked , alters the dialogue system's own reality and hence the student's perception of reality  , for since repedagogic purposes . There are five essential computational characteristics governing the use of PMMs : preconditions  , applicability conditions , removal conditions , revelation conditions , and effects . 
These conditions are predicates matched against information in the dialogue system's essential data structures : a domain knowledge representation  ( it his system , a granularity hierarchy after \[ Greet and McCalla  1989\]  , as shown in Figure 1) ; a model of the student ; and an instructional pan ( in this system , a simplified version of Brecht's ( 1990 ) content planner , from which a sample partial plan is shown in Figure  2  )  . Each step in the instructional plan provides a teaching operator  ( such as prepare-to-teach ) and a concept from the knowledge base which becomes the focus of the instructional interaction  . 
I Major Programming Concept I
Figure 1. A fragment of the domain representation
In this implementation , PMMs act by manipulating the dialogue system's blackboard-based internal communication  . An active PMM intercepts relevant messages before the knowledge base can receive them  , then returns misrepresented information instead of the " true " information to the blackboard  . 
153' UT ~' ( conditional " - ~ COI~"STUDL~IT 1 ~'~~ STUDEI~r " KNOWSKI~WS' ( conol ) hal~?~nditional expres ~ xpressions )   , Figure 2 . A partial content plan from Brecht's \[1990\] planner . 
The first step in using a misrepresentation involves the PMM's preconditions and applicability conditions  . Preconditions are definitional constraints characterizing situations in which a particular PMM is conceivable  . Applicability conditions actually determine the suitability of a PMM to a situation  . 
Each applicability condition examines one element of the current instructional context  , from the student model , the domain representation , r the instructional plan . The individual conditions are combined to determine a final " score " for the PMM  , using a calculus akin to MYCIN's certainty factors  ( \[Shortliffe1976\] )  . For example , one applicability condition states that less student knowledge about a domain concept can provid evidence for the PMM's greater applicability  , and more knowledge implies less applicability . 
A PMM's removal conditions provide a facility for determining when them is representation is o longer useful and may be removed  . However , a dialogue system also needs to know when a PMM is not working well  ; after all , there are certain dangers associated with the use of misrepresentations  . For example , a student may realize the discrepancy between the altered environment and reality  . These situations are monitored by a PMM's revelation conditions  , guiding the system in cases where it must be ready to aband on them is representation and reveal them is representation  . 
If preconditions and applicability conditions are satisfied  , a PMM's procedural effects can be applied to the domain representation  , implementing the ' alternative rality ' presented to the student through the dialogue  . 
The way in which the student's perceived environment is altered and restored plays a crucial part in a misrepresentation's success  . The dialogue actions which accomplish these changes compose two unique subdialogues  . An alteration subdialogue must make a smooth transition to the altered environment  ; a restoration subdialogue has the opposit effect : it must restore the " real " environment  , knot all the loose ends created by the misrepresentation  , adhelp the student transfer knowledge from the misrepresented environment to the real environment  . 
Restoration subdialogues must guard against another potential danger of misrepresentation : that students may retain incorrect information even after them is representation has been retracted at the close of the learning episode  . 
4. DET AILS OF THE PMM MODEL
We have identified several types of pedagogic misrepresentations  , and have implemented and evaluated them in a partial tutorial dialogue system  . 
The implemented system concentrates on the function of them is representation expert  , and therefore the dialogue system is not fully functional : for example  , it does not processor generate surface natural language  . We have implemented them is representation expert and the PMM structures  , the blackboard communication architecture , the student model , and the domain knowledge ( see Figure 1) . The content planner and other system components are implemented as shells able to provide necessary information when needed  . 
Input to the system is a teaching situation including information from the content planner  , the student model , and the domain . The system's output is a log of system actions detailing the simulation of the teaching situation  . 
Figure 3 shows the organization of the implemented PMMs , some of which inherit shared conditions and effects  . The implemented PMMs have a variety of uses : Ignore-Specializations PMM simplifies concepts by reducing the number of kinds that a concept has  ; Compress-Redirect PMM collapses a part of the granularity hierarchy to allow specific instantiations of general concepts  . There are also extended versions of these two PMMs which have more wide-reaching effects  . The remaining
PMMs are Entrapment PMM , which uses a misconception to corner a student and add weight o Explanation PMM  , which reduces the complexity of a concept's functional explanation  . The remaining restriction PMM , Restrict-Peripheral PMM , is detailed in the following section to illustrate the concept of misrepresentation and the elements of the PMM model  , and to show the PMM's use in an actual dialogue . 
Compress- , - I\IE oo ' PMM\[Local PMMJ ~ I , t "? n , ca . e . P  ~ , s , II gnore---~\[LOCalt'MM\]Specializations
Extended PMM
IC ? mpress-IRedirect LoCal , PMM
Figure 3. The PMM hierarchy.
The purpose of the " Restrict Peripheral Concepts " PMM is to simplify concepts related to the current teaching concept  . For example , during an initial discussion of base cases ( while learning programming in L is p )  , a student might benefit from a misrepresentation which restricts recursive cases to a single type  , the variety of recursive case used with cdr recursion  . The restriction allows both participants in the dialogue to discuss and refer to a single common object  , and allows the student o concentrate on base cases without needing to know the complexities of recursive cases  . 
This PMM's preconditions check that there are peripheral concepts in the current instructional context  . Applicability conditions determine whether those concept should be simplified  , by considering the domain's pedagogicomplexity and the student's capabilities  . For example , the PMM considers the difficulty ratings of the current concept and the peripheral concept  , the student's knowledge of these concepts and any existing difficulties with them as shown in the student model  . In addition , the PMM considers other factors such as the student's anxiety level and their ability with structural relationships  . 
Removal conditions for this PMM consider factors such as whether or not instruction about the current concept has been completed  , or whether the instructional context has changed so markedly that the PMM can no longer be useful  . Revelation conditions cover two other cases for a PMM's removal : when the student challenges the misrepresentation  , and when the student or another part of the dialogue system requires a hidden part of the domain  . 
If applied , the effect of this PMM is to restrict peripheral concepts related to the current concept such that all but one of their specializations are hidden  . 
The PMM carries out the restriction , but does not choose the specializations that will remain visible : that decision is left to the pedagogic expert  , using the instructional pan and the student model  . 
5. EXAMPLEDIAL OGUE
PMM " Restrict Peripheral Concepts " is illustrated below in an example dialogue  . The dialogue is based on an actual trial of the implemented system  , which determined when to invoke the PMM , when to revoke it , and all the interactions between the knowledge base and the dialogue system  . However , the surface utterances are fabricated to illustrate how them is representation system would function in a completed tutorial discourse system  . 
The teaching domain in the dialogue is recursion in Lisp  ( as shown in Figure 1 )  , and the system believes the student to be a novice Lisp programmer  . 
T : . . . the next thing I'd like to show you is the part of recursion that stops the reduction  . 
The system's current instructional context contains at each ing operator  , " prepare to teach x , " and a current concept , " base case . " The current situation satisfies the preconditions of PMM " Restrict Peripheral Concepts  , " and its applicability score ranks it as most applicable to the situation  . The PMM thus determines that the peripheral concept " recursive case " will be restricted to one specialization  , and the pedagogic expert chooses'cdr recursive case ' as the most appropriate specialization for novice students  . 
The system asks the instructional planner to replan given the altered view of the domain  , and enters into an alteration subdialogue with the student  . 
Although these subdialogues are only represented as stubs in the system's internal notation  , the discourse could proceed as follows : T : Do you remember the last example you saw ? 
S : Yes.

T : OK . Remember that I pointed out the parts of the recursive function  , the base case and the recursive case ?
S:Yup.
T : Great . Now , I'll just put that example backon for a second . You'll notice that the recursive case looks like  "  ( t ( all nums ( cdr liszt ) ) ) " Got that ?
S:Yup.
T : Ok . For when we look at the base case , I want you to assume that this recursive case is the only kind of recursive case that there is  . Then when we write some programs , you won't have to worry about the recursive case part  . Does that soundok ?\[ At this point the system has already imposed its alteration on the knowledge base  , and when the system asks for the specializations of ' recursive case  , ' it will receive only ' cdr recursive case ' as an answer  . \]
S : Sure.
T : Great . So the thing to remember is , whenever you need a recursive case , use a recursive case like you have in the example . 
So . Let's move on to looking at the way the base case works  ; let's start with that example we had up . 
First , you identify the base case ...
Later in the dialogue , the student is constructing a solution to another problem : S : I'm not sure about the base case for this one  . . . I think I'll do the recursive case first . What does the recursive case do again ? T : A recursive case reduces the problem by calling the function again with reduced input  . The recursive case is the default case of the " cond"statement  , and it calls the function again with the cdr of the list input  . 
\[ Here the PMM again alters perceived reality , restricting ' recursive case'to'cdr recursive case '\] 
S : Right.

T : Yep.
So the recursive case is ( t ( find b ( cdr\[The PMM is again used to verify the student's query  . \]
S : OK . Now the base case ...
This exchange shows that them is representation is useful in focusing the dialogue on the current concept of base case  , by making the recursive case easy to synthesize . 
The system continues investigating and teaching base case until the student can analyse and synthesize simple base cases  . The instructional plan then raises its next step , " complete base case . " Arrival at this plan step satisfies one of the removal conditions for the PMM  , so the system engages in a restoration subdialogue with the student  , which might go as follows , preparing the student for the next context : T : Ok  . The next thing we'll do is look a little closer at recursive case  . Although I told you that there was only one kind of recursive case  , there are actually more . The reason we only used one kind of recursive case is because I wanted to make sure you learned the way a base case works without needing all the details of recursive cases  . Recursive cases still do the same thing ( that is , reducing the input ) but the specific parts might do different things than the recursive case we used  . Does that soundok to you ?
S : ok.
T : So let's look at recursive cases . We ' ll only deal with the kinds used with cdr recursion  .   .   .   . 
6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Evaluative trials for the PMM system have been aimed specifically at both the individual PMMs and the PMM model  . Twenty-six different types of situations have been designed to test the PMMs ' relevance  , consistence , and coherence . Through these trials the individual PMMs demonstrated their integrity  , and the PMM model itself was shown to be capable of working within a dialogue system architecture  . Full details of evaluation methodology and results can be found in \[ Gutwin  1991\]  . 
This research project has shown that PMMs can be represented for use in a tutorial dialogue system  , and supports their value as a pedagogic tool . 
However , the fore most contribution of the PMM system to computational dialogue may be how it extends the notion of focus currently used in dialogue research  . Grosz and Sidner \[1986\] see dialogue as a collection of focus spaces which shift in reaction to changes in the discourse's purposes and salient entities  . This research suggests that within any of these focus spaces  , there can exist a further structure : a context hat provides a specific interpretation f the knowledge represented in the system  . The same knowledge is " in focus " throughout the focus space  , but different contexts can color or interpre that knowledge in different ways  . A pedagogically motivated misrepresentation is thus a context mechanism that alters the domain knowledge for an educational purpose  . It is possible that we always use misrepresentation to mediate between our knowledge and other dialogue participants  . 
Focusing structure has traditionally been used in interpretation : in several projects  ( \[Grosz1977\] , \[ Sidner 1983\]) , context structures are shown to be useful in tasks like pronoun resolution or anaphora resolution  . Pragmatic on texts , uc has those created by a PMM , can direct generation of discourse as well . 
They are active reflections of the larger situation  , rather than local representations of dialogue structure  , and they are able to alter the discourse in order to further some goal  . Responding to patterns in the world outside the dialogue allows pragmatic context mechanisms such as PMMs to consider fitness and suitability of a dialogue situation in addition to a focus space's ubset of goals and salient entities  . 
Another issue of importance to this research is that of tailoring  . While some existing dialogue systems tailor an explanation to the user's level of expertise  ( e . g . \[Paris1989\] , \[McKeown et al1985\]) , the PMM system instead tailors the domain to the learner  . The PMM system does not make basic decisions about either content or delivery in a dialogue  , but attempts to shape the content's representation into a form which will be best suited to the learning situation  . 
The PMM model also touches on research into multiple representation  , in that it provides a mechanism for encapsulating several different interpretations of a knowledge base  . The mechanism might be able to model and administer alternate representations of other kinds as well  , such as analogy . 
The usefulness and ubiquity of PMMs also suggests that a literal interpretation of Grice's maxims  , particularly the maxim of quality , is inappropriate . Clearly , we often say things we know to be false ! However  , the maxim of quality can be rescued by indicating the relationship between truth and dialogue purposes : from the original  , " do not say that which you believe to be false , " we create a new maxim , " do not say that which you believe to be false to your purposes  . " The new maxim shifts emphasis from an absolute standard of truth in dialogue to the more pragmatic idea of truth relative to a dialogue's goals  , and better eflects the way humans actually use discourse  . 
Much remains to be accomplished in this research.
There are undoubtedly other as yet undiscovered PMMs  . The notion of intentional misrepresentation itself may just be an instance of a more general context mechanism that underlies all dialogue  , an idea that should be explored by considering other kinds of dialogue from the perspective of PMMs  , and by a closer examination of existing theories of discourse context  . Finally , all of the oracles used in the PMM System should be replaced by functioning components so that a dialogue system with complete capabilities can standalone as proof of the PMM concept  . 
Nevertheless , this research points the way towards the possibility of a new and widely applicable mechanism for modelling dialogue  . 

The authors wish to thank the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada for financial assistance during this research  . 
REFERENCES\[Brecht1990\]Brecht(Wasson ), B . Determining the Focus of Instruction : Content Planning for Intelligent Tutoring Systems  , Ph . D . thesis,
University of Saskatchewan , 1990.
\[Frederiksen & White1988\] Frederiksen , J . R . , and White , B . Intelligent Learning Environments for Science Education  . in Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring 
Systems , Montreal 1988, pp . 250-257.
\[Greer and McCalla1989\] Greer , J . , and McCalla , G . 
"A computational framework for granularity and its application to educational diagnosis " in Proceedings of the  11th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Detroit MI ,  1989 , pp .  477-482 . 
\[Grice1977\] Grice , H . P . " Logic and Conversation " in Syntax and Semantics  , Vol . 3, New York:
Academic Press , 1975, pp . 41-58.
\[Grosz1977\] Grosz , B . " The Representation ad Use of Focus in a System for Understanding Dialogs " in Proceedings of the  11th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Cambridge , Massachusetts ,  1977 , pp .  67-76 . 
\[Grosz & Sidner 1986\]Grosz , B . J . , and Sidner , C . 
" Attention , Intentions , and the Structure of Discourse " in Computational Linguistics  12  ,  1986 , pp .  175-204 . 
\[Gutwin1991\]Gutwin , C . How to GetAheadby
Lying : Using Pedagogically Motivated
Misrepresentationi Tutorial Dialogue . M . Sc.
Thesis , University of Saskatchewan , 1991.
\[ Joshi et al1984\] Joshi , A . , Webber , B . , and Weischedel , R . " Preventing False Inferences " in Computational Linguistics  ,  1984 , pp . 134-138 . 
\[Lesgold et al1987\] Lesgold , A . , Bonar , J . , Ivil , J , and Bowen , A . An intelligent tutoring system for electronics troubleshooting : DC-circuit understanding  , in Knowing and Learning : lssues for the Cognitive Psychology of Instruction  , L . Resnicked . , Hillsdale NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . 
\[McKeown et al1985\] McKeown , K . , Wish , M . , Matthews , K . " Tailoring Explanations for the User " in Proceedings on the  5th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Los Angeles , 
August 1985, pp . 794-798.
\[Moore and Paris1989\] Moore , J . , and Paris , C . 
" Planning Text for Advisory Dialogues " in Proceeding of the  27th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ,  1989 , pp .  203-211 . 
\[Moore and Swartout1989\] Moore , J . , and Swartout , W . R . "Are active approach to explanation , " in Proceedings of the 11th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Detroit , 1989 pp . 
\[Paris1989\]Paris , Cecile . " The use of explicit user models in a generation system for tailoring answers to the user's level of expertise " in User Models in Dialog Systems  , A . Kobsa and W . Wahlster , eds . Berlin :
Springer-Verlag , 1989, pp . 200-232.
\[Reichman1985\] Reichman , R . Getting Computers to Talk Like You and Me . Cambridge , MA : the
MIT Press , 1985.
\[Shortliffe1976\]Shortliffe , E . H . Computer-Based Medical Consultation : MY CIN . New York : Elsevier . 
\[Shute & Bonar 1986\] Shute , V . , and Bonar , J . G . " An intelligent tutoring system for scientific inquiry skills  . " in Proceedings of the Eighth Cognitive Science Society Conference  , Amherst MA , pp . 353-370 . 
\[ Sidner 1983\] Sidner , C . " Focusing in the Comprehension of Definite Anaphora " in Computational Models of Discourse  , M . Brady and R . 
Berwick , eds . Cambridge , Mass : MIT Press , 1983, pp .  267-330 . 

