CONVERSATION ALIMPLICATURESININDIRECTREPLIES
Nancy Green
Sandra Carberry
Department of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Delaware
Newark , Delaware 19716, USA
email:green@cis.udel.edu , carberry~cis.udel.edu
Abstract I
In this paper we present algorithms for the interpretation and generation of a kind of particu-larized conversational implicature occurring in certain indirect replies  . Our algorithms make use of discoursexpectations , discourse plans , and discourse relations . The algorithms calculate implicatures of discourse units of one or more sentences  . 
Our approach has several advantages . First , by taking discourse relations into account , it can capture a variety of implicatures not handled before  . 
Second , by treating implicatures of discourse units which may consist of more than one sentence  , it avoids the limitations of a sentence-at-a-time approach  . Third , by making use of properties of discourse which have been used in models of other discourse phenomena  , our approach can be integrated with those models . Also , our model permits the same information to be used both in interpretation and generation  . 
1 Introduction
In this paper we present algorithms for the interpretation and generation of a certain kind of conversational implicature occurring in the following type of conversational exchange  . One participant ( Q ) makes an illocutionary-level rquest 2 to be informed if p ; the addressee ( A ) , whose reply may consist of more than one sentence  , conversa-tionally implicates one of these replies : p  , "- p , that there is support for p , or that there is support for "- p . For example , in (1) , assuming Q's utterance has been interpreted as a reques to be informed if A went shopping  , and given certain mutual beliefs e . g . , that A's car breaking down would normally e sufficient to prevent A from going shopping  , and iWe wish to thank Kathy McCoy for her comments on this paper  . 
~i . e . , using Austin's ( Austin ,  1962 ) distinction between locutionary and il\ ] ocutionary force  , Q's utterance is intended to function as a request  ( although it need not have the grammatical form of a question  ) that A's reply is coherent and cooperative )  , A's reply is intended to convey , in part , a ' no ' . 
(1) Q : Did yougo shopping ?
A : a . Mycar ~ s not running.
b . The timing belt broke.
Such indirect replies satisfy the conditions proposed by Grice and others  ( Grice , 1975; Hirschberg , 1985; Sadock ,  1978 ) for being classified as particularized conversational implicatures  . 
First , A's reply does not entail ( in virtue of its conventional meaning ) that A did not go shopping . 
Second , the putative implicature can be cancelled ; for example , it can be denied without the result sounding inconsistent  , as can be seen by considering the addition of ( 2 ) to the end of A's reply in ( 1 . ) (2) A : SoI took the bus to them all . 
Third , it is reinforceable ; A's reply in ( 1 ) could have been preceded by an explicit " no " without destroying coherency or sounding redundant  . Fourth , the putative implicature is nondetachable ; the same reply would have been conveyed by an alternative r-alization of  ( la ) and ( lb )   ( assuming that the alternative did not convey a Manner-based implicature  )  . Fifth , Q and A must mutually believe that , given the assumption that A's reply is cooperative  , and given certain shared background information , Qcan and will infer that by A's reply , Ameant'no ' . 
This paper presents algorithms for calculating such an inference from an indirect response and for generating an indirect response intended to carry such an inference  . 
2 Solution 2.1 Overview
Our algorithms are based upon three notions from discourse research : discourse expectations  , discourse plans , and implicit relational propositions in discourse . 

At certain points in a coherent conversation , the participant share certain expectations ( Reichman , 1984; Carberry ,  1990 ) about what kind of utterance is appropriate . In the type of exchange we are studying , at the point after Q's contribution , the participant share the beliefs that Q has requested to be informed if p and that the request was appropriate  ; hence , they share the discourse expectation that for A to be cooperative  , he must now say as much as he can truthfully say in regard to the truth of p  . ( For convenience , we shall refer to this expectation as Answer-YNQ ( p )  . ) A discourse plan operator 3 ( Lambert & Carberry ,  1991 ) is a representation fanormal or conventional way of accomplishing certain communicative goals  . Alternatively , a discourse plan operator could be considered as a defeasihle rule expressing the typical  ( intended ) effect ( s ) of a sequence of illocutionary acts in a context in which certain applicability conditions hold  . These discourse plan operators are mutually known by the conversational participants  , and can be used by a speaker to construct a plan for achieving his communicative goals  . 
We provide a set of discourse plan operators which can be used by A as part of a plan for fulfilling 

Mann and Thompson ( Mann ~ z Thompson , 1983; Mann & Thompson ,  1987 ) have described how the structure of a written text can be analyzed in terms of certain implicit relational propositions that may plausibly be attributed to the writer to preserve the assumption of textual coherency  .   4 The role of discourse relations in our approach is motivated by the observation that direct replies may occur as part of a discourse unit conveying a relational proposition  . For example , in (3) ,   ( b ) is provided as the ( most salient ) obstacle to the action ( going shopping ) denied by ( a )  ; (3) Q : Did yougo shopping ?
A : a . N o.
b . my car~s not running.
in (4) , as an elaboration of the action ( going shopping ) conveyed by ( a )  ; (4) Q : Did yougo shopping ?
A : a . Yes , b . I bought some shoes.
and in (5) , as a concession for failing to do the action ( washing the dishes ) denied by ( a )  . 
( S)Q:Did you wash the dishes ?
A : a . No , b . ( but ) Is craped them.
3 in Pollack's terminology , are cipe-for-action ( Pollack , 1988; Grosz & Sidner , 1988) ~4 Although they did not study dialogue , they suggested that it can be analyzed similarly . Also note that the relational predicates which we define are similar but not necessarily identical to theirs  . 
Note that given appropriate context , the ( b ) replies in ( 3 ) through ( 5 ) would be sufficient o conversa-tionally implicate the corresponding direct replies  . 
This , we claim , is by virtue of the recognition of the relational proposition that would be conveyed by use of the direct reply and the  ( b ) sentences . 
Our strategy , then , is to generate/interpret A's contribution using a set of discourse plan operators having the following properties :  ( 1 ) if the applicability conditions hold , then executing the body would generate a sequence of utterances intended to implicitly convey a relational proposition R  ( p , q ) ;   ( 2 ) the applicability conditions include the condition that R  ( p , q ) is plausible in the discourse context ; (3) one of the goals is that Q believe that p , where p is the content of the direct reply ; and ( 4 ) the step of the body which realizes the direct reply can be omitted under certain conditions  . Thus , whenever the direct reply is omitted , it is nevertheless implicated as long as the intended relational proposition can be recognized  . Note that property ( 2 ) requires a judgment hat some relational proposition is plausible  . Such judgments will be described using defeasible inference rules  . The next section describes our discourse relation inference rules and discourse plan operators  . 
2 . 2 Discourse Plan Operators and Discourse Relation Inference Rules A typical reason for the failure of an agent's attemp to achieve a domain goal is that the agent's domain planencountered an obstacle  . Thus , we give the rule in ( 6 ) for inferring a plausible discourse relation of Obstacle  . s(8)
If ( i ) coherently-related CA , B ) , and ( ii ) A is a proposition that an agent failed to perform an action of act type T  , and ( iii ) B is a proposition that a ) a normal applicability condition of T did not hold  , or b ) a normal precondition of T failed , or c ) a normal step of T failed , ord ) the agent did not want to achieve a normal goal of T  , then plausible ( Obstacle(B , A)) . 
In (6) and in the rules to follow , ' coherently-related ( A , B ) ' means that the propositions A and B are assumed to be coherently related in the discourse  . The terminology in clause ( iii ) is that of the extended STRIPS planning formalism  ( Fikes 5For simplicity of exposition ,   ( 6 ) and the discourse relation inference rules to follow are stated in terms of the past  ; we plan to extend their coverage of times . 
65 & Nilsson , 1971; Allen , 1979; Carberry , 1990; Litman & Allen ,  1987) . 
Examples of A and B satisfying each of the conditions in  ( 6 . iii ) are given in (7a ) - (7d ), respectively . 
(7)\[A\]I didn't go shopping.
a .\[ B\]The stores were closed.
b .\[ B\]My car was n ' trun-ing.
c.\[B\]Mycar broke doen on the way.
d.\[B\]I didn't want to buy anything.
The discourse plan operator given in ( 8 ) describes a standard way of performing a denial ( exemplified in ( 3 ) ) that uses the discourse relation of Obstacle given in  ( 6 )  . In (8) , as in (6) , A is a proposition that an action of type T was not performed  . 
(8) Deny ( with Obstacle )
Applicability conditions : 1 ) SBMB plausible ( Obstacle ( B , A))
Bo ~ ( unordered )  :  ( optional ) S in form H that A2 ) Tel I ( S , H , B)
Goals : 1 ) H believe that A2 ) H believe that Obstacle ( B , A ) In ( 8 )   ( and in the discourse plan operators to follow ) the " formalism described above is used ; ' S ' and ' H ' denote speaker and hearer , respectively ; ' BMB ' is the one-sided mutual beliefs operator  ( Clark & Marshall ,  1981) ; ' inform ' denotes an illocutionary act of informing  ; ' believe ' is Hintikka's ( Hintikka , 1962) belief operator ; ' TelI(S , H , B ) ' is a subgoal that can be achieved in a number of ways  ( to be discussed shortly )  , including just by Sinforming H that B ; and steps of the body are not ordered .   ( Note that to use these operators for generation of direct replies  , we must provide a method to determine a suitable ordering of the steps  . Also , although it is sufficient for interpretation to specify that step  1 is optional , for generation , more information is required to decide whether it can or should be omitted  ; e . g . , it should not be omitted if S believes that H might believe that some relation besides Obstacle is plausible in the context  .   7 These are areas which we are currently investigating  ; for related research , see section 3 . ) Next , consider that a speaker may wish to inform the hearer of an aspect of the plan by which she accomplished a goal  , if she believes that H may not be aware of that aspect  . Thus , we give the rule in ( 9 ) for inferring a plausible discourse relation of

e'SBMBp'is to be read as ' S believes that it is mutually believed between S and H that p '  . 
ZA related question , which has been studied by others ( Joshi , Webber ~ Weischedel , 1984a ; Joshi , Webber & Weischedel , 1984b ) , is in what situations is a speaker required to supply step  2 to avoid misleading the hearer ? ( 9 ) 
If ( i ) ( ii ) coherently-related ( A,B ), and
A is a proposition that an agent performed some action of act type 
T , and ( iii ) B is a proposition that describes information believed to be new to 
Habouta ) the satisfaction of a normal applicability condition of T such that its satisfaction is not believed likely by H  , or b ) the satisfaction of a normal precondition of T such that its satisfaction is not believed likely by H  , or c ) the success of a normal step of T , or d ) the achievement of a normal goal of T , then plausible ( Elaboration ( B , A)) . 
Examples of A and B satisfying each of the conditions in  ( 9 . iii ) are given in (10a)-(10d ), respectively . 
( I0)\[A\]I went shopping to day.
a .\[ B\]I found a store that was open.
b . \[ B\]I got my car fixed yester day.
c.\[B\]I went to Macy's.
d.\[B\]I go trunning shoes.
The discourse plan operator given in ( 11 ) describes a standard way of performing an affirmation  ( exemplified in ( 4 ) ) that uses the discourse relation of Elaboration . 
(11) Affirm ( with Elaboration )
Applicability conditions : 1 ) SBMB plausible ( Elaboration ( B , A))
Body ( unordered ) : 1 )   ( optional ) S in form H that A2 ) Tel I ( S , H , B)
Goals : 1 ) H believe that A2 ) H believe that Elaboration ( B , A ) Finally , note that a speaker may concede a failure to achieve a certain goal while seeking credit for the partial success of a plan to achieve that goal  . 
For example , the \[ B\] utterances in ( 10 ) can be used following ( 12 )   ( or a Ione , in the right context ) to concede failure . 
(12)\[ A\]I didn't go shopping today , but Thus , the rule we give in ( 13 ) for inferring a plausible discourse relation of Concession is similar  ( but not identical ) to ( 9 )  . 

If ( i ) ( ii ) coherently-related ( A,B ), and
A is a proposition that an agent failed to do an action of act type T  , and ( iii ) B is a proposition that describes a ) the satisfaction of a normal applicability condition of T  , or b ) the satisfaction of a normal precondition of T , or c ) the success of a normal step of T , or d ) the achievement of a normal goal of T , and ( iv ) the achievement of the plan's component in B may bring credit to the agent  , then plausible ( Concession(B , A)) . 
A discourse plan operator , Deny ( with Concession ) , can be given to describe another standard way of performing a denial  ( exemplified in ( 5 ) ) . 
This operator is similar to the one given in (8) , except with Concession i the place of Obstacle . 
An interesting implication of the discourse plan operators for Affirm  ( with Elaboration ) and Deny ( with Concession ) is that , in cases where the speaker chooses not to perform the optional step  ( i . e . , chooses to omit the direct reply ) , it requires that the intende discourse relation be inferred in order to correctly interpret the indirect reply  , since either an affirmation ordenial could be realized with the same utterance  .   ( Although ( 9 ) and ( 13 ) contain some features that differentiate Elaboration and Concession  , other factors , such as intonation , will be considered in future research . ) The next two discourse relations ( described in ( 14 ) and ( 16 ) ) may be part of plan operators for conveying a ' yes'similar to Affirm  ( with Elaboration )  . 

If ( i ) coherently-related ( A , B ) , and ( ii ) A is a proposition that an agent performed an action X  , and ( iii ) B is a proposition that normally implies that the agent has a goal 
G , and ( iv ) X is a type of action occurring as a normal part of a plan to achieve G  , then plausible (

15 ) show stile use of Motivate-Volitional-Action MVA ) in an indirect ( affirmative ) reply . 
(15) Q : Did you close the window ?
A : I was cold.

If ( i ) coherently-related ( A , B ) , and ( ii ) A is a proposition that an event E occurred , and ( iii ) B is a proposition that an event F occurred , and ( iv ) it is not believed that F followed
E , and ( v)F-type events normally cause
E-type events , then plausible ( Cause-Non-Volitional ( B , A)) . 
/17 ) shows the use of Cause-Non-Volitional ( CNV ) man indirect ( affirmative ) reply . 
(17) Q : Did you wa keup very early ?
A : The neighbor's dog was barking.
The discourse relation described in ( 18 ) may be part of a plan operator similar to Deny ( with
Obstacle ) for conveying a ' no'.

If ( i ) coherently-related ( A , B ) , and ( ii ) A is a proposition that an event E did not occur , and ( iii ) B is a proposition that an action F was performed  , and ( iv ) F-type actions are normally performed as a way of preventing 
E-type events , then plausible ( Prevent(B,A)).
(19) shows the use of Prevent in an indirect denial.
(19) Q : Did you catch the flu ?
A : I got a flu shot.
The discourse relation described in ( 20 ) can be part of a plan operator similar to the others described above excep that one of the speaker's goals is  , rather than affirming or denying p , to provide support for the belief that p . 

If ( i ) coherently-related ( A , B ) , and ( ii ) B is a proposition that describes a typical result of the situation described in proposition A  , then plausible ( Evidence ( B , A)) . 

Assuming an appropriate context , (21) is an . example of use of this relation to convey support  , Le . , to convey that it is likely that someone is home . 
(21) Q:Is anyone home ?
A : The upstair slights are on.
A similar rule could be defined for a relation used to convey support against a belief  . 
2  . 3 Imp l i ca tures o f D iscourse Un i ts Consider the similar dialogues in  ( 22 ) and ( 23 )  . 
(22) Q:D id yougo shopping ?
A : a . I had to take the bus.
b . ( because ) My car's not running.
c . ( Yousee ,) The timing belt broke.
(23) Q:D id yougo shopping ?
A : a . My car's not running.
b . The timing belt broke.
c . ( So ) I had to take the bus.
First , note that although the order of the sentences realizing A's reply varies in  ( 22 ) and ( 23 )  , A's overall discourse purpose in both is to conveya'yes '  . 
Second , note that it is necessary to have a rule so that if A's reply consist solely of  ( 22 a )   ( = 23c )  , an implicated ' yes'is derived ; and if It consist solely of (22b ) (= 23a ) , an implicated ' no ' . 
In existing sentence-at-a-timeodels of calculating implicatures  ( Gazdar , 1979; Hirschberg ,  1985) , processing ( 22 a ) would result in an implicated ' yes'being added to the context  , which would successfully block the addition of an implicated ' no ' on processing  ( 22b )  . However , processing ( 23 a ) would result in a putatively implicated ' no " be - in S added to the context  ( incorrectly attributing a fleeting intention of A to convey a ' no '  )  ; then , on processing ( 23c ) the conflicting but intended'yes ' would be blocked by context  , giving an incorrect result . Thus , a sentence-at-a-timeo del must predict when ( 23c ) should override ( 23 a )  . Also , in that model , processing (23) requires " extra effort " , a nonmonotonic revision of belief not needed to handle  ( 22 )  ; yet ( 23 ) seems more like ( 22 ) than a case in which a speaker actually changes hermind  . 
In our model , since implicatures correspond to goals of inferred or constructed hierarchical plans  , we avoid this problem .   ( 22 A ) and ( 23 A ) both correspond to step 2 of Affirm ( with Elaboration )  , TelI(S , H , B ) ; several different discourse plan operators can be used to construct a plan for this Tell action  . For example , one operator for Tell(S , H , B ) is given below in (24) ; the operatore presents that in telling H that B , where B describes an agent's volitional action , a speaker may provide motivation for the agent's action  . 
(24) Tell(S , H , p)
Applicability Conditions : 1) SBMB plausible (

Body ( unordered ): 1) Tell(S , H , q ) 2) S in form H that p

I ) H believe that p2)H believe that
Motivate-Volitional-Action(q , p ) ( We are currently investigating , in generation , when to use an operator such as (24) . For example , a speaker might want to use ( 24 ) in case he thinks that the hearer might doubt the truth of B unless he knows of the motivation  . ) Thus , (22a)/(23c ) corresponds to step 2 of (24) ; (22b ) - (22c ) , as well as (23a ) - (23b ) , correspond to step 1 . Another operator for Tell(S , H , p ) could represent that in telling H that p , a speaker may provide the cause of an event ; i . e . , the operator would be like ( 24 ) but with Cause-Non-Volitional as the discourse relation  . This operator could be used to decompose ( 22b ) -  ( 22c ) / ( 23 a ) -  ( 23b )  . The structure proposed for ( 22A ) / ( 23 A ) is illustrated in Figure 1 . sLinear precedence in the tree does not necessarily represent narrative order  ; one way of ordering the two nodes directly dominated by TeII  ( MVA ) gives ( 22 A )  , another gives (23A ) .   ( Narrative order in the generation of indirect replies is an area we are currently investigating also  ; for related research , see section 3 . ) Note that Deny ( with Obstacle ) cannot be used to generate/interpret ( 22 A ) or ( 23 A ) since its body cannot be expanded to account for  b22a  ) / ( 23c )  . Thus , the correct implicatures cane derived without attributing spurious intentions to A  , and without requiring cancellation of spurious implicatures  . 
8 To use the terminology of ( Moore & Paris , 1989; Moore & Paris ,  1988) , the labelled arcs represent satellites , and the unlabelled arcs nuclei i . However , note that in their model , a nucleus cannot be optional . This differs from our approach , in that we have shown that direct replies are optional in context such as those described by plan operator such as 
Affirm ( with Elaboration).
9Determiuing this requires that the end of the relevant discourse unit be marked/recognlzed by cue phrases  , intonation , or shift of focus ; we plan to investigate his problem . 

Affirm ( with Elaboration )

I went shopping ( Motivate-Volitional-Action )

Mycar's not running

Tell ( CNV )
I(Elaboration )
Tell ( MVA )


Ibad to take the bus ( Cause-Non-Volitional )
The timing belt broke
Figure 1 . A Sample Discourse Structure 2 . 4 A lgor i thms Generation and interpretation algorithms are given in  ( 25 ) and ( 26 )  , respectively . They presuppose that the plausible discourse relation is available  .   1? The generation algorithm assumes as given an illocutionary-level representation of A's communicative goals  . ll (25) Generation of indirect reply : I . Select discourse plan operator : Select from the Ans  , er-YHQ(p ) plan operators all those for , hich a ) the applicability conditions hold , and b ) the goals include S's goals . 
2 . If more than one operator was selected in step I , then choose one . Also , determine step ordering and whether it is necessary to include optional steps  . 
(We are currently investigating how these choices are determined  . ) 3 . Construct a plan from the chosen operator and execute it  . 
1?We plan to implement an inference mechanism for the discourse relation inference rules  . 
11Note that A's goals depend , in part , on the illocutionary-level representation fQ's request  . We assume that an analysis , such as provided in ( Perrault & Allen ,  1980) , is available . 
(26) Interpretation of indirect reply :
I . Infer discourse plan : Select from the Ansver-YNQ ( p ) plan operators all those for , hich a ) the second step of the body matches
S's contribution , and b ) the applicability conditions hold , and ? ) it is mutually believed that the goals are consistent with S's goals  . 
2 . If more than one operator was selected in step I , then choose one .   ( We are currently investigat in E what factors are involved in this choice  . Of course , the utterance may be ambiguous . ) 3 . Ascribe to Sthegoal ( s ) of the chosen plan operator . 
3 Comparison to Past Research
Most previous work in computational or formal linguistics on particularized conversational implicature  ( Green , 1990; Horacek , 1991; Joshi , Webber & Weischedel , 1984a; . \] oshi , Webber Weischedel , 1984b ; Reiter , 1990; Whiner & Maida ,  1991 ) has treated other kinds of implicature than we consider here  . ttirschberg ( Hirschberg ,  1985 ) provided licensing rules making use of mutual beliefs about salient partial orderings of entities in plicatures of an utterance  . Our model is similar to Hirschberg's in that both rely on the representation of aspects of context to generate implicatures  , and our discourse plan operators are roughly analogous in function to her licensing rules  . However , her model makes no use of discourse relations . 
Therefore , it does not handle several kinds of indirect replies which we treat  . For example , although A in ( 27 ) could be analyzed as scalar implicating a'no ' in some contexts  , Hirschberg's model could not account for the use of A in other contexts as an elaboration  ( of how A managed to read chapter 1 ) intended to convey a ' yes ' . 12(27) Q : Did you read the first chapter ?
A : I took it to the beach with me.
Furthermore , Hirschberg provided no computational method for determining the salient partially ordered set in a context  . Also , in her model , implicatures are calculated one sentence at a time  , which has the potential problems described above . 
Lascarides , Asher , and Oberlander ( Lascarides & Asher , 1991; Lascarides & Oberlander ,  1992 ) described the interpretation and generation of temporal implicatures  . Although that type of implicature ( being Manner-based ) is somewhat different from what we are studying , we have adopted their technique of providing defeasible inference rules for inferring discourse relations  . 
In philosophy , Thomason ( Thomason ,  1990 ) suggested that discours expectations play a role in some implicatures  . McCafferty ( McCafferty ,  1987 ) argued that interpreting certain implicated replies requires domain plan reconstruction  . However , he did not provide a computational method for interpreting implicatures  . Also , his proposed technique cannot handle many types of indirect replies  . For example , it cannot account for the implicated negative replies in  ( 1 ) and ( 5 )  , since their interpretation involves reconstructing domain plans that were not executed successfully  ; it cannot account for the implicated affirmative reply in  ( 17 )  , in which no reasoning about domain plans is involved  ; and it cannot account for implicated replies conveying support for or against a belief  , as in (21) . Lastly , his approach cannot handle implicatures conveyed by discourse units containing more than one sentence  . 
Finally , note that our approach of including rhetorical goals in discourse plans is modelled on the work of Hovy  ( Hovy , 1988) and Moore and Paris ( Moore & Paris , 1989; Moore & Paris ,  1988) , who used rhetorical plans to generate coherent text  . 
1 2 The two intended interpretations are marked by different intonations  . 
4 Conclusions
We have provided algorithms for the inter -pretation/generation faty peofreply involving a highly context-dependent conversational implicature  . Our algorithms make use of discourse expectations  , discourse plans , and discourse relations . 
The algorithms calculate implicatures of discourse units of one or more sentences  . Our approach as several advantages . First , by taking discourse relations into account , it can capture a variety of implicatures not handled before  . Second , by treating implicatures of discourse units which may consist of more than one sentence  , it avoids the limitations of a sentence-at-a-time approach  . Third , by making use of properties of discourse which have been used in models of other discourse phenomena  , our approach can be integrated with those models . Also , our model permits the same information to be used both in interpretation and in generation  . 
Our current and anticipated research includes : refining and implementing our algorithms  ( including developing an inference mechanism for the discourse relation rules  )  ; extending our model to other types of implicatures  ; and investigating the integration of our model into general interpretation and generation frameworks  . 

Allen , James F .  (1979) . A Plan-Based Approach to Speech Act Recognition . PhD thesis , University of Toronto , Toronto , Ontario , Canada . 
Austin , J . L .  (1962) . How To Do Things With Words . Cambridge , Massachusetts : Harvard
University Press.
Carberry , Sandra (1990) . Plan Recognition in Natural Language Dialogue . Cambridge , Massachusetts : MIT Press . 
Clark , H . & Marshall , C .  (1981) . Definite reference and mutual knowledge . In A . K . Joshi , B . Webber , & I . Sag(Eds . ), Elements of discourse understanding . Cambridge : Cambridge
University Press.
Fikes , R . E . & Nilsson , N . J .  (1971) . Strips : A new approach to the application of theorem proving to problem solving  . Artificial Intelligence , 2, 189-208 . 
Gazdar , G .  (1979) . Pragmatics : lmplicature , Presupposition , and Logical Form . New York:
Academic Press.
Green , Nancy L .  (1990) . Normal state implicature . In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting , Pittsburgh . Association for Computational Linguistics . 
Grice , H . Paul (1975) . Logic and conversation . In Cole , P . & Morgan , J . L . ( Eds . ), Syntax and
York . Academic Press.
Grosz , Barbara & Sidner , Candace (1988) . Plans for discourse . In P . Cohen , J . Morgan , M . Pollack ( Eds . ), Intentions in Communication . MIT Press . 
Hintikka , J .  (1962) . Knowledge and Belief . Ithaca :
Cornell University Press.
Hirschberg , Julia B .  (1985) . A Theory of Scalar Implicature . PhD thesis , University of Pennsylvania . 
ttoracek , Helmut (1991) . Exploiting conversational implicature for generating concise x pla-nations  . In Proceedings . European Association for Computational Linguistics  . 
Hovy , Eduard H .  (1988) . Planning coherent multisentential text . In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting , ( pp .  163-169) . Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Joshi , Aravind , Webber , Bonnie , & Weischedel , Ralph (1984a ) . Living up to expectations : Computing expert responses  . In Proceedings of the Fourth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , ( pp .  169-175) . , Austin , Texas . 
Joshi , Aravind , Webber , Bonnie , & Weischedel , Ralph (1984b ) . Preventing false inferences . 
In Proceedings of Coling 84, ( pp . 134-138), Stanford University , California . Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Lambert , Lynn & Carberry , Sandra (1991) . A tripartite plan-based model of dialogue . In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting , ( pp .  4754) . Association for Computational Linguistics . 
Lascarides , Alex & Asher , Nicholas (1991) . Discourse relations and defensible knowledge . In Proceedings of the 2gth Annual Meeting , ( pp . 
5562). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lascarides , Alex & Oberlander , Jon (1992) . Temporal coherence and defensible knowledge . 
Theoretical Linguistics , 18.
Litman , Diane & Allen , James (1987) . A plan recognition model for subdialogues in conversation  . Cognitive Science , 11, 163-200 . 
Mann , William C . & Thompson , Sandra A . (1983).
Relational propositions in discourse . Technical
Report ISI/RR-83-115, ISI/USC.
Mann , William C . & Thompson , Sandra A . (1987).
Rhetorical structure theory : Toward a functional theory of text organization  . Text , 8(3), 167-182 . 
McCafferty , Andrew S .  (1987) . Reasoning about Im-plicature : a Plan-Based Approach  . PhD thesis,
University of Pittsburgh.
Moore , Johanna D . & Paris , Cecile (1989) . Planning text for advisory dialogues . In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting , University of British Columbia , Vancouver . Association of
Computational Linguistics.
Moore , Johanna D . ~z Paris , Cecile L .  (1988) . Constructing coherentext using rhetorical relations  . In Proc . l Oth Annual Conference . Cognitive Science Society . 
Perrault , Raymond & Allen , James (1980) . A plan-based analysis of indirect speech acts . 
American Journal of Computational Linguistics ,  6(3-4) ,  167-182 . 
Pollack , Martha (1988) . Plans as complex mental attitudes . In P . Cohen , J . Morgan , & M . Pollack ( Eds . ), Intentions in Communication . MIT Press . 
Reichman , Rachel (1984) . Extended person-machine interface . Artificial Intelligence , 22, 157-218 . 
Reiter , Ehud (1990) . The computational complexity of avoiding conversational implicatures  . In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting , ( pp . 
97-104) . , Pittsburgh . Association for Computational Linguistics . 
Sadock , Jerrold M .  (1978) . On testing for conversational implicature . In Cole , P . & Morgan , J . L . 
(Eds .), Syntax and Semantics , ( pp . 281-297).,
N.Y . Academic Press.
Thomason , Richmond H .  (1990) . Accommodation , meaning , and implicature : Interdisciplinary foundations for pragmatics  . In P . Cohen , J . Morgan , &; M . Pollack ( Eds . ), Intentions in Communication . Cambridge , Massachusetts : MIT Press . 
Wainer , Jacques & Maida , Anthony (1991) . Good and bad news in formalizing eneralized implicatures  . In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society  , ( pp .  66-71) . , Berkeley , California . 

