Spatial Lexicalization in the Translation of Prepositional 

Arturo Trujillo *
Computer Laboratory
University of Cambridge
Cambridge CB23 QG , England

Abstract
A pattern in the translation of locative prepositional phrases between English and Spanish is presented  . A way of exploiting this pattern is proposed in the context of a multilingual machine translation system under development  . 
Introduction
Two of the main problems in machine translation ( MT ) are ambiguity and lexical gaps . Ambiguity occurs when a word in the source language  ( SL ) has more that one translation i to the target language  ( TL )  . Lexical gaps occur when a word in one language cannot be translated directly into another language  . This latter problem is viewed by some as the key translation problem  , ( Kameyama et al ,  1991) . 
A case in point is the translation of prepositional phrases  ( PP )  . The following entry for the translations into Spanish of the preposition along demonstrates this  ( entry taken from ( Garcia-Pelayo ,  1988)) . 
along : pot(by ) , a lolar gode ( to the length of ) , segf in ( according to ) Both problems occur here : there are three different translations for the same English preposition  , and the second of these is a phrase used to describe a sense of along which is not encoded as one word in Spanish  . 
Lexicalization Patterns
It is argued in ( Talmy ,  1985 ) that languages differ in the type of information they systematically encode in lexical units  . That is , languages exhibit distinct lexicalization patterns  . For instance , in a sentence where both the direction and manner of motion are expressed  , English will encode motion and manner in the same verb  , whereas in Spanish a distinct lexicalization of these two meaning components will be favoured  ( Ibid . p . 69): Spa . E1 globosubi 6 potlachimenea flot and oLit . the balloon moved-up through the chimney floating Eng  . The balloon floated up the chimney * This work was funded by the UK Science and Engineering Research Council Here Spanish  subi6 encodes ' move+up ' whereas English floated encodes ' move ? floating '  . 
Capturing lexicalization patterns of this sort can help us make certain generalizations about lexical gaps and ambiguities in MT  . In the rest of this paper two lexicalization patterns for English locative prepositional phrases  ( PP ) will be presented . It will be shown how they allow us to simplify the bilingual lexicon of a transfer based  , multilingual MT system under development . 
Evidence
The two lexicalization patterns under analysis can be illustrated using the following three sentences  ( loc = location , dest = destination ): Eng . Sher an underloc the bridge ( in circles ) Spa . Corri5 deba jodel puente(en circulos )
Lit . Ran-she under of the bridge
Eng . Sheran under pa , h+zoc the bridge ( to the other side ) Spa . Corri6pordeba jodel puente ( hastae lot rolado ) Lit . Ran-she along under of the bridge Eng . Sheran under de , t + aoc the bridge ( and stopped there ) Spa . Corri6hasta deba jodel puente ( y all lse de-tuvo ) 
Lit . Ran-she to under of the bridge
In the first sentence there is a direct translation of the English sentence  . In this case the features encoded by the English and Spanish PP's are the same  . In the second sentence the English preposition encodes the path followed by the runner and the location of this path with respect othe bridge  ; in Spanish such a combination needs to be expressed by the two prepositions pot and debajo de  . In the third example the English preposition expresses the destination of the running and the location of that destination with respect othe bridge  ; this has to be expressed by the two Spanish prepositions basra and debajo de  . 

Other English prepositions which allow either two or three of these readings in locative x pressions are shown in the table below  . 
Plocation path ' along P ' destination ' to P ' behind detr~s depot detrLs de hasta detr?s de below deba jode pot deba jode hasta de ba jode insided entrode pot dentro de hast a dentro de outside fuer a depot fuera de hast a fuera de under deba jode pot deba jode hasta de ba jode between entreporent re-nearcer cade hasta cercade From the table the following generalization can be made : whatever the translation P of the locative sense of an English preposition is  , its path incorporating sense is translated as pot P and its destination incorporating sense is translated as hastaP  . 
In short , certain English prepositions are ambiguous between encoding location  , path + location or destination + location . This is not the case in Spanish . When translating from English such ambiguities cannot be preserved very naturally  . In particular , whenever it is necessary to preserve them ( e . g . for legal documents ) , a disjunction of each individual sense must be used in the TL sentence  . 
In certain cases , however , it may be the case that only one of these readings is allowed  . 

As far as the selection of the appropriate target language  ( TL ) preposition is concerned the constituent which the PP modifies plays a major role in determining which readings of a preposition sense are allowed  . 
Deciding whether the preposition is used in a spatial sense  , as opposed to a temporal or causative sense , is determined by the semantics of the noun phrase  ( NP ) within it , e . g . under the table , under the regime , under three minutes , under pressure , under development , under the bridge ; that is , a place denoting NP gives rise to a spatial PP . 
There are two cases to consider in disambiguating spatial senses  . In the case of the PP attaching to a noun , the sense selected will be the location one . For example
Eng . The park outside the city
Spa . E1 parque fuera de la ciudad
The second case is when the PP modifies a verb . For this case it is necessary to consider the semantics of the verb in question  . Verbs of motion such as walk , crawl , run , swim , row , gallop , march , fly , drive , jump and climbal low location , path and destination readings . 
For instance :
Eng . The diverswam below the boat
Spa .   E1 bucead or had6 deba jode/porde ba jode / hasta de bajo de/1 bote Verbs which do not express motion such as stand  , sit , rest , sleep , live and study usually require the location sense of the preposition : 
Eng . The diverrested below the boat
Spa . Elbuceador descans6 deba jodel bote This second analysis is over simplistic since some readings depend on other semantic features of the verb  , preposition and complement NP involved . However , these can be incorporated into the strategy explained below  . 
One last point to note is that not all the prepositions presented allow all three readings  . This will be taken into consideration when making the generalizations in the encoding of the above observation  . 

Representation for Prepositions
As exemplified above , the translation of a preposition depends on three sources of information :  1  ) the word modified by the PP determines whether the sense of the preposition may include a path or a destination component  ,  2 ) the preposition itself determines how many spatial senses it allows  ,  3 ) the NP complement of the preposition determines whether it is being used spatially  , temporally , causatively , etc . To encode these three sources , prepositions will be represented as three place relations  . The pattern for a prepositional entry is shown in  1  )  ; a possible entry for below is shown in 2) . 
1) P\[modified , preposition , complement \]2) below\[motion-verb , \[ path , dest\] , place \] The notation here is an informal representation f the typed feature structures described in  ( Briscoe et al , 1992) and ( Copestake ,  1992) . The argument types in 1 ) can be explained as follows . ' Modified ' is a type which subsumes ' events ' ( denoted by verbs ) and ' objects ' ( denoted by nouns )  ; the type ' event ' is further subdivided into ' motion-verb ' and ' non-motion-verb '  . ' Preposition ' is a type which subsumes properties which depend on the preposition itself  ; for the examples presented this type will encode whether the preposition can express a path or a destination  ( the extra square brackets indicate a complex type  )  . Finally , ' complement'subsumes a number of types corresponding to the semantic field of the complement NP  ; these include'spatial'with subtype'place ' ; ' temporal ' , and ' causative ' . 
The instantiated entry in 2 ) corresponds to the use of below in the diverswam below the boat  . Such instantiations would be made by the grammar by structure sharing of the semantic features from the modified constituent and from the complement NP  . In this way the three translations of below would only be produced when the semantic features of the modified constituent and complement NP unify with the first and third arguments respectively  . 

Bilingual Lexical Rules
To encode the regularity of the translations presented  , bilingual lexical rules will be introduced . These rules take as input a bilingual exical entry and give as output a bilingual exical entry  . An oversimplified rule to generate the ' path ' sense for a preposition that allows such a reading is given below  ( P = variable ranging over prepositions , e = the empty type , lugar = place , camino=path ) . 

PE.g\[motion-verb,\[path,-\], place\]
Psp~\[verbo-movimiento , e , lugax\]de
Pz,g\[motion-verb,\[path,-\]place\]
POR\[verbo-movimiento , camino , lugar\]
Pap ~\ [ verbo-movimiento , e , lugar\]de
A similar rule would encode the ' destination ' sense generalization  . 
The bilingual lexical rules work by extending the bilingual lexicon automatically before any translation takes place  ; this gives rise to a static transfer component with faster performance but more memory consumption  . Only those entries which unify with the input part of a rule actually produce a new bilingual entry  . 
An example of the ' path ' rule being applied is shown below  . 
Input : below\[motion-verb , \[path , dest\] , place \] ~-* debajo\[verbo-movimiento , e , lugar \] de
Output : below\[motion-verb , \[path , dest\] , place \]*-* POR . \[verbo-movimiento , camino , lugar \] debajo\[verbo-movimiento , e , lugar \] de Note that not all prepositions in the table above allow all three readings  ; for this the allowed readings are stated in the second argument of the preposition  . 
Related Research
In ( Copestake ~ al . , 1992) the notion of all in k is introduced . These are typed feature structures which encode generalizations about the type of transfer elations that occur in the bilingual lexicon  . That is , each bilingual entry corresponds to one f fink . Because ffmks are represented as a hierarchy of types  , the amount of data stored in the bilingual lexicon is minimal  . The bilingual lexical rules presented here will further refine the idea of at link by minimizing the number of bilingual lexical entries that have to be coded manually  , since the bilingua lexical rules can be seen as operating over f finks  ( and hence bilingual exical entries ) to give new t links . 
The grammatical formalism used broadly resembles earlier versions of HPSG  . The idea of bilingual exical rules is partly inspired by the lexical rules introduced within this framework in  ( Pollard & Sag ,  1992) . 
Conclusion
We have argued that ambiguities and lexical mismatches found in EnglishSpanish translation of PP's can be dealt with using ideas from crosslinguistic studies of lexicalization patterns  , and suggested a use of the relevant linguistic insights for MT applications  . 
This consisted of encoding prepositions as three place relations  , and of having bilingua lexical rules which operate over the bilingual lexicon to expand it  . By formulating regularities in this way consistency and compactness in the bilingual exicon  , and therefore in the transfer module , are achieved . 
The next steps will include the implementation of the mechanism to drive the bilingua lexical rules  , the refining and testing of the semantic lassification  , the isolation of further egularities and the investigation of other types of PP's  . 

Many thanks to Ted Briscoe , Antonio Sanfilippo , Ann Copestake and two anonymous reviewers . Thanks also to Trinity Hall , Cambridge , for a travel grant . All remaining errors are mine . 

Briscoe , T . ; Copestake , A . , and de Paiva , V . , editors . 1992 ( forthcoming ) . Default Inheritance in Unification Based Approaches to the Lexicon  . Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge , England.
Copestake , A . ; Jones , B . ; Sanfilippo , A . ; Rodriguez , H . ; Vossen , P . ; Montemagni , S . , and Marinal , E .  1992 . Multilingual lexical representations . Technical Report 043 , ESPRITBRA-3030 AQUILEX Working Paper , Commission of the
European Communities , Brussels.
Copestake , A .  1992 . The AQUILEX LKB : Representation issues in semiautomatic axluisition of large lexicons  . 
In Proceedings 3rd Con \] erence on Applied Natural Language
Processing , Trento , Italy.
Garcia-Pelayo , R .  1988 . Larousse Gran Diccionario Espaaol-Inglgs English Spanish  . Larousse , Mexico DF , Mexico . 
Kameyama , M . ; Ochitani , R . , and Peters , S .  1991 . Resolving translation mismatches with information flow  . In
Proceedings ACL-91, Berkeley , CA.
Pollard , C . , and Sag , I . 1992 forthcoming . Agreement , Binding and Control : Information Based Syntax and Semantics Vol  . II . Lecture Notes . CSLI , Stanford , CA , USA . 
Talmy , L .  1985 . Lexicalization patterns : semantic structure in lexical forms  . In Shopen , T . , editor , Language Typology and Syntactic Description Vol . 111: Grammatical Categories and the Lexicon . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England . 

