TAILORINGLEXICAL CHOICE TO THEUSER'S VOCABULARY
IN MULTIMEDIAEX PLANATION GENERATION
Kathleen McKeown
Jacques Robin
Michael Tanenblatt
Department of Computer Science
450 Computer Science Building
Columbia University
New York , N.Y . 10027
kathy , robin , tanenbla@cs.columbia.edu

In this paper , we discuss the different strategies ued in COMET  ( COordinated Multimedia Explanation Testbed ) for selecting words with which the user is familiar  . When pictures cannot be used to disambiguate a word or phrase  , COMET has four strategies for avoiding unknown words  . We give examples for each of these strategies and show how they are implemented in 

1. Introduction
A language generation system should select words that its user knows  . While this would seem to involve simply selecting a known word instead of an unknown word  ( as is done , for example , in\[1\]) , in many cases it requires entirely rephrasing the rest of the sentence  . For example , in our domain of equipment maintenance and repair  , if the user does not know the word " polarity , " a sentence like " Check the polarity . " will be rephrased as " Make sure the plus on the batte ~  , lines up with the plus on the battery compartment . Even when alternative words can be used-instead of an unknown word  ( e . g . , a descriptive expression can be used instead of an object name  )  , the alternative phrase may interact with other parts of the sentence which then need to be reworded as well  . 
In this paper , we discuss the different strategies used in COMET for selecting words with which the user is familiar  . Since COMET integrates text and pictures in a single explanation  1  , unknown words are frequently disambiguated through accompan  , ying . pictures . For example , when the accompanying picture clearly shows the object and its location  , COMET will use the most common object name even if the user is unfamiliar with the name  2  . When pictures cannot be used to disambiguate a word-or phrase  , COMET has four strategms for avoiding unknown words :  1  . Selecting an alternative word or phrase ( e . g . , generating " some number " instead of " arbitrary number ' '  )  2 . Rephrasing by providing conceptual definitions ( e . g . , generating " Make sure the plus on the battery lines up with the plus on the battery compartment  . " instead of " Check the polarity ") 3 . Rephrasing by generating descriptive referring expressions  ( e . g . , generating " the cable that runs to the KY57" instead of " the COMSEC cable '' )  4 . Using past discourse to construct a referring expression  ( e . g . , generating " Test the cable you just removed . " instead of " Test the COMSEC cable . " if the user had previously been instructed to remove this cable  . ) In the following sections , we first t ? rov ! de an overview of lexical choice in COMET  , snowing how and where it occurs in the overall system  . Each of the strategies is then described in turn , prefaced by a brief discussion of disambiguation of unknown terms through pictures  . Finally , we compare our work with previous work in the area  . 
1See\[2\] for a system overview and\[3 , 4\] for details on media coordination in COMET . 
2This is similar to Appelt's \[5\] integration of language and physical ctions for generating referring expressions  . 
226 i
Text Generator
Content Planner
Logical Form Il.I
Annotated Logical Form /

Lexical \]

Text ) Laytion
IGraphics Generator \]
Multimedia Explanation
Figure 1: COMET System Architecture 2 . Lexical Choice and Architecture COMET's architecture is shown in Figure  1  . On receiving a request for an explanation via a menu interface  , the content planner uses schemas \[6\] to determine which information should be included in the explanation from the underlying knowledge sources  . The explanation content , represented as a hierarchy of logical forms ( LFs ) \[7\] is passed to the media coordinator\[3 ,  8\] , which adds annotations indicating which portions are to be produced by the text generator and which by the graphics generator  \[9\]  . 
The Lexical Chooser is part of the text generator \[7\]  . 
Typically , it selects a word or phrase for each semantic concept in the input LF  ( i . e . , the semantic on-straints on word choice ) . In terms of coverage , the implementation can select words for 148 different semantic concepts using 253 mapping rules , thus yielding on average slightly less than two alternative word choices per concept  ( there are many concepts which are mapped to a single word  , while others have more than two alternatives ) . The lexicon contains 159 open class words . 
In this paper , we show how the user model and past discourse ( pragmatic constraints ) also influence word choice . But these are not the only constraints on word choice  . Syntactic form of the sentence and lexical constraints are other demonstrated  \[10  , 11\] influences on lexical choice . For example , once the verb has been chosen , syntactic on straints on its arguments ( e . g . , whether the object is a clause,
Step 1:
Set the FCTN knobto LD.
Figure 2: Accompanying Picture Clarifies Referent an adj , or np ) will influence what words are chosen to realize the semantic once p that fill these arguments  . 
Conversely , if one of the verb roles can only be realized as a noun phrase  , for example , and not as other syntactic categories , this restricts which verb is selected . Lexical constraints on word choice arise from the use of collocations  [12]  . For example , a verb like " stand " takes the preposition " on " for its location role  , while the verb " turn " takes the preposition " onto  . " Lexical choice is thus influenced by a wide variety of constraints which interact in many ways  . 
Since syntactic and lexical constraints are only available within the text generator  , lexical choice is delayed until this point . Thus COMET waits until a variety of semantic , pragmatic , syntactic and lexical constraints are accumulated before selecting words  . 
This means that COMET can use syntactic and lexical constraints on word choice in conjunction with semantic and graphical constraints provided as input  , plus the new . pragmatic constraints we present . Previous work addressing pragmatic on straints on word usage folded lexical choice into the content planner  ( e . g . , [13], [1]) . This was possible since the work focused primarily on lexical side effects of content determination  ( e . g . , what property to include in a reference as opposed to what linguistic form to use for a property  )  . Such approaches do not allow a system to take syntactic and lexical constraints on word choice into account  . 
On receiving the hierarchy of logical forms , the Lexical Chooser determines the overall grammatical form of each sentence based on the semantic structure of the LFs  ( e . g . , conditional sentences are generated for precondition-action structures  ) and selects the words and phrases realizing semantic oncepts of the LF  . It a SSeS a specification of the sentence's grammatic alrmand open-class words to the general purpose surface sentence generator FUF  [14  ,  15 ,  16] . The Lexical Chooser uses a rewriting system itself implemented on top of FUF  . Its lexicon consists of a base of rules , where each rule rewrites a given set of semantic features into a corresponding set of lexical and syntactic features  . Thus , each lexicon entry associates a semantic concept with words that can be used to realize it  . Additional constraints from the user model , past discourse , and the underlying knowledge base determine which of the alternative words or phrase should be selected  .   3 The user model indicates both the reading level of the current user  4  , any individual words that COMET knows the user does not understand  , and any wording preferences ( e . g . , the user knows abbreviations , the user is familiar with military terminology ) . We make no claims about which of these forms of user models is easier to acquire  , but simply show how to use them when available . 
If none of the alternative wordings for a given semantic concept of the LF are known to the user and the  3When these constraints come from knowledge sources external to FUF  , the Lexical Chooser uses FUF extensions to access such knowledge through the use of coroutines [  17]  . 
4We currently use two levels for a poor and good reader  . At the beginning of the session , the reading level is either preset or
COMET can ask the user.

Install the new holding battery . Step 2 of 6Remove the old holding battery , shown in the cut away view . 
Figure 3: Use of Cross References : Remove the holding battery  , shown in the cut away view accompanying illustration cannot disambiguate these words  , COME Treinvokes the content planner to replan portions of the sentence content or to include additional semantic information  . Thus , COMET's architecture interleaves lexical choice and content planning in order to account for a wide variety of mter-acting constraints on word choice  . 
3. Multimedia Disambiguation
An accompanying picture often makes clear what the referent of a referring expression is  . If the user is unfamiliar with a term , the accompanying picture might define it . For example , Figure 2 shows one step of an explanation generated by COMET for loading frequency into the radio  . The text refers to a " FCTN knob ' and the accompanying picture clearly singles out the knob on the front panel of the radio  [4]  . COMET can also generate an explicit reference to the illustration itself  ( called across reference )  . For example , the cross reference shown in Figure 3 is generated if the user does not understand the term " holding battery "  . In this case , the Lexical Chooser , on determining that " holding battery " is an unfamiliar term  , reinvokes the content planner which finds that no accompanying illustration is currently planned and invokes graphics to generate an accompanying illustration that depicts the hold in ~ battery and its location  . For full details on crossreierencing in COMET see [  18]  . 
4. Selecting a Familiar Word/phrase
Whenever possible , COMET simply selects a familiar word over an unknown word from the list of alternatives in the lexicon  . Figure 4 shows some 9uaired sentences that COMET generates which ii-strate alternative wordings  . The first italicized phrase is generated if the user's vocabulary level is above a certain reading level or if a word is not explicitly listed in the user model as unknown  . Since the lexicon maintains a simple association between the semantic concept and alternative phrasings  , COMET selects the first alternative which the user model indicates is familiar to the user  . For example , Figure 5 shows that for any concept under the concept c -disconnect in the knowledge base taxonomy  , COMET will use the word " disconnect " if the user's vocabulary level is high and the word " remove " otherwise  . COMET also checks whether the user knows abbreviations and if so  , will use a referring expression such as " FCTN knob " as shownm Figure  2  . If not , COMET uses the full name (" function knob ") . If COMET has no information about he user , it generates the abbreviation and relies on the accompanying illustration to clarify the referent  . 
1 . Screw the newman packantenna onto the RT and tighten until them an packantenna is snug/tight  . 
2 . Disconnect/Remove the COMSEC cable from the KY57 audio connector . 
3 . This will cause the display to show an arbitrary /some number  . 
Figure 4: COMET-Generated Word Substitutions ( ( concept # ( under c-disconnect ) ) )   ; realization (( process (( cat verb group ) ; will be a verb ( alt ( ; if level high select " disconnect " ( ( CONTROL ( OK-Lex-UM'c-disconnect high ) )  ( lex " disconnect " ) )  ; else select " remove " ( ( lex " remove " ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) Figure 5: Lexicon Entry for Disconnect Concept 5 . Rephrasing through Replanning Selecting an alternative wording for a semantic on-cept is not always possible since none of the alternatives may be known by the user  . Instead , COMET can describe concepts at a more detailed semantic level of abstraction by retrieving additional definitional information from the knowledge base and it can create referring descriptions when object names are not known  , by retrieving object attributes . 
5 . 1 . Retrieving alternative concept definitions Sometimes the original text uses a word or phrase that abstracts the details of a concepto allow generation of a very concise expression  . If unfamiliar with the word or phrase , the user will be unable to infer the specifics needed to perform the task  . Alternative wordings require choosing a less abstract level of semantic decomposition at which to describe the concept  . In these cases , COMET's lexical choose rein-vokes the content planner to retrieve a finer grained definition of the concept from the knowledge base  . 
For example , this strategy is used for rephrasing the request " Check the polarity " which COMET issues when providing instructions for installing a new holding battery  . More detailed semantics of checking the polarity are stored as different okens of the concept c -polarity in the knowledge base  . 5 For example , in Figure 6 polarity is represented as the ecjuivalence between the two plusses on two batteries ?  . Now , if the plan calls for checking polarity , it can be represented In terms of a checking action on the equivalence of these two plusses  ( i . e . , that they line up ) . If the user is unfamiliar with the word " polarity  , " an alternate decomposition will be retrieved and replace the phenomenon role filler in the original LF  ( Figure 7 )  . 
Figure 8 shows the alternative LF with a new phenomenon role  ( the remainder of the LF is unchanged )  . The resulting rephrased sentence is " Makesure that the plus on the battery lines up with the plus on the battery compartment  .   . "Linesup ' is selected in the lexicon for the equivalence relatlon based on the semantics of its roles  ( i . e . , that they are both plusses on the batteries ) . Here semantic selectional restrictions on the . roles control lexical choice of the verb . 
Since the object of the new sentence is an embedded sentence  , COMET can use either the verb " check " or the collocation " make sure " as the verb realizing the mental process concept c-check  . Note that , while these two verbs are listed as alternatives in the lexicon for c-cheek  , " make sure " cannot be used in the original sentence due to a syntactic on straint : its object cannot be an NP as one cannot say " Make sure the polarity  .   . This is an example of interaction between syntactic and pragmatic on straints  . Since syntax does not constrain the choice of verb in the modified sentence  , COMET arbitrarily selects " make sure ' . 
The lexicon entry containing these two verbs is shown below in Figure  9  . Note that the entry is indexed by the semantic concept c-check  . There are two alternative verbs , only one of which is compatible with a clause as phenomenon role  ( ultimately the object )  . When the phenomenon is an NP , both verbs are valid and one is randomly selected . 
; Instance def in i t ions for po la r i ty ( tellm ( polarity polarity-l )   ( polarity polarity-2 ) )  ; More detail for one instance : polarity is ; represented as two plusses which should ; be equivalent . The roles of the ec/uative ; relation are identified and identifier : about polari  ty-2   ( identified plus-l )   ( identifier plus-2 ) )  ; one is located on the battery ( : about plus-I ( on-loc battery-l ) )  ; one is located on the battery compartment ( : about plus-2 ( on-locbc-l ) ) ) ) Figure 6: Knowledgebase tokens for polarity 5The more detaile definition is stored with e-polarity and not with c-check since in our domain checking is carried out on many different objects  , while few actions are carried out on polarity . 
6 The equative relations has two roles , identified and identifier . 
Since they are included here , the equative relation ( i . e . , that he two plusses " line up " ) is inferred to hold . 
230 ( Concept C-Check ) ; " check " ( Process-Type Mental )   ( Roles ( ( Phenomenon ( ( Concept C-Polar i ty ) ) ) ) ) )  ; " the polarity " Figure 7: Logical Form for Original Sentence ( Concept C-Check )   ; " make sure that " ( Process-Type Mental )   ( Roles ( ( Phenomenon ( ( Concept C-Polarity )   ( Process-Type Equative )   ; " linesup with " ( Roles ( ( Identi f ied ( ( Concept C-Plus )   ; " the plus " ( Roles (( On-Loc ; " on the battery " ( ( Concept C-Battery ) ) ) ) ) ) )   ( Identifier ( ( Concept C-Plus )   ; " the plus " ( Roles (( On-Loc ; " on the battery compartment " ( ( Concept C-BC ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) Figure 8: Logical Form of Rephrased Sentence ; semantic key((concept#( under c-check )) ; realization ( cat verb group ) ; will be a verb ( alt ( ; if phenomenon realized by NP ( ( roles ( ( phenomenon ( ( cat # ( ( under np ) ) ) ) )   ; then always choose " to check " ( lex " check " ) )  ; if phenomenon realized by clause ( ( roles ( ( phenomenon ( ( cat # ( ( under clause )   ) ) ) )  ; then randomly pick " to check " or ; " to make sure " ( lex (( Ralt("check . . . . make sure " ) ) ) )  ) ) ) Figure 9: Lexicon Entry for Check Concept 5 . 2 . Generating New Referential Descriptions If the user does not know an object name  , the content ~ lanner is reinvoked to generate object attributes to uild a referential description  . Although our selection algorithm is not as sophisticated as others  \[19  ,  5 ,   13\] because we do not use a detailed model of user beliefs  , we address a new issue : the interaction between the new description and other parts of the original sentence which may require rephrasing  . Two types of object attributes are used in a referring expression in COMET : object subpart relations and a tial relations to other objects in the accompanying stration  . COMET selects the relations that uniquely identify the object  . 
For example , suppose COMET's Lexical Chooser is provided with the LF for sentence  1  , Figure 10 , but the user does not know the term " COMSEC . " Instead of generating sentence 1 , COMET generates sentence 2 . To do this , COMET first selects a unique relation between the cable and a known object  . In this case , it selects the connect spatial relation between the Radio Transmitter  ( RT ) and the KY 57 , since this cable is the only one that connects the radio and the  KY57  . Selecting this relation for the description and substituting it for ' the COMSEC cable would result in sentence  3  , Fig .  10 . However , COMET notes the redundant references to the audio connector and removes one from the cable modifier by selecting the verb " runs to " instead which only requires one role in the generated sentence  . This would result in the sentence 4, Fig .  10 . In this sentence , the attachment of the prepositional phrase " from the  KY57 audio connector is ambiguous . COMET detects this ambiguity when it removes the first from-location  ; since the two from-locations would have occurred side by side and both previous verbs of the sentence take it as a modifier  , the generator must clarify that it is the from -location of the earlier verb " disconnect " and not " run to  . " To remove ambiguity , COMET surrounds the modifier of the cable by commas in sentence  2  , Fig .  107 . 
Descriptions Generated by COMET :
I."D is connect the COMSEC cable from the
KY 57 audio connector . " 2 . " Disconnect the cable , which runs to the RT , from the KY 57 audio connector . "
Descriptions Avoided by COMET : 3 . " Disconnect the cable that connects the RT to the  KY57 audio connector fom the KY57 audio connector . " 4 . " Disconnect the cable that runs to the RT from the  KY57 audio connector . " Figure 10: Generated Object Description 7Another possible way to avoid ambiguity would be to generate wo sentences such as " Find the cable that runs from the RT to the  KY57 audio connector . Disconnect the cable from the audio connector . " For subsequent reference , the presence of a discursive context allows for a wider variety of strategies to get around gaps in the user's vocabulary  . COMET takes advantage of this fact by maintaining a discourse history  , The content planner records all descriptions into the discourse history  , creating one record for the description as a whole and a separate record for each of its roles  . The entry for the description has four fields : ? The name of the concept  . 
? The description used in the reference.
? The action in which the referring description plays a role  . 
? The list of roles that the description fills in that action  ( e . g . , " COMSEC cable " is the medium of the action " disconnect "  )  . 
For each subsequent reference , the concept name is used as the access key and the three other fields are updated  ; they thus always contain the information on the last reference  . By looking up information in the discourse history  , the content planner is able to construct object descriptions in terms of the last action it was involved in  . 
Sentences generated if the user knows " COMSEC " 1 . " Disconnect the COMSEC cable from the
KY 57 audio-connector . " 2 . " Plug in the hand set to the KY57 audio-connector . ' ' 3 . " Test the COMSEC cable . "
Sentences generated if not : 4 . " Disconnect the cable , which runs to the RT , from the KY 57 audio connector . " 5 . " Plug in the hand set to the KY57 audio connector . " 6 . " Test the cable that you just disconnected . "
Figure 11: Use of Previous Discourse
As an example , consider the explanations COME Tenerates when instructing the user how to diagnosess of side tone  . When the user has no vocabulary gaps , COMET . generate sentences 13, Figure 1l . 
When the user is unfamiliar with the term " COM -SEC  , " sentences 46 are generated instead . Here COMET uses past discourse to produce a descriptive reference for the second reference to the COMSEC cable  . 
As in the previous examples , the gap is detected when the Lexical Chooser checks the user model  . 
Since there is no alternative phrase for " COMSEC " in the lexicon  , COMET calls the content planner to replan the reference  . Since it is not the first reference to the cable , COMET uses the discourse history to plan a modifying description  . A reference to the cablets discovered in the history  ( its entry is shown in Figure 12 ) and the action in this entry is selected as the modifier to build a referring expression  . 8 The role of the cable was medium and thus , COMET can generate the modifier as a relative clause  . The LF for this referring expression is shown in Figure  13  . This LF is sent back to the lexical chooser , which selects the words for the concepts within it  , and continues with generation where it left off . On third and fourth reference to the same concept  , COMET uses its anaphoric reference facility to generate it herabare head  ( e . g . , " cable ") or a pronoun ( e . g . , " it '') . 
( ; The concept name : (( Concept C-Comsec-Cable )) ; The initial generated description : ; included where connected to and from . 
( ( Concept C-Cable )   ( Roles ( ( To-Loc ( ( Concept C-RT ) ) )   ( From-Loc ( ( Concept C-KY57 ) ) ) ) ) )  ; The role it plays in the action : ( ( Roles Medium ) )  ; The action itself : '' disconnect the cable ' '   . 
( ( Process-Type Material )   ( Concept C-Disconnect )   ; Rest of action description ; in discourse history )) ; but not shown here
Figure 12: Entry for COMSEC Cable in the Discourse History 7  . Conclusions and Related Work COMET performs everal lexical choice tasks  . It can choose between alternative words or phrases for any part of speech  . When generating a request operman action , it chooses a level of detail in the concept description appropriate to the user  . When generating both initial and subsequent referring expressions  , it selects a set of distinguishing properties of the referent and chooses words to express the selected  8There is a limit to how far back COMET looks in the discourse to construct a new referring expression : the discourse history is cleared after each menu request for a new explanation  . 
232  ( ( Concept C-Cable )   ( Roles ( ( Latest-Participation ( ( Process-Type Material )   ( Concept C-Disconnect )   ( Roles ( ( Agent ( ( Concept C-User ) ) )   ( Medium ( ( Concept ^5 Concept ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) Figure 13: " the cable you just disconnected " properties , Finally , for subsequent references , COMET can use previous discourse to avoid unknown words  . 
COMET is thus using constraints from the user model  , the accompanying illustration , and past discourse in addition to traditional constraints from semantics  , yn tax , and other word choices . Although other generation systems take into account some of these constraints  , COMET is the first attempt to integrate such a variety of constraints and lexical choice strategies in a single system  . In addition , because COMET is a multimedia system , it can use the accompanying illustrations advantageously for disambiguation  . 
WIP \[20\] can also generate cross references but does not rely  . on a user model for either cross reference eneratlon or lexical choice  . EPICURE\[19\] , KAMP5\] , and FN \[13\] tailor references based on situation , but they do not constrain this choice based on the user's lexical knowledge  . EPICURE uses the user's domain knowledge , KAMP mutual beliefs about the domain , and FN the user's domain knowledge in conjunction with rules on implicatures  . They focus on the selection of appropriate properties to distinguish an object in generating references but do not choose between alternative wordings for the selected properties  . None of these systems reword action descriptions or use past discourse to avoid terms the user does not know  . While Bateman and Paris'system \[21\] uses different dialects depending on which class of users it is addressing through register mappings  , in COMET differenterms can be mixed and matched epending on the individual user model  . 

Research on language generation in COMET has been supported in part by Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Contract  N00039-84-C-0165  , National Science Foundation Grants IRT-84-51438 and GER-90-2406  , New York State Center for Advanced Technology Contracts NYS STF-CAT  ( 90 ) -053 ,  (91)-053 , and (92)-053 , and Office of Naval Research Contracts N00014-82-K-0256 and N00014-89-J-1782  . COMET's development is an ongoing group effort and has benefited from the contributions of Michael Elhadad  ( FUF )  , Doree Seligmann ( graphics generator ) , Andrea Danyluk ( diagnostic rule base) , Yumiko Fukumoto ( media coordinator ) , Jong Lim ( static knowledge base and content planner )  , Christine Lombardi ( media coordinator ) , Jacques Robin ( lexical chooser) , James Shaw ( anaphoric reference facility) , Michael Tanenblatt ( knowledge base , content planner ) , Michelle Baker , Cliff Beshers , David Fox , Laura
Gabbe , Frank Smadja , and Tony Weida.
REFERENCES 1.









Swartout , W . R . , " XPLAIN : a system for creating and explaining expert consulting systems "  , Artificial lntelligence , Vol . 21, No . 3,1983, pp . 

Feiner , S . and K . R . McKeown , " Generating Coor-dinated Multimedia Explanations  "  , Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on AI Applications  , Santa
Barbara , CA ., March 1990.
Feiner , S . and K . R . McKeown , " Coordinating Text and Graphics in Explanation Generation "  , Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Boston , Mass . , August 1990 . 
Feiner , S . and McKeown , K . R . , " Automating the Generation of Coordinated Multimedia Explanations "  , IEEE Computer , Vol . 24, No . 
10, October 1991, pp . 3341.
Appelt , D . E . , Planning English Sentences , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England ,  1985 . 
McKeown , K . R . , Text Generation : Using Discourse Strategies and Focus Constraints to Generate Natural Language Text  , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England ,  1985 . 
McKeown , K . R . , Elhadad , M . , Fukumoto , Y . , Lim , J . , Lombardi , C . , Robin , J . , and Smadja , F . , " Language Generation in COMET " , in Current Research in Language Generation , Mellish , C . , Dale , R . , and Zock , M . , eds . , Academic Press , London , 1990 . 
Elhadad , M . , Seligmann , D . , Feiner , S . , and McKeown , K . , " A Common Intention Description Language for Interactive Multimedia Systems "  , A New Generation of Intelligent Interfaces : Proceedings of  lJCAl89 Workshop on Intelligent Interfaces , Detroit , MI , August 221989 , pp .  46-52 . 
Seligmann , D . D . , and Feiner , S . , " Specifying Composite Illustrations with Communicative Goals "  , Proc . ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology  , Williamsburg , VA , 
November 1315 1989, pp . 19.
McDonald , D . D , " On the place of words in the generation process  "  , in Natural Language Genera-12 . 




tion in Artificial Intelligence and Computational Linguistics  , Paris , C . , Swartout , W . and Mann . 
W.C ., eds ., Kluwer Academic Publishers , 1991.
Danlos , L . , The Linguistic Basis of Text Generation , Cambridge University Press , 
Cambridge , England , 1987.
Smadja , F . and K . R . McKeown , " Automatically Extracting and Representing Collocations for Language Generation "  , Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Pittsburgh , Pa . , June 1990, pp .  252-9 . 
Reiter , E . B . , Generating appropriate natural language object description  , PhD dissertation , Center for research in computing technology , Harvard
University , 1990.
Elhadad , M . , " The FUF Functional Unifier : User's Manual " , Tech . report , Columbia University , 1988 . 
Elhadad , M . , " Types in Functional Unification Grammars " , Proceedings of the 28th meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , 
Pittsburgh , Pa , June 1990.
Elhadad , M . , Using argumentation to control lexical choice : a unification-based implementation  , PhD dissertation , Computer Science Department , 
Columbia University , 1993.
17 . Elhadad , M . and Robin , J . , " Controlling Content Realization with Functional Unification Grammars "  , in Aspects of Automated Natural Language Generation  , Dale , R . and Hovy , H . and Roesner , D . and Stock , O . , ed . , Springier Verlag , 1992, pp . 

18 . McKeown , K . R . , Feiner , S . K . , Robin , J . , Selig-mann , D . , and Tanenblatt , M . , " Generating Cross References for Multimedia Explanations "  , Proceedings of AAAI-92 , AAAI , July 1992 . 
19 . Dale , R . , Generating Referring Expressions , ACL-MIT Press Series in Natural Language Processing  , 
Cambridge , Ma ., 1992.
20 . Wahlster , W . , Andre , E . , Hecking , M . , and T . Rist , "WIP : Knowledgebased Presentation of Information "  , Tech . report WIP-1 , German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence  , May 1989 . 
21 . Bateman , J . A . and Paris , C . L . , " Phrasing a text in terms the user can understand "  , Proceedings of the llth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Detroit , MI ,  1989 , pp .  1511-1517 . 

