TRANSFERS OF MEANING
Geoffrey Nunberg
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center and Stanford University 
Xerox PARC
3333 Coyote Hill Road
Palo Alto CA , 94304 USA
Internet : nunberg@parc.xerox.com

In one form or another , the phenomena associated with " meaning transfer " have become central issues in a lot of recent work on semantics  . Speaking very roughly , we can partition approaches to the phenomenon along two dimensions  , which yield four basic points of departure . In the first two , people have considered transfer in basically semantic or linguistic terms  . Some have concentrated on what we might call the paradigmatic aspects of transfer  , focusing on the productive lexical processes that map semantic features into features -- for example  , the " grinding " rule that applies to turn the names of animals into mass terms denoting their meator fur  . This the approach that's involved in most recent work on " regular polysemy  , " systematic polysemy , " and the like , for example by Apresjan , Ostler and Atkins , Briscoe and Copestake , Nunberg and Zaenen , Wilensky , Kilgarriff and a number of other people . Other people have emphasized the syncat -egorematic aspects of transfer  ; that is , the ways meaning shifts and specifications are coerced in the course of semantic omposition  . This is an approach that has sbeen developed in particular by James Pustejovsky and his collaborators  , building on earlier work on type shifting . 
As opposed to these , there are conceptual and pragmatic approaches to transfer  , which focus on the extralinguistic circumstances that license transfers of various types  . Here again there are both paradigmatic and syncategorematic approaches  , loosely speaking . The first is exemplified in a lot of recent work on metaphor by people associated with the " cognitive linguistics " school  , which has focused chiefly on the relations between domains of experience that metaphor variously exploits and imputes  . The second is represented by work on indirect speech within Gricean pragmatics  , Relevance Theory , and the like , which has been chiefly concerned with specifying the conversational conditions that give rise to metaphor  , irony , and analogous phenomena . 
Of course this categorization is somewhat fac -titious  . The borders between these approaches are highly porous  , and most work on transfer overlaps several of them  . This is entirely appropriate , since these are in no sense competing theories or accounts of the phenomena  . Transfer is clearly a linguistic process , and in many of its most important forms a lexical one  . But it just as clearly has its basis in very general cognitive and communicative principles  . And while it's reasonable that people should choose to focus on one or another of these considerations relative to their immediate interests  , it is also useful to keep the Big Picture in mind  , lest we inadvertently ascribe to one domain of explanation a responsibility hat more properly belongs to another  . This is the picture I want to sketch out in this talk  . 
A comprehensive account of transfer has to make appeal to three different kinds of regularities or rules  . The first are nonlinguistic : the correspondences between domains  , real or imputed , that transfer invokes , and the communicative interests that may make these invocations useful or instructive--they enable us to identify one thing in virtue of its relation to another  , explain an abstract domain by reference to a concrete one  , and so forth . Second , there is the repertory of general linguistic processes of transfer that exploit these correspondences and principles  . By these I have in mind not traditional categories like metaphor  , synecdoche , and metonymy-distinctions that have basically to do with the kinds of domain correspondences that transfer exploits -- but the various types of operations that make possible type-shifting and sort alre assignment of expressions  , syntactic recategorizations , and deferred in dexical reference . These processes may cross-cut the types of domain correspondences that they exploit  , and I'll show that we often find a single type of domain correspondence underlying two or more distinct semantic processes of transfer  . Third , there are the language-specific instantiations of these operations  , for example in the form of constructions or lexical rules that license particular types or like Greenlandic Eskimo  , permit " grinding " of tree names to yield names of types of woods  , but not of animal names to yield the names of fursor meats  . ) In the first part of this talk , I'll focus on one of the general processes that underlie transfer : the semantic operation of " predicate transfer  , " which licenses the sortal reassignment of expressions denoting properties and relations  , and which underlies a great deal of lexical polysemy  . The process I have in mind is illustrated by an example like " I am parked out back  . " This is usually regarded as a classic instance of metonymy-i  . e . ,"person " for " car " - - where we use an expression that would conventionally denote one thing to refer to some other thing to which it is connected by a " relation of contiguity  . " But I ' ll show that on consideration there are compelling reasons for supposing that I here refers to the speaker  , rather than his car .   ( For one thing the number of the pronoun doesn't vary according to the number of cars involved : if you had two cars parked out back you wouldn't say " We are parked out back  , "though of course this would be the appropriate thing to say to refer to a single carowned by two or more people  )  . And other morphological and syntactic observations support the same conclusion : in examples like this what has been transferred is the meaning of the predicate  , rather than its argument . That is , the predicate parked outback has a transferred reading here : it denotes the property that the speaker acquires in virtue of his relation to a car that has the property of being parked out back  . 
Two conditions have to be satisfied before predicate transfers like this one are licensed  . First , there has to be a salient correspondence ( more specifically , an injective function ) between the properties of things in one domain and the properties of things in another  ; e . g . , between the locations of cars in a lot and the properties that distinguish the owner of one car from the owner of another  . Second , it has to be either useful or interesting to know that these acquired or inherited properties apply to their carriers : that's why we can say " I am parked out back " to someone who is about to go get the car  , whereas it is hard to imagine a context in which one would want to say " I was once driven by R  . icardo Montalban . " I will give a simple formal account of these conditions on predicate transfer  , and then show how it resolve some familiar syntactic and semantic difficulties  . Take Jackendoff's example , " Ringo squeezed himself into a narrow parking space  . " If we analyze this as involving a metonymy , we will have to say that the reflexive here denotes something distinct from its antecedent  , and so make provision for certain sortal shifts in giving the identity conditions on reflexivization and other rules and constructions ordinarily require coreference of pronoun and antecedent  . Whereas now we will takes queeze into a narrow parking place as a transferred predicate that denotes a relation between persons : in virtue of having squeezed his car into a space  , that is , Ringo has also done something noteworthy to himself  . More generally , I'l largue that the conditions on rules of anaphora and similar operations need never provide for sortal shifts  ; sortally speaking , we must always take " syntactic identity " in the strictest possible way  . 
In the second part of this paper , I'll show how predicate transfer is instantiated lexically in the rules that provide for systematic polysemy  . I'll mention several familiar cases : grinding , conversion of names of artists to the names of their works  ( e . g . , a Picasso , an Agatha Christie , and the use of the names of publications like newspaper and magazine for the organizations that produce them  . 
Each of these processes is subject to a variety of constraints  , which may answer any of several different principles  . Some are due to the absence of perceived domain correspondences of the appropriate type  ( for example , the reluctance of words like mammal and bird to undergogrinding  . Some are explained by the fact that the acquired property denoted by the transferred predicate is insufficiently noteworthy or criterial : that is why we don't say She was reading a Kafka  . Still others are due to the absence of specific lexical licenses for certain types of transfer  ; this explains why we don't generally use the " artist for work " rule to derive the names of musical works  ( ? two Beethovens , ? several Elvises ) , or why grinding does not apply in English to derive the names of liquids ? We always cook with olive  . All of this by way of showing why it is important obear in mind the heterogeneity of the mechanisms that underlie transfers of all types  . 

