TEXTSEGMENTATION
BASEDONSIMILARITY BETWEENWORDS
Hideki Kozima
Course in Computer Science and Information Mathematics  , 
Graduate School , University of Electro-Communications
1-5-1, Chofugaoka , Chofu,
Tokyo 182, Japan
( xkozima@phaeton.cs.uec,ac.jp )
Abstract
This paper proposes a new indicator of text structure  , called the lexical cohesion profile ( LCP ) , which locates segment boundaries in a text . A text segment is a coherent scene ; the words in a segment a ~ e linked together via lexical cohesion relations  . LCP records mutual similarity of words in a sequence of text  . The similarity of words , which represents their cohesiveness , i computed using a semantic network . Comparison with the text segments marked by a number of subjects shows that LCP closely correlates with the human judgments  . LCP may provide valuable information for resolving anaphor and ellipsis  . 

A text is not just a sequence of words , but it has coherent structure . The meaning of each word cannot be determined until it is placed in the structure of the text  . Recognizing the structure of text is an essential task in text understanding  , especially in resolving anaphor and ellipsis . 
One of the constituents of the text structure is a text segment  . A text segment , whether or not it is explicitly marked , as are sentences and paragraphs , is defined as a sequence of clauses or sentences that display local coherence  . It resembles a scene in a movie , which describes the same objects in the same situation  . 
This paper proposes an indicator , called the lexical cohesion profile ( LCP ) , which locate seg-ment boundaries in a narrative text  . LCP is a record of lexical cohesiveness of words in a sequence of text  . Lexical cohesiveness i defined as word similarity  ( Kozima and Furugori ,  1993 ) computed by spreading activation on a semantic network  . Hills and valleys of LCP closely correlate with changing of segments  . 
SEGMENTS AND COHERENCE
Several methods to capture segment boundaries have been proposed in the studies of text structure  . For example , cue phrases play an important role in signaling segment changes  . ( Grosz and Sidner , 1986) However , such clues are not directly based on coherence which forms the clauses or sentences into a segment  . 
Youmans ( 1991 ) proposed VMP ( vocabulary management profile ) as an indicator of segment boundaries . VMP is a record of the number of new vocabulary terms introduced in an interval of text  . However , VMP does not work well on a high-density text . The reason is that coherence of a segment should be determined not only by reiteration of words but also by lexical cohesion  . 
Morris and Hirst ( 1991 ) used Roget's thesaurus to determine whether or not two words have lexical cohesion  . Their method can capture ahnost all the types of lexical cohesion  , e . g . 
systematic and non-systematic semantic relation.
However it does not deal with strength of cohesiveness which suggests the degree of contribution to coherence of the segment  . 
Computing Lexieal Cohesion
Kozima and Furugori ( 1993 ) defined lexical cohesiveness as semantic similarity between words  , and proposed a method for measuring it . Similarity between words is computed by spreading activation on a semantic network which is systematically constructed from an English dictionary  ( LDOCE )  . 
The similarity cr(w , w ') E\[0 , 1\] between words w , w ~ is computed in the following way: ( 1 ) produce an activated pattern by activating the node w  ;   ( 2 ) observe activity of the node wt in the activated pattern  . The following examples sugges the feature of the similarity ~ r : ? r  ( cat , pet ) = 0 . 133722, o "( cat , hat ) = 0 . 001784, ? r(waiter , restaurant ) = 0 . 175699, cr(painter , restaurant ) = 0 . 006260  . 
The similarity ~ r depends on the significances ( w ) E\[0 ,  1\] , i . e . normalized information of the word w in West's corpus  ( 1953 )  . For example : s(red ) = 0 . 500955, s(and ) = 0 . 254294  . 
286 0 . 4 0 . 2 : 0 . 1 alcohol_dr in k_l NII drink_2' qI~k .   . _kre-d_ 1NL_J \] bottle_Ik___~wine_ 1~___~ poison-l ~\] ~ IIIII swallow~l~___~--1 IIIIIIII spirit_l 2   4   6   8   10 steps Figure 1  . An activated pattern of a word list ( produced from red , alcoholic , drink ) . 
The following examples how the relationship between the word significance and the similarity :   ( waiter , waiter ) = 0 . 596803, a(red,blood)----0 . 111443, ( of , blood ) = 0 . 001041  . 
LEXICAL COHESION PROFILE
LCP of the text T = wl ,  ' "  , wg is a sequence c($1) ,  .  ? . , e(SN ) of lexical cohesiveness e(Si ) . Si is the word list which can be seen through a fixed-width window centered on the ith word of T : Si--Wl  , Wl+l ,  " " "  , wi1 , wi , Wi + l ,  " " ?  , Wr--1 , Wr , 1 = i -- A(ifi _ < A , then l = l ) , r = i + A ( if i > N -- A , then r = N ) . 
LCP treats the text T as a word list without any punctuation or paragraph boundaries  . 
Cohesiveness of a Word List
Lexical cohesiveness c ( Si ) of the word list Si is defined as follows : c ( S ) = w )   , where a(P ( Si ) , w ) is the activity value of the node w in the activated pattern P  ( Si )  . P ( Si ) is produced by activating each node wESi with strengths  ( w ) ~/ ~ s ( w )  . Figure 1 shows a sample pattern of red , alcoholic , drink .   ( Note that it has highly activated nodes like bot tle and wine  . ) The definition of c ( Si ) above expresses that c ( Si ) represent semantic homogeneity of S/ , since P ( Si ) represents the average meaning of w6S ~ . . For example : c("Mol ly saw a cat . It washer family pet . She wished to keep alion . " = 0 . 403239 ( cohesive ), c("There is no one but me . Put on your clothes . I cannot walk more . " ---- 0 . 235462 ( not cohesive ) . 

V  ~
LC Poloooolo \ [ oo . . . \]..

Figure 2 . Correlation between LCP and text segments . 
0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 loo2; o4 ooi ( words)
Figure 3 . An example of LCP ( using rectangular window of A = 25 ) 
LCP and Its Feature
A graph of LCP , which plots c(Si ) at the text position i , indicates changing of segments : ? If S/is inside a segment  , it tends to be cohesive and makes c(Si ) high . 
? If Si is crossing a segment boundary , it tends to semantically vary and makes c ( Si ) low . 
As shown in Figure 2 , the segment boundaries can be detected by the valleys  ( minimum points ) of LCP . 
The LCP , shown in Figure 3 , has large hills and valleys , and also meaningless noise . The graph is so complicated that one cannot easily detern fine which valley should be considered as a segment boundary  . 
The shape of the window , which defines weight of words in it for pattern production  , makes LCP smooth . Experiments on several window shapes ( e . g . triangle window , etc . ) shows that Hanning window is best for clarifying the macroscopic features of LCP  . 
The width of the window also has effect on the macroscopic features of LCP  , especially on separability of segments . Experiments on several window widths ( A_5~60 ) reveals that the Han-ning window of A = 25 gives the best correlation between LCP and segments  . 

LCP0 . 7" 0 . 6 : 0 . 5 0 . 4 0 . 314 tations . 6'4?'izi , . 
Jii I 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700i ( words ) Figure 4 . Correlation between LCP and segment boundaries . 
VERIFICATION OF LCP
This section inspects the correlation between LCP and segment boundaries perceived by the human judgments  . The curve of Figure 4 shows the LCP of the simplified version of O . Henry's " Spring time ? la Carte " ( Thornley ,  1960) . The solid bars represent he histogram of segment boundaries reported by  16 subjects who read the text without paragraph structure  . 
It is clear that the valleys of the LCP correspond mostly to the dominant segment boundaries  . For example , the clear valley at i = 110 exactly corresponds to the dominant segment boundary  ( and also to the paragraph boundary shown as a dotted line  )  . 
Note that LCP can detect segment changing of a text regardless of its paragraph structure  . 
For example , i = 156 is a paragraph boundary , but neither a valley of the LCP nor a segment boundary  ; i = 236 is both a segment boundary and approximately a valley of the LCP  , but not a paragraph boundary . 
However , some valleys of the LCP do not exactly correspond to segment boundaries  . For example , the valley near i = 450 disagree with the segment boundary at i = 465  . The reason is that lexical cohesion cannot cover all aspect of coherence of a segment  ; an incoherent piece of text can be lexically cohesive  . 

This paper proposed LCP , an indicator of segment changing , which concentrates on lexical cohesion of a text segment  . The experiment proved that LCP closely correlate with the segment boundaries captured by the human judgments  , and that lexical cohesion plays main role in forming a sequence of words into segments  . 
Text segmentation described here provides basic information for text understanding : ? Resolving anaphor and ellipsis : Segment boundaries provide valuable restriction for determination of the referents  . 
? Analyzing text structure :
Segment boundaries can be considered as segment switching  ( push and pop ) in hierarchical structure of text . 
The segmentation can be applied also to text summarizing  . ( Consider a list of average meaning of segments . ) In future research , the author needs to examine validity of LCP for other genres -- Hearst  ( 1993 ) segments expository texts . Incorporating other clues ( e . g . cue phrases , tense and aspect , etc . ) is also needed to make this segmentation method more robust  . 

The author is very grateful to Dr . Teiji Furugori , University of Electro-Communications , for his insightful suggestions and comments on this work  . 

Grosz , Barbara J . , and Sidner , Candance L .  (1986) . 
" Attention , intentions , and the structure of discourse . " Computational Linguistics , 12, 175-204 . 
Halliday , Michael A . K . , Hasan , Ruqaiya (1976) . Che-sion in English . Longman . 
Hearst , Marti , and Plaunt , Christian (1993) . " Sub-topic structuring for full-length document access  , " to appear in SIGIR 1993 , Pittsburgh , PA . 
Kozima , Hideki , and Furugori , Teiji (1993) . " Similarity between words computed by spreading activation on an English dictionary  . " to appear in
Proceedings o \] EACL-93.
Morris , Jane , and Hirst , Graeme (1991) . " Lexical cohesion computed by thesaural relations as an indicator of the structure of text  . " Computational
Linguistics , 17, 2148.
Thornley , G . C . editor (1960) . British and American Short Stories , ( Longman Simplified English
Series ). Longman.
West , Michael (1953) . A General Service List of English Words . Longman . 
Youmans , Gilbert (1991) . " A new tool for discourse analysis : The vocabulary-management profile  . "
Language , 67, 763-789.

