THEIMPERFECTIVE PARADOXAND
TRAJECTORY-OF-MOTIONEVENTS *
Michael White
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , PA , USA
m white ? linc.cis.upenn , edu
Abstract
In the first part of the paper , I present a new treatment of THEIMPERFI~CTIVE PARADOX  ( Dowty 1979 ) for the restricted case of trajectory-of-motion events  . This treatment extends and refines those of Moens and Steedman  ( 1988 ) and Jackendoff ( 1991 )  . In the second part , I describe an implemented algorithm based on this treatment which determines whether a specified sequence of such events is or is not possible under certains it-uationally supplied constraints and restrictive assumptions  . 
Introduction
Bach ( 1986:12 ) summarizes THEIM PERFECTIVE PARADOX ( Dowty 1979 ) as follows : " .   .   . how can we characterize the meaning of a progressive sentence like  ( la )   \[17\] on the basis of the meaning of a simple sentence like  ( lb ) \[18\] when ( la ) can be true of a history without ( lb ) ever being true ?" ( la ) John was crossing the street . 
( lb ) John crossed the street.
Citing parallels in the nominal domain , Bach goes onto point out that this puzzle is seemingly much more general  , insofar as it appears whenever any sort of partitive is employed  . In support of this view , we may observe that the start v-ing construction exhibits the same behavior :  ( 2a ) John started jogging to the museum . 
(2b ) John jogged to the museum.
Here we see that ( 2a ) does not entail ( 2b ) - - while ( 2b ) asserts the occurrence of an entire event of John jogging to the museum  ,   ( 2a ) only asserts the * The author gratefully acknowledges the helpful comments of Mark Steedman  , Jeff Siskind , Christy Doran , Matthew Stone , and the anonymous referees , as well as the support of DARPAN 00014-90-J-1863 , AI ~ ODAAL03-89-C-0031 , NSF IRI90-16592 , 
BenFranklin 91S . 3078C-1.
occurrence of the beginning of such an event , leaving open the existential status of its completion  . 
Capitalizing on Bach's insight , I present in the first part of the paper a new treatment of the imperfective paradox which relies on the possibility of having actual events standing in the part of relation to hypothetical super-events  . This treatment extends and refines those of Moens and Steedman  ( 1988 ) and Jackendoff ( 1991 )  , at least for the restricted case of trajectory-of -motion events  . 1In particular , the present reatment correctly accounts not only for what  ( 2a ) fails to entail--namely , that John eventually reaches the museum--but also for what  ( 2a ) does in fact entail--namely , that John follows ( by jogging ) at least an initial part of a path that leads to the museum  . In the second part of the paper , I briefly describe an implemented algorithm based on this theoretical treatment which determines whether a specified sequence of trajectory-of -motion is or is not possible under certain situationally supplied constraints and restrictive assumptions  . 

The present treatment builds upon the approach to aspectual composition developed in White  ( 1993 )  , a brief sketch of which follows . 
White (1993) argues that substances , processes and other such entities should be modeled as abstract kinds whose realizations  ( things , events , etc . ) vary in amount .   2 This is accomplished formally through the use of an order-sorted logic with an axiomatized collection of binary relations  . 
The intended sort hierarchy is much like those of Eberle  ( 1990 ) and Jackendoff ( 1991 )  ; in particular , both substances and things are taken to be subsorts of the material entities  , and similarly 1These are elsewhere called ' directed-motion ' events . 
2This move is intended to resolve certain empirical and computational problems with the view of referential homogeneity espoused by Krifka  ( 1992 ) and his predecessors . 
2 83 both processes and events are taken to be sub -sorts of the nonstative ventualities  . What is new is the axiomatization of Jackendoff's composed-of relation  ( comp ) -- which effects the aforementioned kind-to -realization mapping -- in terms of Krifka's  ( 1992 ) part of relation ( _U )  . Of particular interest is the following subpart closure property :  ( 3 ) Vxyly2\[comp ( x ) (yx ) A y2 C_yl--~comp ( x ) (y2 ) \] Postulate ( 3 ) states that all subparts of a realization of a given kind are also realizations of that kind  . 3 From this postulate it follows , for example , that if e is a process of John running along the river which has a realization ellasting ten minutes  , and if e2 is a subevent of el--the first half , say--then e2 is also a realization of e . As such , this postulate may be used to make John ranalong the river for ten minutes entail John ran along the river for five minutes  , in contras to the pair John rantol hemuseum in ten minutes and John rantol hemuseum in five minules  . 
In order to resolve the imperfective paradox , we may extend White ( 1993 ) by adding a mapping from events to processes ( whose realizations need not terminate in the same way  )  , as well as a means for distinguishing actual and hypothetical events  . 
To do the former , we may axiomatize comp's inverse mapping-- Jackendoff's ground-from  ( gr ) -- again in terms of Krifka's part of relation . This is shown below: ( 4 ) V xylY2\[gr ( yl ) ( X ) A comp ( x ) (y2 ) - - -* y2C_yl\]Postulate ( 4 ) simply requires that all the realizations e2 of a processe which is ' ground from ' an event el must be subevents of el  ( and likewise , mutatismut and is , for substances and things ) . As the realizations e2 of e may be proper subevents of el , the relation gr provides a means for accessing subevents of el with alternate terminations  . 
To distinguish those events which actually occur from those that are merely hypothetical  , we may simply introduce a special predicate Actual  , which we require to preserve the part of relation only in the downwards direction :  ( 5 ) Vxy\[Actual ( z ) Ay U_z --* Actual ( y ) \] Postulate ( 5 ) is necessary to get John slopped running to the museum after ten minutes to entail John ran for ten minutes as well as John ran for nine minutes  , but not John ran for eleven minutes . 
At this point we are ready to examine in some detail how the above machinery may be used in resolving the imperfective paradox  . Let us assume 3For the sake of simplicity I will not address the minimal parts problem here  . 
that sentence such as ( 6 ) receive compositional translations as in ( 7 ) :  ( 6a ) John ran to the bridge . 
(6b ) John stopped running to the bridge.
(7 a ) 3 e l .
run '( j ) ( el ) A to ' ( the ' ( bridge ')) ( r ~ ( el )) A
Actual ( el ) (7b ) 3 eele2e3.
run ' ( j ) ( el ) A to ' ( the' ( bridge' ) ) ( rs ( el ) )A gr ( el ) ( e ) A comp ( e ) (e2 ) A stop ' ( e2 ) (ea ) A

In (7) , el is an event of John running to the bridge . 4In ( Ta ) , this event is asserted to be actual ; in (7b ) , in contrast , the progressive morphology on run triggers the introduction of gr  , which mapsel to the processe .   5 It is this process which e3 is an event of stopping : following Jackendoff ( 1991 )  , this is represented here by introducing an event e ~ composed of e which hase a as its stopping point  . 
Naturally enough , we may expect the actuality of e3 to entail the actuality of e2  , and thus all subevents of e2 . Nevertheless , the actuality of et does not follow , as Postulate ( 4 ) permits e2 to be a proper subpart of el ( which is pragmatically the most likely case )  . 
To make the semantics developed so far more concrete  , we may now impose a particular interpretation on trajectory-of-motion events  , namely one in which these are modeled as continuous functions from times to locations of the object in motion  . Depending on how we model objects and locations , we of course arrive at interpretations of varying complexity  . In what follows we focus only on the simplest such interpretation  , which takes both to be points . 
Note that by assuming the preceding interpretation of trajectory-of-motion events  , we may interpre the relation_as the relation continuous-subset  . Furthermore , we may also interpret processes as sets of events closed under the v-relation  ; this then permits comp to be interpreted as element-of  , and gr ( for events ) as mapping an event to the smallest process containing it  . Before continuing , we may observe that this interpretation does indeed satisfy Postulates  ( 3 ) and ( 4 )  . 

While the above interpretation of trajectory-of -motion events forces one to abstract away from * The spatial trace function r~maps eventualities to their trajectories  ( cf . White 1993) . 
5 Much as in Moens and Steedman ( 1988 ) and Jackendoff ( 1991 )  , the introduction of gr is necessary to avoid having an ill-sorted formula  . 
284 the manner of motion supplied by a verb , it does nevertheless permit one to consider factors such as the normal speed as well as the meanings of the prepositions  10  , lowards , etc . By making two additional restrictive assumptions , namely that these events be of constant velocity and in one dimension  , I have been able to construct and implement an algorithm which determines whether a specified sequence of such events is or is not possible under certain situationally supplied constraints  . 
These constraints include the locations of various landmarks  ( assumed to remain stationary ) and the minimum , maximum , and normal rates associated with various manners of motion  ( e . g . running , jog-ging ) for a given individual . 
The algorithm takes an input string and compositionally derives a sequence of logical forms  ( one for each sentence ) using a simple categorial grammar ( most of which appears in White 1993 )  . 
A special-purpose procedure is then used to instantiate the described sequence of events as a constraint optimization problem  ; note that although this procedure is quite ad hoc , the constraints are represented in a declarative , hierarchical fashion ( cf . White 1993) . If the constraint optimization problem has a solution  , it is found using a slightly modified version of the constraint satisfaction procedure built into SC aEAMER  , Siskind and McAllester's (1993) portable , efficient version of nondeterministic Common Lisp  . 6 As an example of an impossible description , let us consider the sequence of events described below :  ( 8 ) Guy started jogging eastwards Mong the river . 
25 minutes later here ached the cafe/the museum . 
If we assume that the user specifies the cafe and the museum to be  5 and 10 km , respectively , from the implicit starting point , and that the rates specified for Guy are those of a serious but not super-human athlete  , then the algorithm will only find a solution for the first case  ( 10km in 25 minutes is too much to expect . ) Now , by reasoning about subevent s--here , subsegments of lines in space-time--the program exhibits the same behavior with the pair in  ( 9 ) :  ( 9 ) Guy started jogging to the bar .   25 minutes later here ached the cafe/them useum . 
Since " Guy jogging to the cafe is accepted as a possible proper subevent of Guy jogging to the  6The constraint optimization problem is split into two constraint satisfaction problems  , namely finding the smallest consistent value of a cost variable and then finding consistent values for the rest of the variables  . 
bar ( assuming the bar is further east than the other landmarks  )  , example ( 9 ) shows how the present approach successfully avoids the imperfec-tire paradox  ; since Guy jogging to the museum ( in 25 minutes ) is not accepted as a possible subevent , example ( 9 ) likewise shows how the present approach extends and refines those of Moens and Steedman and  3ackendoff vis-a-v is the subevent relation . 7
Future Work
The algorithm as implemented functions only under a number of quite restrictive assumptions  , and suffers from a rather ad hocuse of the derived logical forms  . In future work I in tend to extend the algorithm beyond the unidimensionalnd constant velocity cases considered so far  , and to investigate incorporating the present treatment into the Interpretation as Abduction approach advocated by 
Hobbs et . al . (1993).
References\[1\]EmmonBach . The algebra of events . Linguistics and
Philosophy , 1986.
\[2\] David R . Dowty . Word Meaning and Montague Grammar . Reidel , 1979 . 
\[3\] Kurt Eberle . Eventualities in natural language understanding systems  . In Sorts and Types in Artificial Intelligence . Springer Verlag , 1990 . 
\[4\] Christopher Habel . Propositional and depictorial representations of spatial knowledge : The case of path-concepts  . In Natural Language and Logic . Springer Verlag , 1990 . Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence . 
\[5\] Erhard Hinrichs . A Compositional Semantics for Ak-tionsarten and NP Reference in English  . PhD thesis,
The Ohio State University , 1985.
\[61 Jerry Hobbs , Mark Stickel , Douglas Appelt , and Paul Martin . Interpretation as abduction , 1993 . To appear in Artificial Intelligence Journal . 
\[7\] Ray Jackendoff . Parts and boundaries . Cognition , 41:9-45, 1991 . 
\[ g \] Manfred Krifka . Thematic relations as links between nominal reference and temporal constitution  . In Ivan A , Sag and Anna Szabolesi , editors , Lexical Matters . CSLI , 1992 . 
\[9\] Marc Moens and Mark Steedman . Temporal ontology and temporal reference . Computational Linguistics , June 1988 . 
\ [10\] Jeffrey Mark Siskind and David Allen McAllester . Nondeterministic lisp as a substrate for constraint logic programming  . To appear in AAAI93, 1993 . 
\[11\]H . J . Verkuyl . Aspectual classes and aspectual composition . Linguistics and Philosophy , 12(1), 1989 . 
\[12\] Michael White . Delimitedness and trajectory-of-motion events . In Proceedings of the Sixth Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics ( EACL'93), 1993.
7It is worth noting that the constant velocity restrictive assumption makes start running to and start running towards synonymous  , which is not the case in general ( cf . Habel 1990) . 

