ANEMPIRICAL STUDYON THE MATICK NOWLED GE ACQUISITION 
BASEDONSYNTACTICCLUES ANDHEURISTICS
Rey-Long Liu * and Von-WunSoo **
Department of Computer Science
National Tsing-Hua University
Hsin Chu , Taiwan , R.O.C.
Email : dr 798303@cs . nthu . edu . tw * and soo@cs . nthu . edu . tw**

Thematic knowledge is a basis of semamic interpretation  . In this paper , we propose an acquisition method to acquire thematic knowledge by exploiting syntactic clues from training sentences  . The syntactic lues , which may be easily collected by most existing syntactic processors  , reduce the hypothesis space of the thematic roles  . The ambiguities may be further resolved by the evidences either from a trainer or from a large corpus  . A set of heurist-cs based on linguistic constraints i employed to guide the ambiguity resolution process  . When a train , - . r is available , the system generates new sentences w to set hematic validities can be justified by the trainer  . When a large corpus is available , the thematic validity may be justified by observing the sentences in the corpus  . Using this way , a syntactic processor may become a thematic recognizer by simply derivir  . gits thematic knowledge from its own syntactic knowledge  . 
Keywords : Thematic Knowledge Acquisition , Syntactic Clues , Heuristics-guided Ambigu-ty Resolution , Corpusbased Acquisition , Interactive Acquisition 1 . INTRODUCTION Natural language processing ( NLP ) systems need various knowledge including syntactic  , semantic , discourse , and pragmatic knowledge in different applications  . Perhaps due to the relatively well-established syntactic theories and for rc  . alisms , there were many syntactic processing systew , seither manually constructed or automatically exten J ~ d by various acquisition methods  ( Asker 92 , Berwick 85 , Brentgl , Liu 92b , Lytinen 90 , Samuelss on 91 , Simmons 91 Sanfi-lippo 92 , Smadja 91 and Sekine 92) . However , the satisfactory representation and acquisition methods of domain-independent semantic  , disco~lrse , and pragmatic knowledge are not yet develo ~ dor computationally implemented  . NLP systems 6f' . ensuffer the dilemma of semantic representation . Sophisticated representation of semantics has better expressive power but imposes difficulties on acquF  ; ition in practice . On the other hand , the poor adequacy of naive semantic representation may deteriorate the performance of NLP systems  . Therefore , for plausible acquisition and processing , domain-dependent semantic bias was 9ften employed in many previous acquisition systez , s(Grishman 92 b , Lang 88 , Lu 89 , and

In thi~paper , we present an implemented system that acquires domain-independent thematic knowledge using available syntactic resources  ( e . g . 
syntactic p ~ acessing systems and syntactically processed cort  ; ara ) . Thematic knowledge can represent semantic or conceptual entities  . For correct and efficient parsing , thematic expectation serves as a basis for conflict resolution  ( Taraban 88 )  . For natural language understanding and other applications  ( e . g . 
machine translation ) , thematic role recognition is a major step . ~ematic relations may serve as the vocabulary shared by the parser  , the discourse model , and the world knowledge ( Tanenhaus 89) . More importantly , since thematic structures are perhaps most closely link ~ d to syntactic structures  ( $ ackendoff 72 )  , thematic knowledge acquisition may be more feasible when only  . : ' yntactic resources are available . The consideration of the availability of the resources from which thematic knowledge may be derived promotes the  practica2 feasibility of the acquisition method . 
In geaeral , lexical knowledge of a lexical head should ( at ~ east ) include 1 ) the number of arguments of the lexic ~- ~ lhead , 2) syntactic properties of the arguments , and 3 ) thematic roles of the arguments ( the argument , : ~ ructure ) . The former two components may beeitt ~ er already constructed in available syntactic processors or acquired by many syntactic acquisition systems  . However , the acquisition of the thematic roles of th ~ arguments deserves more exploration  . A constituent ~ a y have different hematic roles for different verbs in different uses  . For example , " John " has different th , ~matic roles in (1 . 1) - (1 . 4) . 
(1.1)\[Agenz John \] turned on the light.
(1.2)\[Goalrohn \] inherited a million dollars.
(1 . 3 ) The magic wandturned\[Theme John \] into a frog  . 

Table 1 . Syntactic lues for hypothesizing thematic roles
Theta role



























Animate Subject
Yy ( animate ) y ( animate ) y(noAg)
Yn


Object nnn

Preposition in PP by till , untill , to , into , down from with , by of , about for at , in , on , under at , in , before , after , about , by , on , during for none in , with by , for , because of in , into (1 . 4) The letter eached\[GoalJohn\]yesterday . 
To acquire thematic lexical knowledge , precise thematic roles of arguments in the sentences needs to be determined  . 
In the next section , the thematic roles considered in this paper are listed  . The syntactic properties of the thematic roles are also summarized  . The syntactic propertie serve as a preliminary filter to reduce the hypothesis space of possible thematic roles of arguments in training sentences  . To further esolve the ambiguities , heuristics based on various linguistic phenomena and constraints are introduced in section  3  . The heuristic serve as a general guidance for the system to collect valuable information to discriminate thematic roles  . Current status of the experiment is reported in section  4  . In section 5 , the method is evaluated and related to previous methodologies  . We conclude , in section 6 , that by properly collecting discrimination information from available sources  , thematic knowledge acquisition may be , more feasible in practice . 
2. THEMATICROLES AND SYNTAC-
TICCLUES
The thematic roles considered in this paper and the syntactic lues for identifying them are presented in Table  1  . The syntactic lues include i ) the possible syntactic on stituents of the arguments  , 2) whether animate or inanimate arguments ,  3 ) grammatical functions ( subject or object ) of the a ; guments when they are Noun Phrases ( NPs ) , and 4 ) p : e positions of the prepositional phrase in which the aaguments may occur  , The syntactic on stituents in c!t : de NP , Proposition ( Po) , Adverbial Phrase ( ADVP ) , Adjective Phrase ( ADJP ) , and Prepositional phrase ( PP ) . In addition to common animate nouns ( e . g . he , she , and I ) , propern guns are treated as animate NPs as well . 
In Table 1 , " y " , " n " ,  "?" , and "-" denote " yes " , " no " , " don't care " , and " seldom " respectively . For example , an Agent should be an animate NP which may be at the subject  ( but not object ) position , and if it is in a PP , the preposition of the PP should be " by " ( e . g . 
" John " in " the light is turned on by John ").
We consider the thematic roles to be wellknown and referred  , although slight differences might be found in various works  . The intrinsic properties of the thematic roles had been discussed from various perspective z in previous literatures  ( Jackendoff 72 and Gruber 76 )  .   Grimshaw88 and Levin86 discussed the problems o_~thematic role marking in so called light verbs and a Jjectival passives  . More detaile descrip-tion of the thematic roles may be found in the literatures  . To illustrate the thematic roles , consider (2 . 1)-(2 . 9) . 
(2 . 1 ) lag The robber \] robbed\[So the bank\]of\[ Th the money \]  . 
(2 . 2)\[Th Therock \] rolled down\[Go the hill \] . 
(2.3)\[InTt , ekey\]can open\[Th the door\].
(2 . 4 ) \[GoWill\]inherited\[Quamillion dollars\] . 
(2 . 5 ) \[ Th ~! eletter \] finally reached\[GoJohn\] . 
(2 . 6 ) \[ Lo "121e restaurant \] candine\[Thfiftypeople\] . 
(2 . 7)\[CaAfire\]burnedown\[Th the house\] . 
(2 . 8 ) lAgJohn\]bought\[BeMary\]\[Thacoat\] \[ Mareluctantly\]  . 
(2 . 9 ) lagJohn\]promised\[GoMary\]\[Po to marry her \]  . -When at r , lining sentence is entered , arguments of lexical verbs in the sentence need to be extracted before learting  . This can be achieved by invoking a syntactic processor  . 

Table 2 . Heuristics for discriminating the ratic roles ? Volition Heuristic  ( VH ) : Purposive constructions ( e . g . in order to ) an 0 purposive adverbials ( e . g . deliberately and intentionally ) may occur in sentences with Agent arguments ( Gruber 76 )  . 
? Imperative Heuristic OH ) : Imperatives are permissible only for Agent subjects  ( Gruber 76 )  . 
? Thematic Hierarchy Heuristic ( THH ) : Given a thematic hierarchy ( from higher to lower ) " Agent > Location , Source , Goal > Theme " , the passive by-phrases must reside at a higher level than the derived subjects in the hierarchy  ( i . e . the Thematic Hierarchy Condition in Jackendoff 72) . In this pap zr , we set up the hierarchy : Agent > Location , Source , Goal , Instrument , Cause > Theme , Beneficiary , Time , Quantity , Proposition , Manner , Result . Subjects and objects cannot reside at the same level  . 
? Preposition Heuristic ( PH ) : The prepositions of the PPs in which the arguments occur often convey good discrimination iformation for resolving thematic roles ambiguities  ( ee the " Preposition in PP " column in Table 1 )  . 
? One-Theme Heuristic ( OTH ) : An ~ x gument is preferred to be Theme if it is the only possible Theme in the argument structure  . 
? Uniqueness Heuristic ( UH ): Notwc , arguments may receive the sanle thematic role ( exclusive of conjunctions and anaphora which co -relate two constituents a signed with the same thematic role  )  . 
If the sentence is selected from a syntactically processed corpus  ( such as the PENN treebank ) the arguments may be directly extracted from the corpus  . To identify the thematic roles of the arguments , Table 1 is consulted . 
For example , consider (2 . 1) as the training sentence . Since " the robber " is an animate NP with the subject grammatical function  , it can only qualify for Ag , Go , So , and Th . Similarly , since " the bank " is an inanimate NP with the object grammatical function  , it can only satisfy the requirements of Go , So , Th , and Re . Because of the preposition " of " , "th ~ money " can only be Th . As a result , after con , ; ulting the constraints in Table 1 , "therobber " , " the bank " , and " the money " can only be Ag , Go , So , Tb , Go , So , Th , Re , and Th respectively . Therefore , although the clues in Table 1 may serve as a filter , lots of thematic role ambiguities till call for other discrimination information and resolution mechanisms  . 
3. FINDING EXTRAIN FOR MATION
FORRESOLVING THETAROLE
AMBIGUITIES
The remaining thematic role ambiguitie should be resolved by the evidences from other sources  . 
Trainers and corpora are the two most commonly available sources of the extra information  . Interactive acquisition had been applied in various systems in which the oracle from the trainer may reduce most ambiguities  ( e . g . Lang 88, Liu 93, Lu89, and Velardi91) . Corpusbased acquisition systems may also converge to a satisfactory performance by collecting evidences from a large corpus  ( e . g . Brent 91, Sekine 92, Smadja 91, and Zernik 89) . We are concerned with the kinds of information the available sources may contribute to thematic knowledge acquisition  . 
The heuristics to discriminate hematic roles are proposed in Table  2  . The heuristic suggest the system the ways of collecting useful information for resolving ambiguities  . Volition Heuristic and Impera-tive Heuriz'j care for confirming the Agent role  , One-Theme Heuristicis for Theme , while Thematic Hierarchy Heuristic , Preposition Heuristic and Uniqueness Heuristic may be used in a general way  . 
Its h~ald be noted that , for the purposes of efficient acquisition , not all of the heuristics were identical to the corresponding original linguistic postula-tions  . For example , Thematic Hierarchy Heuristic was motivated by the Thematic Hierarchy Condition  ( Jackendoff 72 ) but embedded with more constraints to filter ou ~ more hypotheses  . One-Theme Heuristic was a relaxed version of the statement " every sentence has a theme " which might be too strong in many cases  ( Jack . mdoff 87) . 
Becaase of the space limit , we only use an example tc illustrate the idea . Consider (2 . 1 ) " The robber rob ' ~ ed the bank of the money " again  . Astactic clues , "therobber " , " the bank " , and " the money " may be Ag , Go , So , Th , Ge , So , Th , Re , and Th respectively . By applying Uniqueness Heuristic to the Theme role  , the argument structure of " rob " in the sentence can only be  ( AS1 ) " Ag , Go , So , Go , So , Re , Th " , which means that , the external argument is Ag , Go , So and the internal arguments are Go , So , Re and Th . Based on the intermediate result , Volition Heuristic , Imperative Heuristic , Thematic Hierarchy Heuristic , and Preposition Heuristi could be invoked to furthere solve ambiguities  . 
Volition Heuristic and Imperative Heuristicask the learner to verify the validities of : the sentences such as " John intentionally robbed the bank "  ( " John " and " the robber " matches because they have the same properties considered in Table  1 and Table 2  )  . If the sentence is " accepted " , an Agent is needed for " rob " . 
Therefore , the argument structure becomes ( AS2) " Ag , Go , So , Re , Th " Thematic Hierarchy Heuristic guides the learner to test the validity of the passive Form of  ( 2 . 1) . 
Similarly , since sentences like " The barb : is robbed by Mary " could be valid  , " The robber " is higher than " the bank " in the Thematic Hierarchy  . Therefore , the learner may conclude that either AS3 or AS4 may be the argument structure of " rob ": ( AS3 ) " Ag , Go , So , Re , Th "( AS4) " Go , So , Re , Th " . 
Preposition Heuristic suggests the learner to to resolve ambiguities based on the prel : ositions of PPs  . 
For example , it may suggest hesys ~ . em to confirm : The money is from the bank ? If sc  , " the bank " is recognized as Source . The argument structure becomes ( AS5) " Ag , Go , So , Th " . 
Combining ( AS5 ) with ( AS3 ) or ( ASS ) with ( AS2 )  , the learner may conclude that the arg~rnent structure of " rob " is " Ag  , So , Th " . 
In summary , as the arguments of lexical heads are entered to the acquisition system  , the clues in Table 1 are consulted first to reduce tiae hypothesis space  . The heuristics in Table 2 are then invoked to further resolve the ambiguities by coliecting useful information from other sources  . The information that the heuristics sugges the system to collect is the thematic validities of the sentences that may help to confirm the target hematic roles  . 
The confirmation if ormation required by Voli-tion Heuristic  , Imperative Heuristic . and Thematic Hierarchy Heuristic may come from corpora  ( and of course trainers as well )  , while Preposition Heuristic some times r , eeds the information only available from trainers  . This is because the derivation of new PPs might generate ungrammatical sentences not available in general  . : or pora . For example , (3 . 1) from (2 . 3) " The key can open the door " is grammatical , while (3 . 2) from (2 . 5 ) " The letter finally reached John " is ungrammatical  . 
(3.1) The door is opened by the key.
(3.2)* The letter finally reached to John.
Therefore , simple queries as above are preferred in the method  . 
It should also be noted that since these heuristics only serve as the guidelines for finding discrimination information  , the sequence of their applications does not have significant effects on the result of learning  . However , the number of queries may be minimized by applying the heuristics in the order : Volition Heuristic and Imperative Heuristic->Thematic Hierarchy Heuristic -> Preposition Heuristic  . One-Th ' , ~me Heuristic and Uniqueness Heuristic are invoked each time current hypotheses of thematic roles are changed by the application of the clues  , Vol-ition Heuristic , Imperative Heuristic , Thematic Hierarchy Heuristic , or Preposition Heuristic . This is because One-Theme Heuristic and Uniqueness Heuristicaz'e constraint-based  . Given a hypothesis of thematic r ~ . es , they may be employed to filter out impossible combinations of thematic roles without using any qaeries  . Therefore , as a query is issued by other heuristics and answered by the trainer or the corpus  , the two heuristics may be used to " extend " the result by ft~lhere ducing the hypothesis space  . 
4. EXPERIMENT
As described above , the proposed acquisition method require syntactic information of arguments as input  ( recall Table 1 )  . We believe that the syntactic information is one of the most commonly available resources  , it may be collected from a syntactic processor or a  ; yntactically processed corpus . To test the method wita a public corpus as in Grishman92a   , the PENN Tre ~ Bank was used as a syntactically processed co~pus for learning  . Argument packets ( including VP packets and NP packets ) were extracted . to mATIS corpus ( including JUN 90 , SRI_TB , and TI_TB tree files ) , MARI corpus ( including AMBIC ~ and WBUR tree files )  , MUC1 corpus , and MUC2 corpus of the treebank . VP packets and NP packets recorded syntactic properties of the arguments of verbs and nouns respectively  . 

Corpus Sentences
ATIS 1373
MARI 543
MUC 11026
MUC 23341
Table 3. Argument extraction from TreeBank Nords
VP packe ~ Verbs NP packe ~ Nouns 1716   138   959   188   1067   509   425   288   1916   732   907   490   6410   1556   3313   1177 Since not all constructions involving movement were tagged with trace information in the corpus  , to derive the arguments , the procedure needs to consider the constructions of passivization  , interjection , and unbounde dependency ( e . g . in relative clauses and wh-questions ) . That is , it needs to determine whether a constituent is an argument of a verb  ( or noun )  , whether an argument is moved , and if so , which constituent is the moved argument . Basically , Case Theory , The ta Theory ( Chomsky 81) , and Foot Feature Principle ( Gazdar 85 ) were employed to locate the arguments ( Liu 92 a , Liu 92b ) . 
Table 3 summarizes the results of the argument extraction  . About 96% of the trees were extracted . 
Parse trees with too many words (60) or nodes ( i . e . 50 subgoals of parsing ) were discarded . ~2~1 VP packets in the parse trees were derived , but only the NP pack-ets having PPs as modifiers were extracted  . These PPs could help the system to hypothesize axgument sruc-tures of nouns  . The extracted packets were assimilated into an acquisition system  ( called EBNLA , Liu 92a ) as syntactic subcategorization frames . Different morphologies of lexicons were not counted as different verbs and nouns  . 
As an example of the extracted argument pack-ets , consider the following sentence from MUC I : " . . . , atlaline a . . . . . where a FARC front ambushed an 1 lth brigadear mypatrol " . 
The extraction procedure derived the following VP packet for " ambushed ": ambushed  ( NP : a FARC fxont )   ( WHADVP : where )   ( NP : an 1 lth brig a dear my patrol ) The first NP was the external argument of the verb  . 
Other constituents were internal arga:nents of the verb  . The procedure could not determ , r . e whether an argument was optional or not . 
In the corpora , most packets were for a small number of verbs ( e . g . 296 packets to t " show " were found in ATIS ) . Only 1 to 2 packets could be found for most verbs . Therefore , althoughtt . eparse trees could provide good quality of argument packets  , the information was too sparse to resoNe , thematic role ambiguities . This is a weakness embedded in most corpus-based acquisition methods  , since the learner might finally fail to collect sufficient information after spending much  . effort to process the corpus . In that case , the ~ ambiguities need to be temporarily suspended  . ~ To seed-up learning and focus on the usage of the proposed method  , a trainer was asked to check the thematic validities  ( yes/no ) of the sentences generated b , , the learner . 
Excluding packets of some special verbs to be discussed later and erroneous packets  ( due to a small amount of inconsistencies and incompleteness of the corpus and the extraction procedure  )  , the packets were fed into the acquisition system ( one packet for a verb )  . The average accuracy rate of the acquired argument struct ~ ares was  0  . 86 . An argument structure was counted as correct if it was unambiguous and confirmed by the trainer  . On average , for resolving ambiguities ,   113 queries were generated for every 100 successfully acquired argument structures . The packets from ATIS caused less ambiguities , since in this corpus there were many imperative sentences to which Impe:ative Heuristic may be applied  . Volition Heuristic , Thematic Hierarchy Heuristic , and Preposition Heuristic had almost equal frequencies of application in the experiment  . 
As an . example of how the clues and heuristics could successfully derive argument structures of verbs  , consider the sentence from ATIS : " The flight going to San Francisco  . . . " . 
Without issuing any queries , the learner concluded that an argument structure of " go " is " Th  , Go " This was because , according to the clues , " San Francisco " cou Monlybe Goal , while according to One-Theme Heuristic , " the flight " was recognized as Theme . Most argument structures were acquired using 1 to ~ queries . 
The result showed that , after ( manually or automatically ) acquiring an argument packet ( i . e . a syntactics t , b categorization frame plus the syntactic constituent l  3f the external argument ) of a verb , the acquisition ~' r nethod culd be invoked to upgrade the syntactic knowledge to thematic knowledge by issuing only  113 queries for every 100 argument packets . 
Since checking the validity of the generated sentences is not a heavy burden for the trainer  ( answering ' yes'systems for promoting incremental extensibility of thematic knowledge  . 
The way of counting the accuracy rate of the acquired argument structures deserves notice  . Failed cases were mainly due to the clues and heuristics that were too strong or overly committed  . For example , the thematic role of " the man " in (4 . 1 ) from MARI could not be acquired using the clues and heuristics  . 
(4.1) Lauraran away with the man.
In the terminology of Gruber 76 , this is an expression of accompaniment which is not considered in the clues and heuristics  . As another example , consider (4 . 2) also from MARI . 
(4 . 2 ) The greater Boston area ranked eight among major cities for incidence of AIDS  . 
The clues and heuristics could not draw any conclusions on the possible thematic roles of " eight "  . 
On the other hand , the cases cour . tedas " failed " did not always lead to " erroneous " argument structures  . For example , " Mary " in (2 . 9 ) " John promised Mary tomarry her " was treated as Theme rather than Goal  , because " Mary " is the only possible Theme . 
Although " Mary " may be Theme in this case as well  , treating " Mary " as Goal is more f'me-grained . 
The clues and heuristics may often lead to acceptable argument structures  , even if the argument structures are inherently ambiguous  . For example , an NP might function as more than one thematic role within a sentence  ( Jackendoff 87 )  . I a (4 . 3), " John " may be Agent or Source . 
(4.3) Johnsold Mary a coat.
Since Thematic Hierarchy Heuristic assumes that subjects and objects cannot reside at the same level  , " John " must not be assigned as Sotuce . Therefore , " John " and " Mary " are assigned as Agent and Goal respectively  , and the ambiguity is resolved . 
In addition , somethematic roles may cause ambiguities if only syntactic evidences are available  . 
Experiencer , such as " John " in (4 . 4), arid Maleficiary , such as " Mary " in (4 . 5), are the two examples . 
(4.4) Mary surprised John.
(4.5) Mary suffers a head a che.
There are difficulties in distinguishing Experiencer  , Agent , Maleficiary and Theme . Fortunately , the verbs with Experiencer and Male ficiary may be enumerated before learning  . Therefore , the argumen , : structures of these verbs are manually constructed rather than learned by the proposed method  . 
5. RELATED WORK
To explore the acquisition of domain-independent semantic knowledge  , the universal linguistic constraints postulated by many linguistic studies may provide gefier al  ( and perhaps coarse-grained ) hints . 
The hints may be integrated with domain-specific semantic bias for various applications as well  . In the branch of Lhestudy , GB theory ( Chomsky 81 ) and universal feature instantiation principles ( Gazdar 85 ) had been shown to be applicable in syntactic knowledge  ,  . cquisition ( Berwick 85, Liu 92a , Liu 92b ) . 
The proposed method is closely related to those methodolog  ,  . es . The major difference is that , various thematic theories are selected and computationalized for thematic knowledge acquisition  . The idea of structural patterns in Montemagni92 is similar to Preposition Heuristic in that the pattern suggest general guidance to information extraction  . 
Extra information resources are needed for thematic knawledge acquisition  . From the cognitive point of view , morphological , syntactic , semantic , contextual ( Jacobs 88) , pragmatic , world knowledge , and observations of the environment ( Webster 89 , Sisk ind 90) . ~eall important resources . However , the availability ~ of the resources often deteriorated the feasibility of learning from a practical standpoint  . 
The acquisition often becomes " circular " when relying on semantic information to acquire target semantic in format mn  . 
Prede ~: ine domain linguistic knowledge is another important information for constraining the hypothesis  , space in learning ( or for semantic bootstrapping )  . From this point of view , lexical categories ( Zernik 89 , Zemik 90 ) and theory of lexical semantics ( Pustejovsky 87 a , Pustejovsky 87 b ) played similar role ~ as the clues and heuristics employed in this paper  . The previous approaches had demonstrated the ?: : etical interest  , but their performance on largescale acquisition was not elaborated  . We feel that , requ ~ , ng the system to use available resources only ( i . e , . , ; yntactic processors and/or syntactically processed c ' or p or a  ) may make largescale implementations more feasible  . The research investigates the issue as to l what extent an acquisition system may acquire thematic knowledge when only the syntactic resources a : e available  . 
M cClelland86 showed a connectionist model for thematic role assignment  . By manually encoding training ass ! gnments and semantic micro features for a limited number of verbs and nouns  , the connectionist network learned how to assign roles  . Stochastic approaches ( Smadja 91 , Sekine 92 ) also employed available corpora to acquire collocational data for resolving ambiguities in parsing  . However , they acquired numerical values by observing the whole  248  , training corpus ( nonincremental learning ) . Explanation for those numerical values is difficult to derive in those models  . As far as the largescale thematic knowledge acquisition is concerned  , the incremental extensibility of the models needs to be further improved  . 
6. CONCLUSION
Preliminary syntactic analysis could be achieved by many natural anguage processing systems  . Toward semantic interpretation on input sentences  , thematic lexical knowledge is needed . Although each lexicon may have its own idiosyncratic thematic requirements on arguments  , there exist syntactic clues for hypothesizing the thematic roles of the arguments  . 
Therefore , exploiting the information derived from syntactic analysis to acquire thematic knowledge becomes a plausible way to build an extensible thematic dictionary  . In this paper , various syntactic clues are integrated to hypothesize thematic roles of arguments in training sentences  . Heuristics-guided ambiguity resolution is invoked to collect extra discrimination information from the nainer or the corpus  . As more syntactic resources become available , the method could up grade the acquired knowledge from syntactic level to thematic level  . 

This research is supported in part by NSC ( National Science Council of R . O . C . ) under the grant NSC82-0408-E-007-029 and NSC81-0408-E007-19 from which we obtained the PENN TreeBank by Dr . 
Hsien-Chin Liou . We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments  . 
References\[Asker 92\] Asker L . , Gamback B . , Samuelsson C . ,  EBL2 : An Application to Automatic Lezical Acquisition  , Proc . of COLING , pp .  1172-1176, 1992 . 
\ [ Berwick85\] Berwick R . C . , The Acquisition of Syntactic Knowledge , The MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts , London , England ,  1985 . 
\[Brent91\]BrentM . R . , Automatic Acquisition of Subcategorization Frames from Untagged Text  , Proc . of the 29th annual meeting of the ACL , pp .  209-214, 1991 . 
\[Chomsky81\]Chomsky N . , Lectures or Government and Binding , For is Publications-Dordrecht ,  1981 . 
\[Gazdar85\]GazdarG . , Klein E . , Pullum G . K . , and Sag I . A . , Generalized Phrase Struc;ure Grammar , Harvard University Press , Cambridge Massachusetts ,  1985 . 
\[Grim shaw88\] Grimshaw J . and Mester A . , Light Verbs and Theta-Marking , Linguistic Inquiry , Vol . 
19, No . 2, pp . 205-232, 1988.
\[Grishman 92 a\] Grishman R . , Macleod C . , and Ster-ling J . , Evaluating Parsing Strategies Using Stand -ardized Parse Files  , Proc . of the Third Applied NLP , pp .  156-161, 1992 . 
\[Grishman92b \] Grishman R . and Sterling J . , Acquisition of Selectional Patterns , Proc . of COLING-92, pp . 

\[Gruber 76\] . Gruber J . S . , Lexical Structures in Syntax and Semantics , North-Holland Publishing Company ,  1976 . 
\[ Jackendoff 72\] Jackendoff R . S . , Semantic Interpretation in Generative Grammar , The MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts ,  1972 . 
\[ Jackendoff87\] Jackendoff R . S . , The Status of Thematic Relations in Linguistic Theory  , Linguistic Inquiry , VoL 18 , No . 3, pp . 369-411, 987 . 
\[Jacobs88\]JacobsP . and Zernik U . , Acquiring Lexical Knowledge from Text : A Case Study  , Proc . of
AAAI , pp . 739-744, 1988.
\[ Lang88\] Lang F . -M . and Hirschman L . , Improved Portability ~ nd Parsing through Interactive Acquisition of Semantic Information  , Proc . of the second conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , pp .  4957, ~988 . 
\[-Lev in 86\]Lzv in B . and Rappaport M . , The Formation of Adjectival Passives , Linguistic Inquiry , Vol .  17,
No . 4, pp . 623-661, 1986.
\[ Liu 92 a\]L . i a R . -L . and Soo V . -W . , Augmenting and Efficiently Utilizing Domain Theory in Explanation-Based Nat ~  . ral Language Acquisition , Proc . of the Ninth International Machine Learning Conference  , 
ML92, pp . 282-289, 1992.
\[Liu92b\]LiuR . -L and Soo V . -W . , Acquisition of Unbounded Dependency Using Explanation-Based 
Learning , Froc . of ROCLING V , 1992.
\[Liu93\]Li ~ aR . -L . and Soo V . -W . , Parsing-Driven Generalization for Natural Language Acquisition  , International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence  , Vol . 7, No .  3, 1993 . 
\[Lu89\] LuR . , Liu Y . , and Li X . , Computer-Aided Grammar Acquisition in the Chinese Understanding System CC!~AGA  , Proc . of UCAI , pp . I550-I555, 1989 . 
\[ Lytinen 90\] Lytinen S . L . and Moon C . E . , A Comparison of Learning Techniques in Second Language Learning  , \] roc . of the 7th Machine Learning conference , pp .  317-383, 1990 . 
249\[McClell and 86\]McClell and J . L . and Kawamoto A . 
H . , Mechanisms of Sentence Processing : Assigning Roles to Constituents of Sentences  , in Parallel Distributed Processing , Vol . 2, pp .  272-325, 1986 . 
\[ Montemagni92\] MontemagniS . and Vanderwende L . , Structural Patterns vs . String Patterns for Extracting Semantic Information from Dictionary  , Proc . of
COLING-92, pp . 546-552, 1992.
\[ Pustejovsky 87 a\]Pustejovsky J . and Berger S . , The Acquisition of Conceptual Structure for the Lexicon  , 
Proc . of AAM , pp . 566-570, 1987.
\[ Pustejovsky 87b \] Pustejovsky J , On the Acquisition of Lexical Entries : The Perceptual Origin of Thematic Relation  , Proc . of the 25th annual meeting of the
ACL , pp . 172-178, 1987.
\[ Samuelss on 91\] Samuelss on C . and Rayner M . , Quantitative Evaluation of Explanation-Based Learning as an Optimization Tool for a Large -Scale Natural Language System  , Proc . of IJCAI , pp .  609-615, 1991 . 
\[ Sanfilippo92\] SanfilippoA . and Pozanski V . , The Acquisition of Lexical Knowledge from Combined Machine-Readable Dictionary Sources  , Proc . of the Third Conference on Applied NLP , pp .  80-87, 1992 . 
\[ Sekine 92\] Sekine S . , Carroll J . J . , Ananiadou S . , and Tsujii J . , Automatic Learning for Semantic Collocation , Proc . of the Third Conference on Applied NLP , pp .  104-110, 1992 . 
\[ Simmons 91\] Simmons R . F . and Yu Y . -H . , The Acquisition and Application of Context Sensitive Grammar for English  , Proc . of the 29th annual meeting of the ACL , pp .  122-129, 1991 . 
\[ Sisk ind 90\] Siskind J . M . , Acquiring Core Meanings of Words , Represented as Jackendoff-style Conceptual structures  , from Correlated Streams of Linguistic and Nonlinguistic Input  , Proc . of the 28th annual meeting of the ACL , pp .  143-156, 1990 . 
\[Smadja91\]S madjaF . A . , From NGrams to Collocations : An Evaluation of EXTRACT  , Proc . of the 29th annual meeting of the ACL , pp .  279-284, 1991 . 
\[ Tanenhaus89\] Tanenhaus M . K . and Carlson G . N . , Lexical Structure and Language Comprehension , in Lexical Representation and Process , William Marson-Wilson ( ed . ), The MIT Press , 1989 . 
\[ Taraban88\] Taraban R . and McClell and J . L . , Consti-tuent Attachment and Thematic Role Assignment in Sentence Processing : Influences of Content Based Expectations  , Journal of memory and language ,  27 , pp .  597-632, 1988 . 
\[ Velardi 91\] Velardi P . , Pazienza M . T . , and Fasolo M . , How to Encode Semantic Knowledge : A Method for Meaning Representation and Computer-Aided Acquisition  , ~Computational Liguistic , Vol . 17, No . 2, pp . 153-17G~1991 . 
\[ Webster89\]I Webster M . and Marcus M . , Automatic Acquisition o f the Lexical Semantics of Verbs from Sentence Frames  , Proc . of the 27th annual meeting of the ACL , pp .  177-184, 1989 . 
\[Zernik89\] Zernik U . , Lexicon Acquisition : Learning from Corpus by Capitalizing on Lexical Categories  , 
Proc . of IJC&I , pp . 1556-1562, 1989.
\[ Zernik 90\] Zernik U . and Jacobs P . , Tagging for Learning : Collecting Thematic Relation from Corpus  , 
Proc . of COLING , pp . 3439, 1990.

