TWOKINDS OF METONY MY
David Stallard
BBN Systems and Technologies
70 Fawcett Street
Cambridge , MA 02138, USA
Intemet : stallard@bbn.com

We propose a distinction between two kinds of metonymy : " referential " metonymy  , in which the referent of an NP is shifted , and " predicative " metonymy , in which the referent of the NP is unchanged and the argument place of the predicate is shifted instead  . Examples are , respectively , " The hamburger is waiting for his check " and " Which airlinesfly from Boston to Denver "  . 
We also show that complications arise for both types of metonymy when multiple coercing predicates are considered  . Finally , we present implemented algorithms handling these complexities that generate both types of metonymic reading  , as well as criteria for choosing one type of metonymic reading over another  . 
1 INTRODUCTION
The phenomenonf semantic oercion , or " metonymy " , is quite a common one in natural language . In metonymy , the actual argument of a predicate is not the literal argument  , but is instead implicit and related to the literal argument through an implicit binary relation  . For example , in the following utterances , taken from Lakoff and Johnson ( 1980 ) :  ( 1 ) The hams and wich is waiting for his check ( 2 ) Nixon bombed Hanoi it is not literally the ham s and wich which is doing the walling  , but rather the person who order edit , and not literally Nixon who is doing the bombing , but rather the pilots under his command . The noun phrase -" The hams and wich " , " Nixon "- is said to be " coerced " through an implicit binary relation to a related object which is the actual argument of the predicate  . 
Perhaps the most familar definition of metonymy from the literature is that it is a figure of speech in which the speaker is " using one entity to refer to another that is related to it "  ( Lakoff and Johnson , 1980) . 
This definition is quite commonly held in one form or another  . ( For example , see ( Fass , 1991) , where it is directly quoted ; also similar definitions in ( Puste-jovsky , 1991) , ( Hobbs , 1988)) . But what does it really mean ? Does it mean that the coerced noun phrase is actually an indirect reference to an object different from its literal referent ? If so  , then we might expect other linguistic data to supporth is  . For example , we might expect subsequent anaphora to agree with the " real " referent  . And indeed , in the following dialogue the intrasentential pronoun " his " and the extrasentential " he " both agree with the indirect reference to the customer  , not the the literal sandwich : ( 3 ) The hams and wich is waiting for his check
He is getting a little impatient
But compare the dialogues (4) Nix on bombed Hanoi.
He wanted to force the Communists to negotiate ( 4' ) Nixon bombed Hanoi * They sang all the way back to Saigon The dialogue  ( 4 ) is quite natural , while in (4') , the use of " they " to refer to the bomber crews seems ruled out-the reverse of what the indirect reference view would predict  . 
A second problem with the indirect reference view is found in certain performative contexts  , such as wh-questions and imperatives , in which the referent of a particular NP is sought by the speaker  . If this NP is metonymically coerced , we could expect the correct response to the utterance to be the indirect reference  . Consider , the following examples , which are actual utterances collected for the DARPAATIS domain  ( MADCOW , 1992) , a database question-answering domain about commercialir flights :  ( 5 ) Which wide-body jets serve dinner ? ( 6 ) Which airlines fly from Boston to Denver ? both sentences can only be understood metonymically  . 
In (5) , it is not the jets which served inner but the flights on the jets  , and one plausible constmal is indeed that " wide -body jets " is really a reference to flights on wide-body jets  , and the interpretation f the sentence is a request to display the set of these flights  . This would agree with the indirect reference view . 
In (6) , however , the only possible construal seems to be that a set of airlines-the airlines offering flights from bost on to Denver-is being sought  . To respond to this request with the set of flights from Boston to 
Denver would clearly be absurd.
We propose a distinction , motivated by such examples , between two kinds of metonymy , which we term referential and predicative . In referential metonymy , the metonymic noun phrase does indeed have an intended referent related to but different from its literal meaning  . An example is the noun phrase " the hams and wich " in  ( 1 ) above , where the actual and intended referent is to a related object-the person who ordered the s and which  . In predicative metonymy , however , the actual and intended referent of the noun phrase is just the literal one  , and it is more accurate to say that the predicate is coerced  ( though as we show later , this is itself a simplification ) . An example of predicative metonymy is (6) above . 
We also show how both types of metonymy are complicated by the presence of multiple predicates that require the same coercion of an NP  . We present algorithms for generating the two types of metonymic reading that cope with these complexities  . Finally , we present criteria for determining a preference for one type of metonymic reading over another  . ( We do not , however , deal in this paper with the question of how to determine which relations to use for coercion  , viewing this as a separate problem . ) The examples throughout are taken from the ATIS domain  , a domain with a pre-established formal conceptual system of categories and relations that utterances must be mapped onto  . The algorithms presented are implemented in the DELPIM system  ( Bobroweta1 , 1991) , which has been ported to that domain and formally evaluated in it  . 
The remainder of the paper is organized into the following sections : Section  2  , the next section , formalizes the distinction between referential and predicative metonymy by giving logical form readings for each  , and shows how both types of metonymy are globally complicated when multiple coercing predicates are considered  . 
Section 3 gives an algorithm for generating both types of metonymic readings in semantic interpretation that handles these global complications  . 
Section 4 gives criteria for picking one type of reading over another Finally  , section 5 compares our work to previous work on metonymy . 
2 METONYMY ANDLOGICAL FORM
In this section we sharpen and formalize our notion of referentialnd predicative metonymy by giving logical form readings for the different cases  . 
The logical language we use has sortal quantifiers  , with a special quantifier " WH " . A wh question is the treated as: ( 7 )   ( whxS ( and ( P1x )   ( P2x ) ) ) which is interpreted as a request to display all members of S  ( the semantic lass of the wh-np ) which satisfy both P1 ( the modifiers of the wh-np ) and P2 ( the predicate of the clause )  . A labeled-argument notation is used for clause semantics  . 
Now , let us return to the examples of the previous section  . In (5) , the referential metonymic reading of the sentence in which flights are sought that served inner and are on wide-body jets is expressed as:  ( 8 ) Which wide-body jets serve dinner ? ( whx flights ( and ( exist syjets ( and ( aircraft-of x y )   ( wide-body ) ) )   ( serve flight-of xmeal-of dinner ) ) ) where coercion relation is AIRCRAFT-OF , mapping between flights and the aircraf they are on  . 
Compare this with the reading for (6) , in which airlines and not flights are sought : ( 9 ) Which airlinesfly from Boston to Denver ? ( whxair lines ( exists y flights ( and ( airline-of yx )   ( fly flight-of yorig-of Boston dest-of Denver ) ) ) ) tive ( 9 ) are in a sense inside-out versions of each other . 
Both have an interpolated quantifier for FLIGHTS that is not explicitly present in the utterance but in  ( 8 ) the interpolated is on the outside and is the WH -thing displayed whereas in  ( 9 ) the interpolated quantifier is on the inside , and is merely part of the description of what is to be displayed  . This , in logical terms , is the crux of the referential/predicative distinction  . 
Predicative metonymy can be loosely thought of as coercion of a predicate argument place  , rather than of the argument NP itself . It may therefore seem attractive to try to formalize this in a directly composition alway through some device such as lambda-abstraction  . If P is the predicate , R the binary relation of coercion , and i the argument-number of P to be coerced , the coerced version of P might then be defined in such a view as:  ( lambda ( zl . . . . . xi , . . . z , ~ )   ( exists y ( domain R )   ( and ( Ry~i )   ( P21 . . . . . Y , - . .~ , ~)))) This is a predicate just like P , except extended by the relation R in its i'th argument place to take an object in the range of R  . Metonymic extension of the predicate would be then be an essentially compositional  , ocal process , taking place at the juncture of predicate and argument and not affecting interpretation elsewhere  . 
Unfortunately , such a treatment turns out to give the wrong interpretation when multiple predicates requiring the same coercion are present  . Consider : ( 10 a ) Which airlines flying from Boston to Denver leave at  3 pm ? ( 10b ) Show airlines flying from Boston to Denver leaving at  3 pmBoth examples are predicative metonymic utterances  . 
Airlines neither " fly " nor " leave " ; flights do these , so both the main verb and the relative clause modifier predicates require airline-to-flight coercions  . If the lambda-abstraction scheme is right each predicate-application couM be dealt with separately  . 
Yet the following reading for 10 a , which would result from the application of the lambda-abstraction scheme to the two predicates  , is emphatically not the correct reading : ( 11 )   ( whxair lines ( and ( exists y flights ( airline-of yx )   ( fly flight-of yorig-of Boston dest-of Denver ) )  ( exists y ' flights ( airline-of y'x )   ( leave flight-of y ' time-of ( 3 pro ) ) ) ) ) These troth-conditions are too weak , as they allow airlines that have a Boston to Denver flight at any time  , so long as they have another ( possibly different ) flight at 3 pm to any place . The prope reading is instead : ( 12 )   ( whxair lines ( exists y flights ( and ( airline-of yx )   ( fly flight-of yorig-of Boston dest-of Denver )   ( leave flight-of y time-of ( 3 pm ) ) ) ) ) in which the airline is related to a single flight description that has all the desired properties  . 
Note that the issue here is not that one predicate is intemal to the NP and the other external to it  . The same problem arises with whatever combination of internal and external predicates  . In 10b , for example , both predicates are internal to the NP but if the two coercions are carried out seperately the same erroneous troth-conditions will result  , in which the AIRLINE is related to two different FLIGHT descriptions instead of one  . 
Noristhe " single-interpolation " requirement related specifically to the referential \ ] predicatived stinc-tion  . If we modify one of our referential examples to include multiple coercing predicates  , as below : The hams and wich attable 12 is impatient we see that a correct reading would still require that the hams and wich be lated to one and only one interpolated description of a person that ordered the sandwich  , is seated at table 12 , and is impatient . 
That fact that multiple coercions of the same NP , whether internal or external to it , cannot be carried out separately means that the phenomenon of metonymy takes on a decisively global character  , one which is as much akin to quantifier scoping as it is to compositional section  , the quantifier scoping stage of processing is exactly where we locate the solution to these problems  . 
3 GENERATING THEREADINGS
We now show how referential and predicative metonymic readings are generated  , and how the requirement of a single interpolate for multiple coercions is enforced  . 
3.1 Input Representation
A twostage mechanism of semantic interpretation is used in the DELPHI system  . In the first stage , an initial predicate-argument level of semantic representation is produced  , with quantifiers in place . In the second , a fully quantified logical form is generated , in which quantifiers are pulled out of the predicate-argument representation and placed in their prope relative scope  . It is in this second stage that the referential /predicative distinction is made  . 
The first stage of semantic interpretation has been described elsewhere in  ( Bobrow et al 1991 )  , and we do not discuss it here excepto describe its output  , which forms the input to the quantification stage  . This output is a tree of whose nodes are phrasal representation b-jects  . Each of these phrasal representation bjects has a head and a set of bindings  . The head includes semantic type information ( as well as other information such as subcategorization etc  . ) , while the bindings represent the semantic effects of modifiers on the head  . Each binding has four parts : 1 . the modifier grammatical relation 2 . the modifier semantic relation 3 . the filler of this semantic relation 4 . a binary coercion relation The following is the toplevel phrasal representation for " Which airlinesfly from Boston to Denver ?": 
CLAUSE : head:fly subject : flight-of , ( whairlines ) , airline-of pp:orig-of , Boston , identity pp : dest-of , Denver , identity This representation has three bindings : a SUBJECT and two PP-complements  . In the two PP bindings , the ranges of the modifier semantic relations ORIG-OF and and DEST-OF are both CITY  , which agrees with the explict fillers BOSTON and DENVER  . Thus , in these bindings no coercion is needed and the coercion relation is just IDENTITY  . But in the SUBJECT binding , the range of the modifie relation FLIGHT-OF is FLIGHT and the explicit filler is an AIRLINE  . Here , the coercion relation AIRLINE-OF is required to bridge the gap between FLIGHT and AIRLINE  . 
NP semantic representations have the same structure  , plus a quantifier . Here is the representation for " which airline "
NP : head : AIRLINE quant : wh
We refer to the constituent modifier bindings of the NP itself as its " intemal " bindings  . In this particular example , there are no internal modifiers and thus no internal bindings  . When an NP is a constituent of a clause ( or is the object of a PP which is )  , we call the binding in which the NP occurs its " external " binding  . 
Semantic representations of this kind are neutral not only with respect o quantifier scoping  , but to the distinction between predicative and referential metonymy as well  . From the standpoint of the predicate , one can think of the coercion relation as extending the given argument place of the predicate to take an argument of a different yp e  . From the standpoint of the NP argument , on the other hand , the coercion can be viewed as mapping the NP in the " reverse " direction of the relation  , from range AIRLINE to domain FLIGHT instead of from domain to range  . 
3.2 Algorithm
The alternative metonymic readings are generated from these semantic representations apart of the quantifier scoping pass  . There are two steps . 
Step 1 , carded out before quantification begins , is to walk the phrasal representation Ixee and builda " coercion table " relating each nominal head N to the set of coercion relations on it : R ~- the coercion relation of N's external binding R~-the coercion relations of N's internal bindings As a technical convenience  , IDENTITY relations in the R , ,R ~ are subscripted with the semantic type restriction T of the binding in which they occur  . This type restriction is simply the range of the semantic modifier relation in the binding  . 

Step 2 is to pull the quantifiers out of this Stl UC-ture and into their proper places in a complete formula  . 
For an NP with a non-IDENTITY entry in the coercion relation  , alternative WFF-generating schemas are used to generate the alternative referential and predicative metonymic readings  . 
In what follows , let N be the noun phrase under consideration and let Q be its quantifier and S its sort  . 
Let R be any relation which is not IDENTITY and which is one of the coercion relations associated with N in the table-whether Reor one of the Ri  . 
Now , consider all the internal bindings of N which have R as their coercion relation  . Let the MR and F~be respectively the semantic modifie relations and corresponding arguments of these bindings  . Let the Mo , Fo and Robe , respectively , the semantic modifiere-lations , arguments and coercion relations of bindings which do not have R as their coercion relation  . 
The operation of reading generation is to pick a non-IDENTITYR from N's table  , and apply the two schemas . To generate the predicative reading , the following schema is used : ( QxS ( Mox Fo )   ( exists y ( domain R )   ( and ( Ryx )   ( MRyFR ) ) *** ) ) The token "***" indicates the open slot for the matrix predicate of the clause  , and the brackets "" , "" are shorthand for conjoined iteration over the subscripted items within  . 
Note that the interpolated EXISTS quantifer has scope over the matrix formula of the clause  , so it will governany external R coercion for N . Furthermore , because all the R coercions are gathered together in this scheme  , the same quantifier will governany R coercions which are internal to the NP  . This fu fills the requirement of the previous ection : that there be one and only one quantifier for a given coercion  , even when that coercion is needed both by internal modifier relations and by the external clause in which the noun phrase is contained  . 
Use of the schema for our example above generates the interpretation : Which airlines fly from Boston to Denver ?  ( whxAIRLINE ( exists y FLIGHT ( AIRLINE-OF yx )   ( FLY flight-of yorig-of Boston dest-of Denver ) ) ) as desired . 
In order to enforce the restriction that subsequent anaphora resolve to the literal AIRLINE and not the interpolated FLIGHT  ( and , similarly , to " Nixon " instead of the pilots in our earlier example  ) we add a diacritic to the interpolated quantifier  '  ( exists y FLIGHT . . . )' that forbids the discourse component from resolving an anaphor to this quantified escription  . 
The referential metonymic reading is generated by a different schema  . In order to use this schema , the following condition must hold : ( Re = R ) V ( Re = IDENTITYTA ( domain R ) CT ) This condition ensures that a semantically ill -formed expression will not result and simply requires that the type requirement of the external binding of the NP to be referentially coerced agrees with the coerced version  . Either the coercion must be dictated by the external binding itself  , or the external binding's type requirement must beloose enough to accep the coerced version  ( as in the case of a loosely-typed predicate like " show "  )  . 
If these conditions hold , then the following schema can be used to produce the referential reading :  ( Qx ( domain R )   ( and ( exists yS ( and ( May Fa )   ( R x y ) )  ( Mox Fo ) ) )  *** ) Use of the schema generates the following reading for our example : 
Which wide-body jets serve dinner ? ( whxFLIGHT ( exists yJET ( and ( WIDE-BODY y )   ( AIRCRAFT-OF x y )   ( SERVE flight-of xmeal-of DINNER ) ) ) ) In principle , of course , a given NP's entry in the coercion table can have more than one distinct non-IDENTITY coercion relation  . Obviously in such a case there can be at most one referential coercion of the NP  . 

All other coercions to different semantics types must then be predicative  . In the case of multiple predicative coercions , the predicative schema is simply iterated . 
We arbitrarily disallow chains of coercions ( " double-shifting " )  , though these in principle could be accomo-dated . 
4 DETER MINING THE CORRECT

Thus far we have argued for different types of metonymic reading and shown how to generate them  , but have not given any indication of when a given type of reading is to be preferred  . How do we know , for example , that the predicative reading and not the referential is correct in  ( 6 ) "Which airlinesfly from Boston to Denver "? A few criteria are fairly obvious  . One we have already seen in the previous section : the external-binding agreement condition on applying the referential metonymy schema  . If an NP's external semantic context agrees with its literal referent  , but not its refer-entially coerced version , then referential metonymy is ruled out for that N 'P  . 
A somewhat broader notion of external semantic context is found in intrasentential anaphora : The hams and wich is waiting for HIS check Which airline flies to ITS headquarters city ? Clearly  , we would prefer any intrasentential anaphora to agree with the " real " referent of the NP  . In the first sentence above , the pronoun " his " cannot agree with the literal referent  , but can agree with the metonymica Uy interpolated PERSON  , and so provides evidence for the referential reading  . In the second sentence , the pronoun " its " cannot agree in number with the interpolated set of FLIGHTs  , but can agree with the singular " airline " , and so provides evidence for the predicative reading  . 
Neither of these two criteria addresses example ( 6 )  , however . Our hypothesis i that the real distinction being made here is pragmatic  . An important principle of language use ( essentially part of the Gricean Maxim of Quantity  ( Grice , 1975 ) ) is that a cooperative speaker will avoid adding a part of a description which self-evidently adds no constraint to the set of things being described  . This is the reason why such pleonasms as " female woman " sound odd to us  , and are not normally uttered . In this light , the referential reading of the sentence above : ( whxFLIGHT ( exists y AIRLINE ( AIRLINE-OF x y ) )  ( FLY flight-of x orig-of Boston dest-of Denver ) ) has a completely redundant component , since every flight is on some airline . Yet this redundant component is precisely the one introduced to handle the coercion ! Encoding the reference in this way has no utility : one might as well have said " which flights " to begin with  . 
We can formalize this principle as follows . Let R be the coercion relation and let S be the literal NP referent-set  . Then the referential coercion of the NP can be written as the pairing  ( R , S ) , which describes a property on the domain of R that picks out just the subset of the domain of R that is obtained by mapping Sback into the domain in the " reverse " direction of R  . 
Such a property is considered vacuous if it provides no constraint on the domain  , or in other words if : R is a total relation and S =  ( RANGER ) holds . A total , or " into " , relation is one which maps every element of its domain to at least one element of its range  . Since every flight in ATIS is on an airline , AIRLINE-OF is a total relation , and AIRLINE is its range , so a referential metonymy is clearly vacuous in this case  . 
In contrast , the relation AIRCRAFF-OF is total , but " wide-body jet " is a proper subclass of its range  ( AIRCRAFT )  , so this condition does not hold for " What wide body jets serve dinner ?" and referential metonymy is allowed for it  . 
Similar pragmatic onsiderations can be applied to rule out predicative metonymy in some cases  . If a metonymically extended predicate provides no constraint on the NP  , then predicative metonymy is the less likely reading  . Consider again our referential example , " What wide-body jets served inner " . If this is taken predicatively , it would have as its logical form : ( whx jet ( and ( wide-body x )   ( exists y flight ( and ( aircrafty x )   ( serve flight-of ymeal-of dinner ) ) ) ) ) aircraft-types , and the same air craft-type is typically used by a large number of flights with nothing particularly in common  . It therefore seems unlikely that the property " ( used on flights ) that serve dinner " offers any constraint on the class AIRCRAFT : in other words  , that being a particular type of aircraft and being used by a flight that serves dinner are correlated in any way  . 
This particular judgment , however , is based on human knowledge and plausibility , and is difficult to formalize given the current state of the art in knowledge representation  . 
We have proposed a number of possible theoretical criteria for choosing between predicative and referential metonymy  . It is of some interest , therefore , to compare the relative occurences of predicative and referential metonymy in actual data  . Our study of a large ( > 5000 sentence ) corpus of naturally collected ATIS data shows that predicative metonymy is very common  . 
Noun phrases headed by " fare " , " airline " and " ticket " frequently appear in positions that require a flight argument  . Yet it is clear , both from the meaning of the utterance , and from the judgements of independent annotators who pair these sentences with " correct " responses for NL system evaluation  , that fares and airlines are being talked about in such cases  , and not flights . 
Indeed , our experiments have shown that allowing predicative metonymic oercion when evaluating DELPHI agains this corpus leads to a  27% decrease in weighted error over not allowing it . This is very substantial difference indeed , and testifies to the importance of the metonymy phenomenon i actual data  . 
As for the referential type of metonymy , we have found only a few cases of it in this corpus  . We hypothesize that the reason for this is that referential metonymy  , involving as it does an encoding of a reference in terms of a categorially different hing  , is a more marked and unusual event in psychological terms  . 
Predicative metonymy , on the other hand , involves no such operation , merely the convenient making-way of a predicate for a nonstandard but related argument  . For this reason , our work prefers predicative metonymy as the default choice in processing when no other evidence is present  . 
5 COMPARISON WITH PREVIOUS
WORK , CONCLUSIONS metonymy must ultimately be treated as a global phenomenon over the sentence  , part of which belongs with quantificational considerations and part with local compositional interpretation  . We have shown how pragmatic onsiderations of language use can influence which reading is preferred  . 
The referential/predicative distinction is not observed in most of the writing on metonymy  , which is either not formal and computational in nature  ( Lakoff and Johnson , 1980) , or is oriented towards different types of systems and computational concerns  . Hobbs (1987 , 1988) , for instance , discusses metonymy along with a number of other " local pragmatic " issues  ( nominal compounds , etc . ) , but this work is done in the context of a message -processing and not a question-anwering system  , so many of the issues we have discussed ( wh-questions , etc . ) simply do not arise them . 
Something like the referential/predicative distinction does seem to be present  , however , in the work of a few other authors . For example , Fass ( 1991 ) speaks of what he calls the " source " or the " target " of a metonymy being alternatively substituted for  . His sentence representations are not done in a formal logical framework  , however , so it is difficult to tell if the ambiguity has a referential or truth conditional consequence  . 
Closer to our work is that of Pustejovsky (1991).
He defines a notion he calls " logical metonymy " which seems quite close to our notion of predicative metonymy  . In a sentence like " Mary enjoyed the book " , logical metonymy changes the type of the verb " enjoy " to take an object like " book " which is not an event but which is related to one  ( the reading of the book )  . As we have shown in Section 3 , however , the single-interpolation requirement for multiple coercing predicates poses a technical problem for a verb type-changing view which only looks at the given verb and argument by themselves  . Our work has demonstrated that a correct account of metonymicoercion must  , in the most general case , involve considerations that are global over the whole utterance interpretation  . 
Our work has also demonstrated an important interaction between appropriateness of metonymic readings and the Gricean Maxim of Quantity  . To our knowledge , no other work has done this . Finally , our work differs from previous work in the area by having been carded out in an environment of objective evaluation  , an environment whose rigors have pushed us towards many of the insights presented here  . 
We have argued for a distinction between two types of metonymic reading  , and have given evidence that The work reported here was supported by the Advanced Research Projects Agency and was monitored by the Office of Naval Research under Contract No  . N00014-92-C-0035 . The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the author and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies  , either expressed or implied , of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency or the United States 

I would like to thank James Pustejovsky and Rusty Bobrow for valuable comments and discussion  . 
Volume 17, Number 1
March 1991

Lakoff , George and Johnson , Mark Metaphors We Live 8 y
University of Chicago Press 1980
MADCOW Committee ( Hirschman , Lynette et al Multi-Site Data Collection for a Spoken Language Corpus in Proceedings Speech and Natural Language Workshop 
February 1992
Grice , H . P . Logic and Conversationi P . Cole and J . 
L . Morgan , Speech Acts,
New York : Academic Press , 1975
Pustejovsky , James The Generative Lexicon
Computational Linguistics
Volume 17, Number 4
December 1991
Hobbs , Jerry R . and Stickel , Mark Interpretation as Abduction in Proceedings of the  26th ACL
June 1988
Bobrow , R ., Ingria , R . and Stallard , D.
The Mapping Unit Approach to Subcategorization in Proceedings Speech and Natural Language Workshop 
February 1991
Hobbs , Jerry R . , and Martin , Paul Local Pragmatics in Proceedings , 10th International Joint Conference on

Intelligence ( IJCAI-87). Milan , Italy
Fass , Danmet *: A Method for Discrimating Metonymy and Metaphor by Computer 
Computational Linguistics
