STRUCTURAL MATCHING OF PARALLEL TEXTS
Yuji Matsulnoto
Graduate School of Information Science
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology , Nara
Takayanaa-cho , Ikoma-shi , Na.ra 630-01 Japan
matsu@is.aist-nara.ac.jp
Hiroyuki Ishimoto Takehito Utsuro Depar tment of Electrical Engineering 
Kyoto University
Sakyoku , Kyoto 606 Japan is himoto , utsuro@pine . kuee . kyoto-u . ac . jp
Abstract
This paper describes a method for finding struc -rural matching between parallel sentences of two languages  , ( such as Japanese and English ) . Parallel sentences are analyzed based on unification grammars  , and structural matching is performed by making use of a similarity measure of word pairs in the two languages  . Syntactic ambiguities are resolved simultaneously in the matching process  . The results serve as a . useful source for extracting linguistic a . nd lexical knowledge . 

Bilingual ( or parallel ) texts are useful resources for acquisition of linguistic knowledge as well as for applications such as machine translation  . Intensive research as been done for aligning bilingual texts at the sentence level using statistical tecl miques by measuring sentence lengths in words or in characters  ( Brown 91 )  , ( Gale 91a ) . Those works are quite successful in that far more than  90% of sentences in bilingual corpora , area . ligned correctly . 
Although such parallel texts are shown to be useful in real applications such as machine translation  ( Brown 90 ) and word sense disambiguatiol l ( Daga . n 91) , structured bilingual sentences are undoubtedly more informative and important for filture natural language researches  . Structured bilingual or multilingual corpora , serve a . sricher sources for extracting linguistic knowledge  ( Kaji 92 )  , ( Klavans 90) , ( Sadler 91) , ( Utsuro 92) . 
Phrase level or word level alignment has also been done by several researchers  . The Textual Knowledge Bank Project ( Sadler 91 ) is building l no no lingual and multilingual text base structured by linking the elements with grammatical  ( dependency )  , referential , and bilingual relations .   ( Karl 92 ) reports a method to obtain phrase level correspondence of parallel texts by coupling phrases of two languages obtained in CKY parsing processes  . 
This paper presents another method to obtain structural matching of bilingual texts  . Sentences in both languages are parsed to produce  ( disjunctive ) feature structures , from which dependency structures are extracted . Ambiguities are represented as disjunction . Then , the two structures are matched to establish a one -to-one correspondence bt ween their substructures  . The result of the match is obtained as a set of pairs of minimal corresponding substructures of the dependency structures  . Examples of the results are shown in Figures 1 , 2 and 3 . 
A dependency structure is represented as a tree , in which ambiguity is specified by a disjunctive node  ( OR . node ) . Circles in the figures how substructures and bidirectional arrows show corresponding substructures  . 
Our technique and the results are different from those of other lnethods mentioned above  .   ( Kaji 92 ) identifies corresponding phrases and a hns at producing tra  . nslation templates by abstracting those corresponding phrases  . In the Bilingua . l Knowledge Bank ( Sadler 91) , the correspondence is shown by whole subtrees headed by the words  . We prefer the Ininimal substructure correspondence and the relationship between substructures  . Such a minimal substructure stands for the minimal meaningful component in the sentence  , which we believe is very useful for our target application of extracting lexical knowledge fi'om bilingual corpora  . 
SPECIFICATION OF
STRUCTURAL MATCHING

Although the structural matching method shown in this paper is language independent  , we deal with parallel texts of Japanese a . nd English . We assume that a . lignment at the sentence level is already preprocessed manually or by other methods such as those in  ( Brown 91 )  , ( Gale 91a ) . Throughout his paper , we assume to match simple sentences .  1
DEFINITIONS OF DATAST RUCTURES
A pair of Ja . panese and English sentences are parsed independently into  ( disjuuctive ) feature structures . 
For our present purpose , a part of a feature structure is taken out as a dependency structure consisting of the content words  2 that appear in the original sentence . Ambiguity is represented by disjunctive feature structures  ( Kasper 87 )  . Since any relation other than modifier-modifyee dependencies in ot considered here  , path equivalence is not taken into consideration . Both of va . lue disjunction and general disjunction are allowed  . 
We are currently using LFG-like grammars for both Japanese and English  , where the value of the ' pred ' label in an f -structure is the content word that is the head of the corresponding c-structure  . 
We start with the definitions of simplified disjunctive feature structures  , and then disjunctive dependency structures , that are extracted from the disjunctive feature structures obtained by the parsing process  . 
Definition 1 Simple feature structures ( FS )   ( L is the sel of feature labels , and A is the set of atomic values ) are defined recursively : 1 Matching of compound sentences are done by cutting them up into simple sentence fragments  . 
2 In the present system , llOUllS , l ) FOtK ~ utls , verbs , adjectives , madadverbs are regarded as content , words . 
NI Lawherea EA 1:4 where lEL , 4 EFS ? A ~ b where 4 , ? EFS
CV g , where ?, ? EFS
To define ( Disjunctive ) Depen . dency Structures as a special case of an FS , we first require the following definitions . 
Definition 2Top label set of an FS ? , written as tl (?) , is defined : 1 . If O = l : if 1, then tl (4) = l , 2 . If 4=41A4" . or 4= 41 V42, then tl(4) = tl(41) U?~l(42) . 
Definition 3 A relation'sibling'between feature labels in 4 is defined : 1  . If 4-= l:41 , then l and labels in 41 are not sibling , and sibling relation holding in 41 also holds in 4  . 
2 . /Jr4--41A42 , then labels in tl (41) and labels in tl (4_ , ) are sibling . 
3 . If ? --41 V 42 , then labels in 41 and labels in 42 are not sibling . 
Note that the sibling relation is not an equivalence relation  . We refer to a set of feature labels in ? that are mutually sibling as a sibling label set of  4  . Now , we are ready to define a dependency structure ( DS )  . 
Definition 4 A dependency structure ~ b is an FS lhaI satisfies the following condition : Condition : Every sibling label set of ? includes exactly one ' pred'label  . 
The idea behind those are that the value of a ' pred ' label is a content word appearing in the original sentence  , and that a sibling label set defines the dependency relation between content words  . 
Among the labels in a sibling label set , the values of the labels other than ' pred ' are dependent on  ( i . e . , modify ) the value of the ' pred'label . ADS can be drawn as a tree structure where the nodes are either a content word or disjunction operator and the edges represent the dependency relation  . 
Definition 5 A substructure of an FS 4 is defined ( sub ( 4 ) stands for the sel of all substructures of 4 , ): 1 . NIL and 4 itself are substruclures of 4 . 
2 . If 4= a ( aEA) , then a is as ' ubstruct are of ? . 

English : She has long hair.
Japanese : ~- 0 - ~ - ~ : J ~ she-GEN hair-TOP long she long hair = ~ Figure  1: Example of structural matching , No . 1 English : This child is starving for parental love  . 
Japanese : U_ .   69  --~- ~ ~-  09 ~- W -_ this child-TOP parent-GEN love-DAT pa  , ental ~ ~? be-starving this = child = love = ~ . 69 Figure 2: Example of structural matching , No . 2 English : Japan benefits from freetrade . 
Japa , , ese : ~*~~0~, ~, ,, , N -*
Japan-TOP free-trade-GEN benefit-ACC o ????? o . ? . .O ~? oo '" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . .?? . . . .
.  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . , e . ."  . I ( , japan . ) laan:~benefit)c'~t~fA ~, . ~/ ~;2 : ~ i ~ . . . . . . . 
" free: .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
% . ? . . , ? receive japan = El benefit = , ~  , ~trade = I ~ 1 ~ Figure 3: Example of structural matching , No . 3 ? . 
It "\] f?----(~1A(/)2 , then for a ~ y ( qC sub ( el ) and for any ?2esub ( C2 )  , ?1A?~is a subslruclure of t . 
5 . If ? = ?1V?2 , then for for any ' / r / ) l ~ sub ( ~ )  1 ) and for any ?2E sub ( C2 )  , ?1v?2 is a sub-slr ~ ucture of ? . 
The DS derived fi'om an FS is the maximul n substructure of the FS that satisfies the condition in Definition  4  . The DS is uniquely determined fi'oln an FS . 
Definition 6 A disjunction-free maximal substructure of an FS ? is called a complete FS of ?  . 
An FS does not usually have a unique complete FS . This concept is important since the selection of a complete FS corresponds to aln biguity resolution  . 
Naturally , alnaximal disjunction-free substructure of a DS ? is again a DS and is called a complete 
DS of ?.
Definition 7 A semi-complete DS of a DS ? is a substruclure of a complete DS of ? thai satisfies the condition in Definilion ~  . 
Note that a substructure of a DS is not necessarily a DS  . This is why the definition requires the condition in Definition  4  . 
A complete DS~/ . , can be decomposed into a set of nonoverlapping selni-complete DSs  . Such a decomposition defines the units of structural natch-ing and plays the key role in our problem  . 
Definition 8 A set of semi-complete DS of a DS ? , D = ?1 , "' ? n , is called a decomposition of ? , iff every ? i in the set contains at least one occurrence of ' pred ' feature label  , and every content word at the ' pred ' feature label appear iT ~ gin '? is contained in exactly one ~ i  . 
Definition 9Th . e reduced DS of a DS ( , with respect to a decomposition D = ?1 , "-4' , ~ is con-stracted as follows : I . ? i is transformed to a DS , " pred:St ' , where Si is the set of all coT~le~l words appear i ~ J  9   i7~ ? i . Th . is DS is referred to as red(it ) . 
2 . If there is a direcl dependency relatiol ~ between two conient words wl and w ~ that are in ? i and tj  ( i7~j )   , lh . enlhe dependency relation is allotted between ? i and l/  , j . 
Although this definition should be described precisely  , we leave it with this more intuitive description . Examples of dependency structures and reduced dependency structures are found in Figures  1  , 2 and 3 , where the decompositions are indicated by circles . 
It is not difficult to show that the reduced DS satisfies the condition of Definition  4  . 
STRUCTURAL MATCHING OF BILIN-
GUALDEPENDENCYSTRUCTURES
Structural matching problem of bilingual sentences is now defined formally  . 
Parsing parallel English and Japanese sentences results in feature structures  , from which dependency structures are derived by removing unrelated features  . 
As smnethat ~ . 'E and ' OJ are dependency structures of English and Japanese sentences  . The structural matching is to find the most plausible one-to-one mapping between a decomposition of a complete DS of CE and a decomposition of a complete DS of Cj  , provided that the reduced DS of CE and the reduced DS of C j w  . r . t , the decompositions are isomorphic over the dependency relation  . The isomorphism imposes a . natural one-to-one correspondence on the dependency relations between the reduced DSs  . 
Generally , the mapping need not always be one-to-one , i . e . , all elements in a decomposition eed not map into another decomposition  . When the mapping is not one-to-one , we assume that dummy nodes are inserted in the dependency structure so that the mapping naturally extends to be one-to-one  . 
When the decompositions of parallel sentences have such an isomorphic one-to-one mapping  , we assume that there are systematic methods to compute similarity between corresponding elements in the decompositions and to compute similarity between the corresponding dependency relations  3  . 
We write the function defining the former similarity as f  , and that of the latter as g . Then , f is a flmction over semi-complete DSs derived fi ' om English and Japanese parallel sentences into a real number  , and 9 is a function over feature label sets 3in the case of similarity between dependency relations  , the original feature labels are taken into accotult  . 
26 of English and Japanese into a real number.
Definition 10 Given dependency structures , DS1 and DS , , , of two languages , tile structural matching problem is to find an isomorphico T~e-to-one mapping mbe * ween decompositions of DS aaT ~ d  DS2 that maximizes the sum of the vahtes of similarity functions  , f and g . 
That is , the problem is to find the fltnctioT ~ m that maximizes ~- ~ m  ( f ( d , re(d )) + ~ t g(l ,   , n . (/ ) ) ) where d varies over semi-complete DS of DS1 and l varies over feature labels in D , - q .  1 . 
The similarity functions can be defined in various ways  . " vVe assume some similarity measure between Japanese and English words  . For instance , we assume that the similarity function f satisfies the following principles :  1  . f is a simple function defined by the similarity measure between content words of two la  . n-guages . 
2 . Fine-grained decompositions get larger similarity measure than coarse-grained decompositions  . 
3 . Dummy nodes should gives olne negative vahte to f  . 
The first principle is to simplify the complexity of the structural matching a  . lgorithm . The second is to obtain detailed structural matching between parallel sentences and to avoid trivial results  , e . g . , the whole DSs are matched . The third is to avoid the introduction of dunnny nodes when it  , is possible . 
The fimction g should be defined according to the language pair  . Although feature labels represent grammatical relation between content words or phrases and may provide useful information for measuring similarity  , we do not use tile information at , our current stage . The reason is that we found it difficult to have a clear view on the relationship between feature labels of English and Japanese and on the meaning of feature labels between semi-complete dependency structures  . 
STRUCTURAL MATCHING

Tile structural matching of two dependency structures are combinatorially diflicult problem  . V ~ reapply the 1 ) ranch-and-bound method to solve tile problem . 
Tile branch-and-bound algorithm is a topdown depth -first backtracking algorithm for search problems  . It looks for tile answers with the BEST score . 
Ill each new step , it estimate stile maximum value of the expected scores along the current path and compares it  , with the currently know nbest score . 
The maxinmm expected score is usually calculated by a  . simplified problem that guarantees to give a value not less than the best score attainable along the current path  . If the maximuna expectation is less than the currently know nbest score  , it means that there is no chance to find better answers by pursuing the path  . Then , it gives uptile current path and hack tracks to try remaining paths  . 
We regard a dependency structure as a tree structure that in cht des disjunction  ( OR nodes )  , and call a content word and a dependency relation as a node and an edge  , respectively . Then a semi-complete dependency structure corresponds to a connected subgraph in the tree  . 
The matching of two dependency trees starts from the top nodes and the matching process goes along edges of the trees  . During the matching process , three types of nondetermin is lnarise : 1 . Selection of topmost subgraphs in both of the trees  ( i . e . , selection of a semi-complete DS ) 2 . Selection of edges ill both oftile trees to decide the correspondence of dependency relations  3  . Selection of one of the disjuncts a . tan'OR'node While tile matching is done topdown  , the exact score of the matched subgraphs is calculated using the similarity function f  . 4 When the matching process proceeds to the selection of the second type  , it selects an edge in each of the dependency trees  . 
The maximum expected score of matching the subtrees under the selected edges are calculated from the sets of content words in the subtrees  . Tile calculation method of the maximum expected score is defined ills olne relation with the similarity function f  . 
Suppose his the function that gives the maximum expected score of two subgraphs  . Also , suppose B and P be the currently know nbest score  4~  , Ve do not take into account the similarity measure between dependency relations as stated in the preceding section  . 
2 7 and the total score of the already matched subgraphs  , respectively . If s and t are the subgraphs under the selected edges and s ' and t ' are the whole relnailfing subgraphs  , the matching unders and t will be undertaken fi , rther only when the following in equation holds :
P + h(s , t(s ', t ') > B
Any selection of edges that does not satisfy this inequality cannot provide better matching than the currently know nbest ones  . 
All of the three types of nondeterminism are simply treated as the nondeterminism in the algorithm  . 
The syntactic ambiguities in the dependency structures are resolved sponta  . lmously when the matching with the best score is obtained  . 

We have tested the structural matching algorithm with  82 pairs of sample sentences randomly selected froln a JapaneseEnglish dictionary  . 
We used a machine readable JapaneseEnglish dictionary  ( Shimizu 79 ) and Roget's thesaurus ( Roget 11 ) to measure the silnilarity of pairs of content words  , which are used to define the fimctiouf . 
Similarity of word pairs
Given a pair of Japanese and English sentences , we take two methods to lneasure the similarity between Japanese and English content words appearing in the sentences  . 
For each Japanese content word w japl ) earing in the Japanese sentence , we can find a set of translat-able English words fl ' om the Japanese-Ellglish die-tionary  . When the Japanese word is a . polysemous word , we select an English word fi'o meach polysemous entry  . Let CE\] be the set of such translat-able English words of wj  . Suppose CE is the set of contents words in the English sentence  . The trans-latable pairs of wj , Tp(uu ), is de . fined as follows : Tp(wj ) = ( wj , ' wE )\[' we ECE . , nC . ' L , We use Roget's thesaurus to measure similarity of other word pairs  . Roget's t . hesaurtls is regarded as a tree structure where words area  . llocated at the leaves of the tree : For each Japanese content word ' wj appearing in tim Japanese sentence  , we can define the set of translatable English words of wa  , CEj . From each English word in the set . , the minimum distance to each of the English content words appearing in the English sentence is measured  .   5 This minimum distance defines the similarity between pairs of Japanese and English words  . 
We decided to use this similarity only for estimating dissimilarity between Japanese and English word pairs  . We set a predetermined threshold distance . If the minimal distance exceeds the threshold , the exceede distance is counted as the negative similarity  . 
The similarity of two words W l and w2 appearing in the given pair of sentences , im((wl , w ~)) , is defined as follows :) = 6(wl , w2) ET p(wl ) or (' w2 , ' wx)ET p(w2)-I ~( , w  ~ , w . ) ~ tTp(w ~) and ( w2, w ~) f tTp(w . , ) and the distance between wl and w . , exceeds the threshold by k . 
0 otherwise
Similarity of semi-complete DSs The similarity between corresponding semi-complete DSs is defined based on the similarity between the content words  . Suppose that s and t are semi-coln plete DSs to be matched  , and that Vs and Vt are the sets of content words in s and t  . Let A betheless larger set of l ~ and Vt and B be the other  ( IAI < lBI )  . For each injection p from A into B , the set of word pairs D derived from p can be defined as follows  . 
Now , we define the similarity fimction fover Japaaese and English semi-coln plete DSs to give then a a  . x in mmvalue to the following expression for all possible in jections :  ( = max/?O . 951 vd+IVd-~

The summation gives the maxim unasum of the similarity of the content words in s and t  .  0 . 9 5 is the penalty when the semi-complete DSs with more than one content words are used in the matching  . 
Figures 1 ,   2 and 3 shows the results of the structural matching algorithm  , in which the translatable pairs obtained fi'om the JapaneseEnglish dictionary are shown by the equations  . 
5 The dlstaame between words is tile length of tile shortest path in the thesatu'us tree  . 

Table 1: Results of experiment , s
Parsing Jal ) anese and English sent . enccs
Number of sentences 82
Parse failure 23
Parsable 59
Correct parsability
Correct pa . rse\]53\] 89.8% (53/59)
Incorrect parse 610.2% (6/59)
The match with tile best score includes
Correct matching 4789% ( 47/53 ) no correct naatching 611% ( 6/53 ) Single correct matching 34 64% ( 34/53 ) 
Results of the experiments
We used 82 pairs of Japanese and English sentences appearing in a JapaneseEnglish dictionary  . 
The results were checked and examined in detail by hand  . Some of the sentences are not parsable because of the limited coverage of our current grammars  . Although 59 pairs of them are parsable ,   6 out of them do not include correct parse results . 
The structural match i , lg algorithm with the setting described above is applied to the  53 pairs . The cases where the correct , matchilig is not included in the best rated answers are  6 out of them . The remaining 47 pairs include the correct matching , of which 31 pairs result in the correct matching uniquely . Tal)le 1 sumnaarize stile results . 
EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
Although the number of sentences used in tile experiments is small  , the result , shows that about two third of the pairs give the unique matching  , in which every syntactic ambiguity is resolved . 
The cases where no correct matching was obtained needs be examined  . Some sentences contain an idiomatic expression that has coml  ) letely different syntactic structures fl'om the sentence structure of the other  . Such an expression will 110 way be matched correctly except that the whole structures are matched intact  . Other cases are caused by complex sentences that include an embedded sentence  . When the verbs at the roots of the dependency trees are irrelevant  , extraordinary matchings are produced . We intend not to use our method to match complex or compound sentences as a whole  . 
~ , ?e will rather use our method to find structural matching between simple sentences or verb phrases of two languages  . 
Tile matching problmn of complex sentences are regarded as a different problem though the similar technique is usable  . We think that the scores of matched phrases will help to identify tile corresponding phrases when we match complex sentences  . 
Taking the sources of other errors into consideration  , possible improvements are : 1 . Enhancement of English and Japanese grammars for wider coverage and lower error rate  . 
2 . Introduction of more precise similarity measurement of content words  . 
3 . Utilization of grammatical information : ? Feature labels  , for estimating matching plausibility of dependency relations ? Part of speech  , for measuring matching plausibility of content words ? Other grammatical information : mood  , voice , etc . 
The first two iml ) rovements are undoubtedly important . As for the similarity measurement of content words  , completely different approache such as statistical methods may be useful to get good translatable pairs  ( Brown 90 )  , ( Gale 91) . 
Various grammatical information is kept in the feature descriptions produced in the parsing process  . However , we should be very prudent in using it . Since English and Japanese are grammatically quite different  , some grammatical rela . tion may not be preserved between them . In Figure 3 , solid arrows and circles show the correct matching  . While ' benefit'matches with the structure consisting of '  , ~ , ,~ ' and ' ~_ . ~ ~ ' , their dependent words ' trade ' and ' H~:~' modify them as a verb modifier and as a noun modifier  , the grammatical relation of which are quite different  . 
This example highlights another interesting point . Dotted arrows and circles show another matching with the salne highest score  . In this case , ' japan ' is taken as a verb . This rather strange interpretation insists that ' japan ' matches with ' H ~' and '  . ~ 6 ' . Since ' japan ' as a verb has little se-lnantic relation with '\[\]:~' as a country  , discrimination of part-of-speech seems to be useful  . On the other hand , the correspondence between ' benefit ' and ' ~ , ~' is found in their noun entry in the dictionary  . Since ' benefit ' is used as a verb in the may jeopardize the correct matching  , either . The fact that the verb and noun usages of ' benefit'bear common concept implies that more precise similarity measurement will solve this particular problel n  . 
Since the interpretations of the sample English sentences are in different mood  , imperative and declarative , the mood of a . sentence is also usefnl to remove irrelevant interpretations  . 

The structural matchillg problem of parallel texts is formally defined and our current implementation and experilnents are introduced  . Although the research is at the preliminary stage and has a  . very simple setting , the experiments have shown a . nuln-ber of interesting results . The method is easily enhanced by iln proving the gramnm  . rs and by incorporating more accurate similarity measurement  . 
Number of other researches of building tra . nsla-tion dictionaries and of deterlnining similarity relationship between words are useful to improve our method  . 
To extract useful information fl'om bilingual corpora  , structural matching is inevitable for language pairs like English and Japanese that have quite different linguistic structure  . Incidentally , we have found that this dissimilarity plays an important role in resolving syntactic ambiguities ince the sources of anlbiguities in English and Japanese sentences are in many cases do not coincide  ( Utsuro 92 )  . We are currently working on extracting verbal case frames of Japanese fi'om the results of structural matching of a aal  ) an ese-l~nglish corpus ( Utsuro 93 )  . The salnetecl mique is naturally a . pplica-ble to acquire verbal case fi'ames of English as well  . 
Another application we are envisaging is to extract translation pattern from the results of structural matching  . 
We plan to work on possible improvements discussed in the preceding section  , and will make largescale experiments using translated newspal ~ erarticles  , based on the phrase matching stra . t . egy . 

This work is partly supported by the (- ; rants from Ministry of Education , " Knowledge Science "(#03245103) . 

Brown , P . F . , et al , A Statistical Approach to Machine Translation , Computalional Linguistics , 
Vo 1.16, No . 2, pp . 79-85, 1990.
Brown , P . F . , Lai , J . C . and Mercer , R . L . , Aligning Sentences ill Parallel Corpora , ACL-91 , pp . 169-176, 1991 . 
Dagan , I . , Itai , A . and Schwall , U . , Two Languages are More Iuformative than One , ACL-91 , pp . 130-137, 1991a . 
Gale . W . A . and Church , K . W . , A Program for Aligning Sentences in Bilingual Corpora  , 
ACL-91, pp . 177-184, 1991b.
Gale . W . A . and Church , K . W . , Identifying Word Correspondences in Parallel Texts  , '91 DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop , pp . 152-157, 1991 . 
Kaji , H . , Kida , Y . , and Morimoto , Y . , Learning Translation Templates froln Bilingual Text  , 
COLING-92, pp . 672-678, 1992.
Kasper , R . , A Unification Method for Disjunc-tive Feature Descriptions  , ACL-87 , pp . 235-242, 1987 . 
Klavans , J . and Tzoukermann , E . , The BICORD System : Combining Lexical Information from Bilingual Corpora  . and Machine Readable Dictionaries , COLING90, pp . 174-179, 1990 . 
Miller , G . A . , et al , Five Papers on WordNet , Cog-ni live Science Laboratory , Princeton University , CSL Report 43 , July 1990 . 
Roget , S . R . , Roget's Thesaurus , Crowell Co . , 1911 . 
Sadler , V . , The Textual Knowledge Bank : Design , Construction , Applications , Proc . h ~ ler-national Workshop on Fundamental Research for the Future Generation of Natural Language Processing  ( FGNLP )  , pp . 17-32, Kyoto , Japan , 1991 . 
Shimizu , M . , et al(ed . ), JapaneseEnglish Dictionary , Kodansha , 1979 . 
Utsuro , T . , Matsumoto , Y . , and Nagao , M . , Lexical Knowledge Acquisition from Bilingual Corpora  . , COLING-92, pp . 581-587, 1992 . 
Utsuro , T . , Matsumoto , Y . , a . nd Nagao , M . , Verbal Case Frame Acquisition from Bilingual
Corpora , to appear IJCAI-93, 1993.

