QUANTIFICATION ALDOMAINS AND RECURSIVE

Barbara Partee
University of Massachusetts
Department of Linguistics
Amherst , MA 01003, USA
Internet : partee@cs.umass.edu
Abstract
The implicit delimiting or narrowing of the domain of quantification  , e . g . , in the case of " unselective quantifiers " such as the adverbs of quantification always  , usually , mostly , etc . , is a heavily context-dependent phenomenon that has much in common with anaphora  , presupposition projection , the dynamics of reference time , reference location , etc . , and other of the context-dependent phenomena discussed in Partee  ( 1979 )  . While many nonlinguistic factors clearly play a role in such phenomena  , there are interesting issues at the intersection of discourse processing and sentence grammar  , since in addition to context as constructed at the discourse level  , there are subsentential " o-cal contexts " which have limited lifespans and are constrained by aspects of sentence grammar  , both syntactic and semantic . 
So for example in the case of anaphora , while a pronoun can get its value from an entirely nonlinguistic on text  , if the value of a pronoun is determined by a linguistic antecedent  , there are grammatical contraints on the possible structural relations that may hold between antecedent and pronoun  , as illustrated by the familiar " pre-cede ~ command " conditions known since the early work of Ross and Langacker and illustrated in  ( la-b ) below with respect to the possibility of interpreting " some people " as the antecedent of " they "  . 
( la ) Some people complain loudly in the middle of the night and they make so much noise upstairs that one can't sleep  . 
(lb ) They make so much noise upstairs that one can't sleep and some people complain loudly in the middle of the night  . 
In examples ( 2ab ) we see a similar restriction on the possibility of restricting the domain of the quantifier usually by means of material accessible in the linguistic context : and the relevant notion of accessibility turns out to be the same for the wide range of phenomena mentioned above  . 
(2a ) Henrik likes to travel . He goes to France in the summer and he usually travels by car  . 
He goes to England for the spring holidays and he usually travels by ferry  . 
(2b ) Henrik likes to travel . He usually travels by ear and he goes to France in the summer  . He usually travels by ferry and he goes to England for the spring holidays  . 
In the discourse (2b ) , unlike that in (2a ) , it is impossible to understand the domain of the quantifier usually to be limited to the trips to France and the trips to England on its two occurrences  , so the discoursends up sounding contradictory . This constraint on " backwards domain restriction " is analogous to constraints on backwards anaphora  . 
Similar constraints apply to the local satisfaction of presuppositions by virtue of material that has its source in the local linguistic context  . And Heimhas shown in her work on the presupposition projection problem that the relevant accessibility constraints are fundamentally semantic in nature  , as can be seen from examples with propositional attitude verbs  ( which will be reviewed in the lecture ) where examples with identical syntactic structure behave differently because of different presuppositional relationships among e  . g . , " belief worlds " and " hope worlds " . Of course in many cases the semantic and syntactic structures are sufficiently parallel that the constraints can often be described either way  . 
The notions of topic and focus appear to be among the important linguistic notions that play a role in structuring these " recursive contexts "  ; recent work by Rooth and unpublished work by Von Fintel makes progress in relating focus structure to anaphoric structure more generally  . 
As Kemps on has demonstrated , the same broad range of inferential processes that play a role in discourse anaphoric phenomena  ( e . g . , in licensing the use of a definite article ) also play a role in the corresponding phenomena when they show aspects of sentence grammar play a crucial role in defining accessibility relations for " antecedent " material in this whole family of phenomena does not mean that the phenomena themselves are to be described in sentence -grammar terms  . One of the interesting issues , then , is the characterization of the nature of the interface between the grammatical and the extragrammatical mechanisms involved  . Work by Sidner and Webber represents one early line of attack on related problems  , and recent developments in dynamic semantics are another  . This lecture will focus more on articulating the relationships among the different phenomena that appear to operate under common " accessibility " constraints than on choosing a particular formal approach to treating them  . 

