THEEFFECTOFESTABLISHING COHERENCE IN
ELLIPSIS ANDAN APHORARE SOLUTION
Andrew Kehler
Harvard University
Aiken Computation Laboratory
33 Oxford Street
Cambridge , MA 02138
kehler@das.harvard.edu
Abstract
This paper presents a new model of anaphoric processing that utilizes the establishment of coherence relations between clauses in a discourse  . We survey data that comprises a currently stalemated argument over whether VP-ellipsis is an inherently syntactic or inherently semantic phenomenon  , and show that the data can be handled within a uniform discourse processing architecture  . This architecture , which revises the dichotomy between ellipsis vs . Model Interpretive Anaphora given by Sag and Hankamer  ( 1984 )  , is also able to accommodate divergent heories and data for pronominal reference resolution  . The resulting architecture serves as a baseline system for modeling the role of cohesive devices in natural anguage  . 
1 Introduction
There has been much debate concerning the appropriate level of language processing at which to treat VP-ellipsis resolution  . Syntactic accounts ( Fiengo and May , 1990; Hgik , 1987; Hellan , 1988; Hestvik , 1993; Lappin , 1993; Lappin and McCord ,  1990 ) claim that syntactic material is copied from the antecedent clause and reconstructed in the elided clause  , where a semantic accounts ( Dalrymple , 1991; Dalrymple et al , 1991; Gawron and Peters , 1990; Hardt , 1992; Kehler , 1993; Klein ,  1987 ) claim this material is retrieved from semantic representations  . This debate is currently deadlocked ; indeed a survey of the data seems to indicate that ellipsis must be both a syntactic and semantic phenomenon  . In Section 2 , we examine five types of ellipsis contexts , and show a pattern that has gone unnoticed in the literature  . In Section 3 we break the deadlock by presenting a discourse processing architecture from which the correct predictions naturally result  . We present further evidence for this architecture from pronominal NP reference resolution data in Section  4  , and conclude in Section 5 . 
2 VP Ellipsis Data
A simple example of verb phrase ( VP ) ellipsis is given in sentence ( 1 ) :  ( 1 ) Ross likes his mother , and Bill does too . 
The stranded auxiliary in the second clause ( the target clause ) indicates the deletion of a verb phrase , a representation for which is to be located from another clause  ( the source clause )  , in this case , the first clause . Sentence ( 1 ) displays a strict/sloppy ambiguity : Bill may like Ross's mother  ( the strict reading ) or his own mother ( the sloppy reading )  . 
In this section we examine five types of elliptical contexts  , and show the following here to fore unnoticed pattern  .   1 When the relationship between the source clause A and the target clause B is what we term parallel  ( as exemplified by the sentential structure " A and B too "  , as in sentence (1)) , the data indicates that a syntactic representation is reconstructed at the target site  . That is , a syntactically-parallel source VP must be available  , and reconstruction of this VP in the target clause is subject osyntactic on straints  . However , in nonparallel constructions ( for example , contrastive conjunctions (" A but B ") , subordinates (" A because B ') , and domparatives ( " A better than B " ) ) neither a syntactic source VP nor compliance with syntactic on-straints is necessary  , instead only a suitable semantic source representation is required  . These data strongly suggest a discourse processing architecture that is sensitive to the establishment of coherence relations between clauses  , which is described in Section 3 . 
2.1 Passive/Active Alternation
Active elided target VPs can receive interpretations from passive source VPs :  ( 2 ) In March , four fireworks manufacturers asked that the decision be reversed  , and on Monday the ICC did . \[ reverse the decision \] ( from text of Rosenthal ( 1988 )  , cited in Dalrymple ( 1991 ) )  2   1Although space precludes us from discussing past work in detail  , no approach known to us addresses ( let alne accounts for ) all of the phenomena discussed herein . 
2This use of and in this example does not signify a parallel relationship between thc source and target  , as obviously nobody did . \[ look into the problem \] ( Vincent Della Pietra , in conversation ) Less frequent , but still extant , are cases of passive targets with active sources :   ( 4 ) In addition to inducing lethality during the first in star  , it 3 retards embryonic development , but not to the extent that the growth cones were . \[ retarded\](from text of ( Jarecki ,  1992 ) )  ( 5 ) Actually I have implemented it 4 with a manager , but it doesn't have to be . \[ implemented with a manager \] ( Steven Ketchpel , in conversation ) These examples are problematic for syntactic analyses of ellipsis  , because the source clause is not a surface VP constituent  . In contrast , semantic analyses cannot account for the unacceptability of similar examples with parallel constructions :  ( 6 ) * This problem was looked into by John , and
Bob did too.
(7)* This agent retards embryonic development , and the growth cones were too . 
Syntactic parallelism is apparently required in the parallel construction  , but not in the nonparallel ones . 
2.2 Condition C Violations
Fiengo and May ( 1990 ) and Lappin ( 1993 ) note the unacceptability of example such as ( 8 ) and ( 9 ) :  ( 8 ) * I hit Billi , and then heid id too . 
(9) * Mary introduced John j to everyone , and hej did too . 
Under a syntactic reconstruction analysis , this is predicted by a Condition Cviolation within Binding 
Theory ( Chomsky , 1981): (10)* I hit Bill/ , and then he/hit Bill/too . 
(11) * Mary introduced John j to everyone , and hej introduced John j to everyone too . 
Because syntactic on straints do not apply at the semantic level  , semantic accounts predict these cases to be acceptable  . However , Dalrymple ( 1991 ) gives examples where Condition C should apply but apparently does not:  5 the use of too would be inappropriate under the desired reading  . We might term this relationship to be result . 
3 Here , it refers to a previously mentioned chemical agent  . 
4 Here , it refers to a previously mentioned computer system  . 
5These particular cases also violate the Vehicle Change proposal of Fiengo and May  ( 1990 )  , which adequately handles other acceptable cases that violate Condition C  . 
(12) I expected Billi to win even when he/didn't . 
(13 ) The lawyer defended Billj agains the accusations better than he j could have  . 
As these examples are nonparallel constructions , again it appears that syntactic on straints apply in parallel constructions but not in nonparallel ones  . 
2.3 Condition A Violations
As predicted by Condition A of Binding Theory , it is generally difficult to obtain a strict reading when the source clause contains a reflexive pronoun :  ( 14 ) ? ? John i defended himself i , and Bobj did too . 
\[ defended John/\] ( 15 ) ? ? Fredivoted for himself / , and Gary j did too . 
\[voted for Fredi \]
Given appropriate semantic context , judgements improve but still remain somewhat stilted :  6   ( 16 ) ? The alleged murderer/defended himself / , and his lawyer j did too . \[ defended the alleged murdereri \] ( 17 ) ? Bill Clinton/voted for himself / , and his campaign manager j did too . \[voted for Bill

The stiltedness of reflexives under a strict reading disappears  , however , in nonparallel constructions ( from Dalrymple ( 1991 ) ):  ( 18 ) Billi defended himself/against the accusations better than his lawyer j did  . \[ defended Billi \] ( 19 ) John/voted for himself/even though no one else j did  . \[voted for Johni \] In these cases , the strict reading is readily available and perhaps preferred  . Again , there appears to be a syntactic dependency in the parallel cases that is absent from the nonparallel ones  . 
2.4 Non-VPAntecedents
In the following examples , the source representation is not a syntactic VP but instead comes from a nominalization :  7   ( 20 ) This letter deserves a response , but before you do ,   . . . . \[ respond \] ( Gregory Ward , p . c . ) (21) Meanwhile , they sense a drop invisitors to the city . Those who do , they say , are not taking cabs . \[ visit the city \] ( Chicago Tribune , courtesy Gregory Ward ) S There appears to be a dialect that readily allows strict readings with reflexives  . However , even for those speakers , the nonparallel constructions given below are more acceptable under the strict interpretation than the parallel cases  . 
~ Some speakers find these cases slightly awkward or stilted  . Again , however , most find these better than the parallel construction cases given below  . 

Semantic analyses can account for these cases if nominalizations are assumed to evoke event representations into the discourse model  . However , in parallel constructions , discourse-model events from nominalizations are apparently not available :  ( 22 )  *  , This letter provoked a response from Bush , and Clinton did too . \[ responded\] ( 23 ) * There is a rise in American visitors to the city  , and Canadians do too . \[ visit the city \] A similar pattern is seen in cases where the antecedent of the ellipsis is evoked by an adjectival phrase :  ( 24 ) First person pronouns aren't very shiftable , although the plural ones can be . \[ shifted\](Barbara Partee , in conversation ) The acceptability of example ( 24 ) is to be compared with the relative unacceptability of anotherwise similar parallel construction case :  ( 25 ) * First person pronouns aren't very shiftable , and the plural ones also don't . \ [ shift\]Again , nonsyntactic source representations appear to only be available in the nonparallel construction cases  . 
2.5 Subjacency Violations
Ha'ik ( 1987 ) gives examples of apparent subjacency violations in antecedent containe deletion  ( ACD ) :  ( 26 ) John read everything which Bill believe she did . 
(27 ) * John read everything which Bill believes the claim that he did  . 
(28 ) * John read everything which Bill wonders why he did  . 
This data is problematic for a purely semantic theory of ellipsis  , as there should be no syntactic dependency at the ellipsis site  . However , sentence (29) , which has a subordinate conjunction , does not display the expected subjacency violation  ( from
Rooth ( 1981 ) ): s ( 29 ) Which problem did you think John would solve because of the fact that Sus and id ? Without ellipsis  , the gap remains and a subjacency violation results :  ( 30 ) * Which problem did you think John would solve because of the fact that Susan solved ? In our account  , the relative pronoun which does not specify an interclausal coherence link  , and therefore sentences ( 2628 ) are parallel constructions . Consequently , again the source representation for the parallel construction is apparently syntactic  , whereas that for the nonparallel construction ( e . g . , example (29)) is semantic . 
8I thank Stuart Shieber for bringing this example to my attention  . 
3 An Architecture that Exploits

The data given in Section 2 suggests that VP-ellipsis resolution copies a syntactic representation in parallel constructions and a semantic representation in nonparallel ones  . In this section , we present a discourse processing architecture from which these predictions naturally result  . We first describe Sag and Hankamer's ( 1984 )   ( henceforth S&H ) earlier work , the representations from which our analysis will utilize  . 
3.1 Sag and Hankamer~s Architecture
S&H give a performance-based view of anaphoric processing that utilizes two forms of representation  , a propositional representation and a discourse model  . Propositional representations , which they conjecture are held by short term registers in memory  ( henceforth propositional registers )  , maintain the surface syntactic constituent structure of an utterance as well as binding relations  ; however , discourse anaphors are resolved .   9 These representations are builtintandem with a discourse model  . S&H claim that the ellipsis resolution process obtains referents from propositional representations  , whereas what they term Model Interpre-tive Anaphora  ( MIA )   ( e . g . , ' do it ' anaphora ) obtains referents from the discourse model . They give the following example to illustrate ( judgements are theirs ) :  ( 31 ) The children asked to be squirted with the hose , so a . they were . \[ ellipsis \] b . * we did . \[ ellipsis\]c . we did it . \[ MIA\]In their theory , example ( 31 a ) is acceptable because the source representation is a surface VP and therefore is retrievable from its propositional represent a-tion  . Example ( 31b ) is unacceptable because the sources quirt the children with the hose is not a surface VP in the propositional  representation3 ? Sentence ( 31c ) is acceptable because ' do it ' anaphora is an MIA process  , and therefore obtains referents from the discourse model  , in which a representation for squirt the children with the hose is assumed to exist  . One problem with this account is that it does not explain the dichotomy of judgements for the data given in Section  2  . For each of these phenomena , the S~zH approach predicts that all cases are 9In fact , they suggest hat propositional representations ( as opposed to classical surface structures ) are what the parser constructs , a view consistent with our account . 
1 ? Ellipsis , in their formulation , is subject to an identity-o\]-logical-\]orm constraint on propositional representations  . See Dalrymple et al ( 1991 ) and Hardt ( 1992 ) for arguments that this condition is flawed . 
6 4 either acceptable or unacceptable without regard to the type of construction  . The data instead suggests that VP-ellips is within the parallel construction behaves like S&H's definition of ellipsis  , and in nonparallel constructions it behaves like their MIA  . We believe that their dichotomy of phenomena is somewhat illusory  , and a more compelling and elegant treatment is possible by appealing to discourse structure and coherence  . 
3.2 A Revised Architecture
We follow S&H and earlier arguments by Johnson - Laird  ( 1983 ) in specifying a discourse processing architecture that includes both propositional representations and a discourse model  . We propose that a main function of the propositional representations is to serve as a " bridge " in establishing clause-to-clause coherence  . That is , as clauses are parsed , propositional representations are generated and held in the shortterm registers  . When it is established that a nonparallel coherence relationship is present between a clause  ( or set of clauses ) and a subsequent clause , the propositional repre-sentation ( s ) for the first is integrated into the discourse model so that coherence can be computed  , thereby freeing the shortterm propositional register for subsequent representations  . Nonparallel constructions specify a nonparallel coherence relationship overtly  ( e . g . , ' contrast ' ( because ) , ' comparison ' ( better than ) , ' result'(the use of and in example 2)) 11 , thereby identifying the first clause as a unit for coherence stablishment and invoking integration of its propositional representation i to the discourse model  . 
Parallel constructions , on the other hand , do not invoke this integration . Hobbs (1979) , in discussing the parallel coherence relation he defines  , suggests one basis for this distinction : One frequent function of the Parallel relation is to suggest or support the generalization which the two segments are specific instances of  . The relation often links segments which together function as an Exemplification or Elaboration of a more general statement  . 
In our terms , clauses conjoined by a parallel relation will form a group and cohereas a unit with prior and subsequent statements  . Therefore , this relation in itself does not cause the representation for the first clause to be integrated into the discourse model  . Instead , the integration of both representations into the discourse model as a unit is invoked by subsequent coherence stablishment  . 
1 1This use of and raises the question of how the listener knows which meaning of and is present during processing  . We assume that the listener can consider multiple possibilities in parallel  , although it may also be that in these cases the interclausal relationship has been established by the time the ellipsi~site is processed  . 
The preceding analysis makes the predictions necessary to account for the ellipsis data given in Section  2  . Under our account , the representation of an utterance either exists in a propositional register or in the discourse model  ; these are not created in tandem as S&H suggest . An elided VP then receives an interpretation from whichever ep-resentation is available  . The parallel construction cases in Section 2 are unacceptable because the source clause has not been integrated into the discourse model when the ellipsis site is processed  . 
The source must therefore be retrieved from the propositional representation  , where surface syntactic structure and binding relations are maintained  . 
Reconstructing this representation requires syntactic parallelism  ( ruling out passive/active and nominalization cases  ) and can result in violation of syntactic constraints  ( such as Condition C violations , Condition Aviolations , or subjacency violations ) . 
The nonparallel construction cases in Section 2 are acceptable because the antecedent for the ellipsis has been integrated into the discourse model when the ellipsis site is processed  . Because the vestiges of syntactic information are no longer present in the representation  , syntactic constraint violations do not occur ; further more source representations from nominalizations and clauses of differing voice now exist in the discourse model  , x23 . 3 Examples In this section , we work through two examples to illustrate the proposals that have been made thus far  . For resolution at the syntactic level , we assume an S&H-like propositional representation and a straightforward mechanism whereby a VP representation is copied from the source clause represen-t at  . ion into the target clause representation . For resolution in the discourse model , we will use the event representation and resolution algorithm defined in  ( Kehler ,  1993) . The focus of this section , however , is to offer a general illustration of the architecture rather than to make specific claims concerning the  12Differences remain between the distribution of S & tt's ellipsis and MIA phenomena that need to be accounted for in a comprehensive treatment of event anaphora  , as examples ( 31 a-c ) show ( although judgements as to the unacceptability of sentence  ( 31b ) vary )  . 
Interestingly , contra S&H , MIA phenomena also appear to be sensitive to syntactic on straints in certain contexts  , as the following example from Dalrymple ( 1991 ) shows : * I hit Suei , and then she 1d id it . 
One hypothesis is that VP-ellipsis is actually event anaphor a with an empty pronoun  ; it may then be that distributional differences between " do ?"  , " do it ' , and " do that " are due only to the anaphoric properties of the event pronoun involved  , and not due to a fundamental difference between ellipsis and MIA phenomena  . This hypothesis i the subject of ongoing work . 
65 nature of the representations involved.
Examples ( 32 ) and ( 33 ) exhibit the contrast between parallel and nonparallel constructions with active target clauses that have passive source clauses  , as discussed in Section 2 . 1: (32)* John was shot by Bob , and Bill did too . 
(33) John was shot by Bob because Bill wouldn't.
The propositional representation for the source clause in these sentences is shown in representation  ( 34 )  , where P denotes the passive voice : ( 34 ) \[ P\[was . shot' ( by ( Bob ' ) ) \]  ( John ' ) \] Because the two clauses in sentence ( 32 ) stand in a parallel relationship , the source representation has not been integrated into the discourse model at the time the ellipsis site is processed  ; therefore the ellipsis is resolved at the propositional level of representation  . A representation is constructed with the information present in the target clause :  ( 35 ) \[ A\[ . . . \]( Bill')\]HereA denotes the active voice , a feature which is indicated in the target clause through the use of did  . When the elided VP is retrieved , a mismatch occurs : the passive VP cannot be brought into a representation marked as having active voice  . The copying can therefore not be completed , resulting in the unacceptability of the sentence . 
Sentence ( 33 ) also has representation ( 34 ) for its source clause . However , because the two clauses stand in a nonparallel relationship  , representation ( 34 ) has already been integrated into the discourse model when the ellipsis site is processed  , and thus resolution occurs in the discourse model  . The representation for the source clause is : ( 36 ) el :\[ predicate : shot time : past polarity : positive modality : necessity agent : Bob theme : John \] Because this representation is based upon thematic  ( and not syntactic ) roles , the representations for active and passive forms of a sentence are identical  . 
For the target clause , a parallel event representation is created with empty roles  , and the role fillers present in the target clause are filled in:  ( 37 ) e ~:\[ predicate : time : past polarity: negative modality : volitional_possibility agent : Bill theme : \] Representations for the the remaining role fillers are retrieved from the source clause representation :  ( 38 )   e2: \[ predicate : shot time : past polarity : negative modality : volitional_possibility agent : Bill theme : John \] This resolution successfull yields the correct representation for the target clause in sentence  ( 33 )  . 
Examples ( 39 ) and ( 40 ) illustrate the contrast between parallel and nonparallel constructions with respect to potential Condition C violations  , as described in Section 2 . 2: (39)* The lawyer defended Bil4 and heidid too . 
(40 ) The lawyer defended Bill/better than hei could have  . 
In each sentence , the propositional representation for the source clause takes the form given in  ( 41 ) :  ( 41 ) \[\[ defend ' ( nill ' )  \]  ( lawyer l ' ) \] Because the two clauses in sentence ( 39 ) stand in a parallel relationship , the source representation has not been integrated into the discourse model at the time the ellipsis site is processed  . The ellipsis is then resolved at the propositional level of representation  . After filling in the information present in the target clause and copying the representation of the source VP  , representation ( 42 ) results : 13 ( 42 ) \[\[ defend ' ( Bill / )  \]  ( he /' ) \] A manifestation of Condition Capplying at this level rules out this representation as ill -formed  , because the pronoun hec-commands the coreferential 
NP form Bill.
Sentence ( 40 ) also has representation ( 41 ) for its source clause . Because the two clauses stand in a nonparallel relation  , representation ( 41 ) has already been integrated into the discourse model when the ellipsis site is processed  . Resolution then occurs in the discourse model . The representation for the source clause is : ( 43 )   e3: \[ predicate : defend time : past modality : necessity agent : lawyer  1 theme : Bill \] . 
After creating a parallel event representation , filling in role fillers present in the target clause  , and retrieving remaining role fillers from the source representation  , representation ( 44 ) results : ( 44 )   e4: \[ predicate : defend time : past modality : possibility agent : Bill theme : Bill \]  13Recall that pronouns have been resolved at this level of representation  ; we indicate this by coindexing . 

Because no syntactic on straints apply at this level of representation  , representation ( 44 ) is wellformed and yields the correct interpretation for the target clause  . 
In summary , our architecture accounts for data supporting both the syntactic and semantic accounts of ellipsis resolution in an elegant and intuitive way  . Section 4 examines pronominal NP resolution in this model . 
4 Pronoun Resolution
There are also dichotomous views in the literature concerning the process by which pronoun resolution is performed  . Theories incorporating a notion of local focus generally utilize syntactic information in their specifications  . For example , the Centering framework of Grosz et al ( 1986 ) utilizes grammatical role information in specifying the accessibility of potential referents on an ordered forward-looking center list  . Kameyama's work ( Kameyama ,  1988 ) contains rules for property sharing utilizing grammatical roles  . Passonneau (1991) , in looking at the distribution of ' it ' and ' that ' for NP reference in naturally-occurring texts  , concludes that both syntactic form of the antecedent and its grammatical role are needed to adequately account for the data  . 
Furthermore , she suggests that the function of the propositional register discussed by S&H is appropriate for accommodating her rules  . 
Alternatively , some researchers ( Hobbs , 1979; Wilensky ,  1978 ) have suggested that coreference is determined as a byproduct of coherence determination between sentences  . In Hobbs ' account , for example , pronouns are modeled as free variables and are assigned to objects during the process of establishing coherence relations  . 
However , Hobbsh imself acknowledges the power of grammatical role-based heuristics  , 14 noting that upon hearing example (45) , (45) John can open Bill's safe . He . . . 
one is likely to assume that John is the referent of He  . The existence of a garden-path effect in example ( 46 )  , where He refers to Bill instead of John , suggests that pronominal reference resolution is not guided by coherence considerations alone :  ( 46 ) John can open Bill's safe . He's going to have to get the combination changed so on  . 
As focus-based theories would predict , the reader assigns John as the referent of He , and double-takes when semantic information later suggests otherwise  .   15 Our architecture provides an explanation for this phenomenon  . Since a coherence 14 Hobbs ( 1976 ) found that a heuristic favoring subjects over objects was  90% accurate for written texts . 
1 5This effect causes Hobbs to admit that " this strongly suggests that some psychological reality underlies the heuristic\[favoring subjects over objects \]  . " relation has not been established at the time the pronoun is processed  , the propositional representation for the first clause  ( which preserves information that focus-based theories utilize  , such as surface-string ordering and depth-of -embedding of potential referents  ) is the representation available to the reference resolution algorithm  . 16 However , when a nonparallel coherence link is overt , our architecture would predict that a semantically-based resolution process would be used because the propositional representation containing potential referents has already been integrated into the discourse model at the time the pronoun is processed  . This prediction is borne-out empirically ; consider the following two sentence prefixes ( complete sentences taken from ( Ehrlich , 1980)): (47) Steveblamed Frank and he . . . \[spilt the coffee \] . 
(48) Steveblamed Frank because he . . . \[spilt the coffee \] . 
Focus-based theories predict the strong bias toward the referent of he in example  ( 47 ) being the subject ( i . e . , Steve ) , even though he is consistent with both potential referents  . Because this sentence is a parallel construction ( i . e . , the meaning of " and " is not result ) , our architecture also makes this prediction in accordance with those theories  . The heuristic preferring subjects does not apply in example  ( 48 )  , where Frank is perhaps the preferred referent of he  , seemingly as a result of reasoning using semantic features of the verb blame  . Our architecture correctly predicts that the pronoun in sentence  ( 48 ) does not cause processing problems while the one in example  ( 46 ) does , because only in sentence ( 48 ) has the clause containing the referent of hebeen integrated into the discourse model at the time the pronoun is processed  . 
Ehrlich ( 1980 ) gives experimental evidence supporting this view . Ehrlich's goal was to test the biasing effect of the socalled " implicit causality " feature  ( Garvey and Caramazza ,  1974 ) of verbs such as blame in pronoun reference assignment in two-clause sentences with conjunctions other than because  ( which was the only conjunction used in previous work  ( Garvey el al . , 1976)) . In her experiments , subjects were tested for their ability to identify correct referents of pronouns in three versions of six two-clause sentences  ( such as those in sentences ( 47 ) and ( 48 ) ) , where each of the sentences contained one of the conjunctions and  , but , and because . It was found that subjects were significantly more accurate in determining correct referents of a SAfter garden-pathing  , " offline " reasoning apparently allows the reader of example  ( 46 ) to identify the correct referent of the pronoun . This reasoning may allow propositional representations to be integrated into the discourse model so that Hobbs-like coherence determination can be performed  . 
6 7 pronouns when the conjunction used was because or but  , and therefore that the effect of implicit causality was not constant with respect othe conjunction used  . While a detailed analysis of her work is beyond the scope of this paper  , two generalizations that shedraws as a result of her experiments are :  ( 1 ) that subjects were more able to utilize ' general knowledge ' in determining the referent when the conjunction used was because or but than when it was and  ; and ( 2 ) that hearers analyze language a clause at a time . The first of these results supports our view that semantic information required for reasoning is primarily available in the discourse model  ( since the representation for the first clause is integrated into the discourse model when the conjunction used is but or because  )  ; the second point supports our claim that the propositional registers hold clause-level representations  . 17 In summary , our architecture also accommodates evidence supporting competing theories of how pronominal NP resolution is performed  . 
5 Conclusions
This paper presents a model for anaphoric processing that incorporates the role of establishing coherence relationships between clauses in a discourse  . 
By postulating the existence of propositional representations in addition to a discourse model  , we account for ellipsis data that has grid locked work on the topic  . Furthermore , arguments for dichoto-mous approaches to pronoun resolution are resolvable within this framework  . 
It should be noted that coherence stablishment is not likely to be the only discourse factor involved in integrating propositional representations into the discourse model  . Therefore , the analysis described here in only indicates tendencies  , as opposed to predicting cut-and-dry judgements on the basis of type of construction alone  . For instance , example ( 49 ) has been judged by some speakers to be acceptable under a strict reading : is  ( 49 ) I voted for myself , and I hope you did too ! Our account predicts that this case would be at least somewhat stilted due to a Condition Aviolation  . One factor distinguishing this example from 17 Ehr hch's results with the conjunction and are mixed with respect o our theory  , as in some cases her participants preferred a nonsubject position referent over a subject position one  . In particular , she notes that this happens when the main verb of the second clause is the stative verb be  , as in Suecriticized Penny and she wasgloomy . These sentences contain the result meaning of and as opposed to the parallel one  . Unfortunately , Ehrlich's original data was not available at the time of this writing so an analysis distinguishing between uses of and could not be performed  . 
ls I thank an anonymous reviewer for this example.
others we have discussed is the use of first and second person pronouns  , and a second is the fact that the pronominal referent necessary to yield the strict reading is also present in the target clause  . Future work is needed to further analyze the effects of these differences  . 
The theory presented here evokes many other questions for future study  . One such question is how the postulated representations should be further formalized  , and how reasoning with these for-malizations is to be performed  . A second question is how this conception of discourse processing may be integrated with theories of discourse structure  ( Grosz and Sidner , 1986; Scha and Polanyi , 1988; Webber ,  1991) . While we have looked primarily at two-clause structures  , the ramifications that the claims have on multi -clause discourse structure require further investigation  . Such studies will form the basis for further characterization f the role of coherence stablishment in anaphoric processing  . 

This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant  IRI-9009018  , National Science Foundation Grant IRI-9157996 , and a matching grant for the latter from the Xerox Corporation  . 
I would like to thank Mary Dalrymple , Barbara Grosz , Shalom Lappin , Karen Lochbaum , Christine Nakatani , Stuart Shieber , and two anonymous reviewers for valuable discussions and comments on earlier drafts  . 
References ( Chomsky , 1981) Noam Chomsky . Lectures in Government and Binding . Foris , Dordrecht , 1981 . 
( Dalrymple et al , 1991) Mary Dalrymple , Stuart M . Shieber , and Fernando Pereira . Ellipsis and higher-order unification . Linguistics and Philosophy , 14:399-452, 1991 . 
(Dalrymple , 1991) Mary Dalrymp ! e . Against reconstruction in ellipsis . Technical Report SSL-91-114, Xerox , 1991 . 
( Ehrlich , 1980) Kate Ehrlich . Comprehension of pronouns . Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology , "32:247-255, 1980.
( Fiengo and May , 1990) Robert Fiengo and Robert May . Anaphora and ellipsis , ms . , City University of New York and University of California at 
Irvine , 1990.
( Garvey and Caramazza , 1974) C . Garvey and A . Caramazza . Implicit causality in verbs . Linguistic Inquiry , 5:549-564, 1974 . 
( Garvey et al , 1976) C . Garvey , A . Caramazza , and J . Yates . Factors underlying assignment of pronoun antecedents  . Cognition , 3:227-243, 1976 . 
68 ( Gawron and Peters , 1990) Mark Gawron and Stanley Peters . Anaphora and Quantification in Situation Semantics  . CSLI/University of Chicago Press , Stanford University ,  1990 . CSLI Lecture
Notes , Number 19.
( Grosz and Sidner , 1986) Barbara Grosz and Can-dace Sidner . Attention , intentions , and the strc-ture of discourse . Computational Linguistics , 12(3):175-204, 1986 . 
( Grosz et al , 1986) Barbara J . Grosz , Aravind K . 
Joshi , and Scott Weinstein . Towards a computational theory of discourse interpretation  . Unpublished manuscript , 1986 . 
( Ha'/k , 1987) Is a belle Ha'ik . Bound variables that need to be . Linguistics and Philosophy , 11:503-530, 1987 . 
( Hardt , 1992) Daniel Hardt . VP ellipsis and contextual interpretation . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING-92 )  , Nantes , July 1992 . 
( Hellan , 1988) Lars Hellan . Anaphora in Norwegian and the Theory of Grammar . Studies in Generative Grammar 32 . Forts , Dordrecht , 1988 . 
( Hestvik , 1993) Arild Hestvik . Strict reflexives and the subordination effect . In S . Berman and A . Hestvik , editors , Proceedings of the Stuttgart Workshop on Ellipsis : Arbeitspapiere des Sonderforschungsbereich  340  , Berichl Nr . 29-1992, SFB 340 . University of Stuttgart , University of
Tuebingen , and IBM Germany , 1993.
( Hobbs , 1976) Jerry Hobbs . Pronoun resolution.
Technical Report 761 , Department of Computer Science , City University of New York ,  1976 . 
( Hobbs , 1979) Jerry Hobbs . Coherence and coreference . Cognitive Science , 3:67-90, 1979 . 
( Johnson-Laird , 1983) P . N . Johnson-Laird . Mental Models : Towards a Cognitive Science of Language  , Inference , and Consciousness . Cambridge
University Press , 1983.
( Kameyama , 1988) Megumi Kameyama . Japanese zero pronominal binding : Where syntax and discourse meet  . In William J . Poser , editor , Papers from the Second International Workshop on Japanese Syntax  , pages 47-74 . CLSI , 1988 . 
( Kehler , 1993) Andrew Kehler . A discourse copying algorithm for ellipsis and anaphora resolution  . In Proceedings of the Sixth Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ( EACL-93 )  , Utrecht , the
Netherlands , April 1993.
( Klein , 1987) Ewan Klein . VP-Ellipsis in DR theory . In Groen in dijk and Stokhof , editors , Studies in Discourse Representation Theory and the Theory of Generalized Quantifiers  . Forts , 1987 . 
( Lappin and McCord , 1990) Shalom Lappin and Michael McCord . Anaphora resolution in slot grammar . Computational Linguistics , 16:197-212, 1990 . 
( Lappin , 1993) Shalom Lappin . The syntactic basis of ellipsis resolution . In S . Berman and A . Hestvik , editors , Proceedings of the Stuttgart Workshop on Ellipsis : Arbeitspapiere des Sonderforschungsbereich  340  , Bericht Nr . 29-i992, SFB3 40 . University of Stuttgart , University of
Tuebingen , and IBM Germany , 1993.
( Passonneau , 1991) Rebecca Passonneau . Persis-tence of linguistic form in discourse processing  . 
In Proceedings of the Fall Symposium on Discourse Structure in Natural Language Understanding and Generation  , Monterey , CA , November 1991 . 
( Rooth , 1981) Mats Rooth . A comparison of three theories of verb phrase llipsis  . University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers in Linguistics  , Volume 7 ,  1981 . 
( Sag and Hankamer , 1984) Ivan Sag and Jorge Hankamer . Toward a theory of anaphoric processing . Linguistics and Philosophy , 7:325-345, 1984 . 
( Scha and Polanyi , 1988) Remko Scha and Livia Polanyi . An augmented contextfree grammar for discourse . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING-88 )  , pages 573-577 , Budapest , August 1988 . 
(Webber , 1991) Bonnie Lynn Webber . Structure and ostension in the interpretation of discourse deixis  . Language and Cognitive Processes ,  6(2):107-135 ,  1991 . 
( Wilensky , 1978) Robert Wilensky . Understanding Goal-Based Stories . PhD thesis , Yale , 1978 . Research Report #140 . 
Sources of Examples ( Jarecki , 1992) Jill Jarecki . The role of synaptic activity during embryonic neuromuscular junction development in drosophila melanges tr  . Unpublished Yale University Prospectus , August 1992 . 
( Rosenthal , 1988) Harry F . Rosenthal . Agency orders UPS to resume fireworks deliveries -after July  4th   . Associated Press Newswire , June 1988 . 

