DUAL-CODING THEORY AND CONNECTIONISTLEXICAL

Ye-Yi Wang *
Computational Linguistics Program
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh , PA 15232
Internet : yyw@cs.cmu.edu

We introduce the bilingual dual-coding theory as a model for bilingual mental representation  . Based on this model , lexical selection eural networks are implemented for a connectionist transfer project in machine translation  . 

Psycholinguistic knowledge would be greatly helpful  , as we believe , in constructing an artificial anguage processing system  . As for machine translation , we should take advantage of our understandings of  ( 1 ) how the languages are represented in human mind ;   ( 2 ) how the representation is mapped from one language to another  ;   ( 3 ) how the representation admapping are acquired by human  . 
The bilingual dual-coding theory ( Paivio , 1986) partially answers the above questions . It depicts the verbal representations for two different languages as two separate but connected logogen systems  , characterizes the translation process as the activation along the connections between the logogen systems  , and attributes the acquisition of the representation to some unspecified statistical processes  . 
We have explored an information theoretical neural network  ( Gorin and Levinson ,  1989 ) that can acquire the verbal associations in the dual-coding theory  . 
It provides a learnable lexical selection subsystem for a conneetionist transfer project in machine translation  . 
Dual-Coding Theory
There is a wellknown debate in psycholinguistics concerning the bilingual mental representation : i dependence position assumes that bilingual memory is represented by two functionally independents orage and retrieval systems  , whereas interdependence position hypothesizes that all information of languages exists in a common memory store  . Studies on cross-language transfer and cross -language priming have * This work was partly supported by ARPA and ATR Interpreting Telephony Research Laboratorie  . 
provided evidence for both hypotheses ( de Groot and
Nas , 1991; Lambert , 1958).
Dual-coding theory explains the coexistence of in -dependent and interdependent phenomena with separate but connected structures  . The general dual-coding theory hypothesizes that human represents language with dual systems -- the verbal system and the imagery system  . The elements of the verbal system are logogens for words in a language  . The elements of the imagery system , called " imagens " , are connected to the logogens in the verbal systems via referential connections  . Logogens in a verbal system are also interconnected with associative connections  . The bilingual dual-coding theory proposes an architecture in which a common imagery system is connected to two verbal systems  , and the two verbal systems are interconnected to each other via associative connections \ [ Figure  1\]  . Unlike the within-language associations , which are rich and diverse , these between-language associations involve primarily translation equivalent terms that are experienced together frequently  . The interconnections among the three systems explain the interdependent functional behavior  . On the other hand , the different characteristics of within-language and between-language associations account for the independent functional behavior  . 
Based on the above structural assumption , dual-"coding theory proposes a parallel set of processing assumptions  . Activation of connections between referentially related imagens and logogens is called referential processing  . Naming objects and imaging to words are prototypical examples  . Activation of associative connections between logogens is called associative processing  . Lexical translation is an example of associative processing between two languages  . 
Connectionist Lexical Selection
Lexical Selection
Lexical selection is the task of choosing target language words that accurately reflec the meaning of the corresponding source language words  . It plays an important role in machine translation  ( Pustejovsky and f . . -~
VI Association Network
L2 Verbal Systemf
V2 Association Nelwork
VI-I Connections V2-I Connections
Imagery System
Figure 1: Bilingual Dual-Coding Representation
Nirenburg , 1987).
A common lexical selection practice involves an intermediater presentation  . It disambiguates the source language words to entities in the intermediate representation  , then maps from the entities to the target lexical entries  . This intermediater presentation may be Lexical Concept Structure  ( Dorr , 1989) or interlingua ( Nirenberg ,  1987) . This engineering approach requires great effort in designing the representation and the mapping rules  . 
Currently , there are some efforts in statistical lexical selection  . A target language word Wt can be selected with the posterior probability Pr  ( WtIWs ) given the source language word Ws . Several target language lexicai entries may be selected for a single source language word  . Then the correct selections can be iden-tiffed by the language model of the target language  ( Brown ,  1990) . This approach is learnable . However , the accuracy is low . One reason is that it does not use any structural information of a language  . 
In next subsections , we propose information-theoretical networks based on the bilingual dual-coding theory for lexical selection  . 
Information-Theoretical Networks
Information-theoretical network is a neural network formalism that is capable of doing associations between two layers of representations  . The associations can be obtained statistically according to the network's experiences  . 
An information-theoretical network has two layers . Each unit of a layer represents an element in the input or output of a training pattern  , which might be a logogen or a word . Units in different layers are connected . The weight of the connection between unit i in one layer and unit j in the other layer is assigned with the mutual information between the elements rep-resenled by the two units  ( 1 ) wij = l ( vi , vj ) = log ( Pr ( vjvi ) / er ( vi ) ) l Each layer also contains a bias unit , which is always activated . The weight of the connection between the bias unit in one layer and unit j in the other layer is  ( 2 ) woj = loger ( vj ) Both the information-theoretical network and the backpropagation network compute the posterior probabilities for an association task  ( Gorin and Levinson , 1989; Robinson ,  1992) . However , only the information-theoretical network is isomorphic to the directly interconnected verbal systems in the dual-coding theory  . Besides , an information-theoretical network has the following advantages :  ( 1 ) it learns fast . 
The network can learn in a single pass without gradient decent  . (2) it is adaptive . It can incrementally adaptone wexperiences simply by adding new data to the training samples and modifying the associations according to the changed statistics  . These make the network more psychologically plausible  . 
Lexical Selection as an Associative Process We tried to map source language fstructures to target language f-structure in a connectionist transfer project  ( Wang ,  1994) . Functionally , there were two subtasks : 1 . finding the target substructures , their phrasal categories and their corresponding source structures  ;  2 . 
finding the head of a target structure . The second subtask is a problem of lexical selection  . It was first implemented with a backpropagation network  . 
We replaced the backpropagation networks for lexical selection with information-theoretical networks simulating the associative process in the dual-coding theory  . The networks have two layers of units . Each source ( target ) language lexical item is represented by a unit in the input  ( output ) layer . One network is constructed for each phrasal category  ( NP , VP , AP , etc . ) . 
The networks works in the following way : for a target-language f-structure to be generated  , the transfer system knows its phrasal category and its corresponding source-language f-structure from the networks that perform the subtask  1  . It then activates the lexical selection etwork for that phrasal category with the input units that correspond to the heads of the source language f-structure and its substructures  . Through the connections between the two layers , the output units are activated , and the lexical item that corresponds to the most active output unit is selected as the head of the target f-structure  . The following example illustrates how the system selects the head an melden for  1Where vi means the event that unit i is activated . 
3 26 the German XCOMP substructure when it does the transfer from\[sentence\[subji \] would\[ xcomp\[subj\]\]like\[xeomp\[subjI\] register\[pp-adj for the conference \]\]\]\] to \[ sentence\[subjIch\]wer de\[xcomp\[subj Ich\]\[adj gerne\]anmel den\[pp-aajfuer der Konferenz \]\]\]  2  . 
Since the structure networks find that there is a VP substructure of XCOMP in the target structure whose corresponding input structure is \[ x comp\ [ subj to register\[pp-adj for the conference \]\ ]\]  , it activates the VP lexical selection etwork's input units for I  , register and conference . By propagating the activation via the associative connections  , the unit for an melden is the most active output . Therefore , an melden is chosen as the head of the x comp substructure  . 
Preliminary Result
The domain of our work was the Conference Registra -tion Telephony Conversations  . The lexicon for the task contained about 500 English and 500 German words . 
There were 300 English/German f-structure pairs available from other research tasks  ( Osterholtz ,  1992) . A separate set of 154 sentential fstructures was used to test the generalization performance of the system  . The testing data was collected for an independent task  ( Jain ,  1991) . 
From the 300 sentential f-structure pairs , every German VP substructure is extracted and labeled with its English counterpart  . The English counterpart's head and its immediate substructures ' heads serve as the input in a sample of VP association  , and the German f-structure's head become the output of the association  . 
For the above example , the association (\] input I , register , conference \]\ [ output an melden\] ) is a sample drawn from the fstructures for the VP network  . The training samples for all the other networks are created in the same way  . 
The accuracy of our system with information -theoretical network lexical selection is lower than the one with backpropagation networks  ( around 84% versus around 92% ) for the training data . However , the generalization performance on the unseen inputs is better  ( around 70% versus around 62% )  . The information-theoretical networks do not over -learn as the backpropagation etworks  . This is partially due to the reduced number of free parameters in the information-theoretical networks  . 

The lexical selection approach discussed here has two advantages  . First , it is learnable . Little human effort on knowledgengineering is required  . Secondly , it is psycholinguistica Uy well-founded in that the approach  2The fstructures are simplified here for the sake of conciseness  . 
adopts a local activation processing model instead of relies upon symbol passing  , as symbolic systems usually do . 

P . F . Brown and et al A statistical pproach to machine translation  . Computational Linguistics , 16(2):73-85, 1990 . 
A . M . de Groot and G . L . N as . Lexical representation of cognates and noncognates in compound bilin-gums  . Journal of Memory and Language , 30(1), 1991 . 
B . J . Dorr . Conceptual basis of the lexicon in machine translation  . Technical Report A . I . Memo No . 1166, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory , MIT,
August , 1989.
A . L . Gorin and S . E . Levinson . Adaptive acquisition of language . Technical report , Speech Research Department , AT&T Bell Laboratories , Murray Hill ,  1989 . 
A . N . Jain . Parsec : A connectionist learning architecture for parsing spoken language  . Technical Report CMU-CS-91-208 , Carnegie Mellon University ,  1991 . 
W . E . Lambert , J . Havelka and C . Crosby . The influence of language acquisition contexts on bilingualism  . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology ,  56 ,  1958 . 
S . Nirenberg , V . Raskin and A . B . Tucker . The structure of interlingua in translator . In S . Nirenburg , editor , Machine Translation : Theoretical and Methodologicallssues  . Cambridge University
Press , Cambridge , England , 1987.
L . Osterholtzand et al Janus : a multilingual speech to speech translation system  . In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics  , Speech and Signal Processing , volume 1 , pages 209-212 . IEEE , 1992 . 
A . Paivio . Mental Representations ~ A Dual Coding Approach . Oxford University Press , New York , 1986 . 
J . Pustejovsky and S . Nirenburg . Lexical selection in the process of language generation  . In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 201-206 , Standford University , Standford , CA ,  1987 . 
A . Robinson . Practical network design and implementation . In Cambridge Neural Network Summer
School , 1992.
Y . Wang and A . Waibel . Connectionist transfer in machine translation . In prepare , 1994 . 

