SIMULATING CHILDREN'S NULL SUBJECTS :
ANEARLY LANG UAGE GENERATION MODEL
Carole T . Boster
Department of Linguistics , Box U-145
University of Connecticut
Storrs , CT06269-1145, USA


This pape reports work in progress on a sentence generation model which attempts to emulate certain language output patterns of children between the ages of one and one-half and three years  . In particular , the model addresses the issue of why missing or phonetically " null " subjects appear as often as they do in the speech of young English-speaking children  . It will also be used to examine why other patterns of output appear in the speech of children learning language such as Italian and Chinese  . Initial findings are that an output generator successfully approximates the null-subject output patterns found in English-speaking children by using a ' processing overload ' metric alone  ; however , eference to several parameters elated to discourse orientation and agreement morphology is necessary in order to account for the differing patterns of null arguments appearing crosslinguistically  . Based on these findings , it is argued that the ' null-subject phenomenon " is due to the combined effects of limited processing capacity and early  , accurate parameter setting . 
1 ~ PROBLEM
It is wellknown among researchers in language acquisition that young children just beginning to speak English frequently omit subjects  , in linguistic contexts where subjects are considered mandatory in the adult language  . Other major structural components such as verbs and direct objects are also omitted occasionally  ; however , the frequency at which children omit mandatory object NPs tends to be much lower than the rate at which they omit subjects  . For example , P . Bloom's ( 1990 ) analysis of early speech transcripts of Adam , Eve and Sarah ( Brown ,  1973 ) from the CHILDES database ( MacWhinney and Snow ,  1985) , indicates that these children omitted subjects from obligatory contexts  55% of the time on average , whereas obligatory objects were dropped at rates averaging only  9%  . 
But by around age 21/2 , or when the mean length of utterance ( MLU ) exceeds approximately 2 . 0 morphemes , the percentage of null subjects drops off to a level about equal to the level of null objects  . 
The reason for the socalled null-subject phenomenon in early child English has been widely debated in the literature  . Different theories , though they vary greatly in detail , generally fall into two broad categories : processing accounts and parameter-setting accounts  . The general claim of those who favor a processing account is that the phenomenon  ( in English ) is caused by severe limitations in the child's sentence-processing or memory capacity  . It is known that young children's utterances are much shorter on average than adults '  , that their sentence lngth increases steadily with age  , and that other components of a sentence are also routinely omitted  , which could be evidence of processing limitations  . Yet somewhoargue for a strictly grammatical explanation  ( including Hyams ( 1986 )  , Hyams and Wex\]er ( 1993 ) ) claim that the differential patterns of null subjects over null objects cannot be accounted for by any existing processing account  , and instead take this as evidence that the ' unmarked ' setting for the relevant parameter  ( s ) related to null subjects is ( + prodrop )  ; various accounts are offered for how children learning languages that do not permit null subject sultimately make the switch to the correct parameter 

Others , including Valian ( 1991 ) and Rizzi ( 1994 ) have noted differences in the frequency of early null subjects depending on their position in a sentence  ; they tend to be omitted in matrix but not embedded clauses  , and in sentence-initial position but not after a moved wh-element  . This observation has been used to argue for a different grammatical explanation of the null -subject stage  . Both Lillo-Martin (1991) and Rizzi (1994) , for example , argue that the initial value of the parameters is set to  ( -prodrop )  ; Lillo-Martin claims that the matrix subject is outside the domain where the prodrop parameters are applied initially  , while Rizzi claims that the matrix CP is considered optional at a nearly stage in acquisition  . Further evidence which may support either this approach or a ' combined'processing and parameters account includes the higher percentages and different patterns of prodrop and topic-drop found in the speech of children learning Italian  , a prodrop language ( Valian , 1991) and Chinese , which allows ' topic-drop ' ( Wang et . al . , the same age and MLU . Processing constraints should remain the same for children around the globe  , so it is not clear that processing alone can account for the different distributions of nulls exhibited by  2-year olds learning English , Italian , and Chinese . However , the crosslinguistic differences also argue against the claim that all children start out with the relevant parameter  ( s ) initially set to ( + prodrop )  . 
2 THEMODEL
FELICITY , a sentence generation model that emulates early child language output  , has been designed in order to determine whether the ' null-subject ' phenomenoniearly child language can best be accounted for by an incorrect initial setting of certain parameters  , by processing limitations , or by an interaction between parameter setting and processing  . FELICITY assumes a modular approach , following Garrett (1975) , in which the intended message goes through three processing modules to yield three levels of output : semantic  , then syntactic , then phonetic . The model incorporates several standard assumptions of Principles-and-Parameters theory including X'structure-building capacity  ( Chomsky ,  1981) , head-complement ordering parameters , and several parameters currently though to be relevan to the null-subject phenomenon  . Following the Continuity Hypothesis ( Pinker ,  1984) , the model has the potential capacity for producing a full clausal structure from the beginning  ; the structure-building mechanism is presumed to be innate  . It is also assumed , following the VP-internal Subject Hypothesis ( Koopman and Spertiche ( 1988 ) and others ) that the subject is initially generated within the VP  . An algorithm controlling processing capacity , similar in principle to that proposed by Gibson ( 1991 ) to account for processing overload effects in adult sentence processing  , will limit structure-building and dictate maximum " holding ' capacity before a sentence is output  . The lexicon will initially include all words used productively in transcripts of an English -speaking child at age  1  ; 7 ; lexical entries will include information about category  , pronunciation , obligatory and optional complements , and selectional restrictions on those complements  . All parameters will be binary . They can be assigned either value initially and can be reset  ; reference to any given parameter can also be switched on or off  . The processing capacity of the model can also be adjusted  , and the lexicon can be updated . 
The model will be able to produce a sentence with a specific meaning or intent  ( as children presumably do )  , if it is given certain data about he intended proposition  ; this data will comprise a semantic representation containing a verb  , its the ta-grid(i . e . agent , experiencer , goal and/or theme ) , information about time frame or tense , person and number , mood , negation , and whether or not arguments have been identified previously in the discourse  . When making direct comparisons of the model's performance with children's actual utterances  , the data that is input to the model will be coded on the basis of inferences about what the child ' intended'to say based not only on actual transcribed output but also from the situation  , prior discourse , and possibly care giver's report ( cf . L . 
Bloom ( 1970 ) on ' rich interpretation ' of children's utterances  )  . 
Syntactic processing proceeds as follows : Begin structure-building at the level of the matrix CP  , but via a recursive phrase-building process . Phrase-building begins by merging a complement phrase with its X ? head  ( after the complement phrase has been built ) to form an intermediate or X'level of structure  . This unit is then combined with its specifier to form a ' maximal ' phrase or XP  . Lexical items are inserted as soon as the appropriate X ? heads  ( or XPs , for proforms ) become available . 
Each time a structural unit is built , and each time a lexical entry is inserted , the processing load is incremented ; when the maximum load is exceeded , the model abandons processing and outputs the words currently in the buffer  . 
$ INITIAL APPLICATION
FELICITY's output will be compared to actual output from a long it udinal sample of several English-speaking children's early utterances  , using transcripts available on the CHILDES database  . 
The initial lexicon will be constructed based on the productive vocabulary of a given child from her first transcript  . The ' processing limit ' will be set at a given maximum  , such that the model's MLU approximates that of the child in the transcript  ; he algorithm will be fine-tuned to determine how much relative weight or processing ' cost ' should be assigned to  ( a ) lexical lookup to get subcategorization i formation for the verb  ; ( b ) building of a structural unit ; and ( c ) retrieval of phonological information . The sentence-generation procedures will be run under two conditions  , once with parameter-checking enabled and then with parameter-checking disabled  . Additional runs will try to emulate the child's output patterns during subsequent transcripts  , after augmenting the model's lexicon with new words found in the child's vocabulary and adjusting the processing limit upward so that the output matches the child's new MLU  . Statistical comparisons will be made between the model's and the children's performance  ( at null subjects and null objects in the output , percentages of overt nominal subjects ( full NPs ) vs . 
overt pronominal subjects , percentages of other sentence components omitted , and amount of variability in utterancelngths . 
4 PRELIMINARY FINDINGS
Initial trials indicate that , once the processing-complexity algorithm is tuned appropriately  , FELICITY can approximate henull ~ subject output patterns found in English-speaking children with no reference to parameter values  . Indeed , because the model builds complements before specifiers  , it produces a much higher incidence of null subjects than null objects using a proceseing -overload metric alone  . Furthermore , it yields a higher incidence of nulls in matrix sentences than in embedded clauses  , and within a clause it only omits subjects in initial position  , not after a moved wh-element or topic . 
However , it appears that the model will also need to reference parameter values if it is to account for the patterns observed in the speech of children learning languages which d_oo allow null arguments  ; processing constraints alone will not explain the different croselin ~ mistic distributions of nulls  . 
5 FUTURE APPLICATIONS
Once FELICITY's processing metric is fine-tuned for English  , it can be used to emulate argument omission pattern shown in other languages like Italian and Chinese  , to test various parametric theories . If the relevant parameters involved are as given in Lillo-Martin  ( 1991 )  , for example , FELICITY should be able to emulate the relatively high level of null-subject usage by Italian -speaking children reported in Valian  ( 1991 ) by simply switching certain subparameters related to Null Pronoun Licensing  ( NPL ) and Null Pronoun Identification ( NTI ) to positive for an Italian child at age 2 , while keeping processing constraints at the same levels that were established for English-speaking children  . 
The model should also be able to emulate the higher percentages of null subjects and null objects found in the output of Chinese-speaking children in experiments reported in Wang et  . al .   ( 1992 ) by simply switching the Discourse Oriented ( DO ) parameter to positive , while leaving the NPL and NPI parameters set at the default  ( negative ) values . 
FELICITY can also be used to address theories pertaining to other aspects of language acquisition that appear slightly later in development  , such as the appearance of subject-auxiliary inversion in yes/no and wh-questions  , and the emergence of
Tense and Agreement features . Future enhancements to the model are planned with these applications in mind  . 

This material is based upon work supported under a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship  . Thank sgotomy committee members Diane Lillo - Martin  , Stephen Crain , Ted Gibson and Howard Lasnik , and to two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on an earlier draft  . 

Bloom , L .  (1970) . Language development : Form and function in emerging rammars  . Cambridge,
Mass .: MIT Press,
Bloom , P .  (1990) . Subjectles sentences in child language . Linguistic Inauiry , ~491-504 . 
Brown , R .  (1973) . A first language : The early stages . 
Cambridge , Mass .: Harvard University Press.
Chomsky , N .  (1981) . Lectures on government and binding . Dordrecht : Foris . 
Garrett , M . F .  (1975) . The analysis of sentence production . In G . Bower ( Ed . ), P . sychology of learning and motivation ( Vol .  9) . New York:
Academic Press.
Gibson , E . A . F .  (1991) . A computational theory of human linguistic processing : Memory limitations and processing breakdown\[Doctoraldissertation \]  . Pittsburgh : Carnegie Mellon

Hyams , N . M .  (1986) . Language acquisition and the theory of parameters  . Dordrecht:D . Reidel
Publishing Company.
Hyams , N . , & Wex\]er , K .  (1993) . On the grammatical basis of null subjects in child language  . Linguistic In Quiry , 24, 421-459 . 
Koopman , H . , & Sportiche , D .  (1988) . Subjects\[Ms . \] . 
Los Angeles : UCLA.
Lillo-Martin , D . C .  (1991) . Universal Grammar and American Sign Language : Setting the Null Argument Parameters  . Dordrecht : Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
MacWhinney , B . , & Snow , C .  (1985) . The Child Language Data Exchange System . Journal of
Child Language , 12, 271-296.
Pinker , S .  (1984) . Language learnability and language development . Cambridge , Mass . :
Harvard University Press.
Rizzi , L .  (1994) . Early null subjects and root null subjects . In T . Hoekstra & B . D . Schwartz ? ( Eds . ) , Language acquisition studies in generative grammar  ( pp .  151-176) . 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia : John Benjamins.
Valian , V .  (1991) . Syntactic subjects in the early speech of American and Italian children  . 
Cognition , ~21-81.
Wang , Q . , Lillo-Martin , D . , Best , C . T . , & Levitt , A . 
(1992) . Null subject versus null object : Some evidence from the acquisition of Chinese and English  . Language Acquisition , ~221-254 . 

