VERBSEM ANTICS ANDLEXICAL SELECTION
Zhibiao Wu
Department of Information System
& Computer Science
National University of Singapore
Republic of Singapore , 0511

Martha Palmer
Department of Computer and
Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , PA 19104-6389
mpalmer@linc.cis.upenn.edu
Abstract
This paper will focus on the semantic representation of verbs in computer systems and its impact on lexical selection problems in machine translation  ( MT )  . Two groups of English and Chinese verbs are examined to show that lexical selection must be based on interpretation of the sentence as well as selection restrictions placed on the verb arguments  . A novel representation scheme is suggested , and is compared to representations with selection restrictions used in transfer-based MT  . We see our approach as closely aligned with knowledge-based MT approaches  ( KBMT )  , and as a separate component that could be incorporated into existing systems  . Examples and experimental results will show that , using this scheme , in exact matches can achieve correct lexical selection  . 

The task of lexical selection in machine translation  ( MT ) is choosing the target lexical item which most closely carries the same meaning as the corresponding item in the source text  . Information sources that support his decision making process are the source text  , dictionaries , and knowledge bases in MT systems . In the early direct replacement approaches , very little data was used for verb selection . The source verb was directly replaced by a target verb with the help of a bilingual dictionary  . In transfer-based approaches , more information is involved in the verb selection process  . In particular , the verb argument sructure is used for selecting the target verb  . This requires that each translation verb pair and the selection restrictions on the verb arguments be exhaustively isted in the bilingual dictionary  . In this way , a verb sense is defined with a target verb and a set of selection restrictions on its arguments  . Our questions are : Is the exhaustive listing of translation verb pairs feasible ? Is this verb representation scheme sufficient for solving the verb selection problem ? Our study of a particular MT system shows that when English verbs are translated into Chinese  , it is difficult to achieve large coverage by listing translation pairs  . We will show that a set of rigid selection restrictions on verb arguments can at best define a default situation for the verb usage  . The translations from English verbs to Chinese verb compounds that we present here provide evidence of the reference to the context and to a finegrained level of semantic representation  . Therefore , we propose a novel verb semantic representation that defines each verb by a set of concepts in different conceptual domains  . Based on this conceptual representation , a similarity measure can be defined that allows correct lexical choice to be achieved  , even when there is no exact lexical match from the source language to the target language  . 
We see this approach as compatible with other interlingua verb representation methods  , such as verb representation siKBMT ( Nirenburg , 1992) and UNITRAN ( Dorr ,  1990) . Since these methods do not currently employ a multi-domain approach  , they cannot address the fine-tuned meaning differences among verbs and the correspondence b -tween semantics and syntax  . Our approach could be adapted to either of these systems and incopo-rated into them  . 
The limitations of direct transfer
In a transfer-based MT system , pairs of verbs are exhaustively isted in a bilingual dictionary  . The translation of a source verb is limited by the number of entries in the dictionary  . For some source verbs with just a few translations  , this method is direct and efficient . However , some source verbs are very active and have a lot of different translations in the target language  . As illustrated by the following test of a commercial English to Chinese MT system  , Tran Star , using sentences from the Brown corpus , current ransfer-based approaches have no alternative to listing every translation pair  . 
In the Brown corpus , 246 sentences take break as the main verb . After removing most idiomatic 157 sentences left . We used these sentences to test Tran Star . The translation results are shown below : d = ui pohuiji & nxieto hreuk into piecest on a & ked~m & getotoh ~ ve ? break  5   2 J Ilt 0 juelieweif zn bs of L to bresk ( 8 rel~tlon ) to ~ g ~ inst to bresk out 0   0 of ~ henguzh ~ ng chu & nlud ~ du ~ n to break down to bresh into to break & continuity tupo deshixi & nd & n weibel to break through to bre & k even with to bre&k  ( ~ promise ) ow~n chen jued ~ bufen to bre&k with In the TranStar system  , English break only has 13 Chinese verb entries . The numbers above are the frequencies with which the  157 sentences translated into a particular Chinese expression  . 
Most of the zero frequencies represent Chinese verbs that correspond to English break idiomatic usages or verb particle constructions which were removed  . The accuracy rate of the translation is not high . Only 30 (19 . 1%) words were correctly translated . The Chinese verb ~7\]i ~ ( dasui ) acts like a default translation when no other choice matches  . 
The same 157 sentences were translated by one of the authors into  68 Chinese verb expressions . These expressions can be listed according to the frequency with which they occurred  , in decreasing order . The verb which has the highest rank is the verb which has the highest frequency  . 
In this way , the frequency distribution of the two different translations can be shown below : Figure  1  . Frequency distribution of translations It seems that the nature of the lexical selection task in translation obeys Zipf's law  . It means that , for all possible verb usages , a large portion is translated into a few target verbs  , while a small portion might be translated into many different target verbs  . Any approach that has a fixed number of target candidate verbs and provides no way to measure the meaning similarity among verbs  , is not able to handle the new verb usages , i . e . , the small portion outside the dictionary coverage  . However , a native speaker has an unrestricted number of verbs for lexical selection  . By measuring the similarities among target verbs , the most similar one can be chosen for the new verb usage  . 
The challenge of verb representation is to capture the fluid nature of verb meanings that allows human speakers to contrive new usages in every sentence  . 
Translating English into Chinese serial verb compounds Translating the English verb break into Chinese  ( Mandarin ) poses unusual difficulties for two reasons . One is that in English break can be thought of as a very general verb indicating an entire set of breaking events that can be distinguished by the resulting state of the object being broken  . Shatter , snap , split , etc . , can all be seen as more specialized versions of the general breaking event  . Chinese has no equivalent verb for indicating the class of breaking events  , and each usage of break has to be mapped onto a more specialized lexical item  . 
This is the equivalent of having to first interpret the English expression into its more semantically precise situation  . For instance this would probably result in mapping  , John broke the crystal vase , and John broke the stick onto Johnshattered the crys-talvase and Johnsnapped the stick  . Also , English specializations of break do not cover all the ways in which Chinese can express a breaking event  . 
But that is only part of the difficulty in translation  . In addition to requiring more semantically precise lexemes  , Mandarin also requires a serial verb construction  . The action by which force is exerted to violate the integrity of the object being broken must be specified  , as well as the description of the resulting state of the broken object itself  . 
Serial verb compounds in Chinese-Chinese serial verb compounds are composed of two Chinese characters  , with the first character being a verb , and the second character being a verb or adjective  . The grammatical nalysis can be found in ( Wu ,  1991) . The following is an example :
Yueh and a-suile huapin.
John hit-broken Asp . vase.
John broke the vase . ( VA )
Here , da is the action of John , sui is the resulting state of the vase after the action  . These two Chinese characters are composed to form a verb compound  . Chinese verb compounds are productive . Different verbs and adjectives can be composed to form new verb compounds  , as in ilia , ji-sui , hit-being-in-pieces ; orilia , ji-duan , hit-being-in-line-shape . Many of these verb compounds have not been listed in the human dictionary  . However , they must still be listed individually in a machine dictionary  . Not any single character verb or single character adjective can be composed to form a VA type verb compound  . The productive applications must be semantically sound  , and therefore have to treated individually . 

In adequacy of selection restrictions for choosing actions - By looking at specific examples  , it soon becomes clear that shallow selection restrictions give very little information about the choice of the action  . An understanding of the context is necessary . 
For the sentence John broke the vase , a correct translation is:
Yueh and a-suile huapin.
John hit-in-pieces Asp . vase.
Here break is translated into a VA type verb compound  . The action is specified clearly in the translation sentence  . The following sentences which do not specify the action clearly are anomalous  . 
, ~ tr ~ T  ~
Yuehan suile huapin.
John in-pieces Asp . vase.
A translation with a causation verb is also anomalous : * ~ ~ ~ ~ t ~ T  . 
Yuehanshihua pinsuile.
Johnlet vase in-pieces Asp.
The following example shows that the translation must depend on an understanding of the surrounding context  . 
The earthquakes hook the room violently , and the more fragile pieces did not hold up well . 
The dishes shattered , and the glass table was smashed into many pieces . 
Translation of last clause : nabolizhuo zibei zhenchenleeuipian That glasstable Pass  . shake-become Asp . pieces Selection restrictions reliably choose result states - Selection restrictions are more reliable when they are used for specifying the result state  . 
For example , break in the vase broke is translated into dasui ( hit and broken into pieces )  , since the vase is brittle and easily broken into pieces  . Break in the stick broke is translated into zheduan  ( bend and separated into line-segment shape ) which is a default situation for breaking a line -segment shape object  . However , even here , sometimes the context can override the selection restrictions on a particular noun  . In John broke the stick into pieces , the obvious translation would be dasui instead . These examples illustrate that achieving correct lexical choice requires more than a simple matching of selection restrictions  . A finegrained semantic representation of the interpretation of the entire sentence is required  . This can indicate the contextually implied action as well as the resulting state of the object involved  . An explicit representation f the context is beyond the state of the art for current machine translation  . When the context is not available , We need an algorithm for selecting the action verb  . Following is a decision tree for translating English Change-of-state verbs into Chinese : k  , ti . mupremmiia emt ~
V . I . A ~ bsAc ~ oocube inferred ~, ~,-~\] ss . lcmo ~ def ~ ~ clmex ~ . s
VtAwu:bbutud:cbaaatoKleetvEb ~ ? ifi~l
U . . genre , i e t i = g s e c a r o m h ~ = o a , ( I = ~ , ? j =) (= hi , ran , to , =~ . Figure 2 . Decision tree for translation
A multi-domain approach
We suggest that to achieve accurate lexical selection  , it is necessary to have finegrained selection restrictions that can be matched in a flexible fashion  , and which can be augmented when necessary by context-dependent kowledge-based understanding  . The underlying framework for both the selection restrictions on the verb arguments and the knowledge base should be a verb taxonomy that relates verbs with similar meanings by associating them with the same conceptual domains  . 
We view a verb meaning as a lexicalized concept which is undecomposable  . However , this semantic form can be projected onto a set of concepts in different conceptual domains  . Langacker ( Langacker ,  1988 ) presents a set of basic domains used for defining a knife  . It is possible to define an entity by using the size  , shape , color , weight , functionality etc . We think it is also possible to identify a compatible set of conceptual domains for characterizing events and therefore  , defining verbs as well . Initially we are relying on the semantic domains suggested by Levin as relevant osyntactic alternations  , uchasmotion , force , contact , change-of-state and action , etc , ( Levin ,  1992) . We will augmen these domains as needed to distinguish between different senses for the achievment of accurate lexical selection  . 
If words can be defined with concepts in a hierarchical structure  , it is possible to measure the meaning similarity between words with an information measure based on WordNet  ( Resnik ,  1993) , or structure level information based on a thesaurus  ( Kurohashi and Nagao ,  1992) . However , verb meanings are difficult to organize in a verb meanings are involved in several different conceptual domains  . For example , break identifies a change-of-state event with an optional causation conception  , while hit identifies a complex event involving motion  , force and contact domains . Those Chinese verb compounds with V+A constructions always identify complex events which involve action and change-of-state domains  . Levin has demonstrated that in English a verb's syntactic behavior has a close relation to semantic components of the verb  . Our lexical selection study shows that these semantic domains are also important for accurate lexical selection  . For example , in the above decision tree for action selection , a Chinese verb compound dasui can be defined with a concept ~ hit-action in an action domain and a concept ~ separate-into-pieces in a change-of -state domain  . The action domain can be further divided into motion  , force , contact domains , etc . A related discussion about defining complex concepts with simple concepts can be found in  ( Ravin ,  1990) . 
The semantic relations of verbs that are relevant to syntactic behavior and that capture part of the similarity between verbs can be more closely realized with a conceptual multidomain approach than with a paraphrase approach  . Therefore we propose the following representation method for verbs  , which makes use of several different concept domains for verb representation  . 
Defining verb projections - Following is a representation of a break sense  . 
LEXE MEBRE AK-I
EXAMPLEI dropped my cup and it broke.
CONSTRAINT ( is a physical-object El )   ( is a animate-object EO )   ( is a instrument E ~ ) \[ ch . of state (~ ehange-o\] . integrity El )\] OBL

IMP causation ( ~ cause EO * ) instrument ( ~ with-instrument EOE ~
I time ( ~ around-time@tO * ) space ( ~ at-location@10EO )   ( ~ at-location 011 El )   ( ~ at-location@12 E2 ) 
I actio n @
L functionality @
The CONSTRAINT slot encodes the selection information on verb arguments  , but the meaning itself is not a paraphrase . The meaning representation is divided into three parts  . It identifies a % change-of-integrity concept in the change-of-state domain which is OBLIGATORY to the verb meaning  . The causation and instrument domains are OPTIONAL and may be realized by syntactic alternations  . Other time , space , action and functionality domains are IMPLICIT , and are necessary for all events of this type . 
In each conceptual domain , lexicalized concepts can be organized in a hierarchical structure  . The conceptual domains for English and Chinese are merged to form interlingua conceptual domains used for similarity measures  . Following is part of the change-of-state domain containing English and Chinese lexicalized concepts  . 
c ~ tmp- , f-yatt , ~ pa~-h~aM-h~ka = Inliu-~j ~ tpt ~ ir~la:tkqm ( C : du ~ , dltbu ) ( C:ni , l~jni ) ( C:p , y~po ) Figure 3 . Change-of-state domain for English and Chinese Within one conceptual domain  , the similarity of two concepts is defined by how closely they are related in the hierarchy  , i . e . , their structural relations . 
Figure 4 . The concept similarity measure The conceptual similarity between  C1 and C2 is:
ConSim(C1, C2) = 2, N3Nl+N2+2*N3
C3 is the least common superconcept of C1 and C2 .   N1 is the number of nodes on the path from C1 to C3  .   N2 is the number of nodes on the path from C2 to C3  .   N3 is the number of nodes on the path from C3 to root . 
After defining the similarity measure in one domain  , the similarity between two verb meanings , e . g , a target verb and a source verb , can be defined as a summation of weighted similarities between pairs of simpler concepts in each of the domains the two verbs are projected onto  . 
WordSim(Vt , V2) = ~-\] ~ iWl*ConSim(Ci , , , el , 2 ) We have implemented a prototype lexical selection system UNICON where the representations of both the English and Chinese verbs are based on a set of shared semantic domains  . The selection information is also included in these representations  , but does not have to match exactly . 
We then organize these concepts into hierarchical structures to form an interlingua conceptual base  . 
The names of our concept domain constitute the artificial language on which an interlingua must be based  , thus place us firmly in the knowledge based understanding MT camp  . ( Goodman and
Nirenburg , 1991).
The input to the system is the source verb argument structure  . After sense disambiguation , the internal sentence representation can be formed  . 
The system then tries to find the target verb realization for the internal representation  . If the concepts in the representation do not have any target verb realization  , the system takes nearby concepts as candidates to see whether they have target verb realizations  . If a target verb is found , an inexact match is performed with the target verb meaning and the internal representation  , with the selection restrictions associated with the target verb being imposed on the input arguments  . Therefore , the system has two measurements in this inexact match  . One is the conceptual similarity of the internal representation ad the target verb meaning  , and the other is the degree of satisfaction of the selection restrictions on the verb arguments  . We take the conceptual similarity , i . e . , the meaning , as having first priority over the selection restrictions  . 
A running example-For the English sentence The branch broke  , after disambiguation , the internal meaning representation f the sentence can be :\[ INTER-REP sentence-I\]ch -of-state  ( change-of-integrity branch-I ) Since there is no Chinese lexicalized concept having an exact match for the concept change-of -integrity  , the system looks at the similar concepts in the lattice around it  . They are: ( % SEPARATE-IN-PIECES-STATE % SEPARATE-IN-NEEDLE -LIKE-STATE  9~SEPARATE-IN-D UAN-STATE 9~SEPARATE-IN-PO-STATE % SEPARATE-IN-SHANG-STATE % SEPARATE-IN-FENS UI -STATE  ) 
For one concept % SEPARATE-IN-DUAN-
STATE , there is a set of Chinese realizations : ?~- J ~ deanla  ( to separate in line-segment shape )  . 
? ~-1dadean ( to hit and separate the object in line-segment shape  )  . 
? ~ deancheat ( to separate in li .   .   .   .   . gment shape into ) . 
? ~\] ~ zheduan ( to bend and separate in line-segment shape with human hands  ) ? ~' ~ guadean ( to separate in line-segment shape by wind blowing  )  . 
After filling the argument of each verb representation and doing an inexact match with the internal representation  , the result is as . follows : conceptions 6/7   0   0   0   0 constraints 3/14   0   3/7   0   0 The system chooses the verb ~- J " ( duanla ) as the target realization . 
Handling metaphorical usages - One test of our approach was its ability to match metaphorical usages  , relying on a handcrafted ontology for the objects involved  . We include it here to illustrate the flexibility and power of the similarity measure for handling new usages  . In these examples the system effectively performs coercion of the verb arguments  ( Hobbs ,  1986) . 
The system was able to translate the following metaphorical usage from the Brown corpus correctly  . 
c fO9:86:No believer in the traditional devotion of royal servitors  , the plump Pulley broke the language barrier and lured her to Cairo where she waited for nine months  , vainly hoping to see Farouk . 
In our system , break has one sense which means loss of functionality  . Its selection restriction is that the patient should be a mechanical device which fails to match language barrier  . However , in our ontology , a language barrier is supposed to be an entity having functionality which has been placed in the nominal hierachy near the concept of mechanical -device  . So the system can choose the break sense loss of functionality over all the other break senses as the most probable one  . Based on this interpretation , the system can correctly select the Chinese verb ? YM da-po as the target realization  . The correct selection becomes possible because the system has a measurement for the degree of satisfaction of the selection restrictions  . In another example ,   ca43:lO:Other tax-exempt bonds of State and local governments hitaprice peak on February  P1  , according to Standard gJP oor's average . 
hit is defined with the concepts % move-toward-in -space % contact-in-space % receive-for es  . Since tar-exempt bonds and a price peak are not physical objects  , the argument structure is excluded from the HIT usage type  . If the system has the knowledge that price can be changed in value and fixed at some value  , and these concepts of change-in-value toward-in -space ~ contact-in-space  , the system can interpre the meaning as change-in . value and fix-at-value . In this case , the correct lexical selection can be made as Ik ~ da-dao  . This result is predicated on the definition of hit as having concepts in three domains that are all structurally related  , i . e . , nearby in the hierarchy , the concepts related to prices . 
Methodology and experimental results
Our UNICON system translates a subset ( the more concrete usages ) of the English break verbs from the Brown corpus into Chinese with larger freedom to choose the target verbs and more accuracy than the TranStar system  . Our coverage has been extended to include verbs from the semantically similar hit  , touch , break and cut classes as defined by Beth Levin . Twenty-one English verbs from these classes have been encoded in the system  . Four hundred Brown corpus sentences which contain these  21 English verbs have been selected , Among them ,   100 sentences with concrete objects are used as training samples  . The verbs were translated into Chinese verbs . The other 300 sentences are divided into two test sets . Test set one contains 154 sentences that are carefully chosen to make sure the verb takes a concrete object as its patient  . For test set one , the lexical selection of the system got a correct rate  57  . 8% before encoding the meaning of the unknown verb arguments  ; and a correct rate 99 . 4 5% after giving the unknown English words conceptual meanings in the system's conceptual hierarchy  . The second test set contains 116 sentences including sentences with non-concrete objects  , metaphors , etc . The lexical selection of the system got a correct rate of  31% before encoding the unknown verb arguments , a 75% correct rate after adding meanings and a 88 . 8% correct rate after extended selection process applied  . The extended selection process relaxes the constraints and attempts to find out the best possible target verb with the similarity measure  . 
From these tests , we can see the benefit of defining the verbs on several cognitive domains  . 
The conceptual hierarchical structure provides a way of measuring the similarities among different verb senses  ; with relaxation , metaphorical processing becomes possible . The correct rate is improved by 13 . 8% by using this extended selection process . 

With examples from the translation of English to Chinese we have shown that verb semantic representation has great impact on the quality of lexical selection  . Selection restrictions on verb arguments can only define default situations for verb events  , and are often overridden by context information . 
Therefore , we propose a novel method for defining verbs based on a set of shared semantic domains  . This representation scheme not only takes care of the semantic-syntactic or respondence  , but also provide similarity measures for the system for the performance of inexact matches based on verb meanings  . The conceptual similarity has priority over selection constrants on the verb arguments  . We leave scaling up the system to future work . 

Dolm , B . J .  (1990) . Lezical Conceptual Structure and machine Translation  . PhD thesis , MIT . 
GOOD MAN , K . & NIRENBURG , S . , editors (1991) . The KBMT Project : A Case Study in Knowledge -Based Machine Translation  . Morgan Kaufmann

HOBBS , J .  (1986) . Overview of the TACITUS Project . 
Computational Linguistics , 12(3).
JACKEND OFF , R . (1990). Semantic Structures . MIT

KUROHASm , S . & NAGAO , M .  (1992) . Dynamic Programming Method for Analyzing Conjunctive Structures in Japanese  . In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING-9e )  , Nantes , France . 
LANQACKlm , R . W .  (1988) . An overview of cognitive grammar . In RUDZKA-OSTYN , B . , editor , Topics in Cognitive Grammar . John Benjamins Publishing Company , Amsterdam/Phil ~ lelphia . 
LEV lN,B .  (1992) . English Verb Classes and Alternations : A Preliminary Investigation  . Technical report , Department of Linguistics , Northwest-era University , 2016 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL 60208 . 
NmEN BURG , S . , CARBONELL , J . , TOMITA , M . , & GOOD MAN , K .  (1992) . Machine Translation : A Knowledge-Based Approach . Morgan Kaufmann

RAVIN , Y .  (1990) . Lexical Semantics without Thematic Roles . Clarendon Press , Oxford . 
RESNIK , P .  (1993) . Selection and Information : A Class-Based Approach to Lexicai Relationships  . 
PhD thesis , Department of Information and Computer Science , University of Pennsylvania . 
Wu , D .  (1991) . On Serial verb Construction . PhD thesis , Department of Information and Computer
Science , University of Maryland.

