SPEECHDIALOGUE WITH FACIAL DISPLAYS :
MULTIMODAL HUMAN-COMPUTER CONVERSATION
Katashi Nagao and Akikazu Takeuchi
Sony Computer Science Laboratory Inc.
3-14-13 Higashi-got and a , Shinagawa-ku , Tokyo 141 , Japan Email : nagao , takeuchi@csl . sony . co . jp
Abstract
Human face-to-face on versation is an ideal model for humancomputer dialogue  . One of the major features of face-to-face ommunication is its multiplicity of communication channels that act on multiple modalities  . To realize a natural multimodal dialogue , it is necessary to study how humans perceive information and determine the information to which humans are sensitive  . A face is an independent communication channel that conveys emotional and conversational signals  , encoded as facial expressions . We have developed an experimental system that integrates speech dialogue and facial animation  , to investigate the effect of introducing communicative facial expressions as a new modality in humancomputer conversation  . Our experiments have showen that facial expressions are helpful  , especially upon first contact with the system . We have also discovered that featuring facial expressions at a nearly stage improve sub-sequent interaction  . 
Introduction
Human face-to-face on versation is an ideal nmdel for humancomputer dialogue  . One of the major features of face-to-face communication is its multiplicity of communication channels that act on multiple modalities  . A channel is a communication medium associated with a particular encoding method  . Examples are the auditory channel ( carrying speech ) and the visual channel ( carrying facial expressions )  . A modality is the sense used to perceive signals from the outside world  . 
Many researchers have been developing multimodal dialogue systems  . In some cases , researchers have shown that information in one channel complements or modifies information in another  . As a simple example , the phrase " delete it " involves the coordination of voice with gesture  . Neither make sense without the other . Researchers have also noticed that nonverbal ( gesture or gaze ) information plays a role in setting the situational context which is useful in restricting the hypothesis pace constructed ur -ing language processing  . Anthropomorphic interfaces present another approach to nmltimodal dialogues  . An anthropomorphic interface , such as Guides\[Don et al ,  1991\] , provides a means to realize a new style of interaction  . Such research attempts to computationally capture the communicative power of the human face and apply it to humancomputer dialogue  . 
Our research is closely related to the last approach  . The aim of this research is to improve humancomputer dialogue by introducing humanlike behavior into a speech dialogue system  . Such behavior will include factor such as facial expressions and head and eye movement  . It will help to reduce any stress experienced by users of computing systems  , lowering the complexity associated with understanding system status  . 
Like most dialogue systems developed by natural language researchers  , our current system can handle domain-dependent , if ormation-seeking dialogues . Of course , the system encounters problems with ambiguity and missing intbrmation  ( i . e . , anaphor and ellipsis ) . The system tries to resolve them using techniques from natural language understanding  ( e . g . , constraint-based , case-based . 
and plan-based methods ) . We are also studying the use of synergic multimodality to resolve linguistic problems  , as in conventional multimodal systems . This work will bc reported in a separate publication  . 
In this paper , we concentrate on the role of nonverbal nlodality for increasing flexibility of human computer dialogue and reducing the mental barriers that many users associate with computer systems  . 
Research Overview of Multimodal
Dialogues
Multimodal dialogues that combine verbal and nonverbal communication have been pursued  1  . Combining direct manipulation with natural an -guage  ( deictic ) expressions " Direct manipulation ( DM ) " was suggested by Shneider in an \[1983\] . The user can interact directly with graphical objects displayed on the computer screen with rapid  , iNcremeNtal , reversible operations whose effects on the objects of interest are immediately visible  . 
The semantics of natural language ( NL ) expressions is anchored to realworld objects and events by means of pointing and demoNstratiNg actions and deictic expressions such as " this  , "" that , "" here , "" there , "" the N , " and " now . "Some research on dialogue systems has coin-bined deictic gestures aNd naturalanguage such as Put - That-There\[Bolt  ,  1980\] , CUBRICON\[Neal et al ,  1988\] , and ALFREsco\[Stock ,  1991\] . 
One of the advantages of combined NL/DM interaction is that it can easily resolve the missing information in NL expressions  . For example , wheN the system receives a user request in speech like " delete that object  , " it can fill in the missing information by looking for a pointing gesture from the user or objects on the screen at the time the request is made  . 
2 . Using nonverbal inputs to specify the ; ~ on text and filter out unrelated information The focus of attention or the focal point plays a very important role in processing applications with a broad hypothesis pace such as speech recognition  . One example of focusing modality is following the user's looking behavior  . Fixa-tionor gaze is useful for the dialogue system to determine the context of the user's interest  . For example , when a user is looking at a car , that the user says at that time may be related to the car  . Prosodic information ( e . g . , voice tones ) in the user's utterance also helps to determine focus  . In this case , the system uses prosodic information to infer the user's beliefs Or intentions  . Combining estural information with spoken language comprehension shows another example of how context may be determined by the user's nonverbal behavior\[Oviatt et al  ,  1993\] . This research uses multimodal forms that prompt a user to speak or write into labeled fields  . The forms are capable of guiding and segmenting inputs  , of conveying the kind of information the system is expecting  , and of reducing ambiguities in utterances by restricting syntactic and semantic omplexities  . 
3 . Incorporating humanlike behavior into dialogue systems to reduce operation complexity and stress often associated with computer systems Designing humancomputer dialogue requires that the computer makes appropriate backchannel feedbacks like Noddi Ngor expressions such as " aha " and " I see  . " One of the major advantages of using such nonverbal behavior in humancomputer conversation is that reactions are quicker than those fl'om voice-based re-spouses  . For example , the facial backchannel plays an important role in huln an face-to-face conversation  . We consider such quick reactions as being situated actions \[ Suchman  ,   1987\] which are necessary for resource-bounded dialogue participants  . Timely responses are crucial to successfid conversation  , since some delay in reactions can imply specific meanings or make messages unnecessarily ambiguous  . 
Generally , visual channels contribute to quick user recognition of system status  . For example , the system's gaze behavior ( head and eye move-meat ) gives a strong impression of whether it is paying attention or not  . If the system's eyes wander around aimlessly , the user easily recognizes the system's attention elsewhere  , perhaps even unaware that he or she is speaking to it  . 
Thus , gaze is an important indicator of system ( in this case , speech recognition ) status . 
By using humanlike nonverbal behavior , the system can more flexibly respond to the user than is possible by using verbal modality alone  . 
We focused on the third viewpoint and developed a system that acts like a human  . We employed communicative facial expressions as a new modality in humancomputer conversation  . We have already discussed this , however , in another paper \[ Takeuchi and Nagao ,  1993\] . Here , we consider our implemented system as a test bed for incorporating humanlike  ( nonverbal ) behavior into dialogue systems . 
The following sections give a system overview , an example dialogue along with a brief explanation of the process  , and our experimental results . 
Incorporating Facial Displays into a
Speech Dialogue System
Facial Displays as a New Modality
The study of facial expressions has attracted the interest of a number of different disciplines  , including psychology , ethology , and interpersonal communications . Currently , there are two basic schools of thought . One regards facial expressions as beiu ~ expressioNs of emotion \[ Ekman and Friesen  ,  1984\] . The other views facial expressions in a social context  , regarding them as being communicative signals\[ Chovil  ,  1991\] . The term " facial displays " is essentially the same as " facial expressions  , " but is less reminiscent of emotion . In this paper , therefore , we use " facial displays . " nel that conveys emotional and conversational signals  , encoded as facial displays . Facial displays can be also regarded as being a modality because the human brain has a special circuit dedicated to their processing  . 
Table 1 lists all the communicative facial displays used in the experiments described in a later section  . The categorization framework , terminology , and individual displays are based on the work of Chovil  \[1991\]  , with the exception of the em-phasizer , underliner , and facials hrug . These were coined by Ekman\[1969\] . 
Table 1: Communicative Facial Displays Used in the Experiments  . ( Categorization based mostly on Chovil\[1991\])
Syntactic Display ~ ation 2 . Question mark 3 . Emphasizer 4 . Underliner 5 . Punctuation 6 . End of an utterance 7 . Beginning of a story 8 . Story continuation 9 . End of a story 10 . Think ' ragRem embering 11 . Facial shrug:"I don't know " 12 . Interactive : " You know ? "13 . Metacommunicative:
Indication of sarcas morjoke 14 . "Yes "15, " No "15, " Not "17 . *' But "
Listener Comment Disp--~ay 18. Backchannel :
Indication of attendance 19 . Indication of loudness
Understanding levels 20 . Confident 21 . Moderately confident 22, Not confident 23 . "Yes " ~ g
Eyebrow raising or lowering
Eyebrow raising or lowering
Longer eyebrow raising
Eyebrow movement
Eyebrow raising
Eyebrow raising
Avoid eye contact
Eye contact
Eyebrow raising or lowering-T-closing the eyes , pulling back one mouth side
Eyebrow flashes , mouth corners pulled down , mouth corners pulled back
Eyebrow raising
Eyebrow raising and looking up and off
Eyebrow actions
Eyebrow actions
Eyebrow actions
Eyebrow actions
Eyebrow raising , mouth corners turned down
Eyebrows drawn to center
Eyebrow raising , head nod
Eyebrow raising
Eyebrow lowering
Eyebrow raising
Evaluation of utterances 24 . Agreement Eyebrow raising 25 . Request for more information Eyebrow raising 26 . Incredulity Longer eyebrow raising Three major categories are defined as follows  . 
Syntactic displays . These are facial displays that ( 1 ) place stress on particular words or clauses ,   ( 2 ) are connected with the syntactic aspects of an utterance  , or ( 3 ) are connected with the organization of the talk . 
Speaker displays . Speaker displays are facial displays that ( 1 ) illustrate the idea being verbally conveyed , or ( 2 ) add additional information to the ongoing verbal content  . 
Listener comment displays . These are facial displays made by the person who is not speaking  , in response to the utterances of the speaker . 
An Integrated System of Speech
Dialogue and Facial Animation
We have developed an experimental system that integrates speech dialogue and facial animation to investigate the effects of humanlike behavior in humancomputer dialogue  . 
The system consists of two subsystems , a facial animation subsystem that generates a three-dimensional face capable of a range of facial displays  , and a speech dialogue subsystem that recognizes and interpret speech  , and generates voice outputs . Currently , the animation subsystem runs on an SGI 320VGX and the speech dialogue subsystem on a Sony NEWS workstation  . These two subsystems communicate with each other via an 
Ethernet network.
Figure 1 shows the configuration of tlle integrated system  . Figure 2 illustrates the interaction of a user with the system  . 
i............... t.~-~T~--6---~.~-.,.
Speech recognition \~11, ~ . ~ Word sequence ~\ ~ ~ Symactic & semantic analysis ~~'  ,  .  ?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . \ -, I i .   .   .   .   . , o ? . 
.  .   .   .   .   .   .   . . . . . . . . . . ~ sr,~E's in=ntion "\ 1"~--~' . ' .   . . . . . . L: . . . i l ~ . . . . . . . . : , i .   .   .   .   .  " ' "~  . _"~'~------~i'ymoffa ~ ~'1 di ~ C "~" ~---__ ~ Muscle paramemrsi ! ~ System's responsei \] Facial animation ~ i ! I Voice synthesis  . : .   . . . . . . . . . . . . ~-_  .   .  -=  .  : :  .   . -: E .   .   . ~ to_:o .  ,  .  ! !~ , ~_  . ~-~ .   .   .  :=~ .   .   . ~  . . . . . . . . . . ~  . . . . . . . 
Facial display ~ Voice
Facial animation subsystem Speech dialogue subsyst cm 
Figure 1: System Configuration
Facial Animation Subsystem
The face is modeled three-dimensionally . Our current version is composed of approximately 500 polygons . The face can be rendered with a skin-like surface material  , by applying a texture map taken from a photograph or a video frame  . 
In 3D computer graphics , a facial display is realized by local deformation of the polygons representing the face  . Waters showed that deforma-tion that simulates the action of muscles underlying the face looks more natural \[ Waters  ,  1987\] . 
We therefore use munerical equations to simulate muscle actions  , as defined by Waters . Currently , i ~iiii!iiiiiii  ) i i + ii '  . . . . . . . . . . ; i l l
Figure 2: Dialogue Snapshot the system incorporates 16 muscles and 10 parameters , controlling mouth opening , jawrotation , eye movement , eyelido I ) ening , and head orientation . These 16 nmscles were deternfined by Waters , considering the correspondence with action units in the Facial Action Coding System  ( FACS ) \[Ekman and Friesen .  1978\] . For details of the facial modeling and animation system  , see\[Takeuchi and Franks ,  1992\] . 
We use 26 synthesized facial displays , corresponding to those listed in Table 1 , and two additional displays . All facial displays are generated by the above method  , and rendered with a texture map of a young boy's face  . The added displays are " Smile " and " Neutral . " The " Neutral " display features no muscle contraction whatsoever  , and is used when no conversational signal is needed  . 
At runtime , the animation subsystem awaits a request fi'om the speech subsystem  . When the animation subsystem receives a request hat specifies values for the  26 parameters , it starts to de-form the face , on the basis of the received values . 
The deformation process is controlled by the differential equation ff = a-f  , where f is a parameter value at time t and f ' is its time derivative at time t  . a is the target value specified in the request, . A feature of this equation is that defor-mation is fast in the early phase but soon slows  , corresponding closely to the real dynamics of facial displays  . Currently , the base performance of the animation subsystem is around  2025 frames per second when running on an SGI Power Series  . 
This is sufficientoenable realtime animation.
Speech Dialogue Subsystem
Our speech dialogue subsystem works as follows.
First , a voice input is acoustically analyzed by a builtin sound processing board  . Then , a speech recognition module is invoked to output word sequences that have been assigned higher scores by a probabilistic phoneme model  . These word se-quen ( : es are syntactically and semantically analyzed and disambiguated by applying a relatively loose grammar and a restricte domain knowledge  . 
Using a semantic representation of the input utterance  , aI ) lan recognition module extracts the speaker's intention  . For example , ti ' om the utterance " I am interested in Sony's workstation  . " the module interprets the speaker's intention as " he wants to get precise information about Sony ' swork station  . " Once the system detern fines the speaker's intention  , a response generation module is invoked . This generates a response to satisfy the speaker 's request  . Finally , the system's response is output as voice by a voice synthesis module  . This module also sends the information about lip synchronization that describes phonemes  ( including silence ) in the response and their time durations to the facial animation subsystem  . 
With the exception of the voice synthesis nmd-ule , each nmdule can send messages to the facial animation subsystem to reques the generation of a facial display  . The relation between the speech dialogues and facial displays is discussed later  . 
In this case , the specific task of the system is to provide information about Sony's computer-related products  . For example , the system can answer questions about price , size , weight , and specifications of Sony's workstations and PCs . 
Below , we describe the modules of the speech di Mogue subsystem  . 
Speech recognition . This module was jointly developed with the Electrotechnic M Laboratory and Tokyo Institute of Technology  . Speaker-independent continuous speech inputs are accepted without special hardware  . To obtain a high level of accuracy , context-dependent phonetic hidden Marker models are used to construct phoneme-level hypotheses \[ Itou et al  .  1992\] . This nmdule can generate Nbest word-level hypotheses  . 
Syntactic and semantic analysis . This module consists of a parsing n~echanism , a semantic analyzer , a relatively loose grammar consisting of 24 rules , a lexicon that includes 34 nouns . 8 verbs . 
4 adjectives and 22 particles , and afl'ame-based knowledge base consisting of 61 conceptual frames . 
Our semantic analyzer can handle ambiguities in syntactic structures and generates a semantic representation of the speaker's utterance  . We applied a preferential constraint satisfaction technique\[Nagao  ,   1992\] for perfornfing disambiguation and semantic analysis  . By allowing the preferences to control the application of the constraints  . 
105 ambiguities can be efficiently resolved , thus avoiding combinatorial explosions . 
Plan recognition . This module determines the speaker's intention by constructing a model of his/her beliefs  , dynamically adjusting and expanding the model as the dialogue progresses \[ Nagao  ,  1993\] . The model deals with the dynamic nature of dialogues by applying the following two mechanisms  . First , preferences among the contexts are dynamically computed based on the facts and assumptions within each context  . The preference provides a measure of the plausibility of a context  . 
The currently most preferable context contains a currently recognized plan  . Secondly , changing the most plausible context among mutually exclusive contexts within a dialogue is formally treated as belief revision of a plan -recognizing agent  . However , in some dialogues , many alternatives may have very similar preference values  . In this situation , one may wish to obtain additional information , allowing one to be more certain about committing to the preferable context  . A criterion for detecting such a critical situation based on the preference measures for mutually exclusive contexts is being explored  . The module also maintains the topic of the current dialogue and can handle anaphora  ( reference of pronouns ) and ellipsis ( omission of subjects )  . 
Response generation . This module generates a response by using domain knowledge  ( database ) and text templates ( typical patterns of utterances )  . It selects appropriate templates and combines them to construct a response that satisfies the speaker's request  . 
In our prototype system , the method used to comprehend speech is a specific combination of specific types of knowledge sources with a rather fixed information flow  , preventing flexible interaction between them . A new method that enables flexible control of omni-directional information flow in a very context-sensitive fashion has been announced\[ Nagao et al  ,  19931 . Its architecture is based on dynamical constraint \[ Hasida et al  ,   19931 which defines a fine classification based on the dimensions of satisfaction and the violation of constraints  . A constraint is represented in terms of a clausal ogic program  . A finegrained declarative semantics i defined for this constraint by measuring the degree of violation in terms of real-valued potential energy  . A field of force arises along the gradient of this energy  , inferences being controlled on the basis of the dynamics  . This allows us to design combinatorial behaviors under declarative semantics with intractable computational complexity  . Our forthcoming system can , therefore , concentrate on its computational resources according to a dynamic focal point that is important ospeech processing with broad by -pothesis pace  , and apply every kind of constraint , from phonetic to pragmatic , at the same time . 
Correspondence between
Conversational Situations and Facial

The speech dialogue subsystem recognizes a number of typical conversational situations that are important odialogues  . We associate these situations with an appropriate facial display  ( s )  . For example , in situations where speech input is not recognized or where it is syntactically invalid  , the listener comment display " Not confident " is displayed  . If the speaker's request exceeds the range of the system's domain knowledge  , then the system displays a facials hrug and replies " I cannot answer such a question  . " The relationships between conversational situations and facial displays are listed in Table  2  . 
Example Dialogue
Here is an example of a possible dialogue with the system  1  . Un : indicates user speech inputs , Sn : indicates voice responses delivered by the system to the user  . Terms enclosed within square brackets illustrate the types of facial displays introduced in previou section  . " Continuing " means that the system facial expression remains the same  . 
UI : Hello.
SI:\]Attend and BOStory\]Hi . This is Sony Computer Science Laboratory . 
S 2: \[ Continuing \] I can answer ally question about computer-related products  . 
U2: uh ...
$3:\[Not Confident \] I begy our pard on.
U3: I want to know about a personal (: ( unlmter.
$ 4: \[Question \] Do you want to know about a Sony personal computer ? 
U4: No , I don't.
$5:\[Shrug\]I cannot answer such a question.
US : Please tell me about a Sony personal computer . 
$ 6: \[BOStory\]Sony personal computer " Quar-ter L " is a standard IBM comI  ) a tible note book-style personal computer . 
U 6: What can I do with it ? $7: \[BOStory\]You can use all IBMPC software . 
$8:\[ Continuing \] For example , you can use a word processor , and a spread sheet . 
UT : Can I use UNIX with it ? $9: \[BOStory\]If you want to use UNIX , 1 Actually , the system accepts and speaks only Japanese . The example is a translation . 

Table 2: Relation between Conversational Situations and Facial Displays 
CONVERSATION ALSITUATION
Recognition failure
Syntactically invalid utterance
Many recognition cmldidates with close scores
Beginning of a dialogue
Introduction to a topic
Shift " to ' another topic
Clarification dialogue " Underline a remark
Answer " Yes "
Answer " No "
Out of the domain
Answer " Yes " With emphasis
Violation of pragmatic constraints
Reply to " Thmlks "
FACIALDISPLAY(S )
Not Confident ( Listener comment display " Not confident " ) 

Mod Confident ( Listener comment display " Moderately confident " ) Attend ( Listener comment display " Indication of attendance "  ) BOStory ( Syntactic display " Beginning of a story " ) EOStory ( Syntactic display " End of a story " ) and BOStory Question ( Syntactic display " Question mark " ) Underliner ( Syntactic display " Underliner " ) 
Speaker No ( Speaker display " No ")
Shrug ( Speaker display " Facials hrug ")
Speaker Yes and Enlphasizer ( Syntactic display " Emphasizer " ) In credulity ( Listener comment display " In credulity " ) Listener Yes ( Listener comment display " Yes " ) and
Smile ( Complementary display " Smile " )   $10: \[ Underliner \] I recommend you get a work -station  . 
U8: Tell me about a work station.
S l1: \[ EOStory and BOStory\]Sonywork station " NEWS " is a high-performance laptop workstation  . 
S 12: \ [ Continuing \] Its CPU is an R3081 RISC processor , and its processing speed of 37 MIPS is the fastest in this class . 
U9: Is it large ?
SlO:\[Speaker No and Emphasizer \] No , it isn't . 
Sl1:\[BOStory\]"NEWS " is 32 . 4 cmin width , 36 . 4cm indepth , and 6 . 9 cm in height . 
U 10: Is it light ? 812: \[ Speaker Yes and Emphasizer \] Yes , it is . 
S13:\[BOStory\]The weight of " NEWS " is 4 . 5kg . 
Ull : How much ?
S14:\[BOStory\]"NEWS " costs 700,000 yen.
U 12: What does the personal computer cost ? S15: \[EOStory and BOStory\]"QuarterL " costs 398  , 000 yen . 
U13: Thank you.
S16:\[Listener Yes and Smile\]You are welcome.
S17:\[Continuing\]It's my pleasure.
U2 is an example of noisy inputs . The system could not recognize the expression and displayed the facial backchannel Not Confident and replied " I begy our pard on  . " In U3 , there is missing information about personal computer maker  . So , the system enters a clarification dialogue $4 , showing the Question display . In this case , the system tried to drive the user into the dom Mn with which the system is familiar  . However , the user refused to agree with the system by utterance  U4  , then the system revealed its discouragement by showing a facials hrug  . In US , the user changes the topic , by asking for workstation information . The system recognizes this by comparison with the prior topic  ( i . e . , personal computers ) . Therefore , in response to question Sll , the system displays EOS tory and subsequently BOStory to indicate the shift to a different opic  . The system also manages the topic structure so that it can handle anaphor and ellipsis in utterances such as ug  , UIO , and Ull . 
Experimental Results
To examine the effect of facial displays on the interaction between humans and computers  , experiments were performed using the prototype system  . The system was tested on 32 volunteer subjects . Two experiments were prepared . In one experiment , called F , the subjects held a conversation with the system , which used facial displays to reinforce its response  . In the other experiment , called N , the subjects held a conversation with the system , which answered using short phrases instead of facial displays  . The short phrases were two-or three-word sentences that described the corresponding facial displays  . For example , instead of the " Not confident " display , it simply displayed the words " I am not confident  . " The subjects were divided into two groups , FN and NF . As the names indicate , the subjects in the FN group were first subjected to experiment F and then N  . The subjects in the NF group were first subjected to N and then F  . In both experiments , the subjects were assigned the goal of en -computer products  . In each experiment , he subjects were requested to complete the conversation within  10 minutes . During the experiments , the number of occurrences of each facial display was counted  . The conversation content was also evaluated based on how many topics a subject covered intentionally  . The degree of task achievement reflects how it is preferable to obtain a greater number of visit more topics  , and take the least amount of time possible . According to the frequencies of appeared facial displays and the conversational scores  , the conversations that occurred during the experiments can be classified into two types  . The first is " smooth conversation " in which the score is relatively high and the displays " Moderately confident  , " " Beginning of a story , " and " Indication of attendance " appear most often  . The second is " dull conversation , " characterized by a lower score and in which the displays " Neutral " and " Not confident " appear more frequently  . 
The results are summarized as follows . The details of the experiments were presented in another paper \[ Takeuchi and Nagao  ,  1993\] . 
1 . The first experiments of the two groups are compared  . Conversation using facial displays is clearly more successful  ( classified as smooth conversation ) than that using short phrases . We can therefore conclude that facial displays help conversation i the case of initial contact  . 
2 . The overall results for both groups are compared . Considering that the only difference between the two groups is the order in which the experiments were conducted  , we can conclude that early interaction with facial displays contributes to success in the later interaction  . 
3 . The experiments using facial displays 1 e and those using short phrases N are compared . Contrary to our expectations , the result indicates that facial displays have little influence on successful conversation  . This means that the learning effect , occurring over the duration of the experiments , is equal in effect to the facial displays . However , we believe that the effect of the facial displays will overtake the learning effect once the qualities of speech recognition and facial animation have been improved  . 
The premature settings of the prototype system , and the strict restrictions imposed on the conversation inevitably detract from the potential advantages available from systems using communicative facial displays  . We believe that further elaboration of the system will greatly improve the results  . The subjects were relatively well-experienced in using computers  . Experiments with computer novices should also be done  . 
Concluding Remarks and Further

Our experiments showed that facial displays are helpful  , especially upon first contact with the system . It was also shown that early interaction with facial displays improve subsequent interaction  , even though the subsequent interaction does not use facial displays  . These results prove quantitatively that interfaces with facial displays help to break down the mental barrier that many users have toward computing systems  . 
As a future research direction , we plan to integrate more communication channels and modalities  . Among these , the prosodic information processing in speech recognition and speech synthesis are of special interest  , as well as the recognition of users ' gestures and facial displays  . Also , further work needs to be done on the design and implementation of the coordination of multiple communication modalities  . We believe that such coordination is an emergent phenomenon from the tight interaction between the system and its ever-changing environments  ( including humans and other interactive systems ) by means of situated actions and ( more deliberate ) cooperative actions . Precise control of multiple coordinated activities is not  , therefore , directly implementable . 
Only constraints or relationships among perception  , conversational situations , and action will be implementable . 
To date , conversation with computing systems has been over -regulated conversation  . This has been made necessary by communication being done through limited channels  , making it necessary to avoid information collision in the narrow channels  . Multiple chamlels reduce the necessity for conversational regulation  , allowing new styles of conversation to appear . A new style of conversation has smaller granularity  , is highly in-terruptible , and invokes more spontaneous utterances . Such conversation is ( : loser to our daily conversation with families and friends  , and this will further increase familiarity with computers  . 
Co-constructive conversation , that is less constrained by domMns or tasks , is one of our future goals . We are extending our conversational model to deal with a new style of humancomputer interaction called social interaction \[ Nagao and Takeuchi  ,   1994\] which includes co-constructive conversation . This style of conversation features a group of individu Ms where  , say , those individuals talk about the food theyate together in a restraurant a month ago  . There are no special roles ( like the chair person ) for the participants to play . They all have the same role . The conversation terminates only once all the participants are satisfied with the conclusion  . 

We are also interested in developing interactive characters and stories as an application for interactiventertainment  . We are now building a conversational , anthropomorphic computer character that we hope will entertain us with some pleasant stories  . 

The authors would like to thank Mario Tokoro and colleagues at Sony CSL for their encouragement and helpful advice  . We also extend our thanks to Nicole Chovil for her useful comments on a draft of this paper  , and Sat 0 ru Hayamizu , Katunobu Itou , and Steve Franks for their contributions to the implementation of the prototype system  . Spe-ciM thanks go to Keith Waters for granting permission to access his original animation system  . 
REFERENCES\[Bolt , 1980\] Richard A . Bolt .  1980 . Put-That-There : Voice and gesture at the graphics interface  . Computer Graphics , 14(3):262-270 . 
\[Chovil , 1991\] Nicole Chovil .  1991 . Discourse-oriented facial displays in conversation  . Research on Lan . 
guage and Social Interaction , 25:163-194.
\[Doneta L , 1991\] Abbe Don , Tim Oren , and Brenda Laurel .  1991 . Guides 3 . 0 . In Proceedings of ACM CHI'91: Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 447-448 . ACM Press . 
\[Ekmaal and Friesen , 1969\] Paul Ekman and Wallace V . Friesen .  1969 . The repertoire of nonverbal behavior : Categories  , origins , usages , and coding . 
Semiotics , 1:49-98.
\[Ekman and Friesen , 1978\] Paul Ekman and Wallace V . Friesen .  1978 . Facial Action Coding System . .
Consulting Psychologists Press , Palo Alto , California . 
\[Ekman and Friesen , 1984\] Paul Ekman and Wallace V . Friesen .  1984 . Unmasking the Face . Consulting Psychologists Press , Palo Alto , California . 
\[ Hasida et al , 1993\]K (3iti Hasida , Katashi Nagao , and Takashi Miyata .  1993 . Joint utterance : In-trasentential speaker/hearer switch as an emergent phenomenon  . In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( IJCAI-93 )  , pages 1193-1199 . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc . 
\[Itou et al , 1992\] Katunobu Itou , Satoruttay amizu , and Hozumi Tanaka .  1992 . Continuous speech recognition by context -dependent phonetic HMM and an efficient algorithm for finding Nbest sentence hypotheses  . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Acoustics  , Speech , and Signal Processing ( ICASSP-92) , pages 1 . 21-I . 24 . IEEE . 
\[Nagao and Takeuchi , 1994\] Katashi Nagao and Akikazu Takeuchi .  1994 . Social interaction : Multimodal conversation with social agents  . In Proceedings of the Twelfth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( AAAI-9~ )  . The MIT Press . 
\ [ Nagao et al , 1993\] Katashi Nagao , K Siti Hasida , and Takashi Miyata .  1993 . Understanding spoken naturala alguage with omni -directional information flow  . In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( IJCAI-93 )  , pages 1268-1274 . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc . 
\[Nagao , 1992\]Katashi Nagao .  1992 . A preferential constraint satisfaction technique for natural language analysis  . In Proceedings of the Tenth European Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( ECAI-92 )  , pages 523-527 . John Wiley & Sons . 
\[Nagao , 1993\] Katashi Nagao .  1993 . Abduction and dynamic preference in plan-based i a logue understanding  . In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( IJCAI-93 )  , pages 1186-1192 . Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers , Inc.
\[Neal et al , 1988 l Jeannette G . Neal , Zuzana Dobes , Keith E . Bettinger , and Jong S . Byoun .  1988 . Multimodal references in human computer dialogue . In Proceedings of the Seventh National Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( AAAI-88 ) ~ pages 819-823 . 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc.
\[Oviatt et al , 1993\] Sharon L . Oviatt , Philip R . Cohen , and Michelle Wang .  1993 . Reducing linguistic variability in speech and handwriting through selection of presentation format  . In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Spoken Dialogue  ( ISSD-93 )  , pages 227-230 . Waseda University,
Tokyo , Japan.
\[Shneiderman , 1983\] Ben Shneiderman .  1983 . Direct manipulation : A step beyond programming languages  . IEEE Computer , 16:57-69 . 
\[Stock , 1991\] Oliviero Stock .  1991 . Natural language and exploration of an information space : the AL-FRESCO interactive system  . In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( IJCAI-91 )  , pages 972-978 . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc . 
\[Suchman , 1987\] Lucy Suchman .  1987 . Plans and Situated Actions . Cambridge University Press . 
\[ Takeuchi and Franks , 1992\]Akikazu Takeuchi and Steve Franks .  1992 . Arapid face construction lab . 
Technical Report SCSL-TR-92-010 , Sony Computer Science Laboratory Inc . , Tokyo , Japan . 
\[ Takeuchi and Nagao , 1993\] Akikazu Takeuchi and Katashi Nagao .  1993 . Communicative facial displays as a new conversational modality  . In Proceedings of ACM/IFIP INTERCHI'93: Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 187-193 . ACM Press . 
\[ Waters , 1987\]Keith Waters .  1987 . A muscle model for animating three-dimension alf cial expression  . 
Computer Graphics , 21(4):17-24.

