ANEMPIRICAL MODEL OF ACK NOWLED GMENT
FORSPOKEN-LANG UAGE SYSTEMS
David 6: . Novick and Stephen Sutton
Interactive Systems Group
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Oregon Graduate Institute
20000 N.W . Walker Rd.
P.O . Box 91000
Portland , OR 97291-1000
no vick ~ cse , ogi.edu

We refine and extend prior views of the description  , purposes , and contexts-of-use of acknowledgment acts through empirical examination of the use of acknowledgments in task-based conversation  . We distinguish three broad classes of acknowledgments  ( other --* ackn , self --* other --* ackn , and self+ackn ) and present a catalogue of 13 patterns within these classes that account for the specific uses of acknowledgment ithe corpus  . 
1 MOTIVATION
This study is motivated by the need for better dialogue models in spoken-language systems  ( SLSs )  . 
Dialogue models contribute directly to the interaction by providing inter-utterance oherence  . Flu-ent understanding and use of acknowledgments should improve spoken-language systems in at least the following ways : ? Preventing miscommunication  . Acknowledgments are an important device for establishing mutual knowledge and signaling comprehension  . 
Early detection and correction of cases of miscommunication and misunderstanding should prevent failure that would otherwise have been even more catastrophic  . 
? Improved naturalness . Acknowledgments are a prominent feature of human -human dialogue  . 
Supporting the use of acknowledgments for both the system and the user will emphasize the " naturalness " of interfaces and improve their utility  . 
? Dialogue control . Human scope with dialogue control ( e . g . , turntaking ) with seemingly little or no effort . Acknowledgments for man intricate relationship with dialogue control mechanisms  . 
Understanding these control mechanisms i central to the development and success of spoken language systems in order to " track " dialogues and determine appropriate system actions  . 
? Improved recognition . To the extent that a dialogue model can narrow the range of possible contexts for interpretation of a user's utterance  , a spoken-language system'speech recognition performance will be improved  ( Young et al ,  1989) . 
We seek to refine and extend prior views of the description  , purposes , and contexts-of-use of acknowledgment acts through empirical examination of the use of acknowledgments in task-based conversation  . In particular , we seek to describe systematically ( 1 ) the communicative value of an acknowledgment and ( 2 ) the circumstances of its use . The scope of our inquiry involves spoken interaction  . We present a catalogue of types of acknowledgment  . This catalogue is based on a process model of acknowledgment that explains instances of these acts in a corpus of task-based conversations  . 
2 RELATED WORK
Clark and Schaefer ( 1989 ) suggested that acknowledgments are an important component of a larger framework through which communicating parties provide evidence of understanding  . Conversants have a range of means , which vary with respect to strength , for indicating acceptance of a presentation . These include continued attention , initiation of the next relevant contribution , acknowledgment , demonstration , and display . 
Thus acknowledgments are common linguistic devices used to provide feedback  . Broadly speaking , acknowledgments are responsive acts . 1 That is , they are usually uttered in ( possibly partial ) response to a production by another speaker ; acknowledgment acts express beliefs and intentions of one conversant with respect othe mutuality of prior exchanges involving some other conversant  . 
The intended per locutionary effect of an acknowledgment act is generally the perception of mutu-ality of some belief  . 
1A notable exception is the self-acknowledgment which will be discussed shortly edgments has been most readily characterized in terms of attention  , understanding and acceptance on the recipient's be half  ( Kendon , 1967; Schegloff ,  1982) . In addition , it has been suggested that they serve to facilitate active participation in dialogues and promote " smooth " conversations  ( Duncan and Fiske ,  1987) . 
Schegloff ( 1982 ) described two main types of acknowledgment : continuers and assessments  . 
Continuers , such as " u h h u h , "" quite , " and " I see , " act as bridges between units . Conversants use acknowledgments as continuers to signal continued attention and to display the recipient's understanding that the speaker is in an extended turn that is not yet complete  . Moreover , continuers indicate the turning down of an opportunity to undertake a repair subdialogue regarding the previous utterance or to initiate a new turn  . Assessment s--such as " oh wow " and " gosh , really ?"-- are essentially an elaboration on continuers  . That is , they occur in much the same environment and have similar properties to continuers  , but in addition express a brief assessment of the previous utterance  . 
Empirical analysis of conversations has indicated that the occurrence of acknowledgments is not arbitrary  . Acknowledgments mostly occurator near major grammatical boundaries  , which serve as transition-relevance places for turntaking  ( Sacks et al , 1974; Hopper ,  1992) . In particular , work by Orestrom ( 1983 ) and Goodwin ( 1986 ) suggested a tendency for continuers to overlap with the primary speaker's contribution  , in such a way that they serve as bridges between two turn-constructional units  . Assessments , on the other hand , are generally engineered without overlap . 
Good w in suggested that conversants make special efforts to prevent assessments from intruding into subsequent units  . That is , the speaker typically delays production of the subsequent unit until the recipient's assessment has been brought to completion  . 
Clearly , acknowledgments are an important device for providing evidence of understanding and for avoiding miscommunication between parties  . 
Just as next-relevant-contributions include the entire range of potential task or domain actions  , the task-based role of acknowledgments can be differentiated within their class as acceptances  . Beyond continuers and assessments , we will demonstrate that acknowledgments incorporate a larger set of conversational actions  , many of which relate to coherence of multi -utterance ontributions  . 
3 DIALOGUE ANALYSIS
In this section , we describe the task characteristics and the corpus used for this study  , present a theoretical model of acknowledgment acts in task-base dialogue  , and present an analysis of acknowledgment acts based on corpus material  . 
3.1 THEVEHICLEN AVIGATION
SYSTEMCORPUS
The corpus we analyzed was collected by USWEST Advanced Technologies in the domain of a vehicle navigation system  ( VNS )  . A VNS is intended to provide travel directions to motorists by cellular telephone : the system interacts with the caller to determine the caller 's identity  , current location and destination , and then gives driving directions a step at a time under the caller's control  . USWEST collected the dialogues through a Wizard -of-Oz experiment  ( Brunner et M . , 1992 ) in which the wizard was free to engage in linguistically unconstrained interaction in the VNS task  . 
Each of the 21 subjects performed three tasks in the VNS domain . As a whole , the corpus contained 2499 turns and 1107 acknowledgments . 
3.2 A TASK-BASED MODE LOF
ACK NOW LED GMENT ACTS
The generally accepted view of acknowledgments , as noted earlier , distinguishes between two classes--namely continuers and assessments  ( Schegloff ,  1982) . Indeed , there were many occurrences of continuers ( and a few assessments ) in the VNS corpus . However , our analysis suggests that acknowledgments perform functions beyond these two classes  . For instance , we observed several instances of acknowledgment being used at the beginning of a turn by the same speaker  . This contrasts with the notions of continuers and assessments which  , by definition , occur as unitary productions in the context of extended turns by another speaker  . Clearly , an acknowledgment occurring at the beginning of a turn is not serving as a prompt for the other speaker to continue  . 
To account for the evidence provided by the VNS corpus  , we propose to extend Schegloff's classification scheme into a task-based model of acknowledgment acts  . This model formalizes the meaning and usage characteristics of acknowledgments  , based On an analysis of what acknowledgments mean and when acknowledgments are used in the VNS dialogues  . 
A useful way of looking at the role of acknowledgments in the context of turns is to consider the basic structural context of exchanges  . We begin by reviewing the concept of an adjacency pair  ( Schegloff and Sacks ,  1973 ; Clark and Schae-consecutive utterances that have a canonical relationship  , such as question-answer and greeting-greeting . An acknowledgment can be produced as the second phase of an adjacency pair or following a complete adjacency pair  ; in each case , the utterance may contain multiple acceptances . Of course , an acknowledgment can be produced also as a single turn that does not relate to an adjacency pair  . Thus , based on exchange structure one can distinguish three broad structural classes of acknowledgments  :   2 ? Other-*ackn , where the acknowledgment forms the second phase of an adjacency pair  ; ? Sclf --* other --* ackn , where Self initiates an exchange , Other ( eventually ) completes the exchange , and Self the nutters an acknowledgment ; and ? Self?ackn , where Self includes an acknowledgment in an utterance outside of an adjacency pair  . 
In the other --* ackn class , the exchange is a basic adjacency pair ; Other's act will be composed of a single turn . In the self--*other-*ackn class , the exchange initiated and eventually acknowledged by Self may be composed of multiple turns  , with multiple utterances by both Self and Other . In the self ? ackn class , the acknowledgment occurs in a single , extended turn by Self that may contain multiple utterances  . 
3.3 A CATALO GUEOF
ACK NOW LED GMENT ACTS
INTASK-BASEDDIAL OGUE
In this section , we elaborate the structural classes of acknowledgment through a catalogue of patterns of speech acts that occur in each class  . 
This catalogue provides broad coverage of patterns typically encountered in task-oriente discourse  . 
These patterns describe the context of acknowledgments in terms of exchanges and are derived from utterances in the VNS corpus  . Each act in an exchange is represented in terms of speech act verbs based on the set described by Wierzbicka  ( 1987 )   . Table 1 summarizes the speech act patterns in the catalogue  . In the following sections , we will consider each of the structural classes in turn and provide examples of selected patterns from the VNS corpus  . We also consider embed-2The notation for structural class names indicates turns delimited by arrows  ( --* )  . Acts combined within a turn are joined with a plus  ( + ) symbol . Other and self refer to non-acknowledgment acs by the respective conversants  . " Self " refers to the party producing the acknowledgment  ; " Other " is the other party . 
ded exchanges , in which basic patterns are used to build more complex patterns  . 
3 . 3 . 1 Other - * Aekn Acknowledgments in the other-- * ackn class relate principally to the immediately antecedent utterance as opposed to the prior exchange  , which is covered by the self-*other-*ackn class . In Clark and Schae-fer's (1989) terms , Self's acknowledgment in the other-*ackn class serves as the acceptance phase for Other's presentation  . As listed in Table 1 , the canonical other --* ackn patterns axe in form --* ackn  , inform-*ackn+m request , request-*ackn ? in form , m direct-~ackn and preclose-*ackn . 3 In each of these cases , the first turn is by Other and the second turn is Self's acknowledgment  . In some cases , Self's turn also extends to include other significant utterances  . We illustrate the other-*ackn class through examination of the inform-*ackn and inform-*ackn +m request patterns  . 
Inform-*Aekn
The inform-*aekn pattern covers cases where Other performs an informact and Self responds with an acknowledgment of that act  . In the following example 4 of an inform-*ackn , the wizard gives directions to the user , who acknowledges these directions . This is an example of an acknowledgment that Schegloff  ( 1982 ) would call a continuer . 
Example 1 ( U6 . 3 . 1) 5 (1 . 1) Wizard : On Evans , you need to turn left and head West for approximately three quarters of a mile to Clermont  . 
(1.2) User : Okay.
(1 . 3) Wizard : And , urn , on Clermont you turn left , heading South for about two blocks to I liff . 
Here , the " okay " at turn 1 . 2 indicates the user's acceptance of the wizaxd's utterance  . That is , the acknowledgment implies that the user understood information given by the wizard--more emphatically than a simple next-relevant -contribution response  . Use of the acknowledg-3The m request and redirect acts are forms of meta-act in which the speaker initiates a clarification subdi-alogue or other w is explicitly addresses the control of the conversation  ; rare quest and redirect are extensions of Wierzbicka's  ( 1987 ) speech actategories following
Novick's (1988) meta-act analysis.
4In the examples , the acknowledgment of principal interest is highlighted  . 
~ All examples are extracted from a corpus of telephone dialogues from a task-oriented " Wizard -of-Oz " protocol collection study described in Section  3  . 1 . The examples in this paper are notated with the corpus dialogue reference number and each turn is numbered for purposes of reference  . 

Other--~Ackn\[Self--~Other--~AcknSelf ? Ackninform ~ ackninform --* ackn-bm request request- -* ackn+informm direct-*ackn preclose--*ackninform ~ackn-*ackn request --* in form --- ~ acknm request-- * inform--~acknm direct--~ackn--*ackninform+ackn + informmre quest+acknm direct+ackn Table  1: A Summary of Speech-Act Patterns for Structural Classes of Acknowledgmentment would be strong evidence of understanding in Clark and Schaefer ' s  ( 1989 ) terms . An important point to stress here is that the wizard cannot rely on the user necessarily having received the information that was actually conveyed or formed the intended interpretation  . Rather , the wizar disleft with the user's response indicating that the user was apparently satisfied with the wizard's original presentation  . 
Inform --* Ackn+M Request
The inform --* ackn+m request class represents a significant functional variation on the inform -- ~ ackn class just considered  . It covers cases where Other performs an inform act  , Self responds with an acknowledgment of that act and then goes on to seek clarification of the content of the informact  . Requests for clarification are kinds of meta-act because they are concerned with aspects of dialogue control rather than the task itself  . That is , requests for clarification are concerned with the specifics of old information rather than seeking to elicit largely new information -- unliker quest -informacts  . 
Example 2 ( U4 . 3 . 1) (2 . 1) Wizard : Okay . Then you want to go north on Speer Boulevard for one and one half miles to Alcott Street  . 
(2.1) User : Okay . I want to go right on
Speer ? (2.2) Wizard : It will be a left.
In this example , the repair is a potential request for specification  ( Lloyd ,  1992) . That is , the user's clarification at 2 . 2  ( " I want to go right on Speer ?" ) focuses on information which was missing from the surface structure of the original informact but which is potentially available -- namely " right " instead of " north  . " 3 . 3 . 2 Self--~Other---~Ackn Acknowledgments in the self --~other--*ackn class relate to the previous exchange  , rather than just the previous utterance . Broadly speaking , they express the current state of the dialogue in addition to embody-ing the functionality of other -- ~ acknacknowledgments  . That is , they explicitly mark the completion of the antecedent exchange and indicate that the dialogue will either enter a new exchange or resume an existing exchange  . Furthermore , self--~other--~acknacknowledgments signal understanding and acceptance of both the previous exchange and the previous utterance  . The canonical patterns of the self--*other --* ackn class  , as listed in Table 1 , include in form --* ackn---~ackn , request-*inform-~ackn , m request -* in form -- ~ ackn and m direct--~ackn-- * ackn  . We illustrate the self--*other--~ackn class through examination of the request -~ inform --  , a ckn pattern . 
Request--*Inform--~Aekn
The request--~inform --* acknlass covers cases where Self requests an informact of Other  . Other then performs that informact and Self acknowledges  . Note that the acknowledgment it his case follows a completed request-in form adjacency pair  . 
Earlier , we mentioned that question-answer adjacency pairs can be regarded as special cases of request -inform adjacency pairs  ( Searle ,  1969) . In the following example , the wizard requests the user's start location . The user satisfies this request by communicating the desired information and the wizard then acknowledges  . Here the acknowledgment a 3 . 3 serves to indicate acceptance ( that is , receipt , understanding and agreement ) of the user's informact and is a signal that the request initiated by the wizar dat  3  . 1 has been satisfied and thus the exchange is complete  . 
Example 3 ( U2 . 1 . 1) (3 . 1) Wizard : Okay and uh , what's your starting location ? (3 . 2) User:I'mat 36th and Sheridan at the

(3.3) Wizard : Okay , one moment please.
3 . 3 . 3 Self - bAckn Self-acknowledgments occur when Self issues an acknowledgment following some action  ( either verbal or physical ) performed by Self . These are not responsive acts , unlike other acknowledgment usages considered ; however , they are still closely tied with the idea of establishing mutual beliefs  . The canonical patterns , asm request+ackn , and m direct + ackn . We illustrate the self+ackn class through examination of the inform + ackn + in form pattern  . 

In this pattern , Selfuses an acknowledgment in the middle of an extended turn  . Consider the following example :
Example 4 ( U5 . 3 . 1) (4 . 1) Wizard : All right , urn , the first thing you need to do is go South on Logan Street for one and a half miles to Evans Avenue  . 
Then turn left on Evans Avenue and go one and a quarter miles to South Josephine Street  . Okay , then you'll turn left on South Josephine Street . Nineteen Forty South Jose phine is within the first block  . 
This particular self-acknowledgment is very similar to a continuer--indeed it may be regarded as a self-continuer  . The wizard's acknowledgment in this example represents a sort of temporizing  , a chance for the wizard to " catch his mental breath  . " For the user , this sort of " Okay " thus signals that the wizard intends to continue his turn  . This is functionally distinct from a meta-request of the form " Okay ?" because there is norising intonation and the wizard does not wait for a response  . 
In fact , use of a self-acknowledgment a the end of a turn would be peculiar  . 
3 . 3 . 4 Embedded Exchanges We noted earlier that basic patterns can used to build more complex patterns  . This can lead potentially to variations in patterns of acknowledgments  . In particular , it is possible to observe cascades of acknowledgments a nested exchanges are " popped " one by one  . Simple acts may be replaced by more complex exchanges  , o that an informact may be replaced by an exchange that accomplishes an inform via a sequence of informs  , clarifications and acknowledgments . In this section we will consider one of the variations encountered in the VNS corpus  ; where an nform ---* ackn--~ackn replaces the informact in an inform --* ackn sequence  . In the following example , there are three successive acknowledgment acts . The first acknowledgment at 5 . 2 is accompanied by a verbatim response by the user  . It is the second phase of the inform --* ackn adjacency pair  , indicating understanding and acceptance of the wizard's informact in which a direction was clarified  . The second acknowledgment , issued by the wizard at 5 . 3 , marks the completion of the inform --* ackn exchange  . That is , the wizard recognizes that it is his or her turn yet has nothing more to add  , so indicates passing up the turn with an acknowledgment  . The third acknowledgment , issued by the user at 5 . 4 , is associated with the user recognizing that the wizard has finished clarifying directions  ; the user thus acknowledges this embedded in form act  . The user then indicate satisfaction and approval of the wizard's directions with the assessment " Sounds good  . "
Example 5 ( U6 . 2 . 1) (5 . 1) Wizard : Okay , it was , urn , on Evansit's three and three quartermiles to Jas-mine  . 
(5.2) User : Three , okay.
(5.3) Wizard : Okay.
(5.4) User : All right , sounds good.
4 CONCLUSION
Why is a conversation-analytic study of acknowledgment useful in the development of spoken language systems ? SLSs developers face the dual challenges of creating both domain-based dialogues and repair-oriente dialogues  . Lacking systematic mechanisms for natural maintenance of mutuality  , SLSs tend to rely on domain structures -- producing rathers to lid interaction  . The most advanced systems incorporate repair acts  , but are unable to relate the repairs to the main dialogue structures in a natural way  . The acknowledgment model described in this paper provides a systematic method of maintaining mutu -ality of knowledge for both domain and control information  . 
More concretely , using this model SLSs can account for acknowledgments by both user and system  . The corpus evidence suggests that users ' utterances in unconstraine dialogues contain many instances of acknowledgment  . In interpreting these utterances , identification of the appropriate acknowledgment function affects the state of the dialogue model and thus plays an important role in determining an appropriate response by the system  . In producing such responses , the acknowledgment model can provide structurally appropriate utterances  . The fundamental idea is to produce contextually appropriate acknowledgments that advances the dialogues eamlessly with respect to both domain and control functions  . That is , the system needs to give the right signals at the right time  . 
The evidence of the US WEST VNS corpus suggests that understanding and production of domain and control utterances are closely linked  ; they thus cannot be implemented as independent mechanisms in an SLS  . For example , giving directions involves presenting large amounts of information for which an installment approach often proved effective  . Typically the user was given the opportunity to choose the style of presentation of choice of presentation method by the conversants was a dynamic one : in cases where it became apparent hat the user was experiencing difficulties with either hearing or understanding directions  , the wizard often resorted to the step-by-step approach  . This form of repair changed the process of interaction so that the comprehension feach installment was verified before proceeding with the next  . 
The conversants in the VNS corpus displayed relatively higherates of use of acknowledgment i repair situations or when unplanned events arose  ( e . g . , the user had got ten lost ) . Intuitively , people make more effort to establish mutual knowledge when it is apparent hat miscommunication has occurred than at other times  ; their certainty criterion for mutuality ( Clark and Marshall ,  1981 ) is raised as a result of the need for repair . This suggests that a facility for acknowledgment is an important element in the development of robust SLSs because use of acknowledgment is most critical precisely when the conversation has gone awry  . 
We are currently developing a computational model of acknowledgment based on the empirical work presented in this paper  . This model is intended for integration into a SLS where it will serve both to predict when acknowledgments are appropriate from the system and when to expect acknowledgments from the user  . Briefly , determining the applicability of an acknowledgment involves interpreting exchanges in terms of speech acts and then mapping these speech act patterns onto the acknowledgment classes described  . This , we believe , will facilitate improved SLS robustness through achievement of a greater degree of mutual understanding and provide a more natural and intuitive interaction  . The utility and implementation of the empirical model will be the focus of a later paper  . 
5 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by US WEST Advanced Technologies and the Oregon Advanced Computing Institute  . 
References
H . Brunner , G . Whittemore , K . Ferrara , and
J . Hsu .  1992 . An assessment of writ-ten/interactive dialogue for information retrieval applications  . Human Computer Interaction , 7:197-249 . 
H . H . Clark and C . R . Marshall .  1981 . Definite reference and mutual knowledge . In A . K . 
Joshi , B . L . Webber , and I . A . Sag , editors , Elements of discourse understanding , pages 10-63 . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 
H . H . Clark and E . F . Schaefer .  1989 . Contributing to discourse . Cognitive Science , 13:259-294 . 
S . Duncan and D . W . Fiske .  1987 . Face-to-face interaction : Research methods and theory  . Wiley , New York . 
C . Goodwin .  1986 . Between and within : Alternative sequential treatments of continuers and assessments  . Human Studies , 9:205-217 . 
R . Hopper .  1992 . Telephone conversations . University of Indiana , Bloomington , IN . 
A . Kendon .  1967 . Some functions of gaze in social interaction . Acta Psychologica , 26:22-63 . 
P . Lloyd .  1992 . The role of clarification requests in children's communication froute directions by telephone  . Discourse Processes , 15:357-374 . 
D . G . Novick .  1988 . Control of mixed-initiative discourse through meta-locutionary acts : A computational model  . Doctoral dissertation , Department of Computer Science and Information Science  , University of Oregon , December . 
B . Orestrom .  1983 . Turn-taking in english conversation . Gleerup , Lund , Sweden . 
H . Sacks , E . Schegloff , and G . Jefferson .  1974 . 
A simplest systematics for the organization of turntaking in conversation  . Language , 50:696-735 . 
E . A . Schegloff and H . Sacks .  1973 . Opening up closings . Semiotica , 8:289-327 . 
E . A . Schegloff .  1982 . Discourse as an interactional achievement : Some uses of ' uh huh ' and other things that come between sentences  . In D . Tannen , editor , Analyzing Discourse : Text and Talk , pages 71-93 . Georgetown University
Press , Washington , D.C.
J . R . Searle .  1969 . Speech acts : An essay in the philosophy of language  . Cambridge University
Press , Cambridge.
A . Wierzbicka .  1987 . English speech act verbs : A semantic dictionary . Academic Press , Sydney,

S . Young , A . Hauptmann , W . Ward , E . Smith , and P . Werner .  1989 . High level knowledge sources in usable speech recognition systems  . 
Communications of the ACM , 32(2):183-194.

