A COMPUTATIONAL VIEWOFTHECOGNITIVE
SEMANTICS OF SPATIAL PREPOSITIONS *
Patrick Olivier
Centre for Intelligent Systems
University of Wales

Dyfed , SY 233 DB , UK
Internet : plo~aber.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper outlines the linguistic semanticom -mitments underlying an application which automatically constructs depictions of verbal spatial descriptions  . Our approach draws on the ideational view of linguistic semantics developed by Ronald Langacker in his theory of Cognitive Grammar  , and the conceptual representation fphysical objects from the two-level semantics of Bierwisch and Lang  . In particular the dimensions of the process of convent wn a limagery are used as a metric for the design of our own conceptual representation  . 

An increased interest in ttle semantics of spatial language has accompanied the recentrise in popularity of cognitive linguistics  ( see\[Rudzka-Ostyn1988\] )  , yet computational approaches are thin on the ground  . This can in part be accounted for by the rather descriptive and unformalized nature of the theories developed  , but is more likely due to the adoption of an ideational view of linguistic meaning which  , it seems , is an anathemato computational linguists . In this paper we take a serious , if informal , look at Ronald Langacker's theory of Cognitive Grammar\[  Langacker1987\]  , \[Langacker 1988a\] , \[Langacker 1988b\] , more specifically its commitment to conceptualization ad the use of conventional imagery  . 
The first section of this paper introduces the semantics of projective prepositions  ( eg . " infront of " , " behind " , " left of " , " right of ") , illustrating that these seemingly simple predicates are suprisingly complex and ambiguous  . In the light of this discovery the following sections consider Lan-gacker's view of linguistic meaning  , and the design of a conceptual representation for spatial prepositions motivated by the consideration f the various * Thi ~ research wa ~ kindly funded by the Mat-sush it a Electric Industrial Company Limited  . 
Junichi Tsujii
Centre for Computational Linguistics
University of ~ anchester
Institute of Science and Technology,
Manchester , M601 QD , UK
Internet : tsujii ~ ccl . umist . ac . uk dimensions of conventional imagery . The representation has been implemented for English spatial descriptions and after demonstrating its utility for the automatic depiction of verbal descriptions  , we finally contrast our approach against previous attenapts  . 
THESEM ANTICSOF
PROJECTIVE PREPOSITIONS
In this section we characterize the components of the spatial meaning of projective prepositions that have motivated our interest in cognitive linguistic approaches  . Throughout , the decoding problem , that is , generating adequate meanings for a locative x pressionia particular situation  , is our benchmark for representational adequacy . 
The spatial meaning Of a projective prepositional predication  ( eg . " the chair is in front of the desk " ) can include : a constraint on the proximity of the located  ( LO )   ( eg . " the chair ") and reference objects ( RO ) ( eg . " the desk ") ; a directional constraint on the LO relative to the RO  ; and a relative orientation between the speaker , LO and RO . Constraints are of an intrinsically fuzzy nature such that different relative positions and orientations of the speaker  , RO and LO satisfy the predication to different degrees  , and combinations of constraints on the RO and LO originating from different predications must be readily accommodated  . 
PROXIMITY CONSTRAINTS
Projective prepositions necessarily place a constraint on the proximity of the located object and the reference object  . Predication such as " the chair is in front of the desk " constrain the " desk " and " chair "  , to some degree , to be proximal to each other . Conversely projective prepositions such as " away from " predicate a distal relationship between the located and reference object  . The degree of the proximity expressed in any projective prepositional predication varies accord-INTRINSIC In the intrinsic case the reference frame is centered at the  R0 and adopts the intrinsic orientations of the RO . Thus a LO is deemed to be " in front of " the RO under  . an intrinsic reading if it is located in the direction defined by the vector that is the half -plane of the front of the  R0  . 
In figure 1 stool number I is intrinsically " in front of the desk "  . 
DEICTIC The reference frame for a deictic interpretation is centered at the speaker and adopts the speaker's orientation  ; deictic readings can be invoked explicitly with qualifications such as " from where we are standing "  ; when the RO has no intrinsic or extrinsic sideness relating to the preposition used  ; or when intrinsic or extrinsic interpretations are ruled out on other grounds  ( eg . 
the impossibility of spatially arranging the objects as required by the interpretation  )  . In figure 1 stool number 2 is deictically " in front of the desk " . 
Figure 1: Intrinsic , deictic and extrinsic uses of " in front off ' ing to a number of considerations including : the spatial context  ( the spatial extent and content of the scene described  )  ; and the absolute and relative sizes of the LO and RO  ( eg . a car that is " left of " alorry is typically less proximal than an apple and orange similarly described  )  . 
DIRECTION ALCONSTRAINTS
In addition to the constraint on the proximity of the LO and RO  , projective prepositions place a constraint on the position of the LO relative to a particular side of the RO  . In the case of the intrinsic interpretation ( see section ) of a predication such as " thestool is in front of the desk "  , the " stool " is located in some region of the space defined by the half-plane that is the intrinsic front of the " desk "  . Intuitively , the closer the " stool " is to the region of space defined by the projection of the desk's dimensions into this space  , the more the spatial arrangement conforms to the prototypical interpretation of the predication  . 
REFERENCE FRAMES
Intrinsic , deictic and extrinsic interpretations of projective prepositions differ according to the reference frame with respect o which the directional constraint is characterized\[  Retz-Schmidt1988\]  . 
Figure 1 is an example of a scene that might give rise to predications which invoke each of these reference frames  . 
EXTRINSICE xtrinsic readings can occur when the RO has no intrinsic sides relating to the locative preposition  ( eg . for objects such as trees ) but is in close proximity to another object that is strongly sided  ( eg . such as a house ) ; in which case the reference frame capturing the intrinsic orientations of the stronger sided object can be adopted by the RO  . Referring to figure 1 the chair is extrinsically " in front of stool number  3"  ; here the stool has inherited an extrinsic front from the right wall  . 
INTERACTING CONSTRAINTS
Typically an object is located with respecto more than one RO by the means of multiple spatial predications  . This places a requirement of on the meaning representation fspatial predications that they must capable of being easily combined  , to give rise to a cumulative meaning . 
COGNITIVE GRAMM ARAND
LINGUISTIC MEANING
Cognitive granlmar is comprised of five basic claims as to the composition of linguistic meaning  , following \[ Langacker 1988b \] these are : 1 . Meaning reduces to conceptualization . 
2 . Polysemy is the norm and can be adequately accommodated by representing the meaning a lexical item as a network of senses related by categorizing relationships of schematicity or extension  . 
3 . Semantic structures are characterized relative to cognitive domains  . Domains are hierarchically where the characterization fa concept at one level can draw on lower level concepts  . While there need not necessarily be any conceptual primitives  , the lowest level domains are termed basic domains and include our experience of time  , space , color etc . 
4 . A semantic structure derives its value through the imposition of a " profile " upona " base "  . 
5 . Semantic structures incorporate conventional " imagery "  , our ability to construe the same informational content in different ways  . 
That meaning reduces to conceptualization ( thesis 1 )  , is characterized relative to cognitive domains ( thesis3 )  , and incorporates conventional imagery ( thesis5 ) runs in stark contras to the heavy emphasis placed on truth conditions and formalization by current computational linguistic approaches  . We have attempted to tackle the informality of this ideational view of meaning  , by addressing one particular basic cognitive domain  , that of oriented three-dimensional space , and implement a restricted version of Langacker's process of conceptualization by means of conventional imagery  . To verify the utility of the resulting conceptualization  , we use the interpretations of spatial expressions so generated  ( the resulting images )  , to automatically construct a depictions of the scene  . 
Theses 2 , that prototypes should replace traditional objective categories  , lies at the very heart of cognitive semantics\[ Taylor1989\]  , and though it is widely accepted as true for semantic and most other linguistic ategories  , prototype theory is not conducive to rigorous formalization and has consequently been ignored by mainstream computational linguistics  . Likewise our concern is with meaning variations that originate from different construals of the same information in the process of conventional imagery  ( thesis5 )  . 
IMAGERY ANDITS

This special technical use of imagery ( not to be confused with the psychological term meaning the formation and manipulation mental images  ) refers to " our amazing mentalability to " structure " or " construe "' a conceived situation in many alternate ways "\[  Langacker1988b  \] , as opposed to traditional semantic approaches whose concern is with informational content alone  . Thus " every conception reflects some particular construal of its content "  . Langacker identifiesix important dimensions of imagery  ; in our semantic analysis of spatial expressions we are interested in just three of these :  1  . level of specificity 2 . scale and scope of predication 3 . perspective The remainder of this section is a characterization of each of these dimensions and the consequences that their consideration has with respect to the design of a conceptual representation for spatial expressions  . 
REPRESENTING3DSPACE
The basic cognitive domain relative to which the spatial meaning of projective prepositions is characterized  , is structured three-dimensional space . 
In our system space is represented using an orthogonal axis system we refer to as the DCS  ( Domain Coordinate System )  . In the process of image construction conceptual objects will be constrained to locations described relative to the DCS  . The DCS mirrors the speaker's perceptual assignment of axes to a scene  , the x-axis extends from deictic left to deictic right  , the y-axis from deictic front to deictic back , and the z-axis extends vertically . 
LEVEL OF SPECIFICITY
The level of specificity of conventional imagery addresses the issue of the degree of detail with which an entity is characterized  . Specificity has already been mentioned in connection with the construction of the network of polysemous senses of a lexical item  ; on the other hand , concerning different lexical items , we can readily identify different spatial predications that are schematic with respect to each other  . Consider the sentences below . 
( a ) The chair is near the desk.
(b ) The chair is in front of the desk.
(c ) The chair is facing the desk.
Sentence ( a ) simply predicates proximity ;   ( b ) predicates both proximity and a positioning of the LO relative to a particular side of the RO I  ; lastly ( c ) predicates proximity and a relative positioning of the LO with respect to the RO  , with the additional anti-alignment of the fronl face normals of the two objects  . 
Schematic contrast dictates the minimum degree of detail we must maintain in our computational representation of the conceptual reference and located objects  . In sentences ( a ) the objects can be thought of as structure less points  ; in ( b ) the representation of the RO must incorporate the notion of sideness  ; and in ( c ) both the RO and LO are sided . We borrow Lang's conceptual representation of objects Z The issue of which side of the reference object the located object is positioned with respect to is addressed as a consequence of the perspective dimension of conventional imagery within Bierwisch's and Lang's the two-level semantics\[Bierwisch and  Lang1989\]  . The object schema for a desk is : a maxb vert c a crossali-left bli-bottomeli-front  a2 i-right b2 i-top c2 i-back In this first schema a , b and ? label three orthogonal axes centered at the object  , each of which can be instantiated by one or more dimensional assignment parameters  ( DAPs ) 2 ; al-a2 , bl-b2 and c1-?2 are corresponding half-axes . Each half axis is labelled either nilor with an intrinsic side  ( eg . i-fronl;) . This representation is augmented with both a three-dimensional Cartesian coordinate which when assigned locates the conceptual schema relative to the DCS  ; and the values of the default extents for the object type along the axes a  , b and ? . 
Imagery implies an imager , that is , the image exists in and with respect cognitive world of the speaker  ( by default ) and this necessarily has important consequences . With respect to spatial language , issues pertaining to perspective , that is taking account of the imager , include the speaker's vantage point and orientation  . 
ORIENTATION
The interpretation of some spatial expressions i dependent on assumptions as to the speaker's orientation with respect to the objects in the scene  ( eg . whether A is " to the left of " B in a scene , is dependent on the orientation of the speaker /viewer  )  ; other expressions are orientation independent such as " above " and " below " which implicitly refer to the downward pull of gravity  ( although in space verticality is speaker dependent  )  . 
When an object schemata is characterized relative to the DCS it is both assigned a Cartesian position  ( as we show later )  , and its half-axes are assigned deictic sides according to their relative orientation with the observer  . For example if a desk is positioned " agains the left wall " as in figure  1 this would result an instantiated conceptual schema for the " desk " of : a maxb vert c a crossali-left bli-bottom cli-frontd-front d -bottomd-right  a2 i-right b2 i-top c2 i-backd-backdtopd-left 2DAPs are not of direct interest here although they are fundamental to the process of dimensional designation and and important where dimensional ~ signment might result in a reorientation of the conceptual object  ( eg . " the pole is high ") . 
He real is the intrinsic left side but the deictic front of the desk  . 
VANTAGE POINT
The speaker's vantage point is another factor that determines the interpretation of spatial expressions in a scene  . The notions of deictic and intrinsic interpretations of projective prepositions can be accounted for purely by recognizing that in each the speaker adopts a different vantage point  . 
For deictic interpretations the vantage point is the speaker's actual position  . The vantage point for intrinsic interpretations i the functionally relevant position with respect o a reference object  , for example , " left of the desk " under the intrinsic interpretation uses a vantage point that is directly in front of the desk  ( the typical configuration when a human uses a desk  )  . 
The meaning of a projective preposition is conceptually represented as a spatial constraint on the conceptual schema of the located object which extends out from a particular side of a reference object  , the precise nature of which we describe in the next subsection  . In our system the lexicalized constraint is of the form of a two place predicate : < zone proxX : sidsY > Where X is the reference object and Y the located object  . The parameter side depends on the preposition . Thus the schematicity we observed in section is explicitly represented :  ( a ) Visnear X . 
< zonsproxXY >
Proximity constraint between X and Y .
( b ) Y is in front of X .
< zone proxX : frontY >
Proximity and alignment of Y with front of X ( c ) Y is facing X . 
< zone proxX : fron~Y : back >
Proximity , alignment and specific " facing " oriem
SCOPE OF PREDICATION
Scope refers to exactly how much of a cognitive domain is included in the characterization  . Minimally , the scope of an image for " next to " must encompass at least the reference and subject objects and some region of space separating them  . We implement hespirit of this concept by realising the lexicalized constraint for a projective preposition as a potential field fixed at the reference object's position in the DCS  3  , The proximity and directional nature of the constraint < zone prox  .   . > is captured using a potential field P ~ , where : d ,  =  ( x-x0 )   ( 1 )   3This technique is borrowed from robot manipula-tor path-planning \ [  Khatib1986\] 
P~=P p . . . . ? + ed , .,~(3)
P"?~,~=2 ~ p.ox,~)(4)
Kay ., ~ d ~ (5) Pdir,~:2
Here the x-axis points direction of the half-axis of the particular side of the reference axis in the DCS  ; and in the case of " in front of " y is the perpendicular direction in the horizontal plane  ; ( x0 , y0 ) is the Cartesian coordinate of the reference object in the DCS  , and lower the value of Pt ~ for a location ( x , y ) for the located object the better the spatial constraint is satisfied  . The minimum for the field can be quickly computed using gradual approximation  \[3ramada et al1988\]  . The values of Kproz ~ . Lproz ' ~ r ' and Kdir, . ~ . are dependent on the located and reference objects and are set on the basis of scale considerations  ( e e )  . Multiple spatial predications over an object is simply accommodated within the potential field model by linear addition of component fields  . 
SCALE OF PREDICATION
The concept of the scale relates to the object dependency of the degree of proximity and directional constraint afforded by a preosition : where " X is left of Y "  , and X and Y are houses , then the meaning of this predication would contrast with its meaning if X and Y were pieces of fruit  . The concept of proximity and directional constraint predicated by " left of " is apparent in both cases  , what differs is the scale relative to which it is characterized  . 
Scale effects are realised in the mechanism by which the constants of the potential field are set  . 
For the potential field P ~ , the effect of the constants on the nature of the constraint are ::  . K . .o . , , ~ Proportional to range of the possible separations of X and Y that would still satisfy the predication  . 
2. Lpro ~, ~,
The default separation of X and Y .
Proportional to the range of directions that would still satisfy the predication  . 
Thus for a reference object that is a houseKp, . o ~:, ~, Lp, . o ~, ~, Kai, . ~ r must all be considerably greater than for a piece of fruit  . The precise values can only reasonably set as a result of some experimental investigation  , currently Kp~o ~ , t ~' and Lpro ~ , ~ are linearly dependent on the sum of the extents of the reference and subject objects in the direction of spatial alignment  ; and Kdi ~ , ~ . on the perpendicular extent of the reference object in the plane of the constraint  . 
GENERATING DEPICTIONS
After using gradual approximation to find the position of the minimum in the potential fields representing the spatial predications over a particular object  , this point can be regarded as a probable interpretation  . By tying each conceptual object to a graphical model  , and interpreting the DCS as the viewer's perceptual axis system  , conceptual interpretations can be rendered as scene depictions  . Figure 2 illustrates one depiction of the cumulative interpretation of the following verbal description  , in which all projective prepositions are viewed intrinsically  4  . 
" I am in a room . Against the left wall is a long desk . Against the backwall is a shortdesk . 
In front of the long desk is a chair . Another chair is to the left of the long desk . The chair in front of the desk is near the short desk  . "
OTHERAPPROACHESAND
CLOSING REMARKS
Nearly all the work in recent years on computing the meanings of spatial prepositions stem from the prototype semantics of either Herskovits\[  Herskovits1985\]  , \[ Herskovits 1986\] or Talmy\[Talmy 1983\] . Schirra\[Schirr and Stopp1993\] adopts Herskovits ' notion of a core meaning , and implements this as a typicality field . The ability to sum fields of different predications satisfies the compositionality requirement  . Yet representational poverty exists with respect to the spatial and perceptual characteristics of the objects  , as while directionality and proximity constraints are adequately captured for the intrinsic reference frame and set of objects  , variation in the degree of constraint ( for example , depending on the size of the reference object ) and the potential for ambiguity arising from interpretations with respect o different reference frames are not accounted for  . 
Underlying Kalita's work\[Kalit and Badler1991\] is a conceptualization of the space around a reference object as six  4Natural anguage sentences are parsed to three branch quantifiers using a prolog DCG grammar  , the logical predicates are the input to the cognitive semantic processor  , the resulting conceptual representations are converted to depictions in by the depiction module  . The cognitive semantic processor and the depiction module are implemented in Small talk /Objectworks 
In Dut\[
Figure 2: Computer generated depiction ' of a verbal description orthogonal rectangula ~ projected regions  ( based upon an enclosing cuboid idealization of the object  ) due to Douglas\[Douglas and Novick 1987\] . 
Using this model and following Talmy's work , the semantics of projective prepositions are lexicalized as geometric-relation schemas  . Reference frame an abiguity is not addressed ; directionality is too tightly restricted to one of the six rectangular regions  , and proximity constraint is left to the " underlying constraint satisfaction techniques and the use of a weight slot in the template for constraint representation "  . 
Within the framework of the LILOG project \[ Maienborn1991\] Ewald Lang implemented the two-level approach to the semantics of dimensional adjectives in which the perceptual and dimensional properties of objects are conceptually represented as object schemata \ [ Bierwisch and  Lang1989\]  . Further developed for projective spatial predications  , Lang's object schemata are capable of distinguishing deictic and intrinsic readings  , though without explicit reference to a quantitative space  ( i e . actual scenes and observers ) as in the case of Schirra and Kalita . 
Our system represents ~ first attempt , and very highly specialized implementation , f the conventional imagery process that is a component of the cognitive grammarian's view of linguistic semantics  . Its performance , in terms of generating all possible interpretations  , and the quality of the interpretations constitutes a significant advance on previous approaches  . 
References '\[ Bierwisch and Lang 1989\]
M Bierwisch and E Lang .  1989 . Dimensional Adjectives : Grammatical Structure and Conceptual Interpretation  . Springer-Verlag , Berlin Heidelberg New York . 
\[Douglas and Novick 1987\]
S Douglas and D Novick .  1987 . Consistency and variance in spatial reference . In Proceedings of the Ninth Annual Cognitive Science Society 
Meeting , pages 417-426.
\[ Herskovits1985\]A Herskovits .  1985 . Semantics and pragmatics of locative x pressions . Cognitive Science , 9:341-378 . 
\[ Herskovits 1986\]A Herskovits .  1986 . Language and spatial cognition -- an interdisciplinary study of the prepositions in English  . Cambridge
University Press , Cambridge ( UK).
\[Kalit and Badler1991\]J Kalita and B Badler.
1991. Interpreting prepositions physically . In
Proceedings AAAI-91, pages 105-110.
\[Khatib1986\]OK hatib .  1986 . Realtime obstacle avoidance for manipulators and modile robots  . 
The International Journal of Robotics Research ,  5(1):90-98 . 
\[Lang1993\]E Lang .  1993 . A two-level approach to projective prepositions . In CZelinsky-Wibbelt , editor , The semantics of prepositions : from mental processing to Natural Language processing  . Mouton de Gruyter , Berlin . 
\[ Langacker 1987\] RW Langacker .  1987 . Foundations of Cognitive Grammar , Volume I , Theoretical Prerequisites . Stanford University Press,

\[Langacker 1988a\]RW Langacker . 1988a . An overview of cognitive grammar . In B Rudzka-Ostyn , editor , Topics in Cognitive Linguistics , pages 3-48 . Benjamins , Amsterdam-

\[Langacker 1988b\]RW Langacker . 1988b . A view of linguistic semantics . In B Rudzkw-Ostyn , editor , Topics in Cognitive Linguistics , pages 49-90 . Benjamins , Amsterdam-Philadelphia . 
\[Maienborn1991\]JR Maienborn .  1991 . Processing spatial knowledge inlilog . IWBS Report 157, IBM Germany . 
\[Retz-Schmidt1988\]GRetz-Schmidt .  1988 . Various views on spatial prepositions . AI Magazine , 9(2):95-105 . 
\[ Rudzka-Ostyn1988\]B Rudzka-Ostyn , editor .  1988 . Topics in Cognitive Linguistics . 
Benjamins , Amsterdam-Philadelphia.
308\[Schirra and Stopp 1993\] , \] R3 Schirra and EStopp .  1993 . Ant lima--a listener model with mental images . In Proceedings of IJCAI , pages 175-180 . 
\[ TaJmy 1983\] L Talmy .  1983 . How language structures space . In HPick and LAcredolo , editors , Spatial Orientation : Theory , Research , and Application , pages 225-282 . Plenum Press , New

\[ Taylor 1989\] JR Taylor .  1989 . Linguistic categorization : prototypes in linguistic theory  . Oxford
University Press , Oxford.
\[ Yamada et a1 . 1988\]A Yamada , TNishida , and S Doshita .  1988 . Figuring out most plausible interpretation from spatial descriptions  . In Proceedings of the 1Pth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , pages 764-769 . 

