From Strings to Trees to Strings to Trees

Aravind K . Joshi
Dept . of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia PA 19104 Sentences are not just strings of words ( or are they ? )  , they have some ( hierarchical ) structure . This much is accepted by all grammar formalisms . But how much structure is needed ? The more the sentences are like strings the less the need for structure  . 
A certain amount of structure is necessary simply because a clause may embed another clause  , or one clause may attach to another clause or parts of it  . Leav-ing this need of structure aside , the question then is how much structure should a ( minimal ) clause have ? Grammar formalisms can differ significantly on this issue  . Minimal clauses can be just strings , or words linked by dependencies ( dependency trees )  , or with rich phrase structure trees , or with flat ( one level ) phrase structure trees ( almost strings ) and so on . How much hierarchical structure is needed for a minimal clause is still an open question  , that is being debated heat-edly . How are clauses put together ? Are these operations more like string manipulations  ( concatenation , insertion , or wrapping , for example ) or are they more like tree transformations ( generalized transformations of the early transformational grammars  , for example ) ? Curiously , the early transformational grammars , although clearly using tree transformations , actually formulated the transformations apseudo string-like operations ! More recent non -transformational grammars differ significantly with respect to their use of string rewriting or tree rewriting operations  . 
Grammar formalisms differ with respect to their stringinessor treeness  . Also during their evolution , they have gone back and forth between string-like and treelike representations  , often combining them in different ways . Theses wings are a reflection of the complex interplay between aspects of language structure such as constituency  , dependency , dominance , locality of predicates and their arguments , adjacency , order , and discontinuity . We will discuss these issues in an informal manner  , in the context of a range of formalisms . 

