GRADED UNIFICATION : A FRAME WORKFOR
INTERACTIVE PROCESSING
Albert Kim *
Department of Computer and Information Sciences 
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , USA email : alkim ? unagi , c is . upenn , edu
Abstract
An extension to classical unification , called graded unification is presented . It is capable of combining contradictory information  . An interactive processing paradigm and parser based on this new operator are also presented  . 
Introduction
Improved understanding of the nature of knowledge used in human language processing suggests the feasibility of interactive models in computational linguistics  ( CL )  . Recent psycholinguistic work such as ( Stowe , 1989; Trueswell et al ,  1994 ) has document edrapid employment of semantic information to guide human syntactic processing  . In addition , corpus-based stochastic modelling of lexical patterns  ( see Weischedel et al ,  1993 ) may provide information about word sense frequency of the kind advocated since  ( Ford et al ,  1982) . 
Incremental employment of such knowledge to resolve syntactic ambiguity is a natural step towards improved cognitive accuracy and efficiency in CL models  . 
This exercise will , however , pose difficulties for the classical ( ' hard ' ) constraint-based paradigm . As illustrated by the Trueswell et al ( 1994 ) results , this view of constraints is to origid to handle the kinds of effects at hand  . These experiments used pairs of locally ambiguous reduced relative clauses such as:  1  ) them an recognized by the spy took off down the street  2  ) the van recognized by the spy took off down the street The verb recognized is ambiguously either a past participial form or a past tense form  . Eyetracking showed that subjects resolved the ambiguity rapidly  ( before reading the by-phrase ) in 2 ) but not in 1 )  1 . The conclusion they draw is that subjects use knowledge about thematic roles to guide syntactic decisions  . Since van , which is inanimate , makes a good Theme but a poor Agent for recognized  , the past participial analysis in 2 ) is reinforced and the main clause ( past tense ) suppressed . Being animate , man performs either thematic role well , allowing the main clause reading to remain * I thank Christy Doran  , Jason Eisner , Jeff Reynar , and John Trueswell for valuable comments . I am grateful to E wan Klein and the Centre for Cognitive Science  , Edinburgh , where most of this work was conducted , and also acknowledge the support of DARPA grant N00014-90-J-1863  . 
1In fact , ambiguity effects were often completely eliminated in examples like  2  )  , with reading times matching those for the unambiguous case :  3  ) the man/van that was recognized by the spy . . . 
plausible until the disambiguating by-phrase is encountered  . At this point , readers of 1) displayed confusion . 
Semantic on straints do appear to beat work here.
However , the effects observed by Trueswell et al are graded  . Verb-complement combinations occupy a continuous spectrum of " thematic fit "  , which influences reading times . This likely stems from the variance of verbs with respecto the thematic roles they allow  ( e . g . , Agent , Instrument , Patient , etc . ) and the syntactic positions of these . 
The upshot of such observations i that classical unification  ( see Shieber ,  1986) , which has served well as the combinatory mechanism in classical constraint-based parsers  , is too brittle to with stand this on slaught of uncertainty  . 
This paper presents an extension to classical unification  , called graded unification . Graded unification combines two feature structures  , and returns a strength which reflects the compatibility of the information encoded by the two structures  . Thus , two structures which could not unify via classical unification may unify via graded unification  , and all combinatory decisions made during processing are endowed with a level of goodness  . The operator is similar in spirit to the operators of fuzzy logic  ( see Kapcprzyk ,  1992) , which attempts to provide a calculus for reasoning in uncertain domains  . Another related approach is the " Unification Space " model of Kempen & Vosse  ( 1989 )  , which unifies through a process of simulated annealing  , and also uses a notion of unification strength . 
A parser has been implemented which combines constituents via graded unification and whose decisions are influenced by unification strengths  . The result is a paradigm of incremental processing  , which maintains a feature-based system of knowledge representation  . 
System Description
Though the employment of graded unification engenders a new processing style  , the system's architecture parallels that of a conventional unification-based parser  . 
Feature Structures : Prioritized Features The feature structures which encode the grammar in this system are conventional feature structures augmented by the association of priorities with each atomic-valued feature  . Prioritizing features allows them to vary in terms of influence over the strength of unification  . The priority of an atomic-valued feature fi in a feature structure X will be denoted by Pri  ( f i , X ) . 
The effect of feature prioritization is clarified in the following sections  . 

Graded Unification
Given two feature structures , the graded unification mechanism ( Ua ) computes two results , a unifying structure and a unification strength . 
Structural Unification Graded unification builds structure x actly as classical unification except in the case of atomic unification  , where it deviates crucially . 
Atoms in this framework are weighted is junctive values  . The weight associated with a disjunct is viewed as the confidence with which the processor believes that disjunc to be the ' correct ' value  . Figures l ( a ) and l ( b ) depict atoms ( where l ( a ) is " truly atomic " because it contains only one disjunct  )  . 
(a ) ( b ) (?)
Figure h Examples of Atoms
Atomic unification creates a mixture of its two argument atoms as follows  . When two atoms are unified , the set union of their disjuncts is collected in the result  . 
For each disjunct in the result , the associated weight becomes the average of the weights associated with that disjunct in the two argument atoms  . Figurel ( c ) shows an example unification of two atoms . The result is an atom which is ' believed ' to be SG  ( singular )  , but could possibly be PL ( plural ) . 
Unification Strength The unification strength ( denoted t3a Strength ) is a weighted average of atomic unification strengths  , defined in terms of two sums , the actual compatibility and the perfect compatibility  . 
If A and B are non-atomic feature structures to be unified  , then the following holds : IlaStrength(A , B ) = Actual Corn patibility(A , B)
Per\]ectCornpatibility(A,B ) "
The actual compatibility is the sum : Pri ( f i , A ) + Pri(li , B ) , UGStrength(via , ViB )  ~ . iff i shared by A and B ? P v i ( f i , A ) if fi occurs only in APri(fi , B ) if fi occurs only in B where i indexes all atomic -valued features in A or B  , and v ; a and ViB are the values of fi in A and B respectively  . The perfect compatibility is computed by a formula identical to this except hat UaStrength is set to  1  . 
If A and B are atomic , then IIGStrenglh(A , B ) is the total weight of disjuncts shared by A and B : tJc Strength  ( A , B ) = ~- ~ iMin(wiA , WiB ) where i indexes all disjuncts dishared by A and B  , and wia and wiB are the weights of di in A and B respectively  . 
By taking atomic unification strengths into account  , the actual compatibility provides a raw measure of the extent to which two feature structures agree  . By ignoring unification strengths ( assuming a value of 1 . o ) , the perfect compatibility is an idealization of the actual compatibility  ; it is what the actual compatibility would be if the two structures were able to unify via classical unification  . Thus , unification strength is always a value between 0 and 1  . 
The Parser : Activated Chart Edges
The parser is a modified unification-based chart parser  . 
Chart edges are assigned activation levels , which represent the ' goodness ' of ( or confidence in ) their associated analyses . Each new edge is activated according to the strength of the unification which licenses its creation and the activations of its constituent edges  . 
Constraining Graded Unification Without some strict limit on its operation  , graded unification will overgenerate wildly . Two mechanisms exist to constrain graded unification  . First , if a particular unification completes with strength below a specified unification threshold  , it fails . Second , if a new edge is constructed with activation below a specified activation threshold  , it is not allowed to enter the chart , and is suspended . 
Parsing Strategy The chart is initialized to contain one in active edge for each lexical entry of each word in the input  . Lexical edges are currently assigned an initial activation of  1  . o . 
The chart can then be expanded in two ways : 1 . An active edge may be extended by unifying its first unseen constituent with the Lrl S of an in active edge  . 
2 . A new active edge may be created by unifying the LHS of a rule with the first unseen constituent of some active edge in the chart  ( topdown rule invocation )  . 
E ~ EIIA~so/c ~> ~, r ~ e . 2IIG ~\[ c "-- o , o Figure 2: Extension of an Active Edge by an In active Edge Figure  2 depicts the extension of the active EDGE1 with the inactive EDGE2  . The characters represent feature structures , and the ovular nodes on the right end of each edge represent activation level  . The parser tries to unify C' , the mother node of EDGE2 , with C , the first needed constituent of EDGE1 . If this unification succeeds , the parser builds the extended edge , EDGE3 ( where CUaC'produces C ") . The activation of the new edge is a function of the strength of the unification and the current activations of  EDGE1 and EDGE2:   activ3 = wl?tJcSTRENGTH ( C , C ') + w~?activl9-w3 . activ2 ( The weights wi sum to 1 . )  EDGE3 enters the chart only if its activation exceeds the activation threshold  . Rule invocation is depicted in figure 3 . The first needed constituent in EDGE1 is unified with the LHS of aULE1  . EDGE2 is created to begin searching for C . The new edge's activation is again a function of unification strength and other activations : activ  3 --- wl ? UGSTRENGTH ( C , C ') 9-w2 ? activl + w3 . activ2 RULEI \[_IGOr 
EDGE2~'J ~" ~ oDE
Figure 3: Top Down Rule Invocation
The activation levels of grammar rule edges , like those for lexical edges , are currently pegged to 1 . o . 
A Framework for Interactive Processing
The system described above provides a flexible framework for the interactive use of nonsyntactic knowledge  . 
Animacy and Thematic Roles
Knowledge about animacy and its important function in the filling of thematic roles can be modelled as a binary feature  , ANIMATE . A ( active voice ) verb can strongly ' want ' an animate Agent by specifying that its subject be\[ANIMATEJr\] and assigning a high priority to the feature ANIMATE  . Thus , any parse combining this verb with an inanimate subject will suffer in terms of unification strength  . A noun can be strongly animate by having a high weight associated with the positive value of ANIMATE  . Animacy has been encoded in a toy grammar . However , principled settings for the priority of this feature are left to future work  . 
Statistical Information from Corpora Corpusbased part-of-speech  ( POS ) statistics can also be naturally incorporated into the current model  . It is proposed here that a Viterbi decoder could be used to generate the likelihoods of the nbest POS tags for a given word in the input string  . Lexical chart edges would then be initially activated to levels proportional to the predicted likelihoods of their associated tags  . Since these activations will be propagated to larger edges  , parses involving predicted word senses would consequently be given a head start in a race of activations  . Attractively , this strategy allows a fuller use of statistical information than one which uses the information simply to deterministically choose the nbest tags  , which are then treated as equally likely . 
Interaction of Diverse Information A crucial feature of this framework is its potential for modelling the interaction between sources of information like the two above when they disagree  . Sentences 1 and 2) again provide illustration . In such sentences , knowledge about word sense frequency supports the wrong analysis  , and semantic on straints must be employed to achieve the correct  ( human ) performance . 
Intuitively , the raw frequency ( without considering context ) of the past tense form of recognized is higher than that of the past participial  . POS taggers , despite considering local context , consistently mis-tag the verb in reduced relatives  . The absence of a disambiguating relativizer ( e . g . , that ) is one obviou source of difficulty here . But even the ostensibly disambiguating preposition by  , is itself ambiguous , since it might introduce a manner or locative phrase consistent with the main clause analysis  .   2 Modelling human performance in such contexts requires allowing thematic information to compete against and defeat word frequency information  . The current model allows such competition , as follows . POS information may incorrectly predict the main clause analysis  , boosting the lexical edge associated with the past tense  , and thereby boosting the main clause parse . 
However , the unification combining the past tense form of recognized with an inanimate subject  ( van ) will be weak , due to the constraints encoded in the verb's lexical entry  . Since the activations of constituent edges depend on the strengths of the unifications used to build them  , the main clause parse Will lose activation . The parse combining the past participial with an inanimate subject  ( Theme ) will suffer no losses , allowing it to over-take the incorrect parse . 
Conclusions and Future Work
Assigning feature priorities and activation thresholds in this model will certainly be a considerable task  . It is hoped that principled and automated methods can be found for assigning values to these variables  . One promising idea is to glean information about patterns of subcategorization ad thematic roles from annotated corpora  . Annotation of such information has been suggested as a future direction for the Treebank project  ( Marcus el al . , 1993) . It should be noted that learning such information will require more training data  ( hence larger corpora ) than learning to tag part of speech . 
In addition , psycholinguistic studies such as the large norming study  3 of MacDonald and Pearlmutter ( described in Trueswell et al ,  1994 ) may prove useful in encoding thematic information in small lexicons  . 

For d ~ M . , J . Bresnan , &: B . . Kaplan (1982) . A Competence Based Theory of Syntactic Closure . In Bresnan , J . ( Ed . ) , The Mental Representation of Grammaticall : telations  ( pp .  727-796) . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . 
Kempen , O . and T . Vosse (1989) . Incremental Syntactic Tree Formation in Human Sentence Processing : a Cognitive Architecture Based on Activation Decay and Simulated Annealing  . Connection Science , 1(3), 273-290 . 
Kapcprzyk , J .  (1992) . Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic . In Shapiro , S . ( g d . ) The Encyclopedia of Artificial Intelligence . John Wiley8z Sons . , New York . 
Marcus , M . , B . Santorini , and M Markiewicz (1993) . Building a Large Annotated Corpus of English : The Penn Treebank  . Computational Linguistics , 19(2), 1993 . 
Shieber , S .  (1986) . An Introduction to Unification-Based Approaches to Grammar  . CSLI Lecture Notes , Chicago University Press , Chicago . 
Stowe , L .  (1989) . Thematic Structures and Sentence Comprehension . In Carlsonp G . and M . Tanenhaus ( Eds . ) Linguistic Structure in Language Processing Kluwer Academic Publishers  . 
Trueswell , J . , M . T~nnenh & us , S . Garnsey (1994) . Semantic Influences on Parsing : Use of Thematic Role Information in Syntactic Ambiguity B  . es-olutlon . Journal of Memory and Language , 33, In Press . 
Weischedel , R . , B . . Schwartz , J . Palmucci , M . Meteer , and L . P ~ amshaw (1993) . Coping with Ambiguity and Unknown Words through Probabilistic Models  . Computational Linguistics , 19(2), 359-382 . 
= In fact , the utility of by is neutralized in the case of POS tagging  , since prepositions are uniformly tagged ( e . g . , using the tag IN in the Penn Treebank ; see Marcus et al ,  1993) . 
3These studies attempt o establish thematic patterns by asking large numbers of subjects to answer questions like " How typical is it for a van to be recognized by someone ?" with a rating between  1 and 7  . 

