COMMONTOPICS ANDCOHERENTSITUATIONS :
INTERPRETING ELLIPSISINTHECONTEXTOF
DISCOURSE INFERENCE
Andrew Kehler
Harvard University
Aiken Computation Laboratory
33 Oxford Street
Cambridge , MA 02138

Abstract
It is claimed that a variety of facts concerning ellipsis  , event reference , and interclausal coherence can be explained by two features of the linguistic form in question :   ( 1 ) whether the form leaves behind an empty constituent in the syntax  , and ( 2 ) whether the form is anaphoric in the semantics . It is proposed that these features interact with one of two types of discourse inference  , namely Common Topic inference and Coherent Situation inference  . The differing ways in which these types of inference utilize syntactic and semantic representations predicts phenomena for which it is otherwise difficul to account  . 
Introduction
Ellipsis is pervasive in natural language , and hence has received much attention within both computational and theoretical linguistics  . However , the conditions under which a representation fan utterance may serve as a suitable basis for interpreting subsequent elliptical forms remain poorly understood  ; specifically , past attempts to characterize these processes within a single traditional module of language processing  ( e . g . , considering either syntax , semantics , or discourse in isolation ) have failed to account for all of the data . In this paper , we claim that a variety of facts concerning ellipsis resolution  , event reference , and interclausal coherence can be explained by the interaction between the syntactic and semantic properties of the form in question and the type of discourse inference operative in establishing the coherence of the antecedent and elided clauses  . 
In the next section , we introduce the facts concerning gapping , VP-ellipsis , and nonelliptical event reference that we seek to explain  . In Section 3 , we categorize elliptical and event referential forms according to two features :  ( 1 ) whether the expression leaves behind an empty constituent in the syntax  , and ( 2 ) whether the expression is anaphoric in the semantics  . In Section 4 we describe two types of discourse inference , namely Common Topic inference and Coherent Situation inference  , and make a specific proposal concerning the interface between these and the syntactic and semantic representations they utilize  . In Section 5 , we show how this proposal accounts for the data presented in Section  2  . We contras the account with relevant past work in Section  6  , and conclude in Section 7 . 
Ellipsis and Interclausal Coherence It has been noted in previous work that the felicity of certain forms of ellipsis is dependent on the type of coherence relationship extant between the antecedent and elided clauses  ( Levin and Prince , 1982; Kehler , 1993b ) . 
In this section we review the relevant facts for two such forms of ellipsis  , namely gapping and VP-ellipsis , and also compare these with facts concerning nonelliptical event reference  . 
Gapping is characterized by an antecedent sentence  ( henceforth called the source sentence ) and the elision of all but two constituents ( and in limited circumstances , more than two constituents ) in one or more subsequent target sentences , as exemplified in sentence ( 1 ) :  ( 1 ) Bill became upset , and Hillary angry . 
We are concerned here with a particular fact about gapping noticed by Levin and Prince  ( 1982 )  , namely that gapping is acceptable only with the purely conjunctive symmetric meaning of and conjoining the clauses  , and not with its causal asymmetric meaning ( para-phraseable by " and as a result " )  . That is , while either of sentences ( 1 ) or ( 2 ) can have the purely conjunctive reading , only sentence ( 2 ) can be understood to mean that Hillary's becoming angry was caused by or came as a result of Bill's becoming upset  . 
(2) Bill be came upset , and Hillary be came angry.
This can be seen by embedding each of these examples in a context hat reinforces one of the meanings  . For instance , gapping is felicitous in passage (3) , where context supports the symmetric reading , but is in felicitous in passage ( 4 ) under the intended causal meaning of and .   1   1This behavior is not limited to the conjunction and ; a similar distinction holds between symmetric and asymmetric uses of or and but  . See Kehler (1994) for further discussion . 
50  ( 3 ) The Clintons want to get the national debate focussed on healthcare  , and are getting annoyed because the media is preoccupied with White wa-ter  . When a report e recently asked a Whitewater question at a health carerally  , Bill became upset , and Hillary became /0 angry . 
(4 ) Hillary has been getting annoyed at Bill for his inability to deflect controversy and dodamage control  . She has repeatedly told him that the way to deal with White water is to play it down and not to over react  . When a report e recently asked a Whitewater question at a health carerally  , Bill became upset , and ( as a result ) Hillary became/#angry . 
The common stipulation within the literature stating that gapping applies to coordinate structures and not to subordinate ones does not account for why any coordinated cases are unacceptable  . 
VP-ellipsis is characterized by an initial source sentence  , and a subsequent target sentence with a bare auxiliary indicating the elision of a verb phrase  :   ( 5 ) Bill became upset , and Hillary did too . 
The distribution of VP-ellipsis has also been shown to be sensitive to the coherence relationship extant between the source and target clauses  , but in a different respect . In a previous paper ( Kehler , 1993b ) , five contexts for VP-ellipsis were examined to determine whether the representations retrieved are syntactic or semantic in nature  . Evidence was given that VP-ellipsis copies syntactic representations in what wastermed parallel constructions  ( predicting the unacceptability of the voice mismatch in example  ( 6 ) and nominalized source in example ( 8 ) ) , but copies semantic representations in nonparallel constructions  ( predicting the acceptability of the voice mismatch in example  ( 7 ) and the nominalized source in example ( 9 ) ): 2  ( 6 )  #The decision was reversed by the FBI , and the ICC did too . \[ reverse the decision \] (7) In March , four fireworks manufacturers asked that the decision be reversed  , and on Monday the
ICC did . \[ reverse the decision \] ( 8 )  #This letter provoked a response from Bush , and
Clinton did too . \[ respond\] ( 9 ) This letter was mean to provoke a response from
Clinton , and so he did .\[ respond\]
These examples are analogous with the gapping cases in that constraints against mismatches of syntactic form hold for the symmetric  ( i . e . , parallel ) use of and in examples (6) and (8) , but not the asymmetric ( i . e . , nonparallel ) meaning in examples (7) and (9) . In 2These xamples have been taken or adapted from Kehler ( 1993b )  . The phrase shown in brackets indicate the elided material under the intended interpretation  . 
fact , it appears that gapping is felicitous in those constructions where VP-ellips is requires a syntactic antecedent  , whereas gapping is in felicitous in cases where VP -ellipsis requires only a suitable semantic antecedent  . 
Past approaches to VP-ellips is that operate within a single module of language processing fail to make the distinctions necessary to account for these differences  . 
Sag and Hankamer ( 1984 ) note that while elliptical sentence such as ( 6 ) are unacceptable because of a voice mismatch , similar examples with non-elided event referential forms such as do it are much more acceptable:  ( 10 ) The decision was reversed by the FBI , and the ICC did it too . \[ reverse the decision \] An adequate theory of ellipsis and event reference must account for this distinction  . 
In sum , the felicity of both gapping and VP-ellipsis appears to be dependent on the type of coherence relation extant between the source and target clauses  . 
Pronominal event reference , on the other hand , appears not to display this dependence . We seek to account for these facts in the sections that follow  . 
Syntax and Semantics of Ellipsis and
Event Reference
In this section we characterize the forms being addressed in terms of two features :  ( 1 ) whether the form leaves behind an empty constituent in the syntax  , and ( 2 ) whether the form is anaphoric in the semantics . In subsequent sections , we show how the distinct mechanisms for recovering these types of missing information interact with two types of discourse inference to predict the phenomena noted in the previous ection  . 
We illustrate the relevant syntactic and semantic properties of these forms using the version of Categorial Semantics described in Pereira  ( 1990 )  . In the Montagovian tradition , semantic representations are com-position a Uy generated in correspondence with the constituent modification relationships manifest in the syntax  ; predicates are curried . Traces are associated with assumptions which are subsequently discharged by a suitable construction  . Figure 1 shows the representations for the sentence Bill became upset  ; this will serve as the initial source clause representation for the examples that follow  . 3 For our analysis of gapping , we follow Sag ( 1976 ) in hypothesizing that a post-surface-structure level of syntactic representation is used as the basis for interpretation  . In source clauses of gapping constructions , constituents in the source that are parallel to the overt constituents in the target are abstracted out of the clause representation  . 4 For simplicity , we will assume that 3We will ignore the tense of the predicates for ease of exposition  . 
4It has been noted that in gapping constructions , contrastive accent is generally placed on parallel elements in 
NP : Bill ' VP : be eome ' ( upset')
Bill : Bill ' V : become ' AP : upset '
IIbec~ame:bcx ~ me'upset:upset'
Figure 1: Syntactic and Semantic Representations for
Bill be came upset.
this abstraction is achieved by fronting the constituents in the post-surface-structure  , although nothing much hinges on this ; our analysis is compatible with several possible mechanisms  . The syntactic and semantic representations for the source clause of example  ( 1 ) after fronting are shown in Figure 2 ; the fronting leavestrace assumptions behind that are discharged when combined with their antecedents  . 
S:bccomc' ( upsct ' X Bill ' ) \ [ tracc-abs\]hiP:Bill'S : be eome ' ( upset'X to\[trae ~ abs\]Bill:Bill'~:upset ' S : become '  ( tuXtb ) upset : upset ' NP : tb\[~'ace-liclVP : become ' ( tu ) t6V:become'AP:tu\[Iraee-lic\]
IIbee ~ me : become '6
Figure 2: Syntactic and Semantic Representations for
Bill became up set after fronting.
Target clauses in gapping constructions are therefore represented with the overt constituents fronted out of an elided sentence node  ; for instance the representation of the target clause in example  ( 1 ) is shown in Figure 3 both the target and the source clauses , and that abstracting these elements results in an " open proposition " that both clauses share  ( Sag , 1976; Prince , 1986; Steedman ,  1990) . 
This proposition needs to be presupposed ( or accommodated ) for the gapping to be felicitous , for instance , it would be in felicitous to open a conversation with sentence such as  ( 1 )  , whereas it is perfectly felicitous in response to the question How did the Clintons react ?  . Gapping resolution can be characterized as the restoration of this open proposition in the gapped clause  . 
( the empty node is indicated by ?) . The empty con-s:
NP : Hillary ' S:
HiUary : Hinary ' AP : angry ' S:
II angry : angry ' ~5
Figure 3: Syntactic and Semantic Representations for
Hillary angry.
stituent is reconstructed by copying the embedded sentence from the source to the target clause  , along with parallel trace assumptions which are to be bound within the target  . The semantics for this embedded sentence is the open proposition that the two clause share  . This semantics , we claim , can only be recovered by copying the syntax , as gapping does not result in an independently anaphoric expression in the semantics  . ~In fact , as can be seen from Figure 3 , before copying takes place there is no sentence -level semantics for gapped clauses at all  . 
Like gapping , VP-ellipsis results in an empty constituent in the syntax  , in this case , a verb phrase . However , unlike gapping , VP-ellipsis also results in an independently anaphoric form in the semantics  .   6 Figure 4 shows the representations for the clause Hillary did  ( the anaphoric expression is indicated by P )  . 

NP : Hillary '
It tillary : Hillary '
S : P ( Hillary')

AUX:'~Q.QVP:P\[l~-on-lic\]
Idid : AQ . Q
Figure 4: Syntactic and Semantic Representations for
Hillary did.
Given the representation i Figure 1 as the source , the semantics for the missing VP may be recovered in  5This claim is supported by well-established facts suggesting that gapping does not pattern with standard forms of anaphora  . For instance , unlike VP-ellipsis and overt pronouns , gapping cannot be cataphoric , and can only obtain its antecedent from the immediately preceding clause  . 
6 Unlike gapping , VP-ellipsis patterns with other types of anaphora  , for instance it can be cataphoric and can locate antecedents from clauses other than the most immediate one  . 
52 one of two ways . The syntactic VP could be copied down with its corresponding semantics  , from which the semantics for the complete sentence can be derived  . In this case , the anaphoric expression is constrained to have the same semantics as the copied constituent  . Alternatively , the anaphoric expression could be resolved purely semantically  , resulting in the discharge of the anaphoric assumption P  . The higher-order unification methodeveloped by Dalrympl et al  . (1991) could be used for this purpose ; in this case the sentence-level semantics i recovered without copying any syntactic representations  . 
Event referential forms such as do it , do tha ~ , and do so constitute full verb phrases in the syntax  . It has been often noted ( Halliday and Hasan ,  1976 , inter alia ) that it is the main verb do that is operative in these forms of anaphora  , in contras to the auxiliary do operative in VP -ellipsis/It is the pronoun in event referential forms that is anaphoric  ; the fact that the pronouns refer to events results from the type constraints imposed by the main verb do  . Therefore , such forms are anaphoric in the semantics , but do not leave behind an empty constituent in the syntax  . 
To summarize this section , we have characterized the forms being addressed according to two features  , a summary of which appears in Table 1 . Whereas anaphoric
Form Empty Node Anaphoric\[\[in Syntax in Semantics II 
Gapping ~/
VP-Ellipsis ~/ V/
Event Reference ~/
Tablel : Common Topic Relations forms in the semantics for these forms are independently resolved  , empty syntactic on stituents in and of themselves are not anaphoric  , and thus may only be restored when some independently-motivated process necessitates it  . In the section that follows we outline two types of discourse inference  , one of which requires such copying of empty constituents  . 
Discourse Inference
To be coherent , utterances within a discourse segment require more than is embodied in their individual syntactic and semantic representations alone  ; additional rFor instance , other auxiliaries can appear in elided forms but cannot be followed by it  , tt , at , or so as in example (11) , and a pronominal object to the main verb do cannot refer to a state as VP-ellipsis can as in example  ( 12 )  . 
(11 ) George was going to the golf course and Bill was /  (  #it ) / (  #that ) / (  #so ) too . 
(12 ) Bill dislikes George and Hillary does fl/ (  #it ) / (  #that ) / (  #so ) too . 
inter-utterance on straints must be met . Here we describe two types of inference used to enforce the constraints that are imposed by coherence relations  . In each case , arguments to coherence relations take the form of semantic representations retrieved by way of their corresponding node  ( s ) in the syntax ; the operations performed on these representations are dictated by the nature of the constraints imposed  . The two types of inference are distinguished by the level in the syntax from which these arguments are retrieved  , s
Common Topic Inference
Understanding segments of utterances standing in a Common Topic relation requires the determination of points of commonality  ( parallelism ) and departure ( contrast ) between sets of corresponding entities and properties within the utterances  . This process is reliant on performing comparison and generalization operations on the corresponding representations  ( Scha and Polanyi , 1988; Hobbs , 1990; Priist , 1992; Asher ,  1993) . 
Table 2 sketches definitions for some Common Topic relations  , some taken from and others adapted from Hobbs ( 1990 )  . In each case , the hearer is to understand the relation by inferring po  ( al ,   .   .   . , a , ) from sentence So and inferring p1(bl, . . . , bn ) from sentence $1 under the listed constraints . 9In order to meet these constraints , the identification ofp0 and Pl may require arbitrary levels of generalization from the relations explicitly stated in the utterances  . 
Examples of these relations are given in sentences  ( 13a-d )  . 
(13) a . John organized rallies for Clinton , and Fred distributed pamphlets for him . ( Parallel ) b . John supported Clinton , but Mary supported
Bush . ( Contrast ) c . Young aspiring politicians usually support their party's presidential candidate  . For instance , John campaigned hard for Clinton in 1992 . ( Exemplification ) d . A young a spiring politician was arrested in Texas today  . John Smith ,  34 , was nabbed in a Houston law firm while attempting to em-bezzle funds for his campaign  . ( Elaboration ) Passage (13a ) , for instance , is coherent under the understanding that John and Fred have a common prop-SHobbs  ( 1990 )  , following Hume (1748) , suggests a classification of coherence rlations into three broad categories  , namely Resemblance , Cause or Effect , and Contiguity ( Hume's terminology ) . Here , Resemblance rlations appear to pattern well with those employing our Common Topic inference  , and likewise Cause or effect and Contiguity with our Coherent Situation inference  . 
9 Following Hobbs , by al and bibeing similar we mean that for some salient property qi  , qi(ai ) and qi(b , ) holds . 
Likewise by dissimilar we mean that for some qi , q , ( al ) and " ~ qi(bi ) holds . 

Constraints Conjunctions \ [ I Relation




Po = Pl , a i and b i are similar (1) Po = -~ Pl , ai and biare similar (2) P0 = Pl , ai and biared is similar for some i
Po = Pl ; bl Eaiorbi Cai
PO = pl , ai----bi and but for example ' in other words
Table 2: Common Topic Relations erty , namely having done something to support Clinton . Passage ( 13 c ) is likewise coherent by virtue of the inferences resulting from identifying parallel elements and properties  , including that John is a young aspiring politician and that he's a Democrat  ( since Clinton is identified with his party's candidate  )  . The characteristic that Common Topic relations share is that they require the identification of parallel entities  ( i . e . , the al and bi ) and relations ( P0 and Px ) as arguments to the constraints . We posit that the syntactic representation is used both to guide the identification of parallel elements and to retrieve their semantic representations  . 
Coherent Situation Inference
Understanding utterancestanding in a Coherent Situation relation requires that hearers convince themselves that the utterances describe a coherent situation given their knowledge of the world  . This process requires that a path of inference be established between the situations  ( i . e . , events or states ) described in the participating utterances as a whole  , without regard to any constraints on parMlelism between sub-sentent iM constituents  . Four such relations are summarized in Table 3 . l ? In all four cases , the hearer is to infer A from sentence $1 and B from sentence $2 under the constrain that the presuppositions listed be abduced  ( t to bbs et al ,  1993): 11
Relation Presuppose Conjunctions


Violated Expectation
Denial of Preventer
A-.B
B --, A
A---*-, B
B--*-~A and ( as a result ) therefore because but even though despite
Table 3: Coherent Situation Relations
Examples of these relations are given in sentences  ( 14a-d )  . 
(14) a . Billisapolitician , and therefore he's dish on-est .   ( Result ) 1 ? These relations are what Hume might have termed
Cause or Effect.
1 1We are using implication in a very loose sense here , as if to mean " could plausibly follow from " . 
b . Billis dishonest because he's a politician.
( Explanation ) c . Bill is a politician , but he'shonest . 
( Violated Expectation ) d . Billish onest , even though he's a politician . 
( Denial of Preventer)
Beyond what is asserted by the two clauses individually  , understanding each of these sentences requires the presupposition that being a politician implies being dish on-est  . Inferring this is only reliant on the sentential -level semantics for the clauses as a whole  ; there are nop , ai , or bito be independently identified . The same is true for what Hume called Contiguity relations  ( perhaps in-eluding Hobbs ' Occasion and Figure -ground relations  )  ; for the purpose of this paper we will consider these as weaker cases of Cause or Effect  . 
To reiterate the crucial observation , Common Topic inference utilizes the syntactic structure in identifying the semantics for the subsentential constituents to serve as arguments to the coherence constraints  . In contrast , Coherent Situation inference utilizes only the sentential-level semantic forms as is required for ab-ducing a coherent situation  . The question then arises as to what happens when constituents in the syntax for an utterance are empty  . Given that the discourse inference mechanisms retrieve semantic forms through nodes in the syntax  , this syntax will have to be recovered when a node being accessed is missing  . Therefore , we posit that missing constituents are recovered as a byproduct of Common Topic inference  , to allow the parallel properties and entities serving as arguments to the coherence relation to be accessed from within the reconstructed structure  . On the other hand , such copying is not triggered in Coherent Situation inference  , since the arguments are retrieved only from the top level sentence node  , which is always present . In the next section , we show how this difference accounts for the data given in Section  2  . 
Applying the Analysis
In previous sections , we have classified several elliptical and event referential forms as to whether they leave behind an empty constituent in the syntax and whether they are anaphoric in the semantics  . Empty . 
constituents in the syntax are not in themselves referential  , but are recovere during Common Topic infer -pendently referential and are resolved through purely semantic means regardless of the type of discourse inference  . In this section we show how the phenomena presented in Section  2 follow from these properties . 
Local Ellipsis
Recall from Section 2 that gapping constructions such as ( 15 ) are only felicitous with the symmetric ( i . e . ,
Common Topic ) meaning of and : ( 15 ) Bill became upset , and Hillary angry . 
This fact is predicted by our account in the following way  . In the case of Common Topic constructions , the missing sentence in the target will be copied from the source  , the sentential semantics may be derived , and the argument so the coherence relations can be identified and reasoning carried out  , predicting felicity . In the case of Coherent Situation relations , no such recovery of the syntax takes place . Since a gapped clause in and of itself has no sentence-level semantics  , the gapping fails to be felicitous in these cases . 
This account also explain similar differences in felicity for other coordinating conjunctions as discussed in Kehler  ( 1994 )  , as well as why gapping is in felicitous in constructions with subordinating conjunctions indicating Coherent Situation relations  , as exemplified in (16) . 
(16)  #Bill be came up set , because even though Hillary angry . 
despite the fact that
The stripping construction is similar to gapping except that there is only one bare constituent in the target  ( also generally receiving contrastive accent )  ; unlike VP-ellips is there is no stranded auxiliary  . We therefore might predic that stripping is also acceptable in Common Topic constructions but not in Coherent Situation constructions  , which appears to be the case : 12 ( 17 ) Bill became upset , but not #and ( as a result ) #because Hillary . 
 #even though  #despite the fact that
In summary , gapping and related constructions are in felicitous in those cases where Coherent Situation inference is employed  , as there is no mechanism for recovering the sentential semantics of the elided clause  . 
1 2Stripping is also possible in comparative deletion constructions  . A comprehensive analysis of stripping , pseudo-gapping , and VP-ellipsis in such cases requires an articulation of a syntax and semantics for these constructions  , which will be carried out in future work . 
VP Ellipsis
Recall from Section 2 that only in Coherent Situation constructions can VP-ellipsis obtain purely semantic antecedents without regard to constraints on structural parallelism  , as exemplified by the voice mismatches in sentences  ( 18 ) and ( 19 )  . 
(18)  #The decision was reversed by the FBI , and the ICC did too . \[ reverse the decision \] (19) In March , four fireworks manufacturer saked that the decision be reversed  , and on Monday the
ICC did . \[ reverse the decision \]
These facts are also predicted by our account . In the case of Common Topic constructions , a suitable syntactic antecedent must be reconstructed at the site of the empty VP node  , with the result that the anaphoric expression takes on its accompanying semantics  . Therefore , VP-ellipsis is predicted to require a suitable syntactic antecedent in these scenarios  . In Coherent Situation constructions , the empty VP node is not reconstructed . In these cases the anaphoric expression is resolved on purely semantic grounds  ; therefore VP-ellipsis is only constrained to having a suitable semantic antecedent  . 
The analysis accounts for the range of data given in Kehler  ( 1993b )  , although one point of departur exists between that account and the current one with respect to clauses conjoined with but  . In the previous account these cases are all classified as nonparallel  , resulting in the prediction that they only require semantic source representations  . In our analysis , we expect cases of pure contrast to pattern with the parallel class since these are Common Topic constructions  ; this is opposed to the violated expectation use of but which indicates a Coherent Situation relation  . The current account makes the correct predictions  ; examples (20) and (21) , where but has the contrast meaning , appear to be markedly less acceptable than examples  ( 22 ) and ( 23 )  , where but has the violated expectation meaning : 13   ( 20 ) ? ? Clinton was introduced by John , but Mary didn't . \[ introduce Clinton \] ( 21 ) ? ? This letter provoked a response from Bush , but Clinton didn't . \[ respond\] ( 22 ) Clinton was to have been introduced by someone , but obviously nobody did . \[ introduce Clinton \] ( 23 ) This letter deserves a response , but before you do ,   . . . \[ respond\]To summarize thus far , the data presented in the earlier account as well as examples that conflict with that analysis are all predicted by the account given here  . 
As a final note , we consider the interaction between VP-ellipsis and gapping  . The following pair of examples are adapted from those of Sag  ( 1976 , pg .  291 ) : lZThese examples have been adapted from several in 
Kehler (1993b).
55 (24): I ohn supports Clinton , and Mary $ Bush , although she doesn't know whyshe does . 
(25) ? ? John supports Clinton , and Mary 0 Bush , and
Fred does too.
Sag defines an alphabe iic variance condition that correctly predicts that sentence  ( 25 ) is in felicitous , but incorrectly predicts that sentence ( 24 ) is also . Sagthen suggests a weakening of his condition , with the result that both of the above examples are incorrectly predicted to be acceptable  ; he doesn't consider a solution predicting the judgements as stated  . 
The felicity of sentence ( 24 ) and the infelicity of sentence ( 25 ) are exactly what our account predicts . In example (25) , the third clause is in a Common Topic relationship with the second  ( as well as the first ) and therefore requires that the VP be reconstructed at the target site  . However , the VP is not in a suitable form , as the object has been abstracted out of it ( yielding a trace assumption )  . Therefore , the subsequent VP-ellips is fails to be felicitous  . In contrast , the conjunctional fhough used before the third clause in example  ( 24 ) indicates a Coherent Situation relation . Therefore , the VP in the third clause need not be reconstructed  , and the subsequent semantically-based rsolution of the anaphoric form succeeds  . Thus , the apparent paradox between examples ( 24 ) and ( 25 ) is just what we would expect . 
Event Reference
Recall that Sag and Hankamer ( 1984 ) note that whereas elliptical sentences such as ( 26 a ) are unacceptable due to a voice mismatch , similar examples with event referential forms are much more acceptable as exemplified by sentence  ( 26 b ) : 14  ( 26 ) a .  #The decision was reversed by the FBI , and the ICC did too . \[ reverse the decision \] b . The decision was reversed by the FBI , and the ICC did it too . \[ reverse the decision \] As stated earlier , forms such as do it are anaphoric , but leave no empty constituents in the syntax . Therefore , it follows under the present account hat such reference is successful without regard to the type of discourse inferencemployed  . 
Relationship to Past Work
The literature on ellipsis and event reference is volumi-nous  , and so we will not attempt a comprehensive comparison here  . Instead , we briefly compare the current work to three previou studies that explicitly tie ellipsis  14Sag and Hankamer claim that all such cases of VP -ellipsis require syntactic antecedents  , whereas we suggest that in Coherent Situation relations VP-eUipsis operates more like their Model-Interpretive Anaphora  , of which do it is an example . 
resolution to an account of discourse structure and coherence  , namely our previous account ( Kehler , 1993b ) and the accounts of Priist ( 1992 ) and Asher ( 1993 )  . 
In Kehler (1993b ) , we presented an analysis of VP-ellips is that distinguished between two types of relationship between clauses  , parallel and nonparallel . An architecture was presented whereby utterances were parsed into propositional representations which were subsequently integrated into a discourse model  . It was posited that VP-ellipsis could access either propositional or discourse model representations : in the case of parallel constructions  , the source resided in the propositional representation  ; i the case of nonparallel constructions , the source had been integrated into the discourse model  . In Kehler (1994) , we showed how this architecture also accounted for the facts that Levin and 
Prince noted about gapping.
The current work improves upon that analysis in several respects  . First , it no longer needs to be posited that syntactic representations disappear when integrated into the discourse model  ; 15 instead , syntactic and semantic representations coexist . Second , various issues with regard to the interpretation of propositional representations are now rendered moot  . Third , there is no longer a dichotomy with respect othe level of representation from which VP-ellipsis locates and copies antecedents  . Instead , two distinct factors have been separated out : the resolution of missing constituents under Common Topic inference is purely syntactic whereas the resolution of anaphoric expressions in all cases is purely semantic  ; the apparent dichotomy in VP-ellipsis data arises out of the interaction between these different phenomena  . Finally , the current approach more readily scales up to more complex cases  . For instance , it was not clear in the previous account how nonparallel constructions embedded within parallel constructions would be handled  , as in sentences (27a-b ): (27) a . Clinton was introduced by John because Mary had refused to  , and Gore was too . \[ introduced by John because Mary had refused to \] b  .  #Clinton was introduced by John because Mary had refused to  , and Freddid too . \[ introduced Clinton because Mary had refused to \] The current approach accounts for these cases  . 
The works of Priist ( 1992 ) and Asher ( 1993 ) provide analyses of VP-ellipsis 16 in the context of an account of discourse structure and coherence  . With l ~ This claim could be dispensed within the treatment of VP-eUipsis  , perhaps at the cost of some degree of theoretical in elegance  . However , this aspect was crucial for handling the gapping data  , since the infelicity of gapping in nonparallel constructions hinged on there no longer being a propositional representation available as a source  . 
16 In addition , Prfist addresses gapping , and Asher addresses event reference . 

Priist utilizing a mixed representation ( called syntac-tic/semantic structures ) and Asher utilizing Discourse Representation Theory constructs  , each defines mechanisms for determining relations uch as parallelism and contrast  , and gives constraints on resolving VP-ellipsis and related forms within their more general frameworks  . However , each essentially follows Sag in requiring that elided VP representations be alphabetic variants of their referents  . This constraint rules out cases where VP-ellipsis obtain syntactically mismatched antecedents  , uch as example ( 19 ) and other nonparallel cases given in Kehler ( 1993b )  . It also appears that neither approach can account for the infelicity of mixed gapping/VP-ellipsis cases such as sentence  ( 25 )  . 
Conclusion
In this paper , we have categorized several forms of ellipsis and event reference according to two features :  ( 1 ) whether the form leaves behind an empty constituent in the syntax  , and ( 2 ) whether the form is anaphoric in the semantics . We have also described two forms of discourse inference  , namely Common Topic inference and Coherent Situation inference  . The interaction between the two features and the two types of discourse inference predicts facts concerning apping  , VP-ellipsis , event reference , and interclausal coherence for which it is otherwise difficult to account  . In future work we will address other forms of ellipsis and event reference  , as well as integrate a previous account of strict and sloppy ambiguity into this framework  ( Kehler , 1993a ) . 

This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant  IRI-9009018  , National Science Foundation Grant IRI-9350192 , and a grant from the Xerox Corporation . I would like to thank Stuart Shieber , Barbara Grosz , Fernando Pereira , Mary Dalrymple , Candy Sidner , Gregory Ward , Arild Hestvik , Shalom Lappin , Christine Nakatani , Stanley Chen , Karen Lochbaum , and two anonymous reviewers for valuable discussions and comments on earlier drafts  . 

Nicholas Asher .  1993 . Reference to Abstract Objects in Discourse . SLAP50, Dordrecht , Kluwer . 
Mary Dalrymple , Stuart M . Shieber , and Fernando Pereira .  1991 . Ellipsis and higher-order unification . 
Linguistics and Philosophy , 14:399-452.
M . A . K . Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan .  1976 . Cohesion in English . Longman's , London . English Language
Series , Title No . 9.
Jerry R . Hobbs , Mark E . Stickel , Douglas E . Appelt , and Paul Martin .  1993 . Interpretation as abduction . 
Artificial Intelligence , 63:69-142.
Jerry Hobbs .  1990 . Literature and Cognition . CSLI
Lecture Notes 21.
David Hume .  1748 . An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding . The Liberal Arts Press , New York , 1955 edition . 
Andrew Kehler . 1993a . A discourse copying algorithm for ellipsis and anaphora resolution  . In Proceedings of the Sixth Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ( EACL-93 )  , pages 203-212 , Utrecht , the Netherlands , April . 
Andrew Kehler . 1993b . The effect of establishing coherence in ellipsis and anaphora resolution  . In Proceedings of the 31st Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ( ACL93 )  , pages 62-69 , 
Columbus , Ohio , June.
Andrew Kehler .  1994 . A discourse processing account of gapping and causal implicature  . Manuscript presented at the Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America  , January . 
Nancy Levin and Ellen Prince .  1982 . Gapping and causal implicature . Presented at the Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America  . 
Fernando Pereira .  1990 . Categorial semantics and scoping . Computational Linguistics , 16(1):1-10 . 
Ellen Prince .  1986 . On the syntactic marking of presupposed open propositions  . In Papers from the Parasession on pragmalics and grammatical theory at the  g2nd regional meeting of the Chicago Linguistics society  , pages 208-222 , Chicago , IL . 
HubPriist .  1992 . On Discourse Structuring , VP Anaphora , and Gapping . Ph . D . thesis , University of

Ivan Sag and Jorge Hankamer .  1984 . Toward a theory of anaphoric processing . Linguistics and Philosophy , 7:325-345 . 
Ivan Sag . 1976. Deletion and Logical Form . Ph.D.
thesis , MIT.
Remko Scha and Livia Polanyi .  1988 . An augmented contextfree grammar for discourse . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING-88 )  , pages 573-577 , Budapest , 

Mark Steedman .  1990 . Gapping as constituent coordination . Linguistics and Philosophy , 13(2):207-263 . 

