CONCEPTUAL ASSOCIATION FOR COMPOUND NOUN ANALYSIS
Microsoft Institute
65 Epping Road
North Ryde NSW 2113
( t-markl@microsoft.corn )
Mark Lauer
AUSTRALIA
Department of Computing
Macquarie University
NSW 2109
( mark@macadam , mpce.mq.edu.au )

This paper describes research toward the automatic interpretation of compound nouns using corpus statistics  . An initial study aimed at syntactic disambiguation is presented  . The approach presented bases associations upon thesaurus categories  . 
Association data is gathered from unambiguous cases extracted from a corpus and is then applied to the analysis of ambiguous compound nouns  . While the work presented is still in progress , a first attemp to syntactically analyse a test set of  244 example shows 75% correctness . Future work is aimed at improving this accuracy and extending the technique to assign semantic role information  , thus producing a complete interpretation . 

Compound Nouns : Compound nouns ( CNs ) are a commonly occurring construction in language consisting of a sequence of nouns  , acting as a noun ; pottery coffee mug , for example . For a detailed linguistic theory of compound noun syntax and semantics  , see Levi (1978) . Compound nouns are analysed syntactically by means of the rule N--?NN applied recursively  . Compounds of more than two nouns are ambiguous in syntactic structure  . A necessary part of producing an interpretation f a CN is an analysis of the attachments within the compound  . 
Syntactic parsers cannot choose an appropriate analysis  , because attachments are not syntactically governed  . The current work presents a system for automatically deriving a syntactic analysis of arbitrary CNs in English using corpu statistics  . 
Task description : The initial task can be formulated as choosing the most probable binary bracketing for a given noun sequence  , known to form a compound noun , without knowledge of the context . 
E . G . : ( pottery ( coffee mug )) ; (( coffee mug ) holder)
Corpus Statistics : The need for wide ranging lexical-semantic knowledge to support NLP  , commonly referred to as the ACQUISITION PROBLEM , has generated a great deal of research investigating automatic means of acquiring such knowledge  . Much work has employed carefully constructed parsing systems to extract knowledge from machine readable dictionaries  ( e . g . , Vanderwende , 1993) . Other approaches have used rather simpler , statistical analyses of large corpora , as is done in this work . 
Hindle and Rooth ( 1993 ) used a rough parser to extract lexical preferences for prepositional phrase  ( PP ) attachment . The system counted occurrences of unambiguously attached PPs and used these to define LEXICAL ASSOCIATION between prepositions and the nouns and verbs they modified  . This association data was then used to choose an appropriate attachment for ambiguous cases  . The counting of unambiguous cases in order to make inferences about ambiguous ones is adopted in the current work  . An explicit assumption is made that lexical preferences are relatively independent of the presence of syntactic ambiguity  . 
Subsequently , Hindle and Rooth's work has been extended by Resnik and Hearst  ( 1993 )  . Resnik and Hearst attempted to include information about typical prepositional objects in their association data  . 
They introduced the notion of CONCEPTUAL ASSOCIATION in which associations are measured between groups of words considered to represent concepts  , in contrast to single words . Such classbased approaches are used because they allow each observation to be generalized thus reducing the amount of data required  . In the current work , a freely available version of Roget's thesaurus is used to provide the grouping of words into concepts  , which then form the basis of conceptual association  . The research presented here can thus be seen as investigating the application of several key ideas in Hindle and Rooth  ( 1993 ) and in Resnik and Hearst ( 1993 ) to the solution of an analogous problem , that of compound noun analysis . However , both these works were aimed solely at syntactic disambiguation  . The goal of semantic interpretation remains to be investigated  . 

Extraction Process : The corpus used to collect information about compound nouns consists of some  7  . 8 million words from Grolier's multimedia online encyclopedia  . The University of Pennsylvania morphological naly ser provides a database of more than  315  , 000 inflected forms and their parts of speech . 
The Grolier's text was searched for consecutive words separated only by whitespace  . This prevented comma-separated lists and other non-compound noun sequences from being included  . However , it dideliminate many CNs from consideration because many nouns are occasionally used as verbs and are thus ambiguous for part of speech  . This resulted in 35 , 9 74 noun sequences of which all but 655 were pairs . The first 1000 of the sequences were examined manually to check that they were not incidentally adjacent nouns  ( as indirect and indirect objects , say ) . Only 2% did not form CNs , thus establishing a reasonable utility for the extraction method  . The pairs were then used as a training set , on the assumption that a two word noun compound is unambiguously bracketed  ) Thesaurus Categories : The 1911 version of Roget's Thesaurus contains 1043 categories , with an average of 34 single word nouns in each . These categories were used to define concepts in the sense of Resnik and Hearst  ( 1993 )  . Each noun in the training set was taagged with a list of the categories in which it appeared  . " All sequences containing nouns not listed in Roget's were discarded from the training set  . 
Gathering Associations : The remaining 24 , 2 85 pairs of category lists were then processed to find a conceptual association  ( CA ) between every ordered pair of thesaurus categories  ( ti , t2) using the formula below . CA(t1 , t2 ) is the mutual information between the categories , weighted for ambiguity . It measures the degree to which the modifying category predicts the modified category and vice versa  . When categories predict one another , we expect hem to be attached in the syntactic analysis  . 
Let AMBIG ( w ) = the number of thesaurus categories w appears in  ( the ambiguity of w )  . 
Let COUNT(wbw2) = the number of instances of
Wl modifying w2 in the training set
Let FREQ(t ~, t2) =
COUNT(w ~ , w ~) , t " ~ a ~" ~ m , 2 AMBIG(w , ) " AMBIG(w2)
Let CA(tbt2) =
FREQ(tl , t2)
FREQ(t , , i ) - ~ FREQ(i , t2)
Vi Vi where i ranges over all possible thesaurus categories  . 
Note that this measure is asymmetric . CA ( tbt2 ) measures the tendency fortl to modify t2 in a compound noun , which is distinct from CA(t2 , tO . 
Automatic Compound Noun Analysis : The following procedure can be used to syntactically IT his introduces some additional noise  , since extraction cannot guarantee to produce complete noun compounds  2 Some simple morphological rules were used at this point to reduce plural nouns to singular forms analyse ambiguous CNs  . Suppose the compound consists of three nouns : wl  w2w3  . A left-branching analysis , \[\[ wlw2\]w3\] indicates that wl modifies w2 , while a right-branching analysis , \[ wl\[ w2   w3\]\] indicates that wl modifie something denoted primarily by  w3  . A modifier should be associated with words it modifies  . 
So , when CA ( pottery , mug ) > > CA(pottery , coffee ) , we prefer ( pottery ( coffee mug )) . First though , we must choose concepts for the words . For each wi(i = 2 or 3) , choose categories Si ( with w l in S i ) and Ti ( with w i in T i ) so that CA ( Si , Ti ) is greatest . These categories represent the most significant possible word meanings for each possible attachment  . Then choose wiso that CA(Si , Ti ) is maximum and bracket wl as a sibling of wi . We have then chosen the attachment having the most significant association in terms of mutual information between thesaurus categories  . 
In compounds longer than three nouns , this procedure can be generalised by selecting , from all possible bracketings , that for which the product of greatest conceptual ssociations i maximized  . 

Test Set and Evaluation : Of the noun sequences extracted from Grolier's  ,   655 were more than two nouns in length and were thus ambiguous  . Of these ,   308 consisted only of nouns in Roget's and these formed the test set  . All of them were triples . Using the full context of each sequence in the test set  , the author analysed each of these , assigning one of four possible outcomes . Some sequences were not CNs ( as observed above for the extraction process ) and were labeled Error . Other sequences exhibited what Hindle and Rooth ( 1993 ) call SEMANTICINDETERMINACY , where the meanings associated with two attachments cannot be distinguished in the context  . For example , college economics texts . These were labeled Indeterminate . The remainder were labeled Left or Right depending on whether the actual analysis is left -or right-branching  . 
TABLE 1-Test set analysis distribution :
Labels LRIE Total
Count 1638 1352 9308
Percentage 53% 26% 11% 9% 100%
Proportion of different labels in the test set.
Table 1 shows the distribution of labels in the test set . 
Hereafter only those triples that received a bracketing  ( Left or Right ) will be considered . 
The attachment procedure was then used to automatically assign an analysis to each sequence in Table  2  . The overall correctness i 75% on 244 examples . The results show more success with left branching attachments  , oit may be possible to get better overall accuracy by introducing a bias  . 
TABLE 2 -Results of test : x Output Left Output Right
Actual Left 13132
Actual Right 3051
The proportions of correct and incorrect analyses.

Related Work : There are two notable systems that are related to the current work  . The SENS system described in Vanderwende ( 1993 ) extracted semantic features from machine readable dictionaries by means of structural patterns applied to definitions  . These features were then matched by heuristics which assigned likelihood estimates to each possible semantic relationship  . The work only addressed the interpretation f pairs of nouns and did not mention the problem of syntactic ambiguity  . 
A very simple technique aimed at bracketing ambiguous compound nouns is reported in Pustejovsky et al  ( 1993 )  . While attempting to extract taxonomic relationships  , their system heuristically bracketed CNs by searching elsewhere in the corpus for subcomponents of the compound  . Such matching fails to take account of the natural frequency of the words and is likely to require a much larger corpus for accurate results  . Unfortunately , they provide no evaluation of the performance afforded by their approach  . 
Future Plans : A more sophisticated noun sequence extraction method should improve the results  , providing more and cleaner training data . 
Also , many sequences had to be discarded because they contained nouns not in the  1911 Roget's . A more comprehensive and consistent thesaurus needs to be used  . 
An investigation of different association schemes is also planned  . There are various statistical measures other than mutual information  , which have been shown to be more effective in some studies  . 
Association measures can also be devised that allow evidence from several categories to be combined  . 
Compound noun analyses often depend on contextual factors  . Any analysis based solely on the static semantics of the nouns in the compound cannot account for these effects  . To establish an achievable performance target for contextfree analysis  , an experiment is planned using human subjects , who will be given ambiguous noun compounds and asked to choose attachments for them  . 
Finally , syntactic bracketing is only the first step in interpreting compound nouns  . Once an attachment is established , a semantic role needs to be selected as is done in SENS  . Given the promising results achieved for syntactic preferences  , it seems likely that semantic preferences can also be extracted from corpora  . This is the main area of ongoing research within the project  . 

The current work uses thesaurus category associations gathered from an online encyclopedia to make analyses of compound nouns  . An initial study of the syntactic disambiguation of  244 compound nouns has shown promising results , with an accuracy of 75% . 
Several enhancements are planned along with an experiment on human subjects to establish a performance target for systems based on static semantic analyses  . The extension to semantic interpretation of compounds is the next step and represents promising unexplored territory for corpus statistics  . 

Thanks are due to Robert Dale , Vance Gledhill , Karen Jensen , Mike Johnson and the anonymous reviewers for valuable advice  , This work has been supported by an Australian Postgraduate Award and the Microsoft 
Institute , Sydney.
REFERENCES t-nnd ~ Don and Mats Rooth ( 1993 ) " S~Ambiguity and Lexical Relations " Computat /ona/Lngu/st/cs Vol  .  19(1) , Special Issue on Using ~ Corpora I , pp 103-20 Levi , Judith ( 1978 ) " Ihe Syntax and Semantics of Complex
Nominals " Academic Press , New Y~k.
Pustejovsky , James , Sabine B ~ and ~ Anick (1993) " l . exical Semantic Techniques for Corpus Analysis " Computat/ona/L/ng~Vol  . 19(2), Special Issue on Using
Large Coqx ~ N , pp 331-58
Resnik , Philip and Mani Hearst ( 1993 ) " Structural Ambiguity and Conceptual Relations " Proceedings of the Workshop on Very large Corpora : Academic and lndustdal Perspectives  , June 22 , OlflOStaleUfflVel~ty , pp 58-64 V~Lm'y ( 1993 ) " SEN & The System for Evalua fiqg Noun Sequences " in Jensen  , Karen , George Heidom and Stephen Richardson ( eds ) " Natural Language Processing : " l'he PI3qLP A plxoach " , Khwer Academic , pp 161-73
