Polyphony and Argumentative Semantics
Jean-Michel Grandchamp *
LIMSI-CNRS
B.P . 13391403 ORSAY CE DEX FRANCE
kMevala@limsi.fr

We extract from sentences a superstruc-ture made of argumentative operators and connectives applying to the remaining set of terminal subsentences  . We found the argumentative interpretation of utterances on a semantics defined at the linguistic level  . We describe the computation of this particular semantics  , based on the cons-traints that the superstructure impels to the argumentative power of terminal subsentences  . 
1 Introduction
Certain utterance structures contain linguistic clues that constrain their interpretation on an argumentative basis  . The following example illustrates these constraints : 
I was robbed yesterday ...
(1) ... but luckily I had little money.
(2) ... but luckily I had a little money.
(3) ... but unfortunately I had little money.
(4) ... but unfortunately I had a little money.
We describe and compute the signification of such sentences by specifying how the keywords  ( in italics ) constrain the argumentative power of the terminal subsentences  ( TSS ) "I was robbed yesterday " and " I had money " . They may all be interpreted in a relevant context  , but hints for recognizing the need of an " odd " context are given  . For instance , in (1) and (2) , the robbery is considered bad because of the opposition introduced by " but "  , to something considered happy because of " luckily "  . Holding money is considered good in ( 2 ) and bad in ( 1 ) because of the general structure of the sentence and the opposition between " little " and " a little "  . In (3) and (4) , the robbery is considered good , while in ( 3 ) money is normally considered good too , and in ( 4 )   ( the od-dest ) it is considered bad ( imagine a speaker who * This research is supported by SNCF  , Direction de la Recherche , D6 partement RP , 45 rue de Londres ,  75379
Paris Cedex 08 France.
usually likes to be robbed just to see the disappointment because he holds no money  )  . We see on these examples that TSS's are argumentatively ambiguous and modifiers constrain them  . 
In this paper we propose , for a given utterance , the construction of the signification of the underlying sentence  , which captures its polyphonic and argumentative aspects  . The signification of a sent-ence is viewed as the application of an argumentative super-structure to the signification of TSS's  , free of operators or connectives . The signification must finally be interpreted in the context of the utterance  . 
2 Linguistic Background
Our model rests on a framework inspired by Ducrot ( 1980 )  . He defines an utterance as a concrete occurrence of an abstract entity called a sentence  . Understanding an utterance means computing its meaning  , which may be formalized in different contexts ( such as speech acts or beliefs )  . The meaning is built from the context and from the signification of the sent-ence which : lescribes all potential uses of the linguistic matter  . Ducrot's integrated pragmafics also claims that many phenomena usually described at the pragmatic level  , must be described in the signi-fication ( such as argumentation )  . 
Within Ducrot's framework , we use his theory of polyphony , to poi and modifiers . Polyphony is a theory that models utterances with three levels of characters  . The talking subject refers to the person who pronounced the words  . The talking subject introduces the speaker to whom the words are attributed  ( different from the talking subject in some cases such as indirect speech  )  . Sentences contain li-teral semantic ontents , each one being under the responsibility of an utterer  . The relation between the speaker of a sentence and the utterer of a content defines the commitment of the speaker to such a semantic ontent  . This commitment takes one of the following values : identification  ( ID )  , opposition ( OPP ) and partial commitment ( PC )   ( Ducrot ,  1984;
Grandchamp , 1994).
Sentences are chained under linguistic warrants words  . In a sentence or a combination of sentences , some topoi are selected , others are not relevan to the discourse context . In the interpretative process , still others will be eliminated because of irrelevance to the situation  . A toposis selected under one of its topical forms  , made up of a direction ( positive or negative ) and other parameters . The topical form is selected with a given strength  . For instance , there is a top os T linking wealth to acquisitions  . The word " rich " may be seen as the positive form of T that says " when you are rich you may buy a lot of things "  . 
The word " poor " contains the negative form of the same top os T  , that is " when you are not rich you may not buy a lot of things "  . Unlike the warrants of Toulmin (1958) , to poi are not logic warrants . They may give some support for inferences , but do not have to . 
The strength is ruled by a subclass of operators called modifiers  , whose semantics is described precisely as modifying the strength of a selected to pos  . 
Such words include " very " , " little " a little " . Mo-differs combine with each other and with argument sentences  . The strength is specified by a lexical-based partial ordering  , producing non-quantitative degree similar to Klein's  ( 1982 )   . 
3 Computational Framework 3 . 1 S ign i f icat ion o f sentences We have discarded the utterance/sentence level of polyphony in order to simplify the presentation  . Gi-ven a set of top oi T , a set of strength markers F , the set D =  positive , negative of directions , and the set V = ID , PC , OPP of polyphonic values , we define the set C = T x D x V of argument a tive c lls : the top os  , its direction , the strength and the polyphonicom-mitment . The signification of a sentence is defined as a disjunction of subsets of C  . 
3.2 Syntax
Given a sentence , we identify operators , connectives and modifiers , and build the A-structure of the sent-ence linking these linguistic clues to the TSS's  . A sample A-structure is given in Figure 1 . Connecti-vesconstrain a pair of sentences or a sentence and a discursivenvironment  , operators constrain argumentative power , and modifiers constrain only argumentative orientation and strength  . In addition , connectives and operators also specify the commitment of the speaker to semantic ontents  , by means of the theory of polyphony . 
3.3 Lexical contributions
ATSS has a semantics that is described in terms of predications  , all but one being marked by presupposition . The semantics of each predication is described as a set of argumentative clls  . Connecti-ves and operators contribute to the computation of 
Connective but I\[Unfortunately\]\[Terminal sentence I Terminal sentence \[ I was robbed yesterday I had money Figure  1: A-structure for " I was robbed yesterday , but unfortunately I had a little money " the signification in terms of functional transformations of the signification along the four dimensions of the cells  . The signification of TSS is assumed to be computed from the lexicon by a compositional process  . 
3.4 Argumentative structure
The A-structure is then considered as the application of an argumentative structure  ( made of modifiers , operators and connectives ) to a vector of TSS's . 
The signification of a complete sentence is computed as the application of what we call the & -structure  . 
A&-structure is a function that takes as many arguments as there are TSS's  , and is defined by using basic functions that are also used for the description of operators and connectives  . Examples of basic functions that operate cell by cell are the modification of the polyphonic value  , the direction or the strength . 
Examples of basic functions that operate on a set of cells are the selection of cells with a given poly-phonic value  , to pos or direction . The ~- structure is computed recursively on the A -structure  . As the identification or the contribution of an operator may be ambiguous  , the ~- structures may contain disjunctions . 
3.5 Computation
Given as e . atence , its ( ambiguous ) A-and ~- structures are computed . In the normal bottom-up process , the signification of TSS's is computed , and the ?- structure is applied . The result is the ( ambiguous ) signification of the complete sentence . 
If the signification of TSS's reflects their " standard " or " literal " potential  , the normal bottom-up process may fail . We wish to design &- structure so that they may be used for two additional tasks that may require a topdown process :  ( 1 ) accept TSS descriptions containing free variables  , and produce the sets of constraints on them that lead to a solution  ;   ( 2 ) provide the interpretation process with a way of generating " unusual significations " of TSS's requi-red by the global effect of the ~- structure  . 
3064 Sample Lexical Descriptions
Connective " but ": the signification of " P1 but P2" is computed from the significations of P1 and P2  , with the following modifications : generate alternatives according to a partition of top oi of  P1 and P2   ( whose cells have free commitment variables ) with the " opposite " relation which holds in T ; in each alternative , commi the corresponding cells with the value PC for  P1 and ID for P2  .  "  P1 but P2" will argue in the same way as P2 alone , based on a topos that can be opposed to one of P1 . 
Modifier " a little ": the signification of " a little P " is the one of P where the strength of all cells is attenuated  . 
Modifier " little ": the signification of " little P " changes the direction of the cells into the converse value  ( anti-orientation )  . 
TSS " John stopped smoking ": its signification is formed of two sets of cells  , the commitment value being fixed to Pc for the cells from the presupposed predication \[ John smoked before \] and leftfree for the main predication \[ John does not smoke now \]  . 
5 Interpretation
The signification of TSS's , connectives , and operators may contain instructions referring to the context for the attribution of values  . The interpretative process must fill these holes . It also further selects in the sets of top oi those connected to the situation  . 
It drives the topdown process for generating data corresponding to " odd " contexts  . 
We claim that the argumentative structure of sentences in ever questioned by the interpretative process  , that it fully captures the argumentative potential of the sentence and that it is reliable  . The signification is then a firmbase for the computation of the meaning  . 
6 Related Work
Most works on argumentation define links between propositions at a logical evel  , so that linguistic studies focus on pragmatics rather than semantics  ( Cohen ,  1987) . Some ideas of Ducrot were already used in systems : argumentative orientation  ( Guez , I990) and polyphony ( Elhadad and McKeown ,  1990) . Besides , It accah ( 1990 ) develops argumentative semantics without he need of a theory of utterance  . 
7 Conclusion
We have isolated a semantic module which allows the interpretation process to take into accounthe argumentative constraints imposed by linguistic lues  . 
We designed this module so that it starts from lexical descriptions which we are able to provide manually  , and produces a structure whose interpretation can be computed  . Remaining difficulties lay in the linguistic theories themselves  ( mainly combining modifiers and cataloguing to poi )  , the signification of TSS's ( which should be compositional ) and the integration of argumentative semantics with informative and illocutionary elements  . 
References
It . Cohen .  1987 . An Myzing the structure of argumentative discourse  . Computational linguistics , 13(1-2) . 
O . Ducrot et al 1980 . Lesroots du discours , les~ditions de Minuit . 
O . Ducrot .  1984 . Le dire et led it . les~ditions de

M . Elhadad and K . It . McKeown .  1990 . Generating connectives . In Proc . Coling , Helsinki , Finland . 
J . -M . Gr and champ .  1994 . l ~ nonciation et dialogue homme-machine . In Proc . Le Dialogique,
Le Mans , France.
S . Guez .  1990 . A computational model for arguments understanding  . In Proc . Coling , Heisinki,

E . Klein .  1982 . The interpretation flinguisticom-paratives . Journal of Linguistics , 18 . 
P . -Y . It accah .  1990 . Modelling argumentation , or modelling with argumentation . Argumentation , 4 . 
S . Toulmin .  1958 . The uses of Arguments . Cambridge University Press . 

