Sense Disambiguation Using Semantic
Relations and Adjacency Information
Anil S . Chakravarthy
MIT Media Laboratory
20 Ames Street E15-468 a
Cambridge MA 02139
anil@media.mit.edu

This paper describes a heuristic-based approach to word sense disambiguation  . The heuristics that are applied to disambiguate a word depend on its part of speech  , and on its relationship to neighboring salient words in the text  . Parts of speech are found through a tagger , and related neighboring words are identified by a phrase xtractor operating on the tagged text  . To suggest possible senses , each heuristic draws on semantic relations extracted from a Webster's dictionary and the semantic thesaurus WordNet  . For a given word , all applicable heuristics are tried , and those senses that are rejected by all heuristics are discarded  . In all , the disambiguator uses 39 heuristics based on 12 relationships . 
1 Introduction
Word-sense disambiguation has long been recognized as a difficult problem in computational linguistics  . As early as 1960 , Bar-Hillel \[1\] noted that a computer program would find it challenging to recognize the two different senses of the word " pen " in " The pen is in the box  , " and " The box is in the pen . " In recent years , there has been a resurgence of interest in word sense disambiguation due to the availability of linguistic resources like dictionaries and thesauri  , and due to the importance of disambiguation in applications like information retrieval and machine translation  . 
The task of disambiguation is to assign a word to one or more senses in a reference by taking into account the context in which the word occurs  . The reference can be a standardictionary or thesaurus  , or a lexicon constructed specially for some application  . The context is provided by the text unit ( paragraph , sentence , tc . ) in which the word occurs . 
The disambiguator described in this paper is based on two reference sources  , the Webster's Seventh Dictionary and the semantic thesaurus WordNet  \[12\]  . Before the disambiguator is applied , the text input is processed first by a part-of -speech tagger and then by a phrase x trac-tor which detects phrase boundaries  . Therefore , for each ambiguous word , the disambiguator knows the part of speech , and other phrase head words and modifiers that are adjacent to it  . Based on this context information , the disambiguator uses a set of heuristics to assign one or more senses from the Webster's dictionary or WordNet to the word  . Here is an example of a heuristic that relies on the fact that conjoined head nouns are likely to refer to objects of the same category  . Consider the ambiguous word " snow " in the sentence " Slush and snow filled the roads  . " In this sentence , the tagger identifies " snow " as a noun . The phrase xtractor indicates that " snow " and " slush " are conjoined head words of a noun phrase  . 
Then , the heuristic uses WordNet o identify the senses of " slush " and " snow " that belong to a common category  . Therefore , the sense of " snow " as " cocaine " is discarded by this heuristic  . 
The disambiguator has been incorporated into two information retrieval applications which use semantic relations  ( like A-KIND-OF ) from the dictionary and WordNet omatch queries to text  . Since semantic relations are attached to particular word senses in the dictionary and WordNet  , disambiguated representations of the text and the queries lead to targeted use of semantic relations in matching  . 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows . The next section reviews existing approaches to disambiguation with emphasis on directly related methods  . Section 3 describes in more detail the heuristics and adjacency relationships used by the disambiguator  . 
2932 Previous Work on Disambiguation
In computational linguistics , considerable effort has been devoted to word sense disambiguation  \[8\]  . These approaches can be broadly classified based on the reference from which senses are assigned  , and on the method used to take the context of occurrence into account  . The references have ranged from detailed custom -built lexicons  ( e . g . , \[ l 1\] ) to standard resources like dictionaries and thesaurilke Roget's  ( e . g . , \[2, 10, 14\]) . To take the context into account , researchers have used a variety of statistical weighting and spreading activation models  ( e . g . , \[9, 14, 15\]) . This section gives brief descriptions of some approaches that use online dictionaries and 
WordNet as references.
WordNet is a large , manually-constructed smantic network built at Princeton University by George Miller and his colleagues  \[12\]  . The basic unit of WordNet is a set of synonyms , called a synset , e . g . ,\[ go , travel , move \] . A word ( or a word collocation like " operating room " ) can occur in any number of synsets , with each synset reflecting a different sense of the word  . WordNet is organized around a taxonomy of hypernyms  ( A-KIND-OF relations ) and hyponyms ( inverses of A-KIND-OF )  , and 10 othe relations . The disambiguation algorithm described by Voorhees  \[16\] partitions WordNet into hoods , which are then used as sense categories ( like dictionary subject codes and Roget's thesaurus classes  )  . A single synset is selected for nouns based on the hood overlap with the surrounding text  . 
The research on extraction of semantic relations from dictionary definitions  ( e . g . , \[5 ,  7\] ) has resulted in new methods for disambiguation , e . g . , \[2, 15\] . For example , Vanderwende \[15\] uses semantic relations extracted from LDOCE to interpret nominal compounds  ( noun sequences )  . Her algorithm disambiguates noun sequences by using the dictionary to search for predefined relations between the two nouns  ; e . g . , in the sequence " bird sanctuary , " the correct sense of " sanctu-ary " is chosen because the dictionary definition indicates that as anctuary is an area for birds or animals  . 
Our algorithm , which is described in the next section , is in the same spirit as Vanderwende's but with two main differences  . In addition to noun sequences , the algorithm has heuristics for handling 11 other adjacency relationships . Second , the algorithm brings to bear both WordNet and semantic relations extracted from an online Webster's dictionary during disambiguation  . 
3 Sense Disambiguation with
Adjacency Information
The input to the disambiguator is a pair of words , along with the adjacency relationship that links them in the input text  . The adjacency relationship is obtained automatically by processing the text through the Xerox PARC part-of-speech tagger  \[6\] and a phrase x tractor . 
The 12 adjacency relationships used by the disambiguator are listed below  . These adjacency relationships were derived from an analysis of captions of news photographs provided by the Associated Press  . The examples from the captions also helped us identify the heuristic rules necessary for automatic disambiguation using WordNet and the Webster's dictionary  . In the table below , each adjacency category is accompanied by an example  . 39 heuristic rules are used currently . 
Adjacency Relationship Example
Adjective modifying a noun Express train Possessive modifying a noun Pharma cist's coat Noun followed by a proper Tenor Luciano name Pavarotti Present participle gerund Training drill modifying a noun 
Noun noun
Conjoined nouns
Noun modified by a noun at the head of a following " of ' 

Noun modified by a noun at the head of a following " non-of " PP 
Noun that is the subject of an action verb
Noun that is the object of an action verb
Basketballfan
A church and a home
Barrel of the rifle
Amortar with as hell
Amonitor displays information
Writeamystery
Noun that is at the head of a Sentenced to life prepositional phrase following a verb Nouns that are subject and The hawk found a object of the same action perch Given a pair of words and the adjacency relationship  , the disambiguator applies all heuristics corresponding to that category  , and those word senses that are rejected by all heuristics are discarded  . Due to space considerations , we will not describe the heuristic rules individually butristics are described in detail in  \[3\]  . 
? Several heuristics look for a particular semantic relation like hypernymy or purpose linking the two input words  , e . g . , " return " is a hypernym of " for e h and . "? Many heuristics look for particular semantic relations linking the two input words to a common word or synset  ; e . g . , a " church " and a " home " are both buildings . 
? Many heuristics look for analogous adjacency patterns either in dictionary definitions or in example sentences  , e . g . , " write a mystery " is disambiguated by analogy to the example sentence " writes poems and essays  . " ? Some heuristics look for specific hypernyms such as person or place in the input words  ; e . g . , if a noun is followed by a proper name ( as in " ten or Luciano Pavarotti " or " pitcher Curt Schilling "  )  , those senses of the noun that have " person " as a hypernym are chosen  . 
The disambiguator has been used in two retrieval programs  , Im Engine , a program for semantic retrieval of image captions  , and NetSerf , a program for finding Internet information archives  \[3  ,  4\] . The initial results have not been promising , with both programs reporting deterioration i performance when the disambiguator is included  . This agrees with the current wisdom in the IR community that unless disambiguation is highly accurate  , it might not improve the retrieval system's performance\[  13\]  . 
References 1 . Bar-Hillel , Yehoshua .  1960 . " The Present Status of Automatic Translation of Languages  , " in Advances in Computers , F . L . Alt , editor , Academic Press , New

2 . Braden-Harder , Lisa .  1992 . " Sense Disambiguation Using Online Dictionaries , " in Natural Language Processing : The PLNLP Approach  , Jensen , K . , Heidorn , G . E . , and Richardson , S . D . , editors , Kluwer Academic Publishers . 
3 . Chakravarthy , Anil S .  1995 . "Information Access and Retrieval with Semantic Background Knowledge " Ph  . Dthesis , MIT Media Laboratory . 
4 . Chakravarthy , Anil S . and Haase , Kenneth B .  1995 . 
"NetSerf : Using Semantic Knowledge to Find Internet Information Archives  , " to appear in Proceedings of SIGIR'95 . 
5 . Chodorow , Martin . S . , Byrd , Roy . J . , and Heidorn , George . E .  1985 . " Extracting Semantic Hierarchies from a Large On Line Dictionary  , " in Proceedings of the 23rd ACL . 
6 . Cutting , Doug , Julian Kupiec , Jan Pedersen , and Penelope Sibun .  1992 . "A Practical Part-of-Speech Tagger , " in Proceedings of the Third Conference on
Applied NLP.
7 . Dolan , William B . , Lucy Vanderwende , and Richardson , Steven . D .  1993 . " Automatically Deriving Structured Knowledge Bases from Online Dictionaries  , " in Proceedings of the First Conference of the Pacific Association for Computational Linguistics  , Vancouver . 
8 . Gale , William , Church , Kenneth . W . , and David Yarowsky .  1992 . " Estimating Upper and Lower Bounds on the Performance of Word-sense Disambiguation Programs  , " in Proceedings of ACL-92 . 
9 . Hearst , Marti .  1991 . " Noun Homograph Disambiguation Using Local Context in Large Text Corpora  , " Proceedings of the 7th Annual Conference of the UWC entre for the New OED and Text Research  , Oxford , 

10 . Lesk , Michael .  1986 . " Automatic Sense Disambiguation : How to Tella Pine Conefroman Ice Cream Cone  , " in Proceedings of the SIGDOC Conference 11 . McRoy , Susan .  1992 . " Using Multiple Knowledge Sources for Word Sense Discrimination  , " in Computational Linguistics ,  18(1) . 
12 . Miller , George A .  1990 . " WordNet : An Online Lexical Database , " in International Journal of Lexicography ,  3(4) . 
13 . Sanderson , Mark .  1994 . " Word Sense Disambiguation and Information Retrieval  , " in Proceedings of
SIGIR'94.
14 . Yarowsky , David .  1992 . " Word Sense Disambiguation Using Statistical Models of Roget's Categories Trained on Large Corpora  , " in Proceedings of COL-
ING-92, Nantes , France.
15 . Vanderwende , Lucy .  1994 . " Algorithm for Automatic Interpretation f Noun Sequences  , " in Proceedings of COLING94 , Kyoto , Japan . 
16 . Voorhees , Ellen . M .  1993 . " Using WordNet oDisambiguate Word Senses for Text Retrieval  , " in Proceedings of SIGIR'93 . 

