From route descriptions to sketches :
a model for a text-to-image translator
Lidia Fraczak
LIMSI-CNRS , b?t . 508, BP 133
91403 Orsay cedex , France
fraczak@limsi.fr
Abstract
This paper deals with the automatic translation of route descriptions into graphic sketches  . We discuss some general problems implied by such inter-mode transcription  . We propose a model for an automatic text-to-image translator with a twostage intermediate representation i which the linguistic representation faroute description precedes the creation of its conceptual representation  . 
1 Introduction
Computer text-image transcription has lately become a subject of interest  , prompting research on relations between these two modes of representation and on possibilities of transition from one to the other  . Different types of text and of images have been considered  , for example : narrative text and motion pictures ( Kahn , 1979; Abraham and De-scl~s ,  1992) , spatial descriptions and 3-dimensional sketches ( Yamada et al , 1992; Arnold and Lebrun ,  1992) ,   2-dimensional spatial scenes and linguistic descriptions ( Andr ~ et al ,  1987) ,   2-dimensional image sequences and linguistic reports ( Andr ~ et al ,  1988) . 
Linguistic and pictorial modes may be considered as complementary since they are capable of conveying different kinds of content  ( Arnold ,  1990) . This complementarity of expression is explored in order to be used in multimodal systems for humancomputer interaction such as computer assisted architectural conception  ( Arnold and Lebrun ,  1992) . Such systems should not only use different modes to ensure better communication  , but should also be able to pass from one to the other  . Given the differences in capacities of these two means of expression  , one may expect some problems in trying to encode into a picture the information contained in a linguistic description  . 
The present research is concerned with route descriptions  ( RDs ) and their translation into 2-dimensional graphic sketches . We deal with a type of discourse whose informational content may seem quite easy to represent in a graphic mode  . In everyday communication situations , verbal RDs are often accompanied by sketches , thus participating in a 2-mode representation . A sketch can also function as a route representation by itself  . 
We will first outline some problems that may appear while translating descriptions into graphics  . 
Then we will describe our general model for an automatic translator and some aspects of the underlying knowledge representation  . 
2 Some translation problems
Our first approach to translate RDs into graphic maps consisted in manually transcribing linguistic descriptions into sketches  . By doing this , we encountered several problems , some of which we will try to illustrate through the following example  , taken from the French corpus of ( Gryl ,  1992) . 
Example 2 . 1 A la sortie des tourniquets du RER tu prends sur tagauche  . II yaune magni\]ique de-scente ~ prendre . Puistutournes~droite , tutom bessurunes drie de panne aux d ' informations  . Tu continues to ut droiten longeant lest errains detenni set tutom be sur leb dtimentA  .   1 In the description here above we can observe some ambiguities  , or incompleteness of information , which may be a problem for a graphic depiction . The most striking case is the information about the tennis courts : we do not know on which side of the path  , right or left , they are located . 
1 At the turnstiles of the RER station you turn left  . 
There is a steep ( a magnificent ) downgrade to take . 
Then you turn right , you come across a series of sign posts . You continue straight on , passing alongside the tennis courts , and you come to building A . 

There is also another kind of ambiguity due to the fact that in a RD the whole path does not have to be " linguistically covered "  . Consider the fragment about turning to the left ( " tuprends surtagauche " ) and the downgrade ( " descente " )  . It is difficult to judge whether the downgrade is located right after the turn  , or " a little further " . The same question holds for the right turn ( " puistutournes~droite " ) and the sign posts ( " panneaux d ' informations " ) : should the posts be represented as immediately following the turning point  ( as expressed in the text ) or should there be a path between them ? This kind of ambiguity is not really perceived unless we want to derive a graphic representation of the route  . The information is complete enough for a real life situation of finding one's way  . 
Another kind of problem concerns the " magnifique descent e "  . It would not be easy to represent a slope in a simple sketch and  , even less so , its characteristic of being steep , which the French word " magnifique " suggests in this context  . The incompleteness of information will occur on the graphic side this time  , not all properties of the described element being possible to express in this mode  . 
Such transcription constraints , once defined and analyzed , should be taken into account in order to obtain a " faithful " graphic representation  . It seems that , in some cases , verbal-side incompleteness problems might be solved thanks to some relevant linguistic markers  , as well as to the knowledge included in the conceptual model of the route  . We think here in particular of the questions whether there is a significant stretch of path between two elements of environment  ( landmarks )  , or a turn and a landmark , mentioned in the text immediately one after ? the other  . Concerning the ambiguity related to the location of landmarks  , one can either choose an arbitrary value or try to find a way of preserving the ambiguity in the graphic mode itself  . 
We have mentioned here only some of the problems concerning the translation of RDs into graphic sketches  . We have not considered those parts of linguistic description contents which are not representable by images  , such as comments or evaluations ( e . g . " you can't miss it "; " it's very simple ") . 
3 S teps o f the t rans la t ion process Translating linguistic utterances into a pictorial code cannot be done without an intermediater presentation  , that is , a conceptual structure that bridges the gap between these two expression modes  ( Arnold ,  1990) . Abraham and Descl~s ( 1992 ) talk about the necessity of creating a common semantics for the two modes  . 
In our case , the purpose of the intermediater presentation is to extract from the linguistic description the information concerning the route with the aim of representing it in the form of a sketch  . However , instead of trying to create a unique " super -structure "  , we envisage a dual representation , with the linguistic and the conceptual levels . The core of the process of translating RDs into graphic maps will thus consist in the transition from the linguistic representation to the conceptual one  . 
For the sake of the linguistic representation , we thought it necessary to carry out an analysis of real examples and elaborate a linguistic model of this particular type of discourse  . We have worked on a corpus of 60 route descriptions in French . The analysis has been performed at two levels : the global level and the local level  . Global analysis consisted in dividing descriptions into global units  , defined as sequences and connections , and in categorizing these units on a functional and thematic basis  . We have thus specified several categories of route description sequences  , the main ones being action prescriptions ( e . g . " tucontinuest outdroit " ) and landmark indications ( e . g . " tutom bessur leb?timentA . ") . 2 The inter-sequence on nections ( e . g . " puis " , " qu and " , " ou ": " then " , " when " , " or ") , which mark the relationships between sequences or groups of sequences  , have been categorized according to their functions  ( e . g . succession , anchorage , alternative ) . 
Local analysis consisted in the determination of semantic subunits of descriptions and in the definition of the content of different sequences with respecto these subunits  . These latter will enable , during the processing of a RD , to extract and represent information concerning actions and landmarks  , and their attributes . Thus , one of the objectives of local analysis has been to determine which types of verbs in the RD express travel actions and which ones serve to introduce landmarks  . The subunits have been further analyzed and divided into types  ( e . g . different types of actions ) . 
For the purpose of the conceptual representation of RDs  , we need a prototypical model of their referent which is the route  . We have decomposed it into a path and landmarks . A path is made up of transfers and relays . Relays are abstract points initiating transfers and may be " covered " by a turn  . Landmarks can be either associated with relays or with transfers  . More formally , a route is structured into a list of segments , each segment consisting of a relay and of a transfer  . Landmarks are represented as possible attributes ( among others ) of these two ele-2Cf . Example 2 . 1 elements defined in terms of attribute-value pairs  , it is relatively easy to reconstruct the route described by the linguistic input : the reconstruction consists in recognizing the relevant elements and in assigning values to their attributes  . Using the route model , some elements missing in the text can be inferred  . For example , since every route segment contains one relay ( which may be a turn ) and one transfer , the information concerning the fragment of the route expressed by : " tournezk gauche et puis droite "  ( " turn to the left and then to the right " )  , must be completed by adding a transfer between the two turns  . 
Apart from models for linguistic and conceptual representations  , the rules of transition have to be defined . For this purpose , it is necessary to establish relationships between different linguistic and conceptual entities  . For example , the action of the type " progression " ( e . g . " continuer " , " aller " ) corresponds to a transfer and the actions of the type " change of direction "  ( e . g . " tourner ") or " taking away " ( e . g . 
" prend relarue " ) to a relay ( which will coincide with a turn or with the beginning of a way-landmark  , e . g . 
a street , respectively).
Another aspect of modeling consists in specifying graphic objects corresponding to the entities in the route model  . For the time being , we decided to do with simple symbolic elements , without a fine distinction between landmarks . The graphic symbols have been created on the basis of the information accessible from the context rather than the one contained in the " names " of landmarks  . These latter are included in sketches in the form of verb a labels  . 
Once the whole route has been reconstructed at the concept u M level  , we start to generate the corresponding graphic map  , like the one here below . 
0 b&timen ~ A
OOOpanneaux d'informations dQscenl ; @  4 to ~" niquets du RER 4 Conclusion Computer translation of route descriptions into sketches raises some interesting issues  . Firstly , one has to investigate the relationships between the linguistic and the graphic modes  , the constraints and possibilities which appear while generating images from linguistic descriptions  . 
Secondly , a thorough linguistic analysis of route description sine cessary  . We have used a discourse based approach and analyze " local " linguistic elements by filtering them through the discourse structure  , described at the " global " level . Our goal is to build a linguistic model for the text type " route description "  . 
Another interesting problem is the form and the derivation of the conceptual representation f the described route  . We believe that it cannot be directly obtained from the linguistic material itself  . During the understanding process , the linguistic meaning has to be represented before the conceptual representation can be created  . That is why we need a twostage internal representation  , based on specific linguistic and conceptual models  . 

M . Abraham and JP . Desclds .  1992 . Interaction between lexicon and image : Linguistic specifications of animation  . In Proc . o\]COLING-92, pages 1043-1047,

E . Andrd , G . Bosch , G . Herzog , and T . Rist .  1987 . Coping with the intrinsic and the deictic uses of spatial prepositions  . In K . Jorrand and L . Sgurev , editors , Artificial Intelligence II : Methodology , Systems , Applications , pages 375-382 . North-Holland , Amsterdam . 
E . Andrd , G . Herzog , and T . Rist .  1988 . On the simultaneous interpretation of realworld image sequences and their natural anguage description : The system SOCCER  . In Proc . o \] the 8th ECAI , pages 449-454,

M . Arnold and C . Lebrun .  1992 . Utilisation d'une langue pour la creation desc ~nes architecturales n image de synthbse  . Exp6rience tr 6flexions . Intellec-tica , 3(15):151-186 . 
M . Arnold .  1990 . Transcription automatique verbal-image etvice versa  . Contribution ~ une revue de la question . In Proc . of EuropIA-90, pages 3037, Paris . 
A . Gryl .  1992 .   Op6rations cognitives mises enoeuvred ansla description d'itin6ralres   . Mdmoire de DEA,
Universitd Paris 11, France.
K . M . Kahn .  1979 . Creation of computer animation from story descriptions  . A . I . Technical report 540, M . I . T . 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory , Cambridge , MA . 
A . Yamada , T . Yamamoto , H . Ikeda , T . Nishida , and S . Doshita .  1992 . Reconstructing spatial image from natural language texts  . In Proc . of COLING-9P , pages 1279-1283, Nantes . 

