Evaluating Automated and Manual Acquisition of
Anaphora Resolution Strategies
Chinatsu Aone and Scott William Bennett
Systems Research and Applications Corporation ( SRA ) 
2000 15th Street North
Arlington , VA 22201
a one c~sra.corn , bennett~sra.com
Abstract
We describe one approach to build an automatically trainable anaphora resolution system  . In this approach , we use Japanese newspaper articles tagged with discourse information as training examples for a machine learning algorithm which employs the  C4  . 5 decision tree algorithm by Quinlan ( Quinlan ,  1993) . Then , we evaluate and compare the results of several variants of the machine learning-based approach with those of our existing anaphora resolution system which uses manually-designed knowledge sources  . Finally , we compare our algorithms with existing theories of anaphora  , in particular , Japanese zero pronouns . 
1 Introduction
Anaphora resolution is an important but still difficult problem for various largescale natural anguage processing  ( NLP ) applications , uchas information extraction and machine tr ~slation  . Thus far , no theories of anaphora have been tested on an empirical basis  , and therefore there is no answer to the " best " anaphora resolution algorithm  . I Moreover , an anaphora resolution system within an NLP system for real applications must handle : ? degraded or missing input  ( no NLP system has complete lexicons , grammars , or semantic knowledge and outputs perfect results  )  , and ? different anaphoric phenomena in different domains  , languages , and applications . 
Thus , even if there exists a perfect heory , it might not work well with noisy input , or it would not cover all the anaphoric phenomena . 
1 Walker ( Walker , 1989) compares Brennan , Friedmana ~ ad Pollard's centering approach ( Brennan et al , 1987) with Hobbs ' algorithm ( Hohbs , 1976) on a theoretical basis . 
These requirements have motivated us to develop robust  , extensible , and trainable anaphora resolution systems . Previously ( Aone and Mc-Kee ,  1993) , we reported our datadriven multilingual anaphora resolution system  , which is robust , exteusible , and manually trainable . It uses discourse knowledge sources ( KS's ) which are manually selected and ordered . ( Henceforth , we call the system the Manually-Designed Resolver  , or MDR . ) We wanted to develop , however , truly automatically trainable systems , hoping to improve resolution performance and reduce the overhead of manually constructing and arranging such discourse data  . 
In this paper , we first describe one approach we are taking to build an automatically trainable anaphora resolution system  . In this approach , we tag corpora with discourse information , and use them as training examples for a machine learning algorithm  . ( Henceforth , we call the system the Machine Learning-based Resolver  , or MLR . ) Specifically , we have tagged Japanese newspaper articles about joint ventures and used the  C4  . 5 decision tree algorithm by Quinlan ( Quinlan ,  1993) . Then , we evaluate and compare the results of the MLR with those produced by the MDR  . Finally , we compare our algorithms with existing theories of anaphora  , in particular , Japanese zero pronouns . 
2 Applying a Machine Learning
Technique to Anaphora Resolution
In this section , we first discuss corpora which we created for training and testing  . Then , we describe the learning approach chosen , and discuss training features and training methods that we employed for our current experiments  . 
2.1 Training and Test Corpora
In order to both train and evaluate an anaphora resolution system  , we have been developing corpora which are tagged with discourse information  . 
The tagging has been done using a GUI-based tool called the Discourse Tagging Tool  ( DT Tool ) according to " The Discourse Tagging Guidelines " we anaphor with its antecedent and specify the type of the anaphor  ( e . g . pronouns , definite NP's , etc . ) . 
The tagged result can be written out to an SGML -marked file  , as shown in Figure 1 . 
For our experiments , we have used a discourse-tagged corpus which consists of Japanese newspaper articles about joint ventures  . The toollets a user define types of anaphor as necessary  . The anaphoric types used to tag this corpus are shown in Table  1  . 
NAME anaphor are tagged when proper names are used anaphorically  . For example , in Figure 1 , " Yamaichi ( ID = 3 ) " and " Sony-Prudential ( ID = 5 ) " referring back to " Yamaichi Shouken ( ID = 4 ) "  ( Ya-maichi Securities ) and " Sony-Prudential Seimeiho-ken ( ID = 6 ) "  ( Sony-Prudential Life Insurance ) respectively are NAME anaphora . NAME anaphora in Japanese are different from those in English in that any combination of characters in an antecedent can be NAME anaphora slong as the character order is preserved  ( e . g . " abe " can be an anaphor of " abcde ") . 
Japanese definite NPs ( i . e . DNP anaphora ) are those prefixed by " dou " ( literally meaning " the same " )  , " ryou " ( literally meaning " the two ") , and deictic determiners like " kono " ( this ) and " sono " ( that )  . For example , " dou-sha " is equivalent to " the company " , and " ryou-koku " to " the two countries " . 
The DNP anaphora with " dou " and " ryou " prefixes are characteristic of written  , but not spoken , 
Japanese texts.
Unlike English , Japanese has so called zero pronouns , which are not explicit in the text . In these cases , the DT Toollets the user insert a " Z " marker just before the main predicate of the zero pronoun to indicate the existence of the anaphor  . We made distinction between QZPRO and ZPRO when tagging zero pronouns  . QZ PRO ( " quasi-zero pronoun " ) is chosen when a sentence has multiple clauses ( subordinate or coordinate )  , and the zero pronouns in these clauses refer back to the subject of the initial clause in the same sentence  , as shown in Figure 2 . 
The anaphoric types are subdivided according to more semantic riteria such as organizations  , people , locations , etc . This is because the current application of our multilingual NLP system is information extraction  ( Aone et al ,  1993) , i . e . extracting from texts information about which organizations are forming joint ventures with whom  . Thus , resolving certain anaphora ( e . g . various ways to refer back to organizations ) affects the task performance more than others , as we previously reported ( Aone ,  1994) . 
Our goal is to customize and evaluate anaphora resolution systems according to the types of anaphora when necessary  . 
2Our work on the DTTool and tagged corpora was reported in a recent paper  ( Aone and Bennett ,  1994) . 
2.2 Learning Method
While several inductive learning approaches could have been taken for construction of the trainable anaphoric resolution system  , we found it useful to be able to observe the resulting classifier in the form of a decision tree  . The tree and the features used could most easily be compared to existing theories  . 
Therefore , our initial approach as been to employ Quinlan's C4  . 5 algorithm at the heart of our classification approach  . We discuss the features used for learning below and go on to discuss the training methods and how the resulting tree is used in our anaphora resolution algorithm  . 
2.3 Training Features
In our current machine learning experiments , we have taken an approach where we train a decision tree by feeding feature vectors for pairs of an anaphor and its possible antecedent  . Currently we use 66 features , and they include lezical ( e . g . category ), syntactic ( e . g . grammatical role ), semantic ( e . g . semantic class ), and positional ( e . g . distance between anaphor and antecedent ) features . Those features can be either unary features ( i . e . features of either an anaphor or an antecedent such as syntactic number values  ) or binary features ( i . e . features concerning relations between the pairs such as the positional relation between an anaphor and an antecedent  . ) We started with the features used by the MDR , generalized them , and added new features . The features that we employed are common across domains and languages though the feature values may change in different domains or languages  . Example of training features are shown in Table 2 . 
The feature values are obtained automatically b processing a set of texts with our NLP system  , which performs lexical , syntactic and semantic analysis and then creates discourse markers  ( Kamp , 1981) for each NP and S .   3 Since discourse markers to re the output of lexical  , syntactic and semantic processing , the feature vectors are automatically calculated from them  . Because the system output is not always perfect ( especially given the complex newspaper articles )  , however , there is some noise in feature values . 
2.4 Training Methods
We have employe different raining methods using three parameters : anaphoric hains  , anaphoric type identification , and confidence factors . 
The anaphoric chain parameter is used in selecting training examples  . When this parameter is on , we select a set of positive training examples and a set of negative training examples for each anaphor in a text in the following way:  3 Existence of zero pronouns in sentence si detected by the syntax module  , and discourse maxkers are created for them . 
123 < CORe:m='I"><COREFn~'4">ttl--lEff-</mR~:<u . ~ J-m='s '> y-'--?~') l,~Y : ,, ~,) t,? . @ ~ l ~( ~ P , -' ll~l ~ : . ~ t , : ?4 t . lr ) ~ ) < CORE\]:m='O"rcPE='~RB:='i "> </ COR~>III@b ~ .  ~ )   q~'~6<COR  ~  ZD='2e rVPE='ZPm-t~-"REFf'I "> </ COREF > ~ Ii 3"~  . < CORe:ZD='~' WRf"NANE--OR6"   RB:f'4">ttI--</COE~<COREF   ~"8">q  ~ , l , ~ltC)~e't-"~ .   '3 tt~ttll~:~'~'&</COR~<COR~m='s"WR = ' tt~E-O~REFf "#'> y -'---  . ~') t , -~>-b , ,v)l , </ mR ~ : ~- , < COmFn ) = "?' WPE='Dm"REF='8">Cr ~5 , ~- 7" I ,  < , ' CUT~<CORBF m='9"   WR='ZT4~O-O  ~  8EEf'5"> </OR~ff-~T<CO~m="~o"TYR='~O-U ~ RE~='5"> Figure 1: TextTagged with Discourse Information using SGML



























Table 1: Summary of Anaphoric Types

Definite NP
Definite NP
Definite NP
Definite NP
Definite NP
Definite NP whose referent is a facility whose referent is a location whose referent is an organization whose referent is a person whose referent is time Definite NP whose referent is two entities Definite NP whose referent is two organization entities Definite NP whose referent is two location entities Definite NP whose referent is two person entities 
Reflexive expressions ( e . $." jish a ~)
Proper name
Proper name for facility
Proper name for location
Proper name for organization
Proper name for person
Deictic pronoun ( this , these)
Locational indexical ( here , there)
Time indexical ( now , then , later )
Quasi-zero pronoun
Quasi-zero pronoun whose referent is an organization Quasi-zero pronoun whose referent is a person 
Zero pronoun
Zero pronoun in an impersonal construction Zero pronoun whose referent is an organization Zero pronoun whose referent is a person 
JDEL Dou-ellipsis
SONY-waRCA-toteikeishi,VCR-woQZPRO
Sony-subj RCA-with joint venture VCR-obj ( it ) kaihatsu suru to QZPRO happyous hit a develop that ( it ) announced " ( SONY ) announced that SONY will form a joint venture with RCA and  ( it ) will develop VCR's . "
Figure 2: QZPRO Example
Table 2: Examples of Training Features
Unary feature B in axy feature
Lexical category matching-category
Syntactic topicalized matching-topicalized Semantic semantic-class subsuming-semantic-class Positional antecedent-precedes-anaphorantecedent pairs whose anaphor is directly linked to its antecedent in the tagged corpus and also whose anaphor is paired with one of the antecedents on the anaphoric chain  , i . e . the transitive closure between the anaphor and the first mention of the antecedent  . 
For example , if B refers to A and C refers to B , CA is a positive training example as well as BA and 

Negative training examples are chosen by pairing an anaphor with all the possible antecedents in a text except for those on the transitive closure described above  . Thus , if there are possible antecedents in the text which are not in the C-B-A transitive closure  , say D , CD and BD are negative training examples . 
When the anaphoric hain parameter is off , only those anaphor antecedent pairs whose anaphora redirectly linked to their antecedents in the corpus are considered as positive xamples  . Because of the way in which the corpus was tagged  ( according to our tagginguidelines )  , an anaphor is linked to the most recent antecedent  , except for a zero pronoun , which is linked to its most recent over t antecedent  . In other words , a zero pronoun is never linked to another zero pronoun  . 
The anaphoric type identification parameter is utilized in training decision trees  . With this parameter on , a decision tree is trained to answer " no " when a pair of an anaphor and a possible antecedent are not coreferential  , or answer the anaphoric type when they are coreferential  . If the parameter is off , a binary decision tree is trained to answer just " yes " or " no " and does not have to answer the types of anaphora  . 
The confidence factor parameter ( 0100 ) is used in pruning decision trees . With a higher confidence factor , less pruning of the tree is performed , and thus it tends to overfit the training examples  . With a lower confidence factor , more pruning is performed , resulting in a smaller , more generalized tree . We used confidence factors of 25, 50,75 and 100% . 
The anaphoric hain parameter described above was employed because an anaphor may have more than one " correct " antecedent  , in which case there is no absolute answer as to whether one antecedent is better than the others  . The decision tree approach we have taken may thus predict more than one antecedent to pair with a given anaphor  . Currently , confidence values returned from the decision tree are employed when it is desired that a single antecedent be selected for a given anaphor  . We are experimenting with techniques to break ties in confidence values from the tree  . One approach is to use a particular bias , say , in preferring the antecedent closes to the anaphor among those with the highest confidence  ( as in the results reported here )  . Although use of the confidence values from the tree works well in practice  , these values were only intended as a heuristic for pruning in Quinlan's  C4  . 5 . We have plans to use crossvalidation across the training set as a method of determining error -rates by which to prefer one predicted antecedent over another  . 
Another approach is to use a hybrid method where a preference-trained decision tree is brought into supplement the decision process  . Preference-trained trees , like that discussed in Connolly et al ( Connolly et al ,  1994) , are trained by presenting the learning algorithm with examples of when one anaphor antecedent pair should be preferred over another  . 
Despite the fact that such trees are learning preferences  , they may not produce sufficient preferences to permit selection of a single best anaphor antecedent combination  ( see the " Related Work " section below )  . 
3 Testing
In this section , we first discuss how we configured and developed the MLRs and the MDR for testing  . 
Next , we describe the scoring methods used , and then the testing results of the MLRs and the MDR  . 
In this paper , we report the results of the four types of anaphora  , namely NAME-ORG , QZ PRO-ORG , DNP-ORG , and ZPRO-ORG , since they are the majority of the anaphora ppearing in the texts and most important for the current domain  ( i . e . joint ventures ) and application ( i . e . information extraction ) . 
3.1 Testing the MLRa
To build MLRs , we first trained decision trees with 1971 anaphora 4   ( of which 929 were NAME-ORG ; 546 QZPRO-ORG ; 87 DNP-ORG ; 282 ZPRO-ORG ) in 295 training texts . The sixMLRs using decision trees with different parameter combinations are described in Table  3  . 
Then , we trained decision trees in the MLR-2 configuration with varied numbers of training texts  , namely 50 ,  100 ,  150 , 200 and 250 texts . This is done to find out the minimum number of training texts to achieve the optimal performance  . 
3.2 Testing the MDR
The same training texts used by the MLRs served as development data for the MDR  . Because the NLP system is used for extracting information about joint ventures  , the MDR was configured to handle only the crucial subset of anaphoric types for this experiment  , namely all the name anaphor and zero pronouns and the definite NPs referring to organizations  ( i . e . DNP-ORG ) . The MDR applies different sets of generators , filters and orderers to resolve different anaphoric types  ( Aone and McKee ,  1993) . A generator generates a set of possible antecedent hypotheses for each anaphor  , while a filter eliminates * In both training and testing  , we did not include anaphora which refer to multiple discontinuous antecedents  . 







Table 3: Six Configurations of MLR syes no yes no yes no yesnoyes yes no no confidence factor lOO %  75%  '  50%  "  25%   75%   75% unlikely hypotheses from the set . An ordereranks hypotheses in a preference order if there is more than one hypothesis left in the set after applying all the applicable filters  . Table 4 shows KS's employed for the four anaphoric types . 
3.3 Scoring Method
We used recall and precision metrics , as shown in Table 5 , to evaluate the performance of anaphora resolution  . It is importantouse both measures because one can build a high recall-low precision system or a low recall-high precision system  , neither of which may be appropriate in certain situations  . 
The NLP system sometimes fails to create discourse markers exactly corresponding to anaphora in texts due to failures of hxical or syntactic processing  . In order to evaluate the performance of the anaphora resolution systems themselves  , we only considered anaphora whose discourse markers were identified by the NLP system in our evaluation  . Thus , the system performance evaluated against all the anaphora in texts could be different  . 
Table 5: Recall and Precision Metrics for Evaluation
Recall = Nc/I , Precision = Nc/Nn
INumber of system-identified anaphora in input
N ~ Number of correct resolutions
Nh Number of resolutions attempted 3 . 4 Testing Results The testing was done using 1359 anaphora ( of which 1271 were one of the four anaphoric types ) in 200 blind test texts for both the MLRs and the MDR . It should be noted that both the training and testing texts are newspaper articles about joint ventures  , and that each article always talks about more than one organization  . Thus , finding antecedents of orga-nizational anaphora is not straightforward  . Table 6 shows the results of six different MLRs and the MDR for the four types of anaphora  , while Table 7 shows the results of the MLR-2 with different sizes of training examples , 4 Evaluation 4 . 1 The MLRs vs . the MDRUsing Fmeasures 5 as an indicator for overall performance , the MLRs with the chain parameters turned on and type identification turned off  ( i . e . MLR-1,2,3, and 4) performed the best . MLR-1 ,  2 ,  3 ,  4 , and 5 all exceeded the MDR in overall performance based on Fmeasure  . 
Both the MLRs and the MDR used the character subsequence  , the proper noun category , and the semantic lass feature values for NAME-ORG anaphora  ( in MLR-5 , using anaphoric type identification ) . It is interesting to see that the MLR additionally uses the topicalization feature before testing the semantic class feature  . This indicates that , information theoretically , if the topicalization feature is present , the semantic lass feature is not needed for the classification  . The performance of NAME-ORG is better than other anaphoric phenomena because the character subsequence fature has very high antecedent predictive power  . 
4.1.1 Evaluation of the MLIts
Changing the three parameters in the MLRs caused changes in anaphora resolution performance  . 
As Table 6 shows , using anaphoric hains without anaphoric type identification helped improve the MLRs  . Our experiments with the confidence factor parameter indicates the tradeoff between recall and precision  . With 100% confidence factor , which means no pruning of the tree , the tree overfits the examples , and leads to spurious uses of feature such as the number of sentences between an anaphor and an antecedent eartheleaves of the generated tree  . 
This causes the system to attempt more anaphor resolutions albeit with lower precision  . Conversely , too much pruning can also yield poorer results . 
M LR-5 illustrates that when anaphoric type identification is turned on the MLR's performance drops 
SF-measure is calculated by:
F = ( ~2 + 1 . 0) ? PxR#2xP+R where P is precision , R is recall , and /3 is the relative importance given to recall over precision  . In this case , = 1 . 0 . 






Table 4: KS's used by the MDR
Filters current-text current-text current -paragraph current-paragraph syntactic-category -propnnam ~ chax-subsequence semantic-class-org semantic-dass-org semantic-amount-singular not-in -the-same-dc semantic-dass-from-pred not-in-the -same-dcsereantic-dass-from-pred 
Or derers reverse-recency topica \] ization subject -nprecency topica \] ization subject-np category-np recency topicalization subject-np category-np recency  #exmpls 







Table 6: Recall and Precision of the MLRs and the MDR
NAME-ORG 84 . 79 92 . 24 84 . 79 93 . 04 83 . 20 94 . 09 83 . 84 94 . 30 85 . 74 92 . 80 68 . 30 91 . 70 76 . 39 90 . 09
DNP-ORG 44 . 44 50 . 00 44 . 44 52 . 17 37 . 04 58 . 82 38 . 89 60 . 00 44 . 44 55 . 81 29 . 63 64 . 00 35 . 19 50 . 00 65 . 62 80 . 25 64 . 84 84 . 69 63 . 02 84 . 91 64 . 06 85 . 12 56 . 51 89 . 67 54 . 17 90 . 83 67 . 19 67 . 19
ZPRO-ORG 4O . 78 64 . 62 39 . 32 73 . 64 35 . 92 73 . 27 37 . 86 76 . 47 15 . 53 78 . 05 13 . 11 75 . 00 43 . 20 43 . 20
Average 70 . 20 83 . 49 69 . 73 86 . 73 67 . 53 88 . 04 68 . 55 88 . 55 63 . 84 89 . 55 53 . 49 89 . 74 66 . 51 72 . 91
Fmeasure 76 . 27 77 . 30 76 . 43 77 . 28 74 . 54 67 . 03 69 . 5 7 texts 25O Table 7  :  MLR-2 Configuration with Varied Training Data Sizes
NAME-ORG DNP-ORG QZPRO-ORGZ PRO-ORG
RP RPR 81 . 30 91 . 94 35 . 19 48 . 72 59 . 38 82 . 09 92 . 01 38 . 89 53 . 85 63 . 02 82 . 57 91 . 89 48 . 15 60 . 47 55 . 73 83 . 99 91 . 70 46 . 30 60 . 98 63 . 02 84 . 79 93 . 21 44 . 44 53 . 33 65 . 10 84 . 79 93 . 04 44 . 44 52 . 17 64 . 84 76 . 39 90 . 09 35 . 19 50 . 00 67 . 19
Average Fmeasure
PR PRP F 76 . 77 29 . 13 56 . 07 64 . 31 81 . 92 72 . 06 85 . 82 28 . 64 62 . 77 65 . 88 85 . 89 74 . 57 85 . 60 20 . 39 70 . 00 62 . 98 87 . 28 73 . 17 82 . 88 36 . 41 65 . 22 68 . 39 84 . 99 75 . 79 83 . 89 40 . 78 73 . 04 70 . 04 86 . 53 77 . 42 84 . 69 39 . 32 73 . 64 69 . 73 86 . 73 77 . 30 67 . 19 43 . 20 43 . 20 66 . 51 72 . 91 69 . 57 effect of not training on anaphoric hains . It results in poorer performance than the MLR-1 ,  2 ,  3 ,  4 , and 5 configurations and the MDR . 
One of the advantages of the MLRs is that due to the number of different anaphoric types present in the training data  , they also learned classifiers for several additional anaphoric types beyond what the MDR could handle  . While additional coding would have been required for each of these types in the MDR  , the MLRs picked them up without additional work . The additional anaphoric types included DPRO , REFLEXIVE , and TIMEI ( cf . Table 1) . Another advantage is that , unlike the MDR , whose features are handpicked , the MLRs automatically select and use necessary features  . 
We suspect that the poorer performance of ZPRO-OR (  ; and DNP-ORG may be due to the following deficiency of the current MLR algorithms : Because anaphora resolution is performed in a " batch mode " for the MLRs  , there is currently no way to percolate the information on an anaphor antecedent link found by a system after each resolution  . For example , if a zero pronoun ( Z-2 ) refers to another zero pronoun ( Z-l )  , which in turn refers to an overt NP , knowing which is the antecedent of Z-1 may be important for Z-2 to resolve its antecedent correctly . 
However , such information is not available to the
MLRs when resolving Z-2.
4.1.2 Evaluation of the MDR
One advantage of the MDR is that a tagged training corpus is not required for hand-coding the resolution algorithms  . Of course , such a tagged corpus is necessary to evaluate system performance quantitatively and is also useful to consult with during algorithm construction  . 
However , the MLR results seem to indicate the limitation of the MDR in the way it uses order erKS's  . Currently , the MDR uses an ordered list of multiple orderer KS's for each anaphoric type  ( cf . 
Table 4) , where the first applicable order erKS in the list is used to pick the best antecedent when there is more than one possibility  . Such selection ignores the fact that even anaphora of the same type may use different orderers  ( i . e . have different preferences ) , depending on the types of possible antecedents and on the context in which the particular anaphor was used in the text  . 
4 . 2 Training Data Size vs . Performance Table 7 indicates that with even 50 training texts , the MLR achieves better performance than the MDR . Performance seems to reach a plateau at about 250 training examples with a Fmeasure of around 77  . 4 . 
5 Related Work
Anaphora resolution systems for English texts based on various machine learning algorithms  , including a decision tree algorithm , are reported in Connolly et al . ( Connolly et al , 1994) . Our approach is different from theirs in that their decision tree identifies which of the two possible antecedents for a given anaphor is " better "  . The assumption seems to be that the closest antecedent is the " correct " antecedent  . However , they note a problem with their decision tree in that it is not guaranteed to return consistent classifications given that the " preference " relationship between two possible antecedents is not transitive  . 
Soderland and Lehnert's machine learning-based information extraction system  ( Soderland and Lehnert ,  1994 ) is used specifically for filling particular templates from text input  . Although a part of its task is to merge multiple referents when they corefer  ( i . e . anaphora resolution ) , it is hard to evaluate how their anaphora resolution capability compares with ours  , since it is not a separate module . The only evaluation result provided is their extraction result  . 
Our anaphora resolution system is modular , and can be used for other NLP-based applications such as machine translation  . Soderland and Lehnert's approach relies on a large set of filled templates used for training  . Domain-specific features from those templates are employed for the learning  . Consequently , the learned classifiers are very domain-specific , and thus the approach relies on the availability of new filled template sets for porting to other domains  . 
While some such template sets exist , such as those assembled for the Message Understanding Conferences  , collecting such large amounts of training data for each new domain may be impractical  . 
Zero pronoun resolution for machine translation reported by Nakaiw and Ikehara  ( Nakaiw and Ikehara ,  1992 ) used only semantic attributes of verbs in a restricte domain  . The small test results ( 102 sentences from 29 articles ) had high success rate of 93% . However , the input was only the first paragraphs of newspaper articles which contained relatively short sentences  . Our anaphora resolution systems reported here have the advantages of domain-independence and full text handling without the need for creating an extensive domain knowledge base  . 
Various theories of Japanese zero pronouns have been proposed by computational linguists  , for example , Kameyama ( Kameyama , 1988) and Walker et a L ( Walker et al ,  1994) . Although these theories are based on dialogue examples rather than texts  , " features " used by these theories and those by the decision trees overlap interestingly  . For example , Walker et ai . proposes the following ranking scheme to select antecedents of zero pronouns  . 
(GRAMMATICAL or ZERO ) TOPIC > EMPATHY >
SUBJECT > OBJECT2 > OBJECT > OTHERS type identification turned on , the following features were used for QZPRO-ORG in this order : topicalization  , distance between an anaphor and an antecedent , semantic lass of an anaphor and an antecedent , and subject NP . We plan to analyze further the features which the decision tree has used for zero pronouns and compare them with these theories  . 
6 Summary and Future Work
This paper compared our automated and manual acquisition of anaphora resolution strategies  , and reported optimistic results for the former . We plan to continue to improve machine learning -based system performance by introducing other relevant features  . For example , discourse structure information ( Passonneau and Litman , 1993; Hearst ,  1994) , if obtained reliably and automatically , will be another useful domain-independent feature  . In addition , we will explore the possibility of combining machine learning results with manual encoding of discourse knowledge  . This can be accomplished by allowing the user to interact with the produced clas-sifters  , tracing decisions back to particular examples and allowing users to edit features and to evaluate the efficacy of changes  . 
References
Chinatsu Aone and Scott W . Bennett .  1994 . Discourse Tagging Tool and Discourse-tagged Multilingual Corpora  . In Proceedings of International Workshop on Sharable Natural Language 
Resources ( SNLR).
Chinatsu Aone and Douglas McKee . 1993.
Language-Independent Aaphora Resolution System for Understanding Multilingual Texts  . In Proceedings of 31st Annual Meeting of the ACL . 
Chinatsu Aone , Sharon Flank , Paul Krause , and Doug McKee .  1993 . SRA : Description of the SOLOMON System as Used for  MUC-5  . In Proceedings of Fourth Message Understanding Conference  ( MUC-5 )  . 
Chinatsu Aone .  1994 . Customizing and Evaluating a Multilingual Discourse Module  . In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING )  . 
Susan Brennan , Marilyn Friedman , and Carl Pollard .  1987 . A Centering Approach to Pronouns . 
In Proceedings of 25th Annual Meeting of the

Dennis Connolly , John D . Burger , and David S.
Day .  1994 . A Machine Learning Approach to Anaphoric Reference  . In Proceedings of International Conference on New Methods in Language 
Processing ( NEMLAP).
Marti A . Hearst .  1994 . Multi-Paragraph Segmentation of Expository Text . In Proceedings of 32nd
Annual Meeting of the ACL.
Jerry R . Hobbs .  1976 . Pronoun Resolution . Technical Report 761 , Department of Computer Science , City College , City University of New York . 
Megumi Kameyama .  1988 . Japanese Zero Pronominal Binding , where Syntax and Discourse Meet . 
In Papers from the Second International Workshoon Japanese Syntax  . 
Hans Kamp .  1981 . A Theory of Truth and Semantic Representation . In J . Groenendijk et al , editors , Formal Methods in the Study of Language . Mathematical Centre , Amsterdam . 
Hiromi Nakaiwa and Satoru Ikehara .  1992 . Zero Pronoun Resolution in a Japanese to English Machine Translation System by using Verbal Semantic Attribute  . In Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  . 
Rebecca J . Passonneau and Diane J . Litman .  1993 . 
Intention-Based Segmentation : Human Reliability and Correlation with Linguistic Cues  . In Proceedings of 31st Annual Meeting of the ACL . 
J . Rossquinlan . 1993. C~.5: Programs for Machine
Learning . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Stephen Soderland and Wendy Lehnert . 1994.
Corpus-driven Knowledge Acquisition for Discourse Analysis  . In Proceedings of AAAI . 
Marilyn Walker , Masayo Iida , and Sharon Cote.
1994 . Japanese Discourse and the Process of Centering . Computational Linguistics , 20(2) . 
Marilyn A . Walker .  1989 . Evaluating Discourse Processing Algorithms . In Proceedings of 27th Annual
Meeting of the ACL.

