Towards a Cognitively Plausible Model for Quantification 
Walid S . Saba
AT&T Bell Laboratories
480 Red Hill Rd ., Middletown , NJ 07748 USA

Carelton University , School of Computer Science
Ottawa , Ontario , KIS-5 B6 CAN ADA


The purpose of this paper is to sugges that quantifiers in natural languages do not have a fixed truth functional meaning as has long been held in logical semantics  . Instead we suggest that quantifiers can best be modeled as complex inference procedures that are highly dynamic and sensitive to the linguistic context  , as well as time and memory constraints 1 . 
1 Introduction
Virtually all computational models of quantification are based one some variation of the theory of generalized quantifiers  ( Barwise and Perry ,  1981) , and Montague's (1974) ( henceforth , PTQ ) . 
Using the tools of intension a logic and possible -worlds semantics  , PTQ models were able to cope with certain context -sensitive aspects of natural anguage by devising interpretation relative to a context  , where the context was taken to be an " index " denoting a possible-world and a point in time  . In this framework , the intension ( meaning ) of an expression is taken to be a function from contexts to extensions  ( denotations )  . 
In what later became known as " indexical semantics "  , Kaplan ( 1979 ) suggested adding other coordinates defining a speaker  , a listener , alocation , etc . As such , an utterance such as " I called you yesterday " expressed a different content whenever the speaker  , the listener , or the time of the utterance changed . 
While model theoretic semantics were able to cope with certain context-sensitive aspects of natural language  , the intensions ( meanings ) of quantJfiers , however , as well as other functional words , such as sentential connectives , are taken to be constant . That is , such words have the same meaning regardless of the context  ( Forbes ,  1989) . In such a framework , all natural language quantifiers have their meaning grounded in terms of two logical operators : V  ( for all )  , and q(there exists ) . Consequently , all natural language quantifiers ! The support and guidance of Dr  . Jean-Pierre Corriveau of Carleton University is greatly appreciated  . 
are , indirectly , modeled by two logical connectives : negation and either conjunction or disjunction  . In such an oversimplified model , quantifier ambiguity has often been translated to scoping ambiguity  , and elaborate models were developed to remedy the problem  , by semanticists ( Cooper , 1983; LePore et al 1983; Partee ,  1984 ) as well as computational linguists ( Harper , 1992; Alshawi , 1990; Pereira , 1990; Moran ,  1988) . The problem can be illustrated by the following examples :  ( la ) Every student in CS 404 received a grade . 
(lb ) Every student in CS 404 received a course outline . 
The syntactic structures of ( la ) and ( lb ) are identical , and thus according to Montague's PTQ would have the same translation  . Hence , the translation of ( lb ) would incorrectly state that students in CS404 received different course outlines . Instead , the desired reading is one in which " a " has a widers cope than " every " stating that there is a single course outline for the course  CS404  , an outline that all students received . Clearly , such resolution depends on general knowledge of the domain : typically students in the same class receive the same course outline  , but different grades . Due to the compositionality requirement , PTQ models cannot cope with such inferences . Consequently a number of syntactically motivated rules that suggest an adhoc semantic ordering between functional words are typically suggested  . See , for example , ( Moran , 1988) 2 . 
What we suggest , instead , is that quantifiers in natural language be treated as ambiguous words whose meaning is dependent on the linguistic context  , as well as time and memory constraints . 
2 Disambiguation of Quantifiers
Disambiguation fquantifiers , in our opinion , falls under the general problem of " lexical disambiguation '  , which is essentially an inferencing problem ( Corriveau ,  1995) . 
2 In recent years a number of suggestions have been made  , such as discourse representation theory ( DRT )   ( Kamp ,  1981) , and the use of what Cooper ( 1995 ) calls the " background situation ~ . However , in beth approaches the available context is still " syntactic ~ in nature  , and no suggestion is made on how relevant background knowledge can be made available for use in a model theoretic model  . 

Briefly , the disambiguation of " a " in ( la ) and ( lb ) is determined in an interactive manner by considering all possible knferences between the underlying concepts  . 
What we suggest is that the inferencing involved in the disambiguation f " a " in  ( la ) proceeds as follows : l . A path from grade and student , s , in addition to disambiguating grade , determines that grade , g , is a feature of student . 
2 . Having established this relationship between students and grades  , we assume the fact this relationship is many-to -many is known  . 
3 . " agrade " now refers to " a student grade " , and thus there is " a grade " for " every student "  . 
What is important to note here is that , by discovering that grade is a feature of student  , we essentially determined that " grade " is a ( skolem ) function of " student " , which is the effect of having " a " fall under the scope of " every '  . However , in contrast to syntactic approaches that rely on devising ad hoc rules  , such a relation is discovered here by performing inferences using the properties that hold between the underlying concepts  , resulting in a truly context-sensitive account of scope ambiguities  . The inferencing involved in the disambiguation f " a " in  ( lb )  , proceeds as follows : 1 . A path from course and outline disambiguates outline  , and determines outline to be a feature of course . 
2 . The relationship between course and outline is determined to be a one-to-one relationship  . 
3 . A path from course to CS404 determines that CS404 is a course . 
4 . Since there is one course , namely CS404 , " acourse outline " refers to " the " course outline  . 
3 Time and Memory Constraints
In addition to the lingusitic context , we claim that the meaning of quantifiers is also dependent on time and memory constraints  . For example , consider (2a ) Cubans prefer rum over vod ka . 
(21)) Students in CS 404 work in groups.
Our intuitive reading of ( 2a ) suggests that we have an implicit " most " , while in (2b ) we have an implicit " all " . 
We argue that such inferences are dependent on time constraints and constraints on working memory  . For example , since the set of students in CS404 is a much smaller set than the set of " Cubans " , it is conceivable that we are able to perform an exhaustive search over the set of all students in  CS404 to verify the proposition in ( 2b ) within sometime and memory constraints . In (2a ) , however , we are most likely performing a " generalization " based on few examples that are currently activated in shortterm memory  ( ST l V i )  . Our suggestion of the role of time and memory constraints i based on our view of properties and their negation We suggest that there are three ways to conceive of properties and their negation  , as shown in Figure 1 below . 
(a ) ( b ) ( c)
F'~gureI . Three models of negation.
In ( a ) , we take the view that if we have no information regarding P  ( x )  , then , we cannot decide on-~P ( x ) . In ( b) , we take the view that if P cannot be confirmed of some entity x  , then P(x ) is assumed to be false 3 . In ( c ) , however , we take the view that if there is no evidence to negate P  ( x )  , then assume P ( x ) . Note that model ( c ) essentially allows one to " generalize " , given no evidence to the contrary - or , given an overwhelming positive evidence . Of course , formally speaking , we are interested in defining the exact circumstances under which models  ( a ) through ( c ) might be appropriate . We believe that the three models are used , depending on the context , time , and memory constraints . In model ( c ) , we believe the truth ( or falsity ) of a certain property
P ( x ) is a function of the following : np ( P # ) number of positive instance satisfying P ( x ) nn ( P # ) number of negative instance satisfying P ( x ) cf ( P # ) the degree to which P is ~ gencrally " believed of x  . 
It is assumed here that cf is a value v ~ J . u\[0,1\] . That is , a value that is either undefined , or a real value between 0 and 1 . We also suggest hat this value is constantly modified  ( re-enforced ) through a feedback mechanism , as more examples are experienced 4 . 
4 Role of Cognitive Constraints
The basic problem is one of interpreting statements of the form every CP  ( the set-theoretic counterpart of the wffVx ( C ( x ) --- ) P ( x ) ) , where C has an indeterminate cardinality . Verifying every CP is depicted graphically in Figure  2  . It is assumed that the property P is generally attributed to members of the concept C with certainty cf  ( C , P ) , where cf(C , P ) --O represent she fact that P is not generally assumed of objects in C  . On the other hand , a value of cf near 1 , represents a strong bias towards believing P of C at face value  . In the former case , the processing will depend little , if at all , on our general belief , but more on the actual instances . In the latter case , and especially when faced with time and memory constraints  , more weight might be given to prior stereotyped knowledge that we might have accumulated  . More precisely: 3 This is the Closed World Assumption . 
4  .   .   .   .   .   . Thin Is similar to the dynamm reasoning process uggested by 
Wang (1995).
324 1 . An attempt at an exhaustive verification of all the elements in the set C is first made  ( this is the default meaning of " every " )  . 
2 . If time and memory capacity allow the processing of all the elements in C  , then the result is " true " if np = ICI ( that is , if every CP ) , and " false " otherwise . 
3 . If time and/or memory constraints do not allow an exhaustive verification  , then we will attempt making a decision based on the evidence at hand  , where the evidence is based on of , nn , np(a suggested function is given below ) . 
4 . In 3 , ef is computed from C elements that are currently active in shortter memory  ( if any )  , otherwise cf is the current value associated with C the KB  . 
5 . The result is used to update our certainty factor  , ef , based on the current evidence ~ . 
" cm np nn
F ' ~ ur e2 . Quantification with time and memory constraints . 
In the case of 3 , the final output is determined as a function F , that could be defined as follows : (13) Frca , )( nn , p , e , cf , o9=(np>&nn)^(cf(C , P ) >= co ) where e and co are quantifier-specific parameters  . In the case of " every " , the function in (13) states that , in the absence of time and memory resources to process every CP exhaustively  , the result of the process is ~- ue " if there is an overwhelming positive evidence  ( high value for e )  , and if the there is some prior stereotyped belief supporting this inference  ( i . e . , if cf > co > 0) . This essentially amounts to processing every CP as most CP  ( example ( 2a ) ) . 
ff " most " was the quantifier we started with , then the function in ( 13 ) and the above procedure can be applied , although smaller values for G and cowill be assigned  . At this point it should be noted that the above function is a generalization of the theory of generalized quantifiers  , where quantifiers can be interpreted using this function as shown in the table below  . 
5 The nature of this feedback mechanism is quite involved  , and will not be discussed be discussed here . 
quantifier np np-IC In nnp- 0 every n n - 0 some np > 0 nn < ICl nonn-ICI ~>0 s > Os < OW e are currently in the process of formalizing our model  , and hope to define a context-sensitive model for quantification that is also dependent ime and memory constraints  . In addition to the " cognitive plausibility ' requirement  , we require that the model preserve formal properties that are generally attributed to quantifiers in natural language  . 

Alshawi , H .  (1990) . Resolving Quasi Logical Forms , Computational Linguistics ,  6(13) , pp .  133-144 . 
Barwise , J . and Cooper , R .  (1981) . Generalized Quantifiers and Natural Language , Linguistics and
Philosophy , 4pp . 159-219.
Cooper , 1L (1995) , The Role of Situations in Generalized Quantifiers  , In L Shalom ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Contemporary Semantic Theory , Blackwell . 
Cooper , R .  (1983) . Quantification and Syntactic Theory , D . Reidel , Dordrecht , Netherlands . 
Corriveau , J . -P .  (1995) . Time-Constrained Memory , to appear , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , NJ . 
Forbes , G , (1989) . Indexicals , In D . Gabby et al ( Eds . ), Handbook of Phil . Logic : IV , D . Reidel . 
Harper , M . P .  (1992) . Ambiguous Noun Phrases in Logical Form , CO mp . Linguistics , 18(4), pp .  419-465 . 
Kamp , H .  (1981) , A Theory of Truth and Semantic Representation , In Groenendijk , et al ( Eds . ) , Formal Methods in the Study of Language , Mathematisch
Centrum , Amsterdam.
Kaplan , D .  (1979) . On the Logic of Demonstratives , Journal of Philosophical Logic ,  8 , pp .  81-98 . 
LePore , E . and Garson , J .  (1983) . Pronouns and Quantifier-Scope in English , J . of Phil . Logic , 12 . 
Montague , 1L(1974) . Formal Philosophy : Selected Papers of Richard Montague  . R . Thomason ( ed . ) . Yale
University Press.
Moran , D . B .  (1988) . Quantifier Scoping in the SRI Core Language , In Proceedings of 26th Annual Meeting of the ACL , pp .  3,340 . 
Partee , B .  (1984) . Quantification , Pronouns , and VP-Anaphora , In J . Groenedijk et alreds . ) , Truth , Interpretation ad Information , Dordrecht : Foils . 
Pereira , F . C . N . and Pollack , M . E .  (1991) . 
Incremental Interpretation , Artificial Intelligence ,  50 . 
Wang , P .  (1994) , From Inheritance Relation to Non-Axiomatic Logic , International Journal of Approximate Reasoning , ( accepted June 1994-to appear) . 
Zeevat , H .  (1989) . A Compositional Approach to Discourse Representation theory  , Linguistics and
Philosophy , 12, pp . 95-131.

