A Uniform Treatment of Pragmatic Inferences in Simple and 
Complex Utterances and Sequences of Utterances
Daniel Marcu and Graeme Hirst
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
Toronto , Ontario
Canada M5S 1A4
marcu , gh?cs , toronto , edu

Drawing appropriate defeasible inferences has been proven to be one of the most pervasive puzzles of natural language processing and are current problem in pragmatics  . This paper provides a theoretical framework , called stratified logic , that can accommodate defeasible pragmatic inferences  . The framework yields an algorithm that computes the conversational  , conventional , scalar , clausal , and normal state implicatures ; and the presuppositions that are associa-ted with utterances  . The algorithm applies equally to simple and complex utterances and sequences of utteran-ces  . 
1 Pragmatics and Defeasibility
It is widely acknowledged that a full account of na-tural language utterances cannot be given in terms of only syntactic or semantic phenomena  . For example , Hirschberg ( 1985 ) has shown that in order to understand a scalar implicature  , one must analyze the conversants ' beliefs and intentions  . To recognize normal state implicatures one must consider mutual beliefs and plans  ( Green ,  1990) . To understand con-versation Mimplicatures associated with indirect replies one must consider discoursexpectations  , discourse plans , and discourse relations ( Green , 1992; Green and Carberry ,  1994) . Some presuppositions are inferrable when certain lexical constructs  ( factives , aspectuals , etc ) or syntactic on structs ( cleft and pseudo-cleft sentences ) are used . Despite all the complexities that individualize the recognition stage for each of these inferences  , all of them can be defeated by context , by knowledge , beliefs , or plans of the agents that constitute part of the context  , or by other pragmatic rules . 
Defeasibili ~ y is a notion that is tricky to deal with  , and scholars in logics and pragmatics have learned to circumvent it or live with it  . The first observers of the phenomenon preferred to keep defeasibility outside the mathematical world  . For Frege (1892) , Russell (1905) , and Quine (1949) " everything exists " ; therefore , in their logical systems , it is impossible to formalize the cancellation of the presupposition that definite referents exist  ( Hirst , 1991; Marcu and Hirst ,  1994) . We can taxonomize previous approaches to defea ~ ible pragmatic nferences into three categories  ( we omit here work on defeasibility related to linguistic phenomena such as discourse  , anaphora , or speech acts ) . 
1 . Most linguistic approaches account for the de -feasibility of pragmatic nferences by analyzing them in a context hat consists of all or some of the previous utterances  , including the current one . Context ( Karttunen , 1974; Kay ,  1992) , procedural ru-les ( Gazdar , 1979; Karttunen and Peters ,  1979) , lexical and syntactic structure ( Weischedel ,  1979) , intentions ( Hirschberg ,  1985) , or anaphoric on s-traints ( S and t , 1992; Zeevat ,  1992 ) decide what presuppositions or implicatures are projected as pragmatic inferences for the utterance that is analyzed  . 
The problem with these approaches i that they assign a dual life to pragmatic inferences : in the initial stage  , as members of a simple or complex utterance , they are defeasible . However , after that utterance is analyzed , there is no possibility left of cancelling that inference  . But it is natural to have implicatures and presuppositions that are inferred and cancelled as a sequence of utterances proceeds : research in conversation repairs  ( I-Iirst et M . , 1994) abounds in such examples . We address this issue in more detail in section 3 . 3 . 
2 . One way of accounting for cancellations that occur later in the analyzed text is simply to extend the boundaries within which pragmatic inferences are evaluated  , i . e . , to lookahead a few utterances . 
Green ( 1992 ) assumes that implicatures are connected to discours entities and not to utterances  , but her approach still does not allow cancellations across discourse units  . 
3 . Another way of allowing pragmatic inferences to be cancelled is to assign them the status of defeasible information  . Mercer (1987) formalizes pre-faults ( Reiter ,  1980) , but this approach is not tractable and it treats natural disjunction as an exclusive-or and implication as logical equivalence  . 
Computational pproaches fail to account for the cancellation of pragmatic inferences : once presuppositions  ( Weischedel , 1979) or implicatures ( Hirschberg , 1985; Green , 1992) are generated , they can never be cancelled . We are not aware of any for ma-lismor computational pproach that offers a unified explanation for the cancellability of pragmatic inferences in general  , and of no approach that handles cancellations that occur in sequences of utterances  . 
It is our aim to provide such an approach ere . In doing this , we assume the existence , for each type of pragmatic inference , of a set of necessary conditi-ons that must be true in order for that inference to be triggered  . Once such a set of conditions is met , the corresponding inference is drawn , but it is assigned a defeasible status . It is the role of context and knowledge of the conversants to " decide " whe-ther that inference will survive or not as a pragma-tic inference of the structure  . We put no boundaries upon the time when such a cancellation can occur  , and we offer a unified explanation for pragmatic inferences that are inferable when simple utterances  , complex utterances , or sequences of utterances are considered . 
We propose a new formalism , called " stratified logic " , that correctly handles the pragmatic inferences , and we start by giving a very brief introduction to the main ideas that underlie it  . We give the main steps of the algorithm that is defined on the backbone of stratified logic  . We then show how different classes of pragmatic inferences can be captured using this formalism  , and how our algorithm computes the expected results for a representative class of pragmatic inferences  . The results we report here are obtained using an implementation written in Common Lisp that uses Screamer  ( Siskind and McAllester ,  1993) , a macro package that provides nondeterministic constructs  . 
2 Stratified logic 2 . 1 Theoret i ca l foundat ions We can offer here only a brief overview of stratified logic  . The reader is referred to Marcu ( 1994 ) for a comprehensive study . Stratified logic supports one type of in defeasible information and two types of defeasible information  , namely , in felicitously defeasible and felicitously defeasible  . The notion of infe-licitously defeasible information is mean to capture inferences that are anomalous to cancel  , as in: ( 1 ) * John regrets that Mary came to the party but she did not come  . 
The notion of felicitously defeasible information is meant to capture the inferences that can be cancel-led without any abnormality  , as in:
T d . . L d
T '_k '
T"_L "
Felicitously Defea.sible Layer
In felicitously Defeasible Layer
Undefeasible Layer
Figure 1: The lattice that underliestratified logic ( 2 ) John does not regret that Mary came to the party because she did not come  . 
The lattice in figure 1 underlies the semantics of stratified logic . The lattice depicts the three levels of strength that seem to account for the inferences that pertain to natural anguage semantics and pragma -tics : in defeasible information belongs to the u layer  , in felicitously defeasible information belongs to the i layer  , and felicitously defeasible information belongs to the d layer  . Each layer is partitioned according to its polarity in truth  , T  ~ , Ti , Ta , and falsity ,   . L = , . lJ , . 1_d . The lattice shows a partial order that is defined over the different levels of truth  . For example , something that is indefeasibly false ,   . l_u , is stron-ger ( in a sense to be defined below ) than something that is in felicitously defeasibly true  , Ti , or felicitously defeasibly false ,   . La . Formally , we say that the u level is stronger than the i level  , which is stronger than the d level : u < i < d . At the syntactic level , we allow atomic formulas to be labelled according to the same underlying lattice  . Compound formulas are obtained in the usual way . This will give us formulas such as regrets u ( John , come ( Mary , party )) --- , cornel ( Mary , party )) , or ( Vx ) ('- , bachelorU ( x )  --~  ( male a (   ) ^ The satisfaction relation is split according to the three levels of truth into u-satisfaction  , i-satisfaction , and d-satisfaction : Definition 2 . 1 Assume ~ r is an St . valuation such that t~=diEand assume that St  . maps nary predicates p to relations RC7~? .   .   .  ? 79 . For any atomic formula p = ( tl , t2, .   .   .   , t ,  )  , and any stratified valuation a , where zEu , i , d and t i are terms , the z-satisfiability relations are defined as follows : ? a ~ up ~  ( tl ,   .   .   . , tn ) if f(dx , .   .   . , dnlE1 ~ ~ ? iff(dl , .   .   . , dn ) ERuUR--ffURi?o , ~ upa(tx, .   .   . , t , ) iff(d z , .   .   . ,d ,) ER"U'R-?URIU-~URa?tr~ip~(tl, .   .   . , t , ) if f(d t , .   .   . , d ,) ERi . cr ~ i pi(tt , .   .   . , t , ) iff ( dl , .   .   . , d ,) ERi ? pd(tl , .   .   . , t , ) ig(dl , .   .   . , d , ) ERiU ~ TURd?o " ~ ap~(tz, .   .   . , tn ) iff(dl , .   .   . , dn ) ERa??(tl , .   .   . , t , ) iff ( all, .   .   . , d , ) eRd Definition 2 . 1 extends in a natural way to negated and compound formulas  . Having a satisfaction definition associated with each level of strength provi-des a high degree of flexibility  . The same theory can be interpreted from a perspective that allows more freedom  ( u-satisfaction )  , or from a perspective that is tighter and that signals when some defeasible information has been cancelled  ( i - and d-satisfaction )  . 
Possible interpretations of a given set of utteran -ces with respectoa knowledge base are computed using an extension of the semantic table au method  . 
This extension has been proved to be both sound and complete  ( Marcu ,  1994) . A partial ordering ,  < , determines the set of optimistic interpretations for a theory  . An interpretation m0 is preferred to , or is more optimistic than , an interpretation ml ( m0 < ml ) if it contains more information and that information can be more easily updated in the future  . That means that if an interpretation m0 makes an utterance true by assigning to a relation R a defensible status  , while another interpretation ml makes the same utterance true by assigning the same relation Ra stronger status  , m0 will be the preferred or optimistic one , because it is as informative as mi and it allows more options in the future  ( R can be defeated )  . 
Pragmatic inferences are triggered by utterances.
To differentiate between them and semantic inferences  , we introduce a new quantifier , Vvt , whose semantics i defined such that a pragmatic inference of the form  ( V Vtg ) (al (  , 7 ) --* a2 ( g ) ) is instantiated only for those objects t ' from the universe of discourse that pertain to an utterance having the formal  ( ~- Hence , only if the antecedent of a pragma-tic rule has been uttered can that rule be applied  . 
A recta-logical construct uttered applies to the logical translation of utterances  . This theory yields the following definition : Def inition  2  . 2 Let ~ b be a theory described in terms of stratified first-order logic that appropriately formalizes the semantics of lezical items and the necessary conditions that trigger pragmatic inferences  . 
The semantics of lezical terms is formalized using the quantifier V  , while the necessary conditions that pertain to pragmatic inferences are captured using Vtrt  . Let uttered ( u ) be the logical translation of a given utterance or set of utterances  . We say that utterance upragmatically implicates p if and only if p d or p i is derived using pragmatic inferences in at least one optimistic model of the theory ~ Uuttered  ( u )  , and if p is not cancelled by any stronger information  ( ' . p ~,- . pi_ . pd ) in any optimistic model schema of the theory . Symmetrically , one can define what a negative pragmatic inference is  . In both cases,
Wuttered ( u ) is u-consistent.
2.2 The algorithm
Our algorithm , described in detail by Marcu (1994) , takes as input a set of first-order stratified formulas ? that represents an adequate knowledge base that expresses semantic knowledge and the necessary conditions for triggering pragmatic inferences  , and the translation of an utterance or set of utterances uttered  ( u )  . The Mgorithm builds the set of all possible interpretations for a given utterance  , using a generalization of the semantic table au technique  . The model-ordering relation filters the optimistic interpretations  . Among them , the defeasible inferences that have been triggered on pragmatic grounds are checked to see whether or not they are cancelled in any optimistic interpretation  . Those that are not cancelled are labelled as pragmatic inferences for the given utterance or set of utterances  . 
3 A set of examples
We present a set of examples that covers a representative group of pragmatic inferences  . In contrast with most other approaches , we provide a consistent methodology for computing these inferences and for determining whether they are cancelled or not for all possible configurations : simple and complex utterances and sequences of utterances  . 
3 . 1 Simple pragmatic inferences 3 . 1 . 1 Lexica l p ragmat ic in fe rences A factive such as the verb regret presupposes its complement  , but as we have seen , in positive environments , the presupposition is stronger : it is accep -table to defeat a presupposition triggered in a negative environment  ( 2 )  , but is in felicitous to defeat one that belongs to a positive environment  ( 1 )  . Therefore , an appropriate formalization of utterance ( 3 ) and the req ~ fisite pragmatic knowledge will be as shown in  ( 4 )  . 
(3 ) John does not regret that Mary came to the party . 
(4) uttered (- , regrets u(john , come ( , , ry , party ))) ( VU ' = , y , z ) ( regras (= , come(y , coei(y , z )) ( Vu ' = , y , z ) ( regret , " (= , come(y , z )) -* corned(y , z )   ) The stratified semantic table authat corresponds to theory  ( 4 ) is given in figure 2 . The table auyields two model schemata ( see figure 3 )  ; in both of them , it is defeasibly inferred that Mary came to the party  . 
The model-ordering relation < establishes m0 as the optimistic model for the theory because it contains as much information as mlandise asier to defeat  . 
Model m0 explains why Mary came to the party is a presupposition for utterance  ( 3 )  . 
146" ~ regrets(john , come(mary , party )) ( Vx , y , z ) (- ~ regrets(x , come(y , z )) ---* corned(y , z )) ( Vx , y , z ) ( regrets(x , come(y , z )) --* comei(y , z ))
I - . regrets ( john , come(mary , party )) -- corned(mary , party ) regrets ( john , come(mary , party )) --* comei(mary , party ) regrets ( john , come(mary , party )) corned ( mary , party ) u-closed- . regrets ( john , come(mary , party )) comei(mary , party )   m_0   mL1 Figure 2: Stratified table au for John does not regret that Mary came to the party  . 
Schema  #In defeasible Infelicitously defeasible " , regrets ~( john , come(mary , party ) - . regTets ~( joh . , come(mary , party ) momlcome ~( mary , party)
Felicitously defeasible corned ( mary , party ) cornea ( mary , party ) Figure 3: Model schemata for John does not regret that Mary came to the party  . 
Schema  #In defeasible mowen t " ( some ( boys ) , the atre ) - . went"(all(boys ), the atre )
In felicitously Felicitously defeasible defeasible  -'  , wentd(most(boys ) , the atre ) - . went d(many(boys ) , the atre ) - , went d(all ( boys ) , the at re ) Figure 4: Model schema for John says that some of thc boys went to the theatre  . 
Schema  #In defeasible In \] elicitously Felicitously de \] easible defeasible mowe  , ,t "( some(boy , ) , the atre ) , oe , ,t " ( most ( boys ) , the atre ) went ~( many ( boys ) , the atre ) went ~( all ( boys ) , the atre ) d " . went(most(boys ), the atre ) d- . went ( many ( boys ) , the atre)-~wentd(all(boys ) , the at re ) Figure 5: Model schema for John says that some of the boys went to the theatre  . In fact all of them went to the the atre . 
147 3.1.2 Scalar implicatures
Consider utterance (5), and its implicatu-res (6).
(5 ) John says that some of the boys went to the the at re  . 
(6 ) Not many/most/all of the boys went to the the at re  . 
An appropriate formalization is given in (7) , where the second formula captures the defeasible scalar implicatures and the third formula reflects the relevant semantic information for all  . 
( r ) uttered ( went ( some ( boys ) , the atre )) went"(some ( boys ) , the atre)---*(-~wentd(many(boys ) , the atre ) A " , wentd(most(boys ) , the atre )^-~ went d(aii ( boys ) , the atre )) went " ( all ( boys ) , the atre ) ( went " ( most ( boys ) , the atre ) A went " ( many ( boys ) , the atre ) ^ went " ( some ( boys ) , the at re )   ) The theory provides one optimistic model schema ( figure 4 ) that reflects the expected pragmatic inferences , i . e . ,  ( Not most/Not many/Not all ) of the boys went to the the at re . 
3.1.3 Simple cancellation
Assume now , that after a moment of thought , the same person utters : ( 8 ) John says that some of the boys went to the the at re  . In fact all of them went to the the a-tre . 
By adding the extra utterance to the initial theory  ( 7 )  , uttered ( went ( ail ( boys ) , the at re )) , one would obtain one optimistic model schema in which the conventional implicatures have been cancelled  ( see figure 5 )  . 
3.2 Complex utterances
The Achillesheel for most theories of presupposition has been their vulnerability to the projection problem  . Our solution for the projection problem does not differ from a solution for individual utterances  . 
Consider the following utterances and some of their associated presuppositions  ( 11 )   ( the symbol t > precedes an inference drawn on pragmatic grounds  ) :  ( 9 ) Either Chris is not a bachelor or here grets that Mary came to the party  . 
(10) Chris is a bachelor or as p inster.
(11)1> Chrisisa ( male ) adult.
Chris is not a bachelor presupposes that Chrisis a male adult  ; Chrisregrets that Mary came to the party presupposes that Mary came to the party  . There is no contradiction between these two presuppositions  , so one would expect a conversant to infer both of them if she hears an utterance such as  ( 9 )  . However , when one examines utterance (10) , one observes immediately that there is a contradiction between the presuppositions carried by the individual components  . Being a bachelor presupposes that Chris is a male  , while being a spinster presupposes that Chrisis a female  . Normally , we would expect a conversant onotice this contradiction and to drop each of these elementary presuppositions when she interprets  ( 10 )  . 
We now study how stratified logic and the model -ordering relation capture one's intuitions  . 
3.2.1 Or--non-cancellation
An appropriate formalization for utterance ( 9 ) and the necessary semantic and pragmatic knowledge is given in  ( 12 )  . 
(12) luttered (- ~ bachelor ( Chris ) Vregret ( Chris , come ( Mary , party ) ) )   ( -bachelor " ( Chris ) Vregret " ( Chris , come ( Mary , party ) ) )  -~ ( - ~ bachelor d ( Chris ) Aregret d ( chris , come ( Mary , party ))) -- , male(Mary ) ( Vx ) ( bachelor "( x ) . - -+ Imale "( x ) A adult U(z ) A " - , married " ( x ) )  ( VU tx ) (-4bachelorU ( = ) - - ~ marriedi ( x ) )  ( vUtx ) (-~ bachelor " ( x ) -- ~ adulta ( x )   )   ( vu'x ) (-- , bachel or U(x ) . - , maled (=)) y , z ) (- regret "( = , come(y , z )) cored(y ,   , )) ( vv ' = , y , z ) ( regret "( = , ome(y , ))-comei(y , z )) Besides the translation of the utterance , the initial theory contains a formalization of the defeasible implicature that natural disjunction is used as an exclusive or  , the knowledge that Mary is not a name formales , the lexical semantics for the word bachel or , and the lexical pragmatics for bachelor and regret  . 
The stratified semantic tableau generates 12 model schemata . Only four of them are kept as optimistic models for the utterance  . The models yield Mary came to the party ; Chris is a male ; and Chris is an adult as pragmatic inferences of utterance  ( 9 )  . 
3.2.2 Or-cancellation
Consider now utterance (10) . The stratified semantic table authat corresponds to its logical theory yields  16 models , but only Chris is an adult satisfies definition 2 . 2 and is projected as presupposition for the utterance  . 
3 . 3 P ragmat ic in ferences in sequences of u t te rances We have already mentioned that speech repairs constitute a good benchmark for studying the genera-sequences of utterances  ( McRoy and Hirst ,  1993) . 
Suppose , for example , that Jane has two friends--John Smith and John Pevler--and that herroom-mate Mary has met only John Smith  , a married fellow . Assume now that Jane has a conversation with Mary in which Jane mentions only the name John because she is not aware that Mary does not know about the other John  , who is a five-year-old boy . In this context , it is natural for Mary to become confu-sed and to come to wrong conclusions  . For example , Mary may reply that John is not a bachel or . Although this is true for both Johns , it is more appropriate for the married fellow than for the five-year-old boy  . Mary knows that John Smith is a married male , so the utterance makes sense for her . At this point Jane realizes that Mary misunderstands her : all the time Jane was talking about John Pevler  , the five-year-old boy . The utterances in ( 13 ) constitute a possible answer that Jane may give to Mary in order to clarify the problem  . 
(13) a . No , John is not a bachel or.
b . I regret that you have misunderstood me.
c . He is only five years old.
The first utterance in the sequence presuppo-ses ( 14 )  . 
(14) I > John is a male adult.
Utterance ( 13 ) bwarns Mary that is very likely shem is understood a previous utterance  ( 15 )  . The war-ning is conveyed by implicature . 
(15) !> The hearer misunderstood the speaker.
At this point , the hearer , Mary , starts to believe that one of her previous utterances has been elaborated on a false assumption  , but she does not know which one . The third utterance ( 13 ) ccomes to cla-rify the issue . It explicitly expresses that John is not an adult  . Therefore , it cancels the early presupposition ( 14 ) :  ( 16 ) ~ John is an adult . 
Note that there is a gap of one statement between the generation and the cancellation of this presupposition  . The behavior described is mirrored both by our theory and our program  . 
3 . 4 Conversat iona l imp l i ca tures in ind i rec t replies The same methodology can be applied to mode-ling conversational impIi catures in indirect replies  ( Green ,  1992) . Green's algorithm makes use of discourse expectations  , discourse plans , and discourse relations . The following dialog is considered ( Green ,  1992 , p . 68): (17) Q:D id yougo shopping ?
A : a . My car's not running.
b . The timing belt broke.
c . ( So ) I had to take the bus.
Answer (17) conveysa " yes " , but a reply consisting only of ( 17 ) a would implicate a " no " . As Green notices , in previous models of implicatures ( Gazdar , 1979; Hirschberg ,  1985) , processing ( 17 ) a will block the implicature generated by ( 17 ) c . Green solves the problem by extending the boundaries of the analysis to discourse units  . Our approach does not exhibit these constraints . As in the previous example , the one dealing with a sequence of utterances , we obtain a different interpretation after each step  . When the question is asked , there is no conversational implicature . Answer ( 17 ) a makes the necessary conditi-ons for implicating " no " true  , and the implication is computed . Answer (17) breinforces a previous condition . Answer ( 17 ) c makes the preconditions for implicating a " no " false  , and the preconditions for implicating a " yes " true  . Therefore , the implicature at the end of the dialogue is that the conversant who answered went shopping  . 
4 Conclusions
Unlike most research in pragmatics that focuses on certain types of presuppositions or implicatures  , we provide a global framework in which one can express all these types of pragmatic inferences  . Each pragmatic inference is associated with a set of necessary conditions that may trigger that inference  . 
When such a set of conditions is met , that inference is drawn , but it is assigned a defeasible status . 
An extende definition of satisfaction and a notion of " optimism " with respect to different interpretations yield the preferred interpretations for an utterance or sequences of utterances  . These interpretations contain the pragmatic inferences that have not been cancelled by context or conversant's knowledge  , plans , or intentions . The formalism yields an algorithm that has been implemented in Common Lisp with Screamer  . This algorithm computes uniformly pragmatic inferences that are associated with simple and complex utterances and sequences of utterances  , and allows cancellations of pragmatic inferences to occur at any time in the discourse  . 

This research was supported in part by a grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research 
Council of Canada.


G . Frege .  1892 . 0 bets in nund bedeutung . Zeit-schrift fiir Philos . und Philos . Kritik , 100:373-394 . 
reprinted as : On Sense and Nominatum , In Feigl H . and Sellars W . , editors , Readings in Philoso-phical Analysis , pages 85-102 , Appleton-Century-
Croft , New York , 1947.
G . J . M . Gazdar .  1979 . Pragmatics : Implicature , Presupposition , and Logical Form . Academic

N . Green and S . Carberry .  1994 . A hybrid reasoning model for indirect answers . In Proceedings 3Pnd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 58-65 . 
N . Green .  1990 . Normal state implicature . In Proceedings 28th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 8996 . 
N . Green .  1992 . Conversational implicatures in indirect replies . In Proceedings 30th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 6471 . 
J . B . Hirschberg .  1985 . A theory of scalar implicature . Technical Report MS-CIS-85-56 , Department of Computer and Information Science , University of Pennsylvania . Also published by Garl and Publishing Inc . , 1991 . 
G . Hirst , S . McRoy , P . Heeman , P . Edmonds , and D . Horton .  1994 . Repairing conversational misunderstandings and non-understandings  . Speech
Communication , 15:213-229.
G . Hirst .  1991 . Existence assumptions in knowledge representation  . Artificial Intelligence , 49:199-242 . 
L . Karttunen and S . Peters .  1979 . Conventional implicature . In Oh C . K . and Dinneen D . A , editors , Syntaz and Semantics , Presupposition , volume 11 , pages 1-56 . Academic Press . 
L . Karttunen .  1974 . Presupposition and linguistic context . Theoretical Linguistics , 1:3-44 . 
P . Kay .  1992 . The inheritance of presuppositions . 
Linguistics ? 4Philosophy , 15:333-379.
D . Marcu .  1994 . A formalism and an algorithm for computing pragmatic inferences and detecting in felicities  . Master's thesis , Dept . of Computer Science , University of Toronto , September . Also published as Technical Report CSRI-309 , Computer Systems Research Institute , University of

D . Marcu and G . Hirst .  1994 . An implemented formalism for computing linguistic presuppositions and existential commitments  . In H . Bunt , R . Mus-kens , and G . Rentier , editors , International Workshop on Computational Semantics  , pages 141-150 , 

S . McRoy and G . Hirst .  1993 . Abductive explanation of dialogue misunderstandings  . In Proceedings ,   6th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 277-286 , April . 
R . E . Mercer .  1987 . A Default Logic Approach to the Derivation of Natural Language Presuppositions  . 
Ph.D . thesis , Department of Computer Science,
University of British Columbia.
W.V.O.Quine . 1949. Designation and existence.
In Feigl H . and Sellars W . , editors , Readings in Philosophical Analysis , pages 44-51 . Appleton-
Century-Croft , New York.
R . Reiter .  1980 . A logic for default reasoning . Artificial Intelligence , 13:81-132 . 
B . Russell .  1905 . On denoting . Mindn . s . , 14:479-493 . reprinted in : FeiglH . and Sellars W . editors , Readings in Philosophical Analysis , pages 103-115 . Applcton-Century-Croft , New York , 1949 . 
R . A . van der S and t .  1992 . Presupposition projection as anaphora resolution . Journal of Semantics , 9:333-377 . 
J . M . Siskind and D . A . McAllester .  1993 . Screamer : A portable efficient implementation f nondeterministic Common Lisp  . Technical Report IRCS-93-03 , University of Pennsylvania , Institute for Research in Cognitive Science , July 1 . 
R . M . Weischedel .  1979 . A new semantic ompu-tation while parsing : Presupposition and entailment  . In Oh C . K . and Dinneen D . A , editors , Syn-ta ~ and Semantics , Presupposition , volume 11 , pa-ges 155-182 . Academic Press . 
H . Zeevat .  1992 . Presupposition and accommodation in update semantics  . Journal of Semantics , 9:379-412 . 

