Investigating Cue Selection and Placement in Tutorial Discourse 
Megan Moser
Learning Research g : Dev . Center,
and Department of Linguistics
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh , PA 15260
moser@isp , itt.edu
Johanna D . Moore
Department of Computer Science , and
Learning Research & Dev . Center
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh , PA 15260
jmoore@cs.pitt.edu

Our goal is to identify the features that predict cue selection and placement in order to devise strategies for automatic text generation  . Much previous work in this area has relied on ad hoc methods  . Our coding scheme for the exhaustive analysis of discourse allows a systematic evaluation and refinement of hypotheses concerning cues  . 
We report two results based on this analysis : a comparison of the distribution of Sn~CE and BECAUSE in our corpus  , and the impact of embeddedness on cue selection . 
Discourse cues play a crucial role in many discourse processing tasks  , including plan recognition ( Litman and Allen ,  1987) , anaphora resolution ( Gross and Sidner ,  1986) , and generation of coherent multisentential texts ( Elhadad and McKeown , 1990; Roesner and Stede , 1992; Scott and de Souza , 1990; Zukerman ,  1990) . Cues are words or phrase such as BECAUSE , FIRST , ALTHOUGH and ALSO that mark structural and semantic relationships between discourse ntities  . While some specific issues concerning cue usage have been resolved  ( e . g . , the disambiguation f discourse and sentential cues  ( Hirschberg and Litman ,  1993)) , our concern is to identify general strategies of cue selection and placement that can be implemented for automatic text generation  . Relevant research in reading comprehension presents a mixed picture  ( Goldman and Murray , 1992; Lorch ,  1989) , suggesting that felicitous use of cues improves comprehension ad recall  , but that indiscriminate use of cues may have detrimental effects on recall  ( Millis et al ,  1993 ) and that the benefit of cues may depend on the subjects ' reading skill and level of domain knowledge  ( McNamara et al . , In press ) . However , interpreting the research is problematic because the manipulation of cues both within and across studies has been very unsystematic  ( Lorch ,  1989) . While Knott and Dale ( 1994 ) use systematic manipulation to identify functional categories of cues  , their method does not provide the description of those functions needed for text generation  . 
For the study described here , we developed a coding scheme that supports an exhaustive analysis of a discourse  . Our coding scheme , which we call Relational Discouse Analysis ( RDA )  , synthesizes two accounts of discourse structure ( Gross and Sidner , 1986; Mann and Thompson ,  1988 ) that have often been viewed as incompatible . We have applied RDA to our corpus of tutorial explanations  , producing an exhaustive analysis of each explanation  . By doing such an extensive analysis and representing the results in a database  , we are able to identify patterns of cue selection and placement in terms of multiple factors including segment structure and semantic relations  . For each cue , we determine the best description of its distribution i the corpus  . Further , we are able to formulate and verify more general patterns about he distribution of types of cues in the corpus  . 
The corpus study is part of a methodology for identifying the factors that influence effective cue selection and placement  . Our analysis cheme is coordinated with a system for automatic generation of texts  . Due to this coordination , the results of our analyses of " good texts " can be used as rules that are implemented in the generation system  . In turn , texts produced by the generation system provide a means for evaluation and further refinement of our rules for cue selection and placement  . Our ultimate goal is to provide a text generation component that can be used in a variety of application systems  . In addition , the text generator will provide a tool for the systematic construction of materials for reading comprehension experiments  . 
The study is part of a project to improve the explanation component of a computer system that trains a vionics technicians to troubleshoot complex electronicir cuitry  . The tutoring system gives the student a troubleshooting problem to solve  , allows the student o solve the problem with minima \] tutor interaction  , and then engages the student in a post-problem critiquing session  . During this session , the system replays the student'solution step by step  , pointing out good aspects of the solution as well as ways in which the solution could be improved  . 

To determine how to build an automated explanation component  , we collected protocols of 3 human expert tutors providing explanations during the cri-tiquing session  . Because the explanation component we are building interacts with users via text and menus  , the student and human tutor were required to communicate in written form  . In addition , in order to study effective explanation , we chose experts who were rated as excellent tutors by their peers  , students , and superiors . 
1 Re la t iona l D iscourse Ana lys i s Because the recognition of discourse coherence and structure is complex and dependent on many types of nonlinguistic knowledge  , determining the way in which cues and other linguistic marker said that recognition is a difficult problem  . The study of cues must begin with descriptive work using intuition and observation to identify the factors affecting cue usage  . Previous research ( Hobbs , 1985; Grosz and Sidner , 1986; Schiffrin , 1987; Mann and Thompson , 1988; Elhadad and McKeown ,  1990 ) suggests that these factors include structural features of the discourse  , intentional and informational relations in that structure  , givenness of information in the discourse , and syntactic form of discourse constituents . 
In order to devise an algorithm for cue selection and placement  , we must determine how cue usage is affected by combinations of these factors  . The corpus study is intended to enable us to gather this information  , and is therefore conducted directly in terms of the factors thought responsible for cue selection and placement  . Because it is important to detect the contrast between occurrence and nonoccurrence of cues  , the corpus study must be beex haustive , i . e . , it must include all of the factors thought to contribute to cue usage and all of the text must be analyzed  . From this study , we are deriving a system of hypotheses about cues . 
In this section we describe our approach to the analysis of a single speaker's discourse  , which we call Relational Discourse Analysis ( RDA )  . Applying RDA to a tutor's explanation is exhaustive  , i . e . , every word in the explanation belongs to exactly one element in the analysis  . All elements of the analysis , from the largest constituents of an explanation to the minimal units  , are determined by their function in the discourse  . A tutor may offer an explanation in multiple segments  , the topmost constituents of the explanation . Multiple segments arise when a tutor's explanation has several steps  , e . g . , he may enumerate several reasons why the student 's action was inemcient  , or he may point out the flaws in the student's step and then describe a better alternative  . Each segment originates with an intention of the speaker  ; segments are identified by looking for sets of clauses that taken together serve a purpose  . 
Segments are internally structured and consist of a core  , i . e . , that element hat most directly expresses the segment purpose  , and any number of contrlb-utors , the remaining constituents in the segment each of which plays a role in serving the purpose expressed by the core  . For each contributor in a segment , we analyze its relation to the core from an intentional perspective  , i . e . , how it is intended to support he core , and from an informational perspective , i . e . , how its content relates to that of the core . 
Each segme i , t constituent , both core and contributors , may itself be a segment with a core : contributor structure  , or may be a simpler functional element . 
There are three types of simpler functional elements :  ( 1 ) units , which are descriptions of domain states and actions  , (2) matrix elements , which express a mental attitude , a prescription or an evaluation by embedding another element  , and (3) relation clusters , which are otherwise like segments except that they have no core : coatributor structure  . 
This approach synthesizes ideas which were previously thought incompatible from two theories of discourse structure  , the theory proposed by Grosz and Sidner ( 1986 ) and Rhetorical Structure Theory ( RST ) proposed by Mann and Thompson ( 1988 )  . 
The idea that the hierarchical segment structure of discourse originates with intentions of the speaker  , and thus the defining feature of a segment is that there be a recognizable segment purpose  , is due to Grosz and Sidner . The idea that discourse is hierarchically structured by palrwise relations in which one relatum  ( the nucleus ) is more central to the speaker's purpose is due to Mann and Thompson  . Work by Moore and Pollack ( 1992 ) modified the RST assumption that these palrwise relations are unique  , demonstrating that intentional and informational relations occur simultaneously  . 
Moser and Moore ( 1993 ) point out the correspondence between the relation of dominance among intentions in Grosz and Sidner and the nucleus-satellite distinction in RST  . Because our analysis realizes this relation /distinction in a form different from both intention dominance and nuclearity  , we have chosen the new term score and contributor . 
To illustrate the application of RDA , consider the partial tutor explanation in Figure it  . The purpose of this segment is to inform the student that shemade the strategy error of testing inside  paxt3 too so on . The constituent that expresses the purpose , in this case ( B ) , is the core " of the segment . The other constituents help to achieve the segment purpose  . 
We analyze the way in which each contributor relates to the core from two perspectives  , intentional and informational , as illustrated below . Each constituent may itself be a segment with its own core : contributor structure  . For example ,   ( C ) is a subsegment whose t in order to make the example more intelligible to the reader  , we replaced references to parts of the circuit with the simple labels part l  , part ~ and part 3 . 
1 31 purpose is to give a reason for testing part2 first , namely that part2 is more susceptible to damage and therefore a more likely source of the circuit fault  . 
The core of this subsegment is ( C . 2 ) because it most directly expresses this purpose . The contributor in ( C . 1) provides a reason for this susceptibility , i . e . , that part 2 is moved frequently . 

A . you know that part 1 is good,
B . you should eliminate part2 before troubleshooting in part3  . 
THISISBE CAUSE
C . 1. part 2 is moved frequently
ANDTHUS 2. is more susceptible to damage.
Figure 1: An example tutor explanation
Due to space limitations , we can provide only a brief description of core : contributor relations  , and omital together the analysis of the example into the minimal RDA units of state and action units  , matrix expressions and clusters . A contributor is analyzed for both its intentional and informational relations to its core  . Intentional relations describe how a contributor may affect the heater's adoption of the core  . For example ,   ( A ) in Figure 1 acknowledges a fact that might have led the student o make the mistake  . Such a concession contributes to the hearer's adoption of the core in  ( B ) by acknowledging something that might otherwise interfere with this intended effect  . Another kind of intentional relation is evidence , in which the contributors are intended to increase the hearer's belief in the core  . 
For example , ( C ) stands in the evidence relation to ( B ) . The set of intentional relations in RDA is a modification of the presentational relations of RST  . 
Each core : contributor pair is also analyzed for its informational relation  . These relations describe how the situations referred to by the core and contributor are related in the domain  . 
The RDA analysis of the example in Figure 1 is shown schematically in Figure 2  . As a convention , the core appears as the mother of all the relations it participates in  . Each relation is labeled with both its intentional and informational relation  , with the order of relata in the label indicating the linear order in the cliscourse  . Each relation node has up to two daughters : the cue  , if any , and the contributor , in the order they appear in the discourse . 
2 Reliability of RDA application
To assess intercoder reliability of RDA analyses , we compared two independent analyses of the same data  . Because the results reported in this paper depend only on the structural aspects of the analysis  , our reliability assessment is confined to these . The conce$$ton:core step : prev-result
ALTHOA
B . you should eliminate part2 before troubleshooting in part3 core:eride ~ cegcfion : regsozt
THISISC . 2
BECAUSE I evidence : corec=uae : e.~ect
C . 1 AND

Figure 2: The RDA analysis of the example in Figure 1 categorization of core : contributor relations will not be assessed here  . 
The reliability coder coded one quarter of the currently analyzed corpus  , consisting of 132 clauses , 51 segments , and 70 relations . Here we report the percentage of instances for which the reliability coder agreed with the main coder on the various aspects of coding  . 
There are several kinds of judgements made in an RDA analysis  , and all of them are possible sources of disagreement  . First , the two coders could analyze a contributor as supporting different cores  . This occurred 7 times (90% agreement ) . Second , the coders could disagree on the core of a segment  . This occurred 2 times (97% agreement ) . Third , the coders could disagree on which relation a cue was associated with  . This occurred 1 time (98% agreement ) . 
The final source of disagreement reflects more of a theoretical question than a question of reliable analysis  . The coders could disagree on whether a rela-turn should be further analyzed into an embedded core : contributor structure  . This occurred 8 times (91% agreement ) . 
These rates of agreement cannot be sensibly compared to those found in studies of  ( nonembedded ) segmentation agreement ( Grosz and Hirschberg , 1992; Passonneau and Litman , 1993; Hearst ,  1994 ) because our assessment of RDA reliability differs from this work in several keyways  . First , the RDA coding task is more complex than identifying locations of segment boundaries  . Second , our sub-jects/coders are not naive about their task  ; they are trained . Finally , the data is not spoken as in these other studies . 
Future work will include a more extensive reliability study  , one that includes the intentional and informational relations  . 
1 32   3 Initial results and their applicat i on For each tutor explanation in our corpus  , each coder analyzes the text as described above , and then enters this analysis into a database . The technique of representing an analysis in a database and then using database queries to test hypotheses is imilar to work using RST analyses to investigate the form of purpose clauses  ( Vander Linden et al ,  1992) . Because our analysis is exhaustive , information about both occurrence and nonoccurrence of cues can be retrieved from the database in order to test and modify hypotheses about cue usage  . That is , both cue-based and factor-based retrievals are possible  . Incue-based retrievals , we use an occurrence of the cue under investigation as the criterion for retrieving the value of its hypothesized descriptive factors  . Factor-based retrievals provide information about cues that is unique to this study  . In factor-based retrieval , the occurrence of a combination of descriptive factor values is the criteria for retrieving the accompanying cues  . In this section , we report two results , one from each perspective : a comparison of the distribution of sn~cE and BECAUSE in our corpus  , and the impact of embeddedness on cue selection . 
These results are based on the portion of our corpus that is analyzed and entered into the database  , approximately 528 clauses . These clauses comprise 216 segments in which 287 relations were analyzed . 
Accompanying these relations were 165 cue occurrences , resulting from 39 distinct cues . 
3 . 1 Cho ice o f " S ince ~' or " Because " SINCE and BECAUSE were two of the most frequently used cues in our corpus  , occurring 23 and 13 times , respectively . To investigate their distribution , we began with the proposal of Elhadad and McKeown  ( 1990 )  . As with our study , their work aims to define each cue in terms of features of the propositions it connects for the purpose of cue selection during text generation  . Their work relies on the literature and intuitions to identify these features  , and thus provides an important background for a corpus study by suggesting features to include in the corpus analysis and initial hypotheses to investigate  . 
Quirk et al ( 1972 ) note several distributional differences between the two cues :  ( i ) since is used when the contributor precedes the core  , whereas BECAUSE typically occurs when the core precedes the contributor  ,   ( ii ) BECAUSE can be used to directly answer a ~#hy question  , whereas SINCE cannot , and ( iii ) BECAUSE can be in the focus position of an it -cleft  , whereas SINCE cannot . These distributional differences are reflected in our corpus  , and the ordering difference ( i ) is of particular interest . SINCE and BECAUSE are always placed with a contributor  . All but one ( 22/23 ) occurrences of Sn~CE accompanied relations in con -tributor : core order  , while all ( 13/13 ) occurrences of BECAUSE accompanied relations in core : contributor order  2  . 
The crucial factor in distinguishing between S~CE and BECAUSE is the relative order of core and contributor  . Elhadad and McKeown ( 1990 ) claim that the two cues differ with respect to what Ducrot  ( 1983 ) calls " polyphony " , i . e . , whether the subordinate relatum is attributed to the hearer or to the speaker  . 
The idea is that SINCE is used when a relatum has its informational source with the hearer  ( e . g . , by being previously said or otherwise conveyed by the hearer  )  . BECAUSE is monophonous , i . e . , its relata originate from a single utterer , whiles INCE can be polyphonous . According to Elhadad and McKeown , polyphony is a kind of given new distinction and thus the ordering difference between the two cues reduces to the wellknown tendency for given to precede new  . Unfortunately , this characterization of the distinction between s~cg and BECAUSE is not supported by our corpus study  . 
As shown in Figure 3 , whether or not contributors could be attributed to the hearer did not correlate with the choice of SINCE or BECAUSE  . To judge whether a contributor is attributable to the student  , mention of ~ naction or result of a test that the student previously performed  ( e . g . , you tested 30 to 9round earlier ) was counted as ' yes ' , while information available by observation ( e . g . , partl a~d part2 are co~r~ected b~l wires ) , specialized circuit knowledge ( e . g . , part1 is used bll this test step ) and general knowledge ( e . g . , part ~ is more prone to damage ) were counted as ' no ' . 
Is contributor Cue choice attributable s INCEBECAUSE to student ? yes  13 no 10 Figure 3: Polyphony does not underlie the choice between SINCE and BECAUSE  . 
This result shows that the choice between since and BECAUSE is determined by something other than the attributability of contributor to hearer  . In future work , we will consider other factors that may determine ordering as possible alternative accounts for this choice  . Another factor to be considered in distinguishing the two cues is the embeddedness discussed in the next section  . Furthermore , this result demonstrates the need to move beyond small numbers of constructed examples and intuitions formed ~ This included answers that begin with BECAUSE  . In these cases , we took the core to be the presupposition to the question  . 
1 33 from unsystematic analyses of naturally occurring data  . Only by an exhaustive analysis such as ours can hypotheses such as the one discussed here be systematically evaluated  . 
3.2 Effect of Segment Embeddedness on
Cue Selection
The second question we report on here concerns whether segment embeddedness affects cue selection  . 
Much of the work on cue usage , e . g . , ( Elhadad and McKeown , 1990; Millis et al . , 1993; Schiffrin , 1987; Zukerman , 1990) has focused on pairs of text spans , and this has led to the development of heuristics for cue selection that take into account the relation between the spans and other local features of the two relata  ( e . g . , relative ordering of core and contributor , complexity of each span ) . However , analysis of our corpus led us to hypothesize that the hierarchical context in which a relation occurs  , i . e . , what seg-ment(s ) the relation is embedded in , is a factor in cue usage . 
For example , recall that the relation between C . 1 and C . 2 in Figure 2 was expressed as part ~ is moved frequently , ANDTHUS it is more susceptible to damage . Now , the relation between C . 1 and C . 2 could have been expressed , BECAUSE part 2 is muted frequently , it is more musceptible to damage . However , this relation is embedded in the contributor of the relation between B and C  , which is cued by THISISBE CAUSE . Intuitively , we expect that , when a relation is embedded in a no the relation already marked by BECAUSE  , a speaker will select an alternative to BECAUSE to mark the embedded relation  . That is , two relations , one embedded in the other , should be signaled by different cues . Because RDA analyses capture the hierarchical structure of texts  , we were able to explore the effect of embedding on cue selection  . 
We hypothesized that cue selection for one relation constrains the cue selection for relations embedded in it to be a different cue  . To test this hypothesis , we paired each cue occurrence with all the other cue occurrences in the same turn  . Then , for each pair of cues in the same turn , it was categorized in two ways : ( 1 ) the embeddedness of the relations associated with the two cues  , and (2) whether the two cues are the same , alternatives or different . 
Two cues are alternatives when their use with a relation would contribute  ( approximately ) the same semantic ontents . The sets of alternatives in our data are ALSO , AND , BUT , ALTHOUGH , HOWEVER ) and SBecause it is based on a test of intersubstitutability  , the taxonomy proposed by Knott and Dale ( 1994 ) does not establish the sets of alternatives that are of interest here  . Two cues may be intersubstitutable in some contexts but not semantic alternatives  ( e . g . , AND and BECAUSE ) , or they may be semantic alternatives but not intersubstitutable because they are placed in different positions in a relation  ( e . g . , so and BECAUSE) . 
BECAUSE , SINCE , SO , THUS , THEREFOI:tE . The question is whether the choice between the same and an alternate cue correlates with the embeddedness of the two relations  . 
As shown in Figure 4 , we can conclude that , when a relation is going to have a cue that is semantically similar to the cue of a relation it is embedded in  , an alternative cue must be chosen . Other researchers in text generation recognized the need to avoid repetition of cues within a single text and devised heuristics such as " avoid repeating the same connective as long as there are others available "  ( Roesner and Stede ,  1992) . Our results show that this heuristic is over constraining  . The first column of Figure 4 shows that the same cue may occur within a single explanation as long as there is no embedding between the two relations being cued  . Based on these results , our text generation algorithm will use embeddedness as a factor in cue selection  . 
Are relatons II Cue choice embedded ? Same I Alternate  .   . . yes 0   7 no 6   18 Figure 4: Embeddedness correlates with choice between same and alternate cues  . 
4 Conclusions
We have introduced Relational Discourse Analysis , a coding scheme for the exhaustive analysis of text or single speaker discourse  . RDA is a synthesis of ideas from two theories of discourse structure  ( Grosz and Sidner , 1986; Mann and Thompson ,  1988) . It provides a system for analyzing discourse and formulating hypotheses about cue selection and placement  . 
The corpus study results in rules for cue selection and placement hat will then be exercised by our text generator  . Evaluation of these automatically generated texts forms the basis for further exploration of the corpus and subsequent refinement of the rules for cue selection and placement  . 
Two initial results from the corpus study were reported  . While the factor of core : contributor order accounted for the choice between s~ce and BE -CAUSE  , this factor could not be explained in terms of whether the contributor can be attributed to the hearer  . Alternative explanations for the ordering factor will be explored in future work  , including other types given new distinctions and larger contextual factors such as focus  . Second , the cue selection for one relation was found to constrain the cue selection for embedded relations to be distinct cues  . 
Both of these results are being implemented in our text generator  . 


The research described in this paper was supported by the Office of Naval Research  , Cognitive and Neural Sciences Division ( Grant Number : N00014-91-J-1694 )  , and a grant from the DoD FY93 Augmentation of Awards for Science and Engineering Research Training  ( ASSERT ) Program ( Grant Number : N00014-93-I-0812 )  . We are grateful to Erin Glendening for her patient and careful coding and databasentry  , and to Maria Gordin for her reliability coding . 

O . Ducrot .  1983 . Lese as commun . Le dire et led it . 
Leseditions de Minuit , Paris.
Michael Elhadad and Kathleen McKeown . 1990.
Generating connectives . In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , pages 97-101 , Helsinki . 
Susan R . Goldman and John D . Murray . 1992.
Knowledge of connectors as cohesion devices in text : A comparative study of native-english speakers  . Journal of Educational Ps~lchology ,  44(4):504-519 . 
Barbara Grosz and Julia Hirschberg .  1992 . Some intonational characteristics of discourse structure  . 
In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Spoken Language Processing.
Barbara J . Grosz and Candace L . Sidner .  1986 . Attention , intention , and the structure of discourse . 
Computational Linguistics , 12(3):175-204.
Marti Hearst .  1994 . Multl-paragraph segmentation of expository discourse  . In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  . 
Julia Hirschberg and Diane Litman .  1993 . Empirical studies on the disambiguation fcue phrases  . 
Computational Linguistics , 19(3):501-530.
Jerry R . Hobbs .  1985 . On the coherence and structure of discourse . Technical Report CSLI-85-37 , Center for the Study of Language and Information , Lel and Stanford Junior University , Stanford , 
California , October.
Alistair Knott and Robert Dale .  1994 . Using linguistic pheomena to motivate a set of coherence relations  . Discourse Processes , 18(1):35-62 . 
Diane J . Litman and James F . Allen .  1987 . A plan recognition model for subdialogues in conversations  . Cognitive Science , 11:163-200 . 
Robert Lorch .  1989 . Text signaling devices and their effects on reading and memory processes  . 
Educational Ps~/chology Review , 1:209-234.
William C . Mann and Sandra A . Thompson . 1988.
Rhetorical Structure Theory : Towards a functional theory of text organization  . TEXT , 8(3):243-281 . 
Danielle S . McNamara , Eileen Kintsch , Nancy Butler Songer , and Walter Klatsch . In press . A regood texts always better ? Interactions of text coherence  , background knowledge , and levels of understanding in learning from text  . Cognition and Instruction . 
Keith Millis , Arthur Gracsser , and Karl Haberlandt . 
1993 . The impact of connectives on the memory for expository text  . Applied Cognitive PsT/ehology , 7:317-339 . 
Johanna D . Moore and Martha E . Pollack . 1992.
A problem for RST : The need for multilevel discourse analysis  . Computational Linguistics , 18(4):537-544 . 
Megan Moser and Johanna D . Moore .  1993 . Investigating discourse relations . In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intentional it !/ and Sture in 
Discourse Relations , pages 94-98.
Rebecca Passonneau and Diane Litmus . 1993.
Intention-based segmentation : Human reliability and correlation with linguistic cues  . In Proceedings of the 81st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  . 
Randolph Quirk et al 1972. A Grammar of Con.
temporary English . Longman , London.
Dietmar Roesner and Manfred Stede .  1992 . Customizing RST for the automatic production of technical manuals  . In R . Dale , E . Hovy , D . Rosner , and O . Stock , editors , Proceedings of the Sizth International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , pages 199-215 , Berlin . 

Deborah Schiffrin .  1987 . Discourse Markers . Cambridge University Press , New York . 
Donia Scott and Clarisse Sieckenius de Souza .  1990 . 
Getting the message across in RST-based text generation  . In R . Dale , C . Mellish , and M . Zock , editors , Current Research in Natural Language Generation , pages 47-73 . Academic Press , New

Keith Vander Linden , Susanna Cumming , and James Martin .  1992 . Expressing local rhetorical relations in instructional text  . Technical Report 92-43, University of Colorado . To appear in Computational Linguistics . 
Ingrid Zukerman .  1990 . A predictive approach for the generation of rhetorical devices  . Computational Intelligence , 6(1):25-40 . 

