Aspect and Discourse Structure :
Isa Neutral Viewpoint Required ?*
Frank Schilder
Centre for Cognitive Science
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh EH8 9LW , Scotland , U.K.
Internet : schilder@cogsc ?, ed.ac.uk
Abstract
We apply Smith's theory of aspect ( 1991 ) to German-a language without any aspectual markers  . In particular , we try to shed more light on the effects aspect can have on discourse structure and show how English and German behave differently in this respect  . We furthermore describe howSmith's notion of a neutral viewpoint can be helpful for the analysis of discourse in German  . It turned out that proposals claiming that the German Preterite covers the progressive as well as the simple aspect cannot sufficiently explain the data presented in this paper  ( B ~ iuerle ,  1988) . Finally we give a sltuatlon-theoretic approach to formalize Smith's intuitions following Glas-bey  ( 1994 ) incorporating Allen's interval-calculus ( Allen ,  1984) . 
1 Viewpoint and Situation Aspect Smith ( 1991 ) presents two terms which are assigned to two distinct phenomena in language : viewpoint and situation aspect  . This two-level theory gives an explanation for the difference between aspectual information understood as a view on a situation and temporal features of a situation  . The former can be gained after applying a certain viewpoint chosen by the speaker and the latter one is stored in the lexical entry of a lexeme  . l " The author gratefully acknowledges the helpful comments of Sheila Glasbey  , LexHolt and the three anonymous reviewers of this paper  . This research was supported by a PhD-scholarship HSPII/AUFE awarded by the German Academic Exchange Service  ( DAAD )  . 
1Besides the situation aspect described by the semantic entry of the verb many other sentential constituents  ( e . g . object or subject NPs ) may have an influence on it ( Krif ~ ,  1992) . 
Situation Aspects Smith introduces three socalled " conceptual features " of situation aspects which have binary values  \[-4-\]  , namely stative , dura-tire and telic . Five different situation aspects have emerged which are distinguished using these features and certain temporal schemata ? Examples : - Sam owned three peach or chards  . ( State ) - Lilyswam in the pond . ( Activity)-Mrs Ramsey wrote a letter . ( Accomplishment ) - Lily knocked at the door .   ( Semelf active ) -MrRamsey reached the lighthouse .   ( Achievement ) Viewpoints Smith postulates three different viewpoints  . Schematically she uses an idealised timeline where the initial and finishing points of a situation are indicated by I and F respectively  . The duration of the situation can be drawn in two different ways : as an unstructured  (  - -  ) and a structured (  . . . ) phase which has internal stages . The viewpoint is understood in this representation as a focus on parts or on the whole situation  (  / / /  )   ( figure 1 )  . 
a)i .   . IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII .   . F b ) IF
IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII c)I.

Figure 1: The a ) imperfective b ) perfective and c ) neutral viewpoint Two viewpoints correspond mainly to the wellknown opposition perfective /imperfective  . However , additionally Smith assumes a socalled neutral viewpoint which contains the initial point and at least one internal stage  . 
Aspectually vague sentences which provide either an open or a closed reading backup Smith's consid-ZSee Smith  ( 1991 ) for a detaile discussion . 
326 erations ( Smith , 1991:120).3
However , she restricts her analysis to single sentences and neglects the effects viewpoints can have in a discourse  . We will therefore focus on this issue in the next section  . 
2 Discourse Structure
We investigate here which viewpoint is appropriate for the German Preterite  . B ~ uerle (1988:131) , for instance , claims that this tense in German is ambiguous w . r . t , the perfective/imperfective view on a situation and gives the following evidence for it :  ( 1 ) a . Der Angeklagte fuhrnach Hause . Dorttrankerein Glas Trollinger . 
The defendant drove home . There hed rank a glass of Trollinger . 
b . Der Angeklagte fuhrnach Hause . Am
Lustnauer Tor hatteereinen schweren
Unfall und muss teins K ranken hause in gelief ert werden  . 
The defendant was driving home . At the
Lust nauer to werh e had a serious accident and had to be admitted to the hospital  . 
In ( la ) the VP fuhrnach Hause refers to a completed event and therefore contains an endpoint  . In ( lb ) this endpoint is denied by the second sentence . 
Note that the English translation of ( lb ) is therefore only correct if an imperfective view is used  . 
This data shows that the use of the Preterite in German does not commit the speaker to saying anything about the endpoint  . Every inference regarding the ending of a situation is due to the context or our world knowledge  . 
It may be concluded from ( 1 ) that we cannot assume a perfective viewpoint , because this view includes the endpoint of a situation  . The following discourse will furthermore show that also the imperfective view is not applicable to the German 

It is commonly supposed that the imperfective viewpoint which refers to the middle of a situation omitting the initial as well as the final point can be used for describing a background within a discourse  ( cf . Smith , 1991:130):(2) The defendant had an accident . He was driving home ( at this time ) . 
3 FoUowing Smith ( 1991 ) we applied two tests to German data regarding the temporal properties of the endpoint of a situation which are discussed in Schilder  ( 1995 )  . 
A direct German translation , however , expresses two subsequent events . At first the defendant had an accident and then he drove home:  ( 3 ) Der Angeklagte hatte einen Un fall . Erfuhrnach Hause (?? zu der Zeit) . 
Adding the PP zuder Zeit ( ' at this time ' ) the sentence functions as a background for the event described by the first sentence  , but this discourse sound sawkward and the continuation with a state in  ( 4 ) is clearly preferred . 4 (4) Erwarauf dem Wegnach Hause . 
Discourse ( 3 ) shows that for the German Preterite the initial point is focussed by the viewpoint  . This observation proves therefore this tense is not ambiguous w  . r . t the progressive and the simple aspect as B ~ uerle  ( 1988 ) claims . 
To sum up , these two discourses can be seen to show that the German aspect system for the Preterite offers only a neutral view on every situation  . 
Moreover , this data disproves B/~uerle's explanation of (1) , clarifies Smith's definition of a viewpoint and motivates the need for a neutral viewpoint in 

It is obviously a shortcoming of Smith's description to define the viewpoint merely as a focus on parts or on the whole situation  . It emerged from the discours examples that a crucial function of the viewpoint is the commitment the speaker gives as to whether the endpoint has been reached or not  . 
In English , the perfective view sets the endpoint 5 and no cancellation is allowed afterwards . A neutral view on a situation gives only a confirmation of the initial point  . It leaves open whether the end has been reached or not  . Only the temporal knowledge derived from the situation aspect can provide further information which  , however , may be overridden by the context . 
3 A Situation-theoretic
Formalisation
We follow Glasbey ( 1994:15 ) inhercriticism of Smith's formalisation within Discourse Represen-tation Theory  ( DRT )   ( Kamp & Reyle ,  1993) . 6  4Note that the PP at this time is not required for the English discourse to be fully understood  . 
5Provided that the situation aspect provides an inherent end point which is not the case for states  . 
6 A new account presented by Asher ( 1993 ) to describe types of eventualities i currently being investigated  . Note that the standard definition of DRT does not provide any description of types or other abstract entities  . 

Unlike DRT , STDRT ( Cooper ,  1992 ) has the notion of an event type which can be used for the information given by the situation aspect  . Note that this even type does not have to be instantiated with a situation of this type  ; it will therefore not be introduced like ad is course referent in a discourse represent at ionstructure  . 7 s_LJ fahren(X , Y , T ) alnarned(X , 'Der Angeklagte ') named(Y , ' nach Hause ') sl

Figure 2: The complet event type ?
The first sentence of (1) refers to a situations ,   , where sn is of a type ? . Type ? can be seen as the part of an episode of the complet event type ? which is focussed by the neutral viewpoint  . We have therefore to define the initial point and the first stage  . 
<3 i , itial ~ iff :
V e , e'\[\[e:^e':e <3 e'A\[Ve"\[e"e'_e"\]t BEFORE , MEETSt "\]\]
O ~ < 3 first_stage ~ iff :
V e , e ' , e"\[\[ e:aA e': j3 A e ": 7 A 7   <3initial fl\]"+e <3 e'At"MEETSt\]t , t  ~ , t " are the occurrence times of e , e ~ and eH respectively ,   <3 is the PARTOF relation between situations and BEFORE and MEETS are Allen's interval-relations as defined in Allen  ( 1984 )  . 
4 Conclusion
We showed that Smith's notion of a neutral viewpoint is crucial for German  . In particular , we investigated the effects this viewpoint has on a discourse level and compared it with English  . It may be concluded from this analysis that discourse structure differs depending on the language  . A discourse grammar developed for English cannot easily be applied to German  . This crosslinguistic account gives prominence to the underlying concepts instead of focussing only on the surface structure which is unal-terably bound to the peculiarity of a single object language  . 
7Figure 2 shows a simplified representation f the accomplishment even type  . No account will be given of the treatment of PPs like nach Hause for the time being  . 
In our analysis for German , we therefore highlighted the following two properties which can be stipulated regarding the neutral viewpoint :* The endpoint of a situation is beyond the focus of this viewpoint  . Default information given by the situation aspect may be overridden by the context  .   8 ? The neutral viewpoint contains the initial point of the situation  . Backgrounding - a typical function of the imperfective view where the ini-timpoint is not included-is therefore not applicable for this viewpoint  . 
Furthermore , the proposed formalisation provides an account which can handle the discussed phenomena within an implementation  ; this is ongoing work . 
References
James Allen .  1984 . Towards a general theory of action and time . Artificial Intelligence , 23:123-154 . 
Nicholas Asher .  1993 . Reference to abstract Objects in Discourse , Kluwer , Dordrecht . 
Rainer B ~ iuerle . 1988. E reignisse und
Repr~entationen . LILOG-REPORT 43, IBM
Deutschland , Stuttgart.
Robin Cooper .  1992 . Discourse representation is ituation theory . Reading material for the 4 th European Summer School in Logic , Language and Information , University of Essex , Colchester , England , 

Sheila Glasbey .  1994 . Progressives , events and states . In Paul Dekker and Martin Stokhof , editors , Pro(: . of the 9th Amsterdam Colloquium . 
ILLC/Department of Philosophy , University of Amsterdam . 
Hans Kamp and Uwe Reyle .  1993 . From Discourse to Logic : Introduction to Modeltheoretic Semantics of Natural Language  . Kluwer , Dordrecht . 
Manfred Krifka .  1992 . Thematic Relations as Links between Nominal Reference and Temporal Constitution  . In Ivan A . Sag and Anna Szabolcsi , editors , Lexical Matters . CSLI . 
Frank Schilder . 1995. A neutral view on German.
To appear in Proc . of the 5 th International Toulouse Workshop on Time , Space and Movement , Toulouse . 

Carlota S . Smith . 1991. The Parameter of Aspect.
Kluwer , Dordrecht.
8 A formalisation of this intuition by a nonmonotonic reasoning mechanism is described in Schilder  ( 1995 )  . 

