A Minimalist Head-Corner Parser
Mett in a Veenstra
vakgroep Alfa-informatica , University of Groningen
Postbus 716
NL-9700 AS Groningen
Mettina@let.rug.nl
Abstract
In the Minimalist Program ( Chomsky,
1992 ) it is assumed that there are different types of projections  ( lexical and functional ) and therefore different types of heads . This paper explains why functional heads are not treated as head-corners by the mini-real is the ad -corner parser described here  . 
1 Introduction
In the Minimalist Program ( Chomsky ,  1992 ) ' surface ' word order is determined in a very indirect way  . 
Word order is no longer a property of phrase structure  , because phrase structure is universal . Furthermore movements are universal . This implies in principle that when we parse comparable sentences in different languages  , we always build the same tree . Word order differences are distinguished by the choice of the moment of SpellOut  ( SO )  . 
SO is the point in the derivation where instructions are given to an interface level called PF  ( Phonetic Form )  . Thus SO yields what was formerly called surface structure  . SO determines in which position in the tree a certain constituent becomes visible and consequently it determines the relative order of the constituents of a sentence  . This is illustrated in the simplified tree in figure  1  . Note that each cluster of coindexed positions ( i . e . a chain ) in the figure has only one visible constituent . This is the position in which the constituent is represented at the moment of SO  . This moment is not universal . The verb chain of our English example gives instructions to the interface level PF when the verb is adjoined to Agr S  ( head of the agreement phrase of the subject )  . The verb chain of a comparable sentence in Dutch ' spells out ' when the verb is in V  . Thus in Dutch subordinate clauses the movement of the verb to AgrO  ( head of the agreement phrase of the object ) and

Iu /\
CAgr SP
I/\ that ~ DPA grS
I/\ she ~ AgrSA grOP/\
V Agr Sej Aor O
I /\ like skAgrOVPo(;VAgrO
I/\ekVDP\[Lek cat sj
Figure 1: A simplified tree for a transitive subordinate clause in English subsequently AgrShappens ' covertly '  . The motivation for covert movement can be found in  ( Chomsky ,  1992 , pages 38-40) . 
In the following sections we will show that the structure building operations of the Minimalist Program are bidirectional operations  . Because head-corner parsing is a bidirectional strategy  , this type of parser seems more favorable for minimalist parsing  , than the usualeft to right parsing algorithms . 
2GT and Move-c ~
The central operations of the Minimalist Program are Generalized Transformation  ( GT ) and Move-~ . GT is a structure-building operation that builds trees in a bottom-up way as is illustrated in figure  2  . 
338 w
VV/\/\
VeVDP
Y Yl II ~ eher ~ esee her
Figure 2: GT applied to V and DP yielding ~' . 
Two phrase markers ( V and DP ) are combined into one . One of these two is called the target ( V ) . A projection of the target ( V ) is added to the target . The projection of the target has two daughters : the target itself and an empty position  . The empty position is substituted for by the second phrase marker  ( DP )  . This second phrase marker is itself built up in other applications of GT and/or Move-a  . 
Move-(~ is a special kind of GT . It is an operation that combines a target with a moved phrase marker  . It is assumed that movement is always leftward ( Kayne ,  1994 ) and that in the universal trees of the Minimalist Program heads and specifiers  , which are the only positions to move to , are always to the left of the projection line . These two assumptions in combination with the fact that GT and Move-a are bottom-up operations  , effect that the moved phrase marker has to be contained in the tree that was built so far  1 The tree in figure 1 illustrates different kinds of movement . In the Minimalist Program movement occurs to check features  . Elements move from the lexical domain ( VP ) to the functional domain ( e . g . 
AgrOP , Agr SP ) to compare their features with the features that are present in the functional domain  . 
3 Head-corner parsing
The main idea behind head-driven parsing ( Kay ,  1989 ) is that the lexical entries functioning as heads contain valuable information for the parsing process  . 
For example , if a verb is intransitive it will not require a complement  , if it is transitive it will require a complement . Therefore the head is parsed before its sisters in a head-driven parser  . A head-corner parser ( Kay , 1989; Bouma and van Noord , 1993) is a special type of head-driven parser . Its main characteristic is that it does not work from left to right but instead works bidirectionally  . That is , first a potential head of a phrase is located and next the sisters of the head are parsed  . The head can be in any position in the string and its sisters can either be to the right or to the left  . 
A head-corner parser starts the parsing process with a prediction step  . This step is completed when iSee ( Veenstra , 1994) for further details . 
a lexical head is found that is the head-corner of the goal  ( i . e . the type of constituent that is parsed ) . The head-corner relation is the reflexive and transitive closure of the head relation  . A is the head of B if there is a rule with B as lefthand side  ( LHS ) and A as the head daughter on the right hand side  ( RHS )  . 
When a ( lexical ) head-corner is found an X rule is selected in which the  ( lexical ) head is on the RHS . 
The sisters of the head are parsed recursively . The LHS of the rule contains the mother of the head  . 
If this mother is a head-corner of the goal , and the mother and the goal are not equal the whole process is repeated by selecting a rule with the new head-corner  ( i . e . the mother of the first head-corner ) on its RHS . 
In section 2 it is assumed that movement is invariably leftward and that GT and Move-a are bottom-up mechanisms  . GT builds the VP before other projections . Constituents of VP are moved to higher projections by Move-a  , which is a special kind of GT . Suppose that the parser should consider AgrS as the head-corner of Agr SP  , which accords with X-Theory . Then the head ( AgrS ) that should be filled with an adjoined verb by movement from AgrO  ( in a transitive sentence ) or V ( in an intransitive sentence ) is created before AgrO and V . To avoid moving constituents from a part of the tree that has not been built yet  , the head-corner table for the minimal is the ad -corner parser is not constructed completely according to X-Theory  ( see ( 1 ) ) . 
(1)hc(AgrS , AgrSP ), hc(V , VP).
hc(AgrOP , AgrS ). hc(V,V).
hc(AgrO , AgrOP ), hc(N,NP).
hc(VP , AgrO ). hc(N,~).
For example , instead of AgrO , VP is the head-corner of AgrO . This solution is compatible with the Minimalist Program in the sense that in this way the tree is built up in an absolute bottom-up way  ( i . e . starting from V ) so that a position that should be filled by movement is always created after the position from which the moved element comes  . 
The head-corner table in ( 1 ) illustrates that functional heads like AgrO and AgrS are not processed as heads  . Lexical proj_ . ections like VP and NP are treated according to X -Theory  . If we follow ( 1 ) in combination with the tree in figure 1 we establish the fact that the parser searches its way down to the verb as soon as possible  . The topdown prediction step moves from the goal AgrSP to AgrS to AgrOP to AgrO to VP to V and finally to the lexical head-corner V where the bottom-u proces starts as the 
Minimalist Program requires.
The head-corner parsing algorithm and the gram ( GT and Move-a ) have much in common . In both cases a tree is built up in a bottom-up way by starting with a head  ( lexical head-corner in the parsing algorithm , target in the structure building operations ) and creating the sister of the head recursively , etc .   2 By treating only lexical heads as head-corners we achieved that our parsing algorithm completely represents GT  . Only for Move-a we need an extra predicate to accomplish a movement if there is a possible movement to the node that has just been created  . 
4 Parsing vs . Generation
In section 3 we chose not to consider functional heads as head -corners  . This choice was made because it allows GT and Move-ato start constructing a VP before the projections to which constituents from VP are moved are constructed  . Another motivation to start with VP is that V contains information that is useful for the remainder of the structure building process  . For example , if the verb is intransitive we know that V does not require a complement sister  , and we know that we do not need an AgrOP on top of VP  . The fact that V contains lexical information and functional heads like AgrO and AgrS do not  , could be used as a justification for the fact that the latter are not head-corners  . The main idea of head-driven parsing is , as was stated before , that heads contain relevant information for the parsing process  , and that they therefore should be parsed before their sisters  . Functional heads obtain their contents via movement of elements from positions lower in the tree  . This special status makes them less useful for the parsing process  . 
The Minimalist Program is a generation-oriented framework  . Because we are dealing with parsing ( as opposed to generation ) in this paper there are certain discrepancies between the parser and the framework it is based on  . In the minimalist framework , lexical information belonging to a chain is available from the momen that the first position of the chain is created  , because that is the moment when the lexicon is consulted  . When parsing a sentence the lexicon is not by definition consulted at the beginning of the chain  . Figure 1 shows a tree that contains traces and visible constituents  . The position containing a visible constituent is the SO position of that chain  . 
The parser consults the lexicon at the moment in which the SO position of a chain is reached  . Conse-Sin the minimal is the ad-corner parser that is described here a head always has only one sister because minimal is trees are at most binary branching  . 
quently , when a trace is created before SO , the features belonging to that trace are unknown . The features of the traces of a certain chain are known as so on as the SO position is reached  , because all positions in a chain are linked . 
It can be concluded that the absolute bottom-up approach for the building of trees is more useful for generation than for parsing  . In generation , lexical information can be used as soon as a position that is the beginning of a chain is created  . In parsing we will have to wait until the SO position is reached  . 
In spite of this , we chose not to consider functional heads as heads in order to accomplish an absolute bottom -uprocess  . The reason for this is that , as was mentioned before , otherwise we would be reasoning backwards with relation to movement  . This could be inefficient and it is too far removed from the ideas of the minimalist framework  . 
5 Future Plans
The parser described here can judge the grammaticality of simple declarative transitive and intransitive sentences  , and of subordinate clauses . We will extend the parser in such a way that it will cover more advanced linguistic phenomena like anaphors and wh-questions  . Furthermore other types of parsers will be built to determine if this ' lexical' head-corner parser is indeed more efficient  . 
6 Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Gosse Bouma , John Nerbonne , Gertjan van Noord and Jan-Wouter Zwart for their helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper  . 
References
Gosse Bouma and Gertjan van Noord .  1993 . Head-driven parsing for lexicalist grammars : Experimental results  . In 6th Meeting of the European chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Utrecht . 
Noam Chomsky .  1992 . A minimalist program for linguistic theory . MIT Occasional Papers in Linguistics . 
Martin Kay .  1989 . He add riven parsing . In Proceedings of Workshop on Parsing Technologies  , Pitts-burg . 
Richard S . Kayne .  1994 . The antisymmetry of syntax . MIT Press , Cambridge . 
Mettina J . A . Veenstra .  1994 . Towards a formalization of generalized transformation  . In H . de Hoop A . de Boer and Henriette de Swart , editors , Language and Cognition ~ , Groningen . 

