Functional Centering
Michael Strube & Udo Hahn
Freiburg University
( ~\ [ Computational Linguistics Lab
Europaplatz 1, D-79085 Freiburg , Germany
strube , hahn@coling,uni-freiburg , de

Based on empirical evidence from a free word order language  ( German ) we propose a fundamental revision of the principles guiding the ordering of discourse ntities in the forward-looking centers within the centering model  . We claim that grammatical role criteria should be replaced by indicators of the functional information structure of the utterances  , i . e . , the distinction between context-bound and unbound iscourse le-ments  . This claim is backed up by an empirical evaluation of functional centering  . 
1 Introduction
The centering model has evolved as a methodology for the description and explanation of the local coherence of discourse  ( Grosz et al ,  1983; 1995) , with focus on pronominal and nominal anaphora . Though several crosslinguistic studies have been carded out  ( cf . the enumeration iGrosz et al (1995)) , an almost canonical scheme for the ordering on the forward-looking centers has emerged  , one that reflects wellknown regularities of fixed word order languages such as English  . With the exception of Walker et al (1990 ; 1994) for Japanese , Turan (1995) for Turkish , Rambow ( 1993 ) for German and Cote ( 1996 ) for English , only grammatical roles are considered and the ( partial ) ordering in Table 11 is taken for granted . 
I subject > dir-object > in dir-object I > complement  ( s ) > adjunct ( s ) Table 1: Grammatical Role Based Ranking on the C!~ Table  1contains the most explicit ordering of grammatical roles we are aware of and has been taken from Brennan et al  ( 1987 )  . Often , the distinction between complements and adjuncts icollapsed into the category " others "  ( c . f . , e . g . , Grosz et al (1995)) . 
Our work on the resolution of anaphora ( Strube & Hahn , 1995; Hahn & Strube , 1996) and textual ellipsis ( Hahn et al ,  1996) , however , is based on German , a free word order language , in which grammatical role information is far less predictive for the organization of centers  . Rather , for establishing proper referential relations , the functional information structure of the utterances becomes crucial  ( different perspectives on functional analysis are brought forward in Dane ~  ( 1974b ) and Dahl ( 1974 ) ) . We share the notion of functional information structure as developed by Dane ~  ( 1974 a )  . He distinguishes between two crucial dichotomies , viz . given information vs . new information ( constituting the information structure of utterances  ) on the one hand , and theme vs . rheme on the other ( constituting the thematic structure of utterances  ; cf . Halliday & Hasan (1976, pp . 325-6)) . Dane ~ refers to a definition given by Halliday ( 1967 ) to avoid the confusion likely to arise in the use of these terms : "\[  . . . \] while given means what you were talking about ( or what I was talking about before )  , theme means what I am talking about ( now )\[ . . . \]" Halliday (1967, p . 212) . Dane ~ concludes that the distinction between given information and theme is justified  , while the distinction betweenew information and rheme is not  . 
Thus , we arrive at at rich otomy between given information  , the me and rheme ( the latter being equivalent to new information )  . We here subscribe to these considerations , too , and will return in Section 3 to these notions in order to rephrase them more explicitly by using the terminology of the centering model  . 
In this paper , we intend to make two contributions to the centering approach  . The first one , the introduction of functional notions of information structure in the centering model  , is methodological in nature . 
The second one concerns an empirical issue in that we demonstrate how a functional model of centering can successfully be applied to the analysis of several forms of anaphoric text phenomena  . 
At the methodological level , we develop arguments that ( at least for free word order languages ) grammatical role indicator should be replaced by functional dering of discours entities in center lists  . In Section 3 we elaborate on the particular information structure criteria underlying a function-based center ordering  . 
We also make a second , even more general methodological claim for which we have gathered some preliminary  , though still not conclusiv evidence . Based on a reevaluation of empirical arguments discussed in the literature on centering  , we stipulate that exchanging rammatical by functional criteria is also a reasonable strategy for fixed word order languages  . 
Grammatical role constraints can indeed be rephrased by function alones  , which is simply due to the fact that grammatical roles and the information structure patterns  , as we define them , coincide in these kinds of languages . Hence , the proposal we make seems more general than the ones currently under discussion in that  , given a functional framework , fixed and free word order languages can be accounted for by the same ordering principles  . As a consequence , we argue against Walker et al's (1994 , p . 227) stipulation , which assumes that the CI ranking is the only parameter of the centering theory which is language-dependent  . Instead , we claim that functional centering constraints for the C ! ranking are possibly universal  . 
The second major contribution of this paper is related to the unified treatment of specific text phenomena  . It consists of an equally balanced treatment of intersentential  ( pro ) nominal naphor and textual ellipsis ( also called functional or partial anaphora )  . 
The latter phenomenon ( cf . the examples given in the next section ) , in particular , is usually only sketchily dealt within the centering literature  , e . g . , by asserting that the entity in question " is realized but not directly realized "  ( Grosz et al ,  1995 , p . 217) . Furthermore , the distinction between those two kinds of realization is generally delegated to the underlying semantic theory  . We will develop arguments how to locate elliptical discours entities and resolve textual ellipsis properly at the center level  . The ordering constraints we supply account for all of the abovementioned types of anaphora in a precise way  , including ( pro ) nominal anaphora ( Strube & Hahn , 1995; Hahn & Strube ,  1996) . This claim will be validated by a substantial body of empirical data  ( cf . Section 4) . 
2 Types of Anaphora Considered
Text phenomena , e . g . , textual forms of ellipsis and anaphora , are a challenging issue for the design of parsers for text understanding systems  , since imperfect recognition facilities either esult in referentially incoherent or invalid text knowledge representations  . 
At the conceptual level , textual ellipsis relates a quasi-anaphoric expression to its extrasentential antecedent by conceptual ttributes  ( or roles ) associated with that antecedent ( see , e . g . , the relation between " Akkus " ( accumulator ) and "316 LT " , a particular notebook , in(lb ) and ( la )) . Thus , it complements the phenomenon of nominal anaphora  , where an anaphoric expression is related to its antecedent in terms of conceptual generalization  ( as , e . g . , " Rechner " ( computer ) in ( lc ) refers to "316 LT ' in ( la ) mediated by the textual ellipsis in ( lb ) ) . The resolution of text-level nominal ( and pronominal ) anaphora contributes to the construction of referentially valid text knowledge bases  , while the resolution of textual ellipsis yields referentially coherent text knowledge bases  . 
(1) a . Ein Reserve-Batterie paek v rsorgt den 316 LT ca . 
2 Minutenmit Strom.
(A reserve battery pack - supplies - the 316LT -for approximately 2 minutes-with power . ) b . DerStatus desA kkuswird demAn wender ange-zeigt . 
(The status of the accumulator - is - to the user -indicated  . ) c . Ca . 30 Minuten vorder Entleerung beginnt der
Rechner 5Sekundenzubeepen.
(Approximately 30 minutes - before the discharge-starts - the computer-for  5 seconds-to beep . ) d . 5Minutenbevorersichausschaltet,f'angtdie
Low-Battery-LE Dan zu blinken.
( 5 minutes - before-it-itself-turns off- begins - the low-battery-LED-t of lash  . ) In the case of textual ellipsis , the missing conceptual link between two discourse lements occurring in adjacent utterances must be inferred in order to establish the local coherence of the discourse  ( for an early statement of that idea , cf . Clark (1975)) . In the surface form of utterance ( lb ) the information is missing that " Akkus '" ( accumulator ) links up with "316 LT " . 
This relation can only be made explicit if conceptual knowledge about he domain  , viz . the relation part of between the concepts ACCUMULATOR and  316LT   , is available ( see Hahn et al ( 1996 ) for a more detailed treatment of text ellipsis resolution  )  . 
3 Principles of Functional Centering
Within the framework of the centering model ( Grosz et al ,  1995) , we distinguish each utterance's backward-looking center  ( Gb ( U , ~)) and its forward-looking centers ( G!(Un)) . The ranking imposed on the elements of the GI reflects the assumption that the most highly ranked element of GI  ( t i n ) -the preferred center Cp ( Un ) - is the most preferred antecedent of an anaphoricor elliptical expression in Un+l  , while the remaining elements are partially ordered according to decreasing preference for establishing referential links  . Hence , the most important single construct of the centering model is the ordering of the list of forward-looking centers  ( Walker et al ,  1994) . 

The main difference between Grosz et al's work and our proposal concerns the criteria for ranking the forward-looking centers  . While Grosz et al assume that grammatical roles are the major determinant for the ranking on the C ' y  , we claim that for languages with relatively free word order  ( such as German )  , it is the functional information structure ( IS ) of the utterance in terms of the context -boundednessor un-boundedness of discourse elements  . The centering data structures and the notion of context-boundedness can be used to redefine Dane ~'   ( 1974 a ) trichotomy between given information , theme and new information ( rheme ) . The Cb(U ,), the most highly ranked element of C . t(Un-i ) realized in\[In , corresponds to the element which represents the given information  . The theme of U , is represented by the preferred center C'p(U , ) , the most highly ranked element of C!(Un ) . 
The theme/rheme hierarchy of \[ In is represented by CI  ( U , ~  ) which-in our approach-is partly determined by the C !  ( Un-i ) : the rhematic elements of Un are the ones not contained in C !  ( U , _i ) ( unboundis-course dements ) ; they express the new information in Un . The ones contained in Cl(U , _i ) and Cy(U , ) ( bound discourse elements ) are thematic , with the theme/rheme hierarchy corresponding to the ranking in the Cls  . The distinction between context-bound and unbound elements is important for the ranking on the C I  , since bound elements are generally ranked higher than any other nonanaphoric elements  ( cf . also
Haji~ov ~ i et al (1992)).
An alternative definition of theme and rheme in the context of the centering approach is proposed by Rambow  ( 1993 )  . In his approach the theme corresponds to the Cb and the theme/rheme hierarchy can be derived from those elements of C !  ( U , - i ) that are realized in \[ In . Rambow does not distinguish , however , between the information structure and the thematic structure of utterances  , which leads to problems when a change of the criteria for recognizing the thematic structure is envisaged  , Our approach is flexible enough to accomodate other conceptions of theme/rheme as defined  , e . g . , by Haji6ov~i et al (1995) , since this change affects only the thematic but not the information structure of utterances  . 
bound element ( s ) > ~ sb ~ . . unbound element(s ) anaphora > X Sbo , , a ( possessive pronoun xorelliptical antecedent )  > , Sbo , , a ( elliptical expression x or head of anaphoric expression  ) nom head , > pr , cnom head 2 > p ~ , o . . .  >~ , nomheadn Table 2: Functional Ranking Constraints on the C ! The rules holding for the ranking on the C'I  , derived from a German language corpus , are summarized in Table 2 . They are organized into three layers2 . At the top level ,  > , sb , ,~ denotes the basic relation for the overall ranking of information structure  ( IS ) patterns . 
Accordingly , any context-bound expression in the utterance U , _i is given the highest preference as a potential antecedent of an anaphoricor elliptical expression in \[ In while any unbound expression is ranked next to context-bound expressions  . 
The second relation depicted in Table 2 , > iSbou ~ u , denotes preference relations dealing exclusively with multiple occurrences of  ( resolved ) anaphora , i . e . , bound elements , in the preceding utterance . > ' Sbo , ,d distinguishes among different forms of context -bound elements  ( viz . , anaphora , possessive pronouns and textual ellipses ) and their associated preference order . 
The final element of > , Sbou ~ u is either the elliptical expression or the head of an anaphoric expression which is used as a possessive determiner  , a Saxon genitive , a prepositional or a genitival attribute ( cf . the ellipsis in ( 2c ) : " die Ladezeit " ( the charge time ) vs . 
" seine Ladezeit " ( its charge time ) or " die Ladeze it desA kk us " ( the accumulator's chargetime ) ) . 
For illustration purposes , consider text fragment ( 1 ) and the corresponding Oh ~ C ! data in Table 33: In ( ld ) the pronoun " er " ( it ) might be resolved to " Akku " ( accumulator ) or " Rechner " ( computer )  , since both fulfill the agreement condition for pronoun resolution  . Now , " der Rechner " ( computer ) figures as a nominal anaphor , already resolved to DELL-316 LT , while " Akku " ( accumulator ) is only the antecedent of the elliptical expression " der Entleerung "  ( discharge )  . Therefore , the preferred antecedent of " er " ( it ) is determined as Rechner ( computer )  . 
The bottom level of Table 2 specifies > ~ r co which covers the preference order for multiple occurrences of the same type of any information structure pattern  , e . g . , the occurrence of two anaphora or two unbound elements  ( all heads in an utterance are ordered by linear precedence relative to their text position  )  . In sentence (2b ) , two nominal anaphors occur , " Akku " ( accumulator ) and " Rechner " ( computer )  . The textual ellipsis " Ladezeit " ( chargetime ) in ( 2c ) has to be resolved to the most prefer redement of the C'I of  ( 2b )  , viz . the entity denoted by " Akku " ( accumula-tor )   ( cf . Table 4) . Note that " Rechner " ( computer ) is the subject of the sentence , though it is not the preferred antecedent , since " Akku " ( accumulator ) precedes " Rechner " ( computer ) and is anaphoric as well . 
2 Disregarding coordinations , the ordering we propose induces a strict ordering on the entities in a center list  . 
3 Minuten ( minutes ) is excluded from the C ! for reasons concerning the processing of complex sentences  ( cf . Strube (1996)) . 
272 ( la ) Cb : DELL-316 LT:316 LT
Cf . "\[ DELL-316 LT:316 LT , RESERVE-BATTERY-PAcK : Reserve-Batterie pack , TIME-UNIT-PAIR:2 Minuten , POWER : Strom\] ( lb ) Cb:DELL-316 LT:-Cf:\[DELL-3 16 LT : -- , Accu : Akku , STATUS : Status , USER : An wender \] ( lc ) Cb : DELL-3   16LT : Rechner Cf:\[ DELL-316LT : Rechner , Accu : -- , DISCHARGE : Enfleerung , TIME-UNIT-PAIR : 30 Minuten , TIME-UNIT-PAIR : 5Sekunden\] ( ld ) Cb:DELL-316 LT:erCf:\[DELL-316 LT : er , LoW-BATTERY-LED : Low-Battery-LED Table 3: Centering Data for Text Fragment ( 1 ) 



CONTINUE(2a ) Cb : DELL-316 LT:316 LT
Cf:\[DELL-316 LT:316 LT , NIMH-Accu : NiMH-Akku\] ( 2b ) Ch : DELL-3   16LT : Reehner Cf:\[NIMH-Accu : Akku , DELL-316 LT : Rechner , TIME-UNIT-PAIR : 4 Stunden , 
POWER:Sffom\](2c ). Cb:NIMH-Accu:-
Cf:\[NIMH-Accu:-- , CHARGE-TIME : Ladeze it , TIME-UNIT-PAIR : 1 , 5 Stunden \]



Table 4: Centering Data for Text Fragment ( 2 )   ( 2 ) Der316 LTw~dmit einem NiMH-Akkubestllckt . 
(I'he 316LT is-with a NiMH-accumulator-equipped . ) b . Durch dies enneuartigen Akkuwird der Rechner ffirca  . 4 Stundenmit Stromversorgt . 
(Because of this new type of accumulator - is the computer-for approximately  4 hours-with power-provided . ) c . Dartiberhinausit die Ladeze it mit 1 , 5 Stundense hr kurz . 
( Also-is-the chargetime of 1 . 5 hours-quite short . ) Given these basic relations , we may formulate the composite relation : > , s(Table 5) . It states the conditions for the comprehensive ordering of items on C !  ( x and y denote lexical heads )  . 
> , s := ( x , y ) I~fx and y both represent the same type of IS pattern then the relation > ~  , , c applies to x and y else/fx and y both represent different forms of bound elements then the relation > rSbo  , ,a pplies to x and y else the relation > rsb ? , = applies to x and y Table 5: Information Structure Relation 4 Evaluation In this section , we first describe the empirical and methodological framework in which our evaluation experiments were embedded  , and then turn to a discussion of evaluation results and the conclusions we draw from the data  . 
4.1 Evaluation Framework
The test set for our evaluation experiment consisted of three different exts or ts :  15 product reviews from the information technology ( IT ) domain ( one of the two main corporatour lab )  , one article from the German news magazine Der Spiegel  , and the first two chapters of a short story by the German writer Heiner Miiller  4  . 
The evaluation was carried out manually in order to circumvent error chaining  5  . Table 6 summarizes the total numbers of anaphors , textual ellipses , utterances and words in the test set . 
ag . apho~ellipses utterances words
IT 30829 4451 5542
Spiegel 102 258 214 68
Mfi Uer 153 20878 6756 33396 207877
Table 6: Test Set
Given this test set , we compared three major approaches to centering , viz . the original model whose ordering principles are based on grammatical role indicators only  ( the socalled canonical model ) as characterized by Table 1 , an " intermediate " model which can be considered a naive approach to free word order languages  , and , of course , the functional model based on information structure constraints as stated in Table  2  . For reasons discussed below , augmented versions of the naive and the canonical approaches will also be considered  . They are characterized by the additional 4Liebesgeschichte   . In Heiner Mflller . Geschichtenaus der Produktion 2 . Berlin : Rotbuch Verlag , pp .  5763 . 
SA performance evaluation of the current anaphora ndellipsis resolution capacities of our system is reported in 
Hahn et al (1996).
2 73 constraint that elliptical antecedents are ranked higher than elliptical expressions  ( hort : " ante > express " )  . 
For the evaluation of a centering algorithm on naturally occurring text it is necessary to specify how to deal with complex sentences  . In particular , methods for the interaction between intra-and intersentential anaphora resolution have to be defined  , since the centering model is concerned only with the latter case  ( see Suri & McCoy ( 1994 ) ) . We use an approach as described by Strube ( 1996 ) for the evaluation . 
Since most of the anaphors in these texts are nominal anaphors  , the resolution of which is much more restricted than that of pronominal naphors  , the rate of success for the whole anaphora resolution process is not significant enough for a proper evaluation of the functional constraints  . The reason for this lies in the fact that nominal anaphors are far more constrained by conceptual criteria than pronominal anaphors  . So the chance to properly resolve a nominal anaphor  , even at lower ranked positions in the center lists  , is greater than for pronominal anaphors . While we shift our evaluation criteria way from simple anaphora resolution success data to structural conditions based on the proper ordering of center lists  ( in particular , we focus on the most highly ranked item of the forward-looking centers  ) these criteria compensate for the high proportion of nominal anaphora that occur in our test sets  . 
The types of centering transitions we make use of ( cf . 
Table 7) are taken from Walker et al (1994).
~(~) = ~(~) ~(~)#~( ~) cb(u.)=c ~( u._~)
ORCb(U ,,- I ) undef.

RET AIN ROUGH-SHIFT
Cb(U .) #


Table 7: Transition Types 4 . 2 Evaluation Results In Table 8 we give the numbers of centering transitions between the utterances in the three test sets  . The first column contains those which are generated by the naive approach  ( such a proposal was made by Gordon et al ( 1993 ) as well as by Rambow ( 1993 ) who , nevertheless , restricts it to the German middle field only ) . 
We simply ranked the elements of C ! according to their text position  . While it is usually assumed that the elliptical expression ranks above its antecedent  ( Grosz et al ,  1995 , p . 217), we assume the contrary . The second column contains the results of this modification with respect to the naive approach  . In the third column of Table 8 we give the numbers of transitions which are generated by the canonical constraints as stated by Grosz et al  ( 1995 , p . 214, 217) . The fourth column supplies the results of the same modification as was used for the naive approach  , viz . elliptical antecedents are ranked higher than elliptical expressions  . The fifth column shows the results which are generated by the functional constraints from Table  2  . 
First , we examine the error data for anaphora resolution for the five cases  . All approaches have 99 errors in common . These are due to underspecifica-tions at different levels  , e . g . , the failure to account for prepositional naphors  ( 16 )  , plural anaphors (8) , anaphors which refer to a member of a set (14) , sentence anaphors (21) , and anaphors which refer to the global focus (12) . Only 6 errors of the functional approach are directly caused by an inappropriate ordering of the CI  , while the naive approach leads to 10 errors and the canonical to 7  . When the antecedent of an elliptical expression is ranked above the elliptical expression itself the error rate of these two augmented approaches increases to  12 and 9  , respectively . 
We now turn to the distribution of transition types for the different approaches  . The centering model assumes a preference order among these transitions  , e . g . , CONTINUE ranks above RETAIN and RETAIN ranks above SHIFT  . This preference order reflects the presumed inference load put on the hearer or speaker to coherently decode or encode a discourse  . Since the functional approach generates a larger amount of CONTINUE transitions  , we interpret this as a first rough indication that this approach provides for more efficient processing than its competitors  . 
But this reasoning is not entirely conclusive . Counting single occurrences of transition types , in general , does not reveal the entire validity of the center lists  . 
Instead , considering adjacent transition pairs gives a more reliable picture  , since depending on the text sort considered ( e . g . , technical vs . news magazine vs . literary texts ) certain sequences of transition types may be entirely plausible  , though they include transitions which , when viewed in isolation , seem to imply considerable inferencing load ( cf . Table 8) . For instance , a CONTINUE transition which follows a CONTINUE transition is a sequence which requires the lowest processing costs  . But a CONTINUE transition which follows a RET AIN transition implies higher processing costs than a SMOOTH-SHIFT transition following a RETAIN transition  . This is due to the fact that a RE-TAIN transition ideally predicts a SMOOTH-SHIFT in the following utterance  . In this case the SMOOTH-SHIFT is the " least effort " transition  , because only the first element of the C ! of the preceding utterance has to be checked to perform the SMOOTH-SHIFT transition  , while in the case of CONTINUE at least one more check has to be performed  . Hence , we claim that no one particular centering transition is preferred over another  . Instead , we postulate that some centering transition pairs are preferred over others  . Following this
Transition Types naive naive & ante > express
CONTINUE 491 67
RET AIN 269158
SMO OTH-SHIFT 32 41
ROUGH-SHIFT 3923
Errors ' 69   70 canonical 197   309   131   25   35   51   26   4   69   67 


CONTINUE 17
RETAIN 42
SMOOTH-SHIFT 9
ROUGH-SHIFT7
Errors 18
CONTINUE 31
RETAIN 19
SMOOTH-SHIFT 15
ROUGH-SItlFT 14
Errors 22
CONTINUE 97
RET AIN 330
SMOOTH-SHIFT 56
ROUGH-SHIFT 60
Errors ( specific errors )  109  ( 10 )   43   50   23   12   8   13   1   0   17   f6   32   36   18   15   16   18   13   10   22   22   272   395   172   52   59   82   40   14   108   ( 9 )  105  ( 6 )  226 171 209 272 67 46 41 54 111  ( 12 )  106  ( 7 ) Table 8: Numbers of Centering Transitions line of argumentation  , we here propose to classify all occurrences of centering transition pairs with respect to the costs the yimply  . The cost-based evaluation of different C ! orderings refers to evaluation criteria which for manintrinsic part of the centering model  6  . 
Transition pairs hold for two immediately successive utterances  . We distinguish between two types of transition pairs  , cheap ones and expensive ones . We call a transition pair cheap if the backward -looking center of the current utterance is correctly predicted by the preferred center of the immediately preceding utterance  , i . e . , Cb(Ui ) = Gp(Ui_l ), i = 2 .   .   . n . 
Transition pairs are called expensive if the backward-looking center of the current utterance is not correctly predicted by the preferred center of the immediately preceding utterance  , i . e . , Cb(Ui )  #Gp(Ui_l ), i = 2 .   .   . n . Table 9 contains a detailed synopsis of cheap and expensive transition pairs  . In particular , chains of the RETAIN transition in passages where the Cb does not change  ( passages with constant theme ) show that the canonical ordering constraints for the forward-looking centers are not appropriate  , The numbers of centering transition pairs generated by the different approaches are shown in Table  10  , In general , the functional approach shows the best re-6As a consequence of this postulate , we have to redefine Rule 2 of the Centering Constraints ( Grosz et al ,  1995 , p . 215) appropriately , which gives an informal characterization of a preference for sequences of CONTINUE over sequences of RETAIN arid  , similarly , sequences of RETAIN over sequences of SHIFT . Our specification for the case of text interpretation says that cheap transitions are preferred over expensive ones  , with cheap and expensive transitions as defined in Table  9  . 
Suits , while the naive and the canonical approaches work reasonably well for the literary text  , but exhibit a poor performance for the texts from the IT domain and the news magazine  . The results for the latter approaches become only slightly more positive with the modification of ranking the antecedent of a textual ellipsis above the elliptical expression  , but they do not compare to the results of the functional approach  . 
We were also interested in finding out whether the functional ordering we propose possibly " includes " the grammatical role based criteria discussed so far  . 
We , therefore , reevaluated the examples already annotated with Gb/C ! data available in the literature  ( for the English language , we considered all exam-pies from Grosz et al ( 1995 ) and Brennan et al ( 1987 )  ; for Japanese we took the data from Walker et al ( 1994 ) ) . Surprisingly enough , all examples of Grosz et al ( 1995 ) passed the test successfully . Only with respecto the trouble some Alfa Romeo driving scenario  ( cf . Brennan et al (1987, p . 157 ) ) our constraints fail to properly rank the elements of the third sentence C ! of that example  .   7 Note also that these results were achieved without having recourse to extra constraints  , e . g . , the shared property constraint to account for anaphora parallelism  ( Kameyama ,  1986) . 
We applied our constraint so Japanes examples in the same way  . Again we abandoned all extra constraint setup in these studies  , e . g . , the Zero Topic Assignment ( ZTA ) rule and the special role of empathy 7In essence , the very specific problem addressed by that example seems to be that Friedman has not been previously introduced in the local discourse segment and is only accessible via the global focus  . 

CONTINUE-cheap
CONTINUE cheap
RETAIN expensive
SMO OTH-SHIFT cheap
ROUGH-SHIFT expensive
RETAIN expensive cheap expensive expensive expensive 
SMOOTH-SHIFT expens Necheap expens~echeap
ROUGH-SHIFTi expensive expensive expensive expensive 
Table 9: Costs for Transition Pairs naive & cost type naiveant e > express cheap  72   180   1T expensive 317   209 
Cheap 2536
Spiegel expensive 5039 cheap 4548
M Oiler expensive 34   31 cheap 142   264 expensive 401   279 c ~ onical 46" Table 10: Cost Values for Centering Transition Pair Types verbs  ( Walker et al ,  1994) . However , the results our constraints generate are the same as those generated by Walker et al including these model extensions  . Only a single problematic case remains , viz . example (30) of Walker et al (1994, p . 214 ) causes the same problems they described ( discourse-initial utterance , semantic or world knowledge should be available ) . Even for the crucial examples ( 32 ) - ( 36 ) of Walker et al ( 1994 , p . 216-221) our constraints generate the same Cls as
Walker et al's constraints with ZTA.
To summarize the results of our empirical evaluation  , we first claim that our proposal based on functional criteria leads to substantially better and -- with respect to the inference load placed on the text under-stander  , whether human or machine--more plausible results for languages with free word order than the structural constraints given by Grosz et al  ( 1995 ) and those underlying a naive approach . We base these observations on an evaluation approach which considers transition pairs in terms of the inference load specific pairs imply  . Second , we have gathered some evidence , still far from being conclusive , that he functional constraints on centering seem to incorporate the structural constraints for English and the modified structural constraints for Japanese  . Hence , we hypothesize that functional constraints on centering might constitute a general mechanism for treating free an ___dd fixed word order languages by the same descriptive mechanism  . This claim , however , has to be further substan-tiated by additional crosslinguistic empirical studies  . 
5 Compar i son w i th Re la ted Approaches The centering model  ( Grosz et al ,  1983 ;  1995 ) is concerned with the interactions between the local coherence of discourse and the choices of referring expressions  . Crucial for the centering model is the way the forward-looking centers are organized  . Despite several crosslinguistic studies a kind of " standard " has emerged based on the study of English  ( cf . Table 1 in Section 1) . Only few of these crosslinguistic studies have led to changes in the basic order of discourse entities  , the work of Walker et al (1990 ; 1994) being the most far reaching exception . They consider the role of expressive means in Japanese to indicate topic status and the speaker 's perspective  , thus introducing functional notions , viz . ToPIc and EMPATHY , into the discussion . German , the object language we deal with , is also a free word order language like Japanese ( possibly even more constrained )  . 
Our basic revision of the ordering scheme completely abandons grammatical role information and replaces it with entirely functional notions reflecting the information structure of the utterances in the discourse  . Interestingly enough , several extra assumptions introduced to account , e . g . , for anaphora parallelism ( e . g . , the shared property constraint formulated by Kameyama  ( 1986 ) ) can be eliminated without affecting the correctness of anaphora resolutions  . Rambow ( 1993 ) has presented a theme/rheme distinction within the centering model to which we fully subscribe  . His proposal concerning the centering analysis of German  ( already referred to as the " naive " approach ; cf . Section 4) is limited , however , to the German middle field and , hence , incomplete . 
A common topic of criticism relating to focusing approaches to anaphora resolution has been the diversity of data structures they require  , which are likely to hide the underlying linguistic regularities  . Focusing algorithms prefer the discours element already in focus for anaphora resolution  , thus considering context-boundedness , too . But the items of the focus lists are either ordered by thematic roles  ( Sidner , Dahl & Ball ,  1990)) . Dahl & Ball ( 1990 ) improve the focusing mechanism by simplifying its data structures and  , thus , their proposal is more closely related to the centering model than any other focusing mechanism  . But their approach still relies upon grammatical information for the ordering of the centering list  , while we use only the functional information structure as the guiding principle  . 
6 Conclusion
In this paper , we provided an account for ordering the forward -looking centers which is entirely based on functional notions  , grounded on the information structure of utterances in a discourse  . We motivated our proposal by the constraints which hold for a free word order language such as German and derived our results from data -intensive empirical studies of  ( real world ) expository texts . We have gathered preliminary evidence that the functional ordering of discoursenti-ties in the center seems to coincide with the grammatical roles of fixed word order languages  . We also augmented the ordering criteria of the forward-looking center such that it accounts not only for  ( pro ) nominal but also for functional anaphora ( textual ellipsis )  , an issue that , so far , has only been sketchily dealt within the centering framework  . The extensions we propose have been validated by the empirical analysis of realworld expository texts of considerable ngth  . We thus follow methodological principles of corpus-based studies that have been successfully exercised in the work of Passonneau  ( 1993 )  . Still open are proper descriptions of deictic expressions  , proper names ( cf . the Alfa Romeo driving scenario ) , and plural or generic definite noun phrases . An anaphora resolution module and an ellipsis handler based on this functional centering model has been implemented as part of a comprehensive text parser for German  . 
Acknowledgments . We would like to thank our colleagues in the 8?ZY r group for fruitful discussions and J on A1-cantara   ( Cambridge , UK ) for rereading the final version via Interact . This work has been funded by LGFG Baden-
Wiirttemberg ( M . Strube).
References
Brennan , S . E . , M . W . Friedman & C . J . Pollard (1987) . A centering approach to pronouns . In Proc . of ACL-87, pp .  155-162 . 
Clark , H . H .  (1975) . Bridging . In Proc . of TINLAP-1, pp . 

Cote , S .  (1996) . Ranking forward-looking centers . In E . Prince , A . Joshi & M . Walker ( Eds . ), Centering in Discourse . Oxford : Oxford University Press ( to appear) . 
Dahl , D . A . & C . N . Ball (1990) . Reference resolution in PUNDIT . In P . Saint-Dizier & S . Szpakowicz ( Eds . ) , Logic and Logic Grammars for Language Processing , pp . . 168-184 . Chichester , U . K . : Ellis Horwood . 
Dahl , O . ( Ed . ) (1974) . Topic and Comment , Contextual
Boundness , and Focus . Hamburg : Buske.
Dane ~, E(1974a ) . Functional sentence perspective and the organization of the text  . In F . Dane ~( Ed . ), Pa-person Functional Sentence Perspective , pp .  106-128 . 
Prague : Academia.
Dane ~, F . ( Ed . ) (1974b ) . Papers on Functional Sentence Per-spective . Prague : Academia . 
Gordon , P . C . , B . J . Grosz & L . A . Gilliom (1993) . Pronouns , names , and the centering of attention in discourse . Cognitive Science , 17:311-347 . 
Grosz , B . J . , A . K . Joshi & S . We instein (1983) . Providing a unified account of definite noun phrases in discourse  . 
In Proc . of ACL-83, pp . 4430.
Grosz , B . J . , A . K . Joshi & S . Weinstein (1995) . Center- . ing : A framework for modeling the local coherence of discourse  . Computational Linguistics , 21(2):203-225 . 
Hahn , U . & M . Strube (1996) . Incremental centering and center ambiguity . In Proc . of the 18 th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society  . La Jolla , CA . 
Hahn , U . , M . Strube & K . Markert (1996) . Bridging textual ellipses . In Proc . of COLING96 . 
Hajieowi , E . , V . Kubofi & P . Kubofi (1992) . Stock of shared knowledge : A tool for solving pronominal anaphora : In Proc  . of COL1NG-92, Vol . 1, pp .  127-133 . 
Haji~ov ~, E . , H . Skoum alov ~& P . Sgall (1995) . An auto-marie procedure for topic-focus identification  . Computational Linguistics , 21(1):81-94 . 
Halliday , M . A . K .  (1967) . Notes on transitivity and theme in English , Part 2 . Journal of Linguistics , 3:199-244 . 
Halliday , M . A . K , & R . Hasan (1976) . Cohesion in English . 
London : Longman.
Kameyama , M .  (1986) . A property-sharing constraint in centering . In Proc . of ACL-86, pp .  200-206 . 
Passormeau , R . J .  (1993) . Getting and keeping the center of attention . In M . Bates & R . Weise he del ( Eds . ), Challenges in Natural Language Processing , pp .  179-227 . 
Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press.
Rambow , O .  (1993) , Pragmatic aspects of scrambling and topicalization i German  . In IRCS Workshop on Centering in Discourse . Univ . of Pennsylvania , 1993 . 
Sidner , C . L .  (1983) . Focusing in the comprehension of deft-nite anaphora  . In M . Brady & R . Berwick ( Eds . ), Computational Models of Discourse , pp .  267-330 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 
Strube , M .  (1996) . Processing complex sentences in the centering framework  . In this volume . 
Strube , M . & U . Hahn (1995) . Parse Talk about sentence - and text-level anaphora . In Proc . of EACL-95, pp .  237-244 . 
Suri , L . Z . & K . F . McCoy (1994) . RAFT/RAPR and center ? ing : A comparison and discussion of problems related to processing complex sentences  . Computational Linguistics , 20(2):301-317 . 
Turan , U .  (1995) . Null vs . Overt Subjects in Turkish : A Centering Approach . ( Ph . D . thesis ) . University of Pennsylvania . 
Walker , M . A . , M . Iida & S . Cote (1990) . Centering in Japanese discourse . In Proc . of COLING . 90, Appendix , 6pp . 
Walker , M . A . , M . Iida & S . Cote (1994) . Japanese discourse and the process of centering . Computational Linguistics , 20(2):193-233 . 

