Using textual clues to improve metaphor processing
St6phane Ferrari
LIMSI-CNRS
PO Box 133
F-91403 Orsay cSdex , FRANCE
ferrari@limsi.fr
Abstract
In this paper , we propose a textual clue approach to help metaphor detection  , in order to improve the semantic processing of this figure  . The previous works in the domain studied the semantic regularities only  , overlooking an obvious set of regularities . A corpus-based analysis shows the existence of surface regularities related to metaphors  . 
These clues can be characterized by syntactic structures and lexical markers  . We present an object oriented model for representing the textual clues that were found  . 
This representation is designed to help the choice of a semantic processing  , in terms of possible nonliteral meanings . A prototype implementing this model is currently under development  , within an incremental p-proach allowing step-by -step evaluations  .   1   1 Introduction Metaphor is a frequently used figure of speech  , reflecting common cognitive processes . Most of the previous works in Natural Language Understanding  ( NLU ) looked for regularities only on the semantic side of this figure  , as shown in a brief overview in section 2 . This resulted in complex semantic pro-cessings , not based on any previous robust detection , or requiring large and exhaustive knowledge bases  . Our aim is to provide NLU systems with a set of heuristics for choosing the most adequate semantic processing  , as well as to give some probabilistic clues for disambiguating the possibly multiple meaning representations  . 
A corpus-based analysis we made showed the existence of textual clues in relation with the metaphors  . 
These clues , mostly lexical markers combined with syntactic structures  , are easy to spot , and can provide a first set of detection heuristics  . We propose , in 1This work takes part in a research project sponsored by the AUPELF-UREF  ( Francophone Agency For Education and Research ) section 3 , an object oriented model for representing these clues and their properties  , in order to integrate them in a NLU system . For each class , attributes give information for spoting the clues  , and , when possible , the source and the target of the metaphor , using the results of a syntactic parsing . A prototype , STK , partially implementing the model , is currently under development , within an incremental pproach . 
It is Mready used to evaluate the clues relevance.
In conclusion , we will discuss how the model can help chosing the adequate semantic analysis to process at the sentence level or disambiguating multiple meaning representations  , providing probabilities for nonliteral meanings . 
2 C lass ica l methods : a br ie f overv iew The classical NLU points of view of metaphor have pointed out the multiple kinds of relations between what is called the source and the target of the metaphor  , but rarely discuss the problem of detecting the figure that bears the metaphor  . For our purpose , we choose to presenthese approaches in two main groups  , depending on how they initiate the semantic processing  . 
The previous works led to a classification introduced by DanFass  ( Fass ,  1991) . In the comparison view , the metaphor corresponds to an analogy between the structures representing the source and the target of the figure  , as in Gentner's works ( Gentner ,  1988 ) and their implementation ( Falkenhainer et al ,  1989) . The interaction view , as in Hobbs ( Hobbs ,  1991) , points at the novelty brought by the metaphor . Fass also distinguishes a selection restrictions violations view presenting the metaphor as a kind of anomaly  . We would argue that the two previous views already considered metaphor as a kind of anomaly  . Indeed , the semantic an Mysis proposed for dealing with metaphors were processe depend-ing on the results of another  , saya " classical " one 2 . 
2We prefer to call it a classical rather than literal meanings processing because it can deal with some conventional metaphors  , even if not explicitly mentioned . 

Thereby , detecting a metaphor meant detecting an anomaly in the meaning representation issued from such a classical analysis  . 
Fass proposed a method for discriminating literal meanings  , metaphors , metonymies and " anomalies " , merging different points of view ( Fass ,  1991) . In this approach , multiple semantic analysis can be processed , resulting in possibly multiple meaning representations  . In ( Prince and Sabah ,  1992) , a method to overcome similar kinds of ambiguities reveal the difficulties encountered if no previous detection is made  . James Martin's approach ( Martin ,  1992) , called the conventional view by Fass , is based on Lakoff's theory on cognitive metaphors  ( Lakoff and Johnson ,  1980) . It requires a specific knowledge representation base and also results in multiple representation meanings  . Detecting a metaphor is meaningless here , and conventional metaphoric meanings can be viewed as polysemies  . Mart in revealed at least that the heuristic of the ill-formness of meaning representations issued from classical analysis is not sufficient at all to deal with all the possible metaphors  . 
In our point of view , all the previous approaches were founded . The main remaining problem , however , is to choose an adequate processing when confronted with a metaphor  , and thus , to detect the metaphors before trying to build their meaning representation  . This can be partially solved using textual clues . 
3 Textual clues : object oriented description If the classical views of the metaphor overlook the textual clues  , in other domains , especially those concerning explanation , they have been wisely reintroduced . In ( Pery-Woodley ,  1990) , Pery-Woodley shows the existence of such clues related to the explanatory discourse  . They can help in generating explanations in natural language as well as in modelling the student in a intelligentutoring system  ( Daniel et al ,  1992) . A corpus of 26 explanatory texts in French , of about 200 words each , has been collected under a shared research project between psychologists and computer scientists  , in order to study metaphors and analogies in teaching  . 
The analysis we made showed the existence of textual clues in relation with metaphoric on texts and analogies  ( e . g . " like ", " such as ", " illustrated by ") . 
They can be characterized by syntactic regularities  ( e . g . the comparative is used in structure such as " less than "  , " more than " ; the identification is made through attributes or appositions  ,   . . . ) . They also involve lexical markers ( e . g . " literMy " , " illustrating " , " metaphorically " , ) . These properties , already found in the previous works , can help detecting the clues themselves . Studying the relation between the syntactic regularities and the lexical markers  , one can observe that the first build the ground where to find the second  . We thus propose an object-oriented model for representing these clues  . A generic textual clue can thereby be described by the two following attributes : ? the Surface Syntactic Pattern representing the syntactic regularity  , with a label on the item where to find the lexical marker ? the Lexical Marker itself Typically  , the word " metaphor " itself can be used as a lexical marker in expression such as '~ to extend the conventional metaphor  , pruning such a tree means to generalize " . On the other hand , " metaphor " will not be a marker if used as the subject of the sentence  , like in this one . Thus , describing the syntactic regularitie surrounding a lexical marker improves its relevance as a marker  . 
We propose to represent his relevance for probabilistic purposes  . Each clue that was found is currently evaluated on a large corpus  ( about 450 , 000 words ) . The frequencies of use of the lexical markers in metaphoric on texts are represented in the relevance attribute  ( see example below )  . 
The syntactic structures may also give information about the source and the target of the metaphor  . For instance , in the sentence " Yesterday , at home , Peter threw himself on the dessert like alion . " , the subject inherits the properties of speed and vora city of alion attacking its victim  . It is here possible to spot the source and the target of the metaphor using the syntactic properties of the comparison  . Two attributes are added to textual clues related to metaphors  , corresponding to the elements of the sentence bearing the source and the target  . 
Example of textual clue representations type metaphor-analogy name B  . 2 . 2 . 2 comment comparison involving the meaning of a marker  , adjective , attribute of the object , object before the verb
SSPG NoGN 1 VxAdjo\[prep\]GN 2
LMAdjo : pareil ( meaning " similar " ) target GN1 source GN2
LM relevance ( 15/28 ) number of occurrences 28 conventional metaphors 3 new metaphors 2 metaphom contexts 12 total 15 Notations : GN and GV stand for nominal or verbal groups  , Adj and Adv for adjectives and adverbs , and prep for prepositions . 
The model has been partially implemented in a tool  , STK , for detecting the textual clues related to In its current version  , STK allows us to tokenize , tag , and search for lexical markers on large corpora . 
The tagger we use is the one developped by Eric Brill  ( Brill ,  1992 ) with a set of tags indicating the grammatical categories as well as other information such as the number and the gender for nouns and adjectives  . It is evaluated under GRACE 3 protocol for corpus-oriented tools assigning rammatical categories  . It is currently used for the evaluation of the textual clues that were found  . The latter can be easily retrieved using STK , avoiding lexical ambiguities . They are then analyzed by hand , in order to determine their relevance attribute . In the previous example of textual clue , the relevance values are issued from this corpus -based analysis  . 
4 Conclusion , perspectives
Classical approaches to the metaphor in NLU revealed multiple underlying processes  . We therefore focussed our study on how to help detecting metaphors in order to chose the most adequate semantic processing  . Textual clues can give information about he figures that bear the metaphor  , which are easy to spot . Indeed , they can be found using the results of syntactic parsing  . We proposed an object-oriented model to represent these clues and their multiple properties  . 
If textual clues give information about possible nonliteral meanings  , metaphors and analogies , one may argue they do not allow for a robust detection  . 
Indeed , a textual clue is not sufficient oprove the presence of such figures of speech  . The relevance of each clue can be used to help disambiguating multiple meaning representation when it occurs  . This must not be the only disambiguation tool , but when no other is a valaible , it provides NLU systems with a probabilistic method  . 
Our future works will focuss on the study of the relation between the metaphors introduced by a clue and others that are not conventional  . The guideline is that novel metaphors not introduced by a clue at the sentence lvel may have been introduced previously in the text  . 
tiquelaMod ~ lisationCognitive del'\]~l~ve . Lecture Notes in Computer Sciences , 608:252-260 . 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems  ( ITS-92 )  , MontrEal . 
Falkenhainer , B ., Forbus , K ., and Gentner , D.
(1989) . The Structure-Mapping Engine : Algorithm and Examples  . Artificial Intelligence , 41:1-63 . 
Fass , D .  (1991) . met : A Method for Discriminating Metonymy and Metaphor by Computer  . Computational Linguistics , 17(1): 49-90 . 
Fass , D . , Hinkelman , E . , and Martin , J . , editors . 
Proceedings of the IJCAI Workshop on Computational Approaches to Non-Literal Language  , Sydney , Australia .  1991 . 
Gentner , D .  (1988) . Analogical Inference and Analogical Access , In : Analogica , chapter 3 , pages 63-88 . Edited by Prieditis A . , Pitman Publishing , London , Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , Inc . ,
Los Altos , California.
Hobbs , J .  (1991) . Metaphor and abduction . In ( Fass et al ,), pages 5261 . 
Lakoff , G . and Johnson , M .  (1980) . Metaphors we live by . University of Chicago Press , Chicago,

Martin , J .  (1992) . Computer Understanding of Conventional Metaphoric Language  . Cognitive Science , 16:233-270 . 
Pery-Woodley , M .  (1990) . Textual clues for user modeling in an intelligent tutoring system  . Mas-ter's thesis , University of Manchester , England , 

Prince , V . and Sabah , G .  (1992) . Coping with Vague and Fuzzy Words : A Multi -Expert Natural Language System which Overcomes Ambiguities  . 
In Acts of PRICAI'92, Seoul , Corea . September , 1992 . 
References
Brill , E .  (1992) . A simple rule-based part of speech tagger . In Proceedings of the Third Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , Trento . 

Daniel , M . , Nicaud , L . , Prince , V . , and Pery-Woodley , M .  (1992) . Apport du style Linguis-3GRACE stands for " Grammars and Resources for Corpora Analysis and their Evaluation "  . It is a national research project for the development of tools for French language processing  . 

