An Application of WordNet to Prepositional Attachment 
Sanda M . Harabagiu
University of Southern California
Department of Electrical Engineering - Systems 
Los Angeles , CA 90089-2562
harabagi ~ usc.edu
Abstract
This paper presents a method for word
sense disambiguation adcoherence understanding of prepositional relations  . The method relies on information provided by WordNet  1  . 5 . We first classify prepositional attachments according to semantic equivalence of phrase heads and then apply inferential heuristics for understanding the validity of prepositional structures  . 
1 Problem description
In this paper , we address the problem of disambiguation and understanding prepositional attachment  . The arguments of prepositional relations are automatically categorized into semantically equivalent classes of WordNet  ( Miller and Teibel , 1991) concepts . Then by applying inferential heuristics on each class  , we establish semantic on nections between arguments that explain the validity of that prepositional structure  . The method uses information provided by WordNet , such as semantic relations and textual glosses . 
We have collected prepositional relations from the Wall Street Journal tagged articles of the PENN TREEBANK  . Here , we focus on preposition of , the most frequently used preposition in the corpus  . 
2 C lasses o f p repos i t iona l re la t ions Since most of the prepositional attachments obey the principle of locality  ( Wertmer ,  1991) , we considered only the case of prepositional phrases preceded by noun or verb phrases  . We scanned the corpus and filtered the phrase heads to create C  , an adhoc collection of sequences < noun prep noun > and < verb prep noun >  . This collection is divided into classes of prepositional relations  , using the following definitions : Definition 1: Two prepositional structures < noun1 prep noun2 > and < noun3 prep noun4 > belong to the same class if one of the following conditions holds : ?  noun1  , and noun2 are hypernym/hyponym of noun 3 , and noun 4 respectively , or ? noun 1 , and noun2 have a common hyper-nym/hyponym and with noun3  , and noun 4 , respectively . 
A particular case is when noun 1 ( noun 2 ) and noun 3 ( noun 4 ) are synonyms . 
Definition 2: Two prepositional structures <: verb1 prep noun1 > and < verb2 prep noun2 > belong to the same class if one of the following conditions holds : ?  verb1  , and noun1 are hypernym/hyponym of verb 2 , and noun 2 , respectively or ? verb1 , and noun1 have a common hyper-nym/hyponym with verb2  , and noun 2 , respectively . 
A particular case is when the verbs or the nouns are synonyms  , respectively . 
The main benefit and reason for grouping prepositional relations into classes is the possibility to disambiguate the words surrounding prepositions  . 
When classes of prepositional structures are identified  , two possibilities arise : 1 . A class contains at least two prepositional sequences from the collection g  . In this case , all sequences in that class are disambiguated , because for each pair (< noun iprep noun j > , < noun k prep noun q >) , noun i and noun k ( and noun j and noun q respectively ) are in one of the following relations : ( a ) they are synonyms , and point to one synset that is their meaning . 
( b ) they belong to synsets that are in hyper-nym /hyponym relation  . 
( c ) they belong to synsets that have a common hypernym/hyponym  . 
In cases ( a ) , ( b ) and ( c ) , since words are associated to synsets , their meanings are disambiguated . The same applies for classes of prepositional sequences < verb prep noun >  . 
360 acquisition of company
Sense 1= acquisition , acquiring , getting GLOSS :" the act of contracting or assuming  . " HR1 or ~ possession of something ""- . HR3 buy , purchase , take " ~' . 
GLOSS : " obtain by purchase ~ by means of a financial transaction " 
ISA take over , buy out , ?  , GLOSS : " take over ownership of ;
HR2Io ~ corporations ~ compar ~ esI " objeoCof
Sense 1= company
ISA business , concern , business concern
ISA/~corporation
Figure 1: WordNet application of prepositional selection constraints  2  . A class contains only one sequence . We disregard these classes from our study , since in this class it is not possible to disambiguate he words  . 
The collection C has 9511 < noun of noun > sequences , out of which 2158 have at least one of the nouns tagged as a proper noun  .   602 of these sequences have both nouns tagged as proper nouns  . 
Due to the fact that WordNet's coverage of proper nouns is rather sparse  , only 34% of these sequences were disambiguated . Successful cases are < House of Representatives > , < University of Pennsylvania > or < Museum of Art  >  . Sequences that couldn't be disambiguated comprise < A erospaciale of France > or < Kennedy of Massachusetts >  . A small disambiguation rate of 28% covers the rest of the 1566 sequences relating a proper noun to a common oun . 
A successful disambiguation occurred for < hundreds of Californians > or < corporation of Vancouver >  . Sequences like < after math of Iran-Contra > or < acquisition of Merry lLinch > weren't disambiguated  . The results of the disambiguation of the rest of 7353 sequences comprising only common nouns are more encouraging  . A total of 473 classes were devised , out of which 131 had only one element , yielding a disambiguation rate of 72 . 3% . The number of elements in a class varies from 2 to 68  . 
Now that we found disambiguated classes of prepositional structures  , we provide some heuristics to better understand why the prepositional relations are valid  . These heuristics are possible inferences performed on WordNet  . 
3 Se lec t iona l Heur i s t i cs on WordNet In this section we focus on semantic on nections between the words of prepositional structures  . Con-ure 1 illustrate some of the relevant semantic on -nections that can be drawn from WordNet when analyzing this prepositional structure  . 
We note that noun acquisition is semantically connected to the verb acquire  , which is related to the concept buy , purchase , take , a hypernym of take over , buy out . Typical objects for buy out a recorporations and companies  , both hypernyms of concern . Thus , at a more abstract level , we understand acquisition of company as an action performed on a typical object  . Such relations hold for an entire class of prepositional structures  . 
What we want is to have a mechanism that extracts the essence of such semantic on nections  , and be able to provide the inference that the elements of this class are all sequences of < noun lprep noun j >  , with noun j always an object of the action described by noun l  . 
Our approach to establish semantic paths is based on inferential heuristics on WordNet  . Using several heuristics one can find common properties of a prepositional class  . The classification procedure disambiguates both nouns as follows : the word acquisition has four senses in WordNet  , but it is found in its synset number 1 . The word company appears in its synset number 1 . The gloss of acquisition satisfies the prerequisite of HRI : Heuristic Rule  1   ( HR1 ) If the textual gloss of a noun concept begins with the expression the act of followed by the gerund of a verb  , then the respective noun concept describes an action represented by the verb from the gloss  . 
This heuristic applies 831 times in WordNet , showing that nouns like accomplishment , dispatch or subsidization describe actions . 
I \] N r . crt . I Features for < N1 > of < N2 > Example II 1   N2 is the object of the action described by N1 acquisition of company 2   N2 is the agent of the action described by N1 approval of authorities 3   N1 is the agent of the action with object N2 author of paper 4   N1 is the agent of the action with purpose the action described by  N2 activists of sup'port 5   N1 is the objcct of an action whoscag cnt is N2 record of athlete 6   N2 describes the action with the theme N1 allegations of fraud 7   N1 is the location of the activity described by N2 place of business 8   N1 describes an action occurring at the time described by  N2 acquisition of 1995   9   N1 is the consequence of a phenomenon described by N2 impact of earthquake 10   N1 is the output of an action described by N2 result of study Tableh Distribution of prepositions in the Wall Street Journal articles from PENN Treebank Thus acquisition is a description of any of the verbal expressions cont ract possession  , assume possession and acquire possession . 
The role of company is recovered using another heuristic : Heuristic Rule  2   ( HR2 ) The gloss of a verb may contain multiple textual explanations for that concept  , which are separated by semicolons . If one such explanation takes one of the forms : ? of  noun1 ? of nounland noun 2 ? of nOttTt 1 or nolt n 2 then noun z and noun2 respectively are objects of that verb . 
Heuristic HR2 applies 134 times in WordNet , providing objects for such verbs as general i ze  , exfoliate or laicize . 
The noun company is recognized as an object of the synset take over  , buy out , and so is corporation . Both of them are hyponyms of business , concern , business concern , which fills in the object role of business , concern , business concern . Because of that , both company and corporation from the gloss of take over  , buy out are disambiguated and point to their first corresponding synsets  . Due to the inheritance property , company is an object of any hypernyms of take over  , buy out . One such hypernym , buy , purchase , take also meets the requirements of HR3: Heuristic Rule 3   ( HR3 ) If a verb concept has another verb at the beginning of its gloss  , then that verb describes the same action , but in a more specific context . 
Therefore , acquire is a definition of buy , purchase , take , that has company as an object and involves a financial transaction  . These three heuristics operate throughout all the sequences of the class comprising < acquisilion of company >  , < addition of business > , < formalion of group > or < beginning of service > We conclude that for this class of prepositional relations  ,   noun2 is the object of the action described by noun1  . 
4 A case study
Table 1 illustrates the semantic relations observed in WordNet for some of the classes of prepositional relations with preposition of  , when both arguments are nouns . We applied a number of 28 heuristics on 45 disambiguated classes . 
5 Conclusions
This paper proposes a method of extracting and validating semantic relations for prepositional attachment  . The method is appealing because it uses WordNet ( which is publicly available and applicable to broad English  ) and is scalable . A plausibl expla-nation of prepositional attachment may be provided and the lexical disambiguation of the phrase heads is possible  . The method may be improved by using additional attachment locations as provided by the transformations proposed in  ( Brill and Resnik ,  1994) . 

Eric Brill and Philip Resnik .  1994 . A Rule-Based Approach to Prepositional Phrase Attachment Disambiguation  . In Proceedings of COLING-9~ . 
George Miller and Daniel Teibel .  1991 . A proposal for lexical disambiguation . In Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and Nalural Language Workshop  , pages 395-399 , Washington , D . C . 
Philip Resnik .  1995 . Disambiguating Noun Grouping with Respect to WordNet Senses  . 
In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on
Very Large Corpora , pages 5468 , MIT , Cam-bridge , Massachusets , June . 
Stefan Wermter .  1991 . Integration of Semantic and Syntactic Constraints for Structural Noun Phrase Disambiguation  . In Proceedings of IJCAI-91, pages 1486-1491 . 

