From Submit to Submitted via Submission : On Lexical Rules in 
Large-Scale Lexicon Acquisition.
Evelyne Viegas , Boyan Onyshkevych ? , Victor Raskin ? ~ , Sergei Nirenburg
Computing Research Laboratory,
New Mexico State University,
Las Cruces , NM 88003, USA
viegas , boyan , raskin , sergei ~ crl , nmsu.edu
Abstract
This paper deals with the discovery , representation , and use of lexical rules ( LRs ) during largescale semiautomatic computational lexicon acquisition  . The analysis is based on a set of LRs implemented and tested on the basis of Spanish and English business-and finance-related corpora  . We show that , though the use of LRs is justified , they do not come cost-free . Semiautomatic output checking is required , even with blocking and preemtion procedures built in  . Nevertheless , large-scope LRs are justified because they facilitate the unavoidable process of largescale semiautomatic lexical acquisition  . We also argue that the place of LRs in the computational process is a complex issue  . 
1 Introduction
This paper deals with the discovery , representation , and use of lexical rules ( LRs ) in the process of largescale semiautomatic computational lexicon acquisition  . LRs are viewed as a means to minimize the need for costly lexicographic heuristics  , to reduce the number of lexicon entry types , and generally to make the acquisition process faster and cheaper  . The findings reported here have been implemented and tested on the basis of Spanish and English business-and finance-related corpora  . 
The central idea of our approach-that there are systematic paradigmatic meaning relations between lexical items  , such that , given an entry for one such item , other entries can be derived automatically-is certainly not novel  . In modern times , it has been reintroduced into linguistic discourse by the Meaning-Text group in their work on lexical functions  ( see , for instance , ( Mel'~uk ,  1979) . 
? also of US Department of Defense , AttnR5 25 , For tMeade , MD 20755 , USA and Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , PA . USA . ? ? also of Purdue University NLP
Lab , W Lafayette , IN 47907, USA.
It has been lately incorporated into computational lexicography in  ( Atkins ,  1991) , ( Ostler and Atkins ,  1992) , ( Briscoe and Copestake ,  1991) , ( Copestake and Briscoe ,  1992) , ( Briscoe et al ,  1993)) . 
Pustejovsky ( Pustejovsky ,  1991 ,  1995 ) has coined an attractive term to capture these phenomena : one of the declared objectives of his ' generative lexicon ' is a departure from sense enumeration to sense derivation with the help of lexical rules  . The generative lexicon provides a useful framework for potentially infinite sense modulation in specific contexts  ( cf . ( Leech ,  1981) , ( Cruse ,  1986)) , due to type coercion ( e . g . , ( eustejovsky , 1993)) and similar phenomena . Most LRs in the generative lexicon approach , however , have been proposed for small classes of words and explain such grammatical and semantic shifts as + count to-count or-common to + common  . 
While shifts and modulations are important , we find that the main significance of LRs is their promise to aid the task of massive lexical acquisition  . 
Section 2 below outlines the nature of LRs in our approach and their status in the computational process  . Section 3 presents a fully implemented case study , the morphosemantic LRs . Section 4 briefly reviews the cost factors associated with LRs  ; the argument in it is based on another case study  , the adjective-related LRs , which is especialy instructive since it may mislead one into thinking thai  . LRs are unconditionally beneficial . 
2 Nature of Lexical Rules 2 . 1 Onto log ica l - Semant ic Background Our approach to NLP can be characterized as ontology -driven semantics  ( see , e . g . , ( Nirenburg and Levin , 1992)) . The lexicon for which our LRs are introduced is intended to support the computational specification and use of text meaning representations  . The lexical entries are quite complex , as they must contain many different types of lexical knowledge that may be used by specialist processes for automatic text analysis or generation  ( see , e . g . , description ) . The acquisition of such a lexicon , with or without heassistance of LRs , involves a substantial investment of time and resources  . The meaning of a lexical entry is encoded in a ( lexieal ) semantic representation language ( see , e . g . , ( Nirenburg et al ,  1992 ) ) whose primitives are predominantly terms in an independently motivated world model  , or ontology ( see , e . g . , ( Carlson and Nirenburg , 1990) and ( Mahesh and Nirenburg ,  1995)) . 
The basic unit of the lexicon is a ' super entry , ' one for each citation form holds , irrespective of its lexical class . Word senses are called ' entries . ' The LR processor applies to all the word senses for a given super entry  . For example , p ~ v nunciar has ( at least ) two entries ( one could be translated as " articulate " and one as " declare "  )  ; the LR generator , when a p = plied to the super entry , would produce ( among others ) two forms of pronuncia cidn , derived from each of those two senses/entries . 
The nature of the links in the lexicon to the ontology is critical to ' the entire issue of LRs  . Representations of lexical meaning may be defined in terms of any number of ontological primitives  , called con = cepts . Any of the concepts in the ontology may be used ( singly or in combination ) in a lexical meaning representation . 
No necessary correlation is expected between syntactic category and properties and semantic or ontological classification and properties  ( and here we definitely part company with syntax -driven semantics-see  , for example , ( Levin ,  1992) , ( Dorr ,  1993 ) -pretty much along the lines established in ( Nirenburg and Levin ,  1992) . For example , although meanings of many verbs are represented through reference to ontological EVENTs and a number of nouns are represented by concepts from the OBJECT sublattice ~ frequently nominal meanings refer to EVENTs and verbal meanings to OBJECTs  . Many LRs produce entries in which the syntactic a tegory of the input form is changed  ; however , in our model , the semantic category is preserved in many of these LRs  . For example , the verb destroy may be represented by an EVENT , as will the noun destruction ( naturally , with a different linking in the syntax-semantics n-terface  )  . Similarly , destroyer ( as a person ) would be represented using the same event with the addition of a HUMAN as a filler of the agent case role  . 
This built in transcategoriality strongly facilitates applications such as interlingual MT  , as it renders vacuous many problems connected with category mismatches  ( Kameyama et al , 1991) and misalignments or divergences ( Dorr ,  1995) , ( Held ,  1993 ) that plague those paradigms in MT which do not rely on extracting language-neutral text meaning representations  . This transcategoriality is supported by LRs . 
2 . 2 Approaches to LRs and The i r Types In reviewing the theoretical and computational linguistics literature on LRs  , one notices a number of different delimitations of LRs from morphology  , syntax , lexicon , and processing . Below we list three parameters which highligh the possible differences among approaches to LRs  . 
2.2.1 Scope of Phenomena
Depending on the paradigm or approach , there are phenomena which may be more-or less -appropriate for treatment by LRs than by syntactic transformations  , lexical enumeration , or other mechanisms . 
LRs offer greater generality and productivity at the expense of overgeneration  , i . e . , suggesting inappropriate forms which need to be weeded out before actual inclusion in a lexicon  . The following phenomena seem to be appropriate for treatment with LRs : ? Inflected Forms- Specifically  , those inflectional phenomena which accompany changes in subcategorization frame  ( passivization , dative alternation , etc . ) . 
? Word Formation - The production of derived forms by LR is illustrated in a case study below  , and includes formation of deverbal nominals ( destruction , running ) , agentive nouns ( catcher ) . Typically involving a shift in syntactic category  , these LRs are often less productive than inflection-oriented ones  . Consequently , derivational LRs are even more prone to overgeneration than inflectional LRs  . 
? Regular Polysemy-This set of phenomena includes regular polysemies or regular non -metaphoric and non-metonymic alternations such as those described in  ( Apresjan ,  1974) , ( Pustejovsky ,  1991 ,  1995) , ( Ostler and htkins , 1992) and others . 
2.2.2 When Should LRs Be Applied ?
Once LRs are defined in a computational scenario , a decision is required about the time of application of those rules  . In a particular system , LRs can be applied at acquisition time , at lexiconload time and at runtime . 
? Acquisition Time-The major advantage of this strategy is that the results of any LR expansion can be checked by the lexicon acquirer  , though at the cost of substantial additional time  . Even with the best left hand side ( LHS ) conditions ( see below )  , the lexicon acquirer may be flooded by new lexical entries to validate  . During the review process , the lexicographer can accept the generated form , reject it as inappropriate , or make minor modifications . If the LR is being used to build the lexicon up from scratch  , then mechanisms used by Ostler and Atkins ( Ostler and Atkins , 1992) or ( Briscoe et al ,  1995) , such as blocking or preemption , are not available astion . 
? Lexicon Load Time-The LRs can be applied to the base lexicon at the time the lexicon is loaded into the computational system  . As with runtime loading , the risk is that overgeneration will cause more degradation in accuracy than the missing  ( derived ) forms if the LRs were not applied in the first place  . If the LR inventory approach is used or if the LHS constraints are very good  ( see below )  , then the overgeneration penalty is minimized , and the advantage of a larger untime lexicon is combined with efficiency in lookup and disk savings  . 
? Run Time-Application of LRs at runtime raises additional difficulties by not supporting an index of all the head forms to be used by the syntactic and semantic processes  . For example , if there is an Lit which produces abusive-adj2 from abuse-v1  , the adjectival form will be unknown to the syntactic parser  , and its production would only be triggered by failure recovery mechanisms--if direct lookup failed and the reverse morphological process identified abuse-vl as a potential source of the entry needed  . 
A hybrid scenario of LR use is also plausible , where , for example , LRs apply at acquisition time to produce new lexical entries  , but may also be available at runtime as an error recovery strategy to attempt generation of a form or word sense not already found in the lexicon  . 
2.2.3 LRT riggering Conditions
For any of the Litapplication opportunities itemized above  , a methodology needs to be developed for the selection of the subset of LRs which are applicable to a given lexical entry  ( whether base or derived )  . Otherwise , the Lits will grossly overgenerate , resulting in inappropriatentries , computational inefficiency , and degradation of accuracy . Two approaches suggest hemselves . 
? Lit Itemization-The simplest mechanism of rule triggering is to include in each lexicon entry an explicit list of applicable rules  . LR application can be chained , so that the rule chains are expanded , either statically , in the specification , or dynamically , at application time . 
This approach avoids any inappropriate application of the rules  ( overgeneration )  , though at the expense of tedious work at lexicon acquisition time  . One drawback of this strategy is that if a new LR is added  , each lexical entry needs to be revisited and possibly updated  . 
? Itule LIIS Constraints - The other approach is to maintain a bank of LRs  , and rely on their LHSs to constrairi the application of the rules to only the appropriate cases  ; in practice , however , it is difficult to set up the constraints in such a way as to avoid over - or under generation apri - or ~  . Additionally , this approach ( at least , when applied after acquisition time ) does not allow explicit ordering of word senses , a practice preferred by many lexicographers to indicate relative frequency or salience  ; this sort of information can be captured by other mechanisms  ( e . g . , using frequency-of-occurrence statistics ) . This approach does , however , capture the paradigmatic generalization that is represented by the rule  , and simplifies lexical acquisition . 
3 Morpho-Semantics and
Constructive Derivational
Morphology : a Transcategorial
Approach to Lexical Rules
In this section , we present a case study of LRs based on constructive derivational morphology  . Such LRs automatically produce wordforms which are polysemous  , such as the Spanish generador ' generator , ' either the artifactor someone who generates . The LRs have been tested in a real world application  , involving the semiautomatic aquisition of a Spanish computational lexicon of about  35  , 000 word senses . 
We accelerated the process of lexical acquisition 1 by developing morphosemantic LRs which , when applied to a lexeme , produced an average of 25 new candidate entries . Figure 1 below illustrates the overall process of generating new entries from a citation form  , by applying morphosemantic LRs . 
Generation of new entries usually starts with verbs  . Each verb found in the corpora is submitted to the morphosemantic generator which produces all its morphological derivations and  , based on a detailed set of tested heuristics , attaches to each form an appropriate semantic LR . label , for instance , the nominal form comprador will be among the ones generated from the verb comprar and the semantic LR " agent-of " is attached to it  . The mechanism of rule application is illustrated below  . 
The form list generated by the morphosemantic generator is checked against three MRDs  ( Collins Spanish-English , Simon and Schuster Spanish-English , and Larousse Spanish ) and the forms found in them are submitted to the acquisition process  . 
However , forms not found in the dictionaries are not discarded outright because the MRDs cannot be assumed to be complete and some of these ": rejected " forms can  , in fact , be found in corpora or in the input text of an application system  . This mechanism works because we rely on linguistic clues and a See  ( Viegas and Nirenburg ,  1995 ) for the details on the acquisition process to build the core Spanish lexicon  , and ( Viegas and Beale ,  1996 ) for the details oil the conceptual and technological tools used to check the quality of the lexicon  . 
34 verb list file:coznpr ~ . rcon~r ? : ~: . - . -: . ~;~::::~:,:: . ~ . :;~ ~: : : - : : : :  .  : : . : ~::~::~::::::: . ::: . ~::: . ::~  . . :  .  :~ ? . : ? derived verb list file:ccn ~ xpra ~ , v , LR levent compra , n , LR2 event ii .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  :  .  :  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . ~formeiiii : iiiiiiiiiiiii ! i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i a J i i ! i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i  rms rejected forms "  comprar-V1 cat : dfn:ex:aAmin:syn:sere :
V  acquire the possession or right by paying or promising to pay tro cheeom prounanueva empress j long wel  "18   /1   15   :42   :44" " root :\[\] r cat 0 bj:~\[sem:"buy agent : fi-i \] human theme :\[ ~\] object Figure  2: Partial Entry for the Spanish lexieal item comprar  . 
Figure 1: Automatic Generation of New Entries.
therefore our system does not grossly over generate candidates  . 
The Lexical Rule Processor is an engine which produces a new entry from an existing one  , such as the new entry compra ( Figure 3 ) produced from the verb entry comprar ( Figure 2 ) after applying the
LR2 event rule . 2
The acquirer must check the definition and enter an example  , but the rest of the information is simply retained  . The LEXi cal-RUT . ~ . Sz one specifies the morphosemantic rule which was applied to produce this new entry and the verb it has been applied to  . 
The morphosemantic generator produces all predictable morphonological derivations with their morpho-lexico-semantic associations  , using three major sources of clues : 1 ) wordforms with their corresponding morphosemantic classification  ;  2 ) stem alternations and 3 ) construction mechanisms . The patterns of attachement include unification , concatenation and output rules 3 . For instance beber can be 2We used the typed feature structures ( tfs ) as described in ( Pollard and Sag ,  1997) . We do not illustrate inheritance of information across partial lexical entries  . 
3The derivation of stem alternations i beyond the derived into be be \] dero  , be be\[e\]d or , beb\[i \] do , beb\[i \] da , volver into vuel to , and communiear in to telecommu-nicac\[on , etc . . . All affixes are assigned semantic features . For instance , the morphosemantic rule LRpo-larity_negative is at least attached to all verbs belonging to the- A a class of Spanish verbs  , whose initial stem is of the form ' con ' , ' tra ' , or ' fir ' with the corresponding allomorph . in attached to it ( inconlrolable , inlratable, . . .  ) . 
Figure 4 below , showstlle derivational morphology output for eomprar  , with the associated lexical rules which are later used to actually generate the entries  . Lexical rules 4 were applied to 1056 verb citation forms with 1263 senses among them . The rules helped acquire an average of 25 candidate new entries per verb sense , thus producing a total of 31 , 680 candidatentries . 
From the 26 different citation forms shown in Figure 4  , only 9 forms ( see Figure 5) , featuring 16 new entries , have been accepted after checking . 5 For instance , comprable , adj , LR3 feasibility-all ribule l , is morphologically derived from comprar , scope of this paper , and is discussed in ( Viegas et al ,  1996) . 
4We developed about a hundred morphosemantic rules  , described in ( Viegas et al ,  1996) . 
5The results of the derivational morphology program output are checked against  , existing corpora and dictionaries , automatically . 
3 5  "  compra-N1 cat:dfn:ex:admin:syn:sere:lex-rul :
V  acquire the possession or right by paying or promising to pay 
LR2 event "11/1220:33:02"\[ oo , buy \] comprar-Vl " LR2event " Figure 3: Partial Entry for the Spanish lexical item compra generated automatically  . 
and adds to the semantics of comprar the shade of meaning of possibility  . 
In this example no forms rejected by the dictionaries were found in the corpora  , and therefore there was no reason to generate these new entries  . 
However , the citation forms supercompra , precom-pra , precomprado , autocomprar actually appeared in other corpora , so that entries for them could be generated automatically at runtime  . 
4 The Cost of Lexical Rules
It is clear by now that LRs are most useful in largescale acquisition  . In the process of Spanish acquisition ,   20% of all entries were created from scratch by H -level lexicographers and  80% were generated by LRs and checked by research associates  . It should be made equally clear , however , that the use of LRs is not cost-free . Besides the effort of discoveriug and implementing them  , there is also the significantime and effort expenditure on the procedure of semiautomatic hecking of the results of the application of LRs to the basic entries  , such as those for the verbs . 
The shifts and modulation studied in the literature in connection with the LRs and generative lexicon have also been shown to be not problem-free : sometimes the generation processes are blocked-or preempted-for a variety of lexical  , semantic and other reasons ( see ( Ostler and Atkins ,  1992)) . In fact , the study of blocking processes , their view as system ic rather than just a bunch of exceptions  , is by itself an interesting enterprise ( see ( Briscoe et al ,  1995)) . 
Obviously , similar problems occur in real-life largescale lexical rules as well  . Even the most seemingly regular processes do not typically go through in  100% of all cases . This makes the LR-affected entries not generable fully automatically and this is why each application of an LR to a qualifying phe-comprar vlr levent compran  lr2eventSb compran lr2theme_oLevent9b compradon lr2reputation_attla comprador n lr2reputation_att2c comprador n lr2social_role_rel2c compradon lr2theme_of_event la compradoaxtj lr3event_telicla comprable adj lr3feasibility_ att 1 comprade roadj lr3feasibility_att2c compradizo adj lr3feasibility_att3c comprado adj lr3reputation_ art 1 a comprador adj lr3reputation_att2c comprador adj lr3social_ role_relcmal comprar I\[vneg_evM_attitudellr 1event mal comprado adj lr3event_telicla subcomprar Iv part_oLrelation3 lr levent subcomprado I adj lr3event_telicla autocomprarvagent_beneficiary lblrl event auto compran  lr2event8b auto compran lr2theme_oLevent9b auto comprado adj lr3event_telicla recomprarv aspect_iter_semel fact 1 lr levent recompran lr2eventSb recompran lr2theme_oLevent9b recomprado adj lr3event_telicla supercomprarv evM_attitude6 lr levent super compran lr2eventSb supercompran lr2theme_oLevent9b supercomprado adj lr3event_telicla precomprarv before_temporal_rel5 lr levent precompran Ir2eventSb precompran lr2theme_oLevent9b precomprado adj lr3event_telicla deseom prarv opp_rel2 lr levent des compran lr2event8b descompran lr2theme_of_event9b descomprado adj lr3event_telicla compravent an lr2p_eventSb   lr2s_eventSb 
Figure 4: Morpho-semantic Output.
Derived form\[\[POS\[LexicalRule comprarv lr levent compradon  lr2theme_oLevent   1 a compran lr2event8b compradon lr2reputation_attla comprador n lr2agent_of2c comprador n lr2sociaJ_role_rel2c compran lr2theme_oLevent9b comprable adj lr3feasibility_att \] comprade roadj lr3feasibility_att2c compradizo adj lr3feasibility_att3c 
I comprado adj lr3agent_ofla comprador adj lr3reputation_att2c comprador adj lr3social_role_rel2c comprado adj lr3event_telicla recomprarv aspect iter_semel fact Ilr levent , recompran lr2event8b recompran lr2theme_of_event9b compravental\[n\[ lr2p_event8b   lr2s_event8b 
Figure 5: Dictionary Checking Output.
nomenon must be checked manually in the process of acquisition  . 
Adjectives provide a good case study for that . The acquisition of adjectives in general ( see ( Raskin and Nirenburg ,  1995 ) ) results in the discovery and application of several arge-scope lexical rules  , and it appears that no exceptions should be expected  . Table 1 illustrates examples of LRs discovered and used in adjectiventries  . 
The first three and the last rule are truly large -scope rules  . Out of these , the-able rule seems to be the most homogeneous and ' error-proof  . ' Around 300 English adjectives out of the 6 , 000 or so , which occur in the intersection of LDOCE and the 1987-89 Wall Street Journal corpora , end in-able . 
About 87% of all the-able adjectives are like readable : they mean  , basically , something that can be read . In other words , they typically modify the noun which is the theme  ( or beneficiary , if animate ) of the verb from which the adjective is derived : One can read the book  . -The book is readable . 
The temptation to mark all the verbs as capable of assuming the suffix-able  ( or-ible ) and forming adjectives with this type of meaning is strong  , but it cannot be done because of various forms of blocking or preemption  . Verbs like kill , relate , or necessitate do not form such adjectives comfortably or at all  . 
Adjectives like audible or legible do conform to the formula above  , but they are derived , as it were , from suppletive verbs , hear and read , respectively . More distressingly , however , a complete acquisition process for these adjectives uncovers  17 different combinations of semantic roles for the nouns modified by the-ble adjectives  , involving , besides the " standard " theme or beneficiary roles  , the agent , experiencer , location , and even the entire event expressed by the verb . It is true that some of these combinations are extremely rare  ( e . g . perishable ) , and all together they account for under 40 adjectives . The point remains , however , that each case has to be checked manually ( well , semiautomatically , because the same tools that we have developed for acquisition are used in checking  )  , so that the exact meaning of the derived adjective with regard to that of the verb itself is determined  . It turns out also that , for a polysemous verb , the adjective does not necessarily inherit all its meanings  ( e . g . , perishable again ) . 
5 Conclusion
In this paper , we have discussed several aspects of the discovery  , representation , and implementation fLRs , where , we believe , they count , namely , in the actual process of developing a realistic -size  , real-life NLP system . Our LRs tend to be large-scope rules , which saves us a lot of time and effort on massive lexical acquisition  . 
Research reported in this paper has exhibited a finer grain size of description of morphemic semantics by recognizing more meaning components of nonroot morphemes than usually acknowledged  . 
The reported research concentrated on lexical rules for derivational morphology  . The same mechanism has been shown , in small-scal experiments , to work for other kinds of lexical regularities , notably cases of regular polysemy ( e . g . , ( Ostler and Atkins , 1992), ( Apresjan , 1974)) . 
Our treatment of transcategoriality allows for a lexicon super entry to contain senses which are not simply enumerated  . The set of entries in a superen-try can be seen as an hierarchy of a few " original " senses and a number of senses derived from them according to well-defined rules  . Thus , the argument between the sense-enumeration and sense-derivation schools in computational lexicography may be shown to be of less importance than suggested by recent literature  . 
Our lexical rules are quite different from the lexical rules used in lexical \] y-based grammars  ( such as ( GPSG , ( Gazdar et al , 1985) or sign-based theories ( HPSG , ( Pollard and Sag ,  1987)) , as the latter can rather be viewed as linking rules and often deal with issues such as subcategorization  . 
The issue of when to apply the lexical rules in a computational environment is relatively new  . More studies must be made to determine the most beneficial place of LRs in a computational process  . 
Finally , it is also clear that each LR comes at a certain human-labor and computational expense  , and if the applicability , or " payload , " of a rule is limited , its use may not be worth the extra effort . We cannot say at this point that LRs provide any advantages in computation or quality of the deliverables  . What
Comparative All scalars


Positive '. Degree
Adj . Entry corresponding to one semantic role of the underlying verb 
Verbs taking the-able suffix to form an adj
Comparative Degree
Semantic Role
Shifter Family of LR's-Able LR
Human Organs LR
Size Importance LR-Sealed LR
Negative LR


Size adjs
Size adjs
Very True Scalars ( age , size , price ,)
Alladjs
Adjs denoting general human size
Basic size adjs
Truescalar adjectives
Positive adjs
Adj . entry corresponding to another semantic role of the underlying verb 
Adjs formed with the help of-able from these verbs  ( including " suppletivism " ) 
Adjs denoting the corresponding size of all or some external organs 
Figurative meanings of same adjectives
Adj-scale ( d ) good-better big-bigger abusive noticeable noticeable vulnerable  undersized-l-2   buxom-l-2   big-l-2 modest-modest ( ly ) --price ( d ) old-old-age
Corresponding noticeable
Negative adjectives unnoticeable
Table 1: Lexical Rules for Adjectives.
we do know is that , when used justifiably and maintained at a large scope  , they facilitate tremendously the costly but unavoidable process of semiautomatic lexical acquisition  . 
6 Acknowledgements
This work has been supported in part by Depart -merit of Defense under contract number  MDA-904-92-C-5189  . We would like to thank Margarita Gonzales and Jeff Long well for their help and implementation of the work reported here  . We are also grateful to anonymous reviewers and the Mikrokosmosteam from CRL  . 
References
Ju . D . Apresjan 1976 Regular Polysemy Linguistics vol 142  , pp .  5-32 . 
B . T . S . Atkins 1991 Building a lexicon : The contribution of lexicography In B  . Boguraev ( ed . ) , " Building a Lexicon " , Special Issue , International Journal of Lexicography 4:3 , pp .  167-204 . 
E . J . Briscoe and A . Copestake 1991 Sense extensions as lexical rules In Proceedings of the IJCAI Workshop on Computational Approaches to Non-Literal Language  . Sydney , Australia , pp .  12-20 . 
E . J . Briscoe , Valeria de Paiva , and Ann Copestake ( eds . ) 1993 Inheritance , Defaults , and the Lexicon . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 
E . J . Briscoe , Ann Copestake , and Alex Lascarides .  1995 . Blocking . In P . Saint-Dizier and E . Viegas , Computational Lcxical Semantics . Cambridge University Press . 
Lynn Carlson and Sergei Nirenburg 1990 . World Modeling for NLP . Center for Machine Translation , Carnegie Mellon University , Tech Report

Ann Copestake and Ted Briscoe 1992 Lexical operations in a unification-based framework  . In J . Pustejovsky and S . Bergler ( eds ) , Lexical Semantics and Knowledge Repres ~: ntation . Berlin :
Springer , pp . 101-119.
D.A . Cruse 1986 Lexical Semantics Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bonnie Dorr 1993 Machine Translation : A View from the Lexicon Cambridge  , MA : M . I . T . Press . 
Bonnie Dorr 1995 A lexical-semantic solution to the divergence problem in machine translation  . In St-Dizier P . and Viegas E . ( eds ), Computational
Lezical Semantics : CUP.
Gerald Gazdar , E . Klein , Geoffrey Pullum and Ivan Sag 1985 Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar . Blackwell : Oxford . 

Ulrich Heid 1993 Lelexique : quel ques probl@mes de description et de repr@sentation lexieale pour lat raduction automatique  . In Bouillon , P . and Clas,
A.(eds ), La Traductique : AUPEL-UREF.
M . Kameyama , R . Ochitani and S . Peters 1991 Resolving Translation Mismatches With Information
Flow . Proceedings of ACL'91.
Geoffrey Leech 1981 Semantics . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 
Beth Levin 1992 Towards a Le~cical Organization of English Verbs Chicago : University of Chicago 

Igor ' Mel'~uk 1979. Studies in Dependency Syntax.
Ann Arbor , MI : Karoma.
Kavi Mahesh and Sergei Nirenburg 1995 A situated ontology for practical NLP . Proceedings of the Workshop on Basic Ontological Issues in Knowledge Sharing  , International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( IJCAI-95 )  , Montreal , Canada , August 1995 . 
Sergei Nirenburg and Lori Levin 1992 Syntax-Driven and Ontology-Driven Lexical Semantics In J  . Pustejovsky and S . Bergler ( eds ) , Lexical Semantics and Knowledge Representation . Berlin :
Springer , pp . 520.
Sergei Nirenburg and Victor Raskin 1986 A Metric for Computational Analysis of Meaning : Toward an Applied Theory of Linguistic Semantics Proceedings of COLING  '86  . Bonn , F . R . G . : University of Bonn , pp . 338-340 Sergei Nirenburg , Jaime Carbonell , Masaru Tomita , and Kenneth Goodman 1992 Machine Translation : A Knowledge-Based Approach . San Mateo
CA : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Boyan Onyshkevysh and Sergei Nirenburg 1995 A Lexicon for Knowledgebased MT Machine
Translation 10:12.
Nicholas Ostler and B . T . S . Atkins 1992 Pre-dictable meaning shift : Some linguistic properties of lexical implication rules In J  . Pustejovsky and S . Bergler ( eds ) , Lexical Semantics and Knowledge Representation . Berlin : Springer , pp .  87-100 . 
C . Pollard and I . Sag . 1987 An Information . based Approach to Syntax and Semantics : Volume 1 Fundamentals . CSLI Lecture Notes 13, Stanford

James Pustejovsky 1991 The generative lxicon.
Computational Linguistics 17:4, pp . 409-441.
James Pustejovsky 1993 Type coercion and \ [ exical selection . In James Pustejovsky ( ed . ), Semantics and the Lexicon . Dordrecht-Boston : Kluwer , pp . 

James Pustejovsky 1995 The Generative Lexicon.
Cambridge , MA : MIT Press.
Victor Raskin 1987 What Is Therein Linguistic Semantics for Natural Language Processing ? In Sergei Nirenburg  ( ed . ) , Proceedings of Natural Language Planning Workshop  . Blue Mountain
Lake , N.Y .: RADC , pp . 78-96.
Victor Raskin and Sergei Nirenburg 1995 Lexieal Semantics of Adjectives : A Microtheory of Adjectival Meaning  . MCCS-95-28, CRL , NMSU , Las
Cruces , N.M.
Evelyne Viegas and Sergei Nirenburg 1995 Acquisition semi-automatique du lexique . Proceedings of " Quatri ~ mesJourn@escientifiques de Lyon "  , Lez-icologie Langage Terminologie , Lyon 95 , France . 
Evelyne Viegas , Margarita Gonzalez and Jeff Long-well 1996 Morpho-semanlics and Constructive Derivational Morphology : a Transcategorial Approach to Lexical Rules  . Technical Report MCCS-96-295, CRL , NMS U . 
Evelyne Viegas and Stephen Beale 1996 Multilinguality and Reversibility in Computational Semantic Lexicons Proceedings of  INLG'96  , Sussex , 


