Two Sources of Control over the Generation of Software 
Instructions *
Anthony Hartley
Language Centre
University of Brighton , Falmer
Brighton BN1 9PH , UK
afh@itri.bton.ac.uk
C6cile Parist
Information Technology Research Institute University of Brighton  , Lewes Road
Bright on BN 24AT , UK clp@itri , brighton , ac . uk 1 Introduction Our work addresses the generation of software manuals in French and English  , starting from a semantic model of the task to be documented  ( Paris et al ,  1995) . Our prime concern is to be able to exercise control over the mapping from the task model to the generated text  . We set out to establish whether the task model Mone is sufficient o control the linguistic output of a text generation system  , or whether additional control is required . In this event , an obvious source to explore is the communicative purpose of the author  , which is not necessarily constant throughout a manu M  . Indeed , in a typical software manual , it is possible to distinguish at least three sections  , each with a different purpose : a tutorial containing exercises for new users  , a series of step-by-step instructions for the major tasks to be accomplished  , and a ready-reference summary of the commands . 
We need , therefore , to characterise the linguistic expressions of the different elements of the task model  , and to establish whether these expressions are sensitive or not to their context  , that is , the functional section in which they appear . This paper presents the results of an analysis we conducted to this end on a corpus of software instructions in 

2 Methodology
The methodology we employed is similar to that en -dorsed by  ( Biber ,  1995) . It is summarised as follows : 1 . Collect the texts and note their situational characteristics  . We consider two such character -* This work is partially supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council  ( EPSRC ) Grant J 19221 , by BC/DAADARC Project 293 , by the Commission of the European Union Grant LRE-62009  , and by the Office of Naval Research Grant N00014-96-1-0465  . 
tStarting this fall , Dr . Paris ' address will be CSIRO , Division of Information Technology , Sydney Laboratory , Building E6B , Macquarie University Campus , North
Ryde , Sydney , NSW 2113, Australia.
is tics : task structure and communicative purpose.
2 . Identify the range of linguistic features to be included in the analysis  ;  3 . Code the corpus in terms of the selected features  ;  4 . Compute the frequency count of each linguistic feature  ;  5 . Identify cooccurrences between linguistic features and the situational characteristics under consideration  . 
We first carried out a classical sublanguage analysis on our corpus as a whole  , without differentiating between any of the situational characteristics  ( Hartley and Paris ,  1995) . This initial description was necessary to give us a clear statement of the linguistic potentiM required of our text generator  , to which we could relate any restrictions on language imposed by situational variables  . Thus we can account for language restrictions by appealing to general discourse principles  , in keeping with the recommendations of ( Kittredge , 1995) and ( Biber , 1995) for the definition of sublanguages . 
We then correlated task elements with grammati-cM features  . Finally , where linguistic realisation was under determined by task structure alone  , we established whether the communicative purpose provided more discriminating control over the linguistic resources available  . 
3 Linguistic Framework : Systemic
Functional Linguistics
Our analysis was carried out within the framework of Systemic-Functional Linguistics  ( SFL )   ( Halliday , 1978; Halliday ,  1985 ) which views language as a resource for the creation of meaning  . SFL stratifies meaning into context and language . The strata of the linguistic resources are organised into networks of choices  , each choice resulting in a different meaning realised  ( i . e . , expressed ) by appropriate structures . The emphasis is on paradigmatic choices , as opposed to syntagma ~ ic structures . Choices made in stratum beneath . Context hus constrains language . 
This framework was chosen for several reasons.
First , the organisation of linguistic resources according to this principle is well-suited to natural language generation  , where the starting point is necessarily a communicative goal  , and the task is to find the most appropriate x pression for the intended meaning  ( Matthiessen and Bateman ,  1991) . 
Second , a functional perspective offers an advantage for multilingual text generation  , because of its ability to achieve a level of linguistic description which holds across languages more effectively than do structurally -based accounts  . The approach as been shown capable of supporting the sharing of linguistic resources between languages as structurally distinct as English and Japanese  ( Bateman et al , 1991a ; Bateman et at . , 1991b ) . It is therefore reasonable to expect that at least the same degree of commonality of description is achievable between English and French within this framework  . Finally , KPML ( Bateman ,  1994) , the tactical generator we employ , is based on SFL , and it is thus appropriate for us to characterise the corpus in terms immediately applicable to our generator  . 
4 Coding features
Our lexicogrammatical coding was done using the networks and features of the Nigel grammar  ( Halliday ,  1985) . We focused on four main concerns , guided by previous work on instructional texts , e . g . , ( Lehrberger , 1986; Plumet at . , 1990; Ghadessy , 1993; Kosseim and Lapalme ,  1994) . 
? Relations between processes : to determine whether textual cohesion was achieved through conjunctives or through relations implicit in the task structure elements  . 
Among the features considered were clause dependency and conjunction type  . 
? Agency : to see whether the actor performing or enabling a particular action is clearly identified  , and whether the reader is explicitly addressed . We coded here for features such as voice and agent types  . 
? Mood , modality and polarity : to find out the extent to which actions are presented to the reader as being desirable  , possible , mandatory , or prohibited . We coded for both true and implicit negatives , and for both personal and impersonal expressions of modality  . 
? Process types : to see how the domain is construed in terms of actions on the part of the user and the software  . We coded for subcategories of material , mental , verbal and relational processes . 
5 The Corpus
The analysis was conducted on the French version of the Macintosh MacWrite manual  ( Kaehler ,  1983) . 
The manual is derived from an English source by a process of adaptive translation  ( Sager ,  1993) , i . e . , one which loealises the text to the expectations of the target readership  . The fact that the translation is adaptive rather than literal gives us confidence in using this manual for our analysis  . 1 Furthermore , we know that Mac into sh documentation under goes thorough local quality control  . It certainly conforms to the principles of good documentation established by current research on technical documentation ad on the needs of end -users  , e . g . , ( Carroll , 1994; Ham-mond ,  1994) , in that it supplies clear and concise information for the task at hand  . Finally , we have been assured by French users of the software that they consider this particular manual to be well written and to bear no unnatural trace of its origins  . 
Technical manuals within a specific domain constitute a sublanguage  ,   . g . , ( Kittredge , 1982; Sager et al , 1980) . An important defining property of a sublanguage is that of closure  , both lexieal and syntactic . Lexical closure has been demonstrated by , for example , ( Kittredge ,  1987) , who shows that after as few as the first 2000 words of a sublanguage text , the number of new word types increases little if at all  . Other work , e . g . , ( Biber , 1988; Biber , 1989) and ( Grishman and Kittredge ,  1986 ) illustrates the property of syntactic losure , which means that generally available constructions just do not occur in this or that sublanguage  . In the light of these results , we considered a corpus of 15000 words to be adequate for our purposes , at least for an initial analysis . 
The MacWrite manual is organised into three chapters  , corresponding to the three different sections identified earlier : a tutorial  , a series of step-by-step instructions for the major word-processing tasks  , and a ready-reference summary of the commands . We omitted the tutorial because the generation of such text is not our concern  , retaining the other two chapters which provide the user with generic instructions for performing relevant tasks  , and descriptions of the commands available within MacWrite  . The overlap in information between the two chapters offers opportunities to observe differences in the linguistic expressions of the same task structur elements in different contexts  . 
1We would have preferred to use a manual which originated in French to exclude all possibility of interference from a source language  , but this proved impossible . Surprisingly , it appears that large French companies often have their documents authored in English by francophones and subsequently translated into French  . 
One large French software house that we contacted oes author its documentation in French  , but had registered considerable customer dissatisfaction with its quality  . 
We decided , therefore , that their material would be unsuitable for our purposes  . 






Las~lection
Gloss : Selection
Poursdlectionner unmot ,   ( faites undouble-clicsurle mot ) Gloss : To select a word ,   ( do a double-click on the word )   ( Fermer- ) Cetarticle permet defermer une fen~treactiv ~ e Gloss :  ( Close- ) This command enables you to close the active window Sivous donnez ~ votre document let it red ' undocument ddj ~ existant  ,   ( unezone de dialogue appara it ) Gloss : If you give your document the title of an existing document  ,   ( a dialog box appears )   ( Choisissez Collerdanslemenu Edition- ) Une copied u contenudu presse-papiers appara it Gloss :  ( Choose Paste from the Edit menu- ) A copy of the content of the clipboard appears
Ferrnezlafen@tre Rechercher
Gloss : Close the Find window
Ensuite , on ouv reledocument dedestination Gloss : Next , one opens the target document Figure 1: Examples of task element expressions 6 Task Structure Task structure is constituted by five types of task elements  , which we define below . We used the notion of task structure lement both as a contextual feature for the analysis and to determine the segmentation of the text into units  . Each unit is taken to be the expression of a single task element  . 
Our definition of the task elements i based on the concepts and relations commonly chosen to represent a task structure  ( a goal and its associated plan )  , e . g . , ( Fikes and Nilsson , 1971; Sacerdoti ,  1977) , and on related research , e . g . , ( Kosseim and Lapalme , 1994) . Our generator produces instructions from an underlying semantic knowledge base which uses this representation  ( Paris et al ,  1995) . To generate an instruction for performing a task is to chose some task elements to be expressed and linearise them so that they form a coherent set for a given goal the user might have  . We distinguish the following elements , and provide examples of them in Figure 1:2 goals : actions that users will adopt as goals and which motivate the use of a plan  . 
functions : actions that represent the functionality of an interface object  ( such as a menu item )  . A 2The text in parentheses in the Figure is part of the linguistic context of the task element rather than the element is elf  . 
function is closely related to a goal , in that it is also an action that the user may want to perform  . However , the function is accessed through the interface object  , and not through a plan . 
constraints and preconditions : states which must hold before a plan can be employed successfully  . The domain model distinguishes constraints ( states which cannot be achieved through planning ) and preconditions ( states which can be achieved through planning )  . We do not make this distinction in the linguistic analysis and regroup these related task structure elements under one label  . We decided to proceed in this way to determine at first how constraints in general are expressed  . 
Moreover , it is not always clear from the text which type of constraint is expressed  . Drawing too fine distinctions in the corpus analysis at this point  , in the absence of a test for assigning a unit to one of these constrain types  , would have rendered the results of the analysis more subjective and thus less reliable  . 
results : states which arise as planned or unplanned effects of carrying out a plan  . While it might be important to separate planned and un-planned effects in the underlying representation  , we again abstract over them in the lexicogrammatical coding  . 
1 94 substeps : actions which contribute to the execution of the plan  . If the substeps are not primitive , they can themselves be achieved through other plans  . 
7 The Coding Procedure
No tools exist to automate a functional analysis of text  , which makes coding a large body of text a time -consuming task  . We first performed a detailed coding of units of texts on approximately  25% of the corpus , or about 400 units , 3 using the WAG coder ( O'Donnell ,  1995) , a tool designed to facilitate a functional analysis  . 
We then used a public-domain concordance program , MonoConc ( Barlow ,  1994) , to verify the representativeness of the results . We enumerated the realisations of those features that the first analysis had shown as marked  , and produced KWIC 4 listings for each set of realisations . We found that the second analysis corroborated the results of the first  , consistent with the nature of sublanguages . 
8 Distribution of Grammatical
Features over Task Structure and
Communicative Purpose
We examined the correlations between lexicogrammatical realisations and task elements and communicative purpose  . The results are best expressed using tables generated by WAG : given any system  , WAG splits the codings into a number of sets , one for each feature in that system . Percentages and means are computed , and the sets are compared statistically , using the standard T-test . WAG displays the results with an indicator of how statistically significant a value is compared to the combined means in the other sets  . The counts were all done using the local mean , that is , the feature count is divided by the total number of codings which select that fea-ture's system  . Full definitions of the features can be found in ( Halliday , 1985; Bateman et al ,  1990) . 
In some cases , the type of task element is on its own sufficient o determine  , or at least strongly constrain , its linguistic realisation . The limited space available here allows us to provide only a small number of examples  , shown in Figure 2 . We see that the use of modals is excluded in the expression of function  , result and constraint , whereas goal and substep do admit modals . As far as the polarity system is concerned , negation is effectively ruled out for function , goal and substep . Finally , with respect to the mood system , only substep can be realised through imperatives . 
3The authors followed guidelines for identifying task element units which had yielded consistent results when used by students coding other corpora  . 
4 KeyWordInContext
In other cases , however , we observe a diversity of realisations . We highligh there three cases : modality in goal , polarity in constraint , and mood in substep . 
In such cases , we must appeal to another source of control over the apparently available choices  . We have looked to the construct of genre ( Martin , 1992) to provide this additional control , on two grounds : ( 1 ) since genres are distinguished by their communicative purposes  , we can view each of the functional sections already identified as a distinct genre  ;   ( 2 ) genre is presented as controlling text structure and realisation  . In Martin's view , genre is defined as a staged , goal-oriented social process realised through register  , the context of situation , which in turn is realised in language to achieve the goals of a text  . 
Genre is responsible for the selection of a text structure in terms of task elements  . As part of the realisation process , generic choices preselect a register associated with particular elements of text structure  , which in turn preselect lexicogrammatical features  . 
The coding of our text in terms genre and task elements thus allows us to establish the role played by genre in the realisations of the task elements  . It will also allow us to determine the text structures appropriate in each genre  , a study we are currently undertaking . This is consistent with other accounts of text structure for text generation in technical domains  , e . g . , ( McKeown , 1985; Paris , 1993; Kittredge et al ,  1991) . 
For those cases where the realisation remains under determined by the task elementype  , we conducted a finer-grained analysis , by overlaying a genre partition on the undifferentiated data  . We distinguished earlier two genres with which we are concerned : ready-reference and step-by -step  . In the manual analysed , we recognised two more specific communicative purposes in the step-by-step section : to enable the reader to perform a task  , and to increase the reader's knowledge about the task  , the way to achieve it , or the properties of the system as a whole . Because of their distinct communicative purposes , we again feel justified in calling these genres . We label them respectively procedure and elaboration  . The intention that the reader should recognise the differences in function of each section is underscored by the use of distinctive typographical devices  , such as fonts and layout .   5 The first step at this stage of the analysis was to establish whether there was an effective overlap in task elements among the three genres under consideration  . The results of this step is shown in Figure 3 . 
Substep and goal are found in all three genres , while constraint , result and function occur in both ready-reference and elaboration but are absent from procedure  . 
The next step was to undertake a comparative 5See ( Hartley and Paris , 1995) for examples extracted from the manuals . 

Function Result Constraint Goal Substep
Modal-System modal 0%   1%   0%   24%   16% nonmodal 100%   99%   100%   76%   84% polarity positive 100%   90%   68%   97%   97% negative 0%   10%   32%   3%   3% mood-system declarative 100%   100%   100%   100%   24% imperative 0%   0%   0%   0%   76% Figure 2: Selective realisations of task elements
Ready-Reference Procedure Elaboration
Substep 37% 77% 42%
Goal 11% 23% 14%
Constraint 10% 0% 14%
Result 23% 0% 27%
Function 11% 0% 3%
Figure 3: Distribution of task structur elements over genres analysis of the lexicogrammatical features found in the three genres  . This analysis indicated that the languagemployed in these different sections of the text varies greatly  . We summarise here the two genres that are strongly contrasted : procedure and ready -reference  . Elaboration shares features with both of these . 
procedure : The toplevel goM of the user is expressed as a nomin Misation  . Actions to be achieved by the reader are almost exclusively reMised by imperatives  , directly addressing the reader . These actions are mostly materiM directed actions  , and there are no causatives . Few modals are employed , and , when they are , it is to express obligation impersonally . The polarity of processes is always positive . Procedure employs mostly independent clauses , and , when clause complexes are used , the conjunctions are mostly purpose ( linking a user goal and an action ) and alternative ( linking two user actions or two goals )  . 
ready-reference : In this genre ,   M1 task elements are always realised through clauses  . The declarative mood predominates , with few imperatives addressing the reader . Virtually all the causatives occur here . On the dimension of modality , the emphasis is on personal possibility , rather than obligation , and on inclina-tion . We find in this genre most of the ver-bM processes  , entirely absent from procedure . 
Ready-reference is more weighted than procedure towards dependent clauses  , and is particularly marked by the presence of temporal conjunctions  . 
The analysis of ardemonstrates that genre , like task structure , provides some measure of control over the linguistic resources but that neither of these alone is sufficient to drive a generation system  . The finM step was therefore to look at the realisations of the task elements differentiated by genre  , in cases where the realisation was not strongly determined by the task element  . 
We refer the reader back to Figure 2 , and the underconstrained cases of modality in goal  , polarity in constraint , and mood in substep . Figure 4 shows the realisations the task element goal with respect to the modal system  , which brings into sharp relief the absence of modality from procedure  . Figure 5 presents the reaiisations by genre of the polarity system for constraint  . We observe that only positive polarity occurs in ready-reference  . Finally , we note from Figure 6 that the realisation of substeps is heavily loaded in favour of imperatives in procedure  . 
These figures show that genre does indeed provide useful additional control over the expression of task elements  , which can be exploited by a text generation system  . Neither task structure nor genre alone is sufficient o provide this control  , but , taken together , they offer a real prospect of adequate control over the output of a text generator  . 



Procedure Ready-Reference Elaboration 100 . 0% 75 . 0% 72 . 6% 0 . 0% 25 . 0% 28 . 4% Figure 4: Genre-related differences in the modal system for goal 


Ready-Reference Elaboration 0 . 0% 41 . 7% 100% 58 . 3% Figure 5: Genre-related differences in the polarity system for constraint 


Procedure Ready-Reference Elaboration 97 . 3% 44 . 4% 77 . 6% 2 . 7% 55 . 6% 22 . 4% Figure 6: Genre-related differences in the mood system for substep  9 Related Work The results from our linguistic analysis are consistent with other research on sublanguages in the instructions domain  , in both French and English , e . g . , ( Kosseim and Lapalme , 1994; Paris and Scott ,  1994) . Our analysis goes beyond previous work by identifying within the discourse context he means for exercising explicit control over a text generator  . 
An interesting difference with respect oprevious descriptions it he use of the true  ( or direct ) imperative to express an action in the procedure genre  , as results from ( Paris and Scott ,  1994 ) seem to indicate that the infinitive-form of the imperative is preferred in French  . These results , however , were obtained from a corpus of instructions mostly for domestic appliances as opposed to software manuals  . 
Furthermore the use of the infinitive-form in instructions in general as observed by  ( Kocourek , 1982) is declining , as some of the conventions already common in English technical writing are being adopted by French technical writers  , e . g . , ( Timbal-Duclaux , 1990) . 
We also note that the patterns of realisations uncovered in our analysis follow the principle of good technical writing practice known as the minimalist approach  , e . g . , ( Carroll , 1994; Hammond , 1994) . 
Moreover , we observe that our corpus does not exhibit shortcomings identified in a Systemic Functional analysis of English software manuals  ( Plum et al ,  1990) , such as a high incidence of agent less passive and a failure to distinguish the function of in forming from that of instructing  . 
Other work has focused on the crosslinguistic realisations of two specific semantic relations  ( generation and enablement )   ( Delin et al , 1994; Delia et al . , 1996) , in a more general corpus of instructions for household appliances  . Our work focuses on the single application domain of software instructions  . 
However , it takes into consideration the whole task structure and looks at the realisation of semantic elements as found in the knowledge base  , instead of two semantic relations not explicitly present in the underlying semantic model  . 
10 Conclusion
In this paper we have shown how genre and task structure provide two essential sources of control over the text generation process  . Genre does so by constraining the selection of the task elements and the range of their expressions  . These elements , which are the procedural representation f the user's tasks  , constitute a layer of control which mediates between genre and text  , but which , without genre , cannot control the grammar adequately . 
The work presented here is informing the development of our text generator by specifying the necessary coverage of the French grammar to be implemented  , the required discourse structures , and the mechanisms needed to control them . We continue to explore further situation aln d contextual factors which might allow a system to fully control its available linguistic resources  . 

Michael Barlow . 1994. A Guideto Mono Conc.
Athelston , Houston , TX.
John A . Bateman , Robert T . Kasper , Johanna D.
Moore , and Richard Whitney .  1990 . A general or-cessing : The Penman Upper Model . Technical report , USC/ISI , March . 
John A . Bateman , Christian M . I . M . Matthiessen , Keizo Nanri , and Licheng Zeng . 1991a . The reuse of linguistic resources across languages in multilingual generation components  . In Proceedings of the 1991 International Join ~ Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Volume 2 , Sydney , Australia , pages 966-971 . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers . 
John A . Bateman , Christian M . I . M . Matthiessen , Keizo Nanri , and Licheng Zeng . 1991b . MultiLingual text generation : an architecture based on functional typology  . In International Conference on Current Issues in Computational Linguistics  , 
Penang , Malaysia.
John A . Bateman . 1994. KPML : The KOMET-
Penman ( Multilingual ) Development Environment . Technical report , Institut fiir Integrierte Publikations - und Informations system e  ( IPSI )  , GMD , Darmstadt , September . Release 0 . 6 . 
Douglas Biber .  1988 . Variation Across Speech and Writing . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge

Douglas Biber . 1989. A typology of English texts.
Linguistics , 27:3-43.
Douglas Biber .  1995 . Dimensions of Register Variation : A Crosslinguisti comparison  . Cambridge
University Press , Cambridge UK.
John Carroll .  1994 . Techniques for minimalist documentation and user interface design  . In Quality of Technical Documentation , pages 67-75 . Rodopi,

Judy Delin , Anthony Hartley , C@cile Paris , Donia Scott , and Keith Vander Linden .  1994 . Ex-pressing procedural relationships in multilingual instructions  . In Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , Kennebunk port , MN , 2124 June 1994 , pages 6170 . 
Judy Delin , Donia Scott , and Anthony Hartley.
1996 . Language-specific mappings from semantics to syntax  . In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING96 )  , Copenhagen , Denmark , August . 
R . E . Fikes and Nils Nilsson .  1971 . STRIPS : a new approach to the application of theorem proving to problem solving  . Artificial Intelligence , 2:189-208 . 
Mohsen Ghadessy , editor .  1993 . Register Analysis : Theory and Practice . Frances Pinter , London . 
Ralph Grishman and Richard Kittredge , editors.
1986. Analyzing Language in Restricted Domains.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale , New Jersey . 
Michael A . K . Halliday .  1978 . Language as a Social Semiotic : The Social Interpretation of Language and Meaning  . Edward Arnold , London . 
Michael A . K . Halliday .  1985 . An Introduction to Functional Grammar . Edward Arnold , London . 
Nick Hammond .  1994 . Less is More : The Minimalist Approach . Usability Now ! A Guide to Usability . Published by the Open University and the
Department of Trade and Industry.
Anthony Hartley and C@cile Paris .  1995 . French corpus analysis and grammatical description  . Technical Report Project IED/4/1/5827 , ITRI , November . 
Carol Ka~hler . 1983. Macintosh MacWrite . Apple
Seedrin , Les Ulis , France.
Richard Kittredge , Tanya Korelsky , and Owen Rambow .  1991 . On the Need for Domain Communication Knowledge . Computational Intelligence ,  7(4):305-314 , November . 
Richard Kittredge .  1982 . Variation and Homogeneity of Sublanguages . In Richard Kittredge and J . Lehrberger , editors , Sublanguage : Studies of language in restricted semantic domains  , pages 107-137 . de Gruyter , Berlin and New York . 
Richard Kittredge .  1987 . The significance of sublanguage for automatic translation  . In Sergei Nirenburg , editor , Machine Translation : Theoretical and methodological issues  , pages 59-67 . Cambridge University Press , London . 
Richard Kittredge .  1995 . Efficiency vs . Generality in Interlingua L Design : Some Linguistic Considerations  . In the Working notes of the IJCAI-95 Workshop on Multilingual Text Generation , August 2021 , Montr@M , Canada . 
Rost is lav Kocourek .  1982 . Lalangue frangaise de late chniquet de la science  . Brandstetter Verlag,
Wiesbaden , Germany.
Leila Kosseim and Guy Lapalme .  1994 . Content and rhetorical status selection in instructional texts  . 
In Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , Kenneb-unkport , MN , 2124 June 1994 , pages 53-60 . 
John Lehrberger .  1986 . Sublanguage Analysis . In RMph Grishman and Richard Kittredge , editors , Analyzing Language in Restricted Domains , pages 19-38 . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hillsdale,
New Jersey.
James R . Martin .  1992 . English text : systems and structure . Benjamins , Amsterdam . 
Christian M . I . M . Matthiessen and John A . Bateman .  1991 . Text generation and systemic-functional inguistics : experiences from English and Japanese  . Frances Pinter Publishers and St . 
Martin's Press , London and New York.

Kathleen 1%. McKeown . 1985. Text Generation.
Cambridge University Press , New York.
Michael O ' Donnell .  1995 . From Corpus to Cod-ings : Semi-Automating the Acquisition of Linguistic Features  . Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Empirical Methods in Discourse Interpretation and Generation  , Stanford University , California , March 27-29 , March . 
C~cile Paris and Donia Scott .  1994 . Stylistic variation in multilingual instructions . In Proceedings of the Seventh International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , Kennebunk port , MN , 2124 June 1994 , pages 45-52 . 
C@cile Paris , Keith Vander Linden , Markus Fischer , Anthony Hartley , Lyn Pemberton , Richard Power , and Donia Scott .  1995 . A supportool for writing multilingual instructions  . In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , August 2025 , Montr@al , 
Canada , pages 1398-1404.
C ~ cile L . Paris .  1993 . User Modelling in Text Generation . Frances Pinter , London . 
Guenter A . Plum , Christian M . I . M . Matthiessen , Michael A . K . Halliday , and Natalie Shea .  1990 . 
The Electronic Discourse Analyzer Project : Report on Textual Analysis of FJ Manuals  . Technical report , Fujitsu Australia Limited , Documentation Engineering Division . EDA Project Deliv-erables ; Output 7 . 
Earl D . Sacerdoti .  1977 . A Structure for Plans and
Behavior . Elsevier , New York.
Juan C . Sager , David Dungworth , and Peter F . McDonald .  1980 . English Special Languages . Brand-stetter Verlag , Wiesbaden , Germany . 
Juan C . Sager .  1993 . Language Engineering and Translation : Consequences of Automation  . John Benjamins Publishing Company , Amsterdam . 
Lou is Timbal-Duclaux .  1990 . La communication d crite sei entifiquet technique . ESF , Paris,


