Subdeletion in Verb Phrase Ellipsis
Paul G . Donecker
Villanova University
800 Lancaster Avenue
Villanova , PA 19085


This paper stems from an ongoing research project ~ on verb phrasellips is  . The project's goals are to implement a verb phrase ellipsis resolution algorithm  , automatically test the algorithm on corpus data , then automatically evaluate the algorithm against human-generated answers  . The paper will establish the current status of the algorithm based on this automatic evaluation  , categorizing current problem situations . An algorithm to handle one of these problems , the ease of subdeletion , will be described and evaluated . The algorithm attempts to detect and solve subdeletion by locating adjuncts of similar types in a verb phrasellipsis and corresponding antecedent  . 
1. Introduction
A verb phrase ellipsis ( VPE ) exists when a sentence has an auxiliary verb but no verb phrase  ( VP )  . For example , in the sentence " Gathery erose buds while ye may  , "" may " is the beginning of a VPE . Its antecedent is " gathery erose buds . " The research described in this paper is part of a projecto automate he resolution of VPE occurrences  , and also to automate he evaluation of the success of the VPE resolution  ( Hardt 1995 )  . 
Based on these evaluations of the algorithm , several distinct categories of error situations have been determined  . We have focused on errors in which the program selects the correct head verb as antecedent  . 
These cases can be divided into the following categories :  1  ) too much material included from the antecedent ,  2 ) not enough much material included from the antecedent  , 3) discontinuous antecedents , and 4) miscellaneous . 
For a subset of case 1 , subdeletion , an algorithm derived from ( Lappin and McCord ,  1990 ) is evaluated 1 This research was supported in part by NSF
Career Grant , no . IRI-9502257.
in regard to the Brown Corpus.
2. Background
Previous studies on evaluating discourse processing  ( e . g . , Walker , 1989; Hobbs ,  1978 ) have involved subjectively examining test cases to determine correctness  . With the development of resource such as the Penn Treebank  ( Marcus , Santorini , and Marcinkiewicz ,  1993) , it has become possible to automate mpirical tests of discourse processing systems to obtain a more objective measure of their success  . Towards this end , an algorithm was implemented in a Common Lisp program called VPEAL  ( Verb Phrase Ellipsis Antecedent Locator )   ( Hardt ,  1995) , drawing on the Penn Treebank as input . The portion of the Penn Treebank examined -- the Brown Corpus  , about a million words -- contains about 400 VPEs . 
Furthermore , to automatically evaluate the algorithm , utilities were developed to automatically test the output of VPEAL for correctness  . The most recent version of VPEAL contained 18 subparts for ranking and choosing antecedents . Testing the program's performance involved finding the percentage of correct antecedents found by any or all of these algorithms  . This was achieved by having human coders read plaintext versions of the parsed passages  , marking what they felt to be the antecedent . 
Antecedents selected by VPEAL were considered correct if they matched the antecedents selected by the coders  . 
The remainder of this paper will describe the categories of errors observed  , then describe an approach to reducing one category of errors  . 
3. Categories of Errors
The most recent version of VPEAL correctly selects  257 out of 380 antecedents from the Brown Corpus . We have divided the categories into the following categories : A  . Incorrect verb : 90 cases . In these cases , VPEAL selected an incorrect head verb for the evaluated  . 
B . Incorrect antecedent but correct verb : 33 cases . 
VPEAL selected the correct verb to head the antecedent  , but the selected antecedent was either incomplete or included incorrect information  . These cases can be further divided into : 1 ) too much material included from the antecedent ,  2 ) not enough much material included from the antecedent  , 3) discontinuous antecedents , and 4) miscellaneous . 
These subcategories are described below.
1 . Too much material is included from the antecedent  :   11cases  . 
Example ( excerpt from Penn Treebank ) : produce humorous effects in his novels and tales as they did in the writing of Longstreet and 
Hooper and Harris
VPE : did
VPEAL's antecedent : produce humorous effects in his novels and tales Coder's antecedent : produce humorous effects Normally  , an entire verb phrase is selected as the antecedent  . In these cases , though , part of the selected antecedent was not required by the VPE  . The most common situation (6 cases ) , as in the abov example , was subdeletion -- when the VPE structure contains a noun phrase or prepositional phrase which substitutes for a corresponding structure in the antecedent verb phrase  . 
2 . Not enough material is included from the antecedent :  10 cases . 
Example ( excerpt from Penn Treebank):
But even if we cannot see the repulsive characteristics n this new image of America  , foreigners can
VPE : can
VPEAL's antecedent : see the repulsive characteristics Coder's antecedent : see the repulsive characteristics n this new image of America By default  , only text contained by the selected verb phrase is included in the antecedent  . In these cases , however , human coders have selected text that is adjacent to but not parsed as contained by the verb phrase as part of the antecedent  . I can be argued that these errors are not the fault of the VPEAL algorithm--that if ext is parsed as not being a part of the verb phrase then it should still not be included when the verb phrase is chosen as the antecedent  . If the above prepositional phrase " in this new image of America " were parsed as part of the verb phrase -- as indeed it should have been - -then the algorithm would have derived the correct antecedent  . 
3 . Discontinuous antecedents -- the correct antecedent is split into two parts :  5 cases . 
Example ( excerpt from Penn Treebank ) : representing as I do today my wife
VPE : do
VPEAL's antecedent : representing
Coder's antecedent : representing my wife This situation is similar to  B2 in that the antecedent is incorrect because text not contained by the selected verb phrase should be included in the antecedent  . In these cases , however , the reason the omitted text is not contained by the antecedent verb phrase is that an interposing phrase  ( in the example above , the VPE itself ) occurs in the middle of the antecedent . 
4. Miscellaneous : 7 cases.
4. Improving Performance in the Case of

In this section an algorithm is described to reduce the errors in error category B  1 caused by subdeletion . 
Subdeletion is probably the most straightforward of the error categories  . The problem category occurred when prepositional phrases and noun phrases in the antecedent verb phrases were unnecessary because of analogous phrases adjacent to the VPE  . The proposed solution was to check whether the VPE has a sister node that is a prepositional phrase or noun phrase  . If it does , and a phrase of the same type exists as a sister node to the head verb in the antecedent  , then the phrase in the antecedent is removed . This is essentially the strategy outlined by Lappin and McCord  ( 1990 )  . Following are the specific steps to implementing the algorithm :  1  . Check if there are any prepositional phrases or noun phrases that are sister nodes to the antecedent head verb  . 
2 . Check if there are any prepositional phrases or noun phrases that are sister nodes to the VPE head verb  . 
3 . If a prepositional phrase or noun phrase is found in step  1  , and a phrase of the same type is found the antecedent  . 
For example , refer to the example from error case B .  1 . Step 1 would locate the noun phrase " humorous effects " and the prepositional phrase " in his novels and tales " assister nodes to the antecedent head verb " produce  . " Step 2 would locate the prepositional phrase " in the writing of Longstreet and Hooper and Harris " as a sister node to the VPE head verb " did  . " Step 3 would determine that a prepositional phrase xists after both the antecedent's head verb and the VPE and therefore would delete " in his novels and tales " from the antecedent  , resulting in the correct antecedent , " produce humorous effects . " This algorithm will correctly handle the 6 cases of subdeletion i the Brown Corpus . However , examples can be constructed for which this algorithm does not account  . In the sentence " Julie drove to school on Friday  , and Laura did on Saturday , " for example , the VPE is " did " and the correct antecedent is " drove to school  . " In this example , two prepositional phrases --" to school " and " on Friday " -- follow the antee edent's head verb " drove  . " A prepositional phrase , " on Saturday , " also exists following the VPE's head verb . Following the above algorithm , both prepositional phrases " to school " and " on Friday " would be deleted  , resulting in an incorrect antecedent . 
The algorithm makes no provisions for cases containing multiple prepositional phrases and noun phrases  . Fortunately , such situation seem rare , as none were found in the Brown Corpus . 
More significantly , the algorithm also assumes that analogous phrases following the antecedent and VPE always implies ub deletion  . That is , it assumes that prepositional phrases or noun phrases following the VPE always implies that like phrase should be deleted from the antecedent  . Again , it is possible to imagine a counterexample , for example , " Dad stayed in the Hilton like Morn did in Pittsburgh  . " Here , the above algorithm would incorrectly remove the prepositional phrase " in the Hilton  . " The expectation was that these counterexamples would be less frequent than the cases in which the algorithm would correctly remove unwanted text  . A manual sampling of VPEs in the Brown Corpus showed this to be true  . When the algorithm was implemented , however , the number of correct answers improved to 258 , an increase of 1 . In addition to solving the 6 cases of subdeletion , the algorithm a noun phrase or prepositional phrase in the VPE that did not require the deletion of a counterpart in the antecedent  . For example , one of the newly introduced errors occurred in the fragment "  . . . creaking in the fog as it had for thirty years . " The prepositional phrase " for thirty years " in the VPE caused the removal of the phrase " in the fog " from the antecedent  , even though the phrases are not parallel in meaning  . 
These results imply that the structure of a sentence alone is insufficient to detect subdeletion  . It is possible , however , that a larger sample of relevant examples would suggest the best choice  ( to delete or not to delete ) in the absence of additional information . 
Towards these ends , other corpora in the Penn Treebank will be examined with VPEAL  . Also , newer versions of the Treebank include semantic tags to adjunct phrases which will aid in preventing them is identification fsubdeletion described above  . 
5. Conclusion
Improving the results of the VPEAL program is an iterative process  . We have categorized the errors occurring in VPEAL  . An algorithm for solving the error category of subdeletion was described and examined  . Potential problem situations for the algorithm were also presented  . Empirical evaluation of the algorithm indicates that a purely syntactic approach to detecting subdeletion is probably insufficient  . Additional approaches to the problem of subdeletion were suggested  . Other cases of errors will be likew is evaluated . 

Hardt , Daniel .  1995 . An empirical approach to VP ellipsis , Hobbs , Jerry .  1978 . Resolving pronoun references . 
Lingua , 44:311-388.
Lappin , Shalom and Michael McCord . 1990.
Anaphora Resolution in Slot Grammar.
Computational Linguistics , 16(4).
Marcus , Mitchell P . , Beatrice Santorini , and Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz .  1993 . Building a large annotated corpus of english : The penn treebank  . 
Computational Linguistics , 19(2).
Walker , Marilyn .  1989 . Evaluating discourse processing algorithms . In Proceedings , 27th Annual Meeting of the ACL , Vancouver , Canada . 
