A Prosodic Analysis of Discourse Segments in
Direction-Giving Monologues
Julia Hirschberg
AT&T Laboratories , 2C-409
600 Mountain Avenue
Murray Hill , NJ 07974
Christine H . Nakatani *
Harvard University
33 Oxford Street
Cambridge , MA 02138
Abstract
This paper reports on corpus-based research into the relationship between intonational variation and discourse structure  . We examine the effects of speaking style ( read versus ponta-neous ) and of discourse segmentation method ( text-alone versus text-and-speech ) on the nature of this relationship . We also compare the acoustic-prosodic features of initial  , medial , and final utterances in a discourse segment . 
1 Introduction
This paper presents empirical support for the assumption long held by computational linguists  , that intonation can provide valuable cues for discourse processing  . The relationship between intonational variation and discourse structure has been explored in a new corpus of direction-giving monologues  . We examine the effects of speaking style ( read versus spontaneous ) and of discourse segmentation method ( text-alone versus text-and-speech ) on the nature of this relationship . We also compare the acoustic-prosodic features of initial  , medial , and final utterances in a discourse segment . A better understanding of the role of intonation in conveying discourse structure will enable improvements in the naturalness of intonational variation in text-to-speech systems as well as in algorithms for recognizing discourse structure in speech-understanding systems  . 
2 Theoretical and Empirical
Foundations
It has long been assumed in computational linguistics that discourse structure plays an important role in Natural Language Understanding tasks such as identifying speaker intentions and resolving anaphoric reference  . Previous research has found * The second author was partially supported by NSF Grants No  . IRI-90-09018, No . IRI-93-08173, and No . 
C DA-94-01024 at Harvard University and by AT&T Bell

that discourse structural information can be inferred from orthographic cues in text  , such as paragraph-ing and punctuation ; from linguistic cues in text or speech , such as cue PHI ~ . ASES1 ( Cohen , 1984; Reichman , 1985; Grosz and Sidner , 1986; Passonneau and Litman , 1993; Passonneau and Litman , to appear ) and other lexical cues ( Hinkelman and Allen ,  1989) ; from variation in referring expressions ( Linde , 1979; Levy , 1984; Grosz and Sidner , 1986; Webber , 1988; Song and Cohen , 1991; Passonneau and Litman ,  1993) , tense , and aspect ( Schubert and Hwang , 1990; Song and Cohen , 1991); from knowledge of the domain , especially for task-oriented is courses ( Grosz , 1978); and from speaker intentions ( Carberry , 1990; Litman and Hirschberg , 1990; Lochbaum ,  1994) . Recent methods for automatic recognition of discourse structure from text have incorporated thesaurus-based and other information retrieval techniques to identify changes in topic  ( Morris and Hirst , 1991; Yarowsky , 1991; Iwafiska et al , 1991; Hearst , 1994; Reynar ,  1994) . 
Parallel investigations on prosodic/acoustic cues to discourse structure have investigated the contributions of feature such as pitch range  , pausal duration , amplitude , speaking rate , and intonational contour to signaling topic change  . Variation in pitch range has often been seen as conveying ' topic structure ' in discourse  . Brown et al ( 1980 ) found that subjects typically started new topics relatively high in their pitch range and finished topics by compressing their range  . Silverman ( 1987 ) found that manipulation of pitch range alone , or in conjunction with pausal duration between utterances  , facilitated the disambiguation fambiguous topic structures  . Avesani and Vayra ( 1988 ) also found variation in pitch range in professional recordings which appeared to correlate with topic structure  , and Ayers ( 1992 ) found that pitch range correlates with hierarchical topic structure more closely in read than spontaneous conversational speech  . Duration of pause between utterances or phrases has also been  identi-1 Also called DISCOURSEMARKERS or DISCOURSEPAR -TICLES  , these are item such as now , first , and by the way , which explicitly mark discourse structure . 
286 fled as an indicator of topic structure , with longer pauses marking major topic shifts ( Lehiste , 1979; Brown , Currie , and Kenworthy , 1980; Avesani and Vayra , 1988; Passonneau and Litman , 1993); Wood-bury (1987) , however , found no such correlation in his data . Amplitude was also found to increase at the start of a new topic and decrease at the end  ( Brown , Currie , and Kenworthy ,  1980) . Swerts and colleagues ( 1992 ) found that melody and duration can pre-signal the end of a discourse unit  , in addition to marking the discourse-unit-final utterance itself  . And speaking rate has been found to correlate with structural variation  ; in several studies ( Lehiste , 1980; Brubaker , 1972; Butterworth ,  1975 ) segment-initial utterances exhibited slower rates  , and segment-final , faster rates . Swerts and Ostendorf (1995) , however , report negative rate results . 
In general , these studies have lacked an independently -motivated notion of discourse structure  . With few exceptions , they rely on intuitive analyses of topic structure  ; operational definitions of discourse-level properties  ( e . g . , interpreting paragraph breaks as discourse segment boundaries  )  ; or ' theory-neutral'discourse segmentations , where subjects are given instructions to simply mark changes in topic  . Recent studies have focused on the question of whether discourse structure itself can be empirically determined in a reliable manner  , a prerequisite to investigating linguisticues to its existence  . An intention-based theory of discourse was used in  ( Hirschberg and Grosz , 1992; Grosz and Hirschberg ,  1992 ) to identify intonational correlates of discourse structure in news stories read by a professional speaker  . Discourse structural elements were determined by experts in the Grosz and Sidner  ( 1986 ) theory of discourse structure , based on either text alone or text and speech . This study revealed strong correlations of aspects of pitch range  , amplitude , and timing with features of global and local structure for both segmentation methods  . Passonneau and Litman ( to appear ) analyzed correlations of pause , as well as cue phrases and referential relations , with discourse structure ; their segmenters were asked to identify speakers ' communicative " actions "  . The present study addresses is ues of speaking style and segmentation method while exploring in more detail than previou studies the prosodic parameters that characterize initial  , medial , and final utterances in a discourse segment . 
3 Methods 3 . 1 The Boston Directions Corpus The current investigation f discourse and intonation is based on analysis of a corpus of spontaneous and read speech  , the Boston Directions Corpus .   2 This 2The Boston Directions Corpus was designed and collected in collaboration with Barbara Grosz  . 
corpus comprises elicited monologues produced by multiple non-professional speakers  , who were given written instructions to perform a series of nine increasingly complex direction -giving tasks  . Speakers first explained simple route such as getting from one station to another on the subway  , and progressed gradually to the most complex task of planning around trip journey from Harvard Square to several Boston tourist sights  . Thus , the tasks were designed to require increasing levels of planning complexity  . The speakers were provided with various maps , and could write notes to themselves a well as trace routes on the maps  . For the duration of the experiment , hespeakers were in face-to-face contact with a silent partner  ( a confederate ) who traced on hermap the routes described by the speakers  . 
The speech was subsequently orthographically transcribed  , with false starts and other speech errors repaired or omitted  ; subjects returned several weeks after their first recording to read aloud from transcriptions of their own directions  . 
3.2 Acoustic-Prosodic Analysis
For this paper , the spontaneous and read recordings for one male speaker were acoustically analyzed  ; fundamental frequency and energy were calculated using Entropic speech analysi software  . The prosodic transcription , a more abstract representation f the intonational prominences  , phrasing , and melodic contours , was obtained by hand-labeling . We employed the ToBI standard for prosodic transcription  ( Pitrelli , Beckman , and Hirschberg ,  1994) , which is based upon Pierrehumbert's theory of American English intonation  ( Pierrehumbert ,  1980) . The ToBI transcription provided us with a breakdown of the speech sample into minor or INTERMEDIATEPHRASES  ( Pierrehumbert , 1980; Beckman and Pierrehumbert ,  1986) . This level of prosodic phrases erved as our primary unit of analysis for measuring both speech and discourse properties  . The portion of the corpus we report on consists of  494 and 552 intermediate phrases for read and spontaneous speech  , respectively . 
3.3 Discourse Segmentation
In our research , the Grosz and Sidner ( 1986 ) theory of discourse structure , hereafter G&S , provides a foundation for segmenting discourses into constituent parts  . According to this model , at least three components of discourse structure must be distinguished  . The utterances composing the discourse divide into segments that may be embedded relative to one another  . These segments and the embedding relationships between them form the LINGUISTICSTRUCTURE  . The embedding relationships reflect changes in the ATTENTIONAL STATE  , the dynamic record of the entities and attributes that are salient during a particular part of the discourse  . 
Changes in linguistic structure , and hence atten-STRUCTURE ; this structure comprises the intentions or DISCOURSESEGMENT PURPOSES  ( DSPs ) underlying the discourse and relations between DSPs  . 
Two methods of discourse segmentation were employed by subjects who had expertise in the G ~ : Stheory  . Following Hirschberg and Grosz (1992) , three subjects labeled from text alone ( group T ) and three labeled from text and speech ( group S )  . Other than this difference in input modality , all subjects received identical written instructions  . The text for each task was presented with line breaks corresponding to intermediate phrase boundaries  ( i . e . , ToBI BREAK INDICES of level 3 or higher ( Pitrelli , Beckman , and Hirschberg ,  1994)) . In the instructions , subjects were essentially asked to analyze the linguistic and intentional structures by segmenting the discourse  , identifying the DSPs , and specifying the hierarchical relationships among segments  . 
4 Results 4 . 1 Discourse Segmentation 4 . 1 . 1 Raw Agreement Labels on which all labelers in the group agreed are termed the CONSENSUS LABELS  . 3 The consensus labels for segment-initial ( SBEG )  , segment-final ( SF ) , and segment-medial ( SCONT , defined as neither SBEG nor SF ) phrase labels are given in Table 1 . 4 Tableh Percentage of Consensus Labels by
Segment Boundary Type
SBEG SFSCONT Total
READ(N=494)
Text alone ( T ) 14% 11% 32% 57%
Text&Speech(S ) 18% 14% 49% 80%
SPON ( N=552)
Text alone ( T ) 13% 10% 40% 61%
Text&Speech(S ) 15% 13% 54% 81%
Note that group T and group S segmentations differ significantly  , in contrasto earlier findings of ttirschberg and Grosz  ( 1992 ) on a corpus of read-aloud news stories and in support of informal findings of Swerts  ( 1995 )  . Table 1 shows that group S produced significantly more consensus boundaries for both read  ( p < . 001, X = 58 . 8, df = l ) and spontaneous ( p < . 001, X = 55 . 4 , df = l ) speech than did 3Use of consensus labels is a conservative measure of labeler agreement  . Results in ( Passonneau and Litman , 1993) and ( Swerts , 1995) show that with a larger number of labelers , notions of BOUNDARY STRENGTH can be employed . 
4Consensus percentages for the three types in Table  1 do not necessarily sum to the total consensus agreement percentage  , since a phrase is both segment-initial nd segment -final when it makes up a segment by itself  . 
group T . When the read and spontaneous data are pooled , group S agreed upon significantly more SBEG boundaries  ( p < . 05, X = 4 . 7, df = l ) as well as SF boundaries ( p < . 05, X = 4 . 4, df = l ) than did group T . Further , it is not the case that text-alone segmenters imply chose to place fewer boundaries in the discourse  ; if this were so , then we would expect a high percentage of SCONT consensus labels where no SBEGs or SFs were identified  . Instead , we find that the number of consensus SCONTs was significantly higher for text-and-speech labelings than for text-alone  ( p < . 001, X = 49 . 1, df = l) . It appears that the speech signal can help disambiguate among alternate segmentations of the same text  . Finally , the data in Table 1 show that spontaneous speech can be segmented as reliably as its read counterpart  , contrary to Ayer's results (1992) . 
4.1.2 Inter-labeler Reliability
Comparisons of interlabeler reliability , that is , the reproducibility of a coding scheme given multiple labelers  , provide another perspective on the segmentation data  . How best to measure interlabeler reliability for discourse segmentation tasks  , especially for hierarchical segmentation , is an open research question ( Passonneau and Litman , to appear ; Carletta , 1995; Flammi and Zue , 1995; Rotondo , 1984; Swerts ,  1995) . For comparative purposes , we explored several measures proposed in the literature  , namely , COCHRAN'SQ and the KAPPA ( ~ ) COEF-FICIENT ( Siegel and Castellan ,  1988) . Cochran's Q , originally proposed in ( Hirschberg and Grosz ,  1992 ) to measure the likelihood that similarity among labelings was due to chance  , was not useful in the current study ; all tests of similarity using this metric ( pairwise , or comparing all labelers ) gave probability near zero . We concluded that this statistic did not serve , for example , to capture the differences observed between labelings from text alone versus labelings from text and speech  . 
Recent discourse annotation studies ( Isard and Carletta , 1995; Flammia and Zue ,  1995 ) have measured reliability using the g coefficient  , which factors outchance agreement taking the expecte distribu-tion of categories into account  . This coefficient is defined as
Po-P ~ 1-Ps where Po represents the observed agreement and PE represents the expected agreement  . Typically , values of . 7 or higher for this measure provide evidence of good reliability  , while values of . 8 or greater indicate high reliability . Isard and Carletta ( 1995 ) report pairwise a scores ranging from . 43 to . 6 8 in a study of naive and expert classifications of types of ' moves ' in the MapTask dialogues  . For theory-neutral discourse segmentations of information-seeking dialogues  , Flammia ( Flam-mia and Zue ,  1995 ) reports an average pairwise similar labelers . 
An important issue in applying the t~coefficient is how one calculates the expected agreement using prior distributions of categories  . We first calculated the prior probabilities for our databased simply on the distribution of SBEG versus non-SBEG labels for all labelers on one of the nine direction-giving tasks in this study  , with separate calculations for the read and spontaneous versions  . This task , which represented about 8% of the data for both speaking styles , was chosen because it was midway in planning complexity and in length among all the tasks  . Using these distributions , we calculated x coefficients for each pair of labelers in each condition for the remaining eight tasks in our corpus  . The observed percentage of SBEG labels , prior distribution for SBEG , average of the pairwise ~ scores , and standardeviations for those scores are presented in 
Table 2.
Table 3: Comparison of Weighted Average
Coefficients and Extra for Each Condition
Using Flammia's Metric

Text alone
Text & Speech

Text alone
Text & Speech % Weighted
Average Low High 0 . 51  . 22  . 67 0 . 70  . 48  . 87 0 . 53  . 19  . 60 0 . 74  . 63 1 . 00 Once again , averaged scores of . 7 or better for text-and-speech labelings , for both speaking styles , indicate markedly higher interlabeler reliability than do scores for text-alone labelings  , which averaged . 51 and . 53 . 
Table 2: Comparison of Averaget ? Coefficients for SBEGs % Avg  . 
SBEGP ~ as.d.

Text alone .38 .53 .56 .08
Text & Speech .35 .55 .81 .01

Text alone .39 .52 .63 .04
Text & Speech .35 .55 .80 .03
The average g scores for group T segmenters indicate weak interlabeler reliability  . In contrast , average t ~ scores for group S are . 8 or better , indicating a high degree of interlabeler reliability  . Thus , application of this somewhat stricter reliability metric confirms that the availability of speech critically influences how listeners perceive discourse structure  . 
The calculation of reliability for SBEG versus non -SBEG labeling in effect tests the similarity of linearized segmentations and does not speak to the issue of how similar the labelings are in terms of hierarchical structure  . Flammia has proposed a method for generalizing the use of the g coefficient for hierarchical segmentation that gives an upper bound estimate on interlabeler agreement  .   5 We applied this metric to our segmentation data , calculating weighted averages for pairwise ~ scores averaged for each task  . Results for each condition , together with the lowest and highest average ~ scores over the tasks  , are presented in Table 3 . 
5Flammia uses a flexible definition of segment match to calculate pairwise observed agreement : roughly  , a segment in one segmentation is matched if both its SBEG and SF correspond to segment boundary locations in the other segmentation  . 
4 . 2 Intonational Features of Segments 4 . 2 . 1 Phrase Classes and Features For purposes of intonational analysis  , we take advantage of the high degree of agreement among our discourse labelers and include in each segment boundary class  ( SBEG , SF , and SCONT ) only the phrases whose classification all subjects agreed upon  . We term these the CONSENSUS-LABELED PHRASES , and compare their features to those of all phrases not in the relevant class  ( i . e . , non-consensus-labeled phrases and consensus -labeled phrases of the other types  )  . Note that there were one-third fewer consensus -labeled phrases for text-alone labelings than for text-and-speech  ( see Table 1 )  . We examined the following acoustic and prosodic features of SBEG  , SCONT , and SF consensus-labeled phrases : f0 maximum and f0 average ; 6 rms ( energy ) maximum and rms average ; speaking rate ( measured in syllables per second )  ; and duration of preceding and subsequent silent pauses  . As for the segmentation analyses , we compared intonational correlates of segment boundary types not only for group Sversus group T  , but also for spontaneous versus read speech . While correlates have been identified in read speech  , they have been observed in spontaneous speech only rarely and descriptively  . 
6We calculated f0 maximum in two ways : as simple f0 peak within the intermediate phrase and also as f0 maximum measured at the rms maximum of the sonorant portion of the nuclear-accented syllable in the intermediate phrase  ( HIGHF0 in the ToBI framework ( Pitrelli , Beckman , and Hirschberg ,  1994)) . The latter measure proved more robust , so we report results based on this metric . The same applies to measurement of rms maximum . Av era ge f0 and rms were calculated over the entire intermediate phrase  . 

Table 4: Acoustic-Prosodic Correlates of Consensus Labelings from Text Alone 






MaxF0(atHighF0)
AvgFO ( phrasal )
MaxRMS ( at High F0)
AvgRMS ( phrasal )
Rate ~ wer lower

Read lower lower lower lower
Sponlower ~ wer lower lower



Pause higher higher higher higher longer shorter higher higher higher higher longer shorter lower ** lower ** lower shorter ? shorter?s lower * shorter * shorter ? faster *? shorter longer faster ? shorter longer Table  5: Acoustic-Prosodic Correlates of Consensus Labelings from Text and Speech 









MaxF 0 ( at High F0 ) higher higher lower lower lower lower
AvgF0 ( phrasal ) higher higher lower ? lower lower
MaxRMS ( at HighFO ) higher higher lower lower
AvgRMS\](phrasal ) higher higher lower
Rates lower ? lower faster * lower faster
Preceding Subsequent
Pause Pause longer shorter longer shorter shorter t shorter t shorter ? shorter ? shorter longer shorter longer  4  . 2 . 2 G loba l In tonat iona l Cor re la tes We found strong correlations for consensus SBEG  , SCONT , and SF phrases for all conditions . Results for group T are given in Table 4 , and for group S , in
Table 5. ~
Consensus SBEG phrases in all conditions possess significantly higher maximum and average  f0  , higher maximum and averager ms , shorter subsequent pause , and longer preceding pause . For consensus SCONT phrases , we found some differences between read and spontaneous speech for both labeling methods  . Features for group T included significantly lower  f0 maximum and average and lower rms maximum and average for read speech  , but only lower f0 maximum for the spontaneous condition . 
Group S features for SCONT were identical to group T except for the absence of a correlation for maximum rms  . While SCONT phrases for both speaking styles exhibited significantly shorter preceding and subsequent pauses than other phrases  , only the spontaneous condition showed a significantly slower rate  . For consensus SF phrases , we again found similar patterns for both speaking styles and both  label-7T-tests were used to test for statistical significance of difference in the means of two classes of phrases  . Results reported are significant at the . 005 level or better , except where '*' indicate significance at the . 03 level or better . 
Results were calculated using one-tailed t-tests , except where ' t ' indicates a twotailed test . 
ing methods , namely lower f0 maximum and average , lower rms maximum and average , faster speaking rate , shorter preceding pauses , and longer subsequent pauses . 
While it may appear somewhat surprising that results for both labeling methods match so closely  , in fact , correlations for text-and-speech labels presented in Table  5 were almost invariably statistically stronger than those for text-alone labels presented in Table  4  . These more robust results for text-and-speech labelings occur even though the dataset of consensus labels is considerably arger than the dataset of consensus text-alone labelings  . 
4.2.3 Local Intonational Correlates
With a view toward automatically segmenting a spoken discourse  , we would like to directly classify phrases of all three discourse categories  . But SCONT and SF phrases exhibit similar prominence features and appear distinct from each other only in terms of timing differences  . A second issue is whether such classification can be done ' online  . ' To address both of these issues , we made pairwise comparisons of consensus-labeled phrase groups using measures of relative change in acoustic-prosodic parameters over a local window of two consecutive phrases  . Table 6 present significant findings on relative changes in  f0  , loudness ( measured in decibels ) , and speaking rate , from prior to current intermedi-
SBEG versus SCONT


SCONT versus SF


SBEG versus SF


IIMaxF0Change(atHighF0s )
Max DB Change ( at High F0s )
Rate Change increase increase increase increase increase * increase * increase increase increase increase increase decrease * tate phrase  , sFirst , note that SBEG is distinguished from both SCONT and SF in terms of  f0 change and db change from prior phrase ; that is , while SBEG phrases are distinguished on a variety of measures from all other phrases  ( including non-consensus-labeled phrases ) in Table 5 , this table shows that SBEGs are also distinguishable directly from each of the other consensus-labeled categories  . Second , while SCONT and SF appear to share prominence features in Table  5  , Table 6 reveals differences between SCONT and SF in amount of  f0 and db change . Thus , in addition to lending themselves to online processing  , local measures may also capture valuable prominence cues to distinguish between segment -medialnd segment-final phrases  . 
5 Conclusion
Although this paper reports results from only a single speaker  , the findings are promising . We have demonstrated that a theory-based method for discourse analysis can provide reliable segmentations of spontaneous a well as read speech  . In addition , the availability of speech in the text-and-speech labeling method led to significantly higher reliability scores  . 
The stronger correlations found for intonational features of the text-and-speech labelings suggest not only that discourse labelers make use of prosody in their analyses  , but also that obtaining such data can lead to more robust modeling of the relationship between intonation and discourse structure  . 
The following preliminary results can be considered for incorporation in such a model  . First , segment-initial utterances differ from medial and  fi-8We present results only for text-and-speech labelings  ; results for text-alone were quite similar . Note that ' increase ' means that there is a significantly greater increase in  f0  , rm s , or rate from prior to current phrase for category  1 than for category 2 of the comparison , and ' decrease ' means that there is a significantly greater decrease  . T-tests again were one-tailed unless marked by t , and significance lvels were . 002 or better except hose marked by * , which were at . 01 or better . 
nal utterances in both prominence and rhythmic properties  . Segment-medialnd segment-final utterances are distinguished more clearly by rhythmic features  , primarily pause . Finally , all correlations found for global parameters can also be computed based on relative change in acoustic-prosodic parameters in a window of two phrases  . 
Ongoing research is addressing the development of automatic lassification algorithms for discourse boundary type  ; the role of prosody in conveying hierarchical relationships among discourse segments  ; individual speaker differences ; and discourse segmentation methods that can be used by naive subjects  . 
References
Avesani , Cinzia and Mario Vayra .  1988 . Dis-corso , segment ididiscorsoe un'i potesisull'in -tonazione  . In Corso elistampa negli Attidel Con-vegno Inlernazionale " Sull ' Interpunzione '  , Val-leechi , Firenze , Maggio , pages 8-53 . 
Ayers , Gayle M .  1992 . Discourse functions of pitch range in spontaneous and read speech  . Paper presented at the Linguistic Society of America Annual Meeting  . 
Beckman , Mary and Janet Pierrehumbert . 1986.
Intonational structure in Japanese and English.
Phonology Yearbook , 3:15-70.
Brown , G . , K . Currie , and J . Kenworthy .  1980 . 
Questions of Intonation . University Park Press,

Brubaker , R . S .  1972 . Rate and pause characteristics of or alreading . Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research , 1(2):141-147.
Butterworth , B .  1975 . Hesitation and semantic planning in speech . Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research , 4:75-87.
Carberry , Sandra .  1990 . Plan Recognition in Natural Language Dialogue . MIT Press , Cambridge


Carletta , Jean C .  1996 . Assessing agreement on classification tasks : the kappa statistic  . Computational Linguistics , 22(2), To appear . 
Cohen , Robin .  1984 . A computational theory of the function of clue words in argument understanding  . In Proceedings of the lOth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , pages 251-255 , Stanford . 
Flammia , Giovanni and Victor Zue .  1995 . Empirical evaluation of human performance and agreement in parsing discourse constituents in spoken dialogue  . In Proceedings of EUROSPEECH-95,
Volume 3, pages 1965-1968. Madrid.
Grosz , B . and J . Hirschberg .  1992 . Some intonational characteristics of discourse structure  . In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Spoken Language Processing  , pages 429-432 , 
Banff , October.
Grosz , Barbara .  1978 . Discourse analysis . In D . Walker , editor , Understanding Spoken Language . Elsevier , pages 235-268 . 
Grosz , Barbara J . and Candace L . Sidner .  1986 . Attention , intentions , and the structure of discourse . 
Computational Linguistics , 12(3):175-204.
Hearst , Marti A .  1994 . Context and Structure in Automated Full-Text Information Access  . Ph . D . 
thesis , University of California at Berkeley . Available as Report No . UCB/CSD-94/836 . 
Hinkelman , E . and J . Allen .  1989 . Two constraints on speech act ambiguity . In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 212-219 , Vancouver . 
Hirschberg , J . and B . Grosz .  1992 . Intonational features of local and global discourse structure  . 
In Proceedings of the Speech and Natural Language Workshop  , pages 441-446 , Harriman NY , 
DARPA , Morgan Kaufmann , February.
Isard , Amy and Jean Carletta .  1995 . Transaction and action coding in the map task corpus  . Research paper HCRC/RP-65 , March , Human Communication Research Centre , University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh . 
Iwafiska , Lucia , Douglas Appelt , Damaris Ayuso , Kathy Dahlgren , Bonnie Glover Stalls , Ralph Grishman , George Krupka , Christine Montgomery , and Ellen Riloff .  1991 . Computationals pects of discourse in the context of  Muc-3  . In Proceedings of the Third Message Understanding Conference  ( Mac-3 )  , pages 256-282 , San Mateo , CA , Morgan
Kaufmann , May.
Lehiste , I .  1979 . Perception of sentence and paragraph boundaries . In B . Lindblom and S . Oehman , editors , Frontiers of Speech Research . 
Academic Press , London , pages 191-201.
Lehiste , I .  1980 . Phonetic characteristics of discourse . Paper presented at the Meeting of the Committee on Speech Research  , Acoustical Society of Japan . 
Levy , Elena .  1984 . Communicating Thematic Structure in Narrative Discourse : The Use of Referring Terms and Gestures  . Ph . D . thesis , The University of Chicago , Chicago , June . 
Linde , C .  1979 . Focus of attention and the choice of pronouns in discourse  . In T . Givon , editor , Syntax and Semantics , Vol . 12: Discourse and Syntax . 
The Academic Press , New York , pages 337-354.
Litman , Diane and Julia Hirschberg .  1990 . Disambiguating cue phrases in text and speech . 
In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , pages 251-256 , Helsinki , August . 
Lochbaum , Karen .  1994 . Using Collaborative Plans to Model the Intentional Structure of Discourse  . 
Ph.D . thesis , Harvard University . Available as
Tech Report TR-25-94.
Morris , J . and G . Hirst .  1991 . Lexical cohesion computed by thesaural relations as an indicator of the structure of text  . Computational Linguistics , 17:21-48 . 
Passonneau , R . and D . Litman .  1993 . Feasibility of automate discourse segmentation . In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 148-155 , Columbus . 
Passonneau , Rebecca J . and Diane J . Litman . To Appear . Empirical analysis of three dimensions of spoken discourse : Segmentation  , coherence and linguistic devices . In E . Hovy and D . Scott , editors , Burning Issues in Discourse . Springer Vet-lag . 
Pierrehumbert , Janet B .  1980 . The Phonology and Phonetics of English Intonation  . Ph . D . thesis , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , September . Distributed by the Indiana University Linguistics Club  . 
Pitrelli , John , Mary Beckman , and Julia Hirschberg . 
1994 . Evaluation of prosodic transcription labeling reliability in the ToBI framework  . In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Spoken Language Processing  , volume 2 , pages 123-126 , Yokohama . 
Reichman , R .  1985 . Getting Computers to Talk Like You and Me : Discourse Context  , Focus , and Semantics . Bradford . The Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge . 
Reynar , Jeffrey C .  1994 . An automatic method of finding topic boundaries . In Proceedings of the Student Session of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 331-333 . Las Cruces , NM . 

Rotondo , John A .  1984 . Clustering analysis of subjective partitions of text  . Discourse Processes , 7:69-88 . 
Schubert , L . K . and C . H . Hwang .  1990 . Picking reference events from tense trees . In Proceedings of the Speech and Natural Language Workshop  , pages 3441 , Hidden Valley PA . DARPA . 
Siegel , S . and Jr . Castellan , N . John .  1988 . Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences  . 
McGraw Hill , New York , second edition.
Silverman , K .  1987 . The Structure and Processing of Fundamental Frequency Contours  . Ph . D . thesis , Cambridge University , Cambridge UK . 
Song , F . and R . Cohen .  1991 . Tense interpretation in the context of narrative . In Proceedings of the 9th National Conference of the American Association for Artificial Intelligence  , pages 131-136 . 
Swerts , M . , R . Gelyukens , and J . Terken .  1992 . 
Prosodic correlates of discourse units in spontaneous speech  . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Spoken Language Processing  , pages 421-428 , Banff , Canada , October . 
Swerts , Marc .  1995 . Combining statistical and phonetic analyses of spontaneous discourse segmentation  . In Proceedings of the XIIth International Congress of Phonetic Sciences  , volume 4 , pages 208-211 , Stockholm , August . 
Swerts , Marc and Mari Ostendorf .  1995 . Discourse prosody in humanmachine interactions . In Proceedings ESCA Workshop on Spoken Dialogue Systems : Theories and Applications  , pages 205-208 , Visgo , Denmark , May/June . 
Webber , B .  1988 . Discourse deixis : Reference to discourse segments  . In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 113-122 , Buffalo . 
Woodbury , Anthony C .  1987 . Rhetorical structure in a central Alaskan Yupik Eskimo traditional narrative  . In J . Sherzer and A . Woodbury , editors , Native American Discourse : Poetics and Rhetoric , pages 176-239 , Cambridge University
Press , Cambridge UK.
Yarowsky , David . 1991. Personal communication,


