Compositional Semantics of German Prefix Verbs 
Maria Wolters
Institut fiir Kommunikations forschung und Phonetik
University of Bonn
Poppels dorfer Allee 47, D-5315 Bonn
mwo?asll , ikp.uni-bonn , de

A compositional ccount of the semantics of German prefix verbs in HPSG is outlined  . We consider only those verbs that are formed by productive synchronic rules  . 
Rules are fully productive if they apply to all base verbs which satisfy a common description  . Prefixes can be polysemous and have separate , highly underspecified lexical entries . Adequate bases are determined via selection restrictions  . 
1 The Problem
Determining the semantics of unknown words which can be derived from lexicon entries is highly desirable for natural language understanding  ( Light ,  1996) . In this paper , I sketch a compositional c-count of the semantics of German prefix verbs derived from a verbal base  , concentrating on those verbs that can be generated by a productive word formation rule  . Like ( Witte ,  1997) , I assume that the meaning of most of these verbs can be derived compositionally by uni ~' ing the semantic representations of its constituents  . Example: ( 1 ) durch + laufen ( ' through + to run ' ) = ~ durchlaufen ( ' to run through ' ) This is an instance of a common rule which can be summarized informally ms  ( 2 ) ' durch'+VERB\[+motion , + agentive \]: : ~
VERB through a space
When a prefix verb is lexicalized , its meaning frequently shifts due to language change and metaphorical usage  ( Mayo et al ,  1995) . For example , ' durch-laufen'is mostly associated with the meaning " passing through all stages of a process  ":   ( 3 ) Erdurchl?uft die Schulung . 
He passes through the training.
2 The Semantics of Prefix Verbs Frequently , the prefix modifies features of the base verb such as valency or aspect  1  . For example , while ' eilen'('to haste ') is an activity , ' etw . dure heilen '(' to haste through sth . ') is an accomplishment . I assume that the prefix entry provides a highly underspecified blueprint of the structure of the prefix verb  ; therefore , I regard the prefix as the head of the prefix verb  ( but see ( Bauer ,  1990)) . 
The values for all features of the prefix verb are obtained from the base verb via structure sharing  , except for basic morphological information and the information to be modified  . In other words , the values of all unmodified features of the prefix verb are token identical with the corresponding values of the base verb  . 
Most prefixes appear in distinct but semantically related rules  , resulting in polysemou , s prefixes . For example , combined with some stative verbs , ' durch'signifies " ' VERB during a certain period of time "  , as in ( 4 ) durch+leben ( ' through'+'live ' ) = ~ durchleben ( ' live through: ) Specifying the set of adequate bases implicitly by selection restrictions allows to elegantly capture generalizations  . For example , we can specify at the feature structure for verbs of motion that they can only combine with the instance of " durch ' denoting " VERB through a space "  . 
The productivity of a word formation rule is a complex notion  ( Kastovsky , 1986; Bauer , 1988; Mayo et al ,  1995) . For our purposes , a rule is productive if it applies to all bases which satisfy a common description such as "' state " or " transitive verb "  . 
A rule only provides patterns for analogical forma-1Here   . aspect denotes certain general verb classes ( Binnick . 1992; Comrie . 1992) such as state , activity , accomplishment , and achievement ( Vendler ,  1957) . 
525 tions ; the frequency of application and acceptability of results also indicate its degree of productivity  . 
3 Prefix Semantics in HPSG
The main advantage of HPSG ( Head Driven Phrase Structure Grammar , ( Pollard and Sag ,  1994) , for German see e . g . ( Kathol ,  1995 ) ) is that it is both a formalism with strong ties to logic and knowledge representation and a linguistic theory  . Much research in HPSG focuses on the structure of the lexicon  , e . g . ( Davis , 1997) . However , work on semantics and morphology in HPSG is relatively scarce  . 
3 . 1 P rev ious Work lVlost HPSG work on German affixation focuses on the suffix-bar  , which can combine with verbs , most of them transitive , to form an adjective . 
( Krieger and Nerbonne ,  1992 )   ( KN ) assign separate lexical entries to affixes and express selection restrictions by typing and subcategorization frames  . 
In their model , -baris of sort bar-surf and subcategorizes for verbs of sortbar-verb to form adjectives of sort bar-comp-adj  . Complex words have a headed binary structure , with the affix as head . In keeping with the I-IPSG Semant , ics Principle , the semantics of the complex word is structure shared with the semantics of the head  . 
( Riehemann ,  1993 ) found that subcategorization frames were incompatible with her data  . Instead of a word syntactic approach with separate lexical entries for affixes  , she describes the formation of bar-adjectives via a lexical inheritance hierarchy of sorts  . 
Different sorts correspond to differentypes of verbal bases  ( transitive , dative , etc . ) . New adjectives are formed in analogy to existing ones  . 
Although Riehemann's approach is very elegant , it is not adequate for verb prefixes . Most prefixes can be separated from the verb depending on their phonological level  , e Example : (5) Ich mache die Tiirzu . (' I close the door ' ; zumachen='to close ') Therefore , a word syntactic approach and separate lexicM entries for verb prefixes may well be adequate  . 
( Witte , 1997) also advocates a word syntactic approach . His semantic representation relies on ( Davis ,  1997) . ( Light ,  1996 ) bases his semantic representations on first order logic  , but he does not use HPSG . 
3.2 Verb Prefixes
Fig .   1 presents the prefix-related part of the sort hierarchy  . The sort verb-prefix specifies typical lea-2Le . ,dcM Phonology ( Mohanan , 1987) assumes several levels of rules . 
verb-prefix durchdurch_ldutch2
Figure 1: Part of the sort hierarchy for verb prefixes tures of verb prefixes  . Each prefix p is assigned a sort p with subsorts Pl  .   .   .   .   . Pn for each potential meaning . Relevant verb classes , such as semantic fields or Vendler classes , are also specified using sorts . 
Following KN , I assume that the prefix is the head of complex affix words  , but like Riehemann , I do not assume a binary structure . The internal structure of a complex derived word is given in Fig  .  2 . Morphological information is given at the feature MORPII  . 
MORPtIILEVEL specifies eparability ( 1-unsepara-ble , 2-separable ) . MORPHIDTRS the internal structure , and MORPHIB . -kSE the baseform . 
Each verb has a complex feature PREFIX located at SYNSEMILOCICAT  . FO reach prefix p , the value of the subfeature PREFIXIp points to the adequate prefix meaning  . For example , if the instance of ' dutch ' corresponding to ( 2 ) is labelled dutch_l , we get PREFIX\]DURCtI : 1 in the lexical entry for ' eilen ' . 
A verb can only combine with prefixes for which an instance is specified at PREFIX  . Regarding semantics , we focus on aspectual classes . The semantic framework chosen here is Lexical Conceptual Structure  , which has been applied successfidly to the interface between morphology and lexical semantics by e  . g . ( Rappaport Hovav and Levin , in press ) . The representation of " v ~ ndler classes is adapted from  ( Van Valin ,  1990) . Class is specified at SYNSEMII , OCl CONTENTIC r , Ass . 
Prefix entries are heavily underspecified . For example , the entry for " durch ' can be derived from Fig .   2 by deleting all information specific to the COMPlement " eilen '  . except for the value of PREFIX\]DIRCII . The semantics of the complex word is composed at the head and then structure shared with the whole word  , in accordance with the Semantics Principle . A prefix can only be combined with verbs with an adequate feature value at PREFIX  . 
4 Conclusion and Further Work
The representation f the relevant semantics will for-realized more rigorously  . Hypotheses will be checked with the data , using a more refined , statistically motivated notion of productivity . The theory will also be implemented in an adequate lexical knowledge ' BASE cond_concat  ( V  ~ , \[\]) SYNSEM\[\]r , OCICONTJ CLASSCAUSE\[\]
L,~,A,,s ~ BECOME(\['3\],XOTIN r ~)
DTRS " MORPHIBASE\[\]'ellen' ( \[ cAssloo\[\]COMPSSYNSEMILOCCONT/NUC\[\ ]\[RELNeilen\] 
L\[AGENT\[\]NP\]
F,Y NSEM\[\]
Figure 2: Partial lexical entry for ' durcheilen ' . 4 refers to the direct object . 3 to the subject representation language . 

Thanks to Bernhard SchrSder and three anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments  . This research was partially supported by the Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes and ERASMUS  . 

L . Bauer .  1988 . Introducing Linguistic Morphology . 
Edinburgh University Press , Edinburgh.
L . Bauer .  1990 . Be-heading the word . J . Linguistics , 26:1-31 . 
R . Binnick .  1992 . Time and the Verb . Oxford University Press , Oxford . 
B . Comrie . 1992. Aspect . Cambridge University
Press , Cambridge.
A . Davis .  1997 . Lexical Semantics and Linking and the Hierarchical Lexicon  . Ph . D . thesis , Department of Linguistics , Stanford University . 
D . Kastovsky .  1986 . The problem of productivity in word-formation . Linguistics , 24:585-600 . 
A . Kathol .  1995 . Linearization-Based German Syntax . Ph . D . thesis , Department of Linguistics,
Stanford University.
H . - U . Krieger and J . Nerbonne .  1992 . Feature-ba~sed inheritance networks for computational lexicons  . 
In Ted Briscoe , Valeria de Paiva , and Ann Copestake , editors , Inheritance , Defaults and the Lexicon , chapter 7 , pages 90-136 . Cambridge University Press . 
M . Light .  1996 . Morphological Cues for Lexieal Semantics . Ph . D . thesis , Department of Computer
Science , University of Rochester.
B . Mayo , M . -T . Schepping , C . Schwarze , and A . Zal-fanella .  1995 . Semantics in the derivational morphology of Italian : implications for the structure of the lexicon  . Linguistics , 33:583-638 . 
K . P . Mohanan .  1987 . The Theory of Lexieal Phonology . Reidel , Dordrecht . 
C . Pollard and I . Sag .  1994 . Head-Driven Phrase Structure Gramraar . University of Chicago Press . 
M . Rappaport Hovav and B . Levin . in press . Morphology and lexical semantics . In A . Zwicky and A . Spencer . editors . Handbook of Morphology . 
Blackwell , Oxford.
S . Riehemann .  1993 . Word formation in lexical type hierarchies-a case study of bar-adjectives in German  . Master's thesis , Universit?t Tiibingen . SfS-

R . D . Van V Min .  1990 . Semantic parameters of split in transitivity . Language .  66:221-260 . 
Z . ~ ndler .  1957 . Verbs and times . Philosophical
Review , 56:143-160.
J . Witte .  1997 . Composition M semantics for resultative separable prefix constructions in German  . 
In Proe . HPSG 4.

