Towards resolution of bridging descriptions
Renata Vieira and Simone Teufel
Centre for Cognitive Science-University of Edinburgh 
2, Buccleuch Place EH8 9LWE dinburgh UK
renata , simone?cogsci , ed.ac.uk
Abstract
We present preliminary results concerning robust echniques for resolving bridging definite descriptions  . We report our analysis of a collection of 20 Wall Street Journal articles from the Penn Treebank Corpus and our experiments with WordNet to identify relations between bridging descriptions and their antecedents  . 
1 Background
As part of our research on definite description ( D D ) interpretation , we asked 3 subjects to classify the uses of DDs in a corpus using a taxonomy related to the proposals of  ( Hawkins , 1978) ( Prince , 1981) and ( Prince ,  1992) . Of the 1040 DDs in our corpus ,  312  ( 30% ) were identified as anaphoric ( same head )  ,  492  ( 47% ) as larger situation/unfamiliar ( Prince's discourse new )  , and 204(20%) as bridging references , defined as uses of DDs whose antecedents - -coreferential or not--have a different head noun  ; the remaining were classified as idioms or were cases for which the subjects expressed oubt- -see  ( Poesio and Vieira , 1997) for a description of the experiments . 
In previous work we implemented a system capable of interpreting DDs in a parsed corpus  ( Vieira and Poesio ,  1997) . Our implementation employed fairly simple techniques  ; we concentrated on anaphoric ( same head ) descriptions ( resolved by matching the head nouns of DDs with those of their antecedents  ) and larger situation/unfamiliar descriptions ( identified by certain syntactic structures , as suggested in ( Hawkins ,  1978)) . In this paper we describe our subsequent work on bridging DDs  , which involve more complex forms of common sense reasoning  . 
2 Br idg ing descr ip t ions : a corpus s tudy Linguistic and computational theories of bridging references acknowledge two main problems in their resolution : first  , to find their antecedents ( ANCHORS ) and second , to find the relations ( LINKS ) holding between the descriptions and their anchors  ( Clark , 1977; Sidner , 1979; Heim , 1982; Carter , 1987; Fraurud , 1990; Chinchor and Sundheim , 1995; Strand ,  1997) . A speaker is licensed in using a bridging DD when he/she can assume that the common sense knowledge required to identify the relation is shared by the listener  ( Hawkins , 1978; Clark and Marshall , 1981; Prince ,  1981) . This reliance on shared knowledge means that , in general , a system could only resolve bridging references when supplied with an adequate lxicon  ; the best results have been obtained by restricting the domain and feeding the system with specific knowledge  ( Carter ,  1987) . We used the publicly available lexical database WordNet  ( WN )   ( Miller ,  1993 ) as an approximation of a knowledge basis contain in generic information  . 
Bridging DDs and WordNet As a first experiment , we used WN to automatically find the anchor of a bridging DD  , among the NPs contained in the previous five sentences  . The system reports a semantic link between the DD and the NP if one of the following is true : ? The NP and the DD are synonyms of each other  , as in the suit--the lawsuit . 
? The NP and the DD are indirect hyponymy relation with each other  , for instance , dollar--the currency . 
? There is a direct or indirect meronymy ( part of relation ) between the NP and the DD . Indirect meronymy holds when a concept inherits parts from its hypernyms  , like car inherits the part wheel from its hypernym wheeled_vehicle  . 
? Dueto WN's idiosyncratic encoding , it is often sisters , i . e . hyponyms of the same hypernym , such as home--the house . 
An automatic search for a semantic relation in 5481 possible anchor/DD pairs ( relative to 204 bridging DDs ) found a total of 240 relations , distributed over 107 cases of DDs . There were 54 correct resolutions ( distributed over 34 DDs ) and 186 false positives . 
Types of bridging definite descriptions A closer analysis revealed one reason for the poor results : anchors and descriptions are often linked by other means than direct lexicosemantic relations  . According to different anchor/link types and their processing requirements  , we observed six major classes of bridging DDs in our corpus: 
Synonymy/Hyponymy/Meronymy These DDs are in a semantic relation with their anchors that might been coded in WN  . Examples are : a ) Synonymy : new album--the record , three bills -- the legislation ; b ) Hypernymy-Hyponymy : rice -- the plant , the television show--the program ; c ) Meronymy : plants - - the pollen , the house--the chimney . 
Names Definite descriptions may be anchored to proper names  , as in : Mrs . Park--the house wife and Pinkerton's Inc-- the company  . 
Events There are cases where the anchor of a bridging DD is not an NP but a VP or a sentence  . Examples are: . . . individual investors contend . -- They make the argument in letters . . . ; Kadane Oil Co . is currently drilling two wells . . . - - The activity . . . 
Compound Nouns This class of DDs requires considering not only the head nouns of a DD and its anchor for its resolution but also the premodifiers  . 
Examples include : stock market crash--the markets  , and discount packages -- the discounts . 
Discourse Topic There are some cases of DDs which are anchored to an implicit discourse topic rather than to some specific NP or VP  . For instance , the industry ( the topic being oil companies ) and the first half ( the topic being a concert )  . 
Inference One other class of bridging DDs includes cases based on a relation of reason  , cause , consequence , or set-members between an anchor ( previous NP ) and the DD ( as in Republicans/Democratics -- the two sides  , and last week's earthquake -- the suffering people are going through  )  . 
The relative importance of these classes in our corpus is shown in Table  1  . These results explain in part the poor results obtained in our first experiment : only  19% of the cases of bridging DDs fall into the category which we might expect WN to handle  . 
Class #% Class #%
S/H/M 3819% C . Nouns 2512%
Names 4924% D . Topic 1507%
Events 40 20% Inference 37 18%
Table 1: Distribution of types of bridging DDs 3 Other experiments with WordNet Cases that WN could handle Next  , we considered only the 38 cases of syn/hyp/mer relations and tested whether WN encoded a semantic relation between them and their  ( manually identified ) anchors . 
The results for these 38 DDs are summarized in Table 2  . Overall recall was 39% (15/38) .  1
Class Total Found in WN Not Found
Syn12 48
Hyp 1486
Mer 1239
Table 2: Search for semantic relations in WN Problems wi th WordNet Some of the missing relations are due to the unexpected way in which knowledge is organized in WN  . For example , our artifact
I structure/1 construction / 4 . part of housing building ~ lodging edifice " all /\ housed welling  , home / ~ part_of specific houses blood family Figure  1: Part of WN's semantic net for buildings method could not find an association between house and walls  , because house was not entered as a hyponym of building but of housing  , and housing does 1 Our previous experiment found correct relations for  34 DDs , from which only 18 were in the syn/hyp/merclass . Among these 18 ,   8 were based on different anchors from the ones we identified manually  ( for instance , we identified pound--the currency , whereas our automatic search found sterling -- the currency  )  . Other 16 correct relations resulting from the automatic search were found for DDs which we have ascribed manually to other classes than syn/hyp/mer  , for instance , a relation was found for the pair Bach--the composer  , in which the anchor is a name . Also , whereas we identified the pair Koreans -- the population  , the search found a WN relation for nation -- the population  . 
5 23 not have a meronymy link to wall whereas building does  . On the other hand , specific houses ( school-house , smoke house , tavern ) were encoded in WN as hyponyms of building rather than hyponyms of house  ( Fig .  1) . 
Discourse structure Another problem found in our first test with WN was the large number of false positives  . Ideally , we should have a mechanism for focus tracking to reduce the number of false posi-tives -  ( Sidner . 1979), ( Grosz , 1977) . We repeated our first experiment using a simpler heuristic : considering only the closest anchor found in a five sentence window  ( instead of all possible anchors )  . By adopting this heuristic we found the correct anchors for  30 DDs ( instead of 34 ) and reduced the number of false positives from 186 to 77  . 
4 Future work
We are currently working on a revised version of the system that takes the problems just discussed into account  . A few names are available in WN , such as famous people , countries , cities and languages . For other names , if we can infer their entity type we could resolve them using WN  . Entity types can be identified by complements like Mr  . , Co . , Inc . etc . 
An initial implementation of this idea resulted in the resolution of  . 53% (26/49) of the cases based on names . Some relations are not found in WN , for instance , Mr . Morishita ( type person ) -- the 57 year-old . To process DDs based on events we could try first to transform verbs into their nominalisations  , and then looking for a relation between ouns in a semantic net  . Some rule based heuristics or a stochastic method are required to ' guess ' the form of a nominalisation  . We propose to use WN's morphology component as a stemmer  , and to augment the verbal stems with the most common suffixes for nominalisations  , like-ment , - ion . In our corpus ,  16%  ( 7/43 ) of the cases based on events are direct nominalisations  ( for instance , changes were proposed -- the proposals ) , and another 16% were based on semantic relations holding between nouns and verbs  ( such as borrou ~ , ed--theloan ) . The other 29 cases ( 68% ) of DDs based on events require inference reasoning based on the compositional meaning of the phrases  ( as in Itu~entlooking for a partner--the prospect  )  ; these cases are out of reach just now , as well as the cases listed under "' discourse topic " and " inference "  . We still have to look in more detail at compound nouns  . 

Carter , D . M .  1987 . Interpreting Anaphors in . Vat-ural Language Tezts . Ellis Horwood , Chichester . 

Chinchor , N . A . and B . Sundheim .  1995 . ( MUC ) tests of discourse processing . In Proc . AAA\[SS on Empirical Methods in Discourse Interpretation and Generation  . pages 2126, Stanford . 
Clark , H . H .  1977 . Bridging . In Johnson-Laird and Wason , eds . . Thinking : Readings in Cognitive Science . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 
Clark , H . H . and C . P  ~ . Marshall .  1981 . Definite reference and mutual knowledge . In Joshi , Webber and Sag , eds . , Elements of Discourse Understanding . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 
Fraurud , K .  1990 . Definiteness and the Processing of Noun Phrases in Natural Discourse  . Journal of
Semantics , 7, pages 39.5-433.
Grosz , B . J .  1977 . The Representation and Use of Focus in Dialogue Understanding  . Ph . D . thesis,
Stanford University.
Hawkins , J . A .  1978 . Definiteness and Indefiniteness . Croom Helm , London . 
Helm , I .  1982 . The Semantics of Definite and Indefinite Noun Phrases  . Ph . D . thesis , University of
Massachusetts at Amherst.
Miller , G . et al 1993. Five papers in WordNet.
Technical Report CSL Report ~3 , Cognitive Science Laboratory , Princeton University . 
Poesio , M . and Vieira . R .  1997 . A Corpusbased investigation of definite description use  . 
Manuscript , Centre for Cognitive Science , University of Edinburgh . 
Prince , E .  1981 . Toward a taxonomy of given/new information . In Cole . ed . , Radical Pragmatics . 
Academic Press . New York , pages '223-255.
Prince , E .  1992 . The ZPG letter : subjects , define te-ness , and information-status . In Thompson and Mann , eds . , Discourse description : diverse analyses of a fund raising text  . Benjamins . Amsterdam , pages 295-325 . 
Sidner , C . L .  1979 . Towards a computational theory of definite anaphora comprehensioniEnglish discourse  . Ph . D . thesis . MIT . 
Strand , K .  1997 . A Taxonomy of Linking Relations . 
Journal of Semantics , forthcoming.
Vieira , R . and M . Poesio .  1997 . Corpusbased processing of definite descriptions . In Botley and McEneryeds . , Corpusbased and computational approaches to anaphora  . UCL Press . London . 

