Contrastive accent in a data-to-speech sys tem 
Mari~t Theune
IPO , Center for Research on User-System Interact ion 
P.O . Box 513
5600 MBE ind hoven
The Netherlands
the une@ipo , tue . nl
Abstract
Being able to predict heplacement of contrastive accent is essential for the assignment of correct accentuation patterns in spoken language generation  . I discuss two approaches to the generation of contrastive accent and propose an alternative method that is feasible and computationally attractive in data-to-speech systems  . 
1 Motivation
The placement of pitch accent plays an important role in the interpretation of spoken messages  . Utter-antes having the same surface structure but a different accentuation pattern may express very different meanings  . A generation system for spoken language should therefore be able to produce appropriate ac -centuation patterns for its output messages  . 
One of the factors determining accentuation is contrast  . Its importance can be illustrated with all example from Goal Getter  , a data-to-speech sys-teln which generates spoken socce reports in Dutch  ( Klabbers et al ,  1997) . The input of the system is a typed data structure containing data on a soccer match  . So-called syntactic templates ( van Deemter and Odijk ,  1995 ) are used to express parts of this data structure . In Goal Getter , only ' new ' information is accented ; ' given'('old ') information is not ( Chafe ,  1976) , ( Brown ,  1983) , ( Hirschberg ,  1992) . 
However , this strategy does not always lead to a correct accentuation pattern if contrastive information is not taken into account  , as shown in example (1) . t(1) a Ill the 16th minute , the Ajax player Kluivert kicked the ball into the wrong goal  . 
bTen minutes later , Wooter scored for Ajax.
1 All GoalGetter examples are translated from Dutch  . 
Accented words are given in italics ; de accented words are underlined . This is only done where relevant . 
The word A jax in ( 1 ) b is not accented by the system , because it is mentioned for the second time and therefore regarded as ' given '  . However , this lack of accent creates the impression that Kluivert scored for Ajax too  , whereas in fact he scored for the opposing team through a nown goal  . This undesirable effect could be avoided by accenting the second occurrence of Ajax in spite of its givenness  , to indicate that it constitutes contrastive information  . 
2 P red ic t ing cont ras t ive accent In this section I discuss two approaches to predicting contrastive accent  , which were put forward by Scott Prevost ( 1995 ) and Stephen Pulinan ( 1997 )  . 
In the theory of contrast proposed in ( Prevost ,  1995) , an item receives contrastive accent if it cooccurs with another item that belongs to its ' set of alternatives '  , i . e . a set of different items of the same type . There are two main problems with this approach . First , as Prevost himself notes , it is very difficult to define exactly which items count as being of ' the same type '  . If the definition is too strict , not all cases of contrast will be accounted for . On the other hand , if it is too broad , then anything will be predicted to contrast with anything  . A second problem is that there are cases where cooccurrence of two items of the same type does not trigger contrast  , as in the following soccer example : ( 2 ) abcAfter six minutes Nil is scored a goal for PSV  . 
This caused Ajaxt of all behind.
Twenty minutes later Cocu scored for PSV.
According to Prevost's theory , PSV in (2) c should have a contrastive accent , because the two teams Ajax and PSV are obviously in each other's alternative set  . In fact , though , there is no contrast and PSV should be normally de accente due to givenness  . This shows that the presence of an alternative item is not sufficient otrigger contrast accent  . 

Another approach to contrastive accent is advoc -ated by Pulman  ( 1997 )  , who proposes to use higher order unification ( HOU ) for both interpretation and prediction of focus . Described informally , Pulman's focus assignment algorithm takes the semantic representation of a sentence which has just been generated  , looks in the context for another sentence representation containing parallel items  , and abstracts over these items in both representations  . If the resulting representations are unifiable , the two sentences stand in a contrast relation and the parallel elements from the most recent one receive a pitch accent  ( or another focus marker )  . 
Pulman does not give a full definition of parallelism  , but states that " to be parallel , two items need to be at least of the same type and have the same sortal properties "  ( ( Pulman ,  1997) , p .  90) . This is rather similar to Prevost's conditions on alternative sets  . Consequently , Pulman's theory also faces the problem of determining when two items are of the same type  . Still , contrary to Prevost , Pulman can explain the lack of contrast accent in  ( 2 ) c , because obviously the representations of sentences  ( 2 ) b and ( 2 ) c will not unify . 
Another advantage , pointed out in ( Gardent et al ,  1996) , is that a HOU algorithm can take world knowledge into account  , which is sometimes necessary for determining contrast  . For instance , the contrast in ( 1 ) is based on the knowledge that kicking the ball into the wrong goal implies scoring a goal for the opposing team  . In a HOU approach , the contrast in this example might be predicted by unifying the representation f the second sentence with the entailment of the first  . However , such a strategy would require the explicit enumeration of all possible semantic equivalences and entalhnents in the relevant domain  , which seems hardly feasible . Also , implementation of higher order unification can be quite inefficient  . This means that although theoretically appealing , the HOU approach to contrastive accent is less attractive from a computational viewpoint  . 
3 An alternative solution
Fortunately , in data-to-speech systems like Goal Get-ter , the input of which is formed by typed and structured data  , a simple principle can be used for determining contrast  . If two subsequent sentences are generated from the same type of data structure they express imilar information and should therefore be regarded as potentially contrastive  , ven if their surface forms are different . Pitch accent should be assigned to those parts of the second sentence that express data which differ from those in the data structure expressed by the first sentence  . 
Example (1) can be used as illustration . The theory of Prevost will not predict contrastive accent on Ajax in  ( 1 ) b , because ( 1 ) a does not contain a member of its alternative set  . In Pulman's approach , the contrast can only be predicted if the system uses the world knowledge that scoring a nown goal means scoring for the opposing team  . In the approach that I propose , the contrast between ( 1 ) a and b can be derived directly from the data structures they express  . 
Figure 1 shows these structures , A and B , which are both of the type go a L event : a record with fields specifying the team for which a goal was scored  , the player who scored , the time and the kind of goal : normal , own goal or penalty . 
A:go a Levent team : PSV player : Kluivert minute :   16 goal type:own
B : go a L event team : A j axplayer : Wooter minute :   26 goal type : normal Figure 1: Data structures expressed by ( 1 ) a and b . 
Since A and B are of the same type , the values of their fields can be compared , showing which pieces of information are contrastive  . Figure 1 shows that all the fields of B have different values from those of A  . This means that each phrase in ( 1 ) b which expresses the value of one of those fields should receive contrastive accent  ,   2 even if the corresponding field value of A was not mentioned in  ( 1 ) a . This guarantees that in ( 1 ) b the proper name A jax , which expresses the value of the team field of B , is accen-ted despite the fact that the contrasting team was not explicitly mentioned in  ( 1 ) a . 
The discussion of example ( 1 ) shows that in the approach proposed here no world knowledge is needed to determine contrast  ; it is only necessary to compare the data structures that are expressed by the generated sentences  . The fact that the input data structures of the system are organized in such a way that identical data types expressemantically parallel information allows us to make use of the world  ( or domain ) knowledge incorporated in the design of these data structures  , without having to separately encode this knowledge  . This also means 2Sentence ( 1 ) bhappens not to express the goal type value of B , but if it did , this phrase should also receive contrastive accent  ( e . g . , ' Twenty minutes later , Over-mars scored a normal goal ') . 
5 20 that the prediction of contrast does not depend on the linguistic expressions which are chosen to express the input data  ; the data can be expressed in an indirect way , as in (1) a , without influencing the prediction of contrast . 
The approach sketched above will also give the desired result for example  ( 2 ) : sentence ( 2 ) c will not be regarded as contrastive with ( 2 ) b , since ( 2 ) c expresses a goal event but ( 2 ) b does not . 
4 Future directions
An open question which still remains , is at which level data structure should be compared  . In other words , how do we deal with sub-and supertypes ? For example  , apart from the goal_event data type the Goal Getter system also has a card_event type  , which specifies at what time which player received a card of which color  . Since goal_event and card_event are different ypes  , they are not expected to be con-trastible . However , both are subtypes of a more general event type , and if regarded at this higher event level , the structures might be considered as contrast -ibleafter all  . Examples like ( 3 ) seem to suggest that this is possible . 
(3) a In the 11th minute , A jax took the lead through a goal by Kluivert . 
b Shortly after the break , the referee handed
Nil is a yellow card.
cT en minutes later , Kluivert scored for the second time . 
The fact that it is not inappropriate o accent Klu -ivert in  ( 3 ) c , shows that ( 3 ) c may be regarded as contrastive to ( 3 ) b ; otherwise , it would be obligat-ory to deaccent the second mention of Kluivert due to givenness  , like PSV in (2) c . Cases like this might be accounted for by assuming that there can be contrast between fields that are shared by data types having the same supertype  . In (3) , these would be the player and the minute fields of structures C and D  , shown in Figure 2 . This is a tentative solution which requires further research  . 
player : Nilis\]
C : card_event minute: 11 card type : yellow team : A jax
D : goal_event player : Kluivert minute: 21 goal type : normal Figure 2: Data structures expressed by ( 3 ) b and c . 
5 Conclusion
I have sketched a practical approach to the assignment of contrastive accent in data-to -speech systems  , which does not need a universal definition of alternative or parallel items  . Because the determin-ation of contrast is based on the data expressed by generated sentences  , instead of their syntactic structures or semantic reprentations  , there is no need for separately encoding world knowledge  . The proposed approach is domain-specific in that it relies heavily on the data structures that form the input from generation  . On the other hand it is based on a general principle  , which should be applicable in any system where typed data structures form the input for linguistic generation  . In the near future , the proposed approach will be implemented in Goal Getter  . 
Acknowledgements : This research was carried out within the Priority Programme Language and Speech Technology  ( TST )  , sponsored by NWO ( the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research  )  . 
References
Gillian Brown .  1983 . Prosodic structure and the given/new distinction . In D . R . Ladd and A . Cutler ( Eds . ): Prosody : Models and Measurements . Springer
Verlag , Berlin.
Wallace Chafe .  1976 . Givenness , contrastiveness , defin-iteness , subjects , topics and points of view . In C . N . Li ( Ed ): Subject and Topic . Academic Press , New York . 
Kees van Deemter and Jan Odijk .  1995 . Context modeling and the generation of spoken discourse  . 
Manuscript 1125, IPO , Eindhoven , October 1995.
Philips Research Manuscript NL-MS 18728 . To appear in Speech Communication , 21(1/2) . 
Claire Gardent , Michael Kohlhase and Noor van Leusen . 
1996 . Corrections and higher-order unification . To appear in Proceedings of KONVENS , Bielefeld . 
Julia Hirschberg .  1992 . Using discourse context to guide pitch accent decisions in synthetic speech  . In G . 
Bailly , C . Benoit and T . R . Sawallis ( Eds ) Talking Machines : Theories , Models , and Designs . Elsevier Science Publishers , Amsterdam , The Netherlands . 
Esther Klabbers , Jan Odijk , Jan Roelof de Pijper and Mari~t Theune .  1997 . Goal Getter : from Teletext to speech . To appear in IPO Annual Progress Report 31 . 
Eindhoven , The Netherlands.
Scott Prevost .  1995 . A semantics of contrast and information structure for specifying intonation in spoken language generation  . PhD-dissertation , University of

Stephen Pulman .  1997 . Higher Order Unification and the interpretation of focus  . In Linguistics and Philosophy 20 . 

