Centering in-the-Large:
Computing Referential Discourse Segments
Udo Hahn & Michael Strube
Computational Linguistics Research Group
Freiburg University , Werthman nplatz 1
D-79085 Freiburg , Germany


We specify an algorithm that builds up a hierarchy of referential discourse segments from local centering data  . The spatial extension and nesting of these discourse segments constrain the reachability of potential antecedents of an anaphoric expression beyond the local level of adjacent center pairs  . Thus , the centering model is scaled up to the level of the global referential structure of discourse  . An empirical evaluation of the algorithm is supplied  . 
1 Introduction
The centering model ( Grosz et al ,  1995 ) has evolved as a major methodology for computational discourse analysis  . It provide simple , yet powerful data structures , constraints and rules for the local coherence of discourse  . As far as anaphora resolution is concerned , e . g . , the model requires to consider those discourse ntities as potential antecedents for anaphoric expressions in the current utterance Ui  , which are available in the forward-looking centers of the immediately preceding utterance Ui  -   1  . No constraints or rules are formulated , however , that account for anaphoric relationships which spread out over nonadjacent uterances  . Hence , it is unclear how discourse elements which appear in utterances preceding utterance  Ui-1 are taken into consideration as potential antecedents for anaphoric expressions in Ui  . 
The extension of the search space for antecedents is by no means a trivial enterprise  . A simple linear backward search of all preceding centering structures  , e . g . , may not only turn out to establish illegal references but also contradicts the cognitive principles underlying the limited attention constraint  ( Walker , 1996b ) . The solution we propose starts from the observation that additional constraints on valid antecedents are placed by the global discourse structure previous utterances are embedded in  . 
We want to emphasize from the beginning that our proposal considers only the referential properties underlying the global discourse structure  . Accordingly , we define the extension of referential discourse segments  ( over several utterances ) and a hierarchy of referential discourse segments  ( structuring the entire discourse )  .   1 The algorithmic procedure we propose for creating and managing such segments receives local centering data as input and generates a sort of superimposed index structure by which the reachability of potential antecedents  , in particular those prior to the immediately preceding utterance  , is made explicit . The adequacy of this definition is judged by the effects centered is course segmentation has on the validity of anaphora resolution  ( cf . Section 5 for a discussion of evaluation results ) . 
2 Global Discourse Structure
There have been only few attempts at dealing with the recognition and incorporation of discourse structure beyond the level of immediately adjacent utterances within the centering framework  . Two recent studies deal with this topic in order to relate attentional and intentional structures on a larger scale of global discourse coherence  . Passonneau ( 1996 ) proposes an algorithm for the generation of referring expressions and Walker  ( 1996a ) integrates centering into a cache model of attentional state  . Both studies , among other things , deal with the supposition whether a correlation exists between particular centering transitions  ( which were first introduced by Brennan et al ( 1987 )  ; cf . Table 1) and intention-based discourse segments . In particular , the role of SHIFT-type transition si examined from the perspective of whether they not only indicate a shift of the topic between two immediately successive utterances but also signal  ( intention-based ) segment boundaries . The data in both studies reveal that only a weak correlation between the SHIFT transitions and segment boundaries can be observed  . This finding precludes a reliable prediction of segment boundaries based on the occurrence of  1 Our notion of referential discourse segment should not be confounded with the intention alone originating from Grosz & Sidner  ( 1986 )  , for reasons discussed in Section 2 . 

SHIFTS and vice versa . In order to accommodate to these empirical results divergent solutions are proposed  . Pass on neau suggests that the centering data structures need to be modified appropriately  , while Walker concludes that the local centering data should be left as they are and further be complemented by a cache mechanism  . 
She thus in tends to extend the scope of centering in accordance with cognitively plausible limits of the attentional span  . Walker , finally , claims that the content of the cache , rather than the intentional discourse segment structure  , determines the accessibility of discoursent i -ties for anaphora resolution  . 
c~(v.)=cdu.-~)c ~( u.)#
ORCb(Vn-1) undef . Cb(Vn-1)
Cb(Un ) = CONTINUE(C)SMOOTH-SHIFT(SS)c~(u . ) cb(u . ) #RETAIN(R ) ROUGH-SHIFT(RS)c ~ ( u . )
Tableh Transition Types
As a working hypothesis , for the purposes of anaphora resolution we subscribe to Walker's model  , in particular to that part which casts doubt on the hypothesized dependency of the attentional from the intentional structure of discourse  ( Grosz & Sidner ,  1986 , p .  180) . We diverge from Walker (1996a ) , however , in that we propose an alternative to the caching mechanism  , which we consider to be methodologically more parsimonious and  , at least , to be equally effective ( for an elaboration of this claim , cf . Section 6) . 
The proposed extension of the centering model builds on the methodological framework of functional centering  ( Strube & Hahn ,  1996) . This is an approach to centering in which issues such as thematicity or topicality are already inherent  . Its linguistic foundations relate the ranking of the forward-looking centers and the functional information structure of the utterances  , a notion originally developed by Dane ~(1974) . Strube & Hahn ( 1996 ) use the centering data structures to redefine Dane ~' stri-chotomy between given information  , theme and rheme in terms of the centering model . The Cb(Un ) , the most highly ranked element of C ! ( Un-1 ) realized in Un , corresponds to the element which represents the given information  . The theme of Un is represented by the preferred center C p  ( Un )  , the most highly ranked element of C!(Un ) . The theme/rheme hierarchy of Un corresponds to the ranking in the C ! s  . As a consequence , utterances without any anaphoric expression do not have any given elements and  , therefore , no Cb . But independent of the use of anaphoric expressions  , each utterance must have a the mean daC ! as well  . 
The identification of the preferred center with the theme implies that it is of major relevance for determining the thematic progression of a text  . This is reflected in our reformulation of the two types of thematic progression  ( TP ) which can be directly derived from centering data  ( the third one requires to refer to conceptual generalization hierarchies and is therefore beyond the scope of this paper  , cf . Dane ~(1974) for the original statement ): 1 . TP with a constant heme : Successive utterances continuously share the same Cp  . 
2 . TP with linear the matization frhemes : An element of the C !  ( Ui-1 ) which is not the Cp ( Ui-1 ) appears in Ui and becomes the Cp ( U i ) after the processing of this utterance . 
Cf(Vi-1):\[c1 .   .   .   .   . ej .   .   .   .   . cs\]C~(Vi ) :\[ Cl .   .   .   .   . ck .   .   .   .   . et\]Cf(Ui-1):\[el .   .   .   .   . cj .   .   .   .   . cs\]l < j < s
Cf(Vd:\[el.....ek ..... e~l
Table 2: Thematic Progression Patterns
Table 2 visualizes the abstract schemata of TP patterns . In our example ( cf . Table 8 in Section 4) , U1 to Uaillustrate the constant theme , while U7 to U10 illustrate the linear the matization frhemes . In the latter case , the theme changes in each utterance , from " H and buch " ( manual ) via " In halts verz eich n is " ( table of contents ) to " Kapitel " ( chapter ) etc . Each of the new themes are introduced in the immediately preceding utterance so that local coherence between these utterances i established  . 
Daneg ( 1974 ) also allows for the combination and recursion of these basic patterns  ; this way the global thematic coherence of a text can be described by recurrence to these structural patterns  . These principles allow for a major extension of the original centering algorithm  . 
Given a reformulation of the TP constraints in centering terms  , it is possible to determine referential segment boundaries and to arrange these segments in a nested  , i . e . , hierarchical manner on the basis of which reachability constraints for antecedents can be formulated  . According to the segmentation strategy of our approach  , the Cp of the endpoint ( i . e . , the last utterance ) of a discourse segment provides the major theme of the whole segment  , one which is particularly salient for anaphoric reference relations  . Whenever a relevant new theme is established , however , it should reside in its own discourse segment , either embedded or in parallel to another one . Anaphora resolution can then be performed ( a ) with the forward-looking centers of the linearly immediately preceding utterance  ,   ( b ) with the forward-looking centers of the endpoint of the hierarchically immediately reachable discourse segment  , and ( c ) with the preferred center of the endpoint of any hierarchically reachable discourse segment  ( for a formalization of this constraint , cf . Table 4) . 
1 05   3 Computing Global Discourse Structure Prior to a discussion of the algorithmic procedure for hypothesizing discourse segments based on evidence from local centering data  , we will introduce its basic building blocks . Let x denote the anaphoric expression under consideration  , which occurs in utterance Ui associated with segment levels  . The function Resolved(x , s , Us ) ( cf . Table 3 ) is evaluated in order to determine the proper antecedentante for x  . It consists of the evaluation of at each ability predicate for the antecedent on which we will concentrate here  , and of the evaluation of the predicate ls Anaphor For which contains the linguistic and conceptual constraints imposed on a  ( pro ) nominal anaphor ( viz . agreement , binding , and sortal constraints ) or a textual ellipsis ( Hahn et al ,  1996) , not an issue in this paper . 
The predicatels Reachable ( cf . Table 4 ) requires antet o be reachable from the utterance Us associated with the segment levels  .   2 Reachability is thus made dependent on the segment structure DS of the discourse as built up by the segmentation algorithm which is specified in Table  6  . In Table 4 , the symbol "= str " denote string equality , N the natural numbers . We also introduce as a notational convention that a discourse segment is identified by its index s and its opening and closing utterance  , viz . DS\[s . beg\] and DS\[s . end \], respectively . Hence , we may either identify an utterance Ui by its linear text index  , i , or , if it is accessible , with respect oits hierarchical discourse segment index  , s(e . g . , cf . Table 8 where U3 = UDs\[1 . end\]or U13 = UDs\[3 . end\]) . The discourse segment index is always identical to the currently valid segment level  , since the algorithm in Table 6 implements a stack behavior . Note also that we attach the discourse segment indexs to center expressions  , e . g . , Cb(s , Us) . 
Resolved(x , sUi ) := lanteifIsReachable(ante , s , Ui )
AIsAnaphor For(x , ante ) under else
Table 3: Resolution of Anaphora
IsReachable(ante , s , Ui ) if ant e6C/(s , Ui-1) else if ante EC/(s-1 , Uosts_ ,  . ~, a \]) else if (3vEN : ant e = ~ trCp(v , UDsI . . . . a \]) ^ v < ( s - 1)) A (-~ Sv ' 6 N : ante = , t , -Cp(v ' , UDst~ ,  . ~ndl)
A v < v ')
Table 4: Reachability of the Anaphoric Antecedent Finally , the function L if t(s , i ) ( cf . Table 5 ) determines the appropriate discourse segment level  , s , of an utter-2The C f lists in the functional centering model are totally ordered  ( Strobe & Hahn ,  1996 , p . 272 ) and we here implicitly assume that they are accessed in the total order given  . 
anceUi ( selected by its linear text index , i ) . Lift only applies to structural configurations in the centering lists in which themes continuously shift at three different consecutive segment levels and associated preferred centers at least  ( cf . Table 2, lower box , for the basic pattern ) . 
Lift(s , i ) :=
Lift(s-1, i-1) if s > 2Ai > 3^c . (s,u ,_~)#c~(~-1,u ,_~)^c~(s-I,u ,_~)  #c . ( s-2 , u , _ ~)^ c~(s , u , _ , ) ? cj(s-1 , u , _~ )   8 else Table 5: Lifting to the Appropriate Discourse Segment Whenever a discourse segment is created  , its starting and closing utterances are initialized to the current position in the discourse  . Its endpoint gets continuously incremented as the analysis proceeds until this discourse segment DS is ultimately closed  , i . e . , whenever another segment DS ' exists at the same or a hierarchically higher level of embedding such that the endpoint of DS'exceeds that of the endpoint of DS  . Closed segments are inaccessible for the antecedent search  . In Table 8, e . g . , the first two discourse segments at level 3 ( ranging from U5 to U5 and UstoUll ) are closed , while those at level1 ( ranging from U1 to U3) , level 2 ( ranging from U4 to UT ) and level 3 ( ranging from U12 to U13 ) are open . 
The main algorithm ( see Table 6 ) consists of three major logical blocks ( s and Ui denote the current discourse segment level and utterance  , respectively ) . 
1 . Continue Current Segment . The Cp(s , Ui-1) is taken over for Ui . If Ui-1 and Ui indicate the end of a sequence in which a series of thematizations of rhemes have occurred  , all embedded segments are lifted by the function Lift to a higher levels '  . As a result of lifting , the entire sequence ( including the final two utterances ) forms a single segment . This is trivially true for cases of a constant theme  . 
2. Close Embedded Segment(s).
( a ) Close the embedded segment ( s ) and continue another , already existing segment : If Ui does not include any anaphoric expression which is an element of the Cf  ( s , Ui-O , then match the antecedent in the hierarchically reachable segments  . Only the Cp of the utterance at the endpoint of any of these segments is considered a potential antecedent  . Note that , as a side effect , hierarchically lower segments are ultimately closed when a match at higher segment levels succeeds  . 
(b ) Close the embedded segment and open a new , parallel one : If none of the anaphoric expressions under consideration co-specify the this segment level is checked for the given utterance  . If an antecedent matches , the segment which contains Ui- 1 is ultimately closed , since Ui opens a parallel segment at the same level of embedding  . Subsequent anaphora checks exclude any of the preceding parallel segments from the search for a valid antecedent and just visit the currently open one  . 
(c ) Opennew , embedded segment : If there is no matching antecedent in hierarchically reachable segments  , then for utterance Uia new , embedded segment is opened . 
3 . Open New , Embedded Segment . If none of the above cases applies , then for utterance Uia new , embedded segment is opened . In the course of processing the following utterances  , this decision may be retracted by the function Lift  . It serves as a kind of " garbage collector " for globally insignificant discourse segments which  , nevertheless , were reasonable from a local perspective for reference resolution purposes  . Hence , the centere discourse segmentation procedure works in an incremental way and revises only locally relevant  , yet globally irrelevant segmentation decisions on the fly  . 
s := li := 1
DS\[s.be9\]:=i
DS\[s . end\]:=i while--end of text i := i+1 n := Resolved ( x , s , Ui ) lxEU ~ if 3 r ? T ~ : r ~ --- strCp(s , Ui-1) (1) then s'1 = si':=i
DS\[Lift(s ', i') . end\]:=i else if ~3 rET t:r?Cl(s , Ui_l ) (2a ) then found := FALSE k : ~ s while - , found A(k > 1) k := k1i_f3r ? 7? . : r = s , rCp(k , Utk . ~,, ~) then s := k
DS\[s . end\]:=i found := TRUE else if k = s-1 ( 2b ) then if 3r ? ~ : r ?
Cs(k , Utk.o , , , ~) then DS\[s.beg\]:=i
DS\[s . end\]:=i found := TRUE if - , found (2e ) then s := s+1
DS\[s.beg\]:=i
DS\[s.end\]:=i elses := sq-1(3)
DS\[s.beg\]:=i
DS\[s.end\]:=i
Table 6: Algorithm for Centered Segmentation 4 A Sample Text Segmentation The text with respect to which we demonstrate he working of the algorithm  ( see Table 7 ) is taken from a German computer magazine ( c't ,  1995 , No . 4, p . 209) . For ease of presentation the text is somewhat shortened  . Since the method for computing levels of discourse segments depends heavily on different kinds of anaphoric expressions  ,   ( pro ) nominal anaphors and textual ellipses are marked by italics  , and the ( pro ) nominal naphors are underlined , in addition . In order to convey the influence of the German word order we provide a rough phrase-to-phrase translation of the entire text  . 
The centered segmentation aalys is of the sample text is given in Table  8  . The first column shows the linear text index of each utterance  . The second column contains the centering data as computed by functional centering  ( Strube & Hahn ,  1996) . The first element of the CI , the preferred center , C p , is marked by bold font . The third column lists the centering transitions which are derived from the Cb/C ! data of immediately successive utterances  ( cf . Table 1 for the definitions ) . The fourth column depicts the levels of discourse segments which are computed by the algorithm in Table  6  . Horizontalines indicate the beginning of a segment  ( in the algorithm , this corresponds to a value assignment to DS\[s . beg\]) . Verti-callines show the extension of a segment ( its end is fixed by an assignment to DS\[s . end\]) . The fifth column indicates which block of the algorithm applies to the current utterance  ( cf . the right margin in Table 6) . 
The computation starts at U1, the headline . The C1 ( Ux ) is set to "1260" which is meant as an abbreviation of " Brother HL-1260"  . Upon initialization , the beginning as well as the ending of the initial discourse segment are both set to  "1"  . U2 and U a simply continue this segment ( block ( 1 ) of the algorithm )  , so Lift does not apply . The Cv is set to "1260" in all utterances of this segment . Since U4 does neither contain any anaphoric expression which co-specifies the Cv  ( 1  , Ua )   ( block ( 1 ) ) nor any other element of the 67/ (  1 , U3) ( block(2a)) , and as there is no hierarchically preceding segment  , block (2c ) applies . The segment counters is incremented and a new segment at level  2 is opened , setting the beginning and the ending to "4" . The phrase " das diinne Handbiichlein " ( the thin leaflet ) in U5 does not co-specify the Cv ( 2 , U4) but co-specifies an element of the C!(2 , U4) instead ( viz . " Handbuch "( manual)) . 
Hence , block (3) of the algorithm applies , leading to the creation of a new segment at level  3  . The anaphor " H and buch " ( manual ) in U6 co-specifies the Cv ( 3  , Us ) . 
Hence block ( 1 ) applies ( the occurrence of "1260" in CI ( U5 ) is due to the assumptions specified by Strube & Hahn  ( 1996 ) ) . Given this configuration , the function Liftlifts the embedded segment one level  , so the (2) (3) (5) (6) (7)
Brother HL-1260
E in Detail fiilltsch on beimersten Umgangmit dem grogen Brother auf : One particular - is already noticed-in the first approach to-the big Brother  . 
Im Betriebmachte . _grdur cheinkr ~ if tiges Arbeitsger ~ us chaufsich aufmerk sam  , das auchim Stand-by-Modus nochgut veme hmbarist . 
In operation-draws-it-with a heavy noise level-attention to itself-which-also-in the stand-by mode-is still well audible  . 
F ~ r Standard-Insta Uation enkommt mangutohne Handbuchaus  . 
As far as standard installations are concerned- gets-one-well-by-without any manual  . 
Zwared ~ iutert dasd SnneH and biichle in die Bedienung der Hardwareanschaulic hundgut illustriert  . 
Admittedly , gives - the thin leaflet-the operation of the hardware-a clear description of-and-well illustrated  . 
Die Software-Seite wurde imH and buchdage gen stiefm Sttedich behandelt : The software part- was-in the manual-however-like a step mother -treated : b is a ufeine karge Seitemit einem In halts verz eich n is zum HP-Modus suchtman vergebens weitere Information en  . 
except for one meagre page-containing the table of contents for the HP mode-seeks-one-in vain-for further information  . 
(8 ) Kein Wander : unterdemln halts verz eich nissteht derlap-idare Hinweis  , man m6ge sich die Seiten dieses Kapitels doch bittey on Disketteaus drucken-Frech heit  . 
No wonder : beneath the table of contents-one finds the terse instruction  , one should-one self-the pages of this section -please-from disk-print out--impertinence  . 
(9 ) Ohne diesen Aus druck suchtman vergebens nach einem Hinweis darauf  , warum die Auto-Continue-Funktionn der PostScript -Emulation nich twirkt  . 
Without his print-out , looks-one-invain-for a hint-why-the auto-continue-function-in the PostScriptem -ulation-does not work  . 
(10) Nach demEins chaltenzeigt das LC-D is play an , dabdiese praktische Hilfs funk tionichtaktiv is t  ; After switching on-depicts - the LC display- that-this practical help function-not active - is  ; (11) si__ . getiber wacht den Dateien transfer vom Computer . 
it monitors the file transfer from the computer.
(12 ) Viele der kleinen Mackenverzei htmandem HL-1260 wenn maner ste Aus drucke in H ~ inden h~ilt . 
Many of them in or defects-pard on s-one-the HL-1260  , when-one-the first print outs-holds in \[ one's\]h and s  . 
(13 ) Gerasterte Grauflft chenerzeugt der Brothersehr homogen Raster-mode grey scale are as-generates - the Brother-very homogeneously  . . . 
Table 7: Sample Text segment which ended with U4 is now continued up to U6 at level 2  . As a consequence , the centering data of U5 are excluded from further consideration as far as the cospecification by any subsequent anaphoric expression is concerned  . Uzsimply continues the same segment , since the textual ellipsis " Seite " ( page ) refers to " H and buch " ( manual )  . The utterances U8 to U10 exhibit a typical the matization-of-the-rhemes pattern which is quite common for the detailed description of objects  . ( Note the sequence of SHIFT transitions . ) Hence , block ( 3 ) of the algorithm applies to each of the utterances and  , correspondingly , new segments at the levels 3 to 5 are created . This behavior breaks down at the occurrence of the anaphoric expression " sie "  ( it ) in Uxl which co-specifies the Cp (  5 , Ulo ) , viz . " auto-continue function " , denoted by another anaphoric expression , namely " Hil-fsfunktion " ( help function ) in U10 . Hence , block (1) applies . The evaluation of Lift succeeds with respect to two levels of embedding  . As a result , the whole sequence is lifted up to level 3 and continues this segment which started at the discourse lement " lnhalts verz eich-his "  ( list of contents )  . As a result of applying Lift , the whole sequence is captured in one segment .   U12 does not contain any anaphoric expression which co-specifies an element of the C !  ( 3 , U 11) , hence block (2) of the algorithm applies . The anaphor " HL-1260" does not co-specify the Cp of the utterance which represents the end of the hierarchically preceding discourse segment  ( UT )  , but it co-specifies an element of the C ! (2 , UT ) . The immediately preceding segment is ultimately closed and a parallel segment is opened at UI ~  ( cf . block (2b )) . Note also that the algorithm does not check the C  !   ( 3 , U 10 ) despite the fact that it contains the antecedent of  "1260"  . 
However , the occurrences of "1260" in the Cfs of U9 and Ux0 are mediated by textual ellipses . If these utterances contained the expression "1260" itself , the algorithm would have built a different discourse structure and  , therefore ,   "1260" in U10 were reachable for the anaphor in Ulz . Segment 3, finally , is continued by Ulz . 
5 Empirical Evaluation
In this section , we present some empirical data concerning the centered segmentation algorithm  . Our study was based on the analysis of twelve texts from the information technology domain  ( IT )  , of one text from a Ger-(1) Cb:
Cf . " (2) Cb:
Cf : (3) Cb:
Cf : (4) Cb:
Cf . " (5) Cb:
Cf : (6) Cb:
Cf : (7) Cb:
Cf : (8) Cb:
Cf : (9) Cb:
Cf : (10) Cb:
Cf : (11) Cb:
Cf : (12) Cb:
Cf : (13) Cb:

Centering Data Trans.
\[1260\]1260 C\[1260 , Umgang , Detail \] 1260 C\[1260 , Betrieb , Arbeitsger ~ usch , Stand-by-Modus\]\[Standard-Installation , Hadbuch \]
H and buch C\[H and bue h ,  1260 , Hardware , Bedienung \]
Handbuch C\[H and buch , 1260, Software \]
Handbuch C\[H and bueh , Seite , 1260, HP-Modus,
In halts verz eich nis , Information en \]
In halts verz eich n is SS\[In halts verz eiehn is , Hnweis , Seiten , Kapitel , 
Diskette , Frechheit \]
Kapitel SS\[Kapitel , Ausdmck , Hinweis ,  1260 , Auto-Continue-Funktion , PostScript-Emulation \] 1260 RS\[Auto-Continue-Funktion ,  1260 , LC-Display \]
Auto-Continue-Funktion SS\[Auto-Continue -Funktion  , Dateien-Transfer , 
Computer \]\[1260 , Macken , Ausdmck \] 1260 C\[1260 , Graufl ~ i chen \] mannews magazine ( Spiegel ) 3 , and of two literary texts 4 ( Lit ) . Table 9 summarizes the total numbers of anaphors , textual ellipses , utterances , and words in the test set . 
Levels of Discourse Segments 123 45

ITS piegel anaphors 197   101   198 ellipses 195   22   23 utterances 336   84   127 words 5241   1468   1610 
Block 2e1, Lift 2b
Table 8: Sample of a Centered Text Segmentation Analysis neither specified for anaphoric antecedents in U i  , not an issue here , nor for anaphoric antecedents beyond Ui-1 . 
In the test set , 139 anaphors (28%) and 116 textual ellipses (48 , 3% ) f all out of the ( intersentential ) scope of Lit those common algorithms . So , the problem we consider is not a marginal one . 





Table 9: Test Set
Table 10 and Table 11 consider the number of anaphoric and text -elliptical expressions  , respectively , and the linear distance they have to their corresponding antecedents  . Note that common centering algorithms ( e . g . , the one by Brennan et al ( 1987 ) ) are specified only for the resolution of anaphors in  Ui-1  . They are 3 japan-Der Neuederalten Garde . In Der Spiegel , Nr .  3, 1996 . 
4The first two chapters of a short story by the German writer Heiner MOiler  ( Liebesgeschichte . In Heiner M Oiler . 
Geschichtenaus der Produktion 2 . Berlin : Rotbuch Verlag , 1974, pp . 57-63 ) and the first chapter of a novel by U we Johnson ( Zwei Ansichten . Frankfurt/Main : Suhrkamp Verlag , 1965 . )
Lit E 7   32   49   70   121   308   14   24   66   5   10   33   1   5   12   0   1   7   1   3   12   1   1   5   2   1   4 
Ui - ~ to Ui-lO8
Ui-l , to Ui-153
Ui-l~toU,-2o1
Table 10: Anaphoric Antecedent in Utterance U~Table 12 and Table 13 give the success rate of the centered segmentation algorithm for anaphors and textual ellipses  , respectively . The numbers in these tables indicate at which segment level anaphors and textual ellipses were correctly resolved  . The category of errors




Ui-6 to Ui-lo
Ui-uto Ui-15
ITSpiegel Lit E 94   15   15   124   42   6   8   56   16   0   0   16   14   0   0   14   8   0   0   8   14   1   0   15   7   0   0   7 Table 11: Elliptical Antecedent in Utterance Ucovers erroneous analyses the algorithm produces  , while the one for false positives concerns those resolution results where a referential expression was resolved with the hierarchically most recent antecedent but not with the linearly most recent  ( obviously , the targeted ) one ( both of them denote the same discoursentity )  . The categories Cy(s , Ui-1 ) in Tables 12 and 13 contain more elements than the categories Ui-1 in Tables 10 and 11  , respectively , due to the mediating property of textual ellipses in functional centering  ( Strube & Hahn ,  1996) . 
U ~ cI(~,U~-,)
Cp(s-1, UDS\[,--L , , d\])
C/(s-1, UDsls--l.end\])
Cp(s-2, UDS\[8-2...~)
Cp(s-3, UDS\[~-3.,,~)
Cp(s-4, UDS l,--4 . ,, d\])c ~(~- s,uos\[,-~ . , , ~ l ) errors false positives ~ m 10   7   32   49   161   78   125   364   14   9   24   47   7   5   9   21   1   0   1   2   1   0   1   2   0   0   1   1   0   1   0 I 3   1   5   9   ( I )   ( 3 )   ( 7 )   ( 11 ) Table 12: Anaphoric Antecedent in Center ~ cl ( s , U ~- i )
Cp(s-1, UDSi ,-1.,,~d\])
CI(s-1, Uosls-~.*, a\])
Cp(s-2, Uosts-~.~,,~l)
Cp(s-3, UDats-Z.ena \]) errors
ITSpiegel Lit 156   18   17   18   0   4   10   1   2   7   1   0   3   0   0   1   2   0   ( 2 )   ( 0 )   ( 3 ) 
E (5)
Table 13: Elliptical Antecedent in Centerx The centered segmentation algorithm reveals a pretty good performance  . This is to some extimplied by the structural patterns we find in expository texts  , viz . 
their single-theme property ( e . g . , "1260" in the sample text ) . In contrast , the literary texts in the test exhibited a much more difficult internal structure which resem -bled the multiple thread structure of dialogues discussed by  Ros6 et al ( 1995 )  . The good news is that the segmentation procedure we propose is capable of dealing even with these more complicated structures  . While only one antecedent of a pronoun was not reachable given the superimposed text structure  , the remaining eight errors are characterized by full definite noun phrases or proper names  . The vast majority of these phenomena can be considered informationally redundant utterances in the terminology of Walker  ( 1996b ) for which we currently have no solution at all . It seems to us that these kinds of phrases may override text-grammatical structures as evidenced by referential discourse segments and  , rather , trigger other kinds of search strategies . 
Though we fed the centered segmentation algorithm with rather long texts  ( up to 84 utterances )  , the antecedents of only two anaphoric expressions had to bridge a hierarchical distance of more than  3 levels . This coincides with our supposition that the overall structure computed by the algorithm should be rather fi at  . We could not find an embedding of more than seven levels  . 
6 Related Work
There has always been an implicit relationship between the local perspective of centering and the global view of focusing on discourse structure  ( cf . the discussion in Grosz et al (1995)) . However , work establishing an explicit account of how both can be joined in a computational model has not been done so far  . The efforts of Sidner (1983), e . g . , have provided a variety of different focus data structures to be used for reference resolution  . 
This multiplicity and the ongoing rowth of the number of different entities  ( cf . Suri & McCoy ( 1994 ) ) mirrors an increase in explanatory constructs that we consider a methodological drawback to this approach because they can hardly be kept control of  . Our model , due to its hierarchical nature implements a stack behavior that is also inherent othe above mentioned proposals  . We refrain , however , from establishing a new data type ( even worse , differentypes of stacks ) that has to be managed on its own . There is no need for extra computations to determine the " segment focus "  , since that is implicitly given in the local centering data already available in our model  . 
A recent attempt at introducing lobal discourse notions into the centering framework considers the use of a cache model  ( Walker , 1996b ) . This introduces an additional data type with its own management principles for data storage  , retrieval and update . While our proposal for centered is course segmentation also requires a data structure of its own  , it is better integrated into centering than the caching model  , since the cells of segment structures simply contain " pointers " that implement a direct link to the original centering data  . Hence , we avoid extra operations related to feeding and updating the cache  . 
The relation between our centered segmentation algorithm and Walker's  ( 1996a ) integration of centering into the cache model can be viewed from two different angles  . 
On the one hand , centered segmentation may be a part of the cache model  , since it provides an elaborate , nonlinear ordering of the elements within the cache  . Note , however , that our model does not require any prefixed size corresponding to the limited attention constraint  . On the other hand , centered segmentation may replace the of the attentional state  . Centered segmentation has also the additional advantage of restricting the search space of anaphoric antecedents to those discoursentities actually referred to in the discourse  , while the cache model allows unrestricted retrieval in the main or longterm memory  . 
Text segmentation procedures ( more with an information retrieval motivation , rather than being related to reference resolution tasks  ) have also been proposed for a coarse-grained partitioning of texts into contiguous  , nonoverlapping blocks and assigning content labels to these blocks  ( Hearst ,  1994) . The methodological basis of these studies are lexical cohesion indicators  ( Morris & Hirst ,  1991 ) combined with word-level cooccurrence statistics . Since the labelling is one-dimensional , this approximates our use of preferred centers of discourse segments  . 
These studies , however , lack the finegrained information of the contents of C flists also needed for proper reference resolution  . 
Finally , many studies on discourse segmentation highlight the role of cue words for signaling segment boundaries  ( cf . , e . g . , the discussion in Passonneau & Litman (1993)) . However useful this strategy might be , we see the danger that such a surface-level description may actually hide structural regularities at deeper levels of investigation illustrated by access mechanisms for centering data at different levels of discourse segmentation  . 
7 Conclusions
We have developed a proposal for extending the centering model to incorporate the global referential structure of discourse for reference resolution  . The hierarchy of discourse segments we compute realizes certain constraints on the reachability of antecedents  . Moreover , the claim is made that the hierarchy of discourse segments implements an intuitive notion of the limited attention constraint  , as we avoid a simplistic , cognitively implausible linear backward search for potentional discourse referents  . Since we operate within a functional framework , this study also presents one of the rare formal accounts of thematic progression patterns for fullfledged texts which were informally introduced by Dane ~  ( 1974 )  . 
The model , nevertheless , still has several restrictions . 
First , it has been developed on the basis of a small corpus of written texts  . Though these cover diverse text sorts ( viz . technical product reviews , newspaper articles and literary narratives ) , we currently do not account for spoken monologues as modelled  , e . g . , by Passonneau & Litman ( 1993 ) or even the intricacies of dyadic conversations Ros6 et al ( 1995 ) deal with . Second , a thorough integration of the referential and intentional description of discourse segments still has to be worked out  . 
Acknowledgments . We like to thank our colleagues in the CLIF group for fruitful discussions and instant support  , Joe Bush who polished the text as a native speaker  , the three anonymous reviewers for their critical comments  , and , in particular , Bonnie Webber for supplying invaluable comments to an earlier draft of this paper  . Michael Strube is supported by a postdoctoral grant from DFG  ( Str 545/1-1 )  . 

Brennan , S . E . , M . W . Friedman & C . J . Pollard (1987) . A centering approach to pronouns . In Proc . of the 25 th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ; Stanford , Cal . , 6gJuly 1987, pp .  155-162 . 
Dane ~, E (1974) . Functional sentence perspective and the organization of the text  . In EDane ~( Ed . ), Papers on Functional Sentence Perspective , pp .  106-128 . Prague : Academia . 
Grosz , B . J . , A . K . Joshi & S . Weinstein (1995) . Centering : A framework for modeling the local coherence of discourse  . 
Computational Linguistics , 21(2):203-225.
Grosz , B . J . & C . L . Sidner (1986) . Attention , intentions , and the structure of discourse . Computational Linguistics , 12(3):175-204 . 
Hahn , U . , K . Markert & M . Strube (1996) . A conceptual reasoning approach to textual ellipsis  . In Proc . of the 12 th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( ECAI'96 )  ; Budapest , Hungary , 1216 August 1996 , pp .  572-576 . Chich-ester : John Wiley . 
Hearst , M . A .  (1994) . Multiparagraph segmentation f expos-nditory text  . In Proc . of the 32 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ; Las Cruces , N . M . , 27-30 June 1994, pp .  916 . 
Morris , J . & G . Hirst (1991) . Lexical cohesion computed by thesaural relations as an indicator of the structure of text  . 
Computational Linguistics , 17(1):21-48.
Passonneau , R . J .  (1996) . Interaction of discourse structure with explicitness of discourse anaphoric noun phrases  . In M . Walker , A . Joshi & E . Prince ( Eds . ), Centering in Discourse . Preprint . 
Passonneau , R . J . & D . J . Litman (1993) . Intention based segmentation : Human reliability and correlation with linguistic cues  . In Proc . of the 318t Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ; Columbus , Ohio ,  2226
June 1993, pp . 148-155.
Ros 6, C . E , B . Di Eugenio , L . S . Levin & C . Van EssDykema (1995) . Discourse processing of dialogues with multiple rd threads  . In Proc . of the 33 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ; Cambridge , Mass . , 26-30 June 1995, pp .  31-38 . 
Sidner , C . L .  (1983) . Focusing in the comprehension f definite anaphora  . In M . Brady & R . Berwick ( Eds . ), Computational Models of Discourse , pp .  267-330 . Cambridge , Mass . : MIT

Strobe , M . & U . Hahn (1996) . Functional centering . In Proc . 
of the 34 th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ; Santa Cruz , Cal . , 2328 June 1996, pp . 

Suri , L . Z . & K . EMcCoy (1994) . RAFT/RAPR and centering : A comparison and discussion of problems related to processing complex sentences  . Computational Linguistics , 20(2):301-317 . 
Walker , M . A . (1996a ) . Centering , anaphora resolution , and discourse structure . In M . Walker , A . Joshi & E . Prince ( Eds . ), Centering in Discourse . Preprint . 
Walker , M . A . (1996b ) . Limited attention and discourse structure . Computational Linguistics , 22(2):255-264 . 

