Expansion of MultiWord Terms for Indexing and Retrieval 
Using Morphology and Syntax *
Christian Jacquemin Judith L . Klavans
Institut de Rechercheen Informatique Center for Research 
de Nantes , BP 92208
2, chemin de la Houssini ~ re
443 22 NANTES Cedex 3

jacquemin@irin , univ-nantes , fr
Evelyne Tzoukermann
Bell Laboratories,
on Information Access Lucent Technologies , Columbia University 700 Mountain Avenue , 2D-448 , 535 W . ll 4th Street , MC1 101 P . O . Box 636 , New York , NY 10027 , USA Murray Hill , NJ 07974 , USA klavans@cs , columbia , eduevelyne Q research , bell-labs , corn
Abstract
A system for the automatic production of controlled index terms is presented using linguistically motivated techniques  . This includes a finite-state part of speech tagger  , a derivational morphological processor for analysis and generation  , and a unification-based shallow-level parser using transformational rules over syntactic patterns  . The contribution of this research is the successful combination of parsing over a seed term list coupled with derivational morphology to achieve greater coverage of multiword terms for indexing and retrieval  . Final results are evaluated for precision and recall  , and implications for indexing and retrieval are discussed  . 
1 Motivation
Terms are known to be excellent descriptors of the informational content of textual documents  ( Sriniva-san ,  1996) , but they are subject on umerous linguistic variations  . Terms cannot be retrieved properly with coarse text simplification techniques  ( e . g . stemming ) ; their identification requires precise and efficient NLP techniques  . We have developed a domain independent system for automatic term recognition from unrestricted text  . The system presented in this paper takes as input a list of controlled terms and a corpus  ; it detects and marks occurrences of term We would like to thank the NLP Group of Columbia University  , Bell Laboratories-Lucent Technologies , and the Institut Universitaire de Technologie de Nantes for their support of the exchange visitor program for the first author  . We also thank the Institut del'Information Scientifiquet Technique  ( INIST-CNRS ) for providing us with the agricultural corpus and the associated term list  , and Didier Bourigault for providing us with terms extracted from the newspaper corpus through LEXTER  ( Bourigault ,  1993) . 
variants within the corpus . The system takes as input a precompiled ( automatically or manually ) term list , and transforms it dynamically into a more complete term list by adding automatically generated variants  . This method extends the limits of term extraction as currently practiced in the IR community : it takes into account multiple morphological and syntactic ways linguistic concepts are expressed within language  . Our approach is a unique hybrid in allowing the use of manually produced precompiled data as input  , combined with fully automatic computational methods for generating term expansions  . Our results indicate that we can expand term variations at least  30% within a scientifi corpus . 
2 Background and Introduction
NLP techniques have been applied to extraction of information from corpora for tasks such as free indexing  ( extraction of descriptors from corpora )  , ( Metzler and Haas , 1989; Schwarz , 1990; Sheridan and Smeaton , 1992; Strzalkowski ,  1996) , term acquisition ( Smadja and McKeown , 1991; Bourigault , 1993; Justeson and Katz , 1995; Dallle ,  1996) , or extraction of l in 9 uistic information e . g . support verbs ( Grefenstette and Teufel ,  1995) , and event structure of verbs ( Klavans and Chodorow ,  1992) . 
Although useful , these approaches suffer from two weaknesses which we address  . First is the issue of filtering term lists ; this has been dealt with by cons-traints on processing and by postprocessing over generated lists  . Second is the problem of difficulties in identifying related terms across parts of speech  . 
We address these limitations through the use of controlled indexing  , that is , indexing with reference to previously available authoritative trms lists  , such as ( NLM ,  1995) . Our approach is fully automatic , but permits effective combination of available resources  ( such as thesauri ) with language processing techno-logy , i . e . , morphology , part-of-speech tagging , and syntactic analysis . 

Automatic ontrolled indexing is a more difficult task than it may seem at first glance : ? controlled indexing on single-words must account for polysemy and word disambiguation  ( Krovetz and Croft , 1992; Klavans ,  1995) . 
? controlled indexing on multiword terms must consider the numerous forms of term va-riations  ( Dunham , Pacak , and Pratt , 1978; SparckJones and Tait , 1984; Jacquemin ,  1996) . 
We focus here on the multiword task . Our system exploits a morphological processor and a transformation based parser for the extraction of multiword controlled indexes  . 
The action of the system is twofold . First , a corpus is enriched by tagging each word unambiguously  , and then expanded by linking each word with all its possible derivatives  . For example , for English , the word genes is tagged as a plural noun and morphologically connected to genic  , genetic , genome , ge-no toxic , genetically , etc . Second , the term list is dynamically expanded through syntactic transformations which allow the retrieval of term variants  . 
For example , genic expressions , genes were expres-sed , expression of this gene , etc . are extracted as variants of gene expression . 
This system relies on a fullfledged unification formalism and thus is well adapted to a finegrained identification of terms related in syntactically and morphologically complex ways  . The same system has been effectively applied both to English and French  , although this paper focuses on French ( see ( Jacquemin ,  1994 ) for the case of syntactic variants in English )  . All evaluation experiments were performed on two corpora : a training corpus\[ECI\]  ( ECI , 1989 and 1990 ) used for the tuning of the metagrammar and a test corpus\[AGR\]  ( AGR , 1995) used for evaluation . \[ ECI\] is a subset of the European Corpus Initiative data composed of  1  . 3 million words of the French newspaper " Le Monde  "  ; \[AGR\] is a set of abstracts of scientific papers in the agricultural domain from INIST /CNRS  ( 1 . 1 million words ) . A list of terms is associated with each corpus : the terms corresponding to \[ ECI \] were automatically extracted by LEXTER  ( Bourigault ,  1993 ) and the terms corresponding to \[ AGR\] were extracted from the AGROVOC term list owned by INIST/CNRS  . 
The following section describes methods for grou -ping multiword term variants  ; Section 4 presents a linguistically motivated method for lexical analysis  ( inflectional analysis , part of speech tagging , and derivational analysis ) ; Section 5 explains term expansion methods : constructions with a local parse through syntactic transformations preserving dependency relations  ; Section 6 illustrates the empirical tuning of linguistic rules  ; Section 7 presents an evaluation of the results in terms of precision and recall  . 
3 Variation in Multi-Word Terms : A
Description of the Problem
Linguistic variation is a major concern in the studies on automatic indexing  . Variations can be classified into three major categories : ? Syntactic  ( Type 1 ) : the content words of the original term are found in the variant but the syntactic structure of the term is modified  , e . g . technique for performing volumetric measurements i a Type  1 variant of measurement technique . 
? Morpho-syntaetic ( Type 2 ) : the content words of the original term or one of their deri-vatives are found in the variant  . The syntactic structure of the term is also modified  , e . g . ele-ctrophore sed on a neutral polyaery lamidegel is a Type  2 variant of gelectrophores is . 
? Semantic ( Type 3 ) : synonyms are found in the variant ; the structure may be modified , e . g . 
kidney function is a Type 3 variant of renalfun-ction . 
This paper deals with Type1 and Type2 variations . 
The two main approaches to multiword term conflation in IR are text simplification and structural similarity  . Text simplification refers to traditional IR algorithm such as  ( 1 ) deletion of stop words ,   ( 2 ) normalization of single words through stemming , and ( 3 ) phrase construction through dictionary matching . ( See ( Lewis , Croft , and Bhandaru , 1989; Smeaton ,  1992 ) on the exploitation of NLP techniques in IR . ) These methods are generally limited . 
The morphological complexity of the language seems to be a decisive argument for performing rich stemming  ( Popovi ~ and Willett ,  1992) . Since we focus on French , a language with a rich declensional infle-ctional and derivational morphology -- we have chosen the richest and most precise morphological na-lysis  . This is a key component in the recognition of Type  2 variants . For structural similarity , co-arse dependency-based NLP methods do not account for fine structural relations involved in Type  1 variants . For instance , properties of flour should be linked to flour properties  , properties of wheat flour but not to properties offlour starch  ( examples are from ( Schwarz ,  1990)) . The last occurrence must be rejected because starch is the argument of the head the head noun properties in the original term  . Without careful structural disambiguation ver internal phrase structure  , these important syntactic distinctions would be incorrectly overlooked  . 
4 Par t o f Speech D isambiguat ion and Morpho logy First  , inflectional morphology is performed in order to get the different analyses of word forms  . Infle-ctional morphology is implemented with finite-state transducers on the model used for Spanish  ( Tzoukermann and Liberman ,  1990) . The theoretical principles underlying this approach are based on gene-rative morphology  ( Aronoff , 1976; Selkirk ,  1982) . 
The system consists of precomputing stems , extracted from a large dictionary of French ( Boyer , 1993) enhanced with newspaper corpora , a total of over 85 , 000 entries . 
Second , a finite-state part of speech tagger ( Tzoukermann , Radev , and Gale , 1995; Tzoukermann and Radev ,  1996 ) performs the morphosyntactic disambiguation f words  . The tagger takes the output of inflectional morphological nalysis and through a combination of linguistic and statistical techniques  , outputs a unique part of speech for each word in context  . Reducing the ambiguity of part of speech tags eliminates ambiguity in local parsing  . 
Furthermore , part of speech ambiguity resolution permits construction of correct derivational links  . 
Third , derivational morphology ( Tzoukermann and Jacquemin ,  1997 ) is achieved to generate morphological variants of the disambiguated words  . De-rivational generation is performed on the lemmas produced by the inflectional analysis and the part of speech information  . Productive stripping and concatenation rules are applied on lemmas  . 
The derived forms are expressed as tokens with feature structures  1  . For instance , the following set of constraints express that the noun modern is a teuris morphologically related to the word modernisation  2   . 
The < ON > metarule removes the-ion suffix , and the < EUR > rule adds the nominal suffix- eur  . 
1 In the remainder of the paper , Nis Noun , A Adjective , C Coordinating conjunction , D Determiner , PP reposition , AvAdverb , Pu Punctuation , NP Noun
Phrase , and APAdjective Phrase.
2Each lemma has a unique numeric identifier < reference >  . 
< cat >=- N < lemma >= -' modernisation ' < reference > =  52663 < derivation cat > -- N < derivation lemma >=' modern is a teur ' < derivation reference > =  52662 < derivation history > --' < ON <> EUR > ' . 
The morphological analysis performed in this study is detailed in  ( Tzoukermann , Klavans , and Jacquemin ,  1997) . It is more complete and linguistically more accurate than simple stemming for the following reasons : ? Allomorphy is accounted for by listing the set of its possible allomorphs for each word  .   A1-lomorphies are obtained through multiple verb stems , e . g . \] abriqu- , \] a bric- ( fabricate ) or additional allomorphic rules . 
? Concatenation of several suffixes is accounted for by rule ordering mechanisms  . Furthermore , we have devised a method for guessing possible suffix combinations from a lexicon and a corpus  . 
This empirical method reported in ( Jacquemin ,  1997 ) ensures that suffixes which are related within specific domains are considered  . 
? Derivational morphology is built with the perspective of overgeneration  . The nature of the semantic links between a word and its derivational forms is not checked and all allomorphical ter-nants are generated  . Selection of the correct links occurs during subsequent term expansion process with collocational filtering  . Althoughd table ( cowshed ) is incorrectly related to dtablir ( to establish )  , it is very improbable to find a context where dtablir cooccurs with one of the three words found in the three multiword terms containing dtable : nettoyeur  ( cleaner )  , alimen-ration ( feeding ) , and liti ~ re ( litter ) : Since we focus on multiword term variants , overgeneration does not present a problem in our system  . 
5 Transformation-Based Term
Expansion
The extraction of terms and their variants from corpora is performed by a unification-based parser  . The controlled terms are transformed into grammar rules whose syntax is similar to PATR-II  . 
5.1 A Corpus-Based Method for
Discovering Syntactic Transformations We present a method for inferring transformations from a corpus in the purpose of developing a gram -To discover the families of term variants  , we first consider a notion of collocation which is less restri-ctive than variation  . Then , we refine this notion in order to filter out genuine variants and to reject spurious ones  . A Type 1 collocation of a binary term is a text window containing its content words wl and  w2  , without consideration of the syntactics tru -cture  . With such a definition , any Type1 variant is a Type1 collocation . Similarly , a notion of Type 2 collocation is defined based on the cooccurence of wl and  w2 including their derivational relatives . 
A d=5-word window is considered as sufficient for detecting collocations in English  ( Martin , A 1 , and Van Sterkenburg ,  1983) . We chose a window-size twice as large because French is a Romance language with longer syntactic structures due to the absence of compounding  , and because we want to be sure to observe structure spanning over large textual sequences  . For example , the term perteau stockage ( storage loss ) is encountered in the \[ AGR\] corpus as: pertes occasionndes parles insectes ausorgho stock d  ( literally : loss of storeds orghum due to the insects  )  . 
A linguistic classification of the collocations which are correct variants brings up the following families of variations a  . 
? Type 1 variations are classified according to their syntactic stucture  . 
1 . Coordination : a coordination the combination of two terms with a common head word or a common argument  . Thus , fruit set a grumes tropicaux ( literally : tropical ci-trus fruits or fruits ) is a coordination variant of the term fruits tropicaux  ( tropical fruits )  . 
2 . Substitution/Modification : a substitution is the replacement of a content word by a term  ; a modification is the insertion of a modifier without reference to another term  . For example , activitd thermodyna-mique del'eau ( thermodynamicativity of water ) is a substitution variant of activitg del'eau ( activity of water ) if activitd the r-modynamique ( thermodynamicativity ) is a term ; otherwise , it is a modification . 
3. Compounding/Decompounding : in
French , most terms have a compound noun structure , i . e . a noun phrase structure where determiners are omitted such as con-sommation d'oxyg~ne  ( oxygen consumption )  . The decompounding variation is the 3 Variations are generic linguistic functions and variants are transformations of terms by these functions  . 
transformation of a term with a compound structure into a noun phrase structure such as consommation del'oxyg~ne  ( consumption of the oxygen )  . Compounding is the reciprocal transformation . 
? Type 2 variations are classified according to the nature of the morphological derivation  . Often semantic shifts are involved as well ( Viegas , 
Gonzalez , and Longwell , 1996).
1 . Noun-Noun variations : relations such as result /agent  ( fixation del ' azote ( ni-trogen fixation ) /fixateurs d'azote ( nitrogen fixater ) ) or container/content ( rdservoird'eau ( watereser voir ) /rd serveene au ( water reserve ) ) are found in this family . 
2 . Noun-Verb variations : these variations often involve semantic shifts such as pro-cess/result fixation del'azote/fixerl'azote  ( to fix nitrogen )  . 
3 . Noun-Adjective variations : the two ways to modify a noun  , a prepositional phrase or an adjectival phrase , are gene-rally semantically equivalent , e . g . variation duclimat ( climate variation ) is a synonym of variation climatique ( climatic variation )  . 
A method for term variant extraction based on morphology and simple cooccurrences would be very imprecise  . A manual observation of collocations shows that only  55% of the Type 1 collocations are correct Type 1 variants and that only 52% of the Type 2 collocations are correct Type 2 variants . It is therefore necessary to conceive a filtering method for rejecting fortuitous cooccurrences  . The following section proposes a filtering system based on syntactic patterns  . 
6 Empirical Rule Tuning 6 . 1 Syntact ic T rans format ions for Type 1 and Type 2 variants The concept of a grammar of syntactic transformations is motivated by wellknown observations on the behavior of collocations in context  ( e . g . ( Harris et al . , 1989) . ) Initial rules based on surface syntax are refined through incremental experimental tuning  . 
We have devised a grammar of French to serve as a basis for the creation of metarules for term variants  . 
For example , the noun phrase expansion rule is 4:
NP-~D : AP*N ( APIPP ) *  ( 1 ) a we use UNIX regular expression symbols for rules and transformations  . 

From this rule a set of expansions can be generated : 
NP = D ?( Av ? A ) * N(A v ? AI (2)
PD ?( Av?A )* N(A v?A )*)*
In order to balance completeness and accuracy , expansions are limited . After the initial expansion is created for a range of structures  , empirical tuning is applied to create a set of maximum coverage metarules  . 
We briefly illustrate this process for coordination  . For this example , we restric transformations to terms with NPN structures which represent a full  33% of the binary terms . Examples of metarules of Type 1 and Type 2 variations are given in Table 1  . 
6.2 Development of a Coordination
Transformation for NPN Terms
The coordination types are first calculated by combi-ning the pattern  N1   P2 Ns with possible expansions of a noun phrase with a simple paradigmatic structure ATN  ( AIPD ? A ? NAT ) s : Coord ( N1P2Ns ) = N1 ( ( C A T N A T P ) I ( 3 )   ( ACP ) I ( PD ? ATNATCP ? ) ) N3 The first parenthesis ( CATNA ? P ) represents a coordinated head noun , the second ( ACP ) and third ( PD ? ATNATCP ? ) represent respectively an adjective phrase and a prepositional phrase coordinated with the prepositional phrase of the original term  . 
Variants were extracted on the \[ ECI \] corpus through this transformation  ; the following observations and changes have been made  . 
First , coordination accepts a substitution which replaces the noun  N3 with a noun phrase D ? ATNs . 
For example , the variant tempdrature thumid it d initiale de Pair  ( temperature and initial humidity of the air ) is a coordination where a determiner precedes the last noun  ( air )  . 
Secondly , the observations of coordination variants also suggest that the coordinating conjunction can be preceded by an optional comma and followed by an optional adverb  , e . g . la production , etsur-tout ladiffusion dessemences ( the production , and particularly the distribution of the seeds )  . 
Thirdly , variants such as del'humid it det de la vitesse del ' air  ( literally : of humidity and of the speed of the air  ) indicate that the conjunction can be followed by an optional preposition and an optional determiner  . 
5 Subscripts represent indexing.
The three preceding changes are made on the expression of  ( 3 ) and the resulting transformation is given in the first line of Table  1   ( changes are underlined )  . 
Our empirical selection of valid metarules i guided by linguistic considerations and corpus observations  . This mode of grammar conception has led us to the following decisions : ? reject linguistic phenomena which could not be accounted for by regular expression such as sential complements of nouns  ; ? reject noisy and inaccurate variation such as long distance dependencies  ( pecifically within a verb phrase )  ; ? focus on productive and safe variations which are felicitously represented in our framework  . 
Accounting for variants which are not considered in our framework would require the conception of a no-vel framework  , probably in cooperation with a deeper analyzer . It is unlikely that our transformatio-nal approach with regular expressions could do much better than the results presented here  . Table 2 shows some variants of AGROVOC terms extracted from the \[ AGR\] corpus  . 
7 Evaluation
The precision and recall of the extraction of term variants are given in Table  4 where precision is the ratio of correct variants among the variants extracted and the recall is the ratio of variants retrieved among the collocates  . Results were obtained through a manual inspection of  1  , 579 Type 1 variants , 823 Type 2 variants ,  3 , 509 Type 1 collocates , and 2 , 1 04 Type 2 collocates extracted from the\[AGR\]corpus and the 
AGROVOC term list.
These results indicate a very high level of accuracy :  89  . 4% of the variants extracted by the system are correct ones  . Errors generally correspond to a semantic discrepancy between a word and its morphologically derived form  . For example , dlev depourunsol ( literally : high for a so il ) is not a correct variant of dlevage horssol ( off-soilbreeding ) becaused levde and dlevage are morphologically related to two different senses of the verb d lever:  , dlev de derives from the meaning to raise whereas dlevage derives from to breed  . Recall is weaker than precision because only 75 . 2% of the possible variants are retrieved . 
Improvement of Indexing through Variant
Extraction
For a better understanding of the importance of term expansion  , we now compare term indexing with
Variation Term and variant
Coord ( N1 P2 N3 ) = NI ( ( ( Pu:CAvT pTD ? ATNATP )   ( ACA vTP ) 
I(pDTATNATCAvTpT )) DTAT)Ns.
teneuren prot gine ( protein content ) - ~ teneure neau et en prot dine ( protein and water content ) N to V ( NxP2 N3 ) - - - - Vl ( AvT ( pTDIP ) AT ) N3: stabilisation deprix ( pricestabilization ) < Vx derivation reference >= < N1 reference > . --~ stabiliser leurs prix ( stabilize their prices ) Table 2: Examples of Variations from \[ AGR\] . 
Term Variant Type
Eehanged ' ion ( ionex change)
Culture deellules ( cell culture )
Propridtd chimique ( chemical property)
Gestiond'eau ( watermanagement )
Eau de surface ( surface water)
Huile depalme ( palmoil )
Initiation debourge on ( bud initiation ) d changeionique ( ionic exchange ) N to A cultures primaires decellules ( primary cell cultures ) Modif . 
propridtds physique set chimiques Coor.
(chemical and physical properties ) gestion del'eau ( management of the water ) Comp . 
eauet del'd vaporation de surface Coor.
(water and of surface vaporation \[ incorrect variant \]  ) palmier dhuile ( palm tree\[yielding oil\] ) N to N initier desbourge on sN to V ( initiate buds ) and without variant expansion . The\[AGR\]corpus has been indexed with the AGROVOC thesaurus in two different ways :  1  . Simple indexing : Extraction of occurrences of multiword terms without considering variation  . 
2 . Rich indexing : Simple indexing improved with the extraction of variants of multiword terms  . 
Both indexings have been manually checked . Simple indexing is almost error-free but does not cover term variants  . On the contrary , rich indexing is slightly less accurate but recall is much higher  . Both methods are compared by calculating the effectiveness measure  ( Van Rijsbergen ,  1975 ) : P and R are precision and recall and a is a parameter which is close to  1 if precision is preferred to recall . The value of E~varies from 0 to 1 ; E  ~ is close to 0 when all the relevant conflations are made and when no incorrect one is made  . 
The effectiveness of rich indexing is more than three times better than effectiveness of simple indexing  . Retrieved variants increase the number Table 3: Evaluation of Simple vs . Rich Indexing . 
Precision Recall Eo.s
Simple indexing 99.7% 72.4% 16.1%
Rich indexing 97 . 2% 93 . 4% 4 . 7% of indexing items by 28 . 8% (17 . 3% Type 1 variants and 11 . 5% Type 2 variants ) . Thus , term variant extraction is a significant expansion factor for identifying morphologically and syntactically related multiword terms in a document without introducing undesirable noise  . 
As for performance , the parser is fast enough for processing large amounts of textual data due to the presence of several optimization devices  . On a Pen-tium 133 with Linux , the parser processes 18 , 100 words/min from an initial list of 4 , 300 terms . 

This paper has proposed a syntaxbased approach via morphologically derived forms for the identification and extraction of multiword term variants  . 

Table 4: Precision and Recall of Term Variant Extraction on\[AGR\] 
Type 1 variants Type 2 variants Total
Subst . Coord . Comp . A to NN to AN to NN to V  N to V  #correct 808   228   404   19   60   273   471   2263  #rejected 87   26   26   7   5   28   90   269   90  . 3% 90 . 0% 94 . 0% 73 . 1% 91 . 6% 93 . 0% 84 . 0% Precision 89 . 4 ~ o 91 . 2% 86 . 4%
Recall 75.0% 75.6% 75.2%
In using a list of controlled terms coupled with a syntactic analyzer  , the method is more precise than traditional text simplification methods  . Iterative x-perimental tuning has resulted in wide-coverage linguistic description i corporating the most frequent linguistic phenomena  . 
Evaluations indicate that , by accounting for term variation using corpus tagging  , morphological derivation , and transformation based rules ,  28 . 8% more can be identified than with a traditional indexer which cannot account for variation  . Applications to be explored in future research involve the incorporation Of the system as part of the indexing module of an IR system  , to be able to accurately measure improvements in system coverage as well as areas of possible degradation  . We also plan to explore analysis of semantic variants through a predicative r presentation of term semantics  . Our result so far indicate that using computational linguistic techniques for carefully controlled term expansion will permit at least a threefold expansion for coverage over traditional indexing  , which should improve retrieval re-suits accordingly  . 
References
AGR , Institut National del ' Information Scientifique et Technique  , V and ceuvre , France ,  1995 . Corpus del ' Agriculture , first edition . 
Aronoff , Mark .  1976 . Word Formation in Gene-rative Grammar . Linguistic Inquiry Monographs . 
MIT Press , Cambridge , MA.
Bourigault , Didier .  1993 . An endogeneous corpus-based method for structural noun phrase disambiguation  . In Proceedings ,   6th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ( EACL'93 )  , pages 81-86 , 

Boyer , Martin . 1993. Dictionnaire du frangais.
Hydro-Quebec , GNU General Public License,
Qudbec , Canada.
Daille , Bdatrice .  1996 . Study and implementation of combined techniques for automatic extraction of terminology  . In Judith L . Klavans and Philip Resnik , editors , The Balancing Act : Combining Symbolic and Statistical Approaches to Language  . 
MIT Press , Cambridge , MA.
Dunham , George S . , Milos G . Pacak , and Arnold W . 
Pratt .  1978 . Automatic indexing of pathology data . Journal of the American Society for Information Science  ,  29(2):81-90 . 
ECI , European Corpus Initiative , 1989 and 1990.
"Le Monde " Newspaper.
Grefenstette , Gregory and Simone Teufel . 1995.
Corpusbased method for automatic dentif cation of support verbs for nominalizations  . In Proceedings ,   7th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ( EACL'95 )  , pages 98-103 , Dublin . 
Harris , Zellig S . , Michael Gottfried , Thomas Ryck-man , Paul Mattick Jr , Anne Daladier , T . N . Harris , and S . Harris .  1989 . The Form of Information in Science , Analysis of Immunology Sublanguage , volume 104 of Boston Studies in the Philosophy of
Science . Kluwer , Boston , MA.
Jacquemin , Christian .  1994 . Recycling terms into a partial parser . In Proceedings , ~th Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  ( ANLP'94 )  , pages 113-118 , Stuttgart . 
Jacquemin , Christian .  1996 . What is the tree that we see through the window : A linguistic approach to windowing and term variation  . Information Processing eJM anagement ,  32(4):445-458 . 
Jacquemin , Christian .  1997 . Guessing morphology from terms and corpora . In Proceedings ,   20th Research and Development in Information Retrieval  ( SIGIR'97 )  , Philadelphia , PA . 
Justeson , John S . and Slava M . Katz .  1995 . Technical terminology : some linguistic properties and an algorithm for identification in text  . Natural
Language Engineering , 1(1):9-27.
Klavans , Judith L . , editor .  1995 . AAAI Symposium on Representation ad Acquisition of Lexical Knowledge : Polysemy  , Ambiguity , and Generati-vity . American Association for Artificial Intelligence , March . 
Klavans , Judith L . and Martin S . Chodorow .  1992 . 
Degrees of stativity : The lexical representation of verb aspect  . In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , pages 1126-1131 , Nantes , France . 
Krovetz , Robert and W . Bruce Croft .  1992 . Lexical ambiguity and information retrieval . ACM Tran-sactions on Information Systems ,  10(2):115-141 . 
Lewis , David D . , W . Bruce Croft , and Nehru Bhan-daru .  1989 . Language-oriented information retrieval . International Journal of Intelligent Systems ,  4:285-318 . 
Martin , W . J . F . , B . P . F . AI , and P . J . G . Van Sterken-burg .  1983 . On the processing of a text corpus : From textual data to lexicographical information  . In R . R . K . Hartman , editor , Lexicography , Principles and Practice . Academic Press , London , pages 77-87 . 
Metzler , Douglas P . and Stephanie W . Haas .  1989 . 
The Constituent Object Parser : Syntactics tru -cture matching for information retrieval  . ACM Transactions on Information Systems ,  7(3):292-316 . 
NLM , National Library of Medicine , Bethesda , MD ,  1995 . Unified Medical Language System , sixth experimental edition . 
Popovifi , Mirko and Peter Willett .  1992 . The effectiveness of stemming for Natural Language access to Slovene textual data  . Journal of the American Society for Information Science  ,  43(5):384-390 . 
Schwarz , Christoph .  1990 . Automatic syntactic analysis of freetext . Journal of the American Society for Information Science  ,  41(6):408-417 . 
Selkirk , Elisabeth O . 1982. The Syntax of Words.
MIT Press , Cambridge , MA.
Sheridan , Paraic and Alan F . Smeaton .  1992 . The application of morphosyntactic language processing to effective phrase matching  . Information Processing_4 Management ,  28(3):349-369 . 
Smadja , Frank and Kathleen R . McKeown . 1991.
Using collocations for language generation . Computational Intelligence , 7(4), December . 
Smeaton , Alan F .  1992 . Progress in the application of natural anguage processing to information retrieval tasks  . The Computer Journal , 35(3):268-278 . 
SparckJones , Karen and Joel I . Tait .  1984 . Automatic search term variant generation . Journal of
Documentation , 40(1):50-66.
Srinivasan , Padmini .  1996 . Optimal document-indexing vocabulary for Medline . Information Processing ~4 Management ,  32(5):503-514 . 
Strzalkowski , Tomek .  1996 . Naturalanguage information retrieval . Information Processing ~ Ma-nagement ,  31(3):397-417 . 
Tzoukermann , Evelyne and Christian Jacquemin.
1997 . Analyse automatique de la morphologie ddrivationnelle et filtrage demots possibles  . Si-lexicales , 1:251-260 . Colloque Mots possible set mots existants , SILEX , University of Lille III . 
Tzoukermann , Evelyne , Judith L . Klavans , and Christian Jacquemin .  1997 . Effective use of natural language processing techniques for automatic conflation of multiword terms : the role of derivational morphology  , part of speech tagging , and shallow parsing . In Proceedings ,   20th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval  ( SI-
GIR'97), Philadelphia , PA.
Tzoukermann , Evelyne and Mark Y . Liberman.
1990 . A finite-state morphological processor for Spanish  . In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  , pages 277-281 , Helsinki , Finland . 
Tzoukermann , Evelyne and Dragomir R . Radev.
1996 . Using word class for part-of-speech disambiguation  . In SIGDAT Workshop , pages 113 , Copenhagen , Denmark . 
Tzoukermann , Evelyne , Dragomir R . Radev , and William A . Gale .  1995 . Combining linguistic knowledge and statistical learning in French part-of-speech tagging  . In EACL SIGDAT Workshop , pages 51-57 , Dublin , Ireland . 
Van Rijsbergen , C . J .  1975 . Information Retrieval . 
Butterworth , London.
Viegas , Evelyne , Margarita Gonzalez , and Jeff Long-well .  1996 . Morpho-semantics and constructive derivational morphology : A transcategorial p-proach  . Technical Report MCCS-96-295 , Computing Research Laboratory , New Mexico State
University , Las Cruces , NM.

