Integrating Symbolic and Statistical Representations : 
The Lexicon Pragmatics Interface
Ann Copestake
Center for the Study of Language and Information,
Stanford University,
Ventura Hall,
Stanford , CA 94305,

aac ~ csl ?, stanford , edu
Alex Lascarides
Centre for Cognitive Science and
Human Communication Research Centre,
University of Edinburgh,
2, Buccleuch Place,
Edinburgh , EH8 9LW,
Scotland , UK
alex@cogsci , ed.ac.uk
Abstract
We describe a formal framework for inter-
pretation of words and compounds in a
discourse context which integrates a symbolic lexicon/grammar  , word sense probabilities , and a pragmatic omponent . The approach is motivated by the need to handle productive word use  . In this paper , we concentrate on compound nominals . 
We discuss the inadequacies of approaches which consider compound interpretation as either wholly lexicogrammatical or wholly pragmatic  , and provide an alternative integrated account . 
1 Introduction
V V henwords have multiple senses , these may have very different frequencies . For example , the first two senses of the noun diet given in WordNet are: 
O1 .   ( a prescribed selection of foods ) => fare- ( the food and drink that are regularly consumed )  2 . => legislature , legislative assembly , general assembly , law-makers \] kost English speakers will share the intuition that the first sense is much more common than the second  , and that this is ( partly ) a property of the word and not its denotation , since near-synonyms occur with much greater frequency  . Frequency differences are also found between senses of derived forms  ( including morphological derivation , zero-derivation and compounding ) . For example , canoe is less frequent as a verb than as a noun . and the induced action use ( e . g . , they canoed the kids across the lake ) is much less frequent hanthe intransitive form ( with location PP )   ( they canoed across the lake )  .   1 A derived form may be comestablished with one meaning  , but this does not preclude other uses in sufficiently marked contexts  ( e . g . , Bauer's ( 1983 ) example of garbage man with an interpretation analogous to snow man  )  . 
Because of the difficulty of resolving lexical ambiguity  , it is usual in NLP applications to exclude ' rare ' senses from the lexicon  , and to explicitly list frequent forms , rather than to derive them . But this increases errors due to unexpected vocabulary  , especially for highly productive derivational processes  . 
For this and other reasons it is preferable to assume some generative devices in the lexicon  ( Pustejovsky ,  1995) . Briscoe and Copestake ( 1996 ) argue that a differential estimation of the productivity of derivation processes allows an approximation of the probabilities of previously unseen derived uses  . If more probable senses are preferred by the system  , the proliferation of senses that results from unconstrained use of lexical rules or other generative devices is effectively controlled  . An interacting issue is the granularity of meaning of derived forms  . If the lexicon produces a small number of very underspeci-fled senses for a word form  , the ambiguity problem is apparently reduced , but pragmatics may have insufficient information with which to resolve meanings  , or may find impossible interpretations . 
We argue here that by utilising probabilities , a language-specific component can offer hints to a pragmatic module in order to prioritise and control the application of realworld reasoning to disambiguation  . The objective is an architecture utilising a general-purposelxicon with domain-dependent probabilities  . The particular issues we consider here are the integration of the statistical and symbolic components  , and the division of labour between se-1Here and below webase our frequency judgements on semiautomatic analysis of the written portion of the tagged British National Corpus  ( BNC )  . 

Arzt term in * doctor appointment doctor's appointment 
Termin vorschlag * date proposal
Terminvereinbarung * date agreement proposal for a date agreement on a date 

Fr / ihling sanfang * January half * spring beginning half of January beginning of spring Figure  1: Some German compounds with non-compound translation smantics and pragmatics in determining meaning  . 
We concentrate on ( right-headed ) compound nouns , since these raise especially difficult problems for NLP system architecture  ( SparckJones ,  1983) . 
2 The grammar of compound nouns
Within linguistics , attempts to classify nominal compounds using a small fixed set of meaning relations  ( e . g . , Levi (1978)) are usually thought o have failed , because there appear to be exceptions to any classification  . Compounds are attested with meanings which can only be determined contextually  . Downing (1977) discusses apple juice seat , uttered in a context in which it identifies a place-setting with a glass of apple juice  . Even for compounds with established meanings , context can force an alternative interpretation ( Bauer ,  1983) . 
These problems led to analyses in which the relationship between the parts of a compound is undetermined by the grammar  , e . g . , Dowty (1979), Bauer (1983) . Schematically this is equivalent to the following rule  , where R is undetermined ( to simplify exposition , we ignore the quantifier for y):
NO---4N1N2(1)) ~ x\[P ( x)AQ(y)AR(x , y ) \]  ) ~ y\[Q ( y ) \]~x\[P ( x ) \] Similar approaches have been adopted in NLP with further processing using domain restrictions to resolve the interpretation  ( e . g . , Hobbs et al (1993)) . 
However , this is also unsatisfactory , because ( 1 ) overgenerates and ignores systematic properties of various classes of compounds  . Overgeneration is apparent when we consider translation of German compounds  , since many do not correspond straightforwardly to English compounds  ( e . g . , Figure 1) . 
Since these exceptions are English-specific they cannot be explained via pragmatics  . Furthermore they are not simply due to lexical idiosyncrasies : for instance  , A rzt term in /* doctor appointment is representative of many compounds with human-denoting first elements  , which require a possessive in English . 
So we get blacks mith's hammer and not * blacks mith hammer to mean'hammer of a type conventionally associated with a blacks mith '  ( also driver's cab , widow's allow ancetc ) . This is not the usual possessive : compare ( ( ( his blacks mith ) ' s ) hammer ) with ( his ( blacks mith's hammer ) ) . Adjective placement is also restricted : three English blacks mith's hammers /* three blacks mith 's English hammers  . We treat these as a subtype of noun-noun compound with the possessive analysed as a case marker  . 
In another subcategory of compounds , the head provides the predicate ( e . g . , dog catcher , bottle crusher) . Again , there are restrictions : it is not usually possible to form a compound with an agen-tire predicate taking an argument that normally requires a preposition  ( contrast water seeker with * water looker )  . Stress assignment also demonstrates in-adequacies in  ( 1 ) : compounds which have the interpretation ' Y made of X '  ( e . g . , nylon rope , oak table ) generally have main stress on the righthand noun , in contrast omost other compounds ( Liberman and Sproat ,  1992) . Stress sometimes disambiguates meaning : e . g . , with righthand stress cotton bag has the interpretation bag made of cott on while with leftmost stress an alternative reading  , bag for cott on , is available . Furthermore , ordering of elements is restricted : e . g . , cotton garment bag /* gar-ment cotton bag . 
The rule in ( 1 ) is therefore theoretically inadequate , because it predicts that all noun-noun compounds are acceptable  . Furthermore , it gives no hint of likely interpretations , leaving an immense burden to pragmatics . 
We therefore take a position which is intermediate between the two extremes outlined above  . We assume that the grammar/lexicon delimits the range of compounds and indicates conventional interpretations  , but that some compounds may only be resolved by pragmatics and that non-conventional contextual interpretations are always available  . We define a number of schemata which encode conventional meanings  . These cover the majority of compounds , but for the remainder the interpretation is left unspecified  , to be resolved by pragmatics . 
1 37 general-nn\[possessive /1 \\] made-of\]purpose-patient deverbal /
In ? n-derived-ppII deverbal-pp\]linenchest ice cream container Figure  2: Fragment of hierarchy of noun-noun compound schemata  . The boxed nodes indicate actual schemata : other nodes are included for convenience in expressing eneralisations  . 
general-nnNO->N1N2
Ax\[P ( x)AQ(y)AR(x , y)\]Ay\[Q(y)\]Ax\[P ( x)\]
R =/ general-nn anything anything/stressed made - of R = made-of substance physobj/stressed purpose-patient R = TELIC  ( N2 ) anything artifact Figure 3: Details of some schemata for noun-noun compounds . /indicates that the value to its right is default information  . 
Space limitations preclude detaile discussion but Figures  2 and 3 show a partial default inheritance hierarchy of schemata  ( cf . , Jones (1995)) .   2 Multiple schemata may apply to a single compound : for example  , cott on bag is an instantiation of the made-of schema  , the non-derived-purpose-patient schema and also the general-nn schema  . 
Each applicable schema corresponds to a different sense : so cott on bagis ambiguous rather than vague  . 
The interpretation of the hierarchy is that the use of a more general schema implies that the meanings given by specific subschemata are excluded  , and thus we have the following interpretations for cott on bag :  1  . Ax\[cotton(y)Abag(x)A made-of(y,x)\]2 . Ax\[cotton(y)Abag(x)ATELIC(bag)(y , x )\] = Ax\[cotton(y)Abag(x)A contain(y , x ) \]  2We formalise this with typed default feature structures  ( Lascarides et al 1996 )  . Schemata can be regarded formally as lexical /grammar rules  ( lexical rules and grammar rules being very similar in our framework  ) but inefficiency due to multiple interpretations is avoided in the implementation by using a form of packing  . 
3 . Ax\[R(y , x ) A-~(made-of(y , x ) V contain ( y , x)V . . . )\] The predicate made-of is to be interpreted as material constituency  ( e . g . Link (1983)) . We follow Johnston and Busa ( 1996 ) in using Pustejovsky's ( 1995 ) concept of telic role to encode the purpose of an artifact  . These schemata give minimal indications of compound semantics : it may be desirable to provide more information  ( Johnston et al 1995 )  , but we will not discuss that here . 
Established compounds may have idiosyncratic n -terp retations or inherit from one or more schemata  ( though compounds with multiple established senses due to ambiguity in the relationship between constituents rather than lexical ambiguity are fairly unusual  )  . But established compounds may also have unestablished interpretations  , although , as discussed in ?3 , these will have minimal probabilities . In contrast , an unusual compound , such as apple-juices cat , may only be compatible with general-nn , and would be assigned the most underspecified interpretation  . As we will see in ?4 , this means pragmatics I~eq ( cmp-form ) + number-of-applicable-schemata ( cmp-form ) Prod ( csl ) Estimated-freq ( interpretation i with cmp-form j ) = Unseen-prob-mass ( cmp-form j ) x ~ Prod ( csl )   . . . . . Prod(cs . , ) ( where csl .   .   . cs , are the compound schemata needed to derive then unattested entries for the form j  ) Figure 4: Probabilities for unseen compounds : adapted from Briscoe and Copestake  ( 1996 ) must find a contextual interpretation . Thus , for any compound there may be some context in which it can be interpreted  , but in the absence of a marked context , only compounds which instantiate one of the subschemata are acceptable  . 
3 Encoding Lexical Preferences
In order to help pragmatics select between the multi-piepossible interpretations  , we utilise probabilities . 
For an established form , derived or not , these depend straightforwardly on the frequency of a particular sense  . For example , in the BNC , diet has probability of about 0 . 9 of occurring in the food sense and 0 . 005 in the legislature sense ( the remainder are metaphorical extensions , e . g . . diet of crime) . 
Smoothing is necessary to avoid giving a nonzero probability for possible senses which are not found in a particular corpus  . For derived forms , the applicable lexical rules or schemata determine possible senses  ( Briscoe and Copestake ,  1996) . Thus for known compounds , probabilities of established senses depend on corpus frequencies but a residual probability is distributed between unseen interpretations licensed by schemata  , to allow for novel uses . 
This distribution is weighted to allow for productiv-it3" differences between schemata . For unseen compounds , all probabilities depend on schema productivity . Compound schemata range from the nonproductive ( e . g . , the verb-noun pattern exemplified by pickpocket )  , to the almost fully productive ( e . g . ; made-of ) with many schemata being intermediate ( e . g . , has-part : ~- door car is acceptable but the apparently similar * sunro of car is not  )  . 
We use the following estimate for productivity ( adapted from Briscoe and Copestake ( 1996 ) ):

Prod ( cmp-schema ) -N ( where N is the number of pairs of senses which match the schema input and M is the number of attested two-noun output forms -- we ignore compounds with more than two nouns for simplicity  )  . Formulae for calculating the unseen probability mass and for allocating it differentially according to schema productivity are shown in Figure  4  . Finer-grained , more accurate productivity estimates can be obtained by considering subsets of the possible inputs -- this allows for some realworld effects  ( e . g . , the made-of schema is unlikely for liquid /physical-artifact compounds  )  . 
Lexical probabilitie should be combined to give an overall probability for a logical form  ( LF ) : see e . g . , Resnik (1992) . But we will ignore this here and assume pragmatics has to distinguish between alternatives which differ only in the sense assigned to one compound  .   ( 2 ) shows possible interpretations for cott on bag with associated probabilities  . LFS are encoded in DRT . The probabilities given here are based on productivity figures for fabric/container compounds in the BNC  , using WordNet as a source of semanticategories . Pragmatic screens the LFS for acceptability . If a LF contains an underspecified element ( e . g . , arising from general-nn ) , this must be instantiated by pragmatics from the discourse context  . 
(2) a .

Mary put askirt in a cott on bage , x , y ~ Z ~ W , t , nowmary(x ) , skirt(y ) , cotton(w ) , bag(z ) , put ( e , x , y , z ) , hold(e , t ) , t-~now , made-of(z , w )
P = 0.84c.
e , x , y , z , w , t , nowmary(x ) , skirt(y ) , cotton(w ) , bag(z ) , put ( e , x , y , z ) , hold(e , t ) , t-<now , contain ( z , w ) e , X ; y ~ Z , W ~ t , now
P = 0.14 d.
mary(x ) , skirt(y ) , cotton(w ) , bag(z ) , put ( e , x , y , z ) , hold(e , t ) , t-<now , 
Rc(z , w ) , R c = ? , - ~( made-of(z , w)V contain(z , w)V .   .   . )
P = 0.02
Underspecified Relations
The frequency information discussed in ?3 is insufficient on its own for disambiguating compounds  . 
Compounds like apple juice seat require marked contexts to be interpretable  . And some discourse contexts favour interpretations asociated with less frequent senses  . In particular , if the context makes the usual meaning of a compound in coherent  , hen pragmatics should resolve the compound to a less frequent but convention all yicensed meaning  , so long as this improves coherence . This underlies the distinct interpretations of cott on bag in  ( 3 ) vs . (4): (3) a . Mary sorted her clothes into various large bags . 
b . She put her skirt in the cott on bag.
(4) a . Mary sorted her clothes into various bags made from plastic  . 
b . She put her skirt into the cott on bag.
If the bag in ( 4b ) were interpreted as being made of cotton -- in line with the  ( statistically ) most frequent sense of the compound--then the discourse becomes incoherent because the definite description cannot be accommodated into the discourse context  . Instead , it must be interpreted as having the ( less frequent ) sense given by purpose-patient ; this allows the definite description to be accommodated and the discourse is coherent  . 
In this section , we ' ll give a brief overview of the theory of discourse and pragmatics that we'lluse for modelling this interaction during disambiguation between discourse information and lexical frequencies  . We'lluse Segmented Discourse Representation Theory  ( SDRT )   ( e . g . , Asher ( 1993 ) ) and the accompanying pragmatic omponent Discourse in Commonsense Entaihnent  ( DICE )   ( Lascarides and Asher .  1993) . This framework has already been successful in accounting for other phenomena on the interface between the lexicon and pragmatics  , e . g . . Asher and Lascarides (1995) . 
Lascarides and Copestake (1995).
Lascarides , Copestake and Briscoe (1996).
SDRT is an extension of DRT ( Kamp and Reyle ,  1993) . where discourse is represented as a recursive set of DRSS representing the clauses  , linked together with rhetorical relations such as Elaboration and Contrast  . cf . Hobbs (1985) . Polanyi (1985) . Building an SDRS invoh'es computing a rhetorical relation between the representation f the current clause and the SDRS built so far  . DICE specifies how various background knowledge resources interacto provide clues about which rhetorical relation holds  . 
The rules in DICE include default conditions of the form P>Q  , which means If P , then normally Q . For example , Elaboration states : if 2 is to be attached to a with a rhetorical relation  , where a is part of the discourse structurer already  ( i . e . , ( r , a , 2) holds) . 
and 3 is a subtype of a -- which by Subtype means that o 's event is a subtype of  8's   , and the individual filling some role Oi in 3 is a subtype of the one filling the same role in a -- then normally  , a and 2 are attached together with Elaboration ( Asher and Lascarides ,  1995) . The Coherence Constraint on Elaboration states that an elaborating event must be temporally included in the elaborated event  . 
? Subtype : (8~( ea , ~l ) A8z(e3 , ~2) Ae-condn3Z_e-condn~A7"2E_~ , 1)
Subtype(3 . a ) ? Elaboration : (( r , a , 2) A Subtype (3 , a )) > Elaboration(o , ~) ? Coherence Constraint on Elaboration :
Elaboration(a , 3) --+ e3 Cea
Subtype and Elaboration encapsulate clues about rhetorical structure given by knowledge of subtype relations among events and objects  . Coherence Constraint on Elaboration constrains the semantic content of constituents connected by Elaboration in coherent discourse  . 
A distinctive feature of SDRT is that if the DICE axioms yield a nonmonotonic conclusion that the discourse relation is R  , and information that's necessary for the coherence of R is n't already in the constituents connected with R  ( e . g . , Elaboration(a , 8) is nonmonotonically inferred , but e3 C_eo is not in a or in 3) . then this content can be added to the constituents in a constrained manner through a process known as SDRS Update  . Informally . Update(r , a . 3) is an SDRS , which includes ( a ) the discourse context r , plus ( b ) the new information '3 . and ( c ) an attachment of S to a ( which is part of r ) with a rhetorical relation R that's computed via DICE  , where ( d ) the content of v . a and 3 are modified so that the coherence constraints on Rarem et  .   3 Note that this is more complex than DRT : snotion of update  . Update models how interpreters are allowed and expected to fill in certain gaps in what the speaker says : in essence affecting semantic anter through context and pragmatics  , lVe'll use this information 3If R's coherence constraints can't be inferred , then the logic underlying DICE guarantees that R won't be nonmonotonically inferred  . 
1 40 flow between context and semantic content to reason about the semantic ontent of compounds in discourse : simply put  , we will ensure that words are assigned the most freqent possible sense that produces a well defined SDRS Update function  . 
An SDnSS is well-defined ( written 4S ) if there are no conditions of the form x = ? ( i . e . , there are no um'esoh'ed anaphoric elements ) , and every constituent is attached with a rhetorical relation  . A discourse is incoherent if " ~3 , Update(T , a , /3 ) holds for every available attachment point a in ~-  . That is . anaphor a can't be resolved , or no rhetorical connection can be computed via DICE  . 
For example , the represent mions of ( Sa . b )   ( insire-plified form ) are respectively a and t3: ( 5 ) a . Mary put her clothes into various large bags . 
x .  ~ " . Z , e , ~ . to . uo . mary(x ), clothes(Y ), bag(Z ) . 
put(eo , x , ~' . Z ) . hold(e , , , ta " < nb . She put herskirt into the bag made out of cott on . 
x . y . z , w , e3 . t2 . n . u . Bmary(x ), skirt(y ) ~ bag(z ), cotton(w ), 3 . made-of(z , w ), u = ?, B(u , z) . B = ? , put(e  ~ , x , y , z ) , hold(e2 , to ) , t~-<n In words , the conditions in '3 require the object denoted by the definite description to be linked by some ' bridging ' relation B  ( possibly identity , cf . van der S and t ( 1992 ) ) to an object v identified in the discourse context  ( Asher and Lascarides . 
1996) . In SDRT . the values of u and B are computed as a byproduct of  SDRT'5 Update function ( cf . 
Hobbs (1979)) ; one specifies v and B by inferring the relevant new semantic ontent arising from R~s coherence constraints  , where R is the rhetorical relation inferred via the DICE axioms  . If one cannot re-soh'e the conditions u = ? or B = ? through SDnSup-da ~ e  . then by the above definition of well-definedness on SDRSS the discourse is incoherent  ( and we have presupposition failure )  . 
The detailed analysis of ( 3 ) and ( 52 ) involve reasoning about the values of v and B . But for reasons of space , we gloss over the details given in Asher and Lascarides  ( 1996 ) for specifying u and B through the SDRT update procedure  . However . the axiom Assume Coherence below is derivable from the axioms given there  . First some notation : let 3\[C \ ] meant hat ~ contains condition C . a ~ d assume that 3\[C/C '\] stands for the SDRS which is the same as 3  . save that the condition C in 3 is replaced by C ' . 
Then in words , Assume Coherence stipulates that if the discourse can be coherent only if the anaphor u is resolved to x and B is resolved to the specific relation P  , the none monotonically assumes that they are resoh  , ed this way : ? Assume Coherence : ( J ~ Update(z , a , B\[u- . ,-7B = ?/ u = x . B , = P \]) A(C'#( , ~ = z^B = P ) - ~$ Update (7" , a , ~\[ u = ? . B = ?/ C'\])))-~(Update(z , a , ~) Update(v , a , 3\[u = ? , B = ?/ u = x , B = P \])) Intuitively , it should be clear that in ( Sa . b ) - , $ Update(a , a , 3) holds , unless the bag in ( 5b ) is one of the bags mentioned in ( 5a ) -- i . e , u = Z and B = member-of For otherwise the events in  ( 5 ) are too " disconnected " to supportant " rhetorical relation  . On the other hand . assigning u and B these values allows us to use Subtype and Elaboration to infer Elaboration  ( becauses kirt is a kind of clothing , and the bagin ( Sb ) is one of the bags in (5a )) . 
So Assume Coherence , Subtype and Elaboration yield that ( Sb ) elaborates ( Sa ) and the bag in ( 5b ) is one of the bags in ( 5a )  . 
Applying SDRTtO compounds encodes the effects of pragmatics on the compounding relation  . 
For example , to reflect the fact that compounds such as apple juice seat  , which are compatible only with general-nn , are acceptable only when context resoh'es the compound relation  , we assume that the DRS conditions produced by this schema are : Rc  ( y , x ) , Rc- . ,-7 and -, ( made-o/(y . x)V contain(y,x)V .   .   .  )  . By the above definition of well-definedness on SDRSS  , the compound is coherent only if we can resoh , eRc to a particula relation via the SDRT Update function  , which in turn is determined by DICE . Rules such as Assume Coherence serve to specify the necessary compound relation  , so long as context provides enough information . 
5 Integrating Lexical Preferences and Pragmat ics \ Ve now extend SDRT and DICE to handle the probabilistic information given in  ?3  . We want the pragmatic component outilise this knowledge  , while still maintaining sufficient flexibility that less frequent senses are favoured in certain discourse contexts  . 
Suppose that the new information to be integrated with the discourse context is ambiguous between  ~1   .   .   .   . , Bn . Then we assume that exactly one of Update(z . a , ~, ) . \]< i<_n . 
holds . We gloss this complex disjunctive formula as the probability of DRS f~k is greater than that off ~j  . 
Then the rule schema below ensures that the most frequent possible sense that produces discourse coherence is  ( monotonically ) favoured : ? Prefer Frequent Senses : ( /Vl < i < n ( Update ( T , c  ~ , / ~ i )) A $ Update(T , oz , / ~ j)A(/~k ~ " j3j--~-~$Update(T , a , ~k ))) -+
Update(T , a , / ~ j)
Prefer Frequent Senses is a declarative rule for disambiguating constituents in a discourse context  . 
But from a procedural perspective it captures : try to attach the DRS based on the most probable senses first  ; if it works you're done ; if not , try the next most probable sense , and so on . 
Let's examine the interpretation of compounds.
Consider (3) . Let's consider the representation ~' of ( 3b ) with the highest probability : i . e . , the one where cotton bag means bag made of cotton  . Then similarly to (5) , Assume Coherence , Subtype and Elaboration are used to infer that the cott on bag is one of the bags mentioned in  ( 3a ) and Elaboration holds . Since this updated SDRS is well-defined , Prefer Frequent Senses ensures that it's true . And so cott on bag means bag made from cotton in this context  . 
Contrast this with (4) . Update(a , a ,  /~' ) is not well-defined because the cott on bag cannot be one of the bags in  ( 4a )  . On the other hand , Update(a ,  (~ , ~") is well-defined , where t3" is the DRS where cott on bag means bag containing cotton  . This is because one can now assume this bagis one of the bags mentioned in  ( 4a )  , and therefore Elaboration can be inferred as before  . So Prefer Frequent Senses ensures that Update(a , a , ~") holds but
Update(a , o ~, j3') does not.
Prefer Frequent Senses is designed for reasoning about word senses in general  , and not just the semantic ontent of compounds : it predicts dieth as its food sense in  ( 6b ) in isolation of the discourse context ( assuming Update ( O ,  0 ,  ~) = ~) , but it has the law-maker sense in (6) , because SDRT's coherence constraints on Contrast ( ( Asher ,  1993 ) )--which is the relation required for Update because of the cue word but--can't be met when diet means food  . 
(6) a . In theory , there should be cooperation between the different branches of government  . 
b . But the president hates the diet.
In general , pragmatic reasoning is computationally expensive , even in very restricte domains . But the account of disambiguation we've offered circum-scribes pragmatic reasoning as much as possible  . 
All nonmonotonic reasoning remains packed into the definition of Update  ( T , a , f ~) , where one needs pragmatic reasoning anyway for inferring rhetorical relations  . Prefer Frequent Senses is a monotonic rule , it doesn't increase the load on nonmonotonic reasoning  , and it doesn't introduc extra pragmatic machinery peculiar to the task of disambiguating word senses  . Indeed , this rule offers a way of checking whether fully specified relations between compounds are acceptable  , rather than relying on ( expensive ) pragmatics to compute them . 
We have mixed stochastic and symbolic reasoning.
Hobbs et al ( 1993 ) also mix numbers and rules by means of weighted abduction  . However , the theories differ in several important respects  . First , our pragmatic component has no access to word forms and syntax  ( and so it's not language specific )  , whereas Hobbs et als rules for pragmatic interpretation can access these knowledge sources  . Second , our probabilities encode the frequency of word senses associated with word forms  . In contrast , the weights that guide abduction correspond to a wider variety of information  , and do not necessarily correspond to word sense /form frequencies  . Indeed , it is unclear what meaning is conveyed by the weights  , and consequently the means by which they can be computed are not well understood  . 
6 Conclusion
We have demonstrated that compound noun interpretation requires the integration of the lexicon  , probabilistic information and pragmatics . A similar case can be made for the interpretation of morphologically-derived forms and words in extended usages  . We believe that the proposed architecture is theoretically well-motivated  , but also practical , since largescale semiautomatic a quisition of the required frequencies from corpora is feasible  , though admittedly time-consuming . However further work is required before we can demonstrate his  , in particular to validate or revise the formulae in  ?3 and to further develop the compound schemata . 
7 Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Ted Briscoe and three anonymous reviewers for comments on previous drafts  . This material is in part based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grant number  IRI-9612682 and ESRC ( UK ) grant number R000236052 . 


Asher , N .   ( 1993 ) Reference to Abstract Objects in Discourse , Kluwer Academic Publishers . 
Asher , N . and A . Lascarides ( 1995 ) ' Lexical Disambiguation in a Discourse Context ' , Journal of Semantics , voi . 12 . 1, 69-108 . 
Asher , N . and A . Lascarides (1996) Bridging , Proceedings of the International Workshop on Semantic Underspecification  , Berlin , October 1996 , available from the MaxPlank Institute . 
Bauer , L . (1983) English word-formation , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England . 
Briscoe , E . J . and A . Copestake ( 1996 ) ' Controlling the application of lexical rules ' , Proceedings of the ACL SIGLEX Workshop on Breadth and Depth of 
Semantic Lexicons , Santa Cruz , CA.
Downing , P .   ( 1977 ) ' On the Creation and Use of English Compound Nouns '  , Language , vol . 53(~), 810-842 . 
Dowty , D . (1979) Word meaning in Montague Grammar , Reidel , Dordrecht . 
Hobbs , J . (1979) ' Coherence and Coreference ' , Cognitive Science , vol . 3, 67-90 . 
Hobbs , J .   ( 1985 ) On the Coherence and Structure of Discourse , Report No . CSLI-85-37, Center for the
Study of Language and Information.
Hobbs , J . R . , M . Stickel , D . Appelt and P . Martin (1993) ' Interpretation as Abduction ' , Artificial Intelligence , vol .  63 . 1, 69-142 . 
Johnston , M . , B . Boguraev and J . Pustejovsky ( 1995 ) ' The acquisition and interpretation of com-plex nominals '  , Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on representation and acquisition of lexical knowledge  , Stanford , CA . 
Johnston , M . and F . Busa ( 1996 ) ' Qualia structure and the compositional interpretation of com-pounds '  , Proceedings of the ACL SIGLEX workshop on breadth and depth of semantic lexicons  , 
Santa Cruz , CA.
Jones , B . (1995) ' Predicting nominal compounds ' , Proceedings o . f the 17th Annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society  , Pittsburgh , PA . 
Kamp , H . and U . Reyle ( 1993 ) From Discourse to Logic : an introduction to model theoretic semantics  , formal logic and Discourse Representation Theory , Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht , 

Lascarides , A . and N . Asher (1993) ' Temporal Interpretation , Discourse Relations and Common sense Entailment ' , Linguistics and Philosophy , vol .  16 . 5, 437-493 . 
Lascarides , A . , E . J . Briscoe , N . Asher and A . Copestake ( 1996 ) ' Persistent and Order Independent Typed Default Unification '  , Linguistics and Philosophy , voi . 19:1, 1-89 . 
Lascarides , A . and A . Copestake ( in press ) ' Pragmatics and Word Meaning ' , Journal of Linguistics , Lascarides , A . , A . Copestake and E . J . Briscoe (1996) ' Ambiguity and Coherence ' , Journal of Semantics , vol . 13 . 1, 41-65 . 
Levi , J .   ( 1978 ) The syntax and semantics of complex nominals , Academic Press , New York . 
Liberman , M . and R . Sproat ( 1992 ) ' The stress and structure of modified noun phrases in English ' in I  . A . Sag and A . Szabolsci ( eds . ), Lexical matters,
CSLI Publications , pp . 131-182.
Link , G .   ( 1983 ) ' The logical analysis of plurals and mass terms : a lattice-theoretical approach ' in Bguerle  , Schwarze and von Stechow ( eds . ) , Meaning , use and interpretation of language , de
Gruyter , Berlin , pp . 302-323.
Polanyi , L .   ( 1985 ) ' A Theory of Discourse Structure and Discourse Coherence '  , Proceedings of the Papers from the General Session at the Twenty-First Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society  , Chicago , pp .  2527 . 
Pustejovsky , J . (1995) The Generative Lexicon , MIT
Press , Cambridge , MA.
Resnik , P .   ( 1992 ) ' Probabilistic Lexicalised Tree Adjoining Grammar '  , Proceedings of the Coling 92 , 
Nantes , France.
van der Sandt , R .   ( 1992 ) ' Presupposition Projection as Anaphora Resolution '  , Journal of Semantics , voi . 19 . 4, SparckJones , K .   ( 1983 ) ' So what about parsing compound nouns ?' in K . SparckJones and Y . Wilks ( eds . ) , Automatic natural language parsing , Ellis Horwood , Chichester , England , pp .  164-168 . 
Webber , B .   ( 1991 ) ' Structure and Ostension in the Interpretation of Discourse Deixis '  , Language and Cognitive Processes , vol .  6 . 2, 107-135 . 

