Improving Translation through Contextual Information 
Maite Taboada"
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh , PA 15213
taboada + ? cmu , edu
Abstract
This paper proposes a two-layered model of dialogue structure for task-orientedi-alogues that processes contextual information and disambiguates speech acts  . The final goal is to improve translation quality in a speech-to-speech translation system  . 
1 Ambigu i ty in Speech Trans la t ion For any given utterance out of what we can loosely call context  , there is usually more than one possible interpretation  . A speaker's utterance of an elliptical expression  , like the figure "' twelve fifteen " , might have a different meaning depending on the context of situation  , the way the conversation has evolved until that point  , and the previous peaker's utterance . 
" Twelvefifteen " could be the time " a quarter after twelve "  , the price " one thousand two hundred and fifteen  "  , the room number "' one two one five " , and so on . Although English can conflate all those possible meanings into one expression  , the translation into other languages usually requires more specificity  . 
If this is a problem for any human listener , the problem grows considerably when it is a parser doing the disambiguation  . In this paper , I explain how we can use discourse knowledge in order to help a parser disambiguate among different possible parses for an input sentence  , with the final goal of improving the translation in an end-to-end speech translation system  . 
The work described was conducted within the JANUS multilingual speech-to-speech translation system designed to translate spontaneous dialogue in a limited domain  ( Lavie et al .  1996) . The machine translation component of JANUS handles these problems using two different approaches : the Generalized Left-to-Right parser GLR *  ( Lavie and Tomita , 1993) and Phoenix . the latter being the focus of this paper . 
* The author gratefully acknowledges support from " In Caixa " Fellowship Program  . ATR Interpreting Laboratories , and Project Enthusias ~ . 
2 Disambiguation through
Contextual Information
This project addresses the problem of choosing the most appropriate semantic parse for any given input  . The approach is to combine discourse information with the set of possible parses provided by the Phoenix parser for an input string  . The discourse module selects one of these possibilities  . The decision is to be based on : 1 . The domain of the dialogue . JANUS deals with dialogues restricted to a domain  , such as scheduling an appointment or making travel arrangements  . The general topic provides some information about what types of exchanges  , and therefore speech acts , can be expected . 
2 . The macro structure of the dialogue up to that point  . We can divide a dialogue into smaller , self-contained units that provide information on what phases are over or yet to be covered : Are we past the greeting phase ? If a flight was reserved  , should we expect a payment phase at some point in the rest of the conversation '?  3  . The structure of adjacency pairs ( Schegloff and Sacks ,  1973) , together with the responses to speech functions ( Halliday , 1994: Martin .  1992) . 
If one speaker has uttered a request for information  , we expect some sort of response to that--an answer  , a disclaimer or a clarification . 
The domain of the dialogues , named travel plan-n in 9 domain , consists of dialogues where a customer makes travel arrangements with a travel agent or a hotel clerk to book hotel rooms  , flights or other forms of transportation . They are task-oriented i-alogues , in which the speakers have specific goals of carrying out a task that involves the exchange of both intbrmation and services  . 
Discourse processing is structured in two different levels : the context module keeps a global history of the conversation  , from which it will be able to estimate , for instance , the likelihood of a greeting once the opening phase of the conversation is over  . A more local history predicts the expected response inquence  . The model adopted here is that of a two-layered finite state machine  ( henceforth FSM )  . and the approach is that of late-stage di . sarnbzguatlon . 
whereas muci ~ information as possible is collected before proceeding onto disambiguation  , rather than restricting the parser'search earlier on  . 
3 Representation of Speech Acts in
Phoenix
Writing tile appropriate grammars and deciding on the set of speech acts for this domain is also an important part of this project  . The selected speech acts are encoded in the grammar--in the Phoeni ? case  . a semantic grammar--the tokens of whici ~ are concepts thac the segment in question represents  . 
Any utterance is divided into SDUs--Semantic Dialogue Units--which are fed to the parser one at a time  . SDUs represent a full concept , expression , or thought , but not necessarily a complete grammati-cal sentence  . Let us take an example input , and a possible parse for it : ( 1 ) Could you tell me the prices at the Holiday Inn ?   , \[ request\](COULDYOU ; \[ reques ?- mfo(TELLME , '\[ price-into\] ( THEPRICES ( \[ establishment \] ( ATTHE , \[ estabhshmenc-name\] ( HOLIDAYINN ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) The toplevel concepts of the grammar are speech acts themselves  , the ones immediately after are further refinements of the speech act  , and the lower level concepts capture the specifics of the utterance  . 
such as the name of the hotel in the above example . 
4 The Discourse Processor
The discourse module processes the global and local structure of the dialogue in two different layers  . The first one is a general organization of tile dialogue ' subparts : the layer under that pro-  , : esses the possible sequence of speech acts in a subpart  . The assumption is that negotiation dialogues develop ma predictable way -- this assumption was also made for scheduling dialogues in tile Verbmobil project  ( Maier , I096) -- . with three , ' learphases : mlttalizatwn , negotiation , and dos-rag . \ Ve will call the middle phase in our dialogues the task performance phase  , since it is not always a negotiation per se . Within the task performance phase very many subdialogues can take place  , such as intbrmation-seeking , decision making , payment . 
clarification , etc.
Discotrse processing has frequently made use of ~ equeuces of speech acts as they occur in the dialogue  , through bigram probabilities of occurrences . 
or through modelling in a finite state machine.
(31 aier .  1 . 996: Reithinger et a\[ . , t9 . 96: Iida and Ya-maoka . 1990: Qu et al .  1996) . However . taking into account only the speech act of the previou segment 
Phoenix P~l'~er?J~c7.~?3.

Discourse ~ odule
Glooal St ~ cture
Local structure i ~ /- I i ? v
NrLalCl~e:i1~'~Tree2
Figure 1: The Discourse Module might leave us with insufficient information to decide--as is the case in some elliptical utterances which do not follow a strict adjacency pair sequence :  ( 2 )   ( talking about flight times . . . S1\[can . give you the arrival time . Do you have that information already '?
S2No.\[don't.
$1 It's twelve fifteen.
If we are in parsing tile segment "' It's twelve fifteen "  , and our only source of information is the previous segment  . "' No . \[ don't ' , we cannot possibly findtile referent for "' twelve fifteen "  , unless we know we are in a subdialogue discussing flight times  , and arrival times have been previously mentioned . 
Our approach aims at obtaining information both from the subdialogue structure and the speech act sequence by modelling the global structure of tile dialogue with a FSM  . with opening and closing as initial and final states  , and other possible subdialogues in the intervening states  . Each one of those states contains a FSAI itself , which determines the allowed speech acts in a given subdialogue and their sequence  . For a picture of the discourse component here proposed  , see Figure I . 
Let us look at another example where the use of information on the previous context and ontile speaker a Iternance will help choose the most appropriate parse and thus achieve a better translation  . 

The expression " okay " can be a prompt for an answer  ( 3 )  , an acceptance of a previous offer ( 4 ) or a backchanneling element , i . e . , an acknowledgement that the previous speaker's utterance has been understood  ( 5 )  . 
(3) $1 So we ' ll switch you to a double room . okay ? ( 4 ) S1Sowe ' ll switch you to a double room . 
$2 Okay.
(5) S1 The double room is $90 anight.
$2 Okay , and how much is a single room ?
In example (3) , we will know that " okay " is a prompt , because it is uttered by the speaker after he or she has made a suggestion  . In example (4) , it will be an acceptance because it is uttered after the previous speaker ' suggestion  . And in ( 5 ) it is an acknowledgment of the information provided  . The correct assignment of speech acts will provide a more accurate translation into other languages  . 
To summarize , the two-layered FSM models a conversation through transitions of speech acts that are included in subdialogues  . When the parser returns an ambiguity in the form of two or more possible speech acts  , the FSM will help decide which one is the most appropriate given the context  . 
There are situations where the path followed in the two layers of the structure does not match the parse possibility we are trying to acceptor reject  . 
One such situation is the presence of clarification and correction subdialogues at any point in the conversation  . In that case , the processor will try to jump to the upper layer  , in order to switch the subdialogue under consideration  . We also take into account the situation where there is no possible choice  , either because the FSM does not restrict the choice i  . e . , the FSM allows all the parses returned by the parser--or because the model does not allow any of them  . In either of those cases , the transition is determined by unigram probabilities of the speech act in isolation  , and bigrams of the combination of the speech act we are trying to disambiguate plus its predecessor  . 
5 Evaluation
The discourse module is being developed on a set of  29 dialogues , totalling 1 , 393 utterances . An evaluation will be performed on 10 dialogues , previously unseen by the discourse module . Since the module can be either incorporated into the system  , or turned off , the evaluation will be on the system's performance with and without the discourse module  , Independent graders assign a grade to the quality of the translation  1  . A secondary evaluation will be I The final results of this evaluation will be available at the time of the ACL conference  . 
based on the quality of the speech act disambiguation itself  , regardless of its contribution to translation quality  . 
6 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper I have presented a model of dialogue structure in two layers  , which processes the sequence of subdialogues and speech acts in task-oriented dialogues in order to select the most appropriate from the ambiguous parses returned by the Phoenix parser  . The model structures dialogue in two levels of finite state machines  , with the final goal of improving translation quality  . 
A possible extension to the work here described would be to generalize the two-layer model to other  . 
less homogeneous domains . The use of statistical information in different parts of the processing  , such as the arcs of the FSM , could enhance performance . 
References
Michael A . K . Halliday .  1994 . An Introduction to Functional Grammar . Edward Arnold , London(2nd edition ) . 
Hitoshilida and Takyuki Yamaoka .  1990 . Dialogue Structure Analysis Method and Its Application to Predicting the Next Utterance  . Dialogue Structure Analysis . German-Japanese Workshop , Kyoto , Japan . 
Alon Lavie , Donna Gates , Marsal Gavaldh , Laura Mayfield , Alex Waibet , Lori Levin .  1996 . Multilingual Translation of Spontaneously Spoken Language in a Limited Domain  . In Proceedings o . fCOLING 96 . 

Alon Lavie and Masaru Tomita .  1993 . GLR *: An Efficient Noise Skipping Parsing Algorithm for ContextFree Grammars  . In Proceedings o . f the Third\[nterna-tional Workshop on Parsing Technologies  , \[ WPT 93 , 
Tilburg , The Netherlands.
Elisabeth Maier .  1996 . Context Construction as Subtask of Dialogue Processing : The Verbmobil Case  . In Proceedings of the Eleventh Twente Workshop on Language Technology  . TWLT 11 . 
James Martin .  1992 . English Text : System and Structure . John Benjamins . Philadelphia/Amsterdam . 
' fan Qu , Barbara Di Eugenio , Alon Lavie , Lori Levin . 
1996 . Minimizing Cumulative Error in Discourse Context . In Proceedings o\]ECAI96, Budapest , Hungary . 
Norbert Reithinger , Ralf Engel , Michael Kipp . Martin Klesen .  1996 . Predicting Dialogue Acts for a Speech-to-Speech Translation System  . In Proceedings of IC-
SLP96, Philadelphia , USA.
Emmanuel Schegloff and Harvey Sacks .  1973 . Opening up Closings . Semiotica 7, pages 289-327 . 
Wayne Ward .  1991 . Understanding Spontaneous Speech : the Phoenix System  . In Proceedings of
ICASSP91.

