Automatic Extraction of Aspectual Information
from a Monolingual Corpus
Akira Oishi Yuji Matsumoto
Graduate School of Information Science
Nara Institute of Science and Technolog T
8916-5 Takayama , Ikoma,
Nara 630-01 Japan
ryo-o , matsu ~ is , aist-nara , ac.jp
Abstract
This paper describes an approach to extract the aspectual information of Japanese verb phrases from a monolingual corpus  . 
We classify Verbs into six categories by means of the aspectual features which are defined on the basis of the possibility of cooccurrence with aspectual forms and adverbs  . A unique category could be identified for 96% of the target verbs . To evaluate the result of the experiment , we examined the meaning of-leiru which is one of the most fundamental spectual markers in Japanese  , and obtained the correct recognition score of 71% for the 200 sentences . 
1 Introduction
Aspect refers to the internal temporal structure of events and is distinguished from tense  , which has a deictic element in it , of reference to a point of time anchored by the speaker's utterance  . There is a voluminous literature on aspect within linguistics and philosophy  . Recently , computational linguists also have joined in the act within the context of machine translation or text understanding etc  . For example , consider the following Japanese sentences ( quoted from ( Gunji ,  1992)) . 
( a ) . Ken-waim atona rino heya-deki mono-woki-te-i-ru . 
Ken-TOP now next room-LOC kimono-ACC put-on-PRES ' Ken is now putting on kimono in the next room  . '( b ) . Ken-wake sa-kara zut to axtoki mono-woki-te-i-ru . 
Ken-TOP this morning-since always that kimono-
ACC weax-PRES ' Ken has been wearing that kimono since this morning  . '( e ) . Ken-wa a noki mono-wo san-nen mae niki-te-i-ru . 
Ken-TOP that kimono-ACC three-year before wear -PRES ' Ken has the experience of wearing that kimonothre e years ago  . ' Notice that English translations use separate lexical items  ( put on for ( a ) and wear for ( b )  ,   ( c ) ) and different aspectual configurations ( the progressive for ( a )  , the perfect progressive for ( b ) , and another for ( c )) , while all Japanese sentences contain the same verbal form ki-te-i-ru  . Thus . when the system tries to translate these sentences  , it must be aware of the difference among them . 
This paper describes an approach to extract the aspectual information of Japanese verb phrases from a monolingual corpus  . In the next section , we will classify Japanese verbs into six categories by means of aspectual features following the framework of  ( Bennett et al ,  1990) . The aspectual forms land adverbs are defined as the functions which operate on verbs ' aspectual features and changes their values  . By using the constraints of the applicability of the functions  , we can identify a unique category for each verb automatically  . If one can acquire aspectual properties of verbs properly and know how the other constituents in a sentence operate on them  , then the aspectual meaning of the whole sentence will be determined monotonically  . To evaluate the result of the experiment , we will examine the meaning of-teiru which is one of the most fundamental aspectual forms  , since the classification itself is difficult to evaluate objectively  . 
2 Realization Process of Aspectual
Meaning
We consider that the whole aspectual meaning of verb phrases is determined in the following order : verbs - - -  , arguments ~ adverbs ~ aspectual forms , Adverbs and aspectual forms are defined as indicators of such cognitive processes as " zoom - ing " and " focusing " which operate on the timeline representation  . They ares in filar to the notions " aspectual coercion "  ( Moens and Steedman ,  1988 ) or IThe term " form " refers to grammatical morphemes which axe defined in terms of derivation  . In this paper , we refer to the aspectual morphemes which follow verbs as " aspectual forms "  , including compound verbs such as . hazimevu ( begin ) , suffixes with epen the tic-resuch as-teiru , and aspectual nominal such as-bakavi Oustnow ) etc . 
352 " views "( Gunji , 1992) . We explain each in turn . 
2.1 Aspectual Categories of Verbs
A number of aspectually oriented lexical-semantic representations have been proposed  . ~ Veadopt and extend the feature-based framework proposed by  ( Bennett et al , 1990) in the spirit of ( Moens and Steedman ,  1988) . They uses three features : ? dynamic , ? telic , and ? atomic . We add two more features : ? process and ? gradual  . 
The feature dynamicity distinguishes between states  ( - d ) and events ( + d )  , and atomicity distinguishes between point events  ( + a ) and extended events ( - a )  . The duration described by verbs is twofold : an ongoing process and a consequent sate  . 
The feature process concerns an ongoing process and distinguishes whether events described by verbs have the duration for which some actions unfold  . 
The feature telicity distinguishes between culmi -native events  ( + t ) and nonculminative events ( -t )  . 
It presupposes a process . The feature graduality characterizes vents in which some kind of change is included and the change gradually develops  . 
We can classify verbs by means of different combinations of the five features  . Since there are dependences between features , only subsets of the com-binatorially possible configurations of features are defined as shown in the Table  1  . 
In the Table 1, 1 . stative verbs are those that are not dynamic .  2 . atomic verbs are those that express an atomic event  .  3 . resultative verbs express a punctual event followed by a new state which holds over some interval of time  .  4  . process + result verbs are those that express a complex situation consisting of a process which culminates in a new state  .  5 . non-gradual process verbs are those that express only processes and not changes of state  . 
6 . gradual process verbs are those that have grad -uality  . Although the verbs of the categories 5 and 6 don't contain telicity , the arguments of the verbs or some kinds of adverbs can setup the endpoint of the process as discussed later  . In Vendlerian classification , states correspond to 1 , achievements o2 and 3 , accomplishments to 4 and 6 , activities to 5 , respectively ( Vendler ,  1957) . 
Table 1: Aspectual categories of verbs 2 . 2 Arguments Tenny points out that internal argument of a verb can be defined as that which temporally delimits or measures out the event  ( Tenny ,  1994) . 
The direct internal argument can aspectually ?' measure out the event " to which the verb refers  . To clarify what is meant by "' mesuring-out " , she gives examples of three kinds of measuring -out : incremental theme verbs  ( eat an apple , build a house etc . ), change-of-state vrbs ( ripen the fruit etc . ) and path objects of route verbs ( climbed the ladder , playason at a etc . ) . 
On the other hand , the indirect internal argument can provide a temporal terminus for the event described by the verb  . The terminus causes the event to be delimited as in push the cartoag as station  . 
There is only one kind of internal argument , in terms of thematic roles , that does provide an event term i-nus , and that is a goal . 
In terms of the current framework , both of them add the telicity to the verb which does not inherently contain the telicity  . They play a role of framing the interval on which the focus should be brought  . 
2.3 Adverbs
In general , adverbs focus on the subpart of the event described by a verb and give a more detailed description  . According to the discussion in ( Moriyama ,  1988) , adverbs can be classified as follows in terms of the subpart on which they focus  . 
Processes modifiers modify verbs which have process  ( + p )  . This class includes reduplicative onomatopoeia such as gasagasa  , batabata , suisui , ses-set o , butubutu , etc . , which are expressing sound or manner of directed motion  , and rate adverb such as yukkuri ( slowly ) , tebayaku ( quickly ) , etc . , which express the speed of motions . They focus on the ongoing process of events described by verbs  . 
Gradual change indicators express the progress of change of state  , such as d and an ( gradually ) , suko sizutu ( little by little ) , jojom ( gradually ) , dond on ( constantly ) . sidain i ( by degrees ), etc . . which modify gradual process verbs ( + g ) and focus on the process . 
Continuous adverbs are those that can modify both states verbs  ( - d ) and process verbs ( + p )  , such as zutto ( for a long time ) , itumademo ( for ever ) , etc . They express a continuance of an event or a maintenance of a state  . 
categories features examples 1 . stative 2 . atomic3 . resultative 4 . process + result5 . non-gradual process 6 . gradual process\[-d\]\[+d , + a\]\[+d , - a , -p\]\[+d , -a , +p , + t\]\[+d , - a , + p , - t , -g\]\[+d , - a , + p , - t , + g \] aru ( be) , so bieru(se ) , sonzaisuru(e = is Ohirameku ( flash ) , mikaker u(notice ) suwaru(sit down ) , tatu ( standup ) korosu ( kill ) , Urn(puton ~ wear) , ake , '( open ) aruku ( walk ) , in ( say ) , utau(sing ) kusaru ( turns our ) , takamaru ( become high ) such as satto , ponto , gatatto , potarito , syunk an , etc . , which express instantaneous sound emission or an instant  . When these adverbs cooccur with verbs , the events are understood as instantaneous . This doesn't necessarily imply that the verb itself is instantaneous  . 
Quantity regulators measure out events , such as go kiroaruku ( walk 5k in ) . gojikan seizasita ( sit straight for 5 hours ) , etc . These include time , distance , and any quantity of contents . 
End state modifiers express the consequent state of events  , such as mapput at uni ( into wo exact halves ) , konagonani ( into pieces ) , pechank on i ( befiat ) , barabarani ( come apart ) , etc . They focus on the resultant state . 
So far we have described adverbs which concern a single event  , but some adverbs regulate the multiple events which involves iteration of a single event  . By iteration , the whole process of a collective vent can be taken up regardless of the inherent features of verbs  . 
There are two kinds of Repetition adverbs : one regulates the whole quantity of the iteration of events such as san-kai  ( three times ) or nan-domo ( many times ) etc . , and the other describes the habitual repetit ion of events such as itumo  ( always ) or syot tyuu ( very often ) etc . Both describe many events each of which involves one person's act  . 
Finally , we shall mention Time in the pastad-verbs . There are cases where the form-teiru , which marks the presentense , can cooccur with temporal adverbs describing the past  . ( See the exan~ple(lc ) in the introduction . ) It describes the experiential fact of an event . Such adverbs ask a tute ( once ) , mukasi ( in the past ) and izen ( be/ore ) determine the temporal structure of the event related with tense  . 
2.4 Aspectual Forms
The ability of aspectual forms to follow verbs is constrained by the inherent features of verbs  . We briefly describe some of aspectual forms used in the experiment  . 
The form s-you-to-suru ( begoing to ) and kakeru ( be about o ) take up the occurrence of events . 
They can follow the verbs which are dynamic(+d).
The form-tuzuker u ( continue ) can follow the verbs which have duration ( - a )   . It can take up either the ongoing processor the resultant state  . The form-hajimer u ( begin ) can follow the verbs which have pro-cess ( - bp ) and takes up the start time of the process . 
On the other hand , the forms - owaru ( cease ) and - oeru ( finish ) can follow the verbs which are telic ( + t ) and takes up the endpoint of the process . However , these constraints on the inherent features of verbs are only concerned with a single event  . By iteration , the whole process of a collective event can be taken up regardless of the inherent features of verbs  , as mentioned above . 
The forms-tutuar u ( be in progress ) , -tekuru ( come into state ) and-teiku ( go into state ) focus on the gradual process of change . -Tutuaru ( be in progress ) takes up it as a kind of state , -tekuru ( come into state ) views it from the end state of change while - teiku  ( go into state ) from the initial state of change . 
Both of-tekuru and-teiku have usages other than aspect  , as in mot-tekuru ( bring ) or mot-teiku ( take ) . 
3 Experiment
We carried out an experiment to classify Japanese verbs into six categories in the Table  1 by means of corpus data . 
As shown in the Figure 1 , each category is defined in terms of the ability to cooccur with aspectual forms  . However , the discrimination of the categories needs negative vidence which we cannot use by definition  . A corpus only provides positive evidence . 
Furthermore , some forms can be used regardless of the features and have usages other than aspect as discussed in the previou section  . ~ Ve must establish a method which takes into these facts into account  . 
\ oo--2 . atomic verbs + ~ p - -/\ + t // ~ . t3 . resultative verb == ?/\ process + result / ~ 4" verbs + g/~-g 4?i1~   6  . gr = dual process 5 . non-gradual process verbs verbs Figure 1: The relation between categories of verbs and features  3  . 1 Algor i thm We used the EDR Japanese Corpus and the EDR Japanese Cooccurrence Dictionary  ( EDR ,  1995 ) as material to extract syntactic clues in the experiment  . The corpus contains 220 , 000 sentences from various genres of text . The results of the parsing analysis of these sentences indicates that the constituents of the sentence have a dependency struc-dependent words are a verb and an adverb from the EDR Cooccurrence Dictionary and store them with the frequency in an array called PAIRS  ( cf . 
Table 2).
STEP : 2For each adverb in PAIRS , give an adverb class label ( the initial letter of the class name ) on the basis of the discussion is ec .  2 . 3 and store them in an array called ADVERBS ( cf . Table 3 and Table 4) . 
STEP:3 For each verb in PAIRS , add up the frequency of the cooccurrence with the adverbs contained in the array ADVERBS  . If the sum is greater than 4 , store the verb in a list called VERBS . 
STEP : 4For each sentence in the corpus , find a verb and if it is contained in VERBS , then : STEP:4? IIf the form following the verb is contained in the predefined list  ( Table 5 )  , make a narray FORMS\[/ , j \] positive ( where i is the position of the verb in the list VERBS and j is the position of the form in the Table  5  , see Table 6) , provided that the verb is not modified by repetition adverbs  ( R )  . When the form is-te kuru or-teiku , put it on record only if the verb is modified by gradual change indica-tors  ( G )  . 
S TEP:4-2 If the verb is modified by the adverbs contained in the array ADVERBS  , refer to the adverb class label and add 1 to an array MODIFIED\[i , k\] ( where i is the position of the verb in the list VERBS and k is the position of the adverb class label in the  Table4  . When the adverb is continuous one ( C ) , distinguish the cases where the verb is followed by-teiru  ( C1 ) from the other eases ( C2 )  , see Table 7) , provided that the verb is not followed by negative forms such as-naior-zu  , nor the forms which change the voice such as - reru  ( the passivizer ) or-seru ( the causativizer )  , since they affect the a speetual properties of the attached verb  . 
STEP : 5 For each verb in VERBS :
S TEP:5-1 Narrow down the candidates by means of the array FORMS  ( on the basis of possible categories shown in Table  5  )  . 
S TEP:5-2 In the ease where the category of the verb cannot be uniquely identified in  STEP:5-1  , i . e . , other than the category 6 , determine it by means of the array MODIFIED as follows : the category  6 the category 5 the category 4 the category 3 the category 2 the category 1 ambiguous ture . That is . the constituents have a governing-dependent relation  . It is these constituents that form the head phrases of the Japanese Cooccurrence Dictionary which describes collocational information in the form of binary relations  . Each item in the Japanese Cooccurrence Dictionary consists of a governing word  . a dependent word , the relator between the words , and supplementary cooccurrence item information which is composed of the frequency of the cooccurrence rlation and a portion of the actual example sentence from which the cooccurrence relation was taken  . 
The algorithm used for classifying verbs is shown in Figure  2  . 
Table 2: A part of the array PAIRS
I"d ~ bIverbIr~q ? I an ( like that ) tu ( say ) 1 an ( like that ) suru ( do ) 1 ai ( mutually ) au ( rneet ) 1a ~ kawarazu ( as usual ) iru ( be ) 1aikawarazu ( as usual ) otituku ( settle ) 1 aituide ( one after another ) sannyuusuru ( join ) 3 aituide ( one after another ) seturitusuru ( establish )  4
Table 3: A part of the array ADVERBS adverbIlabel\] aikawarazu  ( as usual ) Caegiaegi ( gasping ) Pakaakato ( brightly ) Pakuseku ( busily Patafuta ( in a hurry Patafutato ( in a hurry Pattoiuma ( in an instance ) Aikiiki ( vividly ) P ( if the verb is modified by gradual change indicators  ( G ) )  ( if modified by process modifiers ( P ) and not by end state modifiers ( E ) )  ( if modified by both process modifiers ( P ) and end state modifiers ( E ) )  ( if modified by end state modifiers ( E ) and not by process modifiers ( P ) )  ( if modified by only atomic adverbs ( A ) )  ( if modified by continuous adverbs without being followed by  . teiru ( C2 ) and not modified by process modifiers ( P ) nor gradual change indicators ( G ) nor end state modifiers ( E ) )  ( otherwise ) Figure 2: The algorithm for classifying verbs adverb class ( label ) process modifiers ( P ) gradual change indicators ( G ) continuous adverbs ( C ) atomic adverbs ( A ) quantity regulators ( Q ) end state modifiers ( E ) repetition adverbs ( R ) ' U\[llII\[ . ~l ~ I'\]~i . Ill \] total I examples 470 yukkuri ( slowly ) , gasagasa , batabata , sui  ~ ui , sesse to , butubutu ,  . . . 
52 sidain i ( gradually) , masumasu ( increasingly ) , jojoni ( gradually ) . . . 
78 sonomama ( as it is ) , zutto ( for a long time ) , itumademo ( for ever ) . . . 
294 satto , ponto , gatatto , potarito , syunkan ( instantaneously ) . . . 
12180-do (180 degree) , ippo(a step ) , ippai ( acup ) . . . 
86 mapput at uni ( into two exact halves) , konagonani ( in top wder ) . . . 
122 nandomo ( many times ) , itumo ( always ) , syot tyuu ( very often ) . . . 
Table 5: The aspectual forms used in the experiment forms followable verb categories-you-to-suru  ( begoing to )  , -kakeru ( be about to ) -tuzukeru ( continue ) -hajimeru ( begin ) -owaru ( end ) and - oeru ( finish ) -tutuaru ( be in progress )  , -tekuru ( come into state ) , -teiku ( go into state ) 2 ,  3 ,  4 ,  5 ,  6 3 ,  4 ,  5 ,  6 4  , 5  , 6 5 , 6 verbakka suru ( become worse ) nigiru ( catch ) anteisuru ( becomes table ) isikisuru ( become conscious ) kotonaru ( differ ) i dou suru ( move ) ijisuru ( maintain ) tigau ( differ ) so datu ( grow ) so dateru ( bring up ) ittisuru ( agree ) 
Tabl 6: A part of the array FOR MS-kake ru+-++-+- +-++-+ forms I-tuzuerl-hajimel- ow a  , I-tutuar u-+-+-+-+-+m
Table 7: A part of the array MODIFIED verb adverb class labels 
PIGIClC2\]AIQIEakkasuru ( become worse ) 0500100 nigiru ( eatch ) 0101001 anteisuru ( becomes table ) 011 1001 isikisuru ( become conscious ) 0101000 kotonaru ( differ ) 010000 1idousuru ( move ) 1101100ijisuru ( maintain ) 0004000 tigau ( differ ) 0100100 so datu ( grow ) 53000 11 so dateru ( bring up ) 310 1000 it tisuru ( agree ) 0000 302 mine the target verbs . There are 431 verbs modified by the classified adverbs more than  4 times . In step 2 , we classify adverbs on the basis of the discussion in the previou section  . Although the classification has been done by hand  , it is much easier than that of verbs , since adverbs are fewer than verbs in number (2 , 563 vs .  12 , 766 in the corpus ) and have higher " iconicity " - - the isomorphism between form and meaning -- than verbs  . This classification of adverbs is used not only for determining the aspectual categories of verbs but also for examining the meaning of-teir u as mentioned later  . 
The step 4 is a process to register the cooccurring forms and adverbs for each verb  . By using these data , we identify the aspectual categories of verbs in the step  5  . Since the categories cannot be uniquely identified by aspectual forms only  , we use adverbs which can modify the only restricted set of verbs as shown in Table  8  . 
Table 8: categories adverb class ( Ta-b'e--i ~ Adverb classes and their modifiable verb verb cate ~ process modifiers  ( P ) gradual change indicators ( G ) continuous adverbs ( C ) atomic adverbs ( A ) quantity regulators ( Q ) end state modifiers ( E )  4  , 5  , 6 2  , 3  , 4  , 5  , 6 1  , 3  , 4  , 5  , 6 3 ,  4 ,  6 3 . 2 Eva luat ion and Discuss ion Out of 431 target verbs , we could uniquely identify categories for 375 verbs . As for the rest 56 verbs ,   37 verbs were identified in the step 52 as the category which was not included in the set of categories outputted by the step  51  . This seems to be due to the failure to detect the expression of repetition  , therefore , we chose the category determined in the step 52 . Table 9 shows the results . 
We confirmed that more than 80% of verbs are correctly classified . However , this is a subjective judgement . To evaluate the results of the classification more objectively  , we focus on one evaluation metric ; namely the automatic examination of the meaning of-teiru which can represent several distinct senses as described in the introduction  . 
The form-teiru indicates " zoom in " operation : it is a function that takes an event as its input and returns a type of states  , which refers to unbounded regions i . e . , a part of the timeline with no distinct boundaries  . Figure 3 shows the timeline representation for each aspectual category of verbs  . Aspectual distinctions correspond to how parts of the timeline are delineated  . 
1 . staUvo verbs t ) tl(1) (2) 2 . atomic verbs .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  - -? )  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  ;  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  ; (3) 3 . result at lveverbs .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
t ~' (4) tI , (5) 4 . process + result verbs . . . . . . . . . . . . . ? ? tJ~__I4J(s ) (7) ( e)5 . non-gradual procese verbs .   .   .   .   . ---(3tJ .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  ;  .   .   .   . - i ( 9 )   ( 10 ) gradual process verbs t#t )   ( 12 )   ( 11 ) Figure 3: The timeline representation for aspectual categories of verbs In  Figure3  , thick line segment signify regions , dashed line segments signify unbounded ends of regions and large open dots signify points in time boundaries or punct at events  )  . 
Table 9: The verb classification obtained by the experiment\[verb catel ~ ory\[no  . I examples 1 . stative 302 . atomic 193 . resultative 294 . process + result 305 . non-gradual process 946 . gradual process 210 ambiguous 19 mitumer u ( stare ) ijisuru ( maint at n ) sumu ( live ) sonzaisuru ( ezist ) nagameru ( view , damaru ( be silent ) kumkaesu ( repeat ) tukaeru ( can be used )   . . . 
nageru ( throw ) haneagaru ( leap up ) kizuku ( notie e ) mikakeru ( happen to see ) gouisuru ( arrive at an agreement ) kireru ( snap ) furnikiru ( launch out )   . . . 
nureru ( become wet ) turnaru ( become packed ) tunagaru ( make a connection ) au ( meet ) suwaru ( sit down ) tatamu ( fold ) kureru ( get dark ) ate hamaru ( fit )   . . . 
tateru ( build ) no basu ( lengthen ) rnatomeru ( put together ) narabu ( formaline ) tutumu ( wrap ) majiwaru ( associate ) tiru ( fall ) torikakomu ( surround )   . . . 
nomu ( drink ) hakobu ( carry ) ta no simu ( enjoy ) kansatusuru ( observe ) furueru ( shake ) hibiku ( ring ) to bimawaru ( fly about ) taberu ( eat ) sugosu ( spend )  . . . 
akkasuru ( get worse ) tuyor naru ( gets rong ) takarnaru ( become raised ) sinkouk asuru ( get more acute ) seit you suru ( grow up ) kappatukasuru ( make active )   . . . 
kuwawaru ( join ) tutomeru ( bemployed ) tomonau ( accompany ) tazuneru ( visit ) rainitisuru ( eome to Japan ) uwamawaru ( be more than ) hokoru ( boast )   . . . 

Since-teiru cannot include a time instant at which a state is drastically changed  , it must denote one of the intervals depicted below the lines  . The interval ( 1 ) in Figure3 designates a state which is a part of the state described by a lex_ical stative verb  . It means a state holding before a speaker'seyes . 
It has been stated from ( Kindaichi ,  1976 ) that the form-teiru has three distinct senses : " a simple state '  , ' a progressive state ' and ' a consequent state  '  . (1) corresponds to a simple state . (4) and (7) to a consequent state ,  (6) , (9) and (11) to a progressive state . 
respectively . Though not represented in Figure 3 , a consequent sate can be taken up with the verbs of categories  5 and 6 if the endpoints of the processes are set up by explicit expressions  . 
Kudo ( Kudo ,  1982 ) has pointed out that there are inherent meaning and derivative meaning for both progressive and consequent sates and has sorted out them as follows  . 
( i ) inherent meaning of ' a progressive state ': an ongoing process  ( ii ) derivative meaning of ' a progressive state ': an iteration  ( iii ) inherent meaning of ' a consequent sate ': a resultative state  ( iv ) derivative meaning of ' a consequent state ': an experiential state  ( v ) otherwise : a simple state ( ii ) is the abovementioned process of a collective event  ; " aline as a set of points " , so to speak .   ( iv ) is a state where a speaker has an experience of the event described by a verb and corresponds to the intervals  ( 2 )  ,  (3) ,  (5) ,  (8) ,  (10) , (12) in Figure 3 . 
These derivative meanings are conditioned syntactically or contextually  , that is , they are stipulated as derivative by explicit linguistic expressions such as adverbials etc  . , while not concerned with the inherent features of verbs - - they can appear with most of verbs regardless of their aspectual categories  . 
We carried out an experiment o examine the meaning of-teiruautomatically by means of the classifications of verbs and adverbs obtained in the previous experiment  . Table 10 shows the determination process of the meaning of -teiru  . We checked the cases in Table 10 downward from the top . 
Table 11 shows the results obtained from running the process of Table  10 on 200 sentences containing-teiru which are randomly selected from the EDR 
Japanese Corpus.
The precision on the whole is 71% . Note that the sense ( i ) ' an ongoing process'has high recall but low precision  , while ( iii ) ' are sultative state ' and ( iv ) ' an experiential state's how the opposite . This is due to the fact that the test sentences contain many " speech act " verbs such as syuchousuru  ( insist )  , se-tume isuru ( explain ) , hyoumeisuru(declare ) etc . They are classified as 5 . non-gradual process verbs , and by Table 10: The determination process of the meaning of - teirucase output  ( 1 )  . the verb is modified by repetition ( ii ) an iteration adverbs ( R ( 2 )  . the verb is modified by time in the past adverbs ( P ) or its category is 2 . atomic verbs (3) . the category of the verb is 1 . stative verbs (4) . the category of the verb is 3 . resultative verbs (5) . the verb is modified by process modifiers ( Porgradual change indicators ( G ( 6 )  . the endpoint of the process is explicitly setup ( the verb is modified by end state modifiers ( E ) ot quantity regulators ( Q ) or it takes a goal arsument i . e . , ni(~o)-case etc . 
(7) . the process cannot be taken up ( the verb is modified by atomic adverbs ( A ) or sudeni ( already )  , etc . )  ( iv ) an experiential state ( v ) a simple state ( iii ) are sultative state ( i ) an ongoing process ( iii are sultative state ( iii ) are sultative state ( 8 )  . the category of the verb is ( i an ongoing process 5 . non-gradual processor 6 . gradual process verbs (9) . the category of the verb is ambiguous : ( i ) or ( iii )  4 . process + result verbs the case 8 in Table 10 , the senses of-teiru following them are determined as  ( i ) ' an ongoing process ' . 
However , they takes a quotative to-case that marks the content of the statement and this measures out the event described by verbs  . Therefore the resultative or experiential readings are preferred  . 
The other errors are caused by polysemous verbs such as kakaru  ( hangflie // all . . . ) or at a ru(hit/strike ~ bexposed/shine . . . ) . Their aspectual properties are changed by the complements they take  . The analysis of how complements influence the aspectual properties of their governing verbs is beyond the scope of this paper  . It seems to be a matter of pragmatic world knowledge rather than sense-semantics  ( but see ( Verkuyl , 1993) for English ) . 
4 Related Work
The approach proposed here is similar to that of Dorr's  ( Dorr , 1992: Dorr .  1993) , but different from it in scale and determinability of the categories  . She adopts the four-way classification system following Vendler  ( Vendler , 1957) and utilizes Dowty's test ( Dowty ,  1991 ) for detern fining aspectual categories of English verbs  . She reports the results obtained from running the program on  219 sentences of the LOB corpus . Although we cannot know how many verbs she tested because she has shown only a subset of the verbs  , the program was not able to pare down the aspectual category to one in  18 cases out of 27 verbs . 
Brent ( Brent ,  1991 ) discusses an implemented program that automatically classifies verbs into two groups  , stative vs . nonstative , on the basis of their syntactic on texts . He uses the progressive and rate-the sense of - te=ru judgement by human  ( a ) output of program ( b ) number of agreements ( c ) recall ( % ) c/ax100 precision ( % ) c/b x 100 ( i ) an ongoing process 95137889364 ( ii ) an iteration 42 250 100 ( iii ) are sultative state ( iv ) an experiential state ( v ) a simple state 29   48   93   39   15   14   36   93   19   19   15   79   79 ambiguous 14   12   9   64   75 total 200   200   142   71   71 adverbs constructions in combination with some sort of statistical smoothing technique  . He identified eleven verbs as purely stative , of the 204 distinct verbs occurring at least 100 times in the LOB corpus . 
We think that the extraction of aspectual information must be based on principles that are well-grounded in linguistic theory  . However , some sort of noise reduction technique such as the confidence intervals used by Brent may be needed to detec the cue more accurately  . 
5 Conclusion
In this paper , we have proposed a method for classifying Japanese verbs on the basis of surface vidence from a monolingual corpus  , and examined the meaning of the form-teiru by means of the classifications of verbs and adverbs  . 
The aspect of verb phrases provides not only the temporal configuration within a single event but also the informationeeded for processing temporal relation between multiple events  ( Dowty , 1986; Passonneau , 1988; Webber ,  1988) . 
Furthermore , the lexical aspect of verbs is closely related with their deep complement sructures which may not be directly reflected on the surface argument structures  . Therefore , by combining the aspectual categories of verbs and those that are defined in terms of their surface argument structures  , we can obtain an elaborate classification based on semantic types of verbs  .   ( Preliminary experiments on this issue can be seen in  ( Oishi and Matsumoto ,  1996) . ) Thus , the information obtained here can be used for various applications  . 
References
S . W . Bennett , T . Herlick , K . Hoyt , J . Lifo , and A . Santisteban . 
1990 . A computational model of aspect and verb semantics  . 
Mashine 7~ ranslation , 4(4):247-280.
M . It . Brent .  1991 . Automatic semantic classification of verbs from their syntactic contexts : An implemented classifier for stativity  . In Proceedings of the 5th ACL European Chapter , pages 222-226 . 
B . J . Dorr .  1992 . A parameterized approach to integrating aspect with lexical-semantic for machine translation  . In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of ACL . pages 257-264 . 
B . J . Dorr .  1993 . Machine Translation -- A View from the
Lezicon . The MIT Press.
D . R . Dowty .  1986 . The effects of aspectual class on the temporals tructure of discourse  . Linguistics and Philosophy , 9(1):37-61 . 
D . R . Dowty .  1991 . Word Meaning and Montague Grammar : The Semantics of Verbs and Times in Generative Semantics and in Montague's PTQ  , volume 7 of Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy ( SLAP )  . Kluwer Academic Publishers . 
Japan Electronic Dictionary Research Institute Ltd  . EDIt .  1995 . 
the EDR Electronic Dictionary Technical Guide . ( in
Japanese).
T . Gunji .  1992 . A proto-lexical analysis of temporal properties of japanese verbs  . In Linguistics Studies on Natural Language , Kyung Hee Language Institute Monograph One , pages 197-217 . Hanshin Publishing . 
H . Kindaichi .  1976 . Nihongo Dousi-no Asupekuto ( ' Aspect of Japanese Verbs ' )  . Mugi Shobo . in Japanese) . 
M . Kudo .  1982 . Siteiru-kei-noimi-kijutu ( ' the description of the meaning of the form - teiru '  )  . Muzashi University Jinbun
Gakkai Zasshi , 13(4).
M . Moens and M . Steedman .  1988 . Temporal ontology and temporal reference . Computational Linguistics , 14(2):15-28 . 
T . Moriyama .  1988 . Nihongo Doushi Jutsugobunno Kenkyuu ( ' A Study of Japanese Verb-pradicate Sentences ' )  . Meiji
Shoin . ( in Japanese).
A . Oishi and Y . Matsumoto .  1996 . Detecting the organization of semantic subclasses of Japanese verbs  . Technical Iteport NAI ST-IS-TIt 960 19 , Nara Institute of Science and Technology . 
It . J . Passonneau .  1988 . A computational model of the semantics of tense and aspect  . Computational Linguistics , 14(2:44-60 . 
C . L . Tenny .  1994 . Aspectual Roles and the Syntaz-Semantics Interface  , volume 52 of Studies in Linguistics and Philoso-phy ( SLAP )  . Kluwer Academic . 
Z . Vendler .  1957 . Verbs and times . Philosophical Review , 66:143-160 . 
H . Verkuyl .  1993 . A Theory of Aspectuality . Cambridge University Press . 
B . L . Webber .  1988 . Tense as discourse anaphor . Computational
Linguistics , 14(2):61-73.

