Representing Paraphrases Using Synchronous TAGs
Mark Dras
Microsoft Research Institute , Macquarie University
NSW Australia 2109
markd~mpce,mq.edu.au
Abstract
This paper looks at representing para-
phrases using the formalism of Syn-
chronous TAGs ; it looks particularly at comparisons with machine translation and the modifications it is necessary to make to Synchronous TAGs for paraphrasing  . A more detailed version is in Dras (1997a ) . 
1 Introduction
The context of the paraphrasing in this work is that of Reluctant Paraphrase  ( Dras , 1997b ) . In this framework , a paraphrase is a tool for modifying a text to fit a set of constraints like length or lexical density  . As such , generally applicable paraphrases are appropriate , so syntactic paraphrases -- paraphrases that can be represented in terms of a mapping between syntax trees describing each of the paraphrase alternatives -- have benchosen for their general applicability  . Three examples are : (1) a . The salesman made an attemp to wear
Steven down.
b . The salesman attempted to wear Steven down.
(2) a . The compere who put the contestant to the lie detector gained the cheers of the audience  . 
b . The compere put the contestant to the lie detector test  . He gained the cheers of the audience . 
(3) a . The smile broke his composure.
b . His composure was broken by the smile.
A possible approach for representing paraphrases is that of Chandrasekar et al  ( 1996 ) in the context of text simplification . This involves a fairly straightforward representation  , as the focus is on paraphrases which simplify sentences by breaking them apart  . 
However , for purposes other than sentence simplification , where paraphrases like (1) are used , a more complex representation is needed . 
A paraphrase representation can be thought of as comprising two parts--a representation for each of the source and target texts  , and a representation for mapping between them . Tree Adjoining Grammars ( TAGs ) cover the first part : as a formalism for describing the syntactic aspects of text  , they have a number of desirable features . The properties of the formalism are well established  ( Joshi et al ,  1975) , and the research as also led to the development of a large standard grammar  ( XTAG Research Group ,  1995) , and a parser XTAG ( Doran et al ,  1994) . Mapping between source and target texts is achieved by an extension to the TAG formalism known as Synchronous TAG  , introduced by Shieber and Schabes (1990) . Synchronous TAGs ( STAGs ) comprise a pair of trees plus links betwee nodes of the trees  . The original paper of Shieber and Schabes proposed using STAGs to map from a syntactic to a semantic representation  , while another paper by Abeill @ ( 1990 ) proposed their use in machine translation . The use in machine translation is quite close to the use proposed here  , hence the comparison in the following section ; instead of mapping between possibly different rees in different languages  , there is a mapping between trees in the same language with very different syntactic properties  . 
2 Paraphrasing with STAGs
A beill ~ notes that the STAG formalism allows an explicit semantic representation to be avoided  , mapping from syntax to syntax directly . This fits well with the syntactic paraphrases described in this paper  ; but it does not , as Abeill@also notes , preclude semantic-based mappings , with Shieber and Schabes constructing syntax-to -semantics mappings as the first demonstration f STAGs  . Similarly , more semantically-based paraphrases are possible through an indirect application of STAGs to a semantic representation  , and then back to the syntax . 
One major difference between use in MT and paraphrase is in lexicalisation  . The sorts of mappings that Abeill ~ deals with are lexically idiosyncratic : the English sentences Kimlikes Dale and Kimmisses Dale  , while syntactically parallel and semantically fairly dose  , are translated to different
Figure 1: STAGs : miss-manquerd syntactic structures in French  ; see Figure 1 . The actual mappings depend on the properties of words  , so any TAGs used in this synchronous manner will necessarily be lexicaiised  . Here , however , the sorts of paraphrases which are used are lexically general : splitting off a relative clause  , as in (2) , is not dependent on any lexical attribute of the sentence  . 
Related to this is that , at least between English and French , extensive syntactic mismatch is unusual , much of the difficulty in translation coming from lexical idiosyncrasies  . A consequence for machine translation is that much of the synchronising of TAGs is between elementary trees  . So , even with a more complex syntactic structure than the translation examples above  , the changes can be described by composing mappings between elementary trees  , or just in the transfer lexicon . A beill ~ notes that there are occasions where it is necessary to replace an elementary tree by a derived tree  ; for example , in Hopefully , John will work becomes On esp ~ reque Jean travailler a  , hopefully ( an elementary tree ) matches ones p ~ reque ( derived )  . 
, ~ v,o N ~ P . Po
Figure 2: Relative clause paraphrase
The situation is more complex in paraphrasing : by definition  , the mappings are between units of text with differing syntactic properties  . For example , the mapping of examples ( 2a ) and ( 2b ) involves the pairing of two derived trees , as in Figure 2 . In this case , both trees are derived ones . A problem with the STAG formalism in this situation is that it doesn't capture the generality of the mapping between  ( 2a ) and ( 2b )  ; separate tree pairings will have to be made for verbs in the matrix clause which have complementation patterns different from that of the above examples  ; the same is true for verbs in the subordinate clause  . For more complex matchings , the making and pairing of derived trees becomes combinatorially large  . 
A more compact definition is to have links , of a kind different from the standard STAG links , between nodes higher in the tree . In STAG , a link between two nodes specifies that any substitution or adjunction occurring at one node must be replicated at the other  . This new proposed link would be a summary link indicating the synchronisation of an entire subtree : more precisely  , each subnode of the node with the summary link is mapped to the corresponding node in the paired tree in a synchronous depth-first raversal of the subtree  . Naturally , this can only be defined for pairs of nodes which have the same structure  1   ; that is , in the context of paraphrasing , it is effectively a statement that the paired subtrees are identical  . So , for example , a mapping between the nodes labelled VP1 in each of the trees of the example described above would be an appropriate place to have such a summary link : by establishing a mapping between each subnode of  VP1  , this covers differentypes of matrix clauses . 
Another feature of using STAGs for paraphrasing is that the links are not necessarily one-to-one  . 
In the right hand tree of the Figure 2 pairing , the subject NPs of both sentences are linked to NP1 of the lefthand tree ; this is a statement that both resulting sentences have the same subject  . This does not , however , change the properties in any significant way .   2 It is also useful to add another type of link which is nonstandard  , in that it is not just a link between nodes at which adjunction and substitution occur  , but which represents shared attributes . It connects nodes such as the main verb of each tree  , and indicates that particular attributes are held in common  . 
For example , mapping between active and passive voice versions of a sentence is represented by the tree in Figure  3  . The verb in the active version of ( 3 )   ( broke ) shares the attribute of tense with the auxiliary verb\be\  , and the lexical component is shared with the main verb of the passive tree  ( bro-1More precisely , they need only have the same number and type of argument slots  . 
2This is equivalent to there being m dummy child nodes of the node at the multiple end of an m:l link  , each child node being exactly the same as the parent with fully reentrant feature structures  , with one link being systematically allocated to each child  . 
517 ken ), which takes the past participle form . This sort of link is unnecessary when STAGs are used in MT  , as the trees are lexicalised , and the information is shared in the transfer lexicon  . Since , with paraphrasing , the transfer lexicon does not play such a role , the shared information is represented by this new type of link between the trees  , where the links are labelled according to the information shared  . 
Hence , node 1/1 in the active tree has a TENSE link with node Vo in the passive tree  , where tense is the attribute in common ; and a LEX link with node I/1 in the passive tree , where the lexeme is shared . 33 Notation In paraphrasing , the tree notation thus becomes fairly clums y : as well as consuming a large amount of space  ( given the large derived trees )  , it fails to reflect the generality provided by the summary links  . That is , it is not possible to define a mapping between two structures reflecting their common features if the structures are not  , as is standard in STAG , entire elementary or derived trees . Therefore , a new and more compact notation is proposed to overcome these two disadvantages  . 
The new notation has three parts : the first part uniquely defines each tree of a synchronous tree pair  ; the second part describes , also uniquely , the nodes that will be part of the links ; the third part links the trees via these nodes . So , let variables X and Y stand for any string of argumentypes acceptable in tree names  ; for example , X could be n x ln x2 and Y nl . Then , for example , the tree for ( 2a ) can be defined as the adjunction of a flN0nx0VX tree ( generic relative clause tree , standing for , e . g . , ~ N0nx0Vnxlnx2) into an an0VY tree ; the tree for ( 2b ) can be defined as a conjoined Stree , having a parentSm node and 2 child nodes an0VX and an0VY  . 
s , s,
Figure 3: Paraphrase with partial links The second part of the notation requires picking out important nodes  . The identification scheme ~ The determination of a precise set of link labels is future work  . 
proposed here has a string comprising node labels with relations between them  , signifying a relationship taken from the set parent  , child , left-sibling , right-sibling , abbreviated p , c , ls , rs . The node NP1 of the lefthand tree of Figure 2 can then be described by the string NPp NPp SrpNIL ; an associated mnemonic nickname might be T1 subj NP . 
The third part of the representation is then linking the nodes  . Standard links are represented by an equal sign ; other links are represented with the link type subscripted to the equal sign  . Thus , for Figure 2 , T lsubj NP = T fleftsubj NP , where T21eftsubjNP is NPpS rpSmp NIL for the righthand tree . 
For at a bular representation using this notation , see Dras (1997a ) . 
4 Conclusion
Synchronous TAGs are a useful representation for paraphrasing  , the mapping between parallel texts of the same language which have different syntactic structure  . A number of modifications need to be made , however , to properly capture the nature of paraphrases : the creation of a new type of summary link  , to compensate for the increased importance of derived trees  ; the allowing of many-to-many links between trees ; the creation of partial links , which allow some information to be shared ; and a new notation which expresses the generality of paraphrasing  . 
References
Abeill ~, Anne , Y . Schabes and A . Joshi .  1990 . Using Lexicalised Tags for Machine Translation . Proc . of
COLING 90, 16.
Chandrasekar , R . , C . Doran , B . Srinivas .  1996 . Moti-vations and Methods for Text Simplification . Proc . of
COLING96, 1041-1044.
Doran , Christy , D . Egedi , B . A . Hockey , B . Srinivas and M . Zaidel .  1994 . XTAG System-A Wide Coverage Grammar of English . Proc . o/COLING 94,922-928 . 
Dras , Mark . 1997a . Representing Paraphrases Using Synchronous Tree Adjoining Grammars  . 1997 Australasian NLP Summer Workshop , 1724 . 
Dras , Mark . 1997b . Reluctant Paraphrase : Textual Restructuring under an Optimisation Model  . Submitted to PACLING 97 . 
Joshi , Aravind , L . Levy and M . Takahashi .  1975 . Tree Adjunct Grammars . J of Computer and System Sciences , 10(1) . 
Shieber , Stuart and Y . Schabes .  1990 . Synchronous Tree Adjoining Grammars . Proc . of COLING go , 253-258 . 
XTAG Research Group .  1995 . A Lexicalised Tree Adjoining Grammar for English . Univ . of Pennsylvania
Technical Report IRCS95-03.

