An Estimate of Referent of Noun Phrases in Japanese Sentences 
Masaki Murata Makoto Nagao
Communications Research Laboratory Kyoto Univers ity 
588-2 , Iwaoka , Nishi-ku , Kobe ,  651-2401 , Japan Yoshida-Honmachi , Sakyo , Kyoto 606-01 , Japan
Abstract
In machine translation and man-machine dialogue , it is important oclarify referents of noun phrases  . 
We present a method for determining the referents of noun phrases in Japanese sentences by using the referential properties  , modifiers , and possessors 1 of noun phrases . Since the Japanese language has no articles , it is difficult to decide whether a noun phrase has an antecedent or not  . We had previously estimated the referential properties of noun phrases that correspond to articles by using clue words in the sentences  ( Murata and Nagao 1993 )  . By using these referential properties , our system determined the referents of noun phrases in Japanese sentences  . 
Furthermore we used the modifiers and possessors of noun phrases in determining the referents of noun phrases  . As a result , on training sentences we obtained a precision rate of  82% and a recall rate of 85% in the determination of the referents of noun phrases that have antecedents  . On test sentences , we obtained a precision rate of 79% and a recall rate of 77%  . 
1 Introduction
This paper describes the determination of the referent of a noun phrase in Japanese sentences  . In machine translation , it is important oclarify the referents of noun phrases  . For example , since the two " OJIISAN ( old man ) " in the following sentences have the same referent  , the second " OJIISAN ( old man ) " should be pronominalized in the translation into English  . 
OJIISAN-WAJIMEN-NIKOSHI-WO-OROSHITA.
(old man )   ( ground )   ( sit down )   ( The oldmans at down on the ground . )
YAGATEOJIISAN-WANE MUTTE-SHIMATTA.
(soon )   ( old man )   ( fall a sleep )   ( He ( = the old man ) so on fell a sleep . ) (1) When dealing with a situation like this , it is necessary for a machine translation system to recognize that the two " OJIISAN  ( old man ) " have the same referent . In this paper , we propose a method that determines the referents of noun phrases by using  ( 1 ) the referential properties of noun phrases , (2) the modifiers in noun phrases , and ( 3 ) the possessors of entities denoted by the noun phrases  . 
1 The possessor of a noun phrase is defined as the entity which is the owner of the entity denoted by the noun phrase  . 
For languages that have articles , like English , we can use articles (" the " , " a " , and so on ) to decide whether a noun phrase has an antecedent or not  . 
Ill contrast , for languages that have no articles , like Japanese , it is difficult to decide whether a noun phrase has an antecedent  . We previously estimated the referential properties of noun phrases that correspond to articles for the translation of Japanese noun phrases into English  ( Murata and Nagao 1993 )  . 
By using these referential properties , our system determines the referents of noun phrases in Japanese sentences  . Noun phrases are classified by referential property into generic noun phrases  , definite noun phrases , and indefinite noun phrases . When the referential property of a noun phrase is a definite noun phrase  , the noun phrase can refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase that has already appeared  . 
When the referential property of a noun phrase is an indefinite noun phrase or a generic noun phrase  , the noun phrase cannot refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase that has already appeared  . 
It is insufficient to determine referents of noun phrases using only the referential property  . This is because even if the referential property of a noun phrase is a definite noun phrase  , the noun phrase does not refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase which has a different modifier or possessor  . Therefore , we also use the modifiers and possessors of noun phrases in determining referents of noun phrases  . 
In connection with our approach , we would like to emphasize the following points : ? So far little work has been done on determining the referents of noun phrases in Japanese  . 
? Since the Japanese language has no articles , it is difficult to decide whether a noun phrase has an antecedent or not  . We use referential properties to solve this problem  . 
? We determine the possessors of entities denoted by noun phrases and use them like modifiers in estimating the referents of noun phrases  . Since the method uses the sematic relation between an entity and the possessor  , which is a language-independent knowledge , it can be used in any other language . 
2 Referential Property of a Noun

The following is an example of noun phrase anaphora  . "OJIISAN ( old man ) " in the first sen-tenee refer to the same old man  , and they are in anaphoric relation . 
OJIIS ANTOOBAASAN-GASUNDEITA.
(an old man )   ( and )   ( an old woman )   ( lived )   ( The relived an old man and an old woman . )
OJIISAN-WAY AMA-HES HIBAK ARI-NIITTA.
In definite noun phrase An indefinite noun phrase denotes an arbitrary member of the class of the noun phrase  . For example , " INU ( dog ) " in the following sentence is an indefinite noun phrase  . 
INU-GAS ANBIKIIRU.
( dog )   ( three )   ( there is )   ( There are three dogs . )  ( 5 )   ( old man )   ( mountain )   ( to gather firewood )   ( go ) An indefinite noun phrase cannot refer to the entity  ( The oldman went to the mountains to gather firewood  . ) denoted by a noun phrase that has already appeared  . 

When the system analyzes the anaphoric relation of noun phrases like these  , the referential properties of noun phrases are important  . The referential property of a noun phrase here means how the noun phrase denotes the referent  . If the system can recognize that the second " OJIISAN  ( old man ) " has the referential property of the definite noun phrase  , indicating that the noun phrase refers to the contextually non-ambiguous entity  , it will be able to judge that the second " OJIISAN  ( old man ) " refers to the entity denoted by the first " OJIISAN  ( old man )  . The referential property plays an important role in clarifying the anaphoric relation  . 
We previously classified noun phrases by referential property into the following three types  ( Murata and Nagao 1993 )  . 
generic NP
NP nongeneric NP definite NP in definite NP Generic noun phrase A noun phrase is classified as generic when it denotes all members of the class described by the noun phrase or the class itself of the noun phrase  . For example , " INU ( dog ) " in the following sentence is a generic noun phrase  . 
INU-WAY AKUNI-TATSU.
( dog ) ( useful ) ( Dogs are useful .) (3)
A generic noun phrase cannot refer to the entity denoted by an indefinite or definite noun phrase  . Two generic noun phrases can have the same referent  . 
Definite noun phrase A noun phrase is classified as definite when it denotes a contextually non-ambiguous member of the class of the noun phrase  . 
For example , " INU ( dog ) " in the following sentence is a definite noun phrase  . 
INU-WAMUKOUHEITTA.
( dog ) ( away ) ( go ) ( The dogwent away . )  ( 4 ) A definite noun phrase can refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase that has already appeared  . 
3 How to Determine the Referent o f a Noun Phrase To determine referents of noun phrases  , we made the following three constraints . 
1 . Referential property constraint 2 . Modifier constraint 3 . Possessor constraint When two noun phrases which have the same head noun satisfy these three constraints  , the system judges that the two noun phrases have the same referent  . 
3 . 1 Referential Property Constraint First , our system estimates the referential property of a noun phrase by using the method described in one of our previous papers  ( Murata and Nagao 1993 )  . The method estimates a referential property using surface expressions in the sentences  . For example , since the second " OJIISAN ( old man ) " in the following sentence si accompanied by a particle " WA  ( topic ) " and the predicate is in the past tense , it is estimated to be a definite noun phrase . 
OJIISAN-WAJIMEN-NIKOSHI-WO-OROSHITA.
(old man )   ( ground )   ( sit down )   ( The oldmans at down on the ground . ) YAGATEOJIISAN-WANE MUTTE-SHIMAIM ATTA . 
(soon )   ( old man )   ( fall a sleep )   ( He soon fell a sleep . ) (6) Next , our system determines the referent of a noun phrase by using its estimated referential property  . When a noun phrase is estimated to be a definite noun phrase  , our system judges that the noun phrase refers to the entity denoted by a previous noun phrase which has the same head noun  . For example , the second " OJIISAN " in the above sentences is estimated to be a definite noun phrase  , and our system judges that it refers to the entity denoted by the first " OJIISAN "  . 
When a noun phrase is not estimated to be a deft -nite noun phrase  , it usually does not refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase that has already been timate the referential property  , so the noun phrase might refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase that has already been mentioned  . Therefore , when a noun phrase is not estimated to be a definite noun phrase  , our system gets a possible referent of the noun phrase and determines whether or not the noun phrase refers to it by using the following three kinds of information  . 
? the plausibility ( P ) of the estimated referential property that is a definite noun phrase When our system estimates a referential property  , it outputs the score of each category ( Murata and Nagao 1993 )  . The value of the plausibility ( P ) is given by the score . 
the weight ( W ) of the salience of a possible referent The weight  ( W ) of the salience is given by the particles such as " WA  ( topic ) " and " GA ( subject ) " . The entity denoted by a noun phrase which has a high salience  , is easy to be referred by a noun phrase . 
the distance ( D ) between the estimated noun phrase and a possible referent The distance  ( D ) is the number of noun phrases between the estimated noun phrase and a possible referent  . 
When the value given by these three kinds of information is higher than a given threshold  , our system judges that the noun phrase refers to the possible referent  . Otherwise , it judges that the noun phrase does not refer to the possible referent and is an indefinite noun phrase or a generic noun phrase  . 
3.2 Modifier Constraint
It is insufficient to determine referents of noun phrases by using only the referential property  . 
When two noun phrases have different modi-tiers , they usually do not have the same referent . 
For example , " MIGI ( right ) -NOH OO ( cheek ) " and " HIDARI ( left ) -NOH OO ( cheek ) " in the following sentences do not have the same referent  . 
KONOOJIIS AN-NOK U-WAMIGI-NO HOO-NIATTA.
(this )   ( old man )   ( lump )   ( right )   ( cheek )   ( be on )   ( This old man's lump was on his right cheek . ) TENGU-WA , KOBU-WOHIDARI-NO HOO-NIT SUKETA . 
(tengu )  ~  ( lump )   ( left )   ( cheek )   ( put on )   ( The " tengu " put a lump on his left cheek )   ( 7 ) Therefore , we made the following constraint : A noun phrase that has a modifier cannot refer to the  2A tengu is a kind of monster . 
entity denoted by a noun phrase that does not have the same modifier  . A noun phrase that does not have a modifier can refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase that has any modifier  . 
The constraint is incomplete , and is not truly applicable to all cases . There are some exceptions where a noun can refer to the entity of a noun that has a different modifier  . But we use the constraint because we can get a higher precision than if we did not use it  . 
3.3 Possessor Constraint
When a noun phrase has a semantic marker PAR ( a part of a body )  ,   3 our system tries to estimate the possessor of the entity denoted by the noun phrase  . 
We suppose that the possessor of a noun phrase is the subject or the noun phrase's neares topic that has a semantic mark  , er HUM ( human ) or a semantic marker ANI ( animal )  . For example , we examine two instances of " HOO ( cheek ) " in the following sentences , which have a semantic marker PAR , OJIISAN-NIWA\[OJIISAN-NO\]4 HIDARI-NO ( old man )   ( old man's )   ( left ) 
HOO-NIK OBU-GAATTA.
(cheek )   ( lump )   ( be on )   ( This old man had a lump on his left cheek . )
SORE-WAKOBUSHI-HOD O-NOK U-DATTA.
( it )   ( person's fist )   ( lump )   ( It is about the size of a person's fist . )
OJIISAN-GA\[OJIISAN-NO\]HOO-WO ( old man ( subject ) )  ( old man's )   ( cheek ) 
HUKURA MASE TEIRUYOUNI-MIETA.
(puff )   ( look as if )   ( He looked as if he had puffed out his cheek . ) The possessor of the first " HOO ( cheek ) " is determined to be " OJIISAN ( old man ) " because " OJI-ISAN ( old man ) " , which has a semantic marker HUM(human ) , is followed by a particle " NIWA ( topic ) " and is the topic of the sentence . The possessor of the second " HOO ( cheek ) " is also determined to be " OJIISAN ( old man ) " because " OJIISAN ( old man ) " is the subject of the sentence . 
We made the following constraint , which is similar to the modifier constraint , by using possessors . 
When the possessor of a noun phrase is estimated , the noun phrase cannot refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase that does not have the same possessor  . When the possessor of a noun phrase is not estimated  , the noun phrase can refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase that has any possessor  . 
3 In this paper , we use the Noun Semantic Marker Dictio-naxy ( Watanabeta1 . 1992) . 
4 The words in brackets \[\] are omitted in the sentences  . 

For example , since the two instances of " HOO ( cheek ) " in the above sentences have the same possessor " OJIISAN  ( old man ) " , our system correctly judges that they have the same referent  . 
4 Anaphora Resolution System 4 . 1 Procedure Before referents are determined , sentences are transformed into a case structure by the case structure analyzer  ( Kurohashi and Nagao 1994 )  . 
Referents of noun phrases are determined by using heuristic rules which are made from information such as the three constraints mentioned in Section  3  . 
Using these rules , our system takes possible referents and gives them points  . It judges that the candidate having the maximum total score is the referent  . This is because a number of types of information are combined in anaphora resolution  . VC e can specify which rule takes priority by using points  . 
The heuristic rules are given in the following form  . 
Condition := ~ Proposal Proposal..
Proposal := ( Possible-Referent Point)
Here , Condition consists of surface expressions , e-mantic constraints and referential properties . In Possible-Referent , a possible referent , " Indefinite " , " Generic " , or other things are written . " Indefinite " means that the noun phase is an indefinite noun phrase  , and it does not refer to the entity denoted by a previous noun phrase  . Point means the plausibility value of the possible referent  . 
4 . 2 Heur i s t i c Ru le for Es t imat ing Referents We made  8 heuristic rules for the resolution of noun phrase anaphora  . Some of them are given below . 
R 1 When a noun phrase is modified by the words " SOREZORE-NO  ( each ) " and " ONOONO-NO ( each ) " , ( Indefinite ,  25 )   R2 When a noun phrase is estimated to be a definite noun phrase  , and satisfies the modifier and possessor constraints  , and the same noun phrase
X has already appeared , ( The noun phrase X ,  30 )   R3 When a noun phrase is estimated to be a generic noun phrase  , ( Generic ,  10 )   R4 When a noun phrase is estimated to be an indefinite noun phrase  , ( Indefinite ,  10 )   R5 When a noun phrase X is not estimated to be a definite noun phrase  ,    ( A noun phrase X which satisfies the modifier and possessor constraints  , P+W-D+4) The values P , W , D are as defined in Section 3 . 1 . 
5 Experiment and Discussion 5 . 1 Exper iment Before determining the referents of noun phrases  , sentences were at first transformed into a case structure by the case structure analyzer  ( Kurohashi and Nagao 1994 )  . Tile errors made by the case analyzer were corrected by hand  . Table 1 shows the results of determining the referents of noun phrases  . 
To confirm that the three constraints ( referential property , modifier , and possessor ) are effective , we experimented under several different conditions and compared them  . The results are shown in Table 2 . 
Precision is the fraction of noun phrases which were judged to have antecedents  . Recall is the fraction of noun phrases which have antecedents  . 
In these experiments we used training sentences and test sentences  . The training sentences were used to make the heuristic rules in Section  4  . 2 by hand . 
The test sentences were used to confirm the effectiveness of these rules  . 
In Table 2 , Method 1 is the method mentioned in Section 3 which uses all three constraints . Method 2 is the case in which a noun phrase can refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase  , only when the estimated referential property is a definite noun phrase  , where the modifier and possessor constraints are used  . Method 3 does not use a referential property . It only uses information such as distance , topic-focus , modifier , and possessor . Method 4 does not use the modifier and possessor constraints  . 
The table shows many results . In Method 1 , both the recall and the precision were relatively high in comparison with the other methods  . This indicates that the referential property was used properly in the method that is described in this paper  . Method 1 was higher than Method 3 in both recall and precision . This indicates that the information of referential property is necessary  . In Method 2 , the recall was low because there were many noun phrases that were definite but were estimated to be indefinite or generic  , and the system estimated that the noun phrases cannot refer to noun phrases  . In Method 4, the precision was low . Since the modifier and possessor constraints were not used  , and there were many pairs of two noun phrases that did not corefer  , such as " HIDARI ( left ) -NOH OO ( cheek ) " and " MIGI ( right ) -NOH OO ( cheek ) " , these pairs were incorrectly interpreted to be coreferences  . This indicates that it is necessary to use the modifier and possessor constraints  . 
5.2 Examples of Errors
We found that it was necessary to use modifiers and possessors in the experiments  . But there are some cases when the referent was determined incorrectly because the possessor of a noun was estimated incorrectly  . 

Table 1: Results
Precision Recall
Training sentences 82% ( 130/159 )  85%  ( 130/153 ) Test sentences 79% ( 89/113 )  77?/0  ( 89/115 ) Training sentences example sentences ( 43 sentences )  , a folktale " KOBUTORIJIISAN " ( Nakao 1985 )   ( 93 sentences )  , an essay in " TENSEIJINGO " (26 sentences) , an editorial (26 sentences ) , an article in " Scientific American ( in Japanese ) " ( 16 sentences ) Test sentences a for ktale " TSURUNOONGAESHI "   ( Nakao 1985 )   ( 91 sentences )  , two essays in " TEN-SEIJINGO " (50 sentences ) , an editorial (30 sentences ) , " Scientific American ( in Japanese ) "  ( 13 sentences ) 
Table 2: Comparison
Method 1 Method 3
Training sentences
Test sentences



Recall 82% ( 130/159 )  85% ( 130/153 )  79%  ( 89/113 )  77%  ( 89/115 ) 
Method 292% ( 117/127 )  76% ( 117/153 )  92%  (  78/ 85 )  68%  ( 78/115 )  72% ( 123/170 )  80% ( 123/153 )  69%  ( 79/114 )  69%  ( 79/115 ) 
Method 465% ( 138/213 )  90% ( 138/153 )  58%  ( 92/159 )  80%  ( 92/115 ) Method 1 : The method used in this work Method 2 : Only when it is estimated to be definite can it refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase Method  3 : No use of referential property Method 4 : Nouse of modifier constraint and possessor constraint Sometimes a noun can refer to the entity denoted by a noun that has a different modifier  . In such cases , the system made an incorrect judgment . 
OJIISAN-WACHIKAKU-NO OOKIN A SUGI-NO ( old man )   ( near )   ( huge )   ( cedar ) 
KI-NONE MOTO-NIARUANA-DE ( tree )   ( base )   ( beat )   ( hole ) 
A MAY ADORI-WOSURU-KOTO-NI-SHITA.
(take shelter from the rain )   ( decide to do )   ( So , he decided to takes helter from the rain in a hole which is at the base of a huge cedartree nearby  . )( an omission of the middle part ) TSUGI-NOHI , KONOOJIIS AN-WAY AMA-HEITTE ,   ( next day )   ( this )   ( old man )   ( mountain )   ( goto )   ( The next day , this man went to the mountain , ) SUGI-NOKI-NONE MOTO-NOANA-WOMIT SUKETA . 
(cedar )   ( tree )   ( at base )   ( hole )   ( found )   ( and found the hole at the base of the cedar tree . ) Tile two instances of " ANA ( hole ) " in these sentences refer to the same entity . But our system judged that they do not refer to it because tlae modifiers of the two instances of " ANA  ( hole ) " are different . In order to correctly analyze this case , it is necessary to decide whether the two different expressions are equal in meaning  . 
6 Summary
This paper describes a method for tile determination of referents of noun phrases by using their referential properties  , modifiers , and possessors . Using this method on training sentences , we obtained a precision rate of 82% and a recall rate of 85% in the determination of referents of noun phrases that have antecedents  . On test sentences , we obtained a precision rate of 79% and a recall rate of 77%  . This confirmed that the use of tile referential properties  , modifiers , and possessors of noun phrases is effective . 
References
Sadao Kurohashi , Makoto Nagao .  1994 . A Method of Case Structure Analysis for Japanese Sentences based on Examples in Case Frame Dictionary  . the Institute of Electronics , Information and Communication Enginners Transactions on Information and Systems 
E77-D(2), pages 227-239.
Masaki Murata , Makoto Nagao .  1993 . Determination of referential property and number of nouns in Japanese sentences for machine translation i to English  . In Proceedings of the 5th TMI , pages 218-225 , Kyoto , Japan , 

Kiyoaki Nakao .  1985 . The Old Man with a Wen . Eiyaku Nihon Mukashibanashi Series , Vol . 7, Nihon Eigo Ky-ouiku Kyoukai ( in Japanese) . 
Yasuhiko Watanabe , Sadao Kurohashi , Makoto Nagao . 
1992 . Construction of semantic dictionary by IPAL dictionary and a thesaurus  , ( in Japanese) . In Proceedings of the-~5th Convention of IPSJ , pages 213-214 , 
Tokushima , Japan , July.

