Generating the Structure of Argument
Chris Reed
Department of IS and Computing
Brunel University
Middlesex , Uxbridge UB8 3PH , England
Chris . Reed@brunel , ac.uk
Derek Long
Department of Computer Science
University of Durham
South Road , Durham DH13 LE , England


This paper demonstrates that generating arguments in natural language requires planning at an abstract level  , and that the appropriate abstraction cannot be captured by approaches based solely upon coherence relations  . An abstraction based planning system is presented which employs operators motivated by empirical study and rhetorical maxims  . These operators include a subset of traditional deductive rules of inference  , argumentation theoretic rules of refutation , and inductive reasoning patterns . 
The paper presents a unified system in which the various argument forms are employed in generating rich  , complex structures for persuasive txt . 

The ability to generate arguments in natural language is attracting wide-ranging research interest  , and it is becoming clear that the problem is also stimulating investigation of a number of problems of importance to natural language generation  ( NLG ) as a whole ( Reed and Long , 1997a ) . Argumentation is particularly appropriate as an NLG problem both because it is more highly structured than other forms of natural language  , and because there are a variety of established metrics developed in rhetoric and social psychology for judging the resultant quality of a text  . These advantages are being exploited in the design and implementation f the ~ hetor/ca system  , of which the current workforms apart . 
1 Problems with RST
A number of limitations of the generative capacity of Rhetorical Structure Theory  ( RST )   ( Mann and Thompson ,  1988 ) have recently been identified-most notably , its inability to adequately handle intention ( Moore and Paris ,  1994) . Through investigation of a particular genre- persuasive txt-it has become clear that RST suffers from a much wider catalogue of crippling restrictions  , severely limiting its applicability to generation in this genre and questioning its suitability elsewhere  . 
Mann and Thompson discuss the key role played by the notion of nuclearity-that relations hold between one nucleus and one satellite  . They do , however , concede ( p269 ) that there are a few cases in which nuclearity breaks down - and these they regard as rather unusual  . 
The two types of multinuclear constructs they identify are enveloping structures -" texts with conventional openings and closings " and parallel structures -" texts in which parallelism is the dominant organising pattern "  . Both of these are not just common in argument , but form key components . Enveloping structures are precisely what are described by  , for example , Blair (1838) ( citing Cicero) , when presenting the dissection of argument into introduction  , proposition , division , narration , argumentative , pathetic and conclusion ( these are by no means obligatory in every argument  , nor is there any great consensus over this particular characterisation  ; most authors , however , would agree that some such gross structure , usually involving introduction and conclusion , is appropriate ) . These structures are found with great frequency in natural argument  , and cannot , therefore , be ignored . Parallel structures form the very basis of argument  , since only the most trivial will involve lines of reasoning in which a single premise supports a single conclusion  . 
Multiple subarguments conjoined to support a Cohen  ( 1987 )  , Reed and Long , 1997b ) , and these necessarily form parallel structures . 
Another shortcoming is highlighted by a dissonance between RST and argument analysis  ( see Eemeren et al ( 1996 ) for a review )  . A given text may be amenable to multiple RST analyses-not just as a result of ambiguity  , but because there are , at a fundamental level , " multiple compatible analyses " . This contrasts with the view in argumentation theory  , where one argument has a single , unequivocal structure . There may , of course , be practical problems in identifying this structure  , and two analysts may disagree on the most appropriate analysis  ( and indeed this latter has a close parallel in RST  , since different analysts are at liberty to make different ' plausibility judgements ' as to the aims of the speaker  )  . The presence of these problems , however , is not equivalent to claiming that arguments may simply have more than one structure  , a claim which would pose in surmountable problems to the evaluation process  ( -argumentation theory aims to determine a means of classifying an argument as either good or bad  , and the presence of inherent structural multiplicity would present the possibility of an argument being simultaneously good and bad  )  . 
Finally , there is a more intuitive problem with RST , highlighted by analysing argument structure . Although there is much debate over the number and range of rhetorical relations  ( e . g . 
Hovy ,  1993 ) there seems to be no way of dealing with the idea of argumentative support  . 
In the first place , as Snoeck-Henkemans (1997) points out , Motivation , Evidence , Justification , Cause , Solutionhood and other relations could all be used argumentatively  ( as well , of course , as being applicable in non-argumentative situations  )  . Elhadad ( 1992 ) draws a similar conclusion ( though his list of potentially argument ativer lations is somewhat shorter  )  . 
Thus it is impossible to identify an argumentative rlation on the basis of RST alone  . Secondly , RST offers no way of capturing higher level organisational units  , such as Modus Ponens , Modus Tollens , and so on . For although their structure ( or at least the structure of anyone instance ) can be represented in RST-and , given Marcu's (1996) elegant extensions , even their hierarchical use in larger units - adopting this approach necessitates a lower level view  . It becomes impossible to represent and employ a Modus Tollens subargument supporting the antecedent of a Modus Ponens-rather  , the situation can only be characterised as P supporting through one of the potentially argument a tive RST relations Q  , and showing that-Q , so-P , and - P then supporting through one of the potentially argumentative RST relations R  , therefore R . Apart from being obviously cumber some , the representation has lost the abstract structure of the argument altogether  , and is not generalisable and comparable to other similar argument structures  . 
(It could perhaps be maintained that such structures could be represented as RST schemas  , but there are several problems with such an approach : in the first place  , schemas cannot abstract from individual relations  , so there would need to be a separate ' Modus Ponens'schema for each possible argumentative support relation  ; furthermore , the optionality and repetition rules of schema application  ( Mann and Thomson ,  1988 , p248) are not suited to argument , as they license the creation of incoherent argument structure  )  . 
It is for these reasons , and particularly , the last , that although RST plays an important role in the current work  , it is subsumed by a layer which explicitly represents argumentative constructs  . These constructs can be mapped onto the most appropriate set of RST relations  ( thus , for example , the implicature in an MP may be realised into any one of the potentially argumentative rlations mentioned above  )  . The approach thus maintains the generative capabilities of RST  ( particularly when extended along the lines of Marcu  ( 1996 ) to ensure coherency through adducement of canonical ordering constraints  )  , whil stem bracing the intuitive argument ative r lationships at a more abstract level  . It is these latter relationships which characterise the structure of the argument  ( i . e . the structure which argumentation theory strives to determine  )  . The relationships are also unambiguous : a single argument has exactly one structure at this level abstraction  ( though multiplicity is not thereby prevented at the RST level  )  . Further , parallelism occurs only at the higher level of abstraction  ( multiple each subargument is mononucleaic )  , and similarly , enveloping structures are also characterised only at the higher level  ( thus the
RST is restricted to a predominantly mononucleaic structure  )  . Finally , complete argument texts are not obliged to have complete RST trees  . For although most parts of a text are likely to have unifying RST analyses  , and although there must be a single overarching structure at the highest level of abstraction  , the refinement oRST need not enforce the introduction of rhetorical relations between parts  . This expands the flexibility and generative capacity of the system encompassing a greater proportion of coherent arguments  ( including , for example , those found in laws and contracts ) . 
2 Abstraction-Based Planning
The structure of argument is thus planned at a level more abstract han RST  . To exploit the intrinsic hierarchical structuring of argument  , the current work makes use of AbNLP ( Fox and Long ,  1995) , a hierarchical planner based upon the concept of encapsulation  , whereby the body of an abstract operator contains goals rather than operators  , and further , that the body of an operator is not opened up until an entire abstract plan has been completed  ( i . e . there are no goals left unfulfilled at that level of abstraction  )  . On completion of an abstract plan ( which can be seen , in discourse planning , as a skeletal outline of what is to be communicated  )  , the refinement operation opens up all the abstract operator bodies  , such that the structure and constraints determined at one level of abstraction are propagated to the next level down  . As a consequence , many choices which might have been considered during planning of an argument at the detailed level can be pruned as they become inconsistent with the abstract plan  . Such an approach as the potential to considerably improve upon the performance of a classical planner  , ( Bacchus and Yang ,  1992) . The use of AbNLP in a framework for argumentative discourse planning is discussed in more detail in 
Reed et al (1996).
The operators employed by AbNLP utilise a highly parsimonious set of intentional goals  . Belief goals are used to build the content of an argument  ( as in much other NLG work )  ; saliency goals to express the intention to convey information to the hearer  ( following a notion of saliency similar to that proposed in Walker  ,  1996) ; and topic manipulation goals to control the focus of attention through the discourse  . The roles of these goals and their interrelationships are explored in relation to the information-intention-attention model of Grosz and Sidner  ( 1986 ) in more detail in Reed and Long ( 1997a )  . 
3 Deductive Operators
The choice of operators implemented in the Rhetorica system has been influenced by a number of factors  . The rules of inference are clear candidates for operationalisation : moves such as Modus Ponens are clearly vital components of any argument- though  , as noted in Grosz and Sidner (1986) , p201 , it is inappropriate oview the implication step as one of conventional material implication  . The relationships rather one of support-the hearer must be brought to believe that  ( given the current context and domain of discourse  ) the first proposition warrants , in part , concluding the second . Even given this weaker , predicate-based reading of a Modus Ponens argument  , it is still unclear that any of the other rules of inference  ( which are , after all , formally redundant ) should be necessary . The answer lies in the second consideration , which is entirely empirical-the reason that the argument planning needs to be able to employ other rules of inference is that such argument forms occur naturally  . Modus Tollens , for example , is perfectly common , with numerous ( real world ) examples in argumentation texts such as Fisher ( 1988 )  . 
Further , there is a variety of evidence which suggests that Modus Tollens in fact occupies a crucial position in human reasoning  ( Ohlsson and Robin ( 1994 ) cite examples not only from psychology , artificial intelligence and empirical observation  , but also by reference to classic examples of Euclid  , Galileo , etc . )
Disjunctive Syllogisms are also found reasonably often  , but the remaining rules of inference are found very rarely  . For this reason , only the three logical argument forms , MP , MT and DS , are currently implemented . 
The three deductive operators are shown
Shell : Precond:

Body : Goals:
MT ( Ag , X , P)
Shell : Precond:

Goals : Body:
DS(Ag , X , P)


X , ( X-~P )
BEL(Ag , ~ P )
BEL(Ag , P ) t0:PUSHTOPIC(arg(X , P )) tI:BEL(Ag , X ) t2:IS_SALIENT(Ag , X , arg(X , P )) t3:BEL(Ag , X-)P ) t4: ISSALIENT(Ag , X-~P , arg(X , P )) t5:POP_TOPIC(arg(X , P))
X , (- P-~X )
BEL(Ag , ~ P )
BEL(Ag , P ) t0:PUSH_TOPIC(arg(-X , P )) tI:BEL(Ag , ~ X ) t2: IS_SALIENT(Ag , -X , arg(-X , P )) t3:BEL(Ag , ~ P-~X ) t4: IS_SALIENT(Ag , -P-+X , arg(~X , P )) t5:POP_TOPIC(arg(-X , P))
Precond:X , ( XvP)
BEL(Ag , ~ P )
Add : BEL(Ag , P)
Goals : t0:PUSH_TOPIC(arg(X , P )) tl:BEL(Ag , ~ X ) t2: ISSALIENT(Ag , ~X , arg(X , P )) t3:BEL(Ag , XvP ) t4: ISSALIENT(Ag , X v P , arg(X , P )) t5:POP_TOPIC(arg(X , P ))
Figure 1 . The deductive operators in Figure 1 ( the ordering sconstraining the body goals- enforcing initial and terminal positions for PUSH_TOPIC and POP_TOPIC respectively-are omitted for clarity  )  . The preconditions on each operator act as filters on their applicability  ( so that , for example , the version of MP shown is only applicable for the situation in which the hearer believes the negation of the conclusion  )  . 
The body is bounded by the topic manipulators which take as a parameter the topic for the current argument  , of the form arg(X , P ) , a generic expression representing an argument concluding P using a premise X  ( used to abstract from Modus Ponens , Modus Tollens , etc . ) . The saliency goals also employ the same context parameter : this is used at a later stage to ensure a basic level of coherency  ( by placing utterances within the appropriate focus space  ) -discussion of this mechanism is beyond the scope of this paper  . Finally , the operator bodies also include goals of belief which are satisfied  ( after refinement ) by further applications of the operators ( e . g . the goalt l in a given MP could be fulfilled by an MT  )   4 Refutation operators In addition to these deductive operators  ,   5~hetorica also employs pseudo-deductive operators , by means of which counter-counterargumentation structures can be developed  . The importance of including such refutation in an argument has been conclusively demonstrated in social psychology  ( Hovland ,  1957) . The operators required to effect the generation of such structure are closely related to the notions of conflict explored by Haggith  ( 1996 )  , and draw upon the distinction between rebutting and under cutting counterarguments  , identified in ( Toulmin ,  1958) . Given the situation portrayed in Figure 2 , in which the speaker believes p because of a , and also disbelieves b because of d and e , and the hearer believes-p supported by b and c , a number of options are available to the speaker . The conventional MP operator discussed above can be employed to support p by a - this is rebuttal  . 
In addition , the hearer's belief in-p can be under cut by arguing against one of its supports  , namely , b . 
- b/\dea
H-p/\bc
Figure 2. Sample scenario
There are thus no new operators for rebutting , since those in Figure 1 already fulfil that role . Under cutting , however , requires two new operators , one which characterises a refutation of a premise  ( UCP )  , and one which characterises a refutation of the validity of an inference  ( UCI )  . The operator definitions are shown below in Figure  3  . 
There are several points to note about these definitions  . First , that they are fairly loose , since the speaker is not obliged to believe the falsity of the hearer's premise  , merely be able to persuade the hearer of that falsity  ( though the speaker is somewhat constrained by rules of terminal goal fulfilment-in particular  , the BEE(H , P ) goal is prohibited from fulfilment by
Shell : Precond:

Body:Goals : tOtlt2t3t4t5
P , BEL(Ag , - P)
BEL(Ag , X ), BEL(Ag , X-gP)
BEL(Ag , P)
BEL(Ag , -X ): PUSH_TOPIC(arg(-X , P )): IS_SALIENT(Ag , X , arg(-X , P )): BEL(Ag , -X ): IS_SALIENT(Ag , -X , arg(-X , P )): IS_SALIENT(Ag , X-~P , arg(-X , P )): POP_TOPIC(arg(-X , P))
UCI(Ag , X , P)
Shell : Precond :-( X-+P ), BEL(Ag,-P )
BEL(Ag , X ), BEL(Ag , X-~P )
Add : BEL(Ag , P)
BEL(Ag , -( X-~P ))
Body:Goals : t0:PUSHTOPIC(arg(-(X-+P ) , P )) tI:IS_SALIENT(Ag , X , arg(-(X-~P ) , P )) tI:BEL(Ag , -(X-~P )) t2: IS_SALIENT(Ag , -( X-~P ) , arg(-(X-~P ) , P )) t5:POP_TOPIC(arg(-(X-eP) , P))
Figure 3 . Refutation operators any means other than substantial support  )  . 
Secondly , in the UCP operator , it is necessary to make sure that the hearer is aware that the premise supports his conclusion - but clearly  , the speaker doesn't want to offer any further support for the inference  , hence the absence of a belief goal corresponding to IS_SALIENT  ( Ag , XV , arg(-X , V )) . Lastly , a similar is suefaces the UCI operator-thetl goal expresses the need to make the premise salient before attacking it  . Indeed , stating counterarguments is the key to counter -counterargumentation : just mentioning a counterargument can bolster a claim  . The goal is particularly interesting both from a realisation point of view  ( where information can be exploited that x is being made salient in the context of an argument from ~ x  )  , and an ordering point of view ( whether or not statement should precede refutation  , and then whether or not UCP/I argumentation should precede prosupport is a major issue of debate in psychology  , Hass and Linder ,  1972) . 
The deductive operators , however , do not offer the full range of argument forms found in natural text  . One major omission is the class of inductive operators  , including analogy , inductive generalisation , and causal relation . The framework is designed to admit all these operators  , but the current work concentrates upon inductive generalisation  . 
Inductive generalisation ( IG ) is of particular interest for a number of reasons  . The first is the frequency with which various naively statistical and probabilistic arguments are employed in natural language  . More importantly , though , are the problems faced in argumentation theoretic analyses of inductive generalisation  . Freeman (1991) examines the problems in depth , and , building on Toulmin's work (1958) , and its criticisms , comes to a well justified conclusion that IG should be treated as a convergent arrangement  . His argument rests largely on the distinction between the ' ground adequacy ' and ' relevance ' questions : in analysing any argument as dialogical  , the analyst can look at any two premises and infer that some imaginary opponent had asked a question after the first premise to elicit the second  . If that question was ' Can you give mean other reason ?'  ( ground adequacy )  , the resulting structure is convergent , whereas if that question was ' Why does the premise support the conclusion ?'  ( relevance )  , the resulting structure is linked . An inductive generalisation is thus based on a number of premises between which an imaginary opponent continually asks the ground adequacy question  . The reason , Freeman claims , that inductive generalisation may be intuitively mistaken for a linked structure is that each premise in itself lends only very weak supporto the conclusion  , and that this generally results in assumption of linkage  . Freeman's work and its relation to other accounts of linked and convergent argumentation is explored more fully in  ( Reed and Long , 1997b ) . 
In following Freeman's attractive account of IG , it may appear that the required convergent structure can be fully accounted for in the existing framework  , by allowing the standard iterative fulfilment of goals of belief discussed  ( Reed and Long , 1997a ) . However , Freeman's account , because it is analytic , omits the rather obvious fact that premises in an IG have something in common with each other and with the conclusion  . That a premise in an IG is related to the conclusion in some respect cannot be handled simply by iterating through all available supports for an argument  , since there is no way to select all and only those premises which support the conclusion in the given respect  . Furthermore , it is important that the IG itself is seen as a unit  , since it is quite to be at liberty to intersperse various deductive premises for a conclusion in the midst of the inductive premises  ( or further , that if there exist two or more IGs supporting the same conclusion-each employing a different common attribute-it is inappropriate to mix premises from the various arguments  )  . Seeing the whole IG as a unit enables appropriate scoping for reordering : the premises within the unit can be reordered wholly within the unit  , and the unit itself can be moved around whole sale with respect to the other premises  . An IG is thus viewed in the current work as a premise  . This is illustrated in the diagrammatic argument notation as a phantom node  , as shown in Figure 4 . 

" IG ) ala2 . . . . . . an

X b c < ~- phantom node
Figure 4. Inductive Generalisation
Thus the IG premise phantom node is generated along with all the other premises for a given conclusion  . Then , after refinement , the individual premises within the inductive argument are determined  , occurring concurrently with identification of supports for the other premises which are at the level of the inductive generalisation  . In the scenario illustrated in Figure 4 , for example , the first round of planning identifies that there are three supports for the conclusion p  , namely , a Modus Ponens argument from each of b and c , and an inductive generalisation . After an appropriate order is determined for these three  , refinement opens up the bodies of the operators , and the supports for b and c are identified , and the inductive generalisation is fleshed out to include a ~ through a  . The process of building an inductive generalisation thus involves two different operators : the IG operator  , which identifies that an inductive generalisation is appropriate  , and the ISUP operator , which is used to select each inductive premise . To prevent an inductive generalisation from being considered at every turn  , the precondition list on IG states that there must exist at least one premise which can be used inductively-this is a bare minimum since an inductive generalisation employing a single premise is clearly very weak  . Strengthening the notion of inductive generalisation is a trivial task of increasing the minimum number of premises which must exist for the application of IG to be licensed  . 
The complete definitions for IG and
ISUP are given below in Figure 5.
IG(Ag ,


P , R)
Precond : HAS_PROPERTY(P,R)
HASPROPERTY(X,R)
Add : BEL(Ag , P)
Goals : t0:PUSH_TOPIC(arg(R , P )) t2:BEL(Ag , IG(R , P )) t3:IS_SALIENT(Ag , IG(R , P ) , arg(R , P )) t4:POP_TOPIC(arg(R , P))
ISUP ( Ag , P , R)
Shell : Precond:

Body : Goals:
HAS_PROPERTY(X,R)
BEL(Ag , IG(R , P )) t0:PUSHTOPIC(HAS_PROPERTY(X , R )) tl:BEL(Ag , X ) t2:IS_SALIENT(Ag , X , 
HAS_PROPERTY(X , R )) t3:BEL(Ag , HASPROPERTY(X , R )) t4: IS_SALIENT(Ag , HASPROPERTY(X , R ) , HAS_PROPERTY(X , R )) t5:POP_TOPIC(HASPROPERTY(X , R)
Figure 5. Refutation operators
A single new function is required to express the common feature of the premises and conclusion which license the inductive generalisation-this is implemented as a simple function call to r ~ S_PROPERTY which determines whether or not a given property holds for a given proposition  ( this functionality is encapsulated in an ' oracle ' following \[  Cohen87\]  )  . In both IG and ISUP , the notion of ' support ' is thus esche wed altogether and simply remains implicit in the fact that propositions are the same in respect R  . It is not necessary to introduce a new notion of support  . 

This paper has presented a number of features of the ~  ( hetorica system , and has introduced the deductive , refutation and inductive generalisation operators which are employed to generate the abstract structure of an argument  . In-certainly in coherence relation based NLG ( such as operational RST )  , but also in ( Elhadad , 1992) ( which capture some , but not all of the commonly found argument structures  ) and in ( Maybury ,  1993 )   ( which fails to capture the hierarchical nature of argument  )  . 
Evaluation of non-task-oriented NLG is difficult , particularly when the output is not text , but a plan of primitive operators . However , several evaluative observation support the approach  . First , though only touched upon here , the planning process produces a partially specified plan in which the underspecification is precisely that licensed by Cohen-like constraints on argument coherency  ( Reed and Long , 1997a ) appropriated from empirical studies in argumentation theory  . Furthermore , the approach enables these coherency constraints to be expressed in a tractable way  . Finally , a comparison of system output with natural arguments  ( of equivalent propositional content ) in a small corpus suggests that the constraints of coherency discussed here do indeed ensure the generation of coherent argument structures  , and that the interplay between them and constraints of persuasive effect facilitate the construction of natural language arguments which are both coherent and effective  . 

Bacchus , F . & Yang , Q .   ( 1992 ) The Expected Value of Hierarchical Problem -Solving  , AAAI-92 pp . 

Blair , H . (1838) Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles
Lettres , Charles Daly , London
Cohen , R .   ( 1987 ) Analyzing the Structure of Argumentative Discourse  , Computational
Linguistics 13/1, pp . 11--24
Eemeren , F.H.van , Grootendorst , R . & Snoeck-
Henkemans , F . (1996) Fundamentals of
Argumentation Theor ) ', Lawrence Erlbaum
Elhadad , M . (1992) Generating Coherent Argument Paragraphs , COLING'92 , Nantes , pp . 638--644 Fisher , A . (1988) The Logic of Real Arguments , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK Fox , M . & Long . , D . (1995) Hierarchical Planning using Abstraction , IEE Proceedings on Control Theory and Applications  142/3  , pp . 197 w210 Freeman , J . B .   ( 1991 ) Dialectics and the Macrostructure of Arguments , For is , Dordrecht Grosz , B . J . & Sidner , C . L . (1986) Attention , Intentions and the Structure of Discourse , Computational Linguistics 12/3 , pp . 175--204 Haggith , M .   ( 1996 ) "A metalevel argumentation framework for representing and reasoning about disagreement "  , PhD Thesis , Univ . of Edinburgh Hass , R . G . & Linder , D . E .   ( 1972 ) Counter argument availability and the effects of message structure on persuasion  , Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 23/2pp . 219-233
Hovland , C . I . (1957) The Order of Presentation in Persuasion , Yale University Press , New Haven Hovy , E . H .   ( 1993 ) Automated Discourse Generation Using Discourse Structure Relations  , Artificial
Intelligence 63, pp . 341--385
Mann , W . C . , Thompson , S . A . (1988) Rhetorical structure theor) , , Text 8/3 , pp . 243--281 Marcu , D . (1996) Building Up Rhetorical Structure
Trees AAAI '96, Portland , Oregon
Maybury , M . T .   ( 1993 ) Communicative Acts for Generative Natural Language Arguments  AAAI93 pp . 357--364 Moore , J . D . & Paris , C . L . (1994) Planning Text For Advisor) , Dialogues , Computational Linguistics 19/4 , pp . 651--694 Ohlsson , S . & Robin , N .   ( 1994 ) The Power of Negative Thinking : The Central Role of Modus Tollens in Human Cognition in " Proc  . of the l6th Conf . of the Cognitive Science Soc . ", pp . 681--686 Reed , C . A . , Long , D . P . & Fox , M .   ( 1996 ) An Architecture for Argumentative Dialogue Planning  , in Gabbay , D . & Ohibach , H . J . ( eds ) " Practical Reasoning " , Springer Verlag , pp . 555--566 Reed , C . A . & Long , D . P .   ( 1997a ) Content Ordering in the Generation of Persuasive Discourse  IJCAI'97  , Nagoya , Japan , pp . 1022--1027 Reed , C . A . & Long , D . P . (1997b ) Multiple Subarguments in Logic , Argumentation , Rhetoric and Text Generation in Gabbay , D . M . , et al ( eds ) " Qualitative and Quantitative Reasoning " , Springer
Verlag , pp . 496-510
Snoeck-Henkemans , F .   ( 1997 ) Verbal indicators of argumentation and explanation in " Proc  . of the OSSA Conf on Argument and Rhetoric ", St . 
Catharines , Ontario
Toulmin , S . E . (1958) The Uses of Argument , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK Walker , M . A .   ( 1996 ) The effect of resource limits and task complex it 3  , on collaborative planning in dialogue , Artificial Intelligence 85 , pp .  181-243
