Separable Verbs in a Reusable Morphological Dictionary for German 
Piusten Hacken1& Stephan Bopp 2
l Institut ftir Informatik/ASW2 Lexicologie , Faculteit der Letteren
Universit ~ it Basel , Peters graben 51 Vrije Universiteit , De Boelelaan 1105
CH-4051 Basel ( Switzerland ) NL-1081 HV Amsterdam ( Netherlands ) 
email : tenhacken@uba clu . unibas . chemail : bopp@let . vu . nl

Separable verbs are verbs with prefixes which , depending on the syntactic on text , can occur as one word written together or discontinuously  . They occur in languages such as German and Dutch and constitute a problem for NLP because they are lexemes whose forms cannot always be recognized by dictionary lookup on the basis of a text word  . Conventional solutions take a mixed lexical and syntactic approach  . In this paper , we propose the solution offered by Word Manager , consisting of string-based recognition by means of rules of types also required for periphrastic inflection and clitics  . In this way , separable verbs are dealt with as part of the domain of reusable lexical resources  . We show how this solution compares favourably with conventional approaches  . 
1. The Problem
In German there exists a large class of verbs which behave like  aufh6ren   ( ' stop ' )  , illustrated in (1) . 
(1) a . Annaglaubt , dass Bernard aufh 6rt.
(' Anna believes that Bernard stops ') b . Claudiah 6rt jet zt au f . 
(' Claudia stops now PRT ') c . Danielver such tauf zuh 6 ren . 
(' Dani eltries to_stop')
In subordinate clauses as in (1a ) , the particle auf and the inflected part of the verb  h6rt are written together . In main clauses such as ( lb ) , the inflected form h6rt is moved by verb-second , leaving the particle stranded . In infinitive clauses with the particle zu ( ' to ' )  , zu separates the two components of the verb and all three elements are written together  . 
In analysis , the problem of separable verbs is to combine the two parts of the verb in contexts such as  ( lb ) and ( lc )  . Such a combination is necessary because syntactic and semantic properties of  aufh6ren are the same , irrespective of whether the two parts are written together or not  , but they cannot be deduced from the syntactic and semantic properties of the parts  . Therefore , a solution to the problem of separable verbs will treat  ( lb ) as if it read ( 2a ) and ( lc ) as ( 2b ) :  ( 2 ) a . Claudia aufh 6rt jet zt . 
b . Daniel versucht zu aufh 6 ren.
The problem arises in a very similar fashion in Dutch  , as the Dutch translations ( 3 ) of the sentences in ( 1 ) show . The only difference is that the infinitive in ( 3c ) is not written together . 
(3) a . Annagelo of tdat Bernardo phoudt.
b . Claudi a houdtnuop.
c . Daniel probeer top te houden.
On the other hand , the problem of separable verbs in German and Dutch differs from the corresponding one in English  , because English verbs such as lookup are multiword units in all contexts  . A treatment of these cases which is in line with the solution proposed here is described by Tschichold  ( forthcoming )  . 
As suggested by the English translation , separable verbs in German and Dutch are lexemes . Therefore , an important issue in evaluating a mechanism for dealing with them is how it fits in with the reusability of lexical resources  . 
Given the importance of the orthographic component in the problem  , it~s not surprising that it is hardly if ever treated in the linguistic literature  . 
4712. Previous Approaches
In existing systems or resources for NLP , separable verbs are usually treated as a lexicographic and syntactic problem  . Two typical approaches can be illustrated on the basis of Celex and Rosetta  . 
Celex ( http://www . kun . nl/celex ) is a lexical database project offering a German dictionary with  50'000 entries and a Dutch dictionary with 120'000 entries . In these dictionaries separable verbs are listed with a feature conveying the information that they belong to the class of separable verbs and a bracketing structure showing the decomposition into a prefix and a base  , e . g . 
( auf ) ( h6ren ) . Celex dictionaries are reusable , but the rule component for the interpretation of the information on separable verbs  , i . e . 
the mechanism for going from ( lb-c ) to (2) , remains to be developed by each NLP-system using the dictionaries  . 
Rosetta is a machine translation system which includes Dutch as one of the source and target languages  . Rosetta ( 1994:78-79 ) describes howse parable verbs are treated . 
For the verbophouden illustrated in (3) , there are three lexical entries , ophouden for the continuous forms as in (3a ) , and houden and op for the discontinuous forms as in  ( 3b-c )  . When a form of houden is found in a text , it is multiply ambiguous , because it can be a form of the simple verb houden  ( ' hold ' ) or of one of these parable verbs ophouden ( ' stop ' )  , aanhouden (' arrest ') , afhouden (' with hold ') , etc . The entry for houden as part of ophouden contains the information that it must be combined with a particle op  . 
At the same time , opis ambiguous between a reading as preposition or particle  . In syntax , there is a rule combining the two elements in a sentence such as  ( 3b )  . It is clear that , while this approach may work , it is far from elegant . It creates ambiguity and redundancies , because ophouden written together is treated in a different entry from op+houden as a discontinuous nit  . These properties make the resulting dictionaries less transparent and do not favour reusability  . 
It should be pointed out that Celex and
Ro set tawere not chosen because their solution to the problem of separable verbs is worse than others  . They are representative examples of currently used strategies  , chosen mainly because they are relatively well -documented  . 
3. The Word Manager

Word Manager TM ( WM ) is a system for morphological dictionaries . It includes rules for inflection and derivation ( WM proper ) and for clitics and multiword units ( Phrase Manager , PM ) . We will use WM here as a name for the combination of the two components  . A general description of the design of WM , with references to various publications where the formalism is discussed in more detail  , can be found inten
Hacken & Domenig (1996).
The German WM dictionary consists of a comprehensive set of inflectional and word formation rules describing the full range of morphological processes in German  . In the last two years we have specified more than  100'000 database entries by classification of lexemes in terms of inflection rules  ( for morphologically simple entries ) and by the application of word formation rules ( for morphologically complex entries )  . In addition , the PM module contains a set of rules for clitics and multiword units which covers German periphrastic inflection patterns and separable verbs  . 
The rule types invoked in the treatment of separable verbs in WM include Inflection 
Rules ( I Rules) , Word Formation Rules ( WF Rules) , Periphrastic Inflection ( PI Rules) , and Clitic Rules ( CRules ) . We will describe ach of them in turn . 
3.1. Inflection
In inflection , aufhf Jren is treated as a verb with a detachable prefix at ! f The detachable prefix is defined as an underspecified IF ormative  . This means that , in the same way as for stems , its specification is distributed over a class specification and a citation-forms  ( IC at Detachable-Prefix ) word-forms ( IC at Detachable-Prefix )   ( IC at Detachable-Prefix )   ( IC at V-Stem )   ( IC at V-Suffix )   ( ModInf )   ( IC at V-Stem )   ( IC at V-Suffix )   ( IC at V-Prefix . ge ) ( IC at V-Stem ) .   .   . 
.. ( IC at V-Suffix ) ( Mod PaPa)
Fig . i : Inflection rule for separable verbs in WM . The dots in the last line mark the absence of a line break in the actual code  . Feature specifications separated by tabs refer to sets of formatives in paradigmatic variation  . Each line thus generates one or more word forms . 
target ( RIRule V_Detachable-Prefix ) separable 1 ( IC at Detachable-Prefix )  2  ( IC at V-Stem ) Fig .   2: Target specification of the WF Rule for separable verbs in WM  . 
specification of the individual string . The class is defined by the linguist in the specification of inflection processes  . The specification of the string is part of the lexicographic specification  , i . e . the string specification is the result of the application of the word formation rule the lexicographer chooses for the definition of an individual entry  . In the IRules , detachable prefixes are referred to as formatives in the formulae generating the word forms  . Fig .   1 gives the relevant rule of the database for otherwise regular separable verbs  , such as aufhOren . 
3.2. Word Formation
Word Formation Rules consist of a source definition and a target definition  . The source definition determines what ( kind of ) formatives are taken to form a new word . 
The target definition specifies how the source formatives are combined  , and which inflection rule the new word is assigned to  . 
Separable verbs are the result of WF Rules which are remarkable because of their target  . 
The target specification is as in Fig .  2 . This specification departs from the usual specification of a target in a WF Rule in two respects  . First , instead of concatenating the source formatives , the rule lists them , leaving concatenation to the IRule . This is necessary to form the past participle aufgeh6rt   , where the two formatives are separated by the prefix ge-  ( cf . last line of Fig .  1) . Separable verbs are specified by the lexicographer by linking a word to a WF Rule having a target specification as in Fig  .  2 . In the case of aufl ~ Oren , this is a rule for prefixing in which "1" in Fig . 2 matches a closed set of predefined prefixes . The IRules and WF Rules described so far cover the non-separated occurrences a in  ( 1a )  . 
The second special property of the specification i Fig  .   2 is the system keyword " separable " in the second line  . It assigns the result of the WF Rule to the predefined class % separable  . This class , whose name is defined in the WM-formalism , can be used to establish a link between the result of word formation and the input to the periphrastic inflection mechanism used to recognize occurrences such as in  ( lb )  . 
3.3. Periphrastic Inflection
The mechanism for periphrastic nflection in WM consists of two parts  . PIClasses are used to identify the components and PIRules to turn them into a single word form  . The PIRule for separable verbs in German is given in Fig  .  3 . The rule in Fig , 3 consists of a name and a body , which in turn consists of input and output specifications separated by "="  . The input specifies a finite verb form ( infinitive and participles are excluded by "^" ) and a detachable prefix . The output combines them in the position of the verb  , with the form prefix + verb , and with the features percolated from the verb ( person ,   ( Cat V ) ^ ( ModInf ) ^ ( Mod Part ) +% separable = . .
.. ( POSI ) ( FORM2+i ) ( PERCi ) ( Cat V)
Fig .   3:Pefip~asticInflection Rule ~ rseparable verbs in WM . 
% separable + ( CE lement zu )  +  ( Cat V )   ( ModInf )   ( Temp Pres )   .   .   .   . 
. . ( CE lement zu ) , % separable + ( Cat V )   ( ModInf )   ( Temp Pres ) Fig .   4: CRule for the infinitive of separable verbs in number  , etc . ) . This yields ( 2a ) as a step in the analysis of ( lb )  . 
The possibilities for specifying the relative position of the two elements to be combined are the same as the possibilities for multiword units in general  . In the PIClass for German it is specified that the finite verb always precedes the particle when the two are separated  . In Dutch this is not the case , as illustrated by (3c ) , so that a different specification is required . 
3.4. Clitic Rules
The clitic rule mechanism is used to analyse aufzuh6ren in ( lc ) and produce zu aufh6ren as in ( 2b )  . The CRule used is given in Fig . 
4 . Again input and output are separated by "=" . The input consists of the concatenation of three elements : a detachable prefix  , infinitival zu , and an infinitive . Graphic concatenation is indicated by "+" . The CE lement zu is defined elsewhere as a form of the infinitival zu  , rather than the homonymous preposition , in order not to lose information . The output consists of two words , as indicated by the comma , the second of which concatenates the prefix and the verb  . 
3.5. Recognition and

In recognition , the input is the largest domain over which components of multiword units  ( MWUs ) can be spread . In practice , this coincides with the sentence . 
Since WM does not contain a parser , larger chunks of input will result in spurious recognition of potential MWUs  . Let us assume as an example that the sentences in  ( 1 ) are given as input . 

The first component o act is the clitics component  . It leaves everything unchanged except ( lc ) , which is replaced by ( 2b ) : auf zuh6 ren=>zuat ! f176 ren . Then the rules of WM proper are activated . They replace each wordform by a set of analyses in terms of a string and feature set  . In (1a ), att . flliJrt is analysed as third person singular or second person plural of the present tense of aufh Oren  , in ( lb ) hOrt and attf are analysed separately , and in ( Ic ) au fiti ~ ren , which was given the feature infinitive by the C Rule in Fig  .  4 , only as infinitive , not as any of the homonymous forms in the paradigm  . The next step is periphrastic nflection . It applies to ( la ) and ( lc ) vacuously , but combines hOrt and auf in ( lb ) , producing the feature description corresponding to  ( 2b ) : h Ortau f = > au f h Ort . Finally , the idiom recognition component ( not treated here ) applies vacuously . 
A general remark on recognition is in order here . The rule components of PM , i . e . 
clitics , periphrastic inflection and idiom recognition add their results to the set of intermediater presentations available at the relevant point  . Thus , after the clitic component , attfz . uhiSren continues to exist alongs idez u auJh6ren in the analysis of ( lc )  . 
Since the former cannot be analysed by WM proper , it is discarded . Likewise , hgrt will survive in ( lb ) after periphrastic inflection and indeed as part of the final result  . This is necessary in example such as ( 4 ) :  ( 4 ) Der Hundh 6rt auf den Namen Wurzel . 
(' The dog answers to the name \[ of \]

Since rules in WM are not inherently directional , it is also possible to generate all forms of a lexeme such as aufhOren in the way they may occur in a text  . The client include codes indicating places in the string where other material may intervene  , because this information is available in the relevant 
PIClass of the database.
4. Conclusion
Separable verbs in German and Dutch constitute a problem in NLP because they are lexemes whose recognition is not simply a matter of dictionary lookup  . Therefore , are usable lexical database such as Celex does not offer a comprehensive solution to the problem  . On the other hand , treating them as a problem of syntactic recognition  , as implemented in , for instance , Rosetta , fails to account for the lexeme character of separable verbs  . As a consequence , spurious ambiguities and redundancies are created . 
Ambiguities arise between a simple verb such as hSren  ( ' hear ' ) and the same form functioning as part of a separable verb such as auflzOren  . Redundancies merge between the two different entries for aufhOren  , one for the continuous and one for the discontinuous occurrences  . 
In Word Manager , the recognition of separable verbs is entirely within there usable lexical domain  . A client application can start from an input which resembles  ( 2 ) rather than ( lb-c )  . An indication of the type of input is given in ( 5 ) and ( 6 )  . For ( lb ) , (5a ) and (5b ) are offered as alternatives . For ( lc ) ,   ( 6 ) is offered as the only analysis ( modulo syncretism of versucht )  . 
(5) a . claudia ( Cat Noun ) auf h6 ren ( Cat Verb ) (Tense Pres )   ( Pers Third ) (Num SG ) jetzt ( Cat Adv ) b . claudia ( Cat Noun ) ht~ren ( Cat Verb ) (Tense Pres )   ( Pers Third ) (Num SG ) jetzt ( Cat Adv ) auf ( Cat Prep )   ( 6 ) daniel ( Cat Noun ) versuchen ( Cat Verb ) (Tense Pres )   ( Pers Third ) (Num SG ) zu ( CatInf-marker ) auf h6 ren ( Cat Verb ) (Mode Inf ) The task of the client application in the recognition of separable verbs in  ( 1 ) is reduced to the choice of ( 5a ) rather than ( 5b )  . 
Finally , two points deserve to be emphasized . First , the entire WM-formalism for separable verbs has been implemented as described here  . The rules for German have been formulated and a large dictionary for 
German ( 100'000 entries ) including separable verbs is available . Moreover , the only provision in the WM-formalism specifically geared towards the treatment of separable verbs is the keyword separable in WF Rules  ( cf . Fig . 2) and the corresponding class name % separable . Otherwise the entire formalism used for separable verbs is available as a consequence of general requirements of morphology and multiword units  . 
Referencesten Hacken , Pius & Domenig , Marc (1996) , ' Reusable Dictionaries for NLP : The
Word Manager Approach ', Lexicology 2: 232-255.
Rosetta , M.T . (1994), Compositional
Translation , Kluwer Academic,

Tschichold , Cornelia ( forthcoming ), English
MultiWord Units in a Lexicon for
Natural Language Processing , Ph.D.
dissertation , Universitfit Basel ( Dec.
1996), to appear at Olms Verlag,

Word Manager : http://www . unibas . ch/Lllab/projects/wordmanager/wordmanager . html
Fig . 5: URL for Word Manager.

