Spontaneous Lexicon Change
Luc Steels ?1, 2) and Fr6d 6ricKaplan(1, 3)
(1) Sony CSL Paris-6Rue Amyot , 75005 Paris
(2) VUBAIL ab-B russels
(3) LIP6-4, place Jussieu 75232 Pariscedex05
Abstract
The paper argues that language change can be explained through the stochasticity observed in realworld natural language use  . This thesis is demonstrated by modeling language use through language games played in an evolving population of agents  . We show that the artificial languages which the agents spontaneously develop based on self -organisation  , do notevolve even if the population is changing . 
Then we introduce stochasticity in language use and show that this leads to a constant innovation  ( new forms and new form-meaning associations ) and a maintenance of variation in the population , if the agents are tolerant ovariation . Some of these variations over take xisting linguistic t conventions  , particularly in changing populations , thus explaining lexicon change . 
1 Introduction
Natural language volution takes place at all levels of language  ( McMahon ,  1994) . This is partly due to external factors such as language contact between different populations or the need to express new meanings or support new modes of interaction with language  . But it is well-established that language also changes spontaneously based on an internal dynamics  ( Labov ,  1994) . For example , many sound changes , like from/b/to/p / , / d/to/t / , and / g/to / k / , which took place in the evolution from proto-Indo -European to Modern Germanic languages  , do not have an external motivation . 
Neither do many shifts in the expression of meanings  . For example , the expression of future tense in English has shifted from " shall " to " will "  , even though " shall " was perfectly suited and " will " meant something else  ( namely " wanting to " )  . Similarly , restructuring of the grammar occurs without any apparent reason  . 
For example , in Modern English the auxiliaries come before the main verb  , whereas in Old English after it ( ' he conquered be would ' ( Old English ) vs . ' he would be conquered ' ( Modern English )) . This internal , apparently nonfunctional evolution of language has been discussed widely in the linguistic literature  , leading some linguists to strongly reject the possibility of evolutionary explanations of language  ( Chomsky ,  1990) . 
In biological systems , evolution takes place because \[1\] a population shows natural variation , and \[2\] the distribution of traits in the population changes under the influence of selection pressures present in the environment  . Note that biological variation is also nonfunctional  . 
Natural selection acts post . factum as a selecting agent , pushing the population in certain directions , but the novelty is created independently of a particular goal by stochastic forces operating during genetic transmission and development  . Our hypothesis i that the same applies to language  , not at the genetic but at the cultural level . We hypothesise that language formation and evolution take place at the level of language itself  , without any change in the genetic make up of the agents  . Language recruits and exploits available brain capacities of the agents but does not require any capacity which is not already needed for other activities  ( see also ( Batali ,  1998) , ( Kirby and Hurford ,  1997)) . 
The present paper focuses on the lexicon . It proposes a model to explain spontaneous lexicon evolution  , driven solely by internal factors . 
In order to have any explanatory force at all , we cannot put into the model the ingredients that we try to explain  . Innovation , maintenance of variation , and change should follow as emergent properties of the operation of the model  . Obtaining variation is not obvious , be-natural tendency towards coherence , otherwise communication would not be effective . An adequate explanatory model of lexicon change must therefore show  \[1\] how a coherent lexicon may arise in a group of agents  ,   \[2\] how nevertheless the lexicon may remain internally varied and exhibit constant innovation  , and \[3\] how some of this variation may be amplified to become dominant in the population  . These three quite difficult challenges are taken up in the next three sections of the paper  . 
2 Howacoherent lexicon may arise
To investigate concretely how a lexicon may originate  , be transmitted from one generation to the next , and evolve , we have developed a minimal model of language use in a dynamically evolving population  , called the naming game ( Steels ,  1996) . The naming game has been explored through computational simulations and is related to systems proposed and investigated by  ( Oliphant ,  1996) , ( MacLennan ,  1991) , ( Werner and Dyer ,  1991) , a . o . It has even been implemented on robotic agents who develop autonomously a shared lexicon grounded in their sensorimotor experiences  ( Steels and Vogt ,  1997) , ( Steels ,  1997) . The naming game focuses on associating form and meaning  . Obviously in human natural languages both form and meaning are non-atomic entities with complex internal structure  , but the results reported here do not depend on this internal complexity  . 
We assume a set of agents . A where each agent a E , 4 has contact with a set of objects O = o0 ,   . . . , on . The set of objects constitutes the environment of the agents  . A word is a sequence of letters randomly drawn from a finite alphabet  . The agents are all assumed to share the same alphabet  . A lexicon ? is a time-dependent relation between objects  , words , and a score . Each agent a EA hash is own set of words W ~ , t and his own lexicon L a , tCOa ? Wa , t?J  ~ , which is initially empty . 
An agent a is therefore defined at a time t as a pair at = < W ~  , t , La , t > . There is the possibility of synonymy and homonymy : An agent can associate a single word with several objects and a given object with several words  . It is not required that all agents have at all times the same set of words and the same lexicon  . 
We assume that environmental conditions identify a context CCO  . The speaker selects one object as the topic of this context fsEC  . 
He signals this topic using extralinguistic communication  ( such as through pointing )  . Based on the interpretation of this signalling , the hearer constructs an object score 0 . 0 < e o <_1 . 0 for each object o E C reflecting the likelihood that o is the speaker's topic  . If there is absolute certainty , one object has a score of 1 . 0 and the others are all 0 . 0 . If there is no extralinguistic communication , the likelihood of all objects is the same . If there is only vague extralinguistic communication  , the hearer has some idea what the topic is , but with less certainty . The meaning scope parameter am determines the number of object candidates the hearer is willing to consider  . The meaning focus parameter Cm determines the tolerance to consider objects that are not the center of where the speaker pointed to  . 
In the experiments reported in this paper , the object-score is determined by assuming that all objects are positioned on a  2-dimensional grid . 
The distanced between the topic and the other objects determines the object-score  , such that )
Cm is the meaning focus factor.
To name the topic , the speake retrieves from his lexicon all the associations which involve fs  . 
This set is called the association-set offs . Le to EO be an object , aE?4 be an agent , and t a time moment , then the association-set of o is Ao , a , t = < o , w , u > l < o , w , u > eLa , t ( 2 ) Each of the associations in this set suggests a word w to use for identifying o with a score  0  . 0_< u_<1 . 0 . The speaker orders the words based on these scores  . He then chooses the association with the largest score and transmits the word which is part of this association to the hearer  . 
Next the hearer receives the word w transmitted by the speaker  . To handle stochasticity the hearer not only considers the word itself a set of candidate words W related to w  . These are all the words in the word set of the hearer Wh  , t that are either equal to worrelated with some distance to w  . The form scope parameter score is imposed over the members of the set of candidate words : ? I is the form-focus factor  . The higher this factor , the sharper the hearer has been able to identify the word produced by the speaker  , and therefore the less tolerant he hearer is going to be to accept other candidates  . 
For each word w j in W , the hearer then retrieves the association-set that contains it  . 
He constructs a score-matrix which contains for each object a row and for each word form a column  . The first column contains the object-scores e o , the first row the form-score sm ~ . Each cell in the inner-matrix contains the association-score for the relation between the object and the wordform in the lexicon of the hearer : 
WlW2 ...
mwImw2 ...
O1eolu(o \], Wl > U ~ Ol , w2  ...
02 Co2U<o2,w\]>U<o2, w2> ...
Obviously many cells in the matrix may be empty ( and then set to 0 . 0) , because a certain relation between an object and a wordform may not be in the lexicon of the hearer  . Note also that there may be objects identified by lexicon lookup which are not in the initial context C  . 
They are added to the matrix , but their object-score is 0 . 0 . 
The final state of an innermatrix cell of the score matrix is computed by taking a weighted sum of  ( 1 ) the object-score o on its row , (2) the wordform score m ~ on its column , and (3) the association-score a < o , ~> in the cell itself . 
Weights indicate how strong the agent is willing to rely on each source of information  . One object-word pair will have the best score and the corresponding object is the topic fh chosen by the hearer  . The association in the lexicon of this object -word pair is called the winning association  . This choice integrates extralinguistic information  ( the object-score )  , wordform ambiguity ( the word-form-score ) , and the current state of the hearer's lexicon ( the association-score )  . 
The hearer then indicates to the speaker what topic he identified  . In realworld language games , this could be through a subsequent action or through another linguistic interaction  . 
When a decision could be made and fh = fs the game succeeds  , otherwise it fails . 
The following adaptations take place by the speaker and the hearer based on the outcome of the game  . 
1 . The game succeeds This means that speaker and hearer agree on the topic  . To re-enforce the lexicon , the speaker increments the score u of the associa ~ on that he preferred  , and hence used , with a fixed quantity ~ . And decre-ments the score of then competing associations with ~  .  0 . 0 and 1 . 0 remain the lower and upper bound of u . An association is competing if it associates the topic fs with another word  . The hearer increments by ~ the score of the association that came out with the best score in the score-matrix  , and decrements hencompeting associations with ~ . An association is competing if it associates the wordform of the winning association with another meaning  . 
2 . The game fails There are several cases : 1 . The Speaker does not know a word It could be that the speaker failed to retrieve from the lexicon an association covering the topic  . In that case , the game fails but the speaker may create a new wordform wr and associate this with the topic fs in his lexicon  . This happens with a word creation probability we . 
2. The hearer does not know the word.
In other words there is no association in the lexicon of the hearer involving the wordform of the winning association  . In that case , the game ends in failure but the hearer may extend his lexicon with a word absorption probability wa  . 
He associates the wordform with the highest form -score to the object with the highest object -score  . 
3. There is a mismatch between f h and f s.
In this case , both speaker and hearer have to adapt their lexicons  . The speaker and the hearer decrement with ~ the association that they used  . 
Figure 1 shows that the model achieves our first objective  . It displays the results of an experiment wherein phase  1 a group of 20 agents develops from scratch a shared lexicon for naming  10 objects . Average game success reaches 6 oi : , .  ,~  1 2 "~-~ 30 ~ , ,-20 0 ~  . 0 Closed ~ em ~ Oneag , nt changes ~ On , Igl . t?ha . ges
C , eVely200 games ~ every 200 games
Figure 1: The graphs show for a population of 20 agents and 10 meaning show a coherent set of form-meaning pairs emerges  ( phase 1 )  . In a second phase , an in-and outflow of agents ( 1 in/outflow per 200 games ) is introduced , the language stays the same and high success and coherence is maintained  . 
a maximum and lexicon coherence ( measured as the average spread in the population of the most dominant form-meaning pairs  ) is high ( 100 % ) In the early stage there is important lexicon change as new form-meaning pairs need to be generated from scratch by the agents  . Lexicon change is defined to take place when a new form-meaning pair over takes another one in the competition for the same meaning  . 
Phase 2 demonstrates that the lexicon is re-silient to a flux in the population  . An in-and outflow of agents is introduced . A new agent coming into the population has no knowledge at all about the existing set of conventions  . Success and coherence therefore dip but quickly re-gain as the new agents acquire the existing lexicon  . High coherence is maintained as well as high average game success  . Between the beginning of the flux and the end ( after 30 , 000 language games ) , the population has been renewed 5 times . Despite of this , the lexicon has not changed . It is transmitted across generations without change  . 
3 How a lex icon may innovate and mainta in var ia tion So  , although this model explains the formation and transmission of a lexicon it does not explain why a lexicon might change  . Once a winner-take-all situation emerges , competing forms are completely suppressed and no new innovation arises  . Our hypothesis i that innovation and maintenance of variation is caused by stochasticity in language use  ( Steels and Kaplan ,  1998) . Stochasticity naturally arises in realworld human communication and we very much experienced this in robotic experiments as well  . Stochasticity is modeled by a number of additional stochastic operators :  1  . Stochasticity in nonlinguistic ommunica-tion can be investigated by probabilistically introducing a random error as to which object is used as topic to calculate the object-score  . The probability is called the topic-recognition -stochasticity T  . 
2 . Stochasticity in the message transmission process is caused by an error in production by the speaker or an error in perception by the hearer  . It is modeled with a second stochastic operator F  , the form-stochasticity , which is the probability that a character in the string constituting the word formmutates  . 
3 . Stochasticity in the lexicon is caused by errors in memory lookup by the speaker or the hearer  . These errors are modeled using a third stochastic operator based on a parameter A  , the memory-stochasticity , which alters the scores of the associations in the score matrix in a probabilistic fashion  . 
The hearer has to take a broader scope into account in order to deal with stochasticity  . He should also decrease the focus so that alternative candidates get a better chance to compete  . 
The broader scope and the weaker focus has also the side effect that it will maintain variation in the population  . This is illustrated in figure 2 . In the first phase there is a high form -stochasticity as well as a broad form-scope  . Different forms compete to express the same meaning and none of them manages to become the winner  . When form-stochasticity is set to 0 . 0 , the innovation dies out but the broad scope maintains both variations  . One form ( " lu do " ) emerges as the winner but another form ( " mudo " ) is also maintained in the population . There is no longer a winner-take-all situation because agents tolerate the variation  . We conclude the following :
O , a I " 0, 75"i . U ~ o . ~? I iii ; o , 4 ~ r~t'IUDO?'~+12 0 , 2" t " 0 , It t1~e $ Figure 2: Competition diagram in the presence of form -stochasticity and a broad form-scope  . 
The diagram shows all the forms competing for the same meaning and the evolution of their score  . When F = 0 . 3 new wordforms are occasionally introduced resulting in new word-meaning associations  . When F = 0 . 0 the innovation dies out although some words are still able to maintain themselves due to the hearer's broad focus  . 
1 . Stochasticity introduces innovation in the lexicon  . There is no longer a clear winner-take-all situation  , whereby the lexicon stays in an equilibrium state  . Instead , there is a rich dynamics where new forms appear , new associations are established , and the domination pattern of associations i challenged  . The different sources of stochasticity each innovate in their own way : Topic-stochasticity introduces new form-meaning associations for existing forms  . 
Form-stochasticity introduces new forms and hence potentially new form-meaning associations  . Memory-stochasticity shifts the balance among the word-meaning associations competing for the expression of the same meaning  . 
2 . Tolerance to stochasticity , due to a broad scope ( hightrf ) and a weak focus ( low  f )  , maintains variation . For example , suppose a form " lu do " is transmitted by the speaker but the hearer has only " mu do " in his lexicon  . If the form-focus factor is low and if both forms refer in the respective agents to the same object  , their communication will be successful , because the word-score of " mudo " will not deviate that much from " lu do "  . Neither the hearer nor the speaker will change their lexicons  . Similar effects arise when the agent broadens the meaning scope and weakens its meaning focus to deal with meaning stochasticity  , caused by error or uncertainty in the nonlinguistic om-munication  . 
4 How variation is amplified
Although stochasticity and the agent's increased tolerance to cope with stochasticity explain innovation and the maintenance of variation  , they do not in themselves explain lexicon change . Particularly when a language is already established  , the new form-meaning pairs do not manage to over take the dominating pair  . To get lexicon change we need an additional factor that amplifie some of the variations present in the population  . Several such factors are probably at work . The most obvious one is a change in the population  . New agents arriving in the community may first acquire a minor variant which they then start to propagate further  . After a while this variant could become in turn the dominant variant  . We have conducted a series of experiments otest this hypothesis  , with remarkable results . Typically there is a period of stability ( even in the presence of uncertainty and stochasticity  ) followed by a period of instability and strong competition  , again followed by a period of stasis . This phenomenon has been observed for natural anguages and is known in biology as punctuated equilibria  ( Eldredge and
Gould , 1972).
The following are results of experiments focusing on form-stochasticity  . Figure 3 shows the average game success , lexicon coherence , and lexicon change for an evolving population . 
30,000 language games are shown . It starts when the population develops a lexicon from scratch  ( phase 1 )  . Form-scope is constantly kept at a I-- 5 in other words five forms are considered similar to the world heard  . Initially there is no form-stochasticity . In phase 2 a flow in the population is introduced with a new agent every  100 games . We see that there is no lexicon change . Success and Coherence is maintained at high levels  . Then form-stochasticity is increased to sigma/ =   0  . 05 in phase 3 . Initially there is still no lexicon change . But gradually the language destabilises and rapid change is observed  . 
Interestingly enough average game success and coherence are maintained at high levels  . Afteri:~~~' , f ' i " ~" ~" , 20 i : ' , ,  , ~' ~ i ~ i : ~ ,  = / \]  . L ! ~ : i i ~' i , \] nil ? htL/hguige ~ hlfl~l ( og ~ ulat ~? l ) /-- '40 : % . : . , %::::' =2: '2 ,  .   , o:e Vtly100 evely100F ~)--~: ?* muo , ,m * ,  ~  . ~* o . * o * ~* . ~*\[ Figure 3: The diagram shows that change requires both the presence of uncertainty and stochasticity  , high tolerance ( due to broad scope and diffuse focus ) and a flux in the population . The lexicon is maintained even in the case of population change  ( phase 2 )  , but starts to change when stochasticity is increased  ( phase 3 )  . 
a certain period a new phase of stability starts.
A companion figure ( figure 4 ) focuses on the competition between different forms for the same meaning  . In the initial stage there is a winner-take-all situation  ( the word " bagi " )  . 
When stochasticity is present , new forms start to emerge but they are not yet competitive  . 
It is only when the flux in the population is positive that we see one competitor " pagi " becoming strong enough to eventually overtake " bag i "  . " bagi " resulted from a misunderstanding of " pagi "  . There is a lot of instability as other words also enter into competition  , giving successive dominance of " kagi " , then " kugi " and then " kugo " . A winner-take-all situation arises with " kugo " and therefore a new period of stability sets in  . Similar results can be seen for stochasticity in nonlinguistic ommunica-tion and in the lexicon  . 
5 Conclusions
The paper has presented a theory that explains spontaneous lexicon change based on internal factors  . The theory postulates that ( 1 ) coherence in language is due to self -organisation  , i . e . 
the presence of a positive feedback loop between the choice for using a form-meaning pair and the success in using it  , (2) innovation is dueio . ~  . I-I
Jo ~? j?"+!120 , 6 t " iI ~@ li ' , On e = gent ' , One agent Small 0 , 5 ? i Cle~d~tmi chanties : cha ; ~ oesSt ? ? h , ~ i city 0 , 4 + wer~10 0 , , wlrf 100 F ,  . O , 06 games : gameso , z + 0 , 2 ? o , I , J-:DA61BOO1"\^' , 1 , f , ' ~ I ~@ l ~"" ~ vaa , :' , flJl ; ~ ifi . 1 i:I . ~* o , ' ~? LI , L : __ Figure 4: The diagram shows the competition between different forms for the same meaning  . 
We clearly see first arapid winner-take-all situation with the word " bagi "  , then the rise of competitors until one ( " pagi " ) over takes the others . 
A period of instability follows after which a new dominant winner  ( " kugo " ) emerges . 
to stochasticity , i . e . errors in form transmission , nonlinguistic ommunication , or memory access ,   ( 3 ) maintenance of variation is due to the tolerance agents need to exhibit in order to cope with stochasticity  , namely the broadening of scope and the weakening of focus  , and finally ( 4 ) amplification of variation happens due to change in the population  . Only when all four factors are present will effective change be observed  . 
These hypotheses have been tested using a formal model of language use in a dynamically evolving population  . The model has been implemented and subjected to extensive computational simulations  , validating the hypotheses . 
6 Acknowledgement
The research described in this paper was conducted at the Sony Computer Science Laboratory in Paris  . The simulations presented have been built on top of the BABEL toolkit developed by Angus McIntyre  ( McIntyre , 1998) of Sony CSL . Without this superb toolkit , it would not have been possible to perform the required investigations within the time available  . 
We are also indebted to Mario Tokoro of Sony CSL Tokyo for continuing to emphasise the importance of stochasticity in complex adaptive systems  . 


J . Batali .  1998 . Computational simulations of the emergence of grammar  . In J . Hurford , C . Knight , and M . Studdert-Kennedy , editors , Approaches to the Evolution of Language . Edinburgh University Press , Edinburgh . 
N . Chomsky . 1990. Rules and representations.
Brain and Behavior Science , 3:1-15.
N . Eldredge and S . Gould .  1972 . Punctuated equilibria : an alternative tophyletic gradual-ism  . In T . Schopf , editor , Models in palae obi-ology , pages 82-115 , San Francisco . Freeman and Cooper . 
S . Kirby and J . Hurford .  1997 . Learning , culture and evolution in the origin of linguistic constraints  . In P . Husbands and I . Harvey , editors , Proceedings of the Fourth European Conference on Artificial Life  , pages 493-502 . 
MIT Press.
W . Labov .  1994 . Principles of Linguistic Change . Volume 1: Internal Factors . Back-well , Oxford . 
B . MacLennan .  1991 . Synthetice thology : An approach to the study of communication  . In C . Langton , editor , Artificial Life II , Redwood City , Ca . Addison-Wesley Pub . Co . 
A . McIntyre .  1998 . Babel : A test bed for research in origins of language  . To appear in
COLINGACL 98, Montreal.
A . McMahon .  1994 . Understanding Language Change . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 
M . Oliphant .  1996 . The dilemma of saussure an communication . Biosystems , 1-2(37):31-38 . 
L . Steels and F . Kaplan .  1998 . Stochasticity as a source of innovation in language games  . In C . Adami , R . Belew , H . Kitano , and C . Taylor , editors , Proceedings of Artificial Life VI , 
Los Angeles , June . MIT Press.
L . Steels and P . Vogt .  1997 . Grounding adaptive language games in robotic agents  . In I . Harvey and P . Husbands , editors , Proceedings of the 4th European Conference on Artificial Life , Cambridge , MA . The MIT Press . 
L . Steels . 1996. Self-organizing vocabularies.
In C . Langton , editor , Proceeding of Alife V,
Nara , Japan.
L . Steels .  1997 . The origins of syntax invisually grounded robotic agents  . In M . Pollack , editor , Proceedings of the 15th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  , Los Angeles . Morgan Kauffman Publishers . 
G . M . Werner and M . G . Dyer .  1991 . Evolution of communication iartificial organisms  . In C . G Langton , C . Taylor , and J . D . Farmer , editors , Artificial Life II , Vol . X of SFI Studies in the Sciences of Complexity , Redwood
City , Ca . Addison-Wesley Pub.

Spontane Verandering envanhet LexiconDit artikel argument eert dattaa levolutiel ~ n verklaard worden a and e h and v and e stoc has -ticite it diezich voor doet bij taalge bruik in real-istische omstandigheden  . Deze hypothese word taange to ond do or taalge bruik te modeller enviata alspelenine en evoluer en de populatievan agenten  . Wijtonena and at deartifici ~ letalendie de agent ensponta a nont wikkelen via zelf -organisatie  , nietevolueren , zelf sals depopu-latiever and ert . Dan introducer enwestochas-ticite it in ta alge bruikent one na and at ditleidt to t innovatie  ( nieu we vormen ennieu we vorm-beteken is associaties  ) entothetbe houd van variatie in depopulatie . Sommige van deze vari-aries worden dominant , voor alals depopulatiever and ert . Op die manier kunnen we de lexical ever andering en verk laren  . 
Changements spontan ~ s de lexique
Ce document d6fend l'id@equeles change-ments linguistiques peuvent ~ tre  expliqu6s parla stochasticit6 observ@esdansl'utilisation effectivedu langage nature l  . Nous souten on scetteth ~ senutilisant unmodule informatique minimal desusages linguistiques ous lafor medejeux de langaged ansune population d ' agents en  6volution   . Nous montrons queles langues artificielles que lesagents  d6veloppent spon-'tan~mentens ' auto-organi sant , ' ~ voluent pasm ~ mesilapopulations emodifie . Nousin-tro duison sensuite , dans l ' utilisation du fan-gage , delastochastic it ~ etmontrons comment un niveau constant d ' innovation appara it  ( nou-velles formes , nouveaux sens , nouvelles association sent reformes et sens ) et comment des variations peuvents emaintenir dans lapopulation  . 
Certaines deces variations prennent la place de conventions lexicales existantes  , en particulier dansle cas de populationsqui@ voluent  , cequipermet d ' expliquer leschangements du lexique  . 

