Reference Resolution beyond Coreference :
a Conceptual Frame and its Application
Andrei POPE SCU-BELIS , Isabelle ROBBA and G6rardSABAH
Language and Cognition Group , LIMSI-CNRS
B . P . 133
Orsay , France , 91403
popescu , robba , gs@limsi.fr

A model for reference use in communication is proposed  , from a rep-resentationist point of view . Both the sender and the receiver of a message handle representations of their common environment  , including mental representations of objects . Reference resolution by a computer is viewed as the construction of object representations using referring expressions from the discourse  , whereas often only coreference links between such expressions are looked for  . Differences between these two approaches are discussed  . 
The model has been implemented with elementary rules  , and tested on complex narrative texts ( hundreds to thousands of referring expressions )  . The results support the mental representations paradigm  . 

Most of the natural anguage understanding methods have been originally developed on domain-specific examples  , but more recently several methods have been applied to large corpora  , as for instance morphosyntactic tagging or word sense disambiguation  . These methods contribute only indirectly to text understanding  , being far from building a conceptual representation of the processed is course  . Anaphora or pronoun resolution have also reached significant results on unrestricted texts  . 
Coreference resolution is the next step on the way towards discourse understanding  . 
The Message Understanding Conferences ( MUC ) propose since 1995 a coreference task : coreferring expressions are to be linked using appropriate markup  . 
Reference resolution goes further : it has to find out which object is referred to by an expression  , thus gradually building a representation f the objects with their features and evolution  . Coreference resolution is only part of this task , as coreference is only a relation between two expressions that refer to the same object  . 
A framework for reference use in human communication is introduced in Section  1  , in order to give a coherent and general view of the phenomenon  . Consequences for a resolution mechanism are then examined : data structures  , operations , selectional constraints and activation . This approach is then compared to others in Section  2  . Section 3 describes briefly the implementation f the model , the texts and the scoring methods . Results are given in Section 4 , to corroborate the previous assertions and justify the model  . 
1 A general framework reference use and resolution for  1  . 1 Overview of the model The communication situation is deliberately conceived here from a representationist point of view : the speaker  ( s ) and the hearer ( h ) share the same world ( W ) considered as a set of objects with various characteristics or properties  ( Figure 1 )  . Objects can be material or conceptual , or even belong to fictitious constructions . Each individual's perception of the world is different : ph  ( W ) ~ ps ( W )  . Perception ( p ) as well as inferences ( i ) on perceptions using previous knowledge and beliefs provide each individual with a representation of the world  , that is , RWs and R Wh , where RWx = ix(px(W )) -- ipx(W ) . For computational reasons , it is useful to consider that only part of the world W plays a role in the communication act  ; this is called the topic T , and its representations are RTh and RTs . 
The speaker produces a discourse message ( DM ) and a gesture message ( GM )  . Both DM and GM contain referring expressions ( RE )  , that is , chunks of discourse or gestures which are mapped to particular objects of RW  . RWh and RWs each include a list of represented objects with their properties  , called mental representations ( MR ) . 

SPEAKER ( s ) ~ HEARER ( h ) /T is ( W'T ) k  ~ ) ih ( W'T ) 
RWs--
RWs(h~RW h
RWs(h(s ) ~ RWh(s)
RWh(s(h )) ***.,.
? WD(O , , O2, O3 . . . .) ? RWs DMRs ( O~),
MRs ( O2), ...) ? RWhD(MRh(O~),
MRh(O2),, oo~?RWs(h)D(MRs(MRh(O~)),
MRs ( MRh(O2)), ))) ~ ? RWh(s ) DMR h(MRs(O ,)),

Figure 1 . The proposed formal model for reference representation 
Understanding a message cannot be defined solely with respect to W  , as there is no direct access to it . Instead , each individual builds a representation of the others ' RW  , using its own perceptions and inferences ( ip ) . The speaker has his own RWs and also RWs ( h ) = i ps ( R Wh )  ; the hearer has RWh and RWh(s ) = iph(RWs ) . This hierarchy , called specularity , is potentially infinite , as one may conceive RWh(s(h )) , RWh(s(h(s ))) , etc .   ( it could be tentatively asserted that when all the RW of all individuals become identical for a given assertion  , the assertion becomes " common knowledge ") . 
A message has been understood if , for the current topic , RTh(s ) - RTs , i . e . , if the hearer's representation of the speaker's view of the world is accurate  . This definition simplifies of course reality to make it fit into a computational model  . For instance , from a rhetorical point of view , a communication succeeds if RTh changes according to the sender's will  . 
Evolution in time isn't represented yet , so we do not index the various representations along the time axis  . 
In order to understand a message , the hearer has to find out which objects the referring expressions refer to-REs from the discourse  , as well as deictic ( pointing ) ones . The hearer is able to use his own perception of W  , namely RWh , and his knowledge , to build mental representations of objects from the referring expressions  . 
1 . 2 Human computer dialog vs . story understanding by a computer We focus here on the problem of reference understanding by a computer program  ( c )  . 
Such a program has to build and manage , in theory , a RWc and a RWc(s ) , using information about the world , the message itself , and possibly a deictic set . 
For a window manager application accepting natural language commands  , the displayed graphic objects constitute the topic  ( T )  , i . e . , the part of the world more specifically dealt with  . The program's perception of T is totally accurate  ( pc ( T ) = T )  ; pc ( T ) is the most important and reliable source of information  . 
Mouse pointing provides also direct deictic information  . The difference between RWc and RWc ( s ) may account for the difference between the complete description of the displayed objects and their visible features  . 
For a story understanding program , the direct perception of the shared world W is strongly reduced  , especially for fiction stories . 
Human readers in this case derive their knowledge only from the processed text  . But knowledge about basic properties of W and about language conventions has still to be shared  , otherwise no communication would be possible . For story processing , both pc ( W ) and the gesture message are extremely limited , so the program has to rely only on discourse information  , thus building fh'stRWc ( s ) and only afterwards RWc , using supplementary knowledge about W . The gap between RWc(s ) and RW cissions , or to internal contradictions of the story . 
The system described below follows this second approach  . 
1, 3 Data structures and operations
For minimal reference resolution , a program has to select the referring expressions  ( RE ) of the received message and use them in order to build a list of mental representations of objects  ( MR )  . Each MR is a data structure having several attributes  , depending on the program's capacities . Here is a basic set : ? MR . identificator--a number ; ? MR . list-of-REs-the REs referring to the object  ; ? MR . semantic-information . text--a conceptual structure gathering the properties of the object  , from the REs and from the sentences in which they appear  ; ? MR . semantic-information . dictionary--a conceptual structure gathering the properties of the object from the conceptual dictionary  ( concept lattice ) of the system . 
These properties reflect a priori knowledge about the conceptual categories the MR belongs to  ; ? MR . relations -- the relationship of the MR to other MRs  , for instance : parto for com-posed-of ( these allow processing of plural
MRs ); ? MR . computer-object-a pointer on the object in case it belongs to a computer application  ( e . g . , a window in a command dialog ); ? MR . perceptual-information ~ an equivalent of the previous attribute  , in case the program handles perceptual representations of objects  . 
In turn , the computational representation of a referring expression  ( RE ) should have at least the following attributes : ? RE  . identificator manumber ; ? RE . position-uniquely identifies the RE's position in the text : number  , paragraph , sentence , beginning and ending words ; ? RE . syntactic-information--a parse tree of the RE , the RE's function , or , if available , a parse tree of the whole sentence where the
RE appears ; ? RE . semantic-information ~ a conceptual structure for the RE  , or , if available , for the whole sentence . 
Finally , there are operations on the MR set : ? creation : REi--->MR new--a new MR is created when an object is fh'st referred to  ; ?attachment:REi+MRa---->MRa~whenaRE refers to an already represented object  , the RE is attached to the MR and the MR's structure is updated  ; ?fusion : MRa + MRb ~ MR new--at a given point  , it may appear that two MRs were built for the same object  , so they have to be merged . The symmetrical operation , i . e . , splitting an MR which confusingly represents two objects  , is far more difficult to do , as it has to reverse a lot of decisions ; ? partition : MR a ~ MR a + MR new (1) +
MR new (2) + . . . ; ? grouping : MRa + MRb ~ MRa + MRb +

The last two operations ( partition/grouping ) are symmetrical , and prove necessary in order to deal with collections of objects  ( plurals )  . For instance , from a collective RE as " the team " ( and its MR ) the program has to use builtin knowledge to create several MRs corresponding to the players  , and correctly solve the new RE " the first player  "  . Conversely , after construction of two MRs for " Miss X " and " Mrs  . 
Y " , an RE as " the two women " has to be attached to the MR which was built by grouping the previous MRs  . In both cases , the MR . relation attribute has to be correctly filled-in with the type of relation between MRs  . 
If enough data is available , the system should build a conceptual structure for the MR  ( e . g . , conceptual graphs ) , which should incrementally gather information from all referring expressions attached to the same MR  . A lower-knowledge technique is to record for each MR alist of " characteristic REs " without any conceptual structures  , and apply selectional constraints on it . 
1.4 Selection heuristics
During the resolution process , each RE either triggers the creation of a new MR or is attached to an existing MR  . The purpose of the selection heuristics is to answer whether the RE may be associated to a given MR  , after examining compatibility between the RE and the other REs in the MR  . list-of-REs . One of the simplest heuristics is : ? ( HI ) \[ MR a can be the referent of REi \] iff\[ RE1 being the first element of MR a . list-of-
REs , REi and RE1 can be coreferent \]
This presupposes that the first RE referring to an object is typical  , which is n't always true . 
To take advantage of the MR paradigm , it may seemwiser to compare the current RE to all the REs in the MR  . list-of-REs . This list includes also pronominal REs , which are actually meaningless for the compatibility test  . Despite Ariel's ( 1990 ) claim that there is no clearcut referential difference between pronouns and plementation of our model  . So , a second heuristic is : ? ( H2 ) \[ MR a can be the referent of REi \] iff \[ for all  ( nonpronominal ) REj in MR a . list-of-REs , REi and REj can be coreferent \] This heuristic is in fact quite inefficient : first  , it allows for little variation in the naming of a referent  . Second , it neglects an important distinction in RE use , between identification and information ( as described , for instance , by Appelt and Kronfeld (1987)) . The sender may use a particular RE not only to identify the MR  , but also to bring supplementary knowledge about it  ; thus , two REs conveying different pieces of knowledge may well be incompatible in the system's view  . A more tolerant heuristic is thus : ? ( H3 ) \[ MR a can be the referent of REi \] iff\[there exists a  ( nonpronominal ) REj in MR a . list-of-RE so that REi and REj can be coreferent \ ] A more general heuristic subsumes both  H2   ( ' all ' ) and H3 ( ' one ' ) : ?  ( H4 ) \[ MR a can be the referent of REi \] iff \[ REi and REj can be coreferent for more than X % of the REj in MR a  . list-of-REs \] When X varies from 0 to 100 , this selection heuristic varies from H3 to H2 providing intermediate heuristics that can be tested  ( ?4 )  . 
H 3 seems in fact close to the coreference paradigm , as it privileges links between individual REs , from which the MRs could even be built a posteriori  , using the coreference chains . But here MRs are also characterized by an intrinsic activation factor  , evolving along the text , which cannot be managed in the coreference paradigm  . 
1.5 Activation
The activation of an MR is computed according to salience factors  ( this technique is described for instance by Lappin and Leass  ( 1994 ) ) . Our salience factors are : deactivation in time , re-activation by various types of RE , re-activation according to the function of the RE  . Among the MRs which pass the selection , activation is used to decide whether the current RE is added to an MR  ( the most active ) or if a new MR is created . Activation is thus a dynamic factor , which changes for each MR according to the position in the text and the previous reference resolution decisions  . 
2 Comparison with other works
Theoretical studies of discourse processing have long been advocating use of various representations for discourse referents  . However , implementations of running systems have rather focused on anaphora or coreference  . 
Our purpose here is to show how a simplified computational model of discourse reference can be implemented and give significant results for reference resolution  ; we showed previously ( Popescu-Belis and Robba 1997 ) that it was also relevant for pronoun resolution . 
2.1 High-level knowledge models
The idea of tracking discourse referents using " files " for each of them has already been proposed by Kartunnen  ( 1976 )  . Evans ( 1985 ) and Recanati ( 1993 ) are both close to our proposals , however they neither give a computational implementation no ran evaluation on real texts  . Sidner's work ( 1979 ) on focusled to salience factors and activations , but proved too demanding for an unrestricted use . 
A more operational system using semantic representation of referents is for instance LaSIE  ( Gaizauskas et al 1995 )  , presented at MUC6 , which relies however a lot on task-dependent knowledge  . The system doesn't seem to use activation cues . Another system ( Luperfoy 1992 ) uses " discourse pegs " to model referents and was applied successfully to a man-machine dialogue task  . 
From a theoretical point of view , the model presented by Appelt and Kronfeld ( 1987 ) is in its background close to ours . Being further developed according to the speech acts theory  , it relies however on models of intentions and beliefs of communicating agents which seem uneasy to implement for discourse understanding  . 
2  . 2 Robust , lower-level systems Some of the robust approaches derive from anaphora resolution  ( e . g . , Boguraev and Ken-nedy ( 1996 ) ) because the antecedent / anaphoric links are a particular sort of coreference links  , which disambiguate pronouns . Most of these systems howeve remain within the coreference paradigm  , as defined by the MUC6 coreference task . Numerous low-level techniques have been developed  , using generally pattern-matching between potentially coreferent strings  ( e . g . , McCarthy and Lehnert 1995) . 
An interesting solution has been proposed by Lin ( 1995 ) using constraint solving to group REs into MRs . While this idea fits the MR paradigm , it doesn't work well incrementally , which makes use of activation impossible . 
2.3 Advantages of the MR paradigm
Grouping REs into MRs brings decisive ad-First , it suppresses an artificial ambiguity of coreferencer solution : if  RE1 and RE2 are already known as coreferent , coref(RE1 , RE2) , there is no conceptual difference between coref ( RE3 , RE1) and coref(RE3 , RE2) , so these two possibilities houldn't be examined separately  . Moreover , the system of coreference links makes it very time-consuming to find out whether REi and REj are coreferent  , whereas MRs provide reusable storing of all the already acquired information  . 
Second , coreference links cannot represent multiple dependencies a needed by some objects which are collections of other objects  . 
Coreference links simply mark identity of the referent for two REs : collections require typed links  ( part of/composed-of ) between several objects , as shown previously . 
3 Application of the model 3 . 1 Reference reso lu t ion mechan ism We have particularized and implemented the theoretical model using algorithms in the style of Lappin and Leass  ( 1994 )  . We don't wish to overload this paper with technical details  . The REs are solved one by one , either by attachment to an existent MR , or by creation of a new MR . 
Selection rules are applied to the existing MRs to find out whether the current RE may or may not refer to the object represented by the MR  . As our implementation deals with unrestricted texts  , only very basic selection rules are used ; there are two agreement rules ( for gender and number ) and a semantic rule ( synonyms and hyperonyms are compatible )  . 
As no semantic network is available for French ( e . g . , WordNet ) , only very few synonyms are taken into account . Conceptual graphs are neither used , as our conceptual analyzer isn't robust enough for unrestricted noun phrases  . 
The working memory stores a fixed quota of the most active MRs  , the others being archived and inaccessible for further resolution  . From a cognitive point of view , this memory mimics the human in capacity to track too many story characters  . Computationally , it reduces ambiguity for the attachment of REs , and increases the system'speed . 
3.2 The texts
Two narrative texts have been chosen to test our system : a short story by Stendhal  , Vittoria Accoramboni ( VA ) and the first chapter of a novel by Balzac , LeP ~ reGoriot(LPG ) ( Table 1) . VA , available as plaintext , underwent manual tagging of paragraphs , sentences and boundaries of all REs , then conversion to ' objects ' of our programming environment  ( Small talk )  . Using Vapillon's and al . (1997) LFG parser , an f-structure ( parse tree ) was added to each RE . Then the correct MRs were created using our user -friendly interface  . 


MRs ( key)
RE/MR
Nominal REs
Pronoun REs
Not parsed REs
VA 740528 576686 33592 164803 . 18 7 . 003 901864 2621398 3497 Table 1 . Characteristics of the three texts . 
LPG was already SGML-encoded with the REs and MRs , using Brunese aux and Romary ( 1997 ) markup conventions . Only REs referring to the main characters of the first chapter were encoded : humans  , places and objects . As a result , the ratio RE/MR is much greater than for VA . The text was converted to Small talk objects , fstructures were added to the REs , and MRs were automatically generated from the SGML tags  . To make comparison with VA easier , a fragment of the LPG text was isolated ( LPG . eq ); it contains the same amount of REs as VA . 
It should be noted that in both cases the LFG parser is n't robust enough to deliver proper fstructures for all noun phrases  . The parser's total silence is ca . 4% and its ambiguity ca .  2 . 7 FS per RE . Despite such drawbacks ( unreliable parser , lack of semantics ) , we kept working on complex narrative texts in order to study in depth the effects of elementary rules and parameters in situations where the coreference rate is high  . Reference resolution is probably easier on technical documentation or articles  , as referents receive more constant names . 
3.3 Evaluation methods
The MRs produced by the reference resolution module  ( response ) are compared to the correct solution ( key ) using an implementation of the algorithm described by Vilain and al  . (1995), used also in the MUC evaluations . Although this algorithm was designed for coreference evaluation  , it builds in fact each coreference chain , and compares the key and the response lows thus the MR paradigm  . The algorithm computes a recall error ( number of coreference links missing in the response vs  . the key ) and a precision error ( number of wrong coreference links , i . e . present in the response but absent from the key ) . 
The MUC scoring method isn't always meaningful . We have shown elsewhere ( Popescu-Belis and Robba 1998 ) that it is too indulgent , and have proposed new algorithms which seem to us more relevant  , named here ' core-MR ' and ' exclusive-core-MR ' . 
4 Results and comments
The three heuristics H1 , H2 , H3 have been tested on our system , while keeping all other numeric parameters constant  . The results Table 2 show that on average the heuristic H3 gives here the same results as H1  , and is better than H2 . As explained above , H2 is clearly too restrictive . 
Differentests have been performed to analyze the system's results  . If MR activation is n't used , the scores decrease dramatically , by ca .  50% . When using the H4 heuristic ( variable average between H2 and H3 ) results aren't generally better than those of H3 ( except for VA )  . 
Compatibility with only one RE of the MR seems thus a good heuristic  . 
H 1 ( first)
RP
MUC .66 .60
Core .52 .44
Ex-C .62 .73
MUC .72 .76
Core .57 .34
Ex-C .40 .54
MUC .80 .85
Core .38 .40
Ex-C .29 .48
H2(all)
RP .66 .60 .52 .44 .63 .66 .40 .38 .77 .34 .28

RP . 70  . 60  . 56  . 39  . 73  . 60  . 69  . 70  . 72  . 76  . 35  . 57  . 34  . 54  . 40 54  . 83  . 80  . 85  . 42  . 38  . 40  . 48  . 29  . 48 Table 2 . Successcores for selection heuristics ( for VA , LPG . eq , LPG )
This is confirmed when applying the selection constraints on a limited subset of MR  . list-of-REs . The worst results are obtained when this set fails to gather the shortest nonpronominal REs of an MR  , which shows that these shortest strings ( one or several ) constitute a sort of ' standard name ' for the referent  , which suffices to solve the other references . The good score of H1 tends also to confh-m this view . 
An optimization algorithm based on gradient descent has been implemented to tune the activation parameters of the system  . Not surprisingly , sometimes the local optimum has no cognitive relevance  , as there is no searching heuristic other than recall + precision decrease  . 
A local optimum obtained on one text still leads to good  ( but not optimal ) scores on the other texts . Trained on VA , optimization led to a cumulated 4 . 3% improvement ( precision + recall ), and +2 . 5% on LPG . eq , or in another trial to +5 . 9% . 
I"-4~-LPG . eq-II-VA-4..-F . measure=68I
Avo=70 ( Jo-65..i ri-ir '"
II ! I 50 60 70 80
Recall (%)
Figure 2 . Influence of memory size on recall and precision ( between 2 , left , and 60 , right ) Finally , the limited size buffer storing the MRs , a cognitively inspired feature , was studied . Variations of the system's performance according to the size of this " working memory " show that it has an optimal size  , around 20 MRs ( Figure 2) . A smaller memory increases recall errors , as important MRs aren't remembered . A larger memory leads to more erroneous attachments  ( precision errors ) because the number of MRs available for attachment over passes the selection rules'selec -tiveness  . 
Conclusion
A theoretical model for reference resolution has been presented  , as well as an implementation based on the model , which uses only elementary knowledge , available for unrestricted ceptual accuracy and higher cognitive relevance  . Further technical work will seek a better use of the syntactic information  ; semantic knowledge will be derived in a first approach from a synonym dictionary  , a waiting the development of a significant set of canonical conceptual graphs  . 
Further conceptual work , besides study of complex plurals , will concern integration of time to mental representations  , as well as point of view information . 

The authors are grateful to F . Bruneseaux and L . Romary for the LPG text , to A . Reboul for discussions on the model , and to one of the anonymous reviewers for very significant comments  . This work is part of a project supported by the GIS-Sciences de la Cognition  . 

Appelt D . and Kronfeld A . (1987) A Computational Model of Referring , IJCAI'87 , Milan , volume 2/2 , pp .  640-647 . 
Ariel M . (1990) Accessing noun phrase antecedents,
Routledge , London.
Brunese aux F . and Romary L .   ( 1997 ) Codage desr~f Hence set cordf Hences clansles dialogues homme-machine  , ACH-ALLC'97 , Kingston , Ontario , Can-ac ~ Evans G . (1985) The Varieties of Reference , Oxford
University Press , Oxford , UK.
Gaizauskas R . , Wakao T . , Humphreys K . , Cunningham H . and Wilks Y .   ( 1995 ) University of Sheffield : Description of the LaSIE System as used for 
MUC6, MUC6, pp . 207-220.
Kennedy C . and Boguraev B .   ( 1996 ) Anaphora in a Wider Context : Tracking Discourse Referents  , ECAI96 , Budapest , Hungary , pp .  582-586 . 
Karttunen L . (1976) Discourse referents . In " Syntax and Semantics 7: Notes from the Linguistic Under-ground " , J . D . McCawley , ed . , Academic Press,
New York , pp . 363-385.
Lapp in S . and Leass H . J .   ( 1994 ) An Algorithm for Pronominal Anaphora Resolution , Computational
Linguistics , 20/4, pp . 535-561.
Lin D .   ( 1995 ) University of Manitoba : Description of the PIE System Used for  MUC6  , MUC6 , pp . 

Lupeffoy S .   ( 1992 ) The Representation f Multimodal User Interface Dialogues Using Discourse Pegs  , 30th Annual Meeting of the ACL , University of Delaware , Newark , Delaware , pp .  2231 . 
McCarthy J . F . and Lehnert W . G .   ( 1995 ) Using Decision Trees for Coreference Resolution , IJCAI'95 , 
Montr6al , Canada , pp . 1050-1055.
Popescu-Belis A . and Robba I .   ( 1997 ) Cooperation between Pronoun and Reference Resolution for Unrestricted Texts  ,   ACL'97 Workshop on Operational Factors in Practical , Robust Anaphora Resolution for Unrestricted Texts  , Madrid , Spain , pp .  94-99 . 
Popescu-Belis A . and Robba I .   ( 1998 ) Three New Methods for Evaluating Reference Resolution  , LREC'98 Workshop on Linguistic Coreference , 
Granada , Spain.
Recanati F .   ( 1993 ) Direct Reference : from Language to Thought , Basil Blackwell , Oxford , UK . 
Sidner C . L .   ( 1979 ) Towards a computational theory of definite anaphora comprehensioniEnglish discourse  , Doctoral Dissertation , Artificial Intelligence Laboratory , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 
Technical Report 537.
Vapillon J . , Briffault X . , Sabah G . and Chibout K . 
(1997 ) An Object-Oriented Linguistic Engineering Environment using LFG  ( Lexical Functional Grammar ) and CG ( Conceptual Graphs )  ,   ACL'97 Workshop on Computational Environments for Grammar Development and Linguistic Engineering  , 
Madrid , Spain.
Vilain M . , Burger J . , Aberdeen J . , Connolly D . and Hirshman L .   ( 1995 ) A Model-Theoretic Coreference Scoring Scheme , 6th Message Understanding
Conference , Columbia , Maryland.

