Building Parallel LTAG for French and Italian
Made-H6 16 ne Candito
TALANA&UFRL , Universit 6 Paris 7 , case 7003 ,  2 , place Jussieu 75251 Paris Cedex 05 France


In this paper we view Lexicalized Tree
Adjoining Grammars as the compilation of a more abstract and modular layer of linguistic description : the metagrammar  ( MG )  . MG provides a hierarchical representation of lexicosyntactic descriptions and principles that capture the wellformedness of lexicalized structures  , expressed using syntactic functions . 
This makes it possible for a tool to compile an instance of MG into an LTAG  , automatically performing the relevant combinations of linguistic phenomena  . We then describe the instantiation of an MG for Italian and French  . 
The work for French was performed starting with an existing LTAG  , which has been augmented as a result . The work for Italian was performed by systematic contrast with the French MG  . The automatic compilation gives two parallel LTAG  , compatible for multilingual
NLP applications.
1. Introduction
Lexicalized Tree Adjoining Grammars ( LTAG ) is a formalism integrating lexicon and grammar ( Joshi ,  87 ; Schabes et al 88 ) : its description units are lexicalized syntactic trees  , the elementary trees . The formalism is associated with a tree-rewriting process that links sentences with syntactic structures  ( in either way )  , by combining the elementary trees with two operations  , adjunction and substitution . 
We assume the following linguistic features for LTAG elementary trees  ( Kroch & Joshi ,  85;
Abeili6 , 91; Frank ,  92 ) : ? lexicalization : elementary trees are anchored by at least one lexical item  . 
? semantic oherence : the set of lexical items on the frontier of an elementary tree forms exactly one semantic unit t  . 
? large domain of locality : the elementary trees anchored by a predicate contain positions for the arguments of the predicate  . 
This last feature is known as the predicate -argument cooccurrence principle  ( PACP )  . 
Trees anchored by a predicate represent the minimal structure so that positions for all arguments are included  . These argumental positions are extended either by receiving substitution or by adjoining at a node  . 
Adjunction is used to factor out recursion.
Figure 1 shows two elementary trees anchored by the French verbal form mange  ( eat-pres-sg )  , whose arguments in the active voice are a subject NP and a direct object NP  2  . The first tree shows all arguments in canonical position  . 
The second tree shows a relativized subject and a pronominal object  ( accusative clitic )  . The argument al nodes are numbered , according to their oblicity order , by an index starting at 0 in the unmarked case ( active )  . So for instance in passive trees , the subject is number l , not 0 . 
NO * S

NOV ~ ~ ON1 , L
Imange ~ ~ Vrtqui Cl15 V0
Imange
Figure 1:   2 elementary trees anchored by mange Though LTAG units used during derivation are lexicalized trees  , the LTAG internal representation makes use of " pre-lexicalized " structures  , that we will call tree sketches , whose anchor is not instantiated and that are shared by several exicalized trees  . The set of tree sketches thus forms a syntactic database  , in which lexical items pick up the structures they can anchor  . 
Families group together tree sketches that are likely to be selected by the same lexeme : the tree sketches may show different surface realization of the arguments  ( pronominal clitic realization , extraction of an argument , subject inversion . . . ) or different diathesis - - matchings between semantic arguments and syntactic Thus semantically void lexical forms  ( functional words ) do not anchor elementary trees on their own . 
And words composing an idiomatic expression are multiple anchors of the same elementary tree  . 
2 The trees are examples from a French LTAG ( Abeill 6 ,  91) , with no VP node ( but this is irrelevant here ) . The , 1, means the node must receive substitution . The * means the node must adjoin in another tree . 
211 functions --( active , passive , middle . .) or both . 
The lexical forms select their tree sketches by indicating one or several families  , and features . 
The features may rule out some tree sketches of the selected family  , either because of morphological clash ( eg . the passive trees are only selected by past participles  ) or because of idiosyncrasies . For instance , the French verb peser ( to weight ) can roughly been coded as selecting the transitive family  , but it disallows the passive diathesis . 
It remains that tree sketches are large linguistic unit  . Each represents a combination of linguistic descriptions that are encoded separately in other formalisms  . For instance , a tree sketch is in general of depth > 1 , and thus corresponds to a piece of derivation in a formalism using CF rewrite rules  ( cf ( Kasper et al 95 ) for the presentation of an LTAG as a compiled HPSG  )  . 
This causes redundancy in the set of tree sketches  , which makes it difficult to write or maintain an LTAG  . Several authors ( Vijay-Shanker et al92-hereafter ( VSS 92 ) -  ; Becker ,  93 ; Evans et al 95 ) have proposed practical solutions to represent in a compact way an LTAG  . The idea is to represent canonical trees using an inheritance network and to derive marked syntactic constructions from base tree sketches using lexicosyntactic rules  . 
( Candito ,  96) , building on ( VSS92) , defines an addition a layer of linguistic description  , called the metagrammar ( MG ) , that imposes a general organization for syntactic information and formalizes the wellformedness of lexicalized structures  . MG not only provides a general overview of the grammar  , but also makes it possible for a tool to perform automatically the combination of smaller linguistic units into a tree sketch  . 
This process of tree sketch building is comparable to a contextfree derivation-in the generation way-that would build a minimal clause  . A first difference is that CF derivation is performed for each sentence to generate  , while the tree sketches are built out of an MG at compile time  . Another difference is that while CF derivation uses very local units  ( CF rules )  , MG uses partial descriptions of trees ( Roger set Vijay-Shanker ,  94 ) more suitable for the expression of syntactic generalizations  . 
MG offers a common , principle-based frame for syntactic description , to fill in for different languages or domains . In section 2 we present the linguistic and formal characteristics of MG  ( in a slightly modified version )  , in section 3 the compilation in an LTAG , and in section 4 we describe the instantiation of the MG for French and Italian  . Finally we give some possible applications in section  5  . 
2. The metagrammar
Formally the MG takes up the proposal of ( VSS 92 ) to represent grammar as a multiple inheritance network  , whose classes specify syntactic structures as partial descriptions of trees  ( Rogers & Vijay-Shanker ,  94) . While trees specify for any pair of nodes either a precedence relation or a path of parent relations  , these partial descriptions of trees , are sets of constraints that may leave underspecified the relation existing between two nodes  . 
The relation between two nodes may be further specified  , either directly or by inference , by adding constraints , either in subclasses or in lateral classes in the inheritance network  . 
In the MG , nodes of partial descriptions are augmented with feature structures : one for the feature structures of the future tree sketches and one for the features that are specific to the MG  , called meta-features . These are , for instance , the possible parts of speech of a node or the index  ( cf Section l ) in the case of argumental nodes . 
So a class of an instantiated MG may specify the following slots : ? the  ( ordered ) list of direct parent classes ? a partial description of trees ? feature structures associated with nodes  3 Contrary to ( VSS 92 ) nodes are global variables within the whole inheritance network  , and classes can add features to nodes without involving them in the partial description  . 
Inheritance of partial descriptions i monotonic.
The aim is to be able to build pre-lexicalized structures respecting the PACP  , and to group together structures likely to pertain for the same lexeme  . In order to achieve this , MG makes use of syntactic functions to express either monolingual or crosslinguistic generalizations  ( cf the work in LFG , Meaning-Text Theory or 3 Actually the tree description language -- that we will not detail here -- involves constants  , that name nodes of satisfying trees . Several constants may be equal and thus name the same node  . The equality is either infered or explicitly stated in the description  . 

Relational Grammar ( RG)-see ( Blake , 90) for an overview ) . Positing syntactic functions , characterized by syntactic properties , allows to set parallels between constructions for different languages  , that are different in surface ( for word order or morphosyntactic marking )  , but that share a representation in terms of functional dependencies  . Within a language , it allows to abstract from the different surface realizations of a given function and from the different diathesis a predicate can show  . 
So in MG , subcategorization ( hereafter subcat ) of predicates is expressed as a list of syntactic functions  , and their possible categories . 
Following RG , an initial subcat is distinguished , namely the one for the unmarked case , and is modifiable by redistribution of the functions associated with the arguments of the predicate  . 
Technically , this means that argumental nodes in partial descriptions bear a meta-feature " initial -function " and a meta-feature " function "  . 
The " function " value is by default the " initial -function " value  , but can be revised by redistribution . Redistributions , in a broad sense , comprise : ? pure redistributions that do not modify the number of arguments  ( eg . full passive ) . 
? reductions of the number of arguments ( eg.
agentless passive ) ? augmentations of the number of arguments ( mainly causative )  . 
In MG , structure sharing the same initial subcat can be grouped to form a set of structures likely to be selected by the same lexeme  . For verbal predicates , a minimal clause is partly represented with an ordered list of successive subcats  , from the initial one to the final one . Minimal clauses sharing a final subcat , may differ in the surface realizations of the functions  . The MG represents this repartition of information by imposing a three-dimension iheritance  network4: ? dimension 1: initial subcat ? dimension 2: redistributions of functions ? dimension 3: surface realizations of syntactic functions . 
4 More precisely a hierarchy is defined for each category of predicate  . Dimension 2 is primarily relevant for verbal predicates . Further , remaining structures , for instance for argument-less lexemes or for auxiliaries and raising verbs are represented in an additional network  , by classes that may inherit shared properties , but that are totally written by hand . 
In an instantiated MG for a given language , each terminal class of dimension 1 describes a possible initial subcat and describes partially the verbal morphosyntax  ( the verb may appear with a frozenclitic , or a particle in English ) . Each terminal class of dimension 2 describes a list of ordered redistributions ( including the case of no-redistribution )  . The redistributions may impose a verbal morphology  ( eg . the auxiliary for passive ) . Each terminal class of dimension 3 represent he surface realization of a function ( independently of the initial function )  . For some interdependent realizations , a class may represent here alizations of several functions  ( for instance for clitics in romance languages )  . 
Terminal classes of the handwritten hierarchy are pieces of information that can be combined to form a tree sketch that respects the PACP  . 
For a given language , some of the terminal classes are incompatible . This is stated either by the content of the classes themselves or within an additional set of language-dependent constraints  ( compatibility constraints )  . For instance a constraint is set for French , to block cooccurrence of an inverted subject with an object in canonical position  ( while this is possible for Italian )  . 
3. Compilation of MG to LTAG
The compilation is a two-step process , illustrated figure 2 . First the compiler automatically creates additional classes of the inheritance network : the " crossing classes "  . 
Then each crossing class is translated into one or several tree sketches  . 
Hand-Written Hierarchy initial subcat II ll surface realizations oi\[ 
II funct , oI
JU /' I' . d  ~ . " sI )( , ,, ~_~_~_~___~~IL ""/\"~'~: . '," . ":' . 7 ~ J~-"~bd'v'lL,"^uto,,~t ~' crat,onv . . . . . . v ,~ ~ .   . ' IkL ', ~" of cla . ,q . ~es language dependent
Compatibility constraints ~ C~dimension 2 redistributions of functions , ?  . . . " ~ , , ~ Crossing
Translation into
LTAG families 3 . 1 Automatic extension of the hierarchy A crossing class is a linguistic description that must fulfill the PACP  . Using syntactic functions and the three-dimension partition  , MG makes more precise this wellformedness principle  . A crossing class is a class of the inheritance network that is automatically built as follows : ? acrossing class inherits exactly one terminal class of dimension  1 ? then , acrossing class inherits exactly one terminal class of dimension  2 These two superclasses define an ordered list of subcat  , from the initial one to the final one . 
? then , acrossing class inherits classes of dimension 3 , representing the realizations of every function of the final subcat  . 
Further , for a crossing class to be wellformed , all unifications involved during the inheritance process must succeed  , either for feature structures or for partial descriptions  . Clashes between features or inconsistencies in partial descriptions are used to rule out some irrelevant crossings of linguistic phenomena  . Finally , the compatibility constraints must be respected ( cf
Section 2).
3.2 Translation into LTAG families
While crossing classes specify a partial description with feature structures  , LTAG use trees . So the compiler takes the " representative " tree ( s ) of the partial description ( see Rogers & Vijay-Shanker , 94 for a formal definition ) . 
Intuitively these representative trees are trees minimally satisfying the description  . There can be several for one description . For example , the relative order of several nodes may be underspecified in a description  , and the representative trees show every possible order  . 
A family is generated by grouping all the trees computed from crossing classes that share the same class of dimension  1  . 
4. Metagrammars for French and
Italian : a contrast
We have instantiated the metagrammar for French , starting with an existing LTAG ( Abeill 6 ,  91) . The recompilation MG---~LTAG insures coherence ( a phenomena is consistently handled through the whole grammar  ) and completeness ( all valid crossings are performed )  . The coverage of the grammar has been extended 5 . 
Then we have adapted the French MG to Italian , to obtain a " parallel " LTAG for Italian , close with respect olinguistic analyses . The general organization of the MG gives a methodology for systematic syntactic contrast  . We describe some pieces of the inheritance network for French and Italian  , with particular emphasis on dimension 2 and , indimension 3 , on the surface realizations of the subject . 
4.1 Dimension 1
We do not give a description of the content of this dimension  , but rather focus on the differences between the two languages  . A first difference in dimension 1 is that for Italian , there exist verbs without argument6 ( atmospheric verbs )  , while for French , a subject is obligatory , though may be impersonal . 
Another difference , is known as the unaccusative hypothesis ( see ( Renzi ,  88 , volI ) for an account ) . It follows from syntactic evidence , that the unique argument of a vere-selecting intransitives  ( eg .   ( I ) ) and essere-selecting intransitives ( the unaccusatives , eg . 
(2 ) ) has different behavior when postverbal : ( 1 ) * Neh annotele fonatotre . 
( of-them have phoned three )
Three of them have phoned (2) Ne son or imastetre.
( of-them are remained three )
Three of them have remained.
We represent unaccusatives as selecting an initial object and no initial subject  . A redistribution in dimension 2 promotes this initial object into a special subject  ( showing subject properties and some object proT perties  , like the he-licensing shown in (2)) . This redistribution is also used for specifying passive and middle  , which both trigger unaccusative behavior ( see next section )  . 
s The number of tree sketches passed from 800 to 1100 l without causative trees )  . 
An alternative analysis would be to consider that hese verbs select a subject pronoun  , that is not realized in
Italian ( prodrop language).
7 We take a simpler approach than RG , which accounts for most of the Italian data . Unhandled are the auxiliary change for verbs , when goal-phrases are added ( see ( Dini , 95) for an analysis in HPSG ) . 
214 4.2 Dimension 2
The MG for French and Italian cover the following types of redistributions : passive  , middle , causative and impersonal ( only for French ) . Causative verbs plus infinitives are analysed in Romance as complex predicates  . Due to a lack of space will not describe their encoding in MG here  . Figure 3 shows the inheritance links of dimension 2 for French ( without causative )  . Terminal classes are shown without frame . 
V ~ ~ , 7 ~ s , v ~
Figure 3: Dimension 2 for French ( without causative ) 
The verbal morphology is affected by redistributions  , oit appears in the hierarchy . 
The hierarchy comprises the case of no -redistribution  , that inherits an active morphology : it simply states that the anchor of the future tree sketch is also the verb that receives inflexions for tense  , agreement . . . 
Refering to the notion of hierarchy of syntactic functions  ( Ala Keenan-Comrie )  , we can say that the redistribution shown comprise a subject demotion  ( which can be a deletion ) and a promotion of an element o subject . 
For active impersonal (3) , the subject is demoted to object ( class SUBJECT---~OBJECT )  , and the impersonalil is introduced as subject ( class

(3) I1 estarriv 6 tro is lett res pour vous.
(IL is arrived three letters for you )
There arrived three letters for you.
Passive is characterized by a particular morphology  ( auxiliary bearing inflections + past participle ) and the demotion of subject ( which is either deleted , class SUBJECT--->EMPTY , or demoted to a by-phrase , class SUBJECT--~AGT-OBJ ) , but not necessarily by a promotion of the object to subject  ( class OBJECT----> SUBJECT )   ( cf ( Comrie ,  77)) . In French , the alternative to object promotion is the introduction of the impersonal subject  ( class IMPERS---~ SUBJECT ) 9 . 
This gives four possibilities , agent less personal (4) , full personal (5) , agentless impersonal (6) , full impersonal , but this last possibility is not well attested . 
(4) Le filmser a projet6mardi prochain.
The movie will be shown next tuesday.
(5) Lavoiture a 6t 6 doub l6e parunv 61 o.
The car was overtaken by a bike.
(6) I1 a 6 t 6 d 6 c r 6 t 6 l ' 6 t at d ' urgence.
( IL was declared the state of emergency )
The state of emergency was declared.
Middle is characterized by a deletion of the subject  , and a middle morphology ( are flexive clitics e ) . Here also we have the alternative OBJECT-- ~SUBJECT  ( 7 ) or IMPERS---> SUBJECT ( 8 )  . The interpretation is generic ordeontic in French  . 
(7) Leth 6sesert ~5h.
( TeaSE serves at 5.)
One should serve tea at 5.
(8) I1s edit desh or reursici.
(ILSE says horrible things here )
Horrible things are pronounced in here.
Now letus contras this hierarchy with the one for Italian  . Figure 4 shows dimension 2 for

l ~ OBJECT ~ EX'ITc.~DED-SOBJEC Ti
PERSONAL PASSIVE
Figure 4: Dimension 2 for Italian ( without causative ) In Italian , what is called impersonal ( 9a ) is a special realization of subject ( by a clitics O , meaning either people , one or we . ( cfMonachesi , 95) . The French equivalent is the 8 The locative alternation ( John loaded the truck with oranges/John loaded oranges into the truck  )  , is not covered at presentime , but can easily be added . It requires to choose an initial subcat for the verb  . 
9 So we do not analyse impersonal passive as passive to which apply impersonal  . This allows to account for the ( rare ) cases of impersonal passives with no personal passive counterpart  . 
215 nominative cliticon (9b).
(9a ) it . Siparti.
( SI left ) People/we left.
(9b ) fr . On part it.
This impersonals i is thus coded as a realization of subject  , indimension 3 , and we have no IMPERS---~ SUBJECT promotion for the Italian dimension  2  . The impersonal si can appear with all redistributions excep the middle  . The Italian middle is similar to French , with a reflexive clitics i . Indeed impersonal si , with transitive verbs and singular object (10) , is ambiguous with a middle analysis ( and subject inversion )  . 
(10) Si mangiail gelato.
( SI eat-3sg the ice cream )
The ice cream is eaten.
With a plural nominal object , some speakers do not accept impersonal ( with singular verb ( 11 a ) ) but only the middle ( with verb agreement ( 1lb ) ) . 
(1la ) Si mangial emele.
(SI eat-3sg the apples )   ( 1lb ) Simangianole mele . 
( SI eat-3 pl the apples)
Another difference with French redistributions , is that when the object is promoted , in passive or middle , it is as a subject showing unaccusative behavior ( eg . he-licensing , cf section 4 . 1) . To represent this , we use the class OBJECT---~EXTENDED-SUBJECT , which is also used for the spontaneous promotion of initial object of unaccusative intransitives  ( cf section 4 . 1) . So for Italian , passive ( agent less or full ) and middle ( 1lb ) comprise a subject demotion ( a mandatory deletion for middle ) and the promotion OBJECT--~EXTENDED-SUBJECT , while for intransitive unaccusatives , this promotion is spontaneous . 
Other differences between French and Italian concern the interaction of causative with other redistributions : passive and middle can apply after causative in Italian  , but not in French . 
4.3 Dimension 3
We describe in dimension 3 the classes for the surface realizations of subject  . This function is special as it partially imposes the mode of the clause  . The subject is empty for infinitives and imperatives I ?  . Adnominal participial clauses are to See ( Abeill ~ ,  91 ) for the detail of the linguistic analyses chosen for French  . We describe here the hierarchical organization . 
represented as auxiliary trees that adjoin on a N , the subject is the foot node of the auxiliary tree  ( we do not detail here the different participial clauses  )  . 
For French ( Figure 5) , when realized , the subject is either sentential , nominal or pronominal ( clitic ) . Nominal subjects may be in preverbal position or inverted  , relativized or cleft . These last two realizations inherit also classes describing relative clauses and cleft clauses  . 
Sentential subjects are here only preverbal . Clitic subjects are preverbal ( postverbal subject clitics are not shown here , as their analysis is special ) . 
Note that indimension 2, the class
IMPERS---~SUBJECT specifies that the subject is clitic  , and dominates the word il . This will only be compatible with the clitic subject realization  . 
/I ~ ON . R ~, ~ Z ~, E~t ~, U~'~j ~ ~ k SUBJECT
Figure 5 : SubJect realizations for French For Italian , ( Figure 6) , the hierarchy for subjects is almost the same : a class for non-realized subjects is added  , since Italian is a prodrop language , and pronominal subjects are not realized . But we mentioned in section 4 . 2 the special case of the impersonal subject clitic si  . 
To handle this clitic , the Italian class for clitic subject introduces the si  . 
Figure 6: Subject realizations for Italian ( differences with French in bold ) The two LTAG for French and Italian are easy to maintain  , due to the hierarchical representation iMG . They can be customized for language domains , by cutting subgraphs of the inheritance network in MG  . 
The MG for French is currently used to maintain the French LTAG  . It has also been used to generate the tree sketches for the text generator GTAG  ( Danlos & Meunier ,  96) , based on TAG . 
The generator makes use of tree sketches characterization as a set of features --- called t-features-such as < passive >  , < infinitival-clause > . . . This characterization has been straightforward to obtain with the representation f the tree sketches in MG  . 
Further , the two MG for French and Italian can provide a basis for tranfer between syntactic structures for Machine Translation  . LTAG elementary trees correspond to a semantic unit  , with ( extendable ) positions for the semantic arguments if any . ( Abeill 6 , et al 90 ) propose to pair elementary trees for the source and target languages and to match in these pairs the argumental positions of the predicate  . Once these links are established , the synchronous TAG procedure can be used for translation  . 
The argument alpositions correspondance is straightforward to state within the MG framework  . We plan to define an automatic procedure of tree -to-tree matching using MG representations for source and target languages  , once the initial functions of arguments are matched for pairs of predicates  . This procedure will make use of sets of t -features to characterize tree sketches  ( as in GTAG ) derived at the MG---> LTAG compilation time . 
Correspondances between t-features or sets of t -features have to be defined  . 

A . Abeill 6 ,   1991 : Unegrammaire lexicalis6e d ' arbres adjoints pour le fran ~ a is . Ph . D . 
thesis . Univ . Paris 7.
A . Abeill 6, Y . Schabes , A . Joshi ,   1990 : Using Lexicalized TAG for Machine Translation . 

T . Becker ,   1993 : HyTAG : a new type of Tree Adjoining Grammars for Hybrid Syntactic representation of Free Order Languages  , 
Ph.D . thesis , Univ of Saarbrticken.
MH . Candito ,   1996 : A principle-based hierarchical representation of LTAG  . 

B . Comrie ,   1977 : In defense of spontaneous demotion : the impersonal passive  . Syntax and semantics ~ Grammatical functions > >
Cole & Saddock.
Danlos , L Meunier , F , 1996: GTAG , unformalisme pouria g6n6ration detextes : pr6sentation et applications industrielles . 
ILN'96, Nantes.
L . Dini , 1995: Unaccusative behaviors.
Quaderni di Linguistica . 9/95.
R . Evans , G . Gazdar , D . Weir , 1995: Encoding
Lexicalized TAG in a nonmonotonic inheritance hierarchy  . ACL'95 . 
R . Frank , 1992: Syntactic locality and Tree
Adjoining Grammar : Grammatical,
Acquisition and Processing Perpectives.
Ph.D . thesis . Univ . of Pennsylvania.
R . Kasper , B . Kiefer , K . Netter , K . Vijay-Shanker , 1995: Compilation of HPSG to
TAG . ACL'95.
I . Mel'cuk , 1988: Dependency Syntax : Theory and Practice . State Univ . Press NY , Albany(NY ) . 
P . Monachesi , 1996: A grammar of Italian clitics . Ph . D . thesis . Univ . of Tilburg . 
L . Renzi , 1988: Grandegrammaticadi consultazione (3 vol . ) I1 Mulino , Bologna . 
J . Rogers , K . Vijay-Shanker ,   1994 : Obtaining trees from their descriptions : an application to Tree Adjoining Grammars  . Computational
Intelligence , vol . 10, #4.
Y . Schabes , A . Joshi , A . Abeill 6 ,   1988 : Parsing strategies with lexicalized grammars : Tree adjoining grammars  . COL1NG'88 . 
K . Vijay-Shanker , Y . Schabes , 1992: Structure sharing in Lexicalized TAG . COLING'92 . 

