Universal Grammar and Lexis for Quick Ramp-Up of MT 


This paper introduces Boas , a semiautomatic knowledge licitation system that guides a team of two people through the process of developing the static knowledge sources for a moderate-quality  , broadcoverage MT system from any " low-den-sity " language into English in about six months  . 
The paper focuses on some issues in the elicitation of descriptive knowledge in Boas and also the issue of the principled reuse of preexisting resources  , such as a lexicon , an ontology , and an English generation module , among others , made possible by the fact that the client MT system is developed for a single target language  . 
1. Introduction : The Boas Project
This paper presents Boas , a semiautomatic knowledge elicitation system that guides a team of two people through the process of developing static knowledge sources for a moderate-quality  , broadcoverage MT system from any " low-density " l language into English in about six months  . Boas contains knowledge about human language and means of realization of its phenomena in a number of specific languages and is  , thus , a kind of a " linguist in the box " that helps non-professional acquirers with the task  , whose complexity is legendary .  2
Sergei Nirenburg and Victor Raskin
Computing Research Laboratory
New Mexico State University
Las Cruces , N.M .88003, U.S.A.
sergei , rask in@crl . nmsu . edudictated by the amount of language work which can be carded out  , given the resources available . The rules of the game specifically exclude linguists and MT developers from the acquisition team  . Under such conditions , the only sensible course of action is to attempt to collect as much knowledge about as many languages as possible in advance and include it in the elicitation system itself  . 
Section 2 below is devoted to defining the format of the descriptive language knowledge to be elicited from the acquirers through Boas  . The descriptive language knowledge , which we address in this paper , is , later in the process of Bo as operation , converted into operational knowledge capable of supporting the processes of source language analysis and source-target transfer  . In Section 3 , we discuss how work on ontological semantics in MT can contribute to Bo as in a situation of a single target language  , English . In Section 4 , we address the procedure for descriptive language knowledge acquisition in Boas  , both in terms of resources created and reused and in terms of the actual elicitation techniques  , differentiating between the acquisition of grammatical nd lexical parameters  . 
The knowledge about language licited by Boas from the acquirers aims to support MT output quality which is roughly commensurate with the outputs of the better commercial systems  , such as Systran . These relatively modest expectations are 1 " Density " refers roughly to the amount of effort having been previously expended in the field on computational descriptions of particular languages  , resulting in the creation of a variety of machine -tractable resources -- text corpora  , grammars , lexi . 
cons , analyzers , etc . Thus , Spanish will most probably count a ; " high-density " while , say , Tagalog will not . 
2. Defining Parameters for Boas
The descriptive knowledge about the source language is a set of statements about morphological  , syntactic , and lexical properties ( parameters ) of a language , listed together with their values and realization options  . Data about each parameter includes the language , the name of the parameter , the list of entities to which this parameter applies  ( its domain ) and the list of parameter values ( its 2 We have introduced Boas and discussed some pertinentheoretical issues in Nirenburg  ( 1998 )  . In this paper , we focus on the more practical aspects of
Boas implementation.
975 range ) . Moreover , parameter values have an associated set of realization options in each language  . For instance , the parameter of gender in Ukrainian is described as follows : language : Ukrainian parameter : gender domain : nouns  , adjectives , possessives ( head agreement ) , verbs in pastense range ( parameter values ) : masculine , feminine , neuter realization : \[ gender markers in lexicon for nouns  ; inflection paradigms for adjectives , possessives and verbs in pastense \] For comparison  , the Hebrew gender is described differently : language : Hebrew parameter : gender domain : nouns  , adjectives , possessive ( non-first-person possessor agreement )  , finite verbs range ( parameter values ) : masculine , feminine realization : \[ gender markers in lexicon for nouns  ; gender inflection paradigms for adjectives , possessives and verbs \] Instead of discovering parameters from scratch for each language  , it is preferable , in order to ensure uniformity and systematicity of Bo as operation  , to come up with a complete list of all possible parameters in natural anguages  , with complete lists of their possible values attached  . The attainability of such a resource becomes then a central issue  . 
The terms ' parameter ' and ' value ' are used in our task in the same sense as in the school of theoretical syntactic thought consecutively known as government and binding  ( Chomsky 1981 )  , principles and parameters ( Chomsky 1986 ) and the minimalist position ( Chomsky 1995 )  . The theory postulates a small number of general principles defining the innate human language faculty and a larger number of language parameters  , which implement hese principles by selecting concrete values for particular languages  . The complete set of such parameters and values constitutes a universal grammar  ( UG ) --see also Culikover ( 1997 )  , Lightfoot (1991) an (
Webelhuth (1992).
Unfortunately , work within this approach as no ~ stressed the descriptive task of creating a comprehensive inventory of universal grammar parameters or even those for particular language so \] language families  . For Project Boas , it means tha ~ . 
both the nature of the parameters it would be using and their inventory has to be developed inhouse  . 
In order to define a set of parameters for Boas , it is essential to distinguish among the language phenomena that should be accorded the status of parameter and those that should be understood as parameter values or their realizations  . Still other phenomena may remain , at least for the task at hand , outside the parameter system . We believe , with Dorr (1993) , that parameters may be understood as building blocks of an interlingua in MT  . 
We reserve judgment about whether every component of an interlingua is by definition parametric  3  . 
Thus , the parameter " lexical category " has a range of values V  , N , Adj , Adv ,   . . .   . Any of these values may itself be considered a parameter  . If viewed within a single language , their values are , ultimately , all words in the language which belong to the respective lexical categories  . The realizations of these values are the specific forms of these words  , which appear in text decorated with realizations of appropriate values of such morphological parameters a NUMBER  , GENDER , CASE , etc . 
An example of a syntactic parameter is HEAD-MOD -IFIERDEPENDENCY  , whose values include such pairs as " head:noun ; modifier : adjective ;   . . . . head : verb ; modifier : adverb , "" head:noun ; modifier : relative clause " and others . Realization options for these values involve word or constituent order rules  ( for instance , post-or preposing ) and agreement rules . 
Lexical parameters are viewed as language-inde -pendent lexical meanings  ( ontological concepts )  , such as TABLE FuRNITURE . The values of this parameter are the word senses corresponding to this ontological concept across the inventory of languages  . 
The realizations for these values are the words or phrases that express this meaning in each language  , with a possibility of a lexical gap ( a null value ) 3 Thus , for instance , a morphological nalyzer for Turkish uses information that does not have to be expressed parametrically  , such as data about nominal suffixes , which one needs to know in order to recognize a noun form but which do not correspond to any parametric value that needs to be expressed in English  ; similarly , a Russian verbal prefix may help determine the aspect value but does not realize a distinct parametric value of its own  . 
976 included . Sense:furniture 3 . Translation Environment Supported by Boas The single-target-language  ( English ) environment which Boas serves allows for simplification of both system implementation ad the acquisition process compared to the case of multiple SLs and TLs  . 
First , only one text synthesis module needs to be built . Second , many fewer transfer components ( bilingua lexicons , transduction tables for closed-class lexical items  , feature and structure transfer tables ) are needed . In fact , this situation almost licenses the transfer approach  , as the combinatorial argument for interlingual MT is weaker here than in the case of multiple TLs  ( see , however , below and fn .  3) . Third , it appears that knowledge acquisition for a new SL may be aided by the presence of a number of resources already developed for the 

These resources include a ) the vocabulary of the generation lexicon which can serve as the list of lexical parameters for compiling the bilingual dictionary  ; b ) a world model ( ontology ) providing the terms in which the senses of the English words and phrases are expressed  ( Boas uses the ontology from the Mikrokosmos project at NMSUCRL--see Mahesh and Nirenburg  1995  )  ; c ) the structure and term definitions from the text meaning representation in Mikrokosmos  ( see , for instance , Ony-shkevych and Nirenburg 1995) , to help guide parameter licitation ; d ) the set of English closed-class lexical items and morphemes  ; e ) English grammar used in text synthesis , which provides the TL side of structural transfer ules in the runtime MT system  ( see Figure 1 above )  ; and f ) a set of " ecological " parameters and their realizations for English  . While a complete description of the use of all of the above resources is beyond the scope of this paper  , we will give a few brief illustrations . 
The list of English word sense seeds the acquisition of the SL lexicon  . The acquirer first simply translates all the word senses into SL and then adds SL features to the corresponding entries as needed  . 
The result is an SL-TL transfer dictionary which also serves as the lexicon for SL analysis  . The acquirer gets a lemma with all its senses :
Entry : table-n1
POS : noun
Entry : table-n 2
POS : noun
Sense : diagram and produces the following SL lexicon entries  ( the example is in Hebrew ) :
Entry : shulxan-n1
POS : noun
Gender : m(plural-ot)
Sense:table-nl
Entry : tavla-nl
POS : noun
Gender : f
Sense:table-n2.
In the examples , the senses are conveniently explained not in any specially designed lexicon/ontology notation  , but rather through translation into English . Because each English translation is the entry head for a sense which is already explained in an ontology-based semantic metalanguage in the already existing Mikrokosmos lexicon  , Expedition can benefit from richer semantic information than that acquired using Boas  . We use the Mikrokosmos ontology as a search space to support word sense disambiguation  . The method ( suggested by Jim Cowie ) depends on the bilingual dictionary of the kind illustrated above  . Coarse grain-size lexical mappings of TL word senses to ontological concepts are established  ( for instance , chihuahu and poodle may be both linked to the ontological concept DOG  )  . The system , thus , knows that both chihuahuas and poodles have four legs  , are carnivorous , domesticated , etc . 
The disambiguation method uses such ontological constraints by computing a distance in the ontological space between ambiguous word senses on the one hand and the senses of other words in their context  . SL syntactic information helps to guide the disambiguation process by providing additional constraints  . Thus , closeness between senses of words belonging to the same syntactic unit is weighed more heavily than that across unit boundaries  . 
The acquisition of the complete list of parameters in the single-TL environment is facilitated not only by the availability of the initial set of lexical parameters but also by the prominence of the syn-English  . Thus , for morphology and syntax , the existence of such comprehensive grammars of English as Quirk et al  ( 1985 ) allows a quick round-up of the major parameters . One cannot always limit oneself , however , to TL-induced acquisition as we have demonstrated in the previous section on the example of GENDER in English  . 
4 . Source Language Knowledge Acquisition Acquisition of descriptive knowledge about a language consists in Boas of a set of elicitation " epi -sodes  . " The episodes have been clustered , very unevenly , into six large classes , namely , morphology , closed-class items , open-class items , syntax , transfer features , and ecology . Each episode is an HTML document , accessible through the standard Web browsers . Each page deals with one parameter and elicits information on its values present in the source language as well as the realizations of these values  . It is morphology which seems to require the greatest number of parametric episodes  , though the total is not very high : verbs , around 30 episodes for the finite forms , and about 40 for the nonfinite forms ; nouns , around 20; adverbs and adjectives , under 5 . Morphology does include these four sections . 
Closed-class items are pronouns , temporal relations , spatial relations , and case-like relations , e . g . , prepositional phrases ( the morphological case is , of course , handled in the noun section of the morphology class  )  . Each closed-class page deals with one English closed-class item in one appropriate sense and elicits all the possible translations of that item into the source language  ( or , more accurately , all possibl expressions in the source language which may be translated into English with this item in this sense  )  , with the complete morphological nd syntactic information on each such translation  . 
Because there are , roughly , 200 closed-items in English ( and many other languages )  , this class requires the greatest number of Web pages but they are mot parametric and quite straightforward  . 
Open-class items are acquired lexically , with the help of , essentially , one huge standar delicitation episode/Web page . Lexical acquisition proceeds as described in Section  3 and further aided by a special resource created for Boas/Expedition : continuing our work on significantly reducing the number of different senses in a lexicon entry by combining related senses in MRDs  ( see Nirenburg et al 1995 ) and , more rarely , deleting the marginal ones , we have manually reduced a combined ( Mikrokosmos and other sources ) English lexicon of about 28 , 000 words to about 40 , 000 word senses , each of which serves as a lexical parameter for SL acquisition  . In addition , frequency analyses of SL corpora will provide the requirements for adding lexical parameters from SL  , not just TL . 
Syntax will have rather fewelicitation episodes since much of it will be collected automatically from a large corpus  , pretagged morphologically by Boas--automatically . 
The elicitation pages in transfer features class will deal with nonstandard transfer correpondences  , and ecology with proper names , punctuation , standard acronyms for numbers , and other print conventions of the source language  . It is unlikely to be a very numerous class and it is  , of course , largely nonparametric . 
It is the morphology class which has necessitated the heaviest use of and most remedial effort on parameter inventories  . We have largely expanded the inventory of parameters  , previously acquired in the PROPERTY branch of the Mikrokosmosontology : most of the " grammatical " meanings  , realized in any one of the Mikrokosmos languages , uchas English , Spanish , and Chinese , are already recorded and systematized there . We have also had to compile what we hope to turn out to be the most complete list of both parameters and their values  , such as noun case ( around 30 values ) , verb mood ( about a dozen ) , verb aspect ( about two dozen ) , etc . 
A standard morphological episode elicits the values for a parameter which the user has already marked as present in the source language on the previous Web page  . The moment the box for that parameter was checked there  , the user is taken to the values page , where Boas offers a complete list of existing values for that parameter and requests that the user select all that apply  . 
Two additional factors deserve a special mention.
First , each elicitation episode is supported with context-sensitive online help  , which can be also accessed as a complete morphological  , syntactic , closed-class , etc . tutorial . This tutorial , as far as we grammar . Secondly , each parameter and value choice provides for the selection of " other " unlisted values  , and great care is taken to ass is the user in naming the parameter or value as well as determining the appropriate values for each user -introduced parameter with the appropriate realizations  . 
At the conclusion of each elicitation cycle , such as nouns or verb finite forms , all the elicited information is presented to the user for checking  , correcting , and editing in the form of a paradigm table , which id the Cartesian product of all the established parameters and values  . The user is also guided through the parts of the source language grammar which deals with exceptional paradigms  . 
It should be also noted that , in open-class acquisition , the paradigms for each acquired source language item will be assigned to one of the already established types or  , alternatively , a new exceptional type will be added , if necessary . 
The most difficult issues in acquisition involve the transcategorial realization of values  , such as the signalling of a noun case in the verb or non-stan-dard clitics  , or the lexical realizations in SL of grammatical parameters in TL  , such as the possible absence of continuous tenses in a SL and the choice of a grammatical realization of such lexical values as " right now " in the SL as the present continuous marker on the corresponding verb  . Interestingly also , clitics and similar morphological " complications " of source languages are unlikely to present a significant problem either in elicitation or in transfer  , primarily because of the single target language nvironment in Boasan densuing lack of necessity to generate  ( rather than just to analyze ) much morphological complexity . 
5. Conclusion : Computational Field

Boas exemplifies the broadcoverage descriptive approach to NLP  ( see , for instance , Nirenburg and Raskin 1996 ) and adds to it a complementary new commitment to developing and using automated field-linguistic methodology  ( cf . Nirenburg 1998) . 
This goes hand in hand with the evolving reorient a -tion of theoretical linguistics from selective theo-rizing  , in terms of prevalent atomistic rule postulation and testing  , back to the primary goal of linguistics , which is a theory-based language description . 
A full evaluation of Boas , that is , the development of the first actual SL to English MT system over a six-month time interval  , will take place within the next two years . 

The research reported in this paper was supported by Contract  MDA904-92-C-5189 with the U . S . Department of Defense . Victor Raskinisgrateful to Purdue University for permitting him to consult CRL/NMSU  . 

Chomsky , N . 1981. Lectures on Government and
Binding . Dordrecht : Foris.
Cbomsky , N .  1986 . Knowledge of Language : Its Nature , Origin , and Use . New York : Praeger . 
Chomsky , N .  1995 . The Minimalist Program . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . 
Comrie , B . , and N . Smith 1977 . Lingua Descriptive Studies : Questionnaire . Lingua 42:1, pp .  1-72 . 
Culikover , P . W .  1997 . Principles and Parameters . An Introduction to Syntactic Theory . Oxford
University Press.
Dorr , B .  1993 . Interlingual Machine Translation : A Pa -rametrized Approach  . Artificial Intelligence 63, 429-92 . 
Lightfoot , D .  1991 . How to Set Parameters . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press Mahesh , K . , and S . Nirenburg 1995 . Semantic Classification for Practical Natural Language Processing  . In : Proceedings of the Sixth ASl SSIG/CR Classification Research Workshop : An Interdisciplinary Meeting  . Chicago , IL . 
Nirenburg , S .  1998 . Project Boas : " A Linguist in the Box " as a Multi-Purpose Language Resource  . 
In : Proceedings of The First Lexical
Resources and Evaluation Conference.
Granada , Spain.
Nirenburg , S . , and V . Rask in 19961 Ten Choices in Lexical Semantics . MCCS-96-304, Las Cruces,
N . M .: NM SUCRL.
Nirenburg , S , , V . Raskin , and B . Onyshkevych 1995 . 
Apologia e Ontologiae . TMI'95, Leuven.
Onyshkevych , B . , and S . Nirenburg .  1995 . " A Lexicon for Knowledge-Based MT . " Machine
Translation , 10:1-2, pp . 5-57.
Quirk , R . , S . Greenbaum , G . Leech , and J . Svartvik 1985 . A Comprehensive Grammar of the
English Language . London : Longman.
Webelhuth , G .  1992 . Principles and Parameters of Syntactic Saturation  . New York and Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

