Role of Verbs in Document Analysis
Judith Klavans * and Min-Yen Kan **
Center for Research on Information Access * and Department of Computer Science ** 
Columbia University
New York , NY 10027, USA
Abstract
We present results of two methods for assessing the event profile of news articles as a function of verb type  . The unique contribution of this research is the focus on the role of verbs  , rather than nouns . Two algorithms are presented and evaluated , one of which is shown to accurately discriminate documents by type and semantic properties  , i . e . the event profile . The initial method , using WordNet ( Miller et al 1990) , produced multiple cross-classification f articles  , primarily due to the bushy nature of the verb tree coupled with the sense disambiguation problem  . Our second approach using English Verb Classes and Alternations  ( EVCA ) Levin ( 1993 ) showed that monosemous categorization of the frequent verbs in WSJ made it possible to usefully discriminate documents  . For example , our result show that articles in which communication verbs predominatend to be opinion pieces  , whereas articles with a high percentage of agreement verbs tend to be about mergers or legal cases  . An evaluation is performed on the results using Kendall's ~-  . We present convincing evidence for using verb semantic lasses as a discriminant in document classification  .   1   1 Motivation We present techniques to characterize document type and event by using semantic lassification of verbs  . The intuition motivating our research is illustrated by an examination of the role of  1The authors acknowledge earlier implementations by James Shaw  , and very valuable discussion from Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou  , Kathleen McKeown and Nina Wa-cholder . Partial funding for this project was provided by NSF award #  IRI-9618797 STIMULATE : Generating Coherent Summaries of On Line Documents : Combining Statistical and Symbolic Techniques  ( co-PI's McKeown and Klavans )  , and by the Columbia University Center for Research on Information Access  . 
680 nouns and verbs in documents . The listing below shows the ontological categories which express the fundamental conceptual components of propositions  , using the framework of Jackendoff (1983) . Each category permits the formation of a wh -question  , e . g . for\[THING\]"what did you buy ? " can be answered by the noun " a fish "  . The wh-questions for\[ACTION\] and\[EVENT\] can only be answered by verbal constructions  , e . g . in the question " what did you do ? " , where the response must be a verb , e . g . 
jog , write , fall , etc.
\[TH , NG\]\[DmECT , ON\]\[ACTION\]\[eLAtE\]\[MANNER\]\[ EVENT\]\[AMO  , NT\]The distinction in the ontological categories of nouns and verbs is reflected in information extraction systems  . For example , given the noun phrases fares and USAir that occur within a particular article  , the reader will know what the story is about , i . e . fares and USAir . However , the reader will not know the\[EVENT\] , i . e . what happened to the fares or to USAir . Didair fare prices rise , fallor stabilize ? These are the verbs most typically applicable to prices  , and which embody the event . 
1.1 Focus on the Noun
Many natural anguage analysis ystems focus on nouns and noun phrases in order to identify information on who  , what , and where . For example , in summarization , Barzilay and Elhadad ( 1997 ) and Lin and Hovy ( 1997 ) focus on multiword noun phrases . For information extraction tasks , such as the DARPA-sponsored Message Understanding Conferences  ( 1992 )  , only a few projects use verb phrases ( events ) , e . g . Appelt et al (1993), Lin (1993) . In contrast , the named entity task , which identifies nouns and noun phrases , has generated numerous projects as evidenced by a host of papers in recent conferences  , ( e . g . Wacholder et al 1997 , Palmer and Day 1997 , Neumann et al 1997) . Although rich information on nominal participants  , actors , and other entities is provided , the named entity task provides no information on what happened in the document  , i . e . the event or action . Less progress has been made on ways to utilize verbal information efficiently  . In earlier systems with stemming , many of the verbal and nominal forms were conflated  , sometimes erroneously . With the development of more sophisticated tools , such as part of speech taggers , more accurate verb phrase identification is possible  . We present in this paper an effective way to utilize verbal information for documentype discrimination  . 
1.2 Focus on the Verb
Our initial observations suggested that both occurrence and distribution of verbs in news articles provide meaningful insights into both article type and content  . Exploratory analysis of parsed Wall Street Journal data  2 suggested that articles characterized by movement verbs such as drop  , plunge , or fall have a different event profile from articles with a high percentage of communication verbs  , such as report , say , comment , or complain . However , without associated nominal arguments , it is impossible to know whether the \[ THING\] that drops refers to airfare prices or projected earnings  . 
In this paper , we assume that the set of verbs in a document , when considered as a whole , can be viewed as part of the conceptual map of the events and action in a document  , in the same way that the set of nouns has been used as a concept map for entities  . This paper reports on two methods using verbs to determine an event profile of the document  , while also reliably categorizing documents by type  . Intuitively , the event profile refers to the classification of an article by the kind of event  . For example , the article could be a discussion event , are porting event , or an argument event . 
To illustrate , consider a sample article from WSJ of average length  ( 12 sentences in length ) with a high percentage of communication verbs . 
The profile of the article shows that there are 19 verbs : 11   ( 57% ) are communication verbs , including add , report , say , and tell . Other 2 Penn TreeBank ( Marcus et al 1994 ) from the Linguistic Data Consortium . 
681 verbs include beskeptical , carry , produce , and close . Representative nouns include Polaroid Corp . , Michael Ellmann , Wertheim Schroder Co . , Prudential-Bache , savings , operating " results , gain , revenue , cuts , profit , loss , sales , analyst , and spokesman . 
In this case , the verbs clearly contribute information that this article is a report with more opinions than new facts  . The prepon-derance of communication verbs , coupled with proper noun subjects and human nouns  ( e . g . 
spokesman , analyst ) suggest a discussion article . If verbs are ignored , this fact would be overlooked . Matches on frequent nouns like gain and loss do not discriminate this article from one which announces again or loss as breaking news  ; indeed , according to our results , a breaking news article would feature a higher percentage of motion verbs rather than verbs of communication  . 
1.3 On Genre Detection
Verbs are an important factor in providing an event profile  , which in turn might be used in categorizing articles into different genres  . Turning to the literature in genre classification  , Biber ( 1989 ) outlines five dimensions which can be used to characterize genre  . Properties for distinguishing dimensions include verbal features such as tense  , agentless passives and infinitives . 
Biber also refers to three verb classes : private , public , and suasive verbs . Karlgren and Cutting ( 1994 ) take a computationally tractable set of these properties and use them to compute a score to recognize text genre using discriminant analysis  . The only verbal feature used in their study is present-tense verb count  . As Karlgren and Cutting show , their techniques are effective in genre categorization  , but they do not claim to show how genres differ . Kessler et al ( 1997 ) discuss some of the complexities in automatic detection of genre using a set of computationally efficient cues  , such as punctuation , abbreviations , or presence of Latinate suffixes . The taxonomy of genres and facets developed in Kessler et al is useful for a wide range of types  , such as found in the Brown corpus . Although some of their discriminators could be useful for news articles  ( e . g . presence of second person pronoun tends to indicate a letter to the editor  )  , the indicators do not appear to be directly applicable to a finer classification of news articles  . 
News articles can be divided into several standard categories typically addressed in journalism textbooks  . We base our article category ontology , shown in lower case , on Hill and Breen (1977) , in uppercase : 1 . FEATURESTORIES : feature ; 2 . INTERPRETIVESTORIES : editorial , opinion , report ; 3 . PROFILES ; 4 . PRESSRELE ASES : announcements , mergers , legal cases ; 5 . OBITUARIES ; 6 . STATISTICALINTERPRETATION : postedearnings ;  7 . ANECDOTES ; 8 . OTHER : poems . 
The goal of our research is to identify the role of verbs  , keeping in mind that event profile is but one of many factors in determining text type  . In our study , we explored the contribution of verbs as one factor in document type discrimination  ; we show how article types can be successfully classified within the news domain using verb semantic classes  . 
2 Initial Observations
We initially considered two specific categories of verbs in the corpus : communication verbs and support verbs  . In the WSJ corpus , the two most common main verbs are say , a communication verb , and be , a support verb . In addition to say , other high frequency communication verbs include report  , announce , and state . In journalistic prose , as seen by the statistics in Table 1 , at least 20% of the sentences contain communication verbs such assay and announce  ; these sentences report point of view or indicate an attributed comment  . In these cases , the subordinated complement represents the main event  , e . g . in " Advisors announced that IBM stock rose 36 points over a three year period , " there are two actions : announce and rise . In sentences with a communication verb as main verb we considered both the main and the subordinate verb  ; this decision augmented our verb count an additional  20% and , even more importantly , further captured information on the actual event in an article  , not just the communication event . As shown in Table 1 , support verbs , such as go ( " go out of business " ) or get ( " get alng " )  , constitute 30% , and other content verbs , such as fall , adapt , recognize , or vow , make up the remaining 50% . If we exclude all support type verbs ,   70% of the verbs yield information in answering the question " what happened ? " or " what did X do ? "   3 Event Profile : WordNet and EVCA Since our first intuition of the data suggested that articles with a preponderance of verbs of communication say  , announce . . . . 20% support have , get , go , . . . 30% remainder abuse , claim , offer, . . .   50% Table 1: Approximate Frequency of verbs by type from the Wall Street Journal  ( main and selected subordinate verbs , n = 10 , 295) . 
a certain semantic type might reveal aspects of documentype  , we tested the hypothesis that verbs could be used as a predictor in providing an event profile  . We developed two algorithms to: ( 1 ) explore WordNet ( WN-Verber ) to cluster related verbs and build a set of verb chains in a document  , much as Morris and Hirst ( 1991 ) used Roget's Thesaurus or like Hirst and St . Onge (1998) used WordNet to build noun chains ;   ( 2 ) classify verbs according to a semantic classification system  , in this case , using Levin's ( 1993 ) English Verb Classes and Alternations ( EVCA-Yerber ) as a basis . For source material , we used the manually-parsed Linguistic Data Consortium's Wall Street Journal  ( WSJ ) corpus from which we extracted main and complement of communication verbs to test the algorithms on  . 
Using WordNet . Our first technique was to use WordNet to build links between verbs and to provide a semantic profile of the document  . WordNet is a genera lexical resource in which words are organized into synonym sets  , each representing one underlying lexical concept ( Miller et al 1990 )  . These synonym sets - or synsets - are connected by different semantic relationship such as hypernymy  ( i . e . plunging is a way of descending ) , synonymy , antonymy , and others ( see Fellbaum 1990) . The determination of relatedness via taxonomic relations has a rich history  ( see Resnik 1993 for a review )  . The premise is that words with similar meanings will be located relatively close to each other in the hierarchy  . Figure 1 shows the verbs cite and post , which are related via a common ancestor inform ,   .   .   . , let know . 
The WN-Verber tool . We used the hypernym relationship in WordNet because of its high coverage  . We counted the number of edges needed to find a common ancestor for a pair of verbs  . 
Given the hierarchical structure of WordNet , the lower the edge count , in principle , the closer the verbs are semantically . Because WordNet common ancestor in form . . . . . let know test if Y ~ ~ ou ~ c ~ . . . .
abduct . . . . . cite at test .   .   .   . report post sound Figure 1: Taxonomic Relations for cite and post in WordNet . 
allows individual words ( via synsets ) to be the descendent of possibly more than one ancestor  , two words can often be related by more than one common ancestor via different paths  , possibly with the same relationship ( grandparent and grandparent , or with different relations ( grandparent and uncle )  . 
Results from WN-Verber . We ran all articles longer than 10 sentences in the WSJ corpus ( 1236 articles ) through WN-Verber . Output showed that several verbs-e . g . go , take , and say-participate in a very large percentage of the high frequency synsets  ( approximate 30% )  . 
This is due to the width of the verb forest in WordNet  ( see Fellbaum 1990 )  ; toplevel verb synsets tend to have a large number of descendants which are arranged in fewer generations  , resulting in a flat and bushy tree structure . For example , a toplevel verb synset , in form, .   .   .   , give information , let know has over 40 children , whereas a similar toplevel noun synset , entity , only has 15 children . As a result , using fewer than two levels resulted in groupings that were too limited to aggregate verbs effectively  . Thus , for our system , we allowed up to two edges to intervene between a common ancestor synset and each of the verbs ' respective synsets  , as in Figure 2 . 
acceptable ?\] i ? unacceptable ? 2 a 2   0   ?2 vl ? 1   1   4  ? ? ?  3 v ~ v ~? ? v livl v2  ? ?  v2  ?  v2 ? Figure 2: Configurations for relating verbs in our system . 
In addition to the problem of the flat nature of the verb hierarchy  , our results from WN-Verber are degraded by ambiguity  ; similar effects have been reported for nouns . Verbs with differences in high versus low frequency senses caused certain verbs to be incorrectly related  ; synset meaning " to give birth " although this sense of drop is rare in WSJ  . 
The results of NN-Verber in Table 2 reflect the effects of bushiness and ambiguity . The five most frequent synsets are given in column  1  ; column 2 shows some typical verbs which participate in the clustering  ; column 3 shows the type of article which tends to contain these synsets  . 
Most articles ( 864/1236 = 70% ) end up in the top five nodes . This illustrates the ineffective-ness of these most frequent WordNet synset to discriminate between article types  . 
Synset Sample Article types
Verbs ( listed in order ) in Synset
Act have , relate , announcements , editori-(interact , act to-give , tellals , features gether ,   . . . ) Communicate give , get , in-announcements , editori-(communicate , form , tellals , features , poems intercommunicate ,   .   .   . ) Change have , modify , poems , editorials , an-(change ) take noun cements , features
Alter convert , announcements , poems , ( alter , change ) make , get editorials In form in form , ex-announcements , poems , ( inform , round on , plain , de-features . . . ) scribe Table 2: Frequent synsets and article types . 
Evaluation using Kendall's Tau . We sought independent confirmation to assess the correlation between two variables ' rank for WN -Verber results  . To evaluate the effects of one synset's frequency on another  , we used Kendall's tau ( r ) rank order statistic ( Kendall 1970 )  . For example , was it the case that verbs under the synset act tend not to occur with verbs under the synset think ? If so  , do articles with this property fit a particular profile ? In our results  , we have information about synset frequency , where each of the 1236 articles in the corpus constitutes a sample . Table 3 shows the results of calculating Kendall's r with considerations for ranking ties  , for all ( 10 )  =  45 pairing combinations of the top 10 most frequently occurring synsets . Correlations can range from -1 . 0 reflecting inverse correlation , to +1 . 0 showing direct correlation , i . e . the presence of one class increases as the presence of the correlated verb class increases  . AT value of 0 would show that the two variables ' values are independent of each other  . 
Results show a significant positive correlation between the synsets  . The range of correlation is from . 850 between the communication verb synset ( give , get , inform ,   . . . ) and the act verb synset ( have , relate , give ,   . . . ) to . 238 between the think verb synset ( plan , study , give ,   . . . ) and the change state verb synset ( fall , come , close ,   .   .   .  )  . 
These correlations show that frequent synsets do not behave independently of each other and thus confirm that the WordNet results are not an effective way to achieve document discrimination  . Although the WordNet results were not discriminatory  , we were still convinced that our initial hypothesis on the role of verbs in determining event profile was worth pursuing  . 
We believe that these results are a byproduct of lexical ambiguity and of the richness of the WordNet hierarchy  . We thus decided to pursue a new approach to test our hypothesis  , one which turned out to provide us with clearer and more robust results  . 
act comchngalter in fm exps thn kI judg It rnf ~ tate  . 407  . 296  . 672  . 461  . 286  . 269  . 238 I . 355  . 268; rnsf . 437  . 436  . 251  . 436  . 251  . 404  . 369  . 359 iudge . 444  . 414  . 435  . 450  . 340  . 348  . 427  . ~ xprs . 444  . 414  . 435  . 397  . 322  . 432; hink . 444  . 414  . 435  . 397  . 398 ~ nfrm . 614 ,649  . 341  . 380 ~ lter . 501  . 454  . 6 19 Table 3: Kendall's T for frequent WordNet synsets . 
Utilizing EVCA . A different approach to test the hypothesis was to use another semantic categorization method  ; we chose the semantic classes of Levin's EVCA as a basis for our next analysis  .   3 Levin's seminal work is based on the time-honored observation that verbs which participate in similar syntactic alternations tend to share semantic properties  . Thus , the behavior of a verb with respect othe expression and interpretation of its arguments can be said to be  , in large part , determined by its meaning . Levin has meticulously set out a list of syntactic tests  ( about 100 in all )  , which predict membership n no less than 48 classes , each of which is divided into numerous ub -classes  . The rigor and thoroughness of Levin's study permitted us to encode our algorithm  , EVCA-Verber , on a subset 3Strictly speaking , our classification is based on EVCA . Although many of our classes are precisely defined in terms of EVCA tests  , we did impose some x-tensions . For example , support verbs are not an EVCA category . 
of the EVCA classes , ones which were frequent in our corpus . First , we manually categorized the 100 most frequent verbs , as well as 50 additional verbs , which covers 56% of the verbs by token in the corpus . We subjected each verb to a set of strict linguistic tests  , as shown in Table 4 and verified primary verb usage against the corpus  . 
Verb Class ( sample verbs)
Communication ( add , say , announce , ...)
Motion(rise , fall , decline , ...)
Agreement ( agree , accept , con-cur , ...)
Argument ( argue , debate , , ...)
Causative ( cause )
Sample Test ( 1 ) Does this involve a transfer of ideas ? ( 2 ) X verbed " something . "(1)* " X verbed without moving " . 
(1) " They verbed to join forces . "(2) involves more than one participant . 
(1) " They verbed ( over ) the issue . "(2) indicates conflicting views . 
(3) involves more than one participant.
(1) X verbed Y ( to happen/happened).
(2) X brings about a change in Y .
Table 4: EVCA verb class test
Results from EVCA-Verber . In order to be able to compare article types and emphasize their differences  , we selected articles that had the highest percentage of a particular verb class from each of the ten verb classes  ; we chose five articles from each EVCA class , yielding a total of 50 articles for analysis from the full set of 1236 articles . We observed that each class discriminated between different article types as shown in Table  5  . In contrast to Table 2 , the article types are well discriminated by verb class  . 
For example , a concentration of communica-tion class verbs ( say , report , announce ,   . . .   ) indicated that the article type was a general announcement of short or medium length  , or a longer feature article with many opinions in the text  . Articles high in motion verbs were also announcements  , but differed from the communication ones , in that they were commonly postings of company earnings reaching a new high or dropping from last quarter  . Agreement and argument verbs appeared in many of the same articles  , involving issues of some controversy . 
However , we noted that articles with agreement verbs were a superset of the argument ones in that  , in our corpus , argument verbs did not appear in articles concerning joint ventures and mergers  . Articles marked by causative class verbs tended to be a bit longer  , possibly reflecting prose on both the cause and effect of to investigate articles marked by the absence of members of each verb class  , such as articles lacking any verbs in the motion verb class  . However , we found that absence of a verb class was not discriminatory  . 
Verb Class ( sample verbs)
Communication ( add , say , announce , ...)
Motion(rise , fall , decline , ...)
Agreement ( agree , accept , concur , ...)
Argument ( argue , indicate , contend , .,.)
Causative ( cause )
Article types ( listed by frequency ) issues , reports , opinions , editorials posted earnings , announcements mergers , legal cases , transactions ( without buying and selling ) legal cases , opinions opinions , feature , editorials Table 5: EVCA-based verb class results . 
Evaluation of EVCA verb classes . To strengthen the observations that articles dominated by verbs of one class reflect distinct article types  , we verified that the verb classes behaved independently of each other  . Correlations for EVCA classes are shown in Table 6  . These show a markedly lower level of correlation between verb classes than the results for WordNet synsets  , the range being from . 265 between motion and aspectual verbs to- . 026 for motion verbs and agreement verbs . These low values of T for pairs of verb classes reflects the independence of the classes  . For example , the communication and experience verb classes are weakly correlated  ; this , we surmise , may be due to the different ways opinions can be expressed  , i . e . as factual quotes using communication class verbs or as beliefs using experience class verbs  . 
comunmotion agree argue expI aspect ~ cause appear  . 122  . 076  . 077  . 072  . 182 \[  . 112 J . 037 cause . 093  . 083  . 000  . 000  . 073  . 096 aspect . 246  . 265  . 034  . 110  . 189 exp . 260  . 130  . 054  . 054 argue . 162  . 045  . 033 argree . 071 - . 0 26 Table 6: Kendall's r for EVCA based verb classes . 
4 Results and Future Work.
Basis for WordNet and EVCA compari-s on . This paper reports results from two approaches , one using WordNet and other based paris on must be made explicit  . In the case of WordNet , all verb tokens ( n = 10K ) were considered in all senses , whereas in the case of EVCA , a subset of less ambiguous verbs were manually selected  . As reported above , we covered 56% of the verbs by token . Indeed , when we attempted to add more verbs to EVCA categories  , at the 59% mark we reached a point of difficulty in adding new verbs due to ambiguity  , e . g . verbs such as get . Thus , although our results using EVCA are revealing in important ways  , it must be emphasized that the comparison has some imbalance which puts WordNet in an unnaturally negative light  . In order to accurately compare the two approaches  , we would need to process either the same less ambiguous verb subset with WordNet  , or the full set of all verbs in all senses with EVCA  . Although the results reported in this paper permitted the validation of our hypothesis  , unless a fair comparison between resources i performed  , conclusions about WordNet as a resource versus EVCA class distinction should not be inferred  . 
Verb Patterns . In addition to considering verb type frequencies in texts  , we have observed that verb distribution and patterns might also reveal subtle information in text  . Verb class distribution within the document and within particular subsections also carry meaning  . For example , we have observed that when sentences with movement verbs such as rise or fall are followed by sentences with cause and then atelic aspectual verb such as reach  , this indicates that a value rose to a certain point due to the actions of some entity  . Identification of such sequences will enable us to assign functions to particular sections of contiguous text in an article  , in much the same way that text segmentation program seeks identify topics from distributional vocabulary  ( Hearst , 1994; Kan et al ,  1998) . We can also use specific sequences of verbs to help in determining methods for performing semantic aggregation of individual clauses in text generation for summarization  . 
Future Work . Our plans are to extend the current research in terms of verb coverage and in terms of article coverage  . For verbs , we plan to ( 1 ) increase the verbs that we cover to include phrasal verbs  ;   ( 2 ) increase coverage of verbs by categorizing additional high frequency verbs into EVCA classes  ;   ( 3 ) examine the effects of increased coverage on determining article type  . 
For articles , we plan to explore a general parser so we can test our hypothesis on additional texts and examine how our conclusions scale up  . Finally , we would like to combine our techniques with other indicators to form a more robust system  , such as that envisioned in Biber ( 1989 ) or suggested in Kessler et al ( 1997 )  . 
Conclusion . We have outlined a novel approach to document analysis for news articles which permits discrimination of the event profile of news articles  . The goal of this research is to determine the role of verbs in document analysis  , keeping in mind that event profile is one of many factors in determining text type  . Our results show that Levin's EVCA verb classes provide reliable indicators of article type within the news domain  . We have applied the algorithm to WSJ data and have discriminated articles with five EVCA semantic lasses into categories such as features  , opinions , and announcements . This approach to document type classification using verbs has not been explored previously in the literature  . Our results on verb analysis coupled with what is already known about NP identification convinces us that future combinations of information will be even more successful in categorization of documents  . Results such as these are useful in applications such as passage retrieval  , summarization , and information extraction . 
References
D . Appelt , J . Hobbs , J . Bear , D . Isreal , and M . Tyson . 
1993 . Fastus : A finite state processor for information extraction from realworld text  . In Proceedings of the 13th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( LICAI )  , Chambery , l ~ rance . 
Regina Barzilay and Michael Elhadad .  1997 . Using lexical chains for text summarization . In Proceedings of the Intelligent Scalable Text Summarization Workshop  ( ISTS'97 )  , ACL , Madrid , Spain . 
Douglas Biber .  1989 . A typology of english texts . Language , 27:3-43 . 
Christiane Fellbaum .  1990 . English verbs as a semantic net . International Journal of Lexicography ,  3(4):278-301 . 
Maarti A . Hearst .  1994 . Multiparagraph segmentation of expository text . In Proceedings of the 32th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics  . 
Evan Hill and John J . Breen .  1977 . Reporting ~ Writing the News . Little , Brown and Company , Boston,

Graeme Hirst and David St-Onge .  1998 . Lexical chains as representations of context for the detection and cor-ical database and some of its applications  . 
Ray Jackendoff .  1983 . Semantics and Cognition . MIT University Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts . 
Min-Yen Kan , Judith L . Klavans , and Kathleen R . McKeown .  1998 . Linear segmentation and segment relevance . Unpublished Manuscript . 
Jussi Karlgren and Douglass Cutting .  1994 . Recognizing text genres with simple metrics using discriminant analysis  . In Fifteenth International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING'9 ~ )  , Kyoto , 

Maurice G . Kendall .  1970 . Rank Correlation Methods . 
Griffin , London , England , 4th edition.
Brent Kessler , Geoffrey Nunberg , and Hinrich Schiitze . 
1997 . Automatic detection of text genre . In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics  , Madrid , Spain . 
Beth Levin .  1993 . English Verb Classes and Alternations . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , Ohio . 
Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy .  1997 . Identifying topics by position . In Proceedings of the 5th ACL Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , pages 283-290 , Washington , D . C . , April . 
Dekang Lin .  1993 . University of Manitoba : Description of the NUBA System as Used for  MUC-5  . In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Message Understanding  MUC-5  , pages 263-275 , Baltimore , Maryland . ARPA . 
Mitch Marcus et al 1994 . The Penn Treebank : Annotating Predicate Argument Structure  . ARPA Human
Language Technology Workshop.
George A . Miller , Richard Beckwith , Christiane Fellbaum , Derek Gross , and Katherine J . Miller . 
1990 . Introduction to WordNet : An online lexical database  . International Journal of Lexicography ( special issue )  ,  3(4):235-312 . 
Jane Morris and Graeme Hirst .  1991 . Lexical coherence computed by thesaural relations as an indicator of the structure of text  . Computational Linguistics , 17(1):21-42 . 
1992. Message Understanding Conference--MUC.
Giinter Neumann , Rolf Backofen , Judith Baur , Marcus Becker , and Christian Braun .  1997 . An information extraction core system for real world german text processing  . In Proceedings of the 5th ACL Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , pages 209-216 , 
Washington , D.C ., April.
David D . Palmer and David S . Day .  1997 . A statistical profile of the named entity task . In Proceedings of the 5th ACL Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , pages 190-193 , Washington , D . C . , April . 
Philip Resnik .  1993 . Selection and Information : A Class-Based Approach to Lexical Relationships  . Ph . D . 
thesis , Department of Computer and Information Science , University of Pennsylvania . 
Nina Wacholder , Yael Ravin , and Misook Choi .  1997 . 
Disambiguation of proper names in text . In Proceedings of the 5th ACL Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , volume 1 , pages 202-209 , Washington , D . C . , April . 
