An Empirical Investigation of Proposals in Collaborative 

Barbara Di Eugenio Pamela W . Jordan
Johanna D . Moore Richmond H . Thomason
Learning Research & Development Center , and Intelligent Systems Program
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh , PA 15260, USA
dieugeni,jordan,j moore , thomason@isp , pitt . edu
Abstract
We describe a corpus-based investigation of proposals in dialogue  . First , we describe our DR/compliant coding scheme and report our intercoder reliability results  . Next , we test several hypotheses about what constitutes a wellformed proposal  . 
1 Introduction
Our project's long-range goal ( see http://www . isp . 
pitt . edu/'intgen / ) is to create a unified architecture for collaborative discourse  , accommodating both interpretation and generation . Our computational p-proach ( Thomason and Hobbs ,  1997 ) uses a form of weighted abduction as the reasoning mechanism  ( Hobbs et al , 1993) and modal operators to model context . In this paper , we describe the corpus study portion of our project  , which is an integral part of our investigation i to recognizing how conversational participants coordinate agreement  . From our first annotation trials , we found that the recognition of " classical " speech acts  ( Austin , 1962; Searle , 1975) by coders is fairly reliable , while recognizing contextual relationships ( e . g . , whether an utterance accepts a proposal ) is not as reliable . Thus , we explore other features that can help us recognize how participants coordinate agreement  . 
Our corpus study also provides a preliminary assessment of the Discourse Resource Initiative  ( DR / ) tagging scheme . The DRI is an international " grass roots " effort that seeks to share corpora that have been tagged with the core features of interest to the discourse community  . In order to use the core scheme , it is anticipated that each group will need to refine it for their particular purposes  . A usable draft core scheme is now available for experimentation  ( see http://www . georgetown . edu/luperfoy/Discourse-Treebank/dri-home . html ) . Whereas several groups are working with the unadapted core DR/scheme  ( Core and Allen , 1997; Poesio and Traum ,  1997) , we have attempted to adapt it to our corpus and particula research questions  . 
First we describe our corpus , and the issue of tracking agreement . Next we describe our coding scheme and our intercoder reliability outcomes  . Last we report our findings . on tracking agreement . 
2 Tracking Agreement
Our corpus consists of 24 computer-mediated dialogues 1 in which two participants collaborate on a simple task of buying furniture for the living and dining rooms of a house  ( a variant of the task in ( Walker ,  1993)) . The participants ' main goal is to negotiate purchases  ; the items of highest priority areas of a for the living room and a table and four chairs for the dining room  . The problem solving task is complicated by several secondary goals :  1  ) Match colors within a room , 2) Buy as much furniture as you can , 3) Spendally our money . A point system is used to motivate participants to try to achieve as many goals as possible  . Each subject has a budget and inventory of furniture that lists the quantities  , colors , and prices for each available item . By sharing this initially private information , the participants can combine budgets and select furniture from either's inventory  . The problem is collaborative in that all decisions have to be consensual  ; funds are shared and purchasing decisions are joint  . 
In this context , we characterize an agreement as accepting a partner ' suggestion to include a specific furniture item in the solution  . In this paper we will focus on the issue of recognizing that a suggestion has been made  ( i . e . a proposal ) . The problem is not easy , since , as speech act theory points out ( Austin , 1962; Searle ,  1975) , surface form is not a clear indicator of speaker intentions  . Consider excerpt ( 1 ) : 2  ( 1 ) A:\[35\]:i have a blues of a for 300 . 
\[36\]: it's my cheapest one.
B : \[37\]: I have 1 sofa for 350   \[38\]: that is yellow \[39\]: which is my cheapest , \[40\]: yours sounds good . 
\ [35\] is the first mention of a sofa in the conversa-x Participants work in separate rooms and communicate via the computer interface  . The interface prevents interruptions . 
2 We broke the dialogues into utterances , partly following the algorithm in ( Passonneau ,  1994) . 
3 25 tion and thus cannot count as a proposal to include it in the solution  . Theso faA offers for consideration , is effectively proposed only after the exchange of information in  \[37\]--\[39\]  . 
However , if the dialogue had proceeded as below , \[35'\] would count as a proposal: ( 2 ) B:\ [32 '\]: I have 1 sofa for 350   \[33'\]: that is yellow \[34'\]: which is my cheapest . 
A:\[35'\]: i have a blues of a for 300.
Since context changes the interpretation of \[35\] , our goal is to adequately characterize the context  . For this , we look for guidance from corpus and domain features  . Our working hypothesis is that for both participants context is partly determined by the domain reasoning situation  . Specifically , if the suitable courses of action are highly limited  , this will make an utterance more likely to be treated as a proposal  ; this correlation is supported by our corpus analysis  , as we will discuss in Section 5 . 
3 Coding Scheme
We will present our coding scheme by first describing the core DR/scheme  , followed by the adaptations for our corpus and research issues  . For details about our scheme , see ( Di Eugenio et al ,  1997) ; for details about features we added to DR/ , but that are not relevant for this paper , see ( Di Eugenio et al ,  1998) . 
3.1 The DRI Coding Scheme
The aspects of the core DR/scheme that apply to our corpus are a subset of the dimensions under Forward-and Backward-Looking Functions  . 
3.1.1 Forward-Looking Functions
This dimension characterizes the potential effect that an utterance Ui has on the subsequent dialogue  , and roughly corresponds to the classical notion of an illocutionary act  ( Austin , 1962; Searle ,  1975) . As each Ui may simultaneously achieve multiple effects  , it can be coded for three different aspects : Statement  , Influence-on-Hearer , Influence-on-Speaker . 
Statement . The primary purpose of Statements is to make claims about the world  . Statements are subcategorized as an Assert when Speaker S is trying to change Hearer H's beliefs  , and as a Reassert if the claim has already been made in the dialogue  . 
Influence-on-Hearer ( I-on-H ) . A Uitagged with this dimension influences H's future action  . DR/dis-tinguishes between Smerely laying out options for H's future action  ( Open-Option )  , and Strying to get H to perform a certain action  ( see Figure 1 )  . Infe-R ? quest includes all actions that request information  , in both explicit and implicit forms . All other actions 3 are Action-Directives . 
3 Although this may cause future problems ( Tuomela ,   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
i'IsS discussing potential actions of H ?' , - - Is S~'-th-g-to get Htod .   .   .   .   . thing ?: Open-Op . on . . . . . . .  ;;-/  . . . . . . .  -% . o . .o . 
Is 14 supposed to provide information '?\[ .   .   .   . 3 ( ^ otio . .Diroo . vo Figure 1: Decision Tree for Influence-on-Hearer Influence -on-Speaker  ( I-on-S )  . A Uitagged with this dimension potentially commits S  ( in varying degrees of strength ) to some future course of action . 
The only distinction is whether the commitment is conditional on H's agreement  ( Offer ) or not ( Com-mit )  . With an Offer , S indicates willingness to commit to an action if H accepts it  . Commits include promises and other weaker forms . 
3.1.2 Backward Functions
This dimension indicates whether Ui is unsolicited  , or responds to a previous Uj or segment .   4 The tags of interest for our corpus are : ? Answer : Ui answers a question  . 
? Agreement : 1 . UiAccept/Rejects if it indicates S's attitude towards a belie for proposal embodied in its antecedent  . 
2 . Ui Holds if it leaves the decision about the proposal embodied in its antecedent open pending further discussion  . 
3.2 Refinements to Core Features
The core DRI manual often does not operationalize the tests associated with the different dimensions  , such as the two dashed nodes in Figure 1 ( the shaded node is an addition that we discuss below  )  . This resulted in strong disagreements regarding Forward Functions  ( but not Backward Functions ) during our initial trials involving three coders . 
Statement , In the current DR/manual , the test for Statement is whether Ui can be followed by " That's not true  . " . For our corpus , only syntactic imperatives or interrogatives were consistently filtered out by this purely semantic test  . Thus , we refined it by appealing to syntax , semantics , and domain knowledge : Ui is a Statement if it is declarative  1995  )  , DRI considers joint actions as decomposable into independent Influence-on-Speaker/Hearer dimensions  . 
4 Space constraints prevent discussion of segments.
326 and it is 1) past ; or 2) nonpast , and contains a stative verb ; or 3) nonpast , and contains a nonstative verb in which the implied action : ? does not require agreement in the domain  ; ? or is supplying agreement . 
For example , We could start in the living room is not tagged as a statement if meant as a suggestion  , i . e . if it requires agreement . 
I-on-H and I-on-S . These two dimensions depend on the potential action underlying U ~  ( see the root node in Figure 1 for I-on-H )  . The initial disagreements with respecto these functions were due to the coders not being able to consistently identify such actions  ; thus , we provide a definition for actions in our domain  , s and heuristics that correlate types of actions with I-on-H/I-on-S  . 
We have two types of potential actions : put furniture item X in room Y and remove furniture item X from room Y  . We subcategorize them as specific and general . A specific action has all necessary parameters pecified  ( type , price and color of item , and room ) . General actions arise because all necessary parameters are not set  , as in I have a blue so fauttered in a null context  . 
Heuristic for I-on-H ( the shaded node in Figure 1 )  . If H's potential action described by Ui is specific  , U i is tagged as Action-Directive , otherwise as Open-Option . 
Heuristic for I-on-S . Only a Uithat describes S's specific actions is tagged with an  1-on-S tag . 
Finally , it is hard to offer comprehensive guidance for the test is Strying to get H to do something ? in Figure  1  , but some special cases can be isolated . For instance , when S refers to one action that the participants could undertake  , but in the same turn makes it clear the action is not to be performed  , then S is not trying to get H to do something . This happens in excerpt (1) in Section 2 . A specific action ( get B's $350 yellows of a ) underlies\[38\] , which qualifies as an Action-Directive just like \[35\]  . However , because of \[40\] , it is clear that B is not trying to get A to use B'ss of a  . Thus ,\[38\] is tagged as an Open-Option . 
3 . 3 Cod ing for p rob lem solv ing features In order to investigate our working hypothesis about the relationship between context and limits on the courses of action  , we coded each utterance for features of the problem space  . Since we view the problem space as a set of constraint equations  , we decided to code for the variables in these equations and the number of possible solutions given all the possible assignments of values to these variables  . 
The variables of interest for our corpus are the objects of type t in the goal to put an object in a room  ( e . g . varsola , vartabte or var chairs ) . For a solution to 5Our definition of actions does not apply to Into -Requests  , as the latter are easy to recognize . 
327\[\[Stat . \[I-on-HII-on-SHAnswer\[Agr . II
II"83 1.72 I .72 II .79 I .54 II
Table 1: Kappas for Forward and Backward Functions exist to the set of constraint equations  , each varl in the set of equations must have a solution  . For example , if 5 instances of s of as a reknown for varsol a , but every assignment of a value to varso I a violates the budget constraint  , then varsola and the constraint equations are unsolvable  . 
We characterize the solution size for the problem as determinate if there is one or more solutions and indeterminate otherwise  . It is important onote that the set of possible values for each vari is not known at the outset since this information must be exchange during the interaction  . If S supplies appropriate values for varibut does not know what H has available for it then we say that no solution is possible at this time  . It is also important opoint out that during a dialogue  , the solution size for a set of constraint equations may revert from determinate to indeterminate  (   . g . when Sasks what else H has available for a vari ) . 
4 Analysis of the Coding Results
Two coders each coded 482 utterances with the adapted DRI features ( 44% of our corpus )  . Table 1 reports values for the Kappa ( K ) coefficient of agreement ( Carletta , 1996) for Forward and Backward
Functions .6
The columns in the tables read as follows : if utterance Uihastag X  , do coders agree on the subtag ? For example , the possible set of values for I-on-Hare : NIL ( U i is not tagged with this dimension )  , Action-Directive , Open-Option , and InfoRequest . 
The last two columns probe the subtypes of Backward Functions : was Uitagged as an answer to the same antecedent ? was Uitagged as accepting  , re . 
jecting , or holding the same antecedent ? TK factors out chance agreement between coders  ; K = 0 means agreement is not different from chance , and K = I means perfect agreement . To assess the import of the values 0 < : K < 1 beyond K's statistical significance ( all of our K values are significant at p = 0 . 000005) , the discourse processing community uses Krippendorf's cale  ( 1980 )  8 , which dis-e For problem solving features , K for two doubly coded dialogues was > . 8 . Since reliability was good and time was short , we used one coder for the remaining dialogues . 
7 In general , we consider 2 nonidentical antecedents as equivalent if one is a subset of the other  , e . g . if one is an utterance Uj and the other a segment containing Uj  . 
SMore forgiving scales exist but have not yet been discussed by the discourse processing community  , e . g . the one in ( Rietveld and van Hour , 1993) . 
IIStat.II-on-HII-on-SII Answer IAgr . II
I\]"681 . 71 IN/SaII . 81 I . 4 3 II a N/S means not significant Table 2: Kappas from ( Core and Allen 97 ) counts any variable with K < . 67, and allows tentative conclusions when . 67 < K < . 8K , and definite conclusions when K > . 8 . Using this scale , Table 1 suggests that Forward Functions and Answer can be recognized far more reliably than Agreement  . 
To assess the DRI effort , clearly more experiments are needed . However , we believe our results show that the goal of an adaptable corecoding scheme is reasonable  . We think we achieved good results on Forward Functions because  , as the DRI enterprise intended , we adapted the high level definitions to our domain  . However , we have not yet dones of or Agreement since our initial trial codings did not reveal strong disagreements  ; now given our K results , refinement is clearly needed . Another possible contributing factor for the low K on Agreement is that these tags are much rarer than the Forward Function tags  . The highest possible value for K may be smaller for low frequency tags  ( Grove et al ,  1981) . 
Our assessment is supported by comparing our results to those of Core and Allen  ( 1997 ) who used the unadapted DRI manual--see Table 2 . Overall , our Forward Function results are better than theirs  ( the nonsignificant K for I-on-S in Table 2 reveals problems with coding for that tag )  , while the Backward Function results are compatible  . Finally , our assessment may only hold for task-oriented collaborative dialogues  . One research group tried to use the DRI core scheme on free-flow conversations  , and had to radically modify it in order to achieve reliable coding  ( Stolcke et al ,  1998) . 
5 Tracking Propose and Commit
It appears we have reached an impasse ; if human coders cannot reliably recognize when two participants achieve agreement  , he prospect of automating this process is grim . Note that this calls into question analyses of agreements based on a single coder's tagging effort  , e . g . ( Walker , 1996) . We think we can overcome this impasse by exploiting the reliability of Forward Functions  . Intuitively , a U~tagged as Action-Directive+Offer should correlate with a proposal--given that all actions in our domain are joint  , an Action-Directive tag always cooccurs with either Offer  ( AD+O ) or Commit ( AD?C )  . Further , analyzing the antecedents of Commit should shed light on what was treated as a proposal in the dialogue  . Clearly , we cannot just analyze the antecedents of Commit to characterize proposals  , as a
DetIndetUnknown
AD+O2570
Open-Option 220
AD+C1020
Other 424
Table 3: Antecedents of Commit proposal may be discarded for an alternative  . 
To complete our intuitive characterization of a proposal  , we will assume that for a Uitocount as a wellformed proposal  ( WFP )  , the context must be such that enough information has already been exchanged for a decision to be made  . The feature solution size represents such a context  . Thus our first testable characterization faWFP is:  1  . 1 Ui counts as a WFP if it is tagged as Action -Directive + Offer and if the associated solution size is determinate  . 
To gain some evidence in support of 1 . 1 , we checked whether the hypothesized WFPs appear as antecedents of Commits ? Of the  32 AD ? Os in Table 3  , 25 have determinate solution size ; thus , WFPs are the largest class among the antecedents of Com-mit  , even if they only account for 43% of such antecedents . Another indirect source of evidence for hypothesis  1  . 1 arises by exploring the following questions : are there any WFPs that are not committed to ? if yes  , how are they dealt within the dialogue ? If hypothesis  1  . 1 is correct , then we expect hat each such U i should be responded to in some fashion  . In a collaborative setting such as ours , a partner cannot just ignore a WFP as if it had not occurred  . 
We found that there are 15 AD+Os with determi-nate solution size in our data that are not committed to  . On closer inspection , it turns out that 9 out of these 15 are actually indirectly committed to . 
Of the remaining 6 , four are responded to with a counterproposal ( another AD+O with determinate solution size )  . Thus only two are not responded to in any fashion  . Given that these 2 occur in a dialogue where the participants have a distinctively non-collaborative style  , it appears hypothesis 1 . 1 is supported . 
Going back to the antecedents of Commit ( Table 3) , let's now consider the 7 in determinate AD ? Os . They can be considered astentative proposals that need to be negotiated  .   1? To further refine our characterization f proposals  , we explore the hypothesis : 9Antecedents of Commits are not tagged . We reconstructed them from either variable tags or when Ui has both Commit and Accept tags  , the antecedent of the Accept . 
1?Becanse of our heuristics of tagging specific actions as ActionDirectives  , these utterances are not Open-Options . 
328 1 . 2 When the antecedent of a Commit is an AD+O and indeterminate  , the intervening dialogue renders the solution size determinate  . 
In 6 out of the 7 in determinate antecedent AD+Os , our hypothesis verified ( see excerpt (1) , where \[35\] is an AD + 0 with indeterminate solution size , and the antecedent to the Commit in \[40\]) . 
As for the other antecedents of Commit in Table 3 , it is not surprising that only 4 Open-Options occur given the circumstances in which this tag is used  ( see Figure 1 )  . These Open-Options appear to function as tentative proposals like in determinate AD+Os  , as the dialogue between the Open-Option and the Com-mit develops according to hypothesis  1  . 2 . We were instead surprised that AD+Cs are a very common category among the antecedents of Commit  ( 20% )  ; the second commit appears to simply reconfirm the commitment expressed by the first  ( Walker , 1993; Walker ,  1996) , and does not appear to count as a proposal . Finally , the Other column is a collection of miscellaneous antecedents  , such as Info-Requests and cases where the antecedent is unclear  , that need further analysis . For further details , see ( Di Eugenio et al ,  1998) . 
6 Future Work
Future work includes , first , further exploring the factors and hypotheses discussed in Section  5  . We characterized WFPs as AD+Os with determinate solution size : a study of the features of the dialogue preceding the WFP will highlight how different options are introduced and negotiated  . Second , whereas our coders were able to reliably identify Forward Functions  , we do not expect computers to be able to do so as reliably  , mainly because humans are able to take into account the full previous context  . Thus , we are interested in finding correlations between Forward 
Functions and " simpler " tags.

This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No  . IRI-9314961 . 
We wish to thank Liina Pyllk~inen for her contributions to the coding effort  , and past and present project members Megan Moser and Jerry Hobbs  . 
References
John L . Austin .  1962 . How to Do Things With Words . Oxford University Press , Oxford . 
Jean Carletta .  1996 . Assessing agreement on classification tasks : the kappa statistic  . Computational
Linguistics , 22(2).
Mark G . Core and James Allen .  1997 . Coding dialogues with the DAMSL annotation scheme . 
AAAI Fall Symposium on Communicative Actions in Human and Machines  , Cambridge MA . 
Barbara Di Eugenio , Pamela W . Jordan , and Li-ina Pylkk Lrmn .  1997 . The COCONUT project : Dialogue annotation manual , http://www . isp . 

Barbara Di Eugenio , Pamela W . Jordan , Rich-mond H . Thomason , and Johanna D . Moore . 
1998 . The Acceptance cycle : An empirical investigation of human-human collaborative dialogues  . 
Submitted for publication.
William M . Grove , Nancy C . Andreasen , Pa-tricia McDonald-Scott , Martin B . Keller , and Robert W . Shapiro .  1981 . Reliability studies of psychiatric diagnosis , theory and practice . 
Archives General Psychiatry , 38:408-413.
Jerry Hobbs , Mark Stickel , Douglas Appelt , and Paul Martin .  1993 . Interpretation as abduction . 
Artificial Intelligence , 63(1-2):69-142.
Klaus Krippendorff .  1980 . Content Analysis : an Introduction to its Methodology  . Beverly Hills : Sage

Rebecca J . Passonneau .  1994 . Protocol for coding discourse referential noun phrases and their antecedents  . Technical report , Columbia University . 
Massimo Poesio and David Traum .  1997 . Representing conversation acts in a unified seman -tic/pragmatic framework  . AAAI Fall Symposium on Communicative Actions in Human and Machines  , Cambridge MA . 
T . Rietveld and R . van Hout .  1993 . Statistical Techniques . for the Study of Language and Language
Behaviour . Mouton de Gruyter.
John R . Searle .  1975 . Indirect Speech Acts . In P . Cole and J . L . Morgan , editors , Syntax and Semantics 3 . Speech Acts . Academic Press . 
A . Stolcke , E . Shriberg , R . Bates , N . Coccaro , D . Jurafsky , R . Martin , M . Meteer , K . Ries , P . Taylor , and C . Van EssDykema .  1998 . Dialog act modeling for conversational speech . AAAI Spring Symposium on Applying Machine Learning to Discourse Processing  . 
Richmond H . Thomason and Jerry R . Hobbs . 1997.
Interrelating interpretation adgeneration ian abductive framework  . AAAI Fall Symposium on Communicative Actions in Human and Machines  , 
Cambridge MA.
Raimo Tuomela .  1995 . The Importance of Us . Stanford University Press . 
Marilyn A . Walker .  1993 . Informational Redundancy and Resource Bounds in Dialogue  . Ph . D . 
thesis , University of Pennsylvania , December.
Marilyn A . Walker .  1996 . Inferring acceptance and rejection in dialogue by default rules of inference  . 
Language and Speech , 39(2).

