Robust pronoun resolution with limited knowledge
Ruslan Mitkov
School of Languages and European Studies
University of Wolverhampton
Stafford Street
Wolverhampton WV 11 SB
United Kingdom
R . Mitkov@wlv.ac.uk

Most traditional approaches to anaphora resolution rely heavily on linguistic and domain knowledge  . 
One of the disadvantages of developing a knowledge -based system  , however , is that it is a very labour-intensive and time -consuming task  . This paper pres-ents a robust , knowledge-poor approach to resolving pronouns in technical manuals  , which operates on texts preprocessed by a part-of -speech tagger  . Input is checked against agreement and for a number of antecedentidicators  . Candidates are assigned scores by each indicator and the candidate with the highest score is returned as the antecedent  . Evaluation reports a success rate of 89 . 7% which is better than the success rates of the approaches selected for comparison and tested on the same data  . In addition , preliminary experiments show that the approach can be successfully adapted for other languages with minimum modifications  . 
1. Introduction
For the most part , anaphora resolution has focused on traditional linguistic methods  ( Carbonell & Brown 1988 ; Carter 1987 ; Hobbs 1978 ; Ingria & Stallard 1989 ; Lappin & McCord 1990 ; Lappin & Leass 1994 ; Mitkov 1994 ; Rich & LuperFoy 1988 ; Sidner 1979 ; Webber 1979) . However , to represent and manipulate the various types of linguistic and domain knowledge involved requires considerable human input and computational expense  . 
While various alternatives have been proposed , making use of e . g . neural networks , a situation semantics framework , or the principles of reasoning with uncertainty ( e . g . Connoly et al 1994 ; Mitkov 1995 ; Tin & Akman 1995) , there is still a strong need for the development of robust and effective strategies to meet the demands of practical NLP systems  , and to enhance further the automatic processing of growing language resources  . 
Several proposals have already addressed the anaphora resolution problem by deliberately imiting the extent o which they rely on domain and/or linguistic knowledge  ( Baldwin 1997 ; Dagan & Itai 1990 ; Kennedy & Boguraev 1996 ; Mitkov 1998 ; Nasukawa 1994 ; Williams et al 1996) . Our work is a continuation of these latestrends in the search for inexpensive  , fast and reliable procedures for anaphora resolution  . It is also an example of how anaphors in a specific genre can be resolved quite successfully without any sophisticated linguistic knowledge or even without parsing  . Finally , our evaluation shows that the basic set of antecedent tracking indicators can work well not only for English  , but also for other languages ( in our case Polish and Arabic )  . 
2. The approach
With a view to avoiding complex syntactic , semantic and discourse analysis ( which is vital for realworld applications )  , we developed a robust , knowl-edge-poor approach to pronoun resolution which does not parse and analyse the input in order to identify antecedents of anaphors  . It makes use of only a part-of-speech tagger , plus simple noun phrase rules ( sentence constituents are identified at the level of noun phrase at most  ) and operates on the basis of antecedent-tracking preferences  ( referred to hereafter as " antecedent indicators  "  )  . The approach works as follows : it takes as an input the output of a text processed by a part-of -speech tagger  , identifies the noun phrases which precede the anaphor within a distance of  2 sentences , checks them for gender and number agreement with the anaphor and then applies the genre-specific antecedent indicators to the remaining candidates  ( see next section )  . The noun phrase with the highest aggregate score is proposed as antecedent  ; in the rare even to fatie , priority is given to the candidate with the higher score for immediate reference  . If immediate reference has not been identified , then priority is given to the candi-does not help  , the candidate with the higher score for indicating verbs is preferred  . If still no choice is possible , the most recent from the remaining candidates is selected as the antecedent  . 
2.1 Antecedent indicators
Antecedent indicators ( preferences ) play a decisive role in tracking down the antecedent from a set of possible candidates  . Candidates are assigned a score (-1 ,  0 , 1 or 2) for each indicator ; the candidate with the highest aggregate score is proposed as the antecedent  . The antecedent indicators have been identified empirically and are related to salience  ( definiteness , givenness , indicating verbs , lexical reiteration , section heading preference , " non-prepositional " noun phrases ) , to structural matches ( collocation , immediate reference ) , to referential distance or to preference of terms  . Whilst some of the indicators are more genre -specific  ( term preference ) and others are less genre-specific ( " immediate reference " )  , the majority appear to be genre-independent . In the following we shall outline some the indicators used and shall illustrate them by examples  . 
Indicating verbs
If a verb is a member of the Verb_set=discuss , present , illustrate , identify , summarise , examine , describe , define , show , check , develop , review , report , outline , consider , investigate , explore , assess , analyse , synthesis e , study , survey , deal , cover , we consider the first NP following it as the preferred antecedent  ( scores 1 and 0 )  . Empirical evidence suggests that because of the salience of the noun phrases which follow them  , the verbs listed above are particularly good indicators  . 
Lexical reiteration
Lexically reiterated items are likely candidates for antecedent  ( a NP scores 2 if is repeated within the same paragraph twice or more  , 1 if repeated once and 0 if not ) . Lexically reiterated items include repeated synonymous noun phrases which may often be preceded by definite articles or demonstratives  . 
Also , a sequence of noun phrases with the same head counts as lexical reiteration  ( e . g . " tonerbottle " , " bottle of toner " , " the bottle ") . 
Section heading preference

Definite noun phrases in previous sentences are more likely antecedents of pronominal anaphors than indefinite ones  ( definite noun phrases score 0 and indefinite ones are penalised by -1  )  . We regard a noun phrase as definite if the head noun is modified by a definite article  , or by demonstrative or possessive pronouns . This rule is ignored if there are node finite articles  , possessive or demonstrative pronouns in the paragraph  ( this exception is taken into account because some English user's guides tend to omit articles  )  . 

Noun phrases in previous sentences representing the " given information "  ( theme )   1 are deemed good candidates for antecedents and score  1   ( candidates not representing the theme score 0 )  . In a coherent text ( Firbas 1992) , the given or known information , or theme , usually appears first , and thus forms a coreferential in k with the preceding text  . The new information , or rheme , provides some information about the theme . 
l We use the simple heuristics that the given information is the first noun phrase in a non -imperatives ntence  . 

If a noun phrase occurs in the heading of the section  , part of which is the current sentence , then we consider it as the preferred candidate (1 ,  0) . 
" Non-prepositional " noun phrases
A " pure " , " non-prepositional " noun phrase is given a higher preference than a noun phrase which is part of a prepositional phrase  ( 0 ,  -1) . Example : Insert the cassettei into the VCR making sure it i is suitable for the length of recording  . 
Here " the VCR " is penalised ( -1 ) for being part of the prepositional phrase " into the VCR "  . 
This preference can be explained in terms of salience from the point of view of the centering theory  . 
The latter proposes the ranking " subject , direct object , indirect object " ( Brennan et al 1987 ) and noun phrases which are parts of prepositional phrases are usually indirect objects  . 
Collocation pattern preference
This preference is given to candidates which have an identical collocation pattern with a pronoun  ( 2 , 0) . 
The collocation preference here is restricted to the patterns " noun phrase  ( pronoun )  , verb " and " verb , noun phrase ( pronoun ) " . Owing to lack of syntactic information , this preference is somewhat weaker than the collocation preference described in  ( Dagan & Itai 1990 )  . Example : Press the key idown and turn the volume up  . . . Pressitiagain . 
Immediate reference
In technical manuals the " immediate reference " clue can often be useful in identifying the antecedent  . 
The heuristics used is that in constructions of the form "  . . . ( You ) Vl NP . . . con(you)V2 it(con(you)V3 it ) " , where con ~ and/or/before/after . . . , the noun phrase immediately after V l is a very likely candidate for antecedent of the pronoun " it " immediately following V  2 and is therefore given preference ( scores 2 and 0 )  . 
This preference can be viewed as a modification of the collocation preference  . It is also quite frequent with imperative constructions  . Example : To print the paper , you can stand the printeriup or lay it if lat . 
To turn on the printer , press the Powerbuttoni and hold it i down for a moment  . 
Unwrap the paper i , formiti and aligniti , then load it i into the d rawer . 
Referential distance
In complex sentences , noun phrases in the previous clause 2 are the best candidate for the antecedent of an anaphor in the subsequent clause  , followed by noun phrases in the previou sentence , then by nouns situated 2 sentences further back and finally nouns 3 sentences further back ( 2 ,  1 ,  0 ,  -1) . For anaphors in simple sentences , noun phrases in the previous sentence are the best candidate for antecedent  , followed by noun phrases situated 2 sentences further back and finally nouns 3 sentences further back ( 1 ,  0 ,  -1) . 
Term preference
NPs representing terms in the field are more likely to be the antecedent than NPs which are not terms  ( score 1 if the NP is a term and 0 if not )  . 
2Identification of clauses in complex sentences i done heuristically  . 

As already mentioned , each of the antecedent indicators assigns a score with a value  -1  ,  0 ,  1 ,  2 . 
These scores have been determined experimentally on an empirical basis and are constantly being updated  . Top symptoms like " lexical reiteration " assign score  "2" whereas " non-prepositional " noun phrases are given a negative score of  "-1"  . We should point out that the antecedent indicators are preferences and not absolute factors  . There might be cases where one or more of the antecedent indicators do not " point " to the correct antecedent  . For instance , in the sentence " Insert the cas sette into the VCR imaking sure it i is turned on "  , the indicator " non-prepositional noun phrases " would penalise the correct antecedent  . When all preferences ( antecedent indicators ) are taken into account , however , the right antecedent is still very likely to be tracked down-in the above example  , the " non-prepositional noun phrases " heuristics  ( penalty ) would be overturned by the " collocational preference " heuristics  . 
2 . 2 Informal description of the algorithm The algorithm for pronoun resolution can be described informally as follows:  1  . Examine the current sentence and the two preceding sentences  ( if available )  . Look for noun phrases 3 only to the left of the anaphor 4   2  . Select from the noun phrases identified only those which agree in gender and number  5 with the pronominal anaphor and group them as a set of potential candidates  3  . Apply the antecedent indicators to each potential candidate and assign scores  ; the candidate with the highest aggregate score is proposed as  3A sentence splitter would already have segmented the text into sentences  , a POS tagger would already have determined the parts of speech and a simple phrasal grammar would already have detected the noun phrases  4In this project we do not treat cataphora ; nonanaphoric " it " occurring in constructions such as " It is important "  , " It is necessary " is eliminated by a " referential filter "  5Note that this restriction may not always apply in languages other than English  ( e . g . German ); on the other hand , there are certain collective nouns in English which do not agree in number with their antecedents  ( e . g . 
" government ", team ", " parliament " etc . can be referred to by " they " ; equally some plural nouns ( e . g . " data " ) can be referred to by " it " ) and are exempted from the agreementest . For this purpose we have drawn up a comprehensive list of all such cases  ; to our knowledge , no other computational treatment of pronominal anaphora resolution has addressed the problem of " agreement exceptions "  . 
antecedent . If two candidates have an equal score , the candidate with the higher score for immediate reference is proposed as antecedent  . 
If immediate reference does not hold , propose the candidate with higher score for collocational pattern  . If collocational pattern suggests a tie or does not hold  , select the candidate with higher score for indicating verbs  . If this indicator does not hold again , go for the most recandidate . 
3. Evaluation
For practical reasons , the approach presente does not incorporate syntactic and semantic information  ( other than a list of domain terms ) and it is not realistic to expect its performance to be as good as an approach which makes use of syntactic and semantic knowledge in terms of constraints and preferences  . 
The lack of syntactic information , for instance , means giving upc-command constraints and subject preference  ( or on other occasions object preference , see Mitkov 1995 ) which could be used in center tracking . Syntactic parallelism , useful in discriminating between identical pronouns on the basis of their syntactic function  , also has to be for gone . Lack of semantic knowledge rules out the use of verb semantics and semantic parallelism  . Our evaluation , however , suggests that much less is lost than might be feared  . In fact , our evaluation shows that the results are comparable to syntaxbased methods  ( Lappin & Leass 1994 )  . We believe that the good success rate is due to the fact that a number of antecedent indicators are taken into account and no factor is given absolute preference  . In particular , this strategy can often override incorrect decisions linked with strong centering preference  ( Mitkov & Belguith 1998 ) or syntactic and semantic parallelism preferences  ( see below )  . 
3.1 Evaluation A
Our first evaluation exercise ( Mitkov & Stys 1997 ) was based on a random sample text from a technical manual in English  ( Minolta 1994 )  . There were 71 pronouns in the 140 page technical manual ;   7 of the pronouns were nonanaphoric and 16 exophoric . The resolution of anaphors was carried out with a success rate of  95  . 8% . The approach being robust ( an attempt is made to resolve each anaphor and a proposed antecedent is returned  )  , this figure represents both " precision " and " recall " if we use the MUC terminology  . To avoid any terminological confusion , we shall therefore use the more neutral term " success rate " while discussing the evaluation  . 

In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the approach and to explore if / how far it is superior over the baseline models for anaphora resolution  , we also tested the sample text on ( i ) a Baseline Model which checks agreement in number and gender and  , where more than one candidate remains , picks as antecedent the most recent subject matching the gender and number of the anaphor  ( ii ) a Baseline Model which picks as antecedent the most recent noun phrase that matches the gender and number of the anaphor  . 
The success rate of the " Baseline Subject " was 29  . 2% , whereas the success rate of " Baseline Most Recent NP " was  62  . 5% . Given that our knowledge-poor approach is basically an enhancement of a baseline model through a set of antecedent indicators  , we see a dramatic improvement in performance (95 . 8%) when these preferences are called upon . 
Typically , our preference-based model proved superior to both baseline models when the antecedent was neither the most recent subject nor the most recent noun phrase matching the anaphor in gender and number  . Example : Identify the draweriby the litpaper port LED and add paper to it i  . 
The aggregate score for " the drawer " is 7 ( definiteness 1 + givenness 0 + term preference 1 + indicating verbs l + lexical reiteration 0 +section heading 0 + collocation 0 + referential distance 2 + non-prepositional noun phrase 0 + immediate reference 2  =  7  )  , whereas aggregate score for the most recent matching noun phrase  ( " the lit paper port LED " ) is 4 ( definiteness 1 + givenness 0 + term preference 1 + indicating verbs 0 +lexical reiteration 0 +section heading 0 + collocation 0 + referential distance 2 + non-prepositional noun phrase 0 + immediate reference 0  =  4  )  . 
From this example we can also see that our knowledge-poor approach successfully tackles cases in which the anaphor and the antecedent have not only different syntactic functions but also different semantic roles  . Usually knowledge-based approaches have difficulties in such a situation because they use preferences such as " syntactic parallelism " or " semantic parallelism "  . Our robust approach does not use these because it has no information about the syntactic structure of the sentence or about the syntactic function /semantic role of each individual word  . 
As far as the typical failure cases are concerned , we anticipate the knowledge-poor approach to have difficulties with sentences which have a more complex syntactic structure  . This should not be surprising , given that the approach does not rely on any syntactic knowledge and in particular  , it does not produce any parse tree . Indeed , the approach fails on the sentence : The paper through key can be used to feed\[a blanksheet of paper \] i through the copier out into the copy tray without making a copy on it i  . 
where " blanksheet of paper " scores only 2 as opposed to the " the paper through key " which scores  6  . 
3.2 Evaluation B
Similarly to the first evaluation , we found that the robust approach was not very successful on sentences with too complicated syntax-a price we have to pay for the " convenience " of developing a knowl-edge-poor system  . 
The results from experiment 1 and experiment 2 can be summarised in the following ( statistically ) slightly more representative figures . 
Success rate (= Precision /

Robust approach 89.7%
Baseline subject 31.55%/48.55%
Baseline most recent 65.95%
We carried out a second evaluation of the approach on a different set of sample texts from the genre of technical manuals  ( 47-page Portable Style-Writer User's Guide ( Stylewriter 1994 )  . Out of 223 pronouns in the text , 167 were nonanaphoric ( deictic and nonanaphoric " it " )  . The evaluation carried out was manual to ensure that no added error was generated  ( e . g . due to possible wrong sentence/clause detection or POS tagging  )  . Another reason for doing it by hand is to ensure a fair comparison with Breck Baldwin's method  , which not being available to us , had to be hand-simulated ( see 3 . 3) . 
The evaluation indicated 83 . 6% success rate . The " Baseline subject " model tested on the same data scored  33  . 9% recall and 67 . 9% precision , whereas " Baseline most recent " scored 66 . 7% . Note that " Baseline subject " can be assessed both in terms of recall and precision because this " version " is not robust : in the event of no subject being available  , it is not able to propose an antecedent ( he manual guide used as evaluation text contained many imperative zero-subject sentences  )  . 
In the second experiment we evaluated the approach from the point of view also of its " critical success rate "  . This measure ( Mitkov 1998b ) applies only to anaphors " ambiguous " from the point of view of number and gender  ( i . e . to those " tough " anaphors which , after activating the gender and number filters , still have more than one candidate for antecedent  ) and is indicative of the performance of the antecedent indicators  . Our evaluation established the critical success rate as  82%  . 
A case where the system failed was when the anaphor and the antecedent were in the same sentence and where preference was given to a candidate in the preceding sentence  . This case and other cases suggest that it might be worthwhile reconsider-ing/refining the weights for the indicator " referential distance "  . 
The lower figure in " Baseline subject " corresponds to " recall " and the higher figure - to " precision "  . 
If we regard as " discriminative power " of each antecedent indicator the ratio " number of successful antecedent identifications when this indicator was applied "/" number of applications of this indicator "  ( for the non-prepositional noun phrase and definiteness being penalising indicators  , this figure is calculated as the ratio " number of unsuccessful antecedent identifications "/ " number of applications "  )  , the immediate reference merges as the most discriminative indicator  ( 100% )  , followed by non-prepositional noun phrase (92 . 2%), collocation (90 . 9%), section heading (61 . 9%), lexical reiteration (58 . 5%), givenness (49 . 3%), term preference (35 . 7%) and referential distance (34 . 4%) . The relatively low figures for the majority of indicators should not be regarded as a surprise : firstly  , we should bear in mind that in most cases a candidate was picked  ( or rejected ) as an antecedent on the basis of applying a number of different indicators and secondly  , that most anaphors had a relatively high number of candidates for antecedent  . 
In terms of frequency of use ( " number of nonzero applications "/" number of anaphors "  )  , the most frequently used indicator proved to be referential distance used in  98  . 9% of the cases , followed by term preference (97 . 8%), givenness (83 . 3%), lexical reit-eration (64 . 4%), definiteness (40%), section heading (37 . 8%), immediate reference (31 . 1%) and collocation (11 . 1%) . As expected , the most frequent indicators were not the most discriminative ones  . 
3 . 3 Comparison to similar approaches : comparative evaluation of Breck Baldwin's Cog NIAC We felt appropriate to extend the evaluation of our approach by comparing it to Breck Baldwin's CogNIAC  ( Baldwin 1997 ) approach which features " high precision coreference with limited knowledge our approach and Breck Baldwin's approach share common principles  ( both are knowledge-poor and use a POS tagger to provide the input  ) and therefore a comparison would be appropriate . 
Given that our approach is robust and returns antecedent for each pronoun  , in order to make the comparison as fair as possible  , we used CogNIAC's " resolve all " version by simulating it manually on the same training data used in evaluation B above  . 
CogNIAC successfully resolved the pronouns in 75% of the cases . This result is comparable with the results described in  ( Baldwin 1997 )  . For the training data from the genre of technical manuals  , it was rule 5 ( see Baldwin 1997 ) which was most frequently used ( 39% of the cases , 100% success ) , followed by rule 8 (33% of the cases , 33% success ) , rule 7(11% ,  100%) , rule I (9% , 100%) and rule 3 (7 . 4%, 100%) . 
It would be fair to say that even though the results show superiority of our approach on the training data used  ( the genre of technical manuals )  , they cannot be generalised automatically for other genres or unrestricted texts and for a more accurate picture  , further extensive tests are necessary . 
4 . Adapting the robust approach for other languages An attractive feature of any NLP approach would be its language " universality "  . While we acknowledge that most of the monolingual NLP approaches are not automatically transferable  ( with the same degree of efficiency ) to other languages , it would be highly desirable if this could be done with minimal adaptation  . 
We used the robust approach as a basis for developing a genre-specific reference resolution approach in Polish  . As expected , some of the preferences had to be modified in order to fit with specific features of Polish  ( Mitkov & Stys 1997 )  . For the time being , we are using the same scores for Polish . 
The evaluation for Polish was based technical manuals available on the Internet  ( Internet Manual , 1994; Java Manual 1998) . The sample texts contained 180 pronouns among which were 120 instances of exophoric reference ( most being zero pronouns )  . The robust approach adapted for Polish demonstrated a high success rate of  93  . 3% in resolving anaphors ( with critical success rate of 86 . 2%) . 
Similarly to the evaluation for English , we compared the approach for Polish with ( i ) a Baseline Model which discounts candidates on the basis of agreement in number and gender and  , if there were still competing candidates , elects as the antecedent the most recent subject matching the anaphor in checks agreement in number and gender and  , if there were still more than one candidate left , picks up as the antecedent the most recent noun phrase that agrees with the anaphor  . 
Our preference-based approach showed clear superiority over both baseline models  . The first Baseline Model ( Baseline Subject ) was successful in only 23 . 7% of the cases , whereas the second ( Baseline Most Recent ) had a success rate of 68 . 4% . Therefore , the 93 . 3% success rate ( see above ) demonstrates a dramatic increase in precision , which is due to the use of antecedent tracking preferences  . 
We have recently adapted the approach for Arabic as well  ( Mitkov & Belguith 1998 )  . Our evaluation , based on 63 examples ( anaphors ) from a technical manual ( Sony 1992 )  , indicates a success rate of 95 . 2% ( and critical success rate 89 . 3 %) . 
5. Conclusion
We have described a robust , knowledge-poor approach to pronoun resolution which operates on texts preprocessed by a part-of -speech tagger  . Evaluation shows a success rate of 89 . 7% for the genre of technical manuals and at least in this genre  , the approach appears to be more successful than other similar methods  . We have also adapted and evaluated the approach for Polish  ( 93 . 3% success rate ) and for
Arabic (95.2% success rate).

Baldwin , Breck .  1997 . " CogNIAC : high precision coreference with limited knowledge and linguistic resources "  . Proceedings of the ACL'97/EACL'97 workshop on Operational factors in practical , robust anaphora resolution ,  3845 , Madrid , Spain . 
Brennan , S . , M . Fridman and C . Pollard .  1987 . A centering approach to pronouns . Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the ACL ( ACL'87 )  ,  155-162 , Stanford , 
CA , USA.
Carbonell , James G . & Ralf D . Brown .  1988 . " Anaphora resolution : a multistrategy approach  "  . Proceedings of the 12 . International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING'88 )  , Vol . I . 96-101, Budapest , Hungary . 
Carter , David M .  1987 . Interpreting anaphora in natural language texts . Chichester : Ell is Horwood Connoly , Dennis , John D . Burger & David S . Day .  1994 . 
" A Machine learning approach to anaphoric reference "  . 
Proceedings of the International Conference " New Methods in Language Processing "  ,  255-261 , Manchester , United Kingdom . 
Dagan , l do & Alon Itai .  1990 . " Automatic processing of large corpora for the resolution of anaphora references "  . 
Proceedings of the 13thelnternational Conference on Computational Linguistics ( COLING'90 )  , Vol . III , 13,
Helsinki , Finland
Firbas , Jan .  1992 . Functional sentence perspective in written and spoken communication  . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press Hobbs , Jerry R . 1978 " Resolving pronoun references " . 
Lingua , 44, 339-352.
Ingria , Robert J . P . & David Stallard .  1989 . "A computational mechanism for pronominal reference "  . Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the ACL ,  262-271 , 
Vancouver , British Columbia.
Internet Manual .  1994 . Translation of Internet Manuallnternetio kolice : Przewodnikposwia to wych sieciach komputero wych  . Tracy La Quey , Jeanne C . Ryer Translated by Monika Zielinska , BIZNET Pol and . 
Java Manual . 1998. Jezyk Java . Clico , Krakow.
Kennedy , Christopher & Branimir Boguraev , 1996.
" Anaphora for everyone : pronominal anaphora resolution without a parser "  . Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING'96 )  ,  113-118 . Copenhagen , Denmark Lappin , Shalom & Michael McCord .  1990 . " Anaphora resolution in slot grammar " . Computational Linguistics , 16: 4, 197-212 . 
Lappin , Shalom & Herbert Leass .  1994 . " An algorithm for pronominal anaphora resolution  "  . Computational
Linguistics , 20(4), 535-561.
Minolta .  1994 . Minolta Operator's Manual for Photo cop-ier EP 5325 . Technical Manual Minolta Camera Co . , Ltd . , Business Equipment Division 313 , 2-Chome , Azuchi , - Machi , Chuo-Ku , Osaka 541 , Japan Mitkov , Ruslan .  1994 . " An integrated model for anaphora resolution " . Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING'94 )  ,  1170-1176 , Kyoto , Japan . 
Mitkov , Ruslan .  1995 . " Ununcertainty reasoning approach for anaphora resolution "  . Proceedings of the Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium  ( NLPRS'95 )  ,  149-154 , Seoul , Korea . 
Mitkov , Ruslan . 1998a . "Pronoun resolution : the practical alternative  "  . In T . McEnery , S . Botley ( Eds ) Discourse Anaphor and Anaphor Resolution . John Benjamins . 
Mitkov , Ruslan . 1998b . " Evaluating anaphora resolution approaches " . Proceedings of the Discourse Anaphora and Anaphora Resolution Colloquium  ( DAARC'2 )  , ( forthcoming ) Lancaster , UK Mitkov , Ruslan & Malgorzata Stys .  1997 . " Robust reference resolution with limited knowledge : high precision genre-specific approach for English and Polish "  . Proceedings of the International Conference " Recent Advances in Natural Language Proceeding "   ( RANLP'97 )  , 74-8 l , Tzigov Chark , Bulgaria . 
Mitkov , Ruslan & Lamia Belguith .  1998 . "Pronoun resolution made simple : a robust , knowledge-poor approach in action " . Proceedings of the International Conference " Traduction Automatique et Langage Naturel "  ( TALN'98 )   ( forthcoming )  . Paris , France . 
Rich , Elaine & Susann Luper Foy .  1988 . " An architecture for anaphora resolution " . Proceedings of the Second Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  ( ANLP-2 )  ,  1824 , Texas , U . S . A . 
Sidner , Candy L .  1979 . Towards a computational theory of definite anaphora comprehension in English discourse  . Technical Report No .  537 . M . I . T . , Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory.
Sony .  1992 . Video cassette recorder . Operating Instructions . Sony Corporation . 
Stylewriter 1994 . Portable Style Writer . User's guide . 
Apple Computers.
Tin , Erkan & Varol , Akman .  1994 . " Situated processing of pronominal anaphora " . Proceedings of the KONVENS "94 Conference ,  369-378 , Webber , Bonnie L . 
1979 . A formal approach to discourse anaphora . London : Garl and Publishing . 
Williams , Sandra , Mark Harvey & Keith Preston .  1996 . 
" Rulebased reference resolution for unrestricted text using part-of-speech tagging and noun phrase parsing "  . 
Proceedings of the International Colloquium on Discourse Anaphora and Anaphora Resolution  ( DAARC )  ,  441-456 . Lancaster , UK . 

