Processing Unknown Words in HPSG
Petra Barg and Markus Walther *
Seminarftir Allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft
Heinrich-Heine-Universit ~ it Dtsseldorf
Universit ~ its str . 1, D-40225 Dtisseldorf , Germany
barg , walther@ling,uni-duesseldorf.de

The lexical acquisition system presented in this paper incrementally updates linguistic properties of unknown words inferred from their surrounding context by parsing sentences with an HPSG grammar for German  . We employ a gradual , information-based concept of " unknownness " providing a uniform treatment for the range of completely known to maximally unknown lexical entries  . " Unknown " information is viewed as revisable information  , which is either generalizable or specializable . Updating takes place after parsing , which only requires a mod-ified lexical lookup . Revisable pieces of information are identified by grammar-specified declarations wl fich provide access paths into the parse feature structure  . The updating mechanism revises the corresponding places in the lexical feature structures iff the context actually provides new information  . For revising generalizable inlbrmation , type union is required . A worked-out example demonstrates the inferential capacity of our implemented system  . 
1 Introduction
It is a remarkable fact that humans can often understand sentences containing unknown words  , infer their grammatical properties and incrementally refine hypotheses about hese words when encountering later instances  . In contrast , many current NLP system still presuppose a completelxicon  . Notable exceptions include Zernik (1989) , Erbach (1990) , Hastings & Lytinen (1994) . See Zernik for an introduction to the general issues involved  . 
This paper describes an HPSG-based system which can incrementally earn and refine properties of unknown words after parsing individual sen-*This work was carried out within the Sonderforschungsbereich  282 " Theoriedes Lexikons ' ( project B3 )  , funded by the German Federal Research Agency DFG . We thank James Kil-bury and members of the B3 group for fruitful discussion . 
tences . It focusses on extracting linguistic properties , as compared to e . g . general concept learning ( Hahn , Klenner & Schnattinger 1996) . Unlike Er-bach (1990) , however , it is not confined to simple morphosyntactic information but can also handle selectional restrictions  , emantic types and argument structure . Finally , while statistical approaches like Brent ( 1991 ) can gather e . g . valence information from large corpora , we are more interested in full grammatical processing of individual sentences to maximally exploit each context  . 
The following three goals serve to structure our model  . It should i ) incorporate a gradual , information-based conceptualization f " unknown -ness "  . Words are not unknown as a whole , but may contain unlmown , i . e . revisable pieces of information . Consequently , even known words can undergo revision to e . g . acquire new senses . This view replaces the binary distinction between open and closed class words  . It should ii ) maximally exploit the rich representations and modelling conventions of HPSG and associated formalisms  , with essentially the same grammar and lexicon as compared to closed-lexicon approaches  . This is important both to facilitate reuse of existing grammars and to enable meaningful feedback for linguistic theorizing  . 
Finally , it should iii ) possess domain-independent inference and lexicon -updating capabilities  . The grammar writer must be able to fully declare which pieces of information are open to revision  . 
The system was implemented using MicroCUF , a simplified version of the CUF typed unification formalism  ( DOrre & Dorna 1993 ) that we implemented in SICStus Prolog . It shares both the feature logic and the definite clause extensions with its big brother  , but substitutes a closed-world type system for CUF's open-world regime  . A feature of our type system implementation that will be significant later on is that type information i internal feature struc-The HPSG grammar developed with MicroCUF models a fragment of German  . Since our focus is on the lexicon , the range of syntactic variation treated is currently limited to simplex sentences with canonical word order  . We have incorporated some recent developments of HPSG  , esp . the revisions of Pollard & Sag (1994, ch .  9) , Manning & Sag ( 1995 ) 's proposal for an independent level of arguments ruc-ture and Bouma  ( 1997 ) 's use of argument structure to eliminate procedural lexical rules in favour of relational constraints  . Our elaborate ontology of semantic types-useful for nontrivial acquisition of selectional restrictions and nominal sorts-was derived from a systematic corpus study of a biological domain  ( Knodel 1980 ,  154-188) . The grammar also covers all valence classes encountered in the corpus  . 
As for the lexicon format , we currently list full forms only . Clearly , a morphology component would supply more contextual information from known affixes but would still require the processing of unknown stems  . 
2 Incremental Lexical Acquisition
When compared to a previous instance , a new sentential context can supply either identical  , more special , more general , or even conflicting information along a given dimension  . Example pairs illustrating the latter three relationships are given under  ( 1 ) - ( 3 )   ( words assumed to be unknown in boldface )  . 
(1) a . ImAx on trittein Ruhe potential uf.
' arest potential occurs in the axon ' b . Das Potential wandert tiber das Axon . 
' the potential travels along the axon ' (2) a . Das Ohrreagier tau fakustische Reize . 
' theear reacts to acoustic stimuli'b . Ein Sinnes org an reagier tauf Reize . 
' a sense organ reacts to stimuli'(3) a . Die Naseistftir Geriiche sensibel . 
' the nose is sensitive to smells ' b . Diesensible Nasereagiertauf Gertiche . 
' the sensitive no sereacts to smells '
In contrast to ( la ) , which provides the information that the gender of Axon is not feminine  ( viaim )  , the context in ( lb ) is more specialized , assigning neuter gender ( via das ) . Conversely ,   ( 2b ) differs from ( 2a ) in providing a more general selectional restriction for the subject of reagier t  , since sense organs include ears as a subtype . Finally , the adjective sensibel is used predicatively in ( 3a )  , but attributively in (3b ) . 
The usage types must be formally disjoint , because some German adjectives allow for just one usage  ( ehemalig ' former , attr . ', s chuld'guilty , pred . ') . 
On the basis of contrasts like those in ( 1 ) - ( 3 ) it makes sense to statically assign revisable information to one of two classes  , namely specializable or generalizable .   1 Apart from the specializable kinds'semantic type of nouns ' and ' gender '  , the inflectional class of nouns is another candidate  ( given a morphological component )  . Generalizable kinds of information iclude ' selectional restrictions of verbs and adjectives  '  , predicative vs attributive usage of adjectives ' as well as ' case and form of PP arguments ' and ' valence class of verbs '  . Note that spe-cializable and generalizable information can cooccur in a given lexical entry  . A particular kind of information may also figure in both classes  , as e . g . semantic type of nouns and selectional restrictions of verbs are both drawn from the same semantic ontology  . Yet the former must be invariantly specialized- independent of the order in which contexts are processed-  , where a selectional restrictions on NP complements should only become more general with further contexts  . 
2.1 Representation
We require all revisable or updateable information to be expressible as formal types  .   2As relational clauses can be defined to map types to FSs  , this is not much of a restriction in practice . Figure 1 shows a relevant fragment . Whereas the combination of special-nom_sem/\I ~ ~   .   .   . ~ predattrn?n Ifern?erason ) omas cneut sound smell no see ar
Figure 1: Excerpt from type hierarchyizable information translates into simple type unification  ( e . g . non_fernAneut=neut ) , combining 1The different behaviour underlying this classification has previously been noted by e  . g . Erbach ( 1990 ) and Hastings & Lytinen ( 1994 ) but received either no implementational sttus or no systematic association with arbitrary kinds of information  . 
2In HPSG types are sometimes also referred to as sorts  . 
92 generalizable information requires type union ( e . g . 
predVattr = prd ) . The latter might pose problems for type systems requiring the explicit definition of all possible unions  , corresponding to least common supertypes . However , type union is easy for ( Mi-cro ) CUF and similar systems which allow for arbitrary boolean combinations of types  . Generalizable information exhibits another peculiarity : we need a disjoint auxiliary type u_g to correctly mark the initial unknown information state  ) This is because ' content ' types like prd , pred , attrare to be interpreted as recording what contextual information was encountered in the past  . Thus , using any of these top respecify the initial value-either as the side-effect of a feature appropriateness declaration  ( e . g . prd ) or through grammar-controlled specification ( e . g . pred , attr ) - would be wrong ( cf . prd in iti~tVattr=prd , but u_g initial V attr = u_gV attr ) . 
Generalizable information evokes another question : can we simply have types like those in fig  . 1 within HPSG signs and do in-place type union , just like type unification ? The answer is no , for essentially two reasons . First , we still want to rule out ungrammatical constructions through  ( type ) unification failure of coindexed values , so that generalizable types cannot ahvays be combined by nonfailing type union  ( e . g . * der sensible Geruch ' the sensitive smell ' must be ruled out via sense_organ Asmell = J_  )  . 
We would ideally like to order all type unifications pertaining to a value before all unions  , but this violates the order independence of constraint solving  . Secondly , we already know that a given informational token can simultaneously be generalizable and specializable  , e . g . by being coindexed through HPSG's valence principle  . However , simultaneous in-place union and unification is contradictory  . 
To avoid these problems and keep the declarative monotonic setting  , we employ two independent features gen and clxt . ctxt is the repository of contextually unified information  , where conflicts result in ungrammaticality , genholds generalizable information . Since all gen values contain u_g as a type d is -junct  , they are always unifiable and thus not restrictive during the parse  . To nevertheless get correct gen values we perform type union after parsing  , i . e . during lexicon update . We will see below how this works out . 
3 Actually , the situation is more symmetrical , as we need a dual type u_s to correctly mark " unknown " specializable information  . This prevents in correct updating of known information  . 
However , u_~ is unnecessary for the examples presented below  . 
The last representational issue is how to identity revisable information in  ( substructure sol ) the parse FS . For this purpose the grammar defines revisability clauses like the following :  ( 4 ) a . generalizable (\[ ~\] , \[~) := synsemlloel cat lhead\[adj genb . specializable ( \[\[ I ) :=\[\[ cat lhead noun "1\] \[ synsemJoc\[contiind 1 gend 2  . 2 Processing The first step in processing sentences with unknown or revisable words consists of conventional parsing  . 
Any HPSG-compatible parser may be used , subject to the obvious requirement that lexical lookup must not fail if a word's phonology is unknown  . A canonical entry for such unknown words is defined as the disjunction of maximally underspecified generic lexical entries for nouns  , adjectives and verbs . 
The actual updating of lexical entries consists of four major steps  . Step 1 projects the parse FS derived from the whole sentence on to all participating word tokens  . This results in word FSs which are contextually enriched  ( as compared to their original lexicon state ) and disambiguated ( choosing the compatible disjunct per parse solution if the entry was disjunctive  )  . It then filters the set of word FSs by unification with the right hand side of revisability clauses like in  ( 4 )  . The output of step 1 is a list of update candidates for those words which were unifiable  . 
Step 2 determines concrete update values for each word : for each matching generalizable clause we take the type union of the gen value of the old  , lexical state of the word ( LexGen ) with the ctxt value of its parse projection ( Ctxt ) : TU = LexGenUCtzt . For each matching specializable ( Spec ) lause we take the parse value Spec . 
Step 3 checks whether updating would make a difference w . r . t , the origina lexical entry of each word . 
The condition to be met by generalizable information is that TUDLexGen  , for specializable information we similarly require SpecCLex Spec  . 
In step 4 the lexical entries of words surviving step 3 are actually modified . We retract heold lexical entry , revise the entry and reasser ti . For words never encountered before , revision must obviously be preceded by making a copy of the generic unknown entry  , but with the new word's phonology . Revision itself is the destructive modification of type informa-at the places in a word FS pointed to by the revis-ability clauses  . This is easy in MicroCUF , as types are implemented via the attributed variable mechanism of SICStus Prolog  , which allows us to substitute the type in-place . In comparison , general updating of Prolog-encoded FSs would typically require the traversal of large structures and be dangerous if structure-sharing between substituted and unaffected parts existed  . Also note that we currently assume DNF-expanded entries  , so that updates work on the contextually selected is junct  . This can be motivated by the advantages of working with presolved structures at runtime  , avoiding description-level operations and incremental grammar recompilation  . 
2.3 A Worked-Out Example
We will illustrate how incremental lexical revision works by going through the examples under  ( 5 ) - ( 7 )  . 
(5) Die Naseistein Sinnes organ.
' the nose is a sense organ ' ( 6 ) Das Ohrperzipiert . 
' theear perceives ' ( 7 ) Eine verschnupfte Nase per zi piert den

' a bunged up no seperceives the stench '
The relevant substructures corresponding to the lexical FSs of the unknown noun and verb involved are depicted in fig  .  2 . The leading feature paths synsemllocl cont for Nase and synsemlloc l cat larg-st for perzipiert have been omitted  . 
After parsing ( 5 ) the gender of the unknow noun Nase is instantiated to fern by agreement with the determiner die  . As the specializable clause ( 4b ) matches and the gend parse value differs from its lexical value gender  , gender is updated to fern . Furthermore , the object'semantic type has percolated to the subject Nase  . Since the objecrs sense_organtype differs from generic initial nom_sem  , Nase's ctxt value is updated as well . In place of the still nonex-isting entry for perzipiert  , we have displayed the relevant part of the generic unknown verb entry  . 
Having parsed ( 6 ) the system then knows that perzipiert can be used intransitively with a nominative subject referring to ears  . Formally , an HPSG mapping principle was successful in mediating between surface subject and complement lists and the argument list  . Argument list instantiations are themselves related to corresponding types by a further 
Nase after (5) gend fem\]genu . get xt sense . org an J perzipiert genu-g\]ct xtarg . ~truclafter (6) gend fem\]genu_g ctxt sense . organ Jafter (7) gend fem\]genu . g / ctxtnose Igenu . .gVnpnom \] ctxt arg . strucargs ( \[ Io clcont Lctxtnom_~em\]\]rgenu_gvear\]\]-\] J \ l genu-g V np nom V np nom  . np acc\]ct xt arg . struc I\[,, . \[ genu_gV sense ~ rgan\]\]I/\[ , OCICOmL ctxtnom_semj\] , \\]\' ocI con , g = UogV '; en:l I/
Figure 2: Updates on lexical FSs mapping . On the basis of this type classification of argument structure patterns  , the parse derived the ctxt value np nom . Since genvalues are generalizable , this new value is unioned with the old lexical genvalue  . Note that ctxt is properly unaffected . 
The first ( subject ) element on the aroslist itself is targeted by another revisability clause  . This has the side-effect of further instantiating the underspecified lexical FS  . Since selectional restrictions on nominal subjects must become more general with new contextual evidence  , the union of ear and the old value u_g is indeed appropriate  . 
Sentence ( 7 ) first of all provides more specific evidence about the semantic type of partially known Nase by way of attributive modification through ver -schnupfte  . The system detects this through the difference between lexical ctxt value sense_organ and the parse value nose  , so that the entry is specialized accordingly . Since the subject'syn value is coindexed with the first aros element  , \[ et xtnose \] simultaneously appears in the FS of perzipiert  . However , the revisability clause matching there is of class generalizable  , so union takes place , yielding ear Vnose=sense_organ(w . r . t . the simplified ontology of fig . 
1 used in this paper ) . An analogous match with the second element of ar9 s identifies the necessary update to be the unioning-in of smell  , the semantic type of Gestank . Finally , the system has learned that an accusative NP object can cooccur with perzipiert  , so the argument structure type of gen receives another update through union with np nom_np acc  . 
943 Discussion
The incremental lexical acquisition approach described above attains the goals stated earlier  . It realizes a gradual , information-based conceptualization of unknownness by providing updateable formal types -classified as either generalizable or special -izable-together with grammar-defined revisability clauses  . It maximally exploits standard HPSG representations  , requiring moderate rearrangements in grammars at best while keeping with the standard assumptions of typed unification formalisms  . One noteworthy demand , however , is the need for a type union operation . Parsing is conventional modulo a modified lexical lookup  . The actual exical revision is done in a domain -independent postprocessing step guided by the revisability clauses  . 
Of course there are areas requiring further consideration  . In contrast to humans , who seem to leap to conclusions based on incomplet evidence  , our approach employs a conservative form of generalization  , taking the disjunction of actually observed values only  . While this has the advantage of not leading to over generalization  , the requirement of having to encounter all subtypes in order to infer their common supertype is not realistic  ( sparse-data problem )  . 
In ( 2 ) sense_organ as the semantic type of the first argument of perzipiert is only acquired because the simplified hierarchy in fig  . 1 has no sean dear as its only subtypes . Here the work of Li & Abe ( 1995 ) who use the MDL principle to generalize over the slots of observed case frames might prove fruitful  . 
An important question is how to administrate alternative parses and their update hypotheses  . In DasAktions potential erreicht den Dendriten ' the action potential reaches the dendrite  ( s ) ' , Dendriten is ambiguous between acc . sg , and dat . pl . , giving rise to two valence hypotheses npnom_npacc and npnom_npdat for erreicht  . Details remain to be worked out on how to delay the choice between such alternative hypotheses until further contexts provide enough information  . 
Another topic concerns the treatment of ' cooccurrence restrictions '  . In fig .   2 the system has independently generalized over the selectional restrictions for subject and object  , yet there are clear cases where this overgenerates  ( e . g . * Das Ohrperzipiert den Gestank ' the ear perceives the stench '  )  . An idea worth exploring is to have a partial , extensible is t of type cooccurrences , which is traversed by a recursive principle at parse time  . 
A more general issue is the apparent antagonism predictions and continuing openness to contextual revision  . If after parsing ( 7 ) we transfer the fact that smells are acceptable objects to perzipiert into the restricting ctxt feature  , a later usage with an object of type sound falls . The opposite case concerns newly acquired specializable values  . If in a later context these are used to update a genvalue  , the result may be too general . It is a topic of future research when to consider information certain and when to make re-visable information restrictive  . 

Bouma , G .  (1997) . Valence Alternation without Lexical Rules . In : Papers from the seventh CLIN Meeting 1996 , Eindhoven ,  25--40 . 
Brent , M . R .  (1991) . Automatic Acquisition of Subcategorization Frames From Untagged Text  . In : Proceedings of 29th ACL , Berkeley , 209-214 . 
D0 rre , J . & M . Dorna (1993) . CUF-A Formalism for Linguistic Knowledge Representation  . I : J . DOrre(Exl . ) , Computation a IAspects of Constraint-Based Linguistic Description  . IMS , Universitat Stuttgart . 
Deliverable R1 . 2 . A , DYANA-2-ESPRIT Project 68 52 . 
Erbach , G .  (1990) . Syntactic Processing of Unknown Words . IWBS Report 131 , Institute for Knowledge-Based Systems ( IWBS ) , IBM

Hahn , U ., M . Klenner & K . Schnattinger (1996).
Learning from Texts-A Terminological Meta -Reasoning Perspective  . In : S . Wermter , E . Riloff & G . Scheler ( Ed . ) , Connectionist , Statistical , and Symbolic Approaches to Learning for Natural Language Processing  ,  453--468 . Berlin : Springer . 
Hastings , P . M . & S . L . Lytinen (1994) . The Ups and Downs of Lexical Acquisition . In : Proceedings of
AAAI'94, 754-759.
Knodel , H .  (1980) . Linder Biologie-Lehrbuch fardie Oberstufe . Stuttgart : J . B . Metzler sche Verlags-buch handlung . 
Li , H . & N . Abe (1995) . Generalizing Case Frames Using a Thesaurus and the MDL Principle  . In : Proceedings of Recent Advantages in Natural Language Processing  , Veling rad , Bulgaria ,  239-248 . 
Manning , C . & I . Sag (1995) . Dissociations between arguments ructure and grammatical relations  . Ms . ,
Stanford University.
Pollard , C . & I . Sag (1994) . Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar . Chicago University Press . 
Zernik , U .  (1989) . Paradigms in Lexical Acquisition . 
In : U . Zernik ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the First International Lexical Acquisition Workshop  , Detroit . 
