Evaluating a Focus-Based Approach to Anaphora Resolution * 
Saliha Azzam , Kevin Humphreys and Robert Gaizauskas
s . azzam , k . humphreys , r . gaizauskas ? dcs , shef . ac . uk
Department of Computer Science , University of Sheffield
Regent Court , Portobello Road
Sheffield S14 DPUK
Abstract
We present an approach to anaphora resolution based on a focusing algorithm  , and implemented within an existing MUC ( Message Understanding Conference ) Information Extraction system , allowing quantitative valuation against a substantial corpus of annotated realworld texts  . 
Extensions to the basic focusing mechanism can be easily tested  , resulting in refinement so the mechanism and resolution rules  . Results show that the focusing algorithm is highly sensitive to the quality of syntactic -semantic analyses  , when compared to a simpler heuristic-based approach  . 
1 Introduction
Anaphora resolution is still present as a significant linguistic problem  , both theoretically and practically , and interest has recently been renewed with the introduction of a quantitative evaluation regime as part of the Message Understanding Conference  ( MUC ) evaluations of Information Extraction ( IE ) systems ( Grishman and Sundheim ,  1996) . This has made it possible to evaluate different ( implementable ) theoretical approaches against sizable corpora of realworld texts  , rather than the small collections of artificial examples typically discussed in the literature  . 
This paper describes an evaluation of a focus -based approach to pronoun resolution  ( not anaphora in general )  , based on an extension of Sidner's algorithm ( Sidner , 1981) proposed in ( Azzam ,  1996) , with further refinements from development on realworld texts  . The approach * This work was carried out in the context of the EUAVENTINUS project  ( Thumair ,  1996) , which aims to develop a multilingual IE system for drug enforcement  , and including a language-independent coreference mechanism  ( Azzam et al ,  1998) . 
is implemented within the general coreference mechanism provided by the LaSIE  ( Large Scale Information Extraction ) system ( Gaizauskas et al . , 1995) and ( Humphreys et al ,  1998) , Sheffield University's entry in the MUC6 and 7 evaluations . 
2 Focus in Anaphora Resolution
The term focus , along with its many relations such as theme , topic , center , etc . , reflects an intuitive notion that utterances in discourse are usually ' about ' something  . This notion has been put to use in accounts of numerous linguistic phenomena  , but it has rarely been given a firmenough definition to allow its use to be evaluated  . For anaphora resolution , however , stemming from Sidner's work , focus has been given an algorithmic definition and a set of rules for its application  . Sidner's approach is based on the claim that anaphora generally refer to the current discourse focus  , and so modelling changes in focus through a discourse will allow the identification of antecedents  . 
The algorithm makes use of several focus re -gisters to represent the current state of a discourse : CF  , the current focus ; AFL , the altern-ate focus list , containing other candidate foci ; and FS , the focus stack . A parallel structure to the CF , AF the actor focus , is also set to deal with agentive pronouns . The algorithm updates these registers after each sentence  , confirming or rejecting the current focus . A set of Interpret-ation Rules ( IRs ) applies whenever an anaphor is encountered , proposing potential antecedents from the registers  , from which one is chosen using other criteria : syntactic  , semantic , inferential , etc . 
74 2 . 1 Evaluating Focus-Based Approaches Sidner's algorithmic account  , although not exhaustively specified , has lead to the implement-ation of focus-based approaches to anaphora resolution in several systems  , e . g . PIE ( Lin , 1995) . However , evaluation of the approach as mainly consisted of manual analyses of small sets of problematic cases mentioned in the literature  . Precise evaluation over sizable corpora of realworld texts has only recently become possible  , through the resources provided as part of the MUC evaluations  . 
3 Coreference in LaSIE
The LaSIE system ( Gaizauskas et al , 1995) and ( Humphreys et al ,  1998) , has been designed as a general purpose IE system which can conform to the MUC task specifications for named entity identification  , coreferencer solution , IE template lement and relation identification , and the construction of scenario-specific IE templates  . The system is basically a pipeline architecture consisting of tokenisation  , sentence splitting , part-of-speech tagging , morphological stemming , list lookup , parsing with semantic interpretation , proper name matching , and discourse interpretation . The latter stage constructs a discourse model , based on a predefined domain model , using the , often partial , semantic analyses upplied by the parser . 
The domain model represents a hierarchy of domain -relevant concept nodes  , together with associated properties . It is expressed in the XI formalism ( Gaizauskas ,  1995 ) which provides a basic inheritance mechanism for property values and the ability to represent multiple classific at-ory dimensions in the hierarchy  . Instances of concepts mentioned in a text are added to the domain model  , populating it to become a text- , or discourse- , specific model . 
Coreference resolution is carried out by attempting to merge each newly added instance  , including pronouns , with instances already present in the model . The basic mechanism is to examine , for each new-old pair of instances : semantic type consistency/similarity in the concept hierarchy  ; attribute value con-sistency/similarity , and a set of heuristic rules , some specific to pronouns , which can act to rule out a proposed merge . These rules can refer to various lexical , syntactic , semantic , and positional information about instances . The integration of the focus-based approach replaces the heuristic rules for pronouns  , and represents the use of LaSIE as an evaluation platform for more theoretically motivated algorithms  . It is possible to extend the approach to include definite NPs but  , at present , the existing rules are retained for nonpronominal naphora in the MUC coreference task : proper names  , definite noun phrases and b are nouns . 
4 Implementing Focus-Based
Pronoun Resolution in LaSIE
Our implementation makes use of the algorithm proposed in  ( Azzam ,  1996) , where elementary events ( EEs , effectively simple clauses ) are used as basic processing units , rather than sentences . 
Updating the focus registers and the application of interpretation rules  ( IRs ) for pronoun resolution then takes place after each EE  , permitting intrasentential references3 In addition , an initial'expected focus'is determined based on the first EE in a text  , providing a potential antecedent for any pronoun within the first EE  . 
Development of the algorithm using realworld texts resulted in various further refinements to the algorithm  , in both the IRs and the rules for updating the focus registers  . The following sections describe the two rules sets separately  , though they are highly interrelated in both development and processing  . 
4.1 Updating the Focus
The algorithm includes two new focus registers , in addition to those mentioned in section 2: AFS , the actor focus stack , used to record previous AF ( actor focus ) values and so allow a separate set of IRs for agent pronouns  ( animate verb subjects )  ; and Intra-AFL , the intrasentential alternate focus list , used to record candidate foci from the current EE only  . 
In the space available here , the algorithm is best described through an example showing the use of the registers  . This example is taken from a New York Times article in the  MUC7 training corpus on aircraft crashes : 1An important limitation of Sidner's algorithm , noted in ( Azzam ,  1996) , is that the focus registers are only updated after each sentence  . Thus antecedents proposed for an anaphor in the current sentence will always be from the previous entence or before and intrasentential references axe impossible  . 

State Police said witnesses told them the pro -peller was not turning as the plane descended quickly toward the highway in W are hamnear 
Exit 2. It hit a tree.
EE-I : State Police said tell_eventAn' expected focus ' algorithm applies to initialise the registers as follows: 
CF(current focus ) = tell_event
AF ( actor focus ) = State Police
Intra-AFL remains empty because EE-1 contains no other candidate foci . No other registers are affected by the expected focus  . 
No pronouns occur in EE-1 and so no IRs apply.
EE-2: witnesses told them
The Intra-AFL is first initialised with all ( nonpronominal ) candidate foci in the EE :
Intra-AFL = witnesses
The IRs are then applied to the first pronoun , them , and , in this case , propose the current AF , State Police , as the antecedent . The Intra-AFL is immediately updated to add the antecedent : 
Intra-AFL = State Police , witnesses
EE-2 has a pronoun in ' thematic'position , ' theme ' being either the object of a transitive verb  , or the subject of an intransitive or the copula ( following ( Gruber ,  1976)) . Its antecedent herefore becomes the new CF , with the previous value moving to the FS . EE-2 has an ' agent ' , where this is an animate verb subject ( again as in ( Gruber ,  1976)) , and this becomes the new AF . Because the old AF is now the CF , it is not added to the AFS as it would be otherwise  . After each EE the Intra-AFL is added to the current AFL  , excluding the CF . 
The state after EE-2 is then:
CF = State Police AF = witnesses
FS = tell_eventAFL = witnesses
EE-3: the propeller was not turning
The Intra-AFL is reinitialised with candidate foci from this EE : 
Intra-AFL = propeller
No pronouns occur in EE-3 and so no IR sapply . The ' theme ' , propeller here because of the copula , becomes the new CF and the old one is added to the FS  . The AF remains unchanged as the current EE lacks an agent : 
CF = propeller
AF = witnesses
FS=State Police , tell_event
AFL = propeller , witnesses
EE-4: the plane descended
Intra-AFL = the plane
CF = the plane ( theme)
AF = witnesses ( unchanged)
FS=propeller , State Police , tell_event
AFL = the plane , propeller , witnesses
In the current algorithm the AFL is reset at this point  , because EE-4 ends the sentence . 
EE-5: it hit a tree
Intra-AFL = atree
The IRs resolve the pronoun it with the CF :
CF = the plane ( unchanged )
AF = witnesses ( unchanged)
FS=propeller , State Police , tell_event
AFL = a tree 4 . 2 In terpretat ion Ru les Pronouns are divided into three classes  , each with a distinct set of IRs proposing antecedents : Personal pronouns acting as agents  ( animate subjects )  :  ( e . g . he in Shotz said he knew the pilots ) AF proposed initially , then animate members of AFL . 
Non-agent pronouns : ( e . g . them in EE-2 above and it in EE-5 ) CF proposed initially , then members of the AFL and FS . 
Possessive , reciprocal and reflexive pronouns ( PRRs )  :  ( e . g . their in the brothers had left and were on their way home  ) Ante-cedents proposed from the Intra-AFL , allowing intra-EE references . 
Antecedents proposed by the IRs are accep-ted or rejected based on their semantic type and feature compatibility  , using the semantic and attribute value similarity scores of LaSIE's existing coreference mechanism  . 
5 Eva luat ion w i th the MUC Corpora As part of MUC  ( Grishman and Sundheim ,  1996) , coreference resolution was evaluated as a subtask of information extraction  , which involved negotiating a definition of coreferencer-lations that could be reliably evaluated  . The final definition included only ' identity ' relations between text strings : proper nouns  , common nouns and pronouns . Other possible coreference relations , such as ' part-whole ' , and non-text strings ( zero anaphora ) were excluded . 

The definition was used to manually annot-ate several corpora of newswire texts  , using SGML markup to indicate relations between text strings  . Automatically annotated texts , produced by systems using the same markup scheme , were then compared with the manually annotated versions  , using scoring software made available to MUC participants  , based on ( Vilain et al ,  1995) . 
The scoring software calculates the standard Information Retrieval metrics of ' recall ' and ' precision '  , 2 together with an overall fmeasure . 
The following section presents the results obtained using the corpora and scorer provided for  MUC7 training ( 60 texts , average 581 words per text , 19 words per sentence ) and evaluation (20 texts , average 605 words per text , 20 words per sentence ) , the latter provided for the formal MUC7 run and kept blind during development . 
6 Results
The MUC scorer does not distinguish between different classes of anaphora  ( pronouns , definite noun phrases , bare nouns , and proper nouns ) , but baseline figures can be established by running the LaSIE system with no attempt made to resolve any pronouns : 
Corpus Recall Precision f
Training : 42.4 7.7 3.6 7.5 2.67.
Evaluation : 44.7 7.7 3.9 7.5 5.7 7.
LaSIE with the simple pronoun resolution heuristics of the non-focus-based mechanism achieves the following : 
Corpus Recall Precision f
Training : 58.2 7.7 1.3 7.6 4.17.
Evaluation : 56.0 7.7 0.2 7.6 2.37.
showing that more than three quarters of the estimated  20% of pronoun coreferences in the corpora are correctly resolved with only a minor loss of precision  . 
LaSIE with the focus-based algorithm achieves the following : ~ Recall is a measure of how many correct  ( i . e . manually annotated ) coreferences a system found , and precision is a measure of how many coreferences that the system proposed were actually correct  . For example , with 100 manually annotated coreference rlations in a corpus and a system that proposes  75  , of which 50 are correct , recall is then 50/100 or 50% and precision is 50/75 or 66  . 7% . 
Corpus Recall Precision f
Training : 55.4 7.7 0.3 7.6 1.97.
Evaluation : 53.3 7.6 9.7 7.6 0.47.
which , while demonstrating that the focus-based algorithm is applicable to realworld text  , does question whether the more complex algorithm has any real advantage over LaSIE's original simple approach  . 
The lower performance of the focus-based algorithm is mainly due to an increased reliance on the accuracy and completeness of the grammatical structure identified by the parser  . For example , the resolution of a pronoun will be skipped altogether if its role as a verb argument is missed by the parser  . Partial parses will also affect the identification of EE boundaries  , on which the focus update rules depend . 
For example , if the parser fails to attach a pre-positional phrase containing an antecedent  , it will then be missed from the focus registers and so the IRs  ( see ( Azzam ,  1995)) . The simple LaSIE approach , however , will be unaffected in this case . 
Recall is also lost due to the more restricted proposal of candidate antecedents in the focus -based approach  . The simple LaSIE approach proposes antecedents from each preceding paragraph until one is accepted  , while the focus-based approach suggests a single fixed set  . 
From a theoretical point of view , many interesting issues appear with a large set of examples  , discussed here only briefly because of lack of space  . Firstly , the fundamental assumption of the focus-based approach  , that the focus is favoured as an antecedent , does not always apply . For example : In June , a few weeks before the crash of TWAF light 800 , leaders of several Middle Eastern terrorist organizations met in Te-heran to plan terrorist acts  . Among them was the PFL of Palestine , an organization that has been linked to airplane bombings in the past  . 
Here , the pronoun them corefers with organiz-ations rather than the focus leaders  . Additional information will be required to override the fundamental assumption  . 
Another significant question is when sentence focus changes  . In our algorithm , focus changes when there is no reference ( pronominal or otherwise ) to the current focus in the current causes the focus at the end of the first sentence to be that of the last EE in that sentence  , thus allowing the pronoun it in the subsequent sentence to be correctly resolved with the plane  . 
However in the example below , the focus of the first EE ( the writ ) is the antecedent of the pronoun it in the subsequent sentence  , rather than the focus from the last EE ( the . . . flight ) : The writ is for " damages " of seven passengers who died when the Airbus  A310 flight crashed . It claims the deaths were caused by negligence . 
Updating focus after the complete sentence , rather than each EE , would propose the correct antecedent in this case  . However neither strategy has a significant overall advantage in our evaluations on the MUC corpora  . 
Another important factor is the priorities of the Interpretation Rules  . For example , when a personal pronoun can corefer with both CF and AF  , IRs select the CF first in our algorithm . 
However , this priority is not fixed , being based only on the corpora used so far , which raises the possibility of automatically acquiring IR priorities through training on other corpora  . 
7 Conclusion
A focus-based approach to pronoun resolution has been implemented within the LaSIEIE system and evaluated on realworld texts  . The results show no significant preformance increase over a simpler heuristic-based approach  . The main limitation of the focus-based approach is its reliance on a robust syntactic/semantic analysis to find the focus on which all the IRs depend  . Examining performance on the realworld data also raises questions about the theoretical assumptions of focus-based approaches  , in particular whether focus is always a favoured antecedent  , or whether this depends , to some extent , on discourse style . 
Analysing the differences in the results of the focus-and non-focus-based approaches  , does show that the focus-based rules are commonly required when the simple syntactic and semantic rules propose a set of equivalent antecedents and can only select  , say , the closest arbitrarily . A combined approach is therefore suggested , but whether this would be more effect-ive than further refining the resolution rules of the focus-based approach  , or improving parse results and adding more detailed semantic on-straints  , remains an open question . 
References
S . Azzam , K . Humphreys , and R . Gaizauskas.
1998 . Coreference resolution in a multilingual information extraction system  . In Proceedings of the First Language Resources and Evaluation Conference  ( LREC )  . Linguistic
Coreference Workshop.
S . Azzam .  1995 . Anaphors , PPs and Disambiguation Process for conceptual analysis  . In
Proceedings of l~th IJCAL
S . Azzam .  1996 . Resolving anaphors in embedded sentences . In Proceedings of 34th ACL . 
R . Gaizauskas , T . Wakao , K Humphreys,
H . Cunningham , and Y . Wilks .  1995 . Description of the LaSIE system . In Proceedings of MUC6, pages 207-220 . Morgan

R . Gaizauskas . 1995. XI : A Knowledge
Representation Language Based on Cross-
Classification and Inheritance . Technical Report CS-95-24 , University of Sheffield . 
R . Grishman and B . Sundheim .  1996 . Message Understanding Conference- 6: A brief history . In Proceedings of 16th IJCAI , pages 466-471 . 
J . S . Gruber .  1976 . Lexical structures in syntax and semantics . North-Holland . 
K . Humphreys , R . Gaizauskas , S . Azzam,
C . Huyck , B . Mitchell , H . Cunningham , and Y . Wilks .  1998 . Description of the LaSIE-II system . In Proceedings of MUC7 . Forthcoming . 
D . Lin .  1995 . Description of the PIE System . In Proceedings of MUC6, pages 113-126 . Morgan Kaufmann . 
C . Sidner .  1981 . Focusing for interpretation of pronouns . American Journal of Computational Linguistics ,  7:217-231 . 
G . Thurmair .  1996 . AVENTINUS System Architecture . AVENTINUS project report LE1-2238 . 
M . Vilain , J . Burger , J . Aberdeen , D . Connolly , and L . Hirschman .  1995 . A modeltheoretic coreference scoring scheme . In Proceedings of
MUC6, pages 4552. Morgan Kaufmann.

