Embedding New Information into Referring Expressions 
Hua Cheng
Department of Artificial Intelligence , University of Edinburgh
El 7, 80 South Bridge , Edinburgh EH1 1HN , U.K.
Email : huac@dai.ed.ac.uk

This paper focuses on generating referring expressions capable of serving multiple communicative goals  . The components of a referring expression are divided into a referring part and a non-referring part  . 
Two rules for the content determination and construction of the non-referring part are given  , which are realised in an embedding algorithm . The significant aspect of our approach is that it intends to generate the non-referring part given the restrictions imposed by the referring part  , whose realisation is , on the other hand , affected by the non-referring part . 
1 Components of a Referring Expression
The referring expression is a very important and complex construction in languages  . It can serve multiple communicative goals including referring to an object  , providing new information about it , and expressing the speaker's emotional attitude towards it  ( Appelt ,  1985) . Although a formal model of referring built within the framework of a general theory of speech acts and rationality is given in  ( Appelt and Kronfeld ,  1987) , and this can be used to explain how referring acts achieve multiple goals  , there is a gap between the general model and the planning of the linguistic content of a referring expression  . 
We divide the constituents in a referring expression I into two parts based on their communicative goals and the rules for their content determination and realisation  . They area referring part , which intends to refer to an object and a non -referring part  , which intends to provide additional new information about the object  . For example , in " the actual writing style of Xuanzong , who was a wellknown calligrapher " , the boldfaced items belong to the referring part  , and the underlined ones to the non-referring part . 
The division is a pragmatic one and the two parts are closely related to each other  . On the one hand , the referring part puts both syntactic and semantic ~ Only singular referring expressions that are primarily for referring to physical objects are considered here  . 
constraints on the presenting of the non-referring part  . The syntactic on straint concerns mainly the available syntactic slots around the head  . The semantic constraint will be introduced in section  3  . 
On the other hand , the possibility of adding a non-referring part can make some realisations of a referent preferred over others  . When generating referring expressions , multiple factors should be considered , which include Centering Theory ( Groszeta L ,  1995 ) and stylistic preferences such as avoiding too many repetitions  . If we are to satisfy all constraints to some extent  , we may need to consider more than one possible realisation of a referent  , choosing among those that do not significantly affect the coherence of the text  . Then one of the realisations that is most suitable for adding new information can be selected  . 
A great amount of work has been done on generating various types of referring expressions  , which addresses the referring part , while little has addressed the generation issues with respect othe other part  , excep that in ( Scott and de Souza ,  1990) , the relation between embedding and rhetorical relations is discussed and several heuristics for combining sentences using embedding are given  . But this is far from enough for generating an appropriate r-ferring expression  . 
2 System Architecture
We design an algorithm to generate referring expressions consisting of both parts  . The referring pan is generated by the referring process  ( Dale ,  1992) , while the non-referring pan is generated by a subtype of the aggregation process called embedding  , which selects suitable facts and realises them as components within the structure of a referring expression  . The algorithm fits into the text planner of
ILEX ( Oberlander et al , 1998).
ILEX is an adaptive hypertext system generating museum object descriptions  . In ILEX , pieces of domain knowledge that may be worth expressing in a text are represented as nodes and links in a graph called the Content Potential  . Two kinds of nodes nodes and fact nodes 2 . A fact is represented as Pre-dicate(Argl , Arg2) . A revised version of Text Structure ( TS )   ( Meteer ,  1992 ) is used as an intermediate level of representation between the text planner and the sentence realiser  , which provide syntactic on-straints to the text planner while abstracting away from linguistic details  . The Text Structure uses a unified representation for structures both above and below sentence level  , so that abstract sentence planning can be done in text planning  . 
The text generation process follows roughly four steps :  1  ) The text planner selects a set of facts to be expressed and the best rhetorical relations between them  3  .  2 ) The text planner builds the TS for each fact in the set  . For each entity in a chosen fact , the referring process produces a list of possible realisations that will unambiguously refer  ( the referring part )  . Based on the constraints imposed by the referring part  , the embedding process finds from the set al the unexpressed facts whose Argls are that entity  4  , and makes embedding decisions including what to embed  , what syntactic form the embedded parts should take and which realisation for the entity is preferred  , according to the principles in the next section . This step iterates until the TS for all facts is built  .  3 ) The aggregation process goes through the TS for parataxis possibilities  .  4 ) The appropriately simplified TS is sent to the surface realiser  , where the natural anguage text is generated . 
We distinguish between two types of parataxis : semantic and textual  . Semantic parataxis concerns facts that have two identical semantic on stituents or a rhetorical relation between them  , while textual paratax is deals with any adjacent facts from text planning  , with no rhetorical connection between . In step 3), both types of parataxis are performed . 
3 Generating the Non-Referring Part
A referring expression is primarily for referring to an entity  . So the addition of a non-referring part should not interfere with this primary function  . We summarise two principles that the non -referring part must obey  , which have been realised in our embedding algorithm in a simple way  . 
2 Each entity node corresponds to a domain object ; each fact node represents a relation between two entities and can be expressed as a single sentence in language  . 
3Details of the text planning algorithm can be found in  ( Oberlandertal . , 1998) . 
4The chosen fact actually forms the nucleus of Elaboration  , and the facts collected by embedding form the satellites  . 
1 . The non-referring part should not confuse the reader about the referent indicated by the referring part  . That is , if the referring part can uniquely identify the referent  , the reader should not be confused over which object he referring expression is about because of the addition of the non-referring part  . For example , in the description of a currently focal object which is a necklace  , we might say " The necklace is made from gold " . Suppose we also want to inform the readers that the necklace has floral motifs  . We should use " The necklace , which has floral motifs , is made from gold " rather than " The necklace with floral motifs is made from gold " because the latter may make the readers think that the sentence is about a necklace which is not the focal object  . 
Based on both the properties of English and our analysis of real museum descriptions  , we find that additional information is provided by evaluat-ive adjectives  , nonrestrictive clauses , and almost all grammatical constituents in an indefinite and a demonstrative noun phrase  . These characteristics are captured by embedding rules  . For example , the definition of one rule that embeds a prepositional phrase is:  ( def-embed-rule : name with-phrase ; the name of this rule : priority 4 : type prep-phrase ; the type of embedding : constraints ( (: type pred Generalized-Possession )   ( : type refer ( : or demonstrative indefinite ) ) ) : RT ( (: rel-parent Adjunct )   ( : textual-semWith-Prep-phrase ) ) ) In the definition , priority is the order in which the rule should be tried  , where those rules producing simpler syntactic forms always have higher priority  ( Scott and de Souza ,  1990) ; constraints is the restrictions that must be satisfied by the predicate and arguments of the embedded fact and the realisation of the referring part  . In the above example , the required semantic ategory of the predicate is specified  , which is used to select suitable facts for embedding  ; RT is the resource tree for building the
TS for the embedded component.
Assume we have two facts Fl = style(J1 , Organic ) and F2 = hasqual(J1 , Floral-motif ) . Without using embedding , we might generate " The necklace is in the Organic style  . It has floral motifs " . Suppose F1 and F2 are selected by the text planner and the embedding process respectively  , and the referring form of the entity Jl can be demonstrative  , defin-ite or pronoun . Applying the above embedding rule , of F1 , and choose demonstrative , as " This necklace with flor almotifs is in the Organic style "  . 
2 . The non-referring part should not reduce the readability of the text  . There are several restrictions concerning readability:  1  ) Complexity of a referring expression : the generated expression should not be too complex to read  . We use a fixed number of syntactic slots to restrict the maximum amount of information that can be expressed  . But the actual complexity is decided by user models  . At present we only distinguish between adults and children  . According to observations in psycholinguistic research  , embedded clauses in subjects are a major obstacle to comprehensibility  ( Coleman ,  1962) . So for children , the system generates fewer nonrestrictive clauses than for adults and none at all in subjects  . 
2 ) Compatibility with other aggregation possibilities : only semantic paratactic and hypotactic relations between facts are considered here  . Complex embedded components like nonrestrictive clauses may interrup the semantic on nection between a set of sentences  . For example , if we do not consider such connections while making embedding decisions  , we would generate a sentence like : " This jewel is made of gold  , sapphire , a kind of precious tone and enamel which is often used to produce a shiny surface "  . It is not good compared with : " This jewel is made of gold  , s apphire and e name l . S apphire is a kind of precious stone , and enamel is often used to produce as hiny surface "  . 
Adjectives would not have such negativ effect in most cases  , especially when the paratactic parts have syntactically symmetrical modifications  , like " The bracelet has a slightly flared b and and as well-ing mid section  . " Prepositional phrases fall between adjectives and relative clauses in their effect  . 
Also when one fact is to be embedded , it is necessary to check if there are facts semantically related to it  , which should be embedded together . For instance , it is bad to say " The necklace , which is made from gold , is in the Organic style . It is also made from enamel " . 
So before embedding a fact , our embedding algorithm considers the possibilities of other types of aggregation  , and only embeds if the embedded properties can be realised as a syntactic form other than a nonrestrictive clause in possible paratactic nuclei  , and all of the semantically related facts can be embedded at the same time  . This means that embedding has a lower priority than parataxis and hy-potaxis  , which reflects the relationship between the weakest rhetorical relation  , Elaboration , and other types of rhetorical relations . 
4 Future Work
This paper discusses our ongoing work on how to embednew information into a referring expression  . While the restrictions concerning the second principle are currently implemented in a procedural way  , it is possible to formalise them as constraints within the embedding rules  . 
An interesting problem is the relation between embedding and entity-based coherence  , which exists between spans of text in virtue of shared entities  ( Oberlandertal . , 1998) . When a fact is embedded into another one , the entity inside it may become unavailable for an entity-based move  , and the smooth transfer from this fact to its elaborating facts is cutoff  . The effect of embedding on local and global coherence is to be exploited more in future work  , and a comprehensive evaluation is indispensable . 
Acknowledgement This research is supported by a University of Edinburgh Studentship  . The author appre-ciates the comments from Dr . Chris Mellish , Dr . MickO ' Donnell and the four anonymous reviewers . 

Appelt , D .  1985 . Planning English Referring Expression . Artificial Intelligence , 26:1-33 . 
Appelt , D and Kronfeld , A .  1987 . A Computational Model of Referring . In Proceedings of the Tenth
IJCAL 640-647.
Coleman , E .  1962 . Improving Comprehensibil-ity by Shortening Sentences  . Journal of Applied
Psychology , 46:131-134.
Dale , R .  1992 . Generating Referring Expressions : Constructing Descriptions in a Domain of Objects and Processes  . MIT Press . 
Grosz , B , et al 1995 . Centering : A Framework for Modelling the Local Coherence of Discourse  . 
Computational Linguistics , 21:203-226.
Meteer , M .  1992 . Expressibility and The Problem of Efficient Text Planning  . Pinter Publishers Ltd . 
Oberlander , J . et al in press . Information Structure and Non-canonical Syntax in Descriptive Texts  . 
Text Representation : Linguistic and Psycholin -guistic Aspects  . Benjamins Publisher . 
Scott , D . and de Souza , C .  1990 . Getting the Message Across in RST-based Text Generation  . Current Research in NLG , 47-73 . 

