SemiAutomatic Recognition of Noun Modifier Relationships 
KenBARKER and StanSZPAKOWICZ
School of Information Technology and Engineering
University of Ottawa
Ottawa , Canada K1N 6N5
kbarker , szpak)@site.uottawa.ca

Semantic relationships among words and phrases are often marked by explicit syntactic or lexical clues that help recognize such relationships in texts  . Within complex nominals , however , few overt clues are available . Systems that analyze such nominals must compensate for the lack of surface clues with other information  . One way is to load the system with lexical semantics for nouns or adjectives  . This merely shifts the problem elsewhere : how do we define the lexical semantics and build large semantic lexicons ? Another way is to find constructions similar to a given complex nominal  , for which the relationships are already known . This is the way we chose , but it too has drawbacks . 
Similarity is not easily assessed , similar analyzed constructions may not exist , and if they do exist , their analysis may not be appropriate for the current nominal  . 
We present a semiautomatic system that identifies semantic relationships in noun phrases without using precoded noun or adjective semantics  . Instead , partial matching on previously analyzed noun phrases leads to a tentative interpretation of a new input  . Processing can start without prior analyses , but the early stage requires user interaction . As more noun phrases are analyzed , the system learns to find better interpretations and reduces its reliance on the user  . In experiments on English technical texts the system correctly identified  60-70% of relationships automatically . 
1 Introduction
Any system that extracts knowledge from text cannot ignore complex noun phrases  . In technical domains especially , noun phrases carry much of the information . Part of that information is contained in words ; cataloguing the semantics of single words for computational purposes is a difficult task that has received much attention  . But part of the information in noun phrases is contained in the relationships between components  . 
We have built a system for noun modifier e -lationship  ( NMR ) analysis that assigns semantic relationships in complex noun phrases  . Syntactic analysis finds noun phrases in a sentence and provides a flat list of premodifiers and postmodifying prepositional phrases and appositives  . The NMR analyzer first brackets the flat list of premodifiers into modifier-head pairs  . Next , it assigns NMRs to each pair . NMRs are also assigned to the relationships between the noun phrase and each postmodifying phrase  . 
2 Background 2.1 Noun Compounds
A head noun along with a noun premodifier is often called a noun compound  . Syntactically a noun compound acts as a noun : a modifier or a head may again be a compound  . The NMR analyzer deals with the semantics of a particular kind of compound  , namely those that are transparent and endocentric . 
The meaning of a transparent compound can be derived from the meaning of its elements  . For example , laser printer is transparent ( a printer that uses a laser )  . Guineapigiso paque : there is no obvious direct relationship to guinea or topig  . 
An endocentric compound is a hyponym of its head . Desktop computer is endocentric because it is a kind of computer  . Bird brain is exocentric because it does not refer to a kind of brain  , but rather to a kind of person ( whose brain resembles that of a bird )  . 
Since the NMR analyzer is intended for technical texts  , the restriction to transparent endocen-tric compounds should not limit the utility of the system  . Our experiments have found noop a que or exocentric compounds in the test texts  . 
96 2 . 2 Semantic Relations in Noun Phrases Most of the research on relationships between nouns and modifiers deals with noun compounds  , but these relationships also hold between ouns and adjective premodifiers or postmodifying prepositional phrases  . Lists of semantic labels have been proposed , based on the theory that a compound expresses one of a small number of covert semantic relations  . 
Levi ( 1978 ) argues that semantics and word formation make noun-noun compounds a heterogeneous class  . She removes opaque compounds and adds nominal non -predicating adjectives  . For this class Levi offers nine semantic labels . According to her theory , these labels represent underlying predicates deleted during compound formation  . George ( 1987 ) disputes the claim that Levi's non-predicating adjectives never appear in predicative position  . 
Warren ( 1978 ) describes a multilevel system of semantic labels for noun-noun relationships  . 
Warren ( 1984 ) extends the earlier work to cover adjective premodifiers as well as nouns  . The similarity of the two lists suggests that many adjectives and premodifying nouns can be handled by the same set of semantic relations  . 
2.3 Recognizing Semantic Relations
Programs that uncover the relationships in modi -fier-noun compounds often base their analysis on the semantics of the individual words  ( or a composition thereof )  . Such systems assume the existence of some semantic lexicon  . 
Leonard ' system ( 1984 ) assign semantic labels to noun-noun compounds based on a dictionary that includes taxonomic and meronymic  ( part-whole ) information , information about he syntactic behaviour of nouns and about he relationships between ouns and verbs  . Finin ( 1986 ) produces multiple semantic interpretations of modifier-noun compounds  . The interpretations are based on pre-coded semantic class information and domain-dependent frames describing the roles that can be associated with certain nouns  . TerStal's system ( 1996 ) identifies concepts in text and unifies them with structures extracted from a handcoded lexicon containing syntactic information  , logical form templates and taxonomic information . 
In an attempto avoid the hand-coding required in other systems  , Vanderwende ( 1993 ) automatically extract semantic features of nouns from online dictionaries  . Combinations of feature simply particular semantic interpretations of the relationship between two nouns in a compound  . 
3 Noun Modifier Relationship Labels
Table 1 lists the NMRs used by our analyzer . The list is based on similar lists found in literature on the semantics of noun compounds  . It may evolve as experimental evidence suggests changes  . 
Agent ( agt )
Beneficiary ( benf )
Cause ( caus )
Container ( ctn )
Content ( cont )
Destination ( dest)
Equative ( equa )
Instrument ( inst )
Located ( led)
Location ( loc)
Material ( matr )
Object ( obj)
Possessor ( poss )
Product ( prod )
Property ( prop)
Purpose ( purp )
Result ( resu )
Source ( src)
Time ( time )
Topic ( top )
Table 1: The noun modifie relationships
For each NMR , we give a paraphrase and example modifier-noun compounds  . Following the tradition in the study of noun compound semantics  , the paraphrases act as definitions and can be used to check the acceptability of different interpretations of a compound  . The paraphrases serve as definitions in this section and to help with interpretation during user interactions  ( as illustrated in section 6 )  . In the analyzer , awkward paraphrases with adjectives could be improved by replacing adjectives with their WordNet pertainyms  ( Miller ,  1990) , giving , for example , " charity benefits from charitable donation " instead of " charitable benefits from charitable donation "  . 
Agent : compound is performed by modifier student protest  , b and concert , military assault Beneficiary : modifier benefits from compound student price  , charitable donation
Cause : modifier causes compound examanxiety , over due fine
Container : modifier contains compound printer tray  , floodwater , film music , story idea Content : modifier is contained in compound paper tray  , eviction otice , oil pan Destination : modifier is destination of compound game bus  , exit route , entrance stairs compose rarranger , player coach Instrument : modifier is used in compound electron microscope  , diese lengine , laser printerLocated:modifier is located at compound building site  , home town , solar system Location : modifier is the location of compound labprinter  , internal combustion , desert storm
Material : compound is made of modifier carbon deposit  , ginger breadman , water vapot trObject : modifier is acted on by compound engine repair  , horse doctor
Possessor : modifier has compound national debt , student loan , company car Product : modifier is a product of compound automobile factory  , light bulb , colour printer
Property : compound is modifier blue car , bighouse , fast computer Purpose : compound is meant for modifier concert hall soup pot  , grinding abrasive Result : modifier is a result of compound storm cloud  , cold virus , death penalty Source : modifier is the source of compound foreign capital  , chest pain , north windTime:modifier is the time of compound w interse mester  , latesupper , morning class Topic : compound is concerned with modifier computer expert  , safety standard , horror novel 4 Noun Modifier Bracketing Before assigning NMRs , the system must bracket the head noun and the premodifier sequence into modifier-head pairs  . Example ( 2 ) shows the bracketing for noun phrase ( 1 )  . 
(1 ) dynamic high impedance microphone ( 2 )   ( dynamic ( ( high impedance ) microphone ) ) The bracketing problem for noun-noun-noun compounds has been investigated by Liberrnan & Sproat  ( 1992 )  , Pustejovsky et al (1993) , Resnik (1993) and Lauer (1995) among others . Since the NMR analyzer must handle premodifier sequences of any length with both nouns and adjectives  , it requires more general techniques . Our semiautomatic bracketer ( Barker ,  1998 ) allows for any number of adjective or noun premodifiers  . 
After bracketing , each non-atomic element of a bracketed pair is considered a subphrase of the original phrase  . The subphrases for the bracketing in ( 2 ) appear in ( 3 )  , (4) and (5) . 
(3 ) high impedance ( 4 ) high_impedance microphone ( 5 ) dynamic high_impedance_microphone Each subphrase consists of a modifier  ( possibly compound , as in (4)) and a head ( possibly compound , as in (5)) . The NMR analyzer assigns an NMR to the modifier -head pair that makes up each subphrase  . 
Once an NMR has been assigned , the system must store the assignment to help automate future processing  . Instead of memorizing complete noun phrases ( or even complete subphrases ) and analyses , the system reduces compound modifiers and compound heads to their own local heads and stores these reduced pairs with their assigned NMR  . This allows it to analyze different noun phrases that have only reduced pairs in common with previous phrases  . For example , (6) and (7) have the reduced pair (8) in common . If (6) has already been analyzed , its analysis can be used to assist in the analysis of  ( 7 ) -- see section 5 . 1 . 
(6 )   ( dynamic ( ( high impedance ) microphone ) )  ( 7 )   ( dynamic ( cardioid ( vocal microphone ) ) )   ( 8 )   ( dynamic microphone )   5 Assigning NMRs Three kinds of construction require NMR assignments : the modifier-head pairs from the bracketed premodifier sequence  ; postmodifying prepositional phrases ; appositives . 
These three kinds of input can be generalized to a single form--a triple consisting of modifier  , head and marker(M , H , Mk ) . For premodifiers , Mk is the symbol nil , since no lexical item links the premodifier to the head  . For postmodifying prepositional phrases Mk is the preposition  . For appositives , Mk is the symbol appos . The ( M , H , Mk ) triples for examples (9) , (10) and (11) appear in Table 2 . 
(9 ) monitor cable plug ( 10 ) large piece of chocolate cake ( 11 ) my brother , a friend to all young people To assign an NMR to a triple  ( M , H , Mk ) , the system looks for previous triples whose distance to the currentriple is minimal  . The NMRs assigned to previou similar triples comprise lists of candidate NMRs  . The analyzer then finds what it considers the best NMR from these lists of candi-monitor cable nilmonitor_cable plugnil chocolate cakenil large piecenil chocolate_cake large_piece of young people nilyoung_people friend to friend brother appos Table  2:   ( M , H , Mk ) triples for (9) ,   ( I0 ) and ( 11 ) dates to present othe user for approval . Apposi-tives are automatically assigned Equative . 
5.1 Distance Between Triples
The distance between two triples is a measure of the degree to which their modifiers  , heads and markers match . Table 3 gives the eight different values for distance used by NMR analysis  . 
The analyzer looks for previous triples at the lower distances before attempting to find triples at higher distances  . For example , it will try to find identical triples before trying to find triples whose markers do not match  . 
Several things about the distance measures require explanation  . First , a preposition is more similar to an ilmarker than to a different preposition  . Unlike a different preposition , the nilmarker is not known to be different from the marker in an overtly marked pair  . 
Next , no evidence suggests that triples with matching M are more similar or less similar than triples with matching H  ( distances 3 and 6 )  . 
Triples with matching prepositional marker ( distance 4 ) are considered more similar than triples with matching Mor Honly  . A preposition is an overt indicator of the relationship between M and H  ( see Quirk , 1985: chapter 9 ) so a correlation is more likely between the preposition and the NMR than between a given M or H and the NMR  . 
If the current riple has a prepositional marker not seen in any previous triple  ( distance 5 )  , the system finds candidate NMRs in its NMR marker dictionary  . This dictionary was constructed from a list of about  50 common atomic and phrasal prepositions . The various meanings of each preposition were mapped to NMRs by hand  . Since the list of prepositions is mall , dictionary con'struction was not a difficult knowledgengineer-ing task  ( requiring just twenty hours of work of a secondary school student  )  . 
5.2 The Best NMRs
The lists of candidate NMRs consist of all those NMRs previously assigned to  ( M , H , Mk ) triples at a minimum distance from the triple under analysis  . If the minimum distance was 3 or 6 , there may be two candidate lists : LM contains the NMRs previously assigned to triples with matching M  , L , -with matching H . The analyzer attempts to choose a set R of candidates to suggest to the user as the best NMRs for the currentriple  , If there is one list L of candidate NMRs , R contains the NMR ( or NMRs ) that occur most frequently in LF or two lists LM and L  , , R could be found in several ways , We could take R to contain the most frequent NMRs in LMuL  ,  . This absolute frequency approach as a bias towards 
NMRs in the larger of the two lists.
Alternatively , the system could prefer NMRs with the highest relative frequency in their lists  . If there is less variety in the NMRs in LM than in LH  , M might be a more consistent indicator of NMR than H  . Consider example (12) . 
(12) front line
Compounds with the modifier front may always have been assigned Location  . Compounds with dist currentriple 0(M , H , Mk ) 1(M , H , < prep >)2(M , H , Mk ) 3(M , H , Mk ) 4(M , H , < prep >) 5(M , H , < prep >) 6(M , H , Mk ) 7(M , H , Mk ) previous triple example ( M , H , Mk ) ( M , H , nil ) ( M , H , _)(M ,  _ , Mk ) or (_ , H , Mk )( .   .   .   . < prep >)(_ .   .   .   . )( M .   .   .   . ) or (_, H ,_)( .   .   .   .   .   ) wall beside a garden wall beside a garden wall beside a garden garden wall wall beside a garden wall around a garden pile of garbage pile of sweater spile of garbage house of brick sice in the cup nmrm  ( in , \[ ctn , inst , loc , src , time\] ) wall beside a garden garden fence wall beside a garden pile of garbage Table  3: Measures of distance between triples ferent NMRs . If line has been seen as a head more often than front as a modifier  , one of the NMRs assigned to line may have the highest absolute frequency in L Mu LH  . But if Location has the highest relative frequency  , this method correctly assigns Location to (12) . There is a potential bias , however , for smaller lists ( a single N-MR in a list always has the highest relative frequency  )  . 
To avoid these biases , we could combine absolute and relative frequencies  . Each NMR i is assigned a scoresical culated as: freq  ( i ~ Lu ) 2 freq ( ie LH ) 2s , = + IL . IR would contain NMR(s ) with the highest score . 
This combined formula was used in the experiment described in section  7  . 
5.3 Premodifiers as Classifiers
Since NMR analysis deals with endocentric compounds we can recover a taxonomic relationship from triples with an ilmarker  . Consider example ( 13 ) and its reduced pairs in ( 14 ) :  ( 13 )   ( ( laser printer ) stand )   ( 14 )   ( laser printer )   ( printer stand ) These pairs produce the following output : laser . .printer_stand isastand laser_ . printer is a printer 6 User Interaction The NMR analyzer is intended to start processing from scratch  . A session begins with no previous triples to match against the triple at hand  . To compensate for the lack of previous analyses , the system relies on the help of a user , who supplies the correct NMR when the system cannot determine it automatically  . 
In order to supply the correct NMR , or even to determine if the suggested NMR is correct  , the user must be familiar with the NMR definitions  . 
To minimize the burden of this requirement , all interactions use the modifier and head of the current phrase in the paraphrases from section  3  . 
Furthermore , if the appropriate NMR is not among those suggested by the system  , the user can reques the complete list of paraphrases with the current modifier and head  . 
6.1 An Example
Figure 1 shows the interaction for phrases ( 15 ) - ( 18 )  . The system starts with no previously analyzed phrases  . The NMR marker dictionary maps the preposition of to twelve NMRs : Agent  , Cause , Content , Equative , Located , Material , Object , Possessor , Property , Result , Source , Topic . 
(15 ) small gasol in engine ( 16 ) the repair of diesel engines ( 17 ) diesel engine repairs hop ( 18 ) an autore pair center User input is shown bold underlined  . At any promp the user may type ' list ' to view the complete list of NMR paraphrases for the current modifier and head  . 
7 Evaluation
We present he results of evaluating the NMR analyzer in the context of a large knowledge acquisition experiment  ( see Barker et al ,  1998) . The NMR analyzer is one part of a larger interactive semantic analysis system  . The experiment evaluated the semantic analysis of Atkinson  ( 1990 )  . We refer to it as the small engines experiment . Other experiments have shown similar results . 
We consider three evaluation criteria . First , we evaluate the analyzer's ability to learn to make better suggestions to the user as more noun phrases are analyzed  . Second , we evaluate its coverage by comparing the number of relationships assigned with the total number of such relationships in the text  ( i . e . , the number it should have assigned ) . Third , we assess the burden that semiautomatic analysis places on the user  . 
7.1 Improvement in System Performance
Since the system starts with no previous noun phrase analyses  , the user is responsible for supplying NMRs at the beginning of a session  . To measure the rate of learning , we compare the cumulative number of assignments required from the user to the cumulative number of correct assignment suggested by the system  . 
In the small engines experiment , 886 modi-fier-noun pairs were assigned an NMR . We consider the system's assignment correct when the correct label is among its suggestions  . According to this definition , 608 of the 886 NMRs ( 69% ) were assigned correctly by the system . For most single suggestion . It had multiple ( on average 3 . 3) suggestions only 22 times . 
Phrase (15): small gasoline engine
There is a relationship between gasoline and gasoline_engine  . 
Please enter a valid NMR label : inst
Do you accept the NMR Instrument : gasoline is used in gasoline __ engine Y_ 
There is a relationship between small and small_gasoline_engine  . 
Please enter a valid NMR label : prop
Do you accept the NMR Property: small_gasoline__engine is small Y Phrase  ( 16 ) : the repair of diesel engines
There is a relationship between diesel and diesel_engine  . 
NMR Analyzer's best suggestions for this input : ( 1 ) prop : diesel_engine is diesel ( 2 ) inst : diesel is used in diesel_engine Please enter a number between  1 and 2:   _2 
Do you accept the NMR Instrument : diesel is used in diesel_engine Y 
There is a relationship between diesel_engine and repair  . 
NMR Analyzer's best suggestions for this input : ( 1 ) agt : repair is performed by diese lengine ( 2 ) caus : diesel_engine causes repair ( 7 ) obj : diesel_engine is acted on by repair ( 12 ) top : repair is concerned with diesel_engine Please enter a number between  1 and 12:   7 
Do you accept the NMR Object : dies el_en ~ line is acted on by repair Y Phrase  ( 17 ) : diese lengine repairs hop
Do you accept the NMR Instrument : diesel is used in diesel_engine Y__ 
Do you accept the NMR Object : diesel_engine is acted on by diesel_engine_  . repair Y
There is a relationship between diesel_ engine_repair and diesel_engine repair_shop  . 
Please enter a valid NMR label : purp
Do you accept the NMR Purpose: diese lengine_repair __ shop is meant for diese C engine_repair Y 
Phrase (18): an autore pair center
Do you accept the NMR Object : auto is acted on by auto_repair Y 
Do you accept the NMR Purpose : auto_repair_ center is meant for auto_repair Y Figure I:NMR analysis interaction for  ( 15 ) - ( 18 ) Figure 2 shows the cumulative number of NMR assignments upplied by the user versus those determined correctly by the system  . After about 100 assignments , the system was able to make the majority of assignments automatically  . 
The curves in the figure show that the system learns to make better suggestions as more phrases are analyzed  . 
700 soo ' ~400
E 300  ~  2o0 i 100 "- E ~ EEEE ~ ~ number of medifier-noun pairs
Figure 2: Cumulative NMR assignments 7 . 2 NMR Coverage The NMR analyzer depends on a parser to find noun phrases in a text  . If parsing is not 100% successful , the analyzer will not see all noun phrases in the input text  . It is not feasible to find manually the total number of relationships in a text--even in one of only a few hundred sentences  . To measure coverage , we sampled 100 modifier-noun pairs at random from the small engines text and found that  87 of them appeared in the analyzer's output . At 95% confidence , we can say that the system extracted between 79 . 0% and 92 . 2% of the modifier-noun relationships in the text . 
7.3 User Burden
Userburden is a fairly subjective criterion . To measure burden , we assigned an " onus " rating to each interaction during the small engines experiment  . The onus is a number from 0 to 3 . 0 means that the correct NMR was obvious , whether suggested by the system or supplied by the user  .   1 means that selecting an NMR required a few moments of reflection  . A rating of 2 means that the interaction required serious thought  , but we were even after much contemplation , we were unable to agree on an NMR . 
The average user on us rating was 0 . 1 for NMR interactions in the small engines experiment  .   808 of the 886 NMR assignments received a nonus rating of 0  ; 71 hadarating of 1 ; 7 received a rating of 2 . No interactions were rated on us level 3 . 
8 Future Work
Although the list of NMRs was inspired by the relationships found commonly in others ' lists  , it has not undergone a more rigorous validation ( such as one described in Barker et al ,  1997) . 
In section 5 . 2 we discussed different approaches to choosing NMRs from two lists of candidates  . We have implemented and compared five different techniques for choosing the best NMRs  , but experimental results are inconclusive as to which techniques are better  . We should seek a more theoretically sound approach followed by further experimentation  . 
The NMR analyzer currently allows its stored triples  ( and associated NMRs ) to be saved in a file at the end of a session . Any number of such files can be reloaded at the beginning of subsequent sessions  , " seeding " the new sessions . It is necessary to establish the extent o which the triples and assignments from one text or domain are useful in the analysis of noun phrases from another domain  . 

This work is supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada  . 

Atkinson , Henry F .  (1990) . Mechanics of Small Engines . New York : Gregg Division , McGraw Hill . 
Barker , Ken (1998) . " A Trainable Bracketer for Noun Modifiers " . The Twelfth Canadian Conference on
Artificial Intelligence.
Barker , Ken , Terry Copeck , Sylvain Delisle & Stan Szpakowicz (1997) . " Systematic Construction of a Versatile Case System  . " Journal of Natural Language Engineering 3(4) , December 1997 . 
Barker , Ken , Sylvain Delisle & Stan Szpakowicz (1998) . " Test-Driving TANKA : Evaluating a Semi Automatic System of Text Analysis for Knowledge Acquisition  . " The Twelfth Canadian Conference on
Artificial Intelligence.
Finin , Timothy W .  (1986) . " Constraining the Interpretation of Nominal Compounds in a Limited Context  . "In Analyzing Language in Restricted Domains : Sublanguage Description and Processing  , R . Grishman & R . Kittredge , eds . , Lawrence Erlbaum,
Hillsdale , pp . 163-173.
George , Steffi (1987) . On " Nominal Non-Predicating " Adjectives in English  . Frankfurt am Main : Peter

Lauer , Mark (1995) . " Corpus Statistics Meet the Noun Compound : Some Empirical Results  . " Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  . Cambridge .  4754 . 
Leonard , Rosemary (1984) . The Interpretation of English Noun Sequences on the Computer  . Amsterdam :

Levi , Judith N .  (1978) . The Syntax and Semantics of Complex Nominals . New York : Academic Press . 
Liberman , Mark & Richard Sproat (1992) . "Stress and Structure of Modified Noun Phrases . " Lexical Matters ( CSLI Lecture Notes , 24) . Stanford : Center for the Study of Language and Information  . 
Miller , George A . , ed .  (1990) . " WordNet : An OnLine Lexical Database . " International Journal of Lexicography 3(4) . 
Pustejovsky , James , S . Bergler & P . Anick (1993) . 
" Lexical Semantic Techniques for Corpus Analysis . " Computational Linguistics 19(2) .  331-358 . 
Quirk , Randolph , Sidney Greenbaum , Geoffrey Leech & Jan Svartvik (1985) . A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language . London : Longman . 
Resnik , Philip Stuart (1993) . " Selection and Information : A Class-Based Approach to Lexical Relationships  . " Ph . D . thesis , IRCS Report 93-42 , University of Pennsylvania . 
ter Stal , Wilco (1996) . " Automated Interpretation of Nominal Compounds in a Technical Domain  . " Ph . D . 
thesis , University of Twente , The Netherlands.
Vanderwende , Lucy (1993) . " SENS : The System for Evaluating Noun Sequences  . " In Natural Language Processing : The PLNLP Approach  , K . Jensen , G . 
Heidorn & S . Richardson , eds ., Kluwer Academic
Publishers , Boston , pp . 161-173.
Warren , Beatrice (1978) . Semantic Patterns of Noun-Noun Compounds . G/Steborg : Acta Universitatis

Warren , Beatrice (1984) . Classifying Adjectives . G Ste-borg : Acta Universitatis Gothobur gens is . 

