Bitext Correspondences through Rich Markup
Raquel Martlnez
Departamento de Sis . Inform?ticosy Programaci Sn , Facult adde Matem?ticas
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
e-mail : raquel ? eucmos , sim . ucm . es
Joseba Abaitua
Facult adde Filosofiay Letras
Universidade Deusto , Bilbao
e-mail : abaitua ~ fil , deusto , es
Arantza Casillas
Departamento de Autom~tica , Universida de Alcal ~ de Hen are se-mail : a rantza ? aut  , alcala , es
Abstract
Richmark up can considerably benefi the process of establishing bitext correspondences  , that is , the task of providing correct identification and alignment methods for text segments that are translation equivalences of each other in a parallel corpus  . 
We present a sentence alignment algorithm that , by taking advantage of previously annotated texts , obtains accuracy rates close to 100% . The algorithm evaluates the similarity of the linguistic and extralinguistic markup in both sides of a bitext  . Given that annotations are neutral with respect to typological  , grammatical nd orthographical differences between languages  , rich markup becomes an optimal foundation to support bitext correspondences  . The main originality of this approach is that it makes maximal use of annotations  , which is a very sensible and efficient method for the exploitation of parallel corpora when annotations exist  . 
1 Introduction
Adequate encoding schemes applied to large bodies of text in electronic form have been a main achievement in the field of humanities computing  . Research in computational linguistics , which since the late 1980s has resorted to methodologies involving statistics and probabilities in large corpora  , has however largely neglected the existence and provision of extra information from such encoding schemes  . In this paper we present an approach to sentence alignment that crucially relies on previously introduced annotations in a parallel corpus  . Following ( Harris 88) , corpora containing bilingual texts have been called " bitexts "  ( Melamed 97 )  , ( Martlnez et al 97) . 
The utility of annotated bitexts will be demonstrated by the proposition of a methodology that crucially takes advantage of rich markup to resolve bitext correspondences  , that is , the task of providing correct identification and alignment methods for text segments that are translation equivalencies of each other  ( Chang & Chen 97 )  . Bitext correspondences provide a great source of information for applications such as example and memory based approaches to machine translation  ( Sumita & Iida 91 )  , ( Brown et al 93) , ( Collins et al 96) ; bilingual terminology extraction ( Kupiec 93) , ( Eijk 93) , ( Dagan et al 94) , ( Smajda et al 96) ; bilingual lexicography ( Catizione et al 93) , ( Daille et al .  94) , ( Gale & Church , 91b ) ; multilingual information retrieval ( SIGIR96) , and word sense disambiguation ( Gale et al92) , ( Chan & Chen 97) . Moreover , the increasing availability of running parallel text in annotated form  ( e . g . 
WWW pages ) , together with evidence that poor markup ( as HTML ) will progressively be replaced by richer markup ( e . g . SGML/XML ) , are good enough reasons to investigate methods that benefit from such encoding schemes  . 
We first provide details of how a bitext sample has been marked up  , with particular emphasis on the recognition and annotation of proper nouns  . Then we show how sentence alignment relies on markup by the application of a methodology that resorts to annotations to determine the similarity between sentence pairs  . 

This is the ' tags as cognates ' algorithm , T as C.
2 B i text tagg ing and segmentat ion A large bitext has been compiled consisting of a collection of administrative and legal bilingual documents written both in Spanish and Basque  , with close to 7 million words in each language . 
For the experiments , we have worked on a representative subset of around  500  , 000 words in each language . Several stages of automatic tagging , based on pattern matching and heuristics , were undertaken , rendering different descriptive levels : General encoding  ( paragraph , sentence , quoted text , dates , numbers , abbreviations , etc . ) . 
? Document specific tags that identify document types and define document internal organisation  ( sections , divisions , identification code , number and date of issue , issuer , lists , itemised sections , etc . ) . 
? Proper noun tagging ( identification and categorisation of proper nouns into several classes  , including : person , place , organisation , law , title , publication and uncate-gorised ) . 
This collection of tags ( shown in Table 1 ) reflects basic structural and referential features  , which appear consistently at both sides of the bitext  . Although the alignment of smaller segments ( multiword lexical units and collocations ) will require more expressive tagging , such as part-of-speech tagging ( POS ) , for the task of sentence alignment , this is not only unnecessary , but also inappropriate , since it would introduce undesired language dependent information  . The encoding scheme has been based on TEI's guidelines for SGML based markup  ( Ide & Veron is 95 )  . 
2.1 Proper noun tagging
As for many other text processing applications , proper noun tagging plays a key role in our approach to sentence alignment  . It has been reported that proper nouns reachup to  10% of tokens in text ( newswire text ( Wakao et al 96 ) and ( Coates-Stephens 92 ) ) and one third of noun groups ( in the Agence France Presseflow ( Wolinski et al 95 ) ) . We have calculated that proper nouns constitute a  15% of the tokens in our corpus . The module for the recognition of proper nouns relies on patterns of typography  ( capitalisation and punctuation ) and on contextual information ( Church 88 )  . It also makes use of lists with most common person  , organisation , law , publication and place names . The tagger annotates a multiword chain as a proper noun when each word in the chain is uppercase initial  . 
A closed list of functional words ( prepositions , conjunctions , determiners , etc . ) is allowed to appear inside the proper noun chain  , see examples in Table 2 . A collection of heuristics discard uppercase initial words in sentence initial position or in other exceptional cases  . 
In contrast with other known classifications ( e . g . MUC695) , we exclude from our list of proper nouns time expressions  , percentage expression , and monetary amount expressions ( which for us fall under a different descriptive level  )  . However , on top of organisation , person and location names , we include other entities such as legal nomenclature  , the name of publications as well as a number of professional titles whose occurrence in the bitext becomes of great value for alignment  . 
2.2 Bitext asymmetries
Because our approach to alignment relies on consistent tagging  , bitext asymmetries of any type need to be carefully dealt with  . For example , capitalisation conventions across languages may show great divergences  . Although , in theory , this should not be the case between Spanish and Basque  , since officially they follow identical conventions for capitalisation  ( which are by the way the same as in French )  , in practise these conventions have been interpreted very differently by the writers of the two versions  ( lawyers in Spanish and translators in Basque )  . In the Basque version , nouns referring to organisations saila ' Department '  , professional titles diputatua ' Deputy ' , as well as many or ographic or geographical sites arana ' Valley '  , are often written in lower case , while in the Spanish original documents these are normally written in uppercase  ( see Table 2 )  . These nouns belong to the type described as ' trigger ' words by  ( Wakao et al 96 )  , in the sense that they permit the identification of the token surrounding them as proper nouns  . Then , it has been required to resort to contextual information  . The results of the resolution of these singularities are shown in Table II General encoding < p >  , < s > , < num > , < date > < abbr > , < q > I Document especific < div > , < class Code > < keywords > , < dateline > , < list > < seg >
Proper nouns < rs >
Table 1: Tagset used for sentence alignment
Proper Noun Classes Spanish Basque
Person Ana Ferndndez Gutierrez-Crespo Ana Ferndndez Gutierrez-Crespo 
Place Valle de Arratia Arratiko arana
Organisation Departamento de Presidencia Lehendakaritza Saileko Law Real Decreto Legislativo Legegintzazko Erret Dekretuko Title Diputado Foralde Urban isr no Hirigintza for u diputatua Publication Boletln Oficial de Bizkaia Bizkaiko Aldizkari Ofizialean 
Un categorised Anexoer ask in
Table 2: Examples.
3 Us ing tags as cognates for sentence a l ignment Algorithms for sentence alignment abound and range from the initial pioneering proposals of  ( Brown et al 91 )  , ( Gale & Church 91a ) , ( Church 93) , or ( Kay & Roscheisen 93) , to the more recent ones of ( Chang & Chen 97) , or ( Tillmann et al 97) . The techniques employed include statistical machine translation  , cognates identification , pattern recognition , and digital signal and image processing . Our algorithm , as ( Simard et al92) , and ( Melamed 97 ) employs cognates to align sentences ; and similar to ( Brown et al 91) , it also uses markup for that purpose . Its singularity does not lie on the use of markup as delimiter of text regions  ( Brown et al 91 ) in combination with other techniques , but on the fact that it is the sole foundation for sentence alignment  . We call it the ' tags as cognates ' algorithm , T as C . This algorithm is not disrupted by word order differences or small asymmetries in nonliteral translation  , and , unlike other reported algorithms ( Melamed 97) , it possesses the additional advantage of being portable to any pair of languages without the need to resort to any language-specific heuristics  . Provided an adequate and consistent bitext markup  , sentence alignment becomes a simple and accurate process also in the case of typologically disparate or orthographically distinct language pairs for which techniques based on lexical cognates may be problematic  . One of of proper nouns the best consequences of this approach is that the burden of language dependent processing is dispatched to the monolingual tagging and segmentation phase  . 
3 . 1 Simi lar i ty calculus between b i texts The alignment algorithm establishes similarity metrics between candidate sentences which are delimited by corresponding markup  . Dice's coefficient is used to calculate these similarity metrics  ( Dice 45 )  . The coefficient returns a real numeric value in the range  0 to 1  . Two sentences which are totally dissimilar in the content of their internal markup will return a Dice score of  0  , while two identical contents will return a
Dice score of 1.
For two text segments , P and Q , one in each language , the formula for Dice's similarity coefficient will be: 
Dice(P , Q)--2FpQ
Fp+FQ where FpQ is the number of identical tags that P and Q have in common  , and Fp and FQ are the number of tags contained by each text segment P and Q  . 
Since the alignment algorithm determines the best matching on the basis of tag similarity  , not only tag names used to categorise different cognate classes  ( number , date , abbreviation , proper noun , etc . ) , but also attributes contained by these tags may help identify the cognate itself : < num  num=57>57</num  > . Furthermore , attributes








Spanish Basque
Precision I Recall 1% Spanish PN Precision I Recall 1% Basque PN 100%   100%   100%   100%   99  . 2% 97 . 8% 99 . 2% 99 . 2% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 4 . 48% 6 . 38% 23 . 96% 47 . 93% 6 . 55% 2 . 58% 8 . 10% 100% 100% 4 . 76% 100% 100% 6 . 95% 100% 100% 24 . 17% 100% 100% 46 . 15% 97 . 2% 97 . 2% 6 . 59% 100% 100% 2 . 74% 100% 100% 8 . 60 100% II 99 . 8% 199 . 8%\[100% II 99 . 4%199 . 1%\[ Table 3: Results of proper noun identification may serve also to subcategorise proper noun tags : < rs type=place > Bilbao</rs >  . 
Such subcategorisations are of great value to calculate the similarity metrics  . If markup is consistent , he correlation between tags in the candidate text segments will be high and Dice's coefficient will come close to  1  . For a randomly created bitext sample of source sentences  , Figure 1 illustrates how correct candidate alignments have achieved the highest Dice's coefficients  ( represented by '*' s )  , while next higher coefficients ( represented by ' o's ) have achieved significant lower values . It must be noted that the latter do not correspond to correct values  . 
The difference mean between Dice's coefficients corresponding to correct alignments and next higher values is : n ~  ( DCci-DC wi ) 
M = i=1 = 0.45 n
Where for a given source sentence i , DCci represents Dice's coefficient corresponding to its correct alignment and DCwi represents he next higher value of Dice's coefficients for the same source sentence i  . In all the cases , this difference is greater than 0 . 2 . 
For consistently marked up bitexts , these results show that sentence alignment founded on the similarity between annotations can be robust criterion  . 
Figure 2 illustrates how the Dice's coefficient is calculated between candidate sentences to alignment  . 
3 . 2 The s t ra tegy of the TasC algor i thm The alignment of text segments can be formalised by the matching problem in bipartite_  0  . 5 $ DC of correct a l ignment given a source sentence o The next higher DC for the same source sentence ooocoo Oco cooooooo ~ o oo  ~000   0   000   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0 o % ~ ooo 0 o Figure 1: Values of Dice's coefficient between corresponding sentences graphs  . Let G = ( V , E , U ) be a bipartite graph , such that V and U are two disjoint sets of vertices  , and E is a set of edges connecting vertices from V to vertices in U  . Each edge in E has associated a cost . Costs are represented by a cost matrix . The problem is to find a perfect matching of G with minimum cost  . 
The minimisation version of this problem is well known in the literature as the assignment problem  . 
Applying the general definition of the problem to the particular case of sentence alignment : V and U represent two disjoint sets of vertices corresponding to the Spanish and Basque sentences that we wish to align  . In this case , each edge has not a cost but a similarity metric quantified by Dice's coefficient  . The fact that vertices are materialised by sentences detracts gen-<s  id=sESdoc5-4>Habi4ndose dtect a doene lanuncio publica doen elndmero < num  num=79>   79 </ num > defecha < date date=2?/04>27 deabril</date>deeste<rstype=publication > Boletfn</rs >  , la omisi6n del primerp ~ rrafo de la < rs type = law > Or den For al</rs > de referencia  , se procede a su~ntegra publicaci6n . </ s >
Basque Sentence : < s id=sEUdoc5-5>Agerkaria hone tako<dated at e=27/04>apirilaren   27ko</date > < num num=79>79k  . an</num > argitaratutakoira-garkianai pameneko <rstype=law>ForuA gindu aren</rs > lehen lerroaldea ez de lageri de tektatuon dor enberaren argitarape no soa egitera joda  . </s > The common tags are : < datedate=27/04> , < numnum=79 > , <rstype=law > The Dice's similarity coefficient will be : Dice  ( P , Q ) = 2x3/4+3=0 . 8 57 Figure 2: Similarity calculus between candidate sentences erality to the assignment problem and makes it possible to add constraints to the solutions reported in the literature  . These constraints take into account the order in which sentences in both the source and target exts have been written  , and capture the prevailing fact that translators maintain the order of the original text in their translations  , which is even a stronger property of specialised texts  , By default , a whole document delimits the space in which sentence alignment will take place  , although this space can be customised in the algorithm  . The average number of sentences per document is approximately  18  . Two types of alignment can take place : ? 1 to 1 alignment : when one sentence in the source document corresponds to one sentence in the target document  ( 94 . 39% of the cases ) . 
? N to M alignment : when N sentences in the source document correspond to M sentences in the target document  ( only 5 . 61% of the cases ) . It includes cases of 12, 13 and 01 alignments . 
Both alignmentypes are handled by the algorithm.

The.
The algorithm
T as C algorithm works in two steps :
It obtains the similarity matrix S from
Dice's coefficients corresponding to candidate alignment options  . Each row in S represents the alignment options of a source sentence classified in decreasing order of similarity  . In this manner , each column represents a preference position ( 1 the best alignment option , 2 the second best and so on ) . Therefore , each Si , j is the identification of one or more target sentences which match the source sentence i in the preference position j  . In order to obtain the similarity matrix , it is not necessary to consider all possible alignment options  . Constraints regarding sentence ordering and grouping greatly reduce the number of cases to be evaluated by the algorithm  . In the algorithm each source sentence x i is compared with candidate target sentences yj as follows:  ( xi , Yi ); ( xi , Y j Y j+I .   .   .   , where YjYj + I represents the concatenation of yj with Yj+I  . The algorithm module that deals with candidate alignment options can be easily customised to cope with different bitext configurations  ( since bitexts may range from a very simple one -paragraph text to more complex structures  )  . In the current version of the algorithms even alignment options are taken into account  . 
2 . The TasC algorithm solves an assignment problem with several constraints  . It aligns sentences by assigning to each ith source sentence the Si  , j target option with minimum j value , that is , the option with more similarity . Furthermore , the algo-rithm solves the possible conflicts when a sentence matches with other sentences already aligned  . The average cost of the algorithm , experimentally contrasted , is linear in the size of the input , although in the worst case the cost is bigger . 
The result of sentence alignment is reflected in the bitext by the incorporation of the attribute ' corresp to sentence tags  , as can be seen 11
NM % Corpus 94.39%% Accuracy 100% 5.61% 99.68%
Table 4: TasC Algorithm results in Figure 3 . This attribute points to the corresponding sentence identification code in the other language  . 
4 Evaluation
The current version of the algorithm has been tested against a subcorpus of  500  , 000 words in each language consisting of 5 , 9 88 sentences and has rendered the results shown in Table  4  . 
The accuracy of the 1 to 1 alignment is 100%.
In the N to M case only 1 error occurred out of 314 sentences , which reaches 99 . 68% accuracy . 
The algorithm to sentence alignment has been designed in such a modular way that it can easily change the tagset used for alignment and the weight of each tag to adapt it to different bitext annotations  . The current version of the algorithm uses the tagset shown in Table  1 without weights . 
5 Future work
Once sentences have been aligned , the next step is the alignment of sentence -internal segments  . The sentence will delimit the search space for this alignment  , and hence , by reducing the search space , the alignment complexity is also reduced . 
5.1 Proper noun alignment
Proper nouns are a key factor for the efficient management of the corpus  , since they are the basis for the indexation and retrieval of documents in the two versions  . For this reason , at present we are concerned with proper noun alignment  , something which is not usually done in the mapping of bitexts  . The alignment is achieved by resorting to : ? The identification of cognate nouns  , aided by a set of phonological rules that apply when Spanish terms are taken to produce loan words in Basque  . 
? The restriction of cognate search space to previously aligned sentences  , and * The application of the TasC algorithm adapted to proper noun alignment  . 
5.2 Alignment of collocation
The next step is the recognition and alignment of other multiword lexical units and collocations  . Due to the still unstable translation choices of much administrative trminology in Basque  , on top of the considerable typological and structural differences between Basque and Spanish  , many of the techniques reported in the literature  ( Smadja et al 96 )  ,   ( Kupiec 93 ) and ( Eijk 93 ) cannot be effectively applied . POS tagging combined with recurrent bilingual glossary lookup is the approach we are currently experimenting with  . 
6 Conclusions
We have presented a sentence alignment approach that  , by taking advantage of previously introduced markup  , obtains accuracy rates close to 100% . This approach is not disrupted by word order differences and is portable to any pair of languages without the need to resort to any language specific heuristics  . Provided and adequate and consistent bitext markup  , sentence alignment becomes an accurate and robust process also in the case of typologically distinct language pairs for which other known techniques may be problematic  . The TasC algorithm has been designed in such a modular way that it can be easily adapted to different bitext configurations as well as other specific tagsets  . 
7 Acknowledgements
This research is being partially supported by the Spanish Research Agency  , project ITEM , TIC-96-1243-C03-01 . 
References
Brown , P . , Lai , J . C . , Mercer , R .  (1991) . Aligning Sentences in Parallel Corpora . Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association . for Computational Linguistics , 169-176,
Berkeley , 1991.
Brown , P . , Della Pietra , V . , Della Pietra , S . , Mercer , R . 
(1993) . The mathematics of statistical machine translation : parameter estimation  . Computational Linguistics 19(2):263-3011993 . 
Catizone , R . , Russell , G . , Warwick , S .  (1993) . Deriving Translation Data from Bilingual Texts . Proccedings of the First International Lexical Acquisition Workshop  , Detroit , MI ,  1993 . 
Chang , J . S . , Chen , M . H .  (1997) . An Alignment Method for Noisy Parallel Corpora based on Image Processing Techniques  . Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ,  297-304 ,  1997 . 

Spanish Sentence : < s id=sESdoc5-4   corresp=sEUdoc5-5>Habi4n-dose detect a doenel an uncio publica doenelnd mero < num  num=79>   79 </ num > defecha < date date=27/04>27 deabril</date>deeste<rstype=publicat ion > Boletfn </ rs >  , la omisi6n del primer phrrafo de la < rs type = law > Or den For al</rs > de referenciase procede as u integra  publicaci6n  . </s>
Basque Sentence : < s id=sEUdoc5-5   corresp=sESdoc5-4>Agerkaria hone tako < date date=27/04> a pirilaren 27ko</date > < num num=79>79k  . an</num > argitaratutakoira garkianai pameneko < rstype=law>ForuA gindu aren</rs > lehenler -roaldea ez de lage ride tektatuon dor enberaren argitarape no soa egitera joda  . </ s > Figure 3: Results of sentence alignment expressed by the correspattribute Church  , K . W .  (1988) . A Stochastic parts program and noun phrase parser for unrestricted text  . Proceedings of the Second Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  ,  136143 ,  1988 . Association for Computational Linguistics . 
Church , K . W .  (1993) . Char_Align : A Program for Aligning Parallel Texts at the Character Level  . Proceedings of the 31th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics , Columbus , USA 1993.
Coates-Stephen , S .  (1992) . The Analysis and Acquisition of Proper Names for Robust Text Understanding  , Ph . D . Department of Computer Science of City University  , London , 
England , 1992.
Collins , B . , Cunningham , P . , Veale , T .  (1996) . An Example Based Approach to Machine Translation . Expanding MT Horizonts : Proceedings of the Second Conference of the Association for Machine Translation in the 
Americas : AMTA-96, 125-134, 1996.
Daille , B . , Gaussier , E . , Lange , J . M .  (1994) . Towards Automatic Extraction of Monolingual and Bilingual Terminology  . Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ,  515-521 , Kyoto , Japan . 
Dagan , I . , Church , K .  (1994) . Termigh : Identifying and translating Technical Terminology  . Proceedings Fourth Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  ( ANLP-94 )  , Stuttgart , Germany ,  34-40 ,  1994 . Association for Computational Linguistics . 
Dice , L . R .  (1945) . Measures of the Amount of Ecologic Association Between Species  . Ecology , 26, 297-302 . 
Eijk , P . van der .  (1993) . Automating the acquisition of Bilingual Terminology  . Proceedings Sixth Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistic  , Utrecht , The Netherlands ,  113-119 ,  1993 . 
Gale , W . , Church , K . W . (1991a ) . A Program for Aligning Sentences in Bilingual Corpora  . Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ,  177-184 , Berkeley , 1991a . 
Gale , W . , Church , K . W . (1991b ) . Identifying Word Correspondences in Parallel Texts  . Proceedings of the DARPA
SNL Workshop , 1991.
Gale , W . , Church , K . W . , Yarowsky , D .  (1992) . Using Bilingual Materials to Develop Word Sense Disambiguation Methods  . Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation  ( TMI-92 )  ,  101-112 , Montreal , Canada 1992 . 
Harris , B .  (1988) . Bi-Text , a New Concept in Translation Theory . Language Monthly #54, 1988 . 
Ide , N . , Veronis , J .  (1994) . MULTEXT ( Multilingual Text Tools and Corpora . ) Proceedings of the International Workshop on Sharable Natural Language Resources  ,  90-96 ,  1994 . 
Ide , N . , Veronis , J .  (1995) . The Text Encoding Initiative : Background and Contexts  . Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic
Publishers , 1995.
Kay , M . , Roscheisen , M .  (1993) . Text-Translation Alignment . 
Computational Linguistics , 19:1, 121-142, 1993.
Kupiec , J .  (1993) . An algorithm for finding noun phrase correspondences in bilingual corpora  . Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the ACL , Columbus , Ohio ,  1722 . Association for Computational Linguistics 1993 . 
Martinez , R . , Casillas , A . , Abaitua , J .  (1997) . Bilingual parallel text segmentation adtagging for specialize documen-tation  . Proceedings of the International Conference Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing  , RANLP'97 ,  369-372 ,  1997 . 
Melamed , I . D .  (1997) . A Portable Algorithm for Mapping Bitext Correspondence  . Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ,  305-312 ,  1997 . 
MUC6 .  (1995) . Proceedings of the Sixth Message Understanding Conference  ( MUC6 )  . Morgan Kaufman . 
SIGIR .  (1996) . Workshop on Crosslinguistic Multilingual Information Retrieval  , Zurich ,  1996 . 
Simard , M . , Foster , G . F . , Isabelle , P .  (1992) . Using Cognates to Align Sentences in Bilingual Corpora  . Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation  , Montreal ,  67-81 ,  1992 . 
Smadja , F . , McKeown , K . , Hatzivassiloglou , V . (1996) . Translating Collocations for Bilingual Lexicons : A Statistical Approach  . Computational Linguistics Volume 22, No .  1, 1996 . 
Sumita , E . , Iida , H .  (1991) . Experiments and prospect of example-based machine translation  . Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics  . Berkeley , 185-192, 1991 . 
Tillmann , C . , Vogel , S . , Ney , H . , Zubiaga , A .  (1997) . ADP based Search Using Monotone Alignments in Statistical Translation  . Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  ,  289-296 ,  1997 . 
Wakao , T . , Gaizauskas , R . , Wilks , Y .  (1996) . Evaluation of an Algorithm for the Recognition and Classification of Proper Names  . Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  ( COLING96 )  , 418-423 ,  1996 . 
Wolinski , F . , Vichot , F . , Dillet , B .  (1995) . Automatic Processing of Proper Names in Texts . The Computation and Language E-Print Archive , http://xxx . lanl . gov/list/cmp-lg/9504001
