Veins Theory:
A Model of Global Discourse Cohesion and Coherence
Dan CRISTEA
Dept . of Computer Science
University < < A.I . Cuza > >
Ia ~ i , Romania

Nancy IDE
Dept . of Computer Science
Vassar College
Poughkeepsie , NY , USA

Laurent ROMARY



romary@loria.fr

In this paper , we propose a generalization
of Centenng Theory ( CT ) ( Grosz , Joshi,
We instein (1995)) called Veins Theory
( VT ), which extends the applicability of
centering rules from local to global
discourse . A key`facet of the theory
involves the idenufication of << veins > > over discourse structure trees such as those defined in RST  , which delimit domains of referential accessibility for each unit in a discourse  . Once identified , reference chains can be extended across segment boundaries  , thus enabling the application of CT over the entire discourse  . We describe the processes by which veins are defined over discourse structure trees and how CT can be applied to global discourse by using these chains  . We also define a discourse << smoothness >> index which can be used to compare different discourse structures and interpretations  , and show how VT can be used to abstract a span of text in the context of the whole discourse  . 
Finally , we validate our theory by analyzing examples from corpora of 
English , French , and Romanian.

As originally postulated , Centering Theory ( CT ) ( Grosz , Joshi , and Weinstein ( 1995 ) ) accounts for references between adjacent units but is restricted to local reference  ( i . e . , within segment boundaries ) . Recently , CT-based work has emerged which considers the relation of global discourse structure and anaphora  , all of which proposes extensions to centering in order to apply it to global discourse  . 
We approach the relationship between global structure and anaphora resolution from a different  , but related , perspective . We identify domains of referential accessibility for each discourse unit over discourse structure trees such as those defined in Rhetorical Structure Theory  ( RST ; Mann and Thompson ( 1987 ) ) and show how CT can then be applied to global discourse by  . using these domains . As such , our approach differs from Walker's (1996) , whose account of referential it ~ , within the cache memory model does not rely on discourse structure  , but rather on cue phrases and matching constraint sogether to reflect the plausible limits of the attentional span  . Our approach is closer to that of Passonneau ( 1995 ) and Hahn and Strtibe ( 1997 )  , who both use a stack-based model of discourse structure based on Grosz and Sidner's  ( 1986 ) focus spaces . Such a model is equivalento a dynamic processing model of a treelike structure reflecting the hierarchical nesting of discourse segments  , and thus has significant similarities to discourse structure trees produced by RST  ( see Moser and Moore ( 1996 ) ) . 
However , using the RST notion of nuclearity , we go beyond previous work by revealing a " hidden " structure in the discourse tree  , which we call veins , that enables us to determine the referential accessibility domain for each discourse unit and ultimately to apply CT globally  , without extensions to CT or addltional
Oata structures.
In this paper , we describe Veins Theory ( VT ) by showing how veins are defined over discourse structure trees  , and how CT can be applied to global discourse by using them  . We use centering transitions ( Brennan , Friedman and Pollard ( 1987 ) ) to define a << smoothness >> index , which is used to compare different discourse structures and interpretations  . Because veins define the domains of referential ccess for each discourse unit  , we further demonstrate how VT may ` be potentially used to determine the << minimal >> parts ot a text required to resolve references m a given utterance or  , more generally , to understand it out of the context of the entire discourse  . Finally , we validate our theory by analyzing examples from corpora of 
English , French , and Romanian.
1 The vein concept
We define veins over discourse structure trees of the kind used in RST  . Following that theory , we consider the basic units of a discourse to be nonoverlapping spans of text  ( i . e . , sharing no common text ) , usually reduced to a clause and including a single predicate  ; and we assume that various rhetorical- , cohesive , and coherence relations hold between individual units or groups of units  . ' i Note that unlike RST , Veins Theory ( VT ) is not concerned with the type of relations which hold We represent discourse structures as binary trees  , where terminal nodes represent discourse units and nonterminal nodes represent discourse relations  . A polarity is established among the children of a relation  , which identifies at least one node , the nucleus , considered essential for the writer's purpose ; non-nuclear nodes , which include spans of text that increase understanding but are not essential to the writer spurpose are called satellites  . 
Vein expressions defined over a discourse tree are subsequences of the sequence of units making up the discourse  . In our discussion , the following notations are used : ? each terminal node  ( leaf node , discourse unit ) has an attached label ; ? mark ( x ) is a function that takes a string of symbols x and returns each symbol in x marked in some way  ( e . g . , with parentheses ) ; ? simpl ( x ) is a function that eliminates all marked symbols from its argument  , if they exist ; e . g . simpl(a(bc)d(e )) = ad ; ? seq(x,y ) is as e . quencing function that takes as m put two non -intersect mg strings of terminal node labels  , x and y , and returns that permutation of x/y ( x concatenated with y ) that is given by the left to right reading of the sequence of labels in x and y on the terminal frontier of the tree  . The function maintains the parentheses , if they exist , and seq(nil , y ) = y . 
Heads 1. The head of a terminal node is its label.
2 . The head of a nonterminal node is the concatenation of the heads of its nuclear children  . 
Vein expressions 1 . The vein expression of the root is its head . 
2 . For each nuclear node whose parent node has vein v  , the vein expression is : ? if the node has a left non-nuclear sibling with head h  , then seq(mark(h ) , v ); ? otherwise , v . 
3 . For each non-nuclear node of head h whose parent node has vein v the vein expression is : ? if the node is the left childot its parent  , then seq(h , v ); ? otherwise , seq(h ,  . simpl(v)) . 
Note that the computation of heads is bottom-up , while that of veins is topdown . 
Consider example 1: 1 . According to engineering lore , 2 . the late Ermal C . Fraze , 3 . founder of Dayton Reliable Tool &
Manufacturing Companyin Ohio , 2a . came up with a practical idea for the pop-topl i d  3  . after attempting with halting success to open a beer can on the bumper of his car  . 
The structure of this discourse fragment is given in Figure  1  . The central grayline traces the among discourse units  , but considers only the topological structure and the nuclear/satellite status  ( see below ) of discourse units . 
282 principal vein of the tree , which starts at the root and descends along the nuclear nodes  . Auxiliary veins are attached to the principal vein  . The vein expressions corresponding to each node indicate its domain of accessibility  , as defined in the following section . Accordingly , in this example , unit 1 is accessible from unit 2 , but not unit 3 . 
2 Accessibility
The domain of accessibility of a unit is defined as the string of units appearing in its vein expression and prefixing that unit itself  . 
More formally , for each terminal node u , if vein(u ) is its vein , then accessibility from u is given by acc ( u ) = pref ( u , unmark(vein(u )) , where : vein is the function that computes the vein  ; unmark ( x ) is a function that removes the markers from all symbols of its argument  ; ? pref is a function that retains the prefix of the second argument up to and including the first argument  ( e . g . , if a and 13 are strings of labels and u is a label , pref(u , aufl ) = ocu , Conjecture CI : References from a given unit are possible only in its domain of accessibility  . 
In particular , we can say the following : 1 . In most cases , if B is a unit and be B is a referential expression  , then either b directly realizes a center that appears for the first time in the discourse  , or it refers back to another center realized by a referential expression ae A  , such that Aeacc(B ) . 2 Such cases instantiate direct references . 
2 . If (1) is not applicable , then if A , B , and C are units , ceC is a referential expression that refers to be B  , and B is not on the vein of C . ( i . e . , it is not visible from C ) , then there is an itemae A , where A is a unit on the common vein of B and C , such that both b and c refer to a . In this case we say that c is an indirect reference to a J  3  . If neither (1) nor (2) is applicable , then the reference in C can be understood without here fere e  , as if the corresponding entity were introduced in the discourse for the first time  . 
Such references are inferential references.
Note that VT is applicable even when the division into units~scoarser than in our examples  . For instance , Example 1 in its entirety could be taken to comprise a single unit  ; if it appeared in the context of a larger discourse  , it would still be possible to . compute its veins ( although , of course , the veins would likely be shorter because there are fewer units to consider  )  . It can be proven formally ( Cristea , 2If a and b are referential expressions , where the center ( directly ) realized by b is the same as the one ( directly ) realized by a , or where it is a role of the center ( directly ) realized by a , we will say that brefers ( back ) to a , or b is a bridge reference to a . 
3 On the basis of their common semantic representations  . 
Figure 1: Tree structure and veins for Example 1



V = I2


V = 24

V = (1) 2

V= ( 1 ) 22 seesIf 1998 ) that when passing from a finer granularity to a coarser one the accessibility constraints are still obeyed  . This observation is important in relation to other approaches that search for stability with respect to granularity  ( see for instance , Walker ,  1996) . 
3 Global coherence
This section shows how VT can predict the inference load for processing lobal discourse  , thus providing an account of discourse coherence . 
A corollary of Conjecture C1 is that CT can be applied along the accessibility domains defined by tile veins of the discourse structure  , rather than to sequentially placed units within a single discourse segment  . Therefore , in VT reference domains for any node may include units that are sequentially distant in the text stream  , and thus long-distance references ( including those requiring " return-pops " ( Fox ,  1987 ) over segments that contain syntactically feasible referents  ) can be accounted for . Thus our model provides a description of global discourse cohesion  , which significantly extends the model of local cohesion provided by 

CT defines a set of transition types for discourse  ( Grosz , Joshi , and Weinstein (1995); Brennan , Friedman and Pollard (1987)) . A smoothness score for a discourse segment can be computed by attaching an elementary score to each transition between sequential units according to Table  2  , summing up the scores for each transition in the entire segment  , and dividing the result by the number of transitions in the segment  . This provides an index of the overall coherence of the segment  . 
A global CT smoothness score can be computed by adding up the scores for the sequence of units making up the whole discourse  , and dividing the result by the total number of transitions  ( number of units minus one )  . In general , this score will be slightly higher than the average of the scores for the individual segments  , since accidental transitions at segment boundaries might also occur  . Analogously , a global VT smoothness core

V =2   3   3 doesn't see 1 can be computed using accessibility domains to determine transitions rather than sequential units  . 
Table 2: Smoothnes scores for transitions
CENTERCONTINUATION 4
CENTERRETAINING 3
CENTERSHIFTING ( SMOOTH ) 2
CENTERSHIFTING ( ABRUPT)1
NOC b0
Conjecture C2: The global smoothnes score of a discourse when computed following VT is at least as high as the score computed following 

That is , we claim that long-distance transitions computed using VT are systematically smoother than accidental transitions at segment boundaries  . 
Note that this conjecture is consistent with results reported by authors like Passonneau  ( 1995 ) and Walker ( 1996 )  , and provides an explanation for their results . 
We can also consider anaphora resolution using Cb 's computed using accessibility domains  . 
Because a unit can simultaneously occur in several accessibility domains  , unification can be applied using the Cf list of one unit and those of possibly several subsequent  ( although not necessarily adjacent ) units . A graph of Cb-unifications can be derived , in which each edge of the graph represents a Cb computation and therefore a unification process  . 
4 Minimal text
The notion that text summaries can be created by extracting the nuclei from RST trees is well known in the literature  ( Mann and Thompson ,  (1988)) . Most recently , Marcu ( 1997 ) has described a method for text summarization based on nuclearity and selective retention of hierarchical fragments  . Because his salient units correspond to heads in VT  , his results are predicted in our model . That is , the union of heads at a given level in the tree provides a summary of the text at a degree of detail dependent on the depth of that level  . 
In addition to summarizing entire texts , VT can be used to summarize a given unitor subtree of that by text summarization efforts so far : instead of attempting to summarize an entire discourse at a given level of detail  , we select a single span of text and abstract the minimal text required to understand this span alone when considered in the context of the entire discourse  . This provides a kind of focused abstraction , enabling the
Table 5: Verifying conjecture C1 extraction of subtexts from larger documents . 
Because vein expressions for each node include all of the nodes in the discourse within its domain of reference  , they identify exactly which parts of the discourse tree are required in order to understand and resolve references for the unitor subtree below that node  . 
Source No . of units Total no.
of refs
English 6297
French 48 110
Romanian 66176 Total
Table 6: Verifying Conjecture C2
Direct on the vein ( case 1) 7577 . 3% 98 89 . 1% 104 93 . 7% 277 87 . 1%
Indirect on the vein ( case 2) 1414 . 4% 11 10 . 0% 2 1 . 8% 27 8 . 5 %
Inference ( case 3) 55.2% 10.9% 54.5% 113.5%
How many obey CI 9496 . 9% 110 100 . 0% 111 100 . 0% 315 99 . 1% Source No . of CTScore Average CT score per VT score Average VT score transitions transition per transition 
English 5976 1.258 41.38
French 4710 92.32 1162.47
Romanian 6514 22.18 1522.34
Total 1733 271 . 89 352 2 . 03 5 . Corpus analysis Because of the lack of largescale corpora annotated for discourse  , our study currently involves only a small corpus of English  , Romanian , and French texts . The corpus was prepared using an encoding scheme for discourse structure  ( Cristea , Ide , and Romary ,  1998 ) based on the Corpus Encoding Standard ( CES )   ( Ide ( 1998 ) ) . The following texts were included in our analysis  :   . three short English texts , RST-analyzed by experts and subsequently annotated for reference and Cf lists by the authors  ; ? a fragment from de Balzacs < < LeP ~ reGoriot > >   ( French )  , previously annotated for coreference ( Bruneseaux and Romary ( 1997 ) ) ; RST and Cf lists annotation made by the authors ; ? a fragment from Alexand ruMitru's < < Legen dele Olimpului > >  4   . ( Romanian ); structure , reference , and Cf hsts annotated by one of the authors . 
The encoding marks referring expressions , links between referring expressions ( coreference or functional )  , units , relations between units ( if known ) , nuclearity , and the units ' C flists in terms of refemng expressions  . We have developed a program 5 that does the following : builds the tree structure of units and relations between them  , adds to each referring expression the index of the unit it occurs in  , computes the heads and veins for all nodes in the structure  , determines the accessibility domains of the terminal nodes  ( units )  , counts the number of direct and indirect references  . 
Hand-analysis was then applied to determine which references are inferential and therefore do not conform to Conjecture  C1  , as summarized in Table 5 . Among the 318 references in the text , only three references not conforming to Conjecture  C1 were found ( all of them appear in one of the English texts )  . However , if the
BACKGROUND relation is treated as bi-nuclear , ~ all three of these references become direct . 
To verify Conjecture C2 , Cb's and transitions were first marked following the sequential order of the units  ( according to classical CT )  , and a smoothness score was computed . Then , following VT , accessibility domains were used to determine maximal chains of accessibility strings  , Cb's and transitions were recomputed following these strings  , and a VT smoothness score was similarly computed . The results are summarized in Table 6 . They show that the score for VT is better than that for CT in all cases  , thus validating . Conjecture C2 . 
An investigation of the number of long-distance resolutions yielded the results shown in Table  7  . 
Such resolutions could not have been predicted using CT  . 
Table 7: Long distance reference resolution Source No of long distance No of new referents 
C bunifications found
English 62
French 111
Romanian 18   3   4 ~ The Legends of Olimp ~ 5 Written in Java . 
6 Other bi-nuclear relations are JOIN and

2846. Discussion and related work
VT is not a model of anaphora resolution ; rather , its accessibility domains provide a means to constrain the resolution of anaphora  . The fundamentals sumption underlying VT is that an inter-unit reference is possible only if the two units are in a structural relation with one another  , even if they are distant from one another in the text stream  . Furthermore , inter-unit-references are primarily to nuclei rather than to satellites  , reflecting the intuition that nuclei asser the writer's mare ideas and provide the main < < threads >> of the discourse  ( Mann and Thompson\[1988\] . This Is shownm the computation of veins over ( binary ) discourse trees where each pair of descendants of a parent node are either both nuclear or the nuclear node is on the left  ( a left-polarized tree )  . In such trees , any reference from a nuclear unit must be to entities contained in linguistic expressions appearing in previously occurring nuclei  ( although perhaps not any nucleus )  . On the other hand , satellites are dependent on their nuclei for their meaning and hence may refer to entities introduced within them  . The definition of veins formalizes these relationship  , s . Given the mapping of Grosz and Sidners ( 1986 ) stack-based model of discourse structure to RST structure trees outlined by Moser and Moore  ( 1996 )  , the domains of referentiality defined for left -polarized trees using VT are consistent with those defined using the stack-based model  ( e . g . 
Passonneau (1995), Hahn and Strtibe (1997)).
However , in cases where the discourse structure is not left-polarized  , VT provides a more natural account of referential ccessibility than the stack-based model  . In nonleft-polarized trees , at least one satellite precedes its nucleus in the discourse and is therefore its left sibling in the binary discourse tree  . The vein definition formalizes the intuition that in a sequence of units ABC  , where A and C are satellites of B , B can refer to entities in A ( its left satellite )  , but the subsequent right satellite , C , cannot refer to A due to the interposition of nuclear unit B  . In stack-based approaches to referentiality , such configurations pose problems : because B dominates  7 A it must appear below it on the stack , even though it is processed after A . Even if the processing difficulties are overcome , this situation leads to the postulation of cataphoric references when a satellite precedes its nucleus  , which is counterintuitive . 

Our thanks go to Daniel Marcu who pointed some weak parts and provided RST analysis and to the  TELR1 program who facilitated the second meeting of the three authors  . 
7We use Grosz and Sidner's ( 1986 ) terminology here , but note the equivalence of dominance in G&S and nucleus/satellite relations in RST pointed out by 
Moser and Moore (1996).


Brennan , S . E . , Walker Friedman , M . and Pollard , C . J . 
(1987). A Centering Approach to Pronouns.
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the
ACL , Stanford , 155-162.
Brunese aux Florence and Laurent Romary (1997).
Codage des Rfffrence set corfffrences darts les
Dialogues Homme-machine . Procee Cings of ACH/ALLC , Kingston ( Ontario ) . 
Cristea , D .  (1998) . Formal proofs in Incremental Discourse Processing and Veins Theory  , Research Report TR98-2 Dept . of Computer Science,
University " A.I . Cuza ", Ia ~ i.
Cristea , D . , Ide , N . and Romary , L .  (1998) . Marking-up Multiple Views of a Text : Discourse and Reference  , Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation , Granada , Spain.
Fox , B .  (1987) . Discourse Structure and Anaphora . 
Written and Conversational English . no48 in Cambridge Studies in Linguistics , Cambridge
University Press.
Grosz , B . J . , Joshi , A . K . and Weinstein , S .   ( 1995 ) Centering : A framework for modeling the local coherence of discourse  . Computational Linguistics , 12(2), 203-225 . 
Grosz , B . and Sidner , C .  (1986) . Attention , Intention and the Structure of Discourse . Computational
Linguistics , 12, 175-204.
Hahn , U . and Striibe , M .  (1997) . Centered Segmentation : Scaling Up the Centering Model to Global Discourse Sttructure  . Proceedings of
EACL/ACL97, Madrid , 104-11.
Ide , N .   ( 1998 ) Corpus Encoding Standard : Encoding Practices and a Data A architecture for Linguistic Corpora  . Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation , Granada , Spain . See also http:ll www . cs . vassar . edu/CESI . 
Mann , W . C . , Thompson S . A .  (1988) . Rhetorical structure theory : A theory of text organization  , 
Text , 8:3, 243-281.
Marcu , D .  (1997) . The rhetorical parsing , summarisation and generation of natural anguage texts  , Ph . D . thesis , Dept . of Computer Science,
University of Toronto.
Moser , M . and Moore , J .  (1996) . Toward a Synthesis of Two Accounts of Discourse Structure  . 
Computational Linguistics , 22:3, 409-20.
Passonneau , R . J .  (1995) . Using Centering to Relax Gricean Informational Constraints on Discourse Anaphoric Noun Phrases  , research report , Bellcore . 
Walker , M.A . (1996). The Cash Memory Model.
Computational Linguistics , 22:2, 55-64.
Walker , M . A . ; Joshi , A . K . , Prince , E . F .  (1997) . 
Centering in Naturally-Occurring Discourse : An Overview  . In Walker , M . A . ; Joshi , A . K . , Prince , E . F . ( eds . ): Centering in Discourse , Oxford
University Press.
