Project for production of closed-caption TV programs 
for the hearing impaired
Takahiro Wakao
Telecommunications Advancement
Organization of Japan
Uehara Shibuya-ku , Tokyo 151-0064, Japan

Eiji Sawamura

Terumasa Ehara
NHK Science and Technical
Research Lab/TAO
Ichiro Maruyama

Katsuhiko Shirai
Waseda University , Department of
Information and Computer Science/TAO

We describe an ongoing project whose
primary aim is to establish the technology of
producing closed captions for TV news
programs efficiently using natural anguage processing and speech recognition techniques for the benefit of the hearing impaired in Japan  . The project is supported by the
Telecommunications Advancement
Organisation of Japan with the help of the ministry of Posts and Telecommunications  . 
We propose natural anguage and speech processing technique should be used for efficient closed caption production of TV programs  . They enable us to summarise TV news texts into captions automatically  , and synchronise TV news texts with speech and video automatically  . Then the captions are super imposed on the screen . 
We propose a combination of shallow methods for the summarisation  . For all the sentences in the original text , an importance measure is computed based on key words in the text to determine which sentences are important  . If some parts of the sentences are judged unimportant  , they are shortened or deleted . We also propose keyword pair model for the synchronisation between text and speech  . 

The closed captions for TV programs are not provided widely in Japan  . Only 10 percent of the TV programs are shown with captions  , in contrast to 70 % in the United States and more than 30 % in Britain . Reasons why the availability is low are firstly the characters used in the Japanese language are complex and many  . 
Secondly , at the moment , he closed captions are produced manually and it is a time-consuming and costly task  . Thus we think the natural language and speech processing technology will be useful for the efficient production of TV programs with closed captions  . 
The Telecommunications Advancement
Organisation of Japan with the support of the ministry of Posts and Telecommunications ha initiated a project in which an electronically available text of TV news programs is summarised and syncrhorinised with the speech and video automatically  , then super imposed on the original programs . 
It is a five-year project which started in 1996 , and its annual budget is about 200 million yen . 
In the following chapters we describe main research issues in detail and the project schedule  , and the results of our preliminary research on the main research topics are presented  . 
1340 ne WSSC :
TV program with
Figure 1 System Outline 1 Research Issues Main research issues in the project are as follows : ? automatic text summarisation ? automatic synchronisation of text and speech ? building an efficient closed caption production system The outline of the system is shown in Figure  1  . 
Although all types of TV programs are to be handled in the project system  , the first priority is given to TV news programs ince most of the hearing impaired people say they want to watch closed-captioned TV news programs  . The research issues are explained briefly next . 
1.1 Text Summarisation
For most of the TV news programs today , the scripts ( written text ) are available lectronically before they are read out by news casters  . 
Japanese news texts are read at the speed of between  350 and 400 characters per minute , and if all the characters in the texts are shown on the TV screen  , there are too many of them to be understood well ( Komine et al 1996 )  . 
Therefore we need to summarise the news texts to some extent  , and then show them on the screen . The aim of the research on automatic text summarisation is to summarise the textfully or partially automatically to a proper size to obtain closed captions  . The current aim is 70% summarisation in the number of characters . 
1.2 Synchronisation of Text and Speech
We need to synchronise the text with the sound , or speech of the program . This is done by hand at present and we would like to employ speech recognition technology to assist the synchronisation  . 
First , synchronising points between the original text and the speech are determined automatically  ( recognition phase in Figurel )  . 
Then the captions are synchronised with the speech and video  ( synchronisation phase in

1.3 Efficient Closed Caption Production

We will build a system by integrating the summarisation and synchronisation techniques with techniques for superimposing characters onto the screen  . We have also conducted research on how to present he captions on the screen for the handicapped people  . 
2 Project Schedule
The project has two stages : the first 3 years and the rest 2 years . We research on the above issues and build a prototype system in the first stage  . The prototype system will be used to produce closed captions  , and the capability and functions of the system will be evaluated  . We will focus on improvement and evaluation of the system in the second stage  . 
13413 Preliminary Research Results
We describe results of our research on automatic summarisation adautomatic synchronisation f text and speech  . Then , a study on how to present captions on TV screen to the hearing impaired people is briefly mentioned  . 
3.1 Automatic Text Summarisation
We have a combination of shallow processing methods for automatic text summarisation  . 
The first is to compute keywords in a text and importance measures for each sentence  , and then select importanct sentences for the text  . The second is to shoten or delete unimportant parts in a sentence using Japanese language -specific rules  . 
3.1.1 Sentence Extraction
E hara found that compared with newspaper text , TV news texts have longer sentences and each text has a smaller number of sentences  ( Ehara et al 1997 )  . If we summarise TV news text by selecting sentences from the orignal text  , it would be ' rough ' summarisation . On the other hand , if we devide long sentences into smaller units , thus increase the number of sentences in the text  , we may have finer and better summarisation ( Kim & Ehara 1994 )  . 
Therefore what is done in the system is that if a sentence in a given text is too long  , it will be partitioned into smaller units with minimun changes made to the original sentence  . 
To compute importance measures for each sentence , we need to find first keywords of the text . We tested high-frequency keyword method ( Luhn 1957 , Edumunds on 1969) and a
TF-IDF-based ( Text frequency , Inverse
Document Frequency ) method . We evaluated the two methods using ten thousand TV news texts  , and found that high-frequency keyword method showed slightly better results than the method based on TFIDF scores  ( Wakao et al 1997 )  . 
3.1.2 Rules for shortening text
Another way of reducing the number of characters in a Japanese text  , thus summarising the text , is to shorten or delete parts of the sentences . For example , if a sentence nds with as a henver b followed by its inflection  , or helping verbs or particles to express proper politeness  , it does not change the meaning much even if we keep only the verb stem  ( or sahen noun ) and delete the rest of it . This is one of the ways found in the captions to shorten or delete unimportant parts of the sentences  . 
We analysed texts and captions in a TV news program which is broadcast fully captioned for the hearing impaired in Japan  . We complied 16 rules . The rules are devided into 5 groups . We describe them one by one below . 
1 ) Shotening and deletion of sentence nds We find some of phrases which come at the end of the sentence can be shortened or deleted  . If as a henver b is used as the main verb , we can change it to its sahen noun . 
For example : ? . . . keikakushiteimasu ( ~ mb'Cl,~T ) --, . . . keikaku ( ~) ( note : keikakusuru = plan , sahen verb ) If the sentence nds in a reporting style , we may delete the verb part . 
?  . . . bekidaton obemashita ( ~ t::~bt: ) - - ~ be kida ( ~< ~ t ?_ )   ( be kida = should , no be mash it a = have said )  2 ) Keeping parts of sentence Important noun phrases are kept in captions  , and the rest of the sentence is deleted . 
? taihosar et anoha Matumotoshachou(~~~1": . g ) ~$ . ~'~, ~) --, taiho Matumotoshachou(~$'~:~k ~ . ) ( taiho = arrest , shachou = a company president , Matumoto = name of a person )  3 ) Replacing with shorter phrase Some nouns are replaced with a simpler and shoter phrase  . 
? souridaijin ( ~ ) --* shushou ( Yi ~ d )   ( souridaij in , shushou both mean a prime minister )
Conneticting phrases omitted 4)
Connecting phrases at the beginning sentence may be omitted  . 
. shikashi ( b ~ , b = however) , ippou ( --:8 = on the other hand ) of the Comparative time expression such as today ( kyou ~-\[\] )  , yesterday ( kinou , I ?\[\]) can be deleted . However , the absolute time expressions such as May ,  1998  ( 1998~5 B ) stay unchanged in summarisation . 
When we apply these rules to selected important sentences  , we can reduce the size of text further 10 to 20 percent . 
3 . 2 Automatic Synchronisation of Text and Speech We next synchronise the text and speech  . First , the written TV news text is changed into a stream of phonetic transcriptions  . Second , we try to detec the time points of the text and their corresponding speech sections  . We have developed'keyword pair model ' for the synchronisation which is shown in Figure  2  . 
Nu ~ larc
TA ..... TBlc
Figure 2 Keyword Pair Model
The model consists of two sets of words ( keywords l and keywords2 ) before and after the synchronisation point ( point B )  . Each set contains one or two keywords which are represented by a sequence of phonetic HMMs  ( Hidden Markov Models )  . Each HMM is a three-loop , eight-mixture-distribution HM . 
We use 39 phonetic HMMs to represent all
Japanese phonemes.
When the speech is put in the model , non-synchronising input data travel through the garbage arc while synchronising data go through the two keyword sets  , which makes the likelihood at point B increase . Therefore if we observe the likelihood at point B and it becomes bigger than a certain threshold  , we decide it is the synchronisation point for the input data  . 
Thirty-four ( 34 ) keywords pairs were taken from the data which was not used in the training and selected for the evaluation of the model  . 
We used the speech of four people for the evaluation  . 
The evaluation results are shown in Table 1.
They are the accuracy ( detection rate ) and false alarm rate for the case that each keyword set has two keywords  . The threshold is computed as logarithm of the likelihood which is between zero and one  , thus it becomes less than zero . 
Threshold- I0   -20   -30   -40   -50   -60   -70   -80   -90  -  I00   -150   -200   -250   -300 
Detection rate (%) 34 . 56 44 . 12 54 . 41 60 . 29 64 . 71 69 . 12 69 . 85 71 . 32 78 . 68 82 . 35 91 . 18 94 . 85 95 . 59 99 . 26
False Alarm Rate ( FA/KW/Hour ) 0 . 06 0 . 06 0 . 06 0 . 12 0 . 18 0 . 18 0 . 54 1 . 21 1 . 81 2 . 41
Table 1 Synchronisation Detection
As the threshold decreases , the detection rate increases , however , the false alarm rate increases little ( Maruyama 1998 )  . 
3.3 Speech Database
We have been gathering TV and radio news speech . In 1996 we collected speech data by simulating news programs  , i . e . TV news texts were read and recorded sentence by sentence in a studio  . It has seven and a halfhouses of recordings of twenty people  ( both male and female )  . In 1997 we continued to record TV news speech by simulation  , and recorded speech data from actual radio and TV programs  . It has now ten hours of actual radio recording and ten hours of actual TV programs  . We will continue to record speech data and increase the size of the database in  1998  . 
3.4 Caption Presentation
We have conducted a study , though on small scale , on how to present captions on TV screen superimposed captions by hand on several kinds of TV programs  . They were evaluated by the hadicapped people ( hard of hearing persons ) in terms of the following points : ? characters : ize  , font , colour ? number of lines ? timing ? location ? methods of scrolling ? inside or outside of the picture  ( see two examples below )  . 
Figure 3Captions in the picture
Figure 4 Captions outside of the picture Most of the subjects preferred  2-line   , outside of the picture captions without scrolling  ( Tanahashi ,  1998) . This was still a preliminary study , and we plan to conduct similar evaluation by the hearing impaired people on largescale  . 

We have described a national project , its research issues and schedule , as well as preliminary research results . The project aim is to establish language and speech processing technology so that TV news program text is summarised and changed into captions  , and synchronised with the speech , and super imposed to the original program for the benefits of the hearing impaired  . We will continue to conduct research and build a prototype TV caption production system  , and try to put it to a practical use in the near future  . 

We would like to thank Nippon Television Network Corporation for letting us use the pictures  ( Figure 3 ,  4 ) of their news program for the purpose of our research  . 

Edmundson , H . P .   ( 1969 ) New Methods in Automatic Extracting Journal of the ACM  ,  16(2) , pp 264-285 . 
Ehara , T . , Wakao , T . , Sawamura , E . , Maruyama I . , Abe Y . , Shirai K .   ( 1997 ) Application of natural language processing and speech processing technology to production of closed-caption TV programs for the hearing impaired NLPRS  1997 Kim Y . B . , Ehara , T .   ( 1994 ) A method of partitioning of long Japanese sentences with subject resolution in J/E machine translation  , Proc . 
of 1994 International Conference on Computer Processing of Oriental Languages  , pp . 467-473 . 
Komine , K . , Hoshino , H . , Isono , H . , Uchida , T . , Iwahana , Y .   ( 1996 ) Cognitive Experiments of News Captioning for Hearing Impaired Persons Technical Report of IECE  ( The Institution of Electronics , Information and Communication Engineers ) , HCS96-23 , in Japanese , pp 712 . 
Lulm , H . P .   ( 1957 ) A statistical approach to the mechanized encoding adsearching of literary information IBM Journal of Research and 
Development , 1(4), pp 309-317.
Maruyama , I . , Abe , Y . , Ehara , T . , Shirai , K .   ( 1998 ) A Study on Keyword spotting using Keyword pair models for Synchronization f Text and Speech  , Acoustical Society of Japan , Spring meeting , 2-Q-13 , in Japanese . 
Tanahashi D .   ( 1998 ) Study on Caption Presentation for TV news programs for the hearing impaired Wased a University  , Department of Information and Computer Science ( master's thesis ) in Japanese . 
Wakao , T . , Ehara , E . , Sawamura , E . , Abe , Y . , Shirai , K .   ( 1997 ) Application of NLP technology to production of closed-caption TY programs in Japanese for the hearing impaired  . ACL97 workshop , Natural Language Processing for
Communication Aids , pp 55-58.

