Discourse Cues for Broadcast News Segmentation
Mark T . Maybury
The MITRE Corporation
202 Burlington Road
Bedford , MA 01730, USA


This paper describes the design and application of time-enhanced  , finite state models of discourse cues to the automated segmentation of broadcast news  . We describe our analysis of a broadcast news corpus  , the design of a discourse cue based story segment or that builds upon information extraction techniques  , and finally its computational implementation ad evaluation in the Broadcast News Navigator  ( BNN ) to support video news browsing , retrieval , and summarization . 
1. Introduction
Large video collections require content-based information browsing  , retrieval , extraction , and summarization to ensure their value for tasks such as realtime profiling and retrospective search  . 
Whereas image processing for video indexing currently provides low level in dec ~ such as visual transitions and shot classification  ( Zhang et al 1994 )  , some research has investigated the use of linguistic streams  ( e . g . , closed captions , transcripts ) to provide keyword-based indexes to video . Story-based segmentation remains illusive . For example , traditional text tiling approaches often under segment broadcast news because of rapid topic shifts  ( Mani et al 1997 )  . This paper takes a corpus-based approach to this problem  , building linguistic models based on an analysis of a digital collection of broadcast news  , exploiting the regularity utilized by humans in signaling topic shifts to detect story segments  . 
2. Broadcast News Analysis
Human communication is characterized by distinct discourse structure  ( Grosz and Sidner 1986 ) which is used for a variety of purposes including managing interaction between participants  , mitigating limited attention , and signaling topic shifts . In processing enre such as technical or journalistic texts  , programs can take advantage of explicit discourse cues  ( e . g . , " the first " , " the most important " ) to perform tasks such as summarization ( Paice 1981 )  . Our initial inability to segment topics in closed caption news text using thesaurus based subject assessments  ( Liddy and Myaeng 1992 ) motivated an investigation of explicit turn taking signals  ( e . g . , anchor to reporter hand off ) . We analyzed programs ( e . g . , CNN PrimeNews ) from an over one year corpus of closed caption texts with the intention of creating models of discourse and other cues for segmentation  . 
I ~ .   .   .   .   .   . Discourse Cuesc ~~--, .   .  -~,~,+: , __ . . . --- Insertions OV ~ IIIV HE Anl : h ~ r . >> TALKSBETWEEN RES ~ . NTATW ~ Sgn, . ~TTEAMSTERSUN~N~~UPSARE/HAS MC* . ' EC~E'V ~ NCLOSER TO ADEAL UPSI~_L_O ~_N . lJl DURING THE STRII < E 300 MILLIONDC t . ARSAWEB ~, ASTH ~ TFA ~ qqT ? ~ cT ? ' ~" ~ .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . Fc"~'nI'~~TSTO>>STRIKESIVOLV hGTHE TRANSPORTATIONO ~ PEOF % EARERULEDB ~ CNEF ~DERALL A WALKOL rTSINT HEP ACK AGES HIPPING INDUSTRY BYANOTHERLET'S'~?'Omionn  . l~--Ej ro ( s >> PRESIOENTCL~TONSAY THATALONEEX PLAINS HIS REPU  4T VEN ( ANOSTOP THE UPSSTRKEASHEDIDSO ( MOSTHSAGOWHENIRLI~PILOTS > ~ THE AIRL~4E COMPANIES ~ ECAUSETH g?TAKE--REBYA FEDERALL AWWHK ~ HGNESTHE  SIO~14/T ~J ? ? ~ H ~ ~ . ) IN I ERV ~ N E 1"~-'I=~I ~?"~ IS S LIBSTANTIAL EC . ~ f~C~vI ? 0ANGER OP~TOTHECOUNTRY THEUP~?GTRIKE WITH THE TEAMSTERSISNOT COVERED BY TH 

Figure 1 . Closed Caption Challenges ( CNN Prime News , August 17 ,  1997 ) While human captioners employ standard cues to signal discourse shifts in the closed caption stream  ( e . g . , ">>" is used to signal a speaker shift whereas " >>>" signals a subject change  )  , these can be erroneous , incomplete , or inconsistent . Figure 1 illustrates a typical excerpt from our corpus . Our creation of a gold standard corpus of a variety of broadcast sources indicates that transcription word error rates range from  2% for prerecorded programs such as 60 Minutes news magazine to 20% for live transcriptions ( including errors of insertion , deletion , and transposition ) . This noisy data complicates robust story segmentation  . 
819 2.1 News Story Discourse Structure
Broadcast news has a prevalent structure with often explicit cues to signal story shifts  . For example , analysis of the structure of ABC World News
Tonight indicates : ? broadcasts start and end with the anchor ? reporter segments are preceded by an introductory anchor segment and together they form a single story ? commercials serve as story boundaries Similar but unique structure is also prevalent in many other news program such as CNN Prime News  ( See Figure 1 ) or MSNBC . For example , the structure for the Jim Lehrer News Hour provides not only segmentation if ormation but also content information for each segment  . Thus , the order of stories is consistently : ? preview of major stories of the day or in the broadcast program ? sponsor messages ? summary of the day's news  ( including some major stories ) ? four to six major stories ? recap summary of the day's news ? sponsor messages Recovering this structure would enable a user to view the four minute opening summary  , retrieved aily news summaries , preview and retrieve major stories , or browse avideotable of contents , with or without commercials . 
2.2 Discourse Cues and Named Entities
Manual and semiautomated analysis of our news corpora reveals that regular cues are used to signal these shifts in discourse  , although this structure varies dramatically from source to source  . For example , CNN discourse cues can be classified into the following categories  ( examples from 8/18/97 ) : ? Start of Broadcast " GOODEVENING , I'MKATHLEENKENNEDY , SITTING
INFORJOIECHEN . "? Anchor-to-Reporter Handoff " WE'REJOINED BY CNN'SCHARLE SZE WEINNEW 
ORLEANS . CHARLES ? ? Reporter-to-Anch or Handoff " CHARLES ZEWE  , CNN , NEWORLEANS"?CataphoricSegment " STILLAHEAD ONPRIMENEWS"?BroadcastEnd"THATWRAPSUP THIS MONDAYEDITION OF " PRIMENEWS " " The regularity of these discourse cues from broadcast to broadcast provides an effective foundation for discourse-based segmentation routines  . We have similarly discovered regular discourse cues in other news programs  . For example , anchor/reporter and reporter/anchor handoffs in CNN Prime News or ABC News and other network programs are identified through pattern matching of strings such as : ?  ( word )   ( word )  " , ABCNEWS "?" ABC'SCORRESPONDENT '' ( word )   ( word ) The pairs of words in parentheses correspond to the reporter's first and last names  . Combining the handoffs with structural cues , such as knowing that the first and last speaker in the program will be the anchor  , allow us differentiate anchor segments from reporter segments  . By preprocessing the closed caption text with a part of speech tagger and named entity detector  ( Aberdeen et al 1995 ) retrained on closed captions , we generalize search of text strings to the following class of patterns : *  ( proper name )  " , ABCNEWS "?" ABC'SCORRESPONDENT '" ( proper name )  3 . Computational Implementation Our discourse cue story segment or has been implemented in the context of a multimedia  ( closed captioned text , audio , video ) analysis system for webbased broadcast news navigation  . We employ a finite state machine to represent discourse states such as an anchor  , reporter , or advertisting segment ( See Figure 2) . We further enhance these with multimedia cues ( e . g . detected Silence , black or logokey frames ) and temporal knowledge ( indicated as time in Figure 2 )  . For example , from statistical analysis of CNN Prime News Programs  , we know that weather segments appear on average 18 minutes after the start of the news . 

Figure 2. Partial Time-Enhanced FSM
After segmentation , the user is presented with a hierarchical navigation space of the news which enable search and retrieval of segmented stories or browsing stories by date  , topic , named entity or keyword ( see Figure 3) . This is MITRE's
Broadcast News Navigator ( http://www . mitre . org/resources/centers / advanced_info/g04f/bnn/mmhomeext  . html) . 
NamedEnt~t~es by TypeCaptionsStorySummary
Figure 3. Broadcast News Navigator
We leverage the story segments and extracted named entities to selec the sentence with the most named entities to serve as a single sentence summary of a given segment  . Story structure is also useful for multimedia summarization  . For example , we can select key frames or keywords from the substructure which will likely contain the most meaningful content  ( e . g . , an reporter segment within an anchor segment ) . 
4. Evaluation
We evaluated segment or performance by measuring both the precision and recall of segment boundaries compared to manual annotation of story boundaries where:  1  . Precision - #of correct segment tags  #of total segment tags  2  . Recall =  #of correct segment tags  #of hand tags
Jim Lehrer News Hour I 7752
Table 1. Segmentation Performance
Table 1 presents average precision and recall results for multiple programs after apply in generalized cue patterns developed first for ABC as described in Section  2  . 2 . Recall degrades when porting these same algorithms to different news programs  ( e . g . , CNN , Jim Lehrer ) given the genre differences as described in Section  2  . 1 . 
Errors in story boundary detection include erroneously splitting a single story segment into two story segments  , and merging two contiguou story segments into a single story segment  . Furthermore , given our error-driven transformation based proper name taggers operate at approximately  80% precision and recall , this can adversely impact discourse cue detections  . Also , our preliminary evaluation of speech transcription results in word error rates of approximately  50%  , which suggest noncaptioned text is not yet feasible for this class of segmentation  . 
We have just completed an empirical study ( Merlino and Maybury , forthcoming ) with BNN users that explores the optimal mixture of media elements show in Figure  3   ( e . g . , keyframes , named entities , topics ) in terms of speed and accuracy of story identification and comprehension tasks  . Key findings include that users perform better and prefer mixed media presentations over just one media  ( e . g . , named entities or topic lists ) , and they are quicker and more accurate working from extracts and summaries than from the source transcript or video  . 
8216. Conclusion and Future Work
We have described and evaluated a news story segmentation algorithm that detects news discourse structure using discourse cue  , s that exploit fixed expressions and transformational-based  , part of speech and named entity taggers created using error-driven learning  . The implementation utilizes a time-enhanced finite state automata that represents discourse states and their expected temporal occurance in a news broadcast based on statistical analysis of the corpus  . This provides an important mechanism to enable topic tracking  , indeed we take the text from each segment an run this through a commercial topic identification rou Unean provide the user with a list of the top classes associated with each story  ( See Figure 3 )  . 
The segmentor has been integrated into a system ( BNN ) for content-based news access and has been deployed in a corporate intranet and is currently being evaluated for deployment in the US government and a national broadcasting corporation  . 
We have improved segmentation performance by exploiting cues in audio and visual streams  ( e . g . , speaker shifts , scene changes ) ( Maybury et al 1997) . To obtain a better indication of annotator reliability and for comparative evaluation  , we need to measure interannotator agreement . Future research includes investigating the relationship of other linguistic properties  , such as coreference , intonation contours , and lexical semantics coherence to serve as a measure of cohesion that might further support story segmentation  . Finally , we are currently evaluating in user studies which mix of media elements  ( e . g . , key frame , named entities , key sentence ) are most effective in presenting story segments for different information seeking tasks  ( e . g . , story identification , comprehension , correlation ) . 

Andy Merlino is the principal system developer of BNN  . The Alembic subsystem is the result of efforts by MITRE's Language Processing Group including Marc Vilaln and John Aberdeen for part of speech proper name taggers  , and David Day for training these on closed caption text  . 

Aberdeen , J . ; Burger , J . ; Day , D . ; Hirschman , L . ; Robinson , P . and Vilain , M .   ( 1995 ) "Description of tile Alembic System Used for MUC6"  , Proceedings of the Sixth Message Understanding Conference  , Columbia , 
MD , 68 November , 1995.
Brill , E .   ( 1995 ) Transformation-based Error-Driven Learning and Natural Language Processing : A Case Study in Part of Speech Tagging  . Computational
Linguistics , 21(4).
Grosz , B . J . and Sidner , C . July-September , (1986) " Attention , Intentions , and the Structure of Discourse . " Computational Linguistics 12(3):175-204 . 
Liddy , E . and Myaeng , S .   ( 1992 ) "DR-LINK's Linguistic-Conceptual Approach to Document Detection "  , Proceedings of the First Text Retrieval
Conference , 1992, NIST.
Mani , I . , House , D . , Maybury , M . and Green , M .   ( 1997 ) Towards Content-based Browsing of Broadcast News Video  . In Maybury , M . ( ed . ) Intelligent Multimedia Information Retrieval , AAAI/MIT Press ,  241-258 . 
Merlino , A . and Maybury , M . forthcoming . An Empirical Study of the Optimal Presentation of Multimedia Summaries of Broadcast News  . In Mani , I . 
and Maybury , M . ( eds .) Automated Text

Merlino , A . , Morey , D . and Maybury , M .   ( 1997 ) " Broadcast News Navigation using Story Segments  "  , Proceedings of the ACM International Multimedia Conference  , Seattle , WA , November 814 ,  381-391 . 
Paice , C . D .   ( 1981 ) The Automatic Generation of Literature Abstracts : An Approach Based on the Identification of Self -Indicating Phrases  . In Oddy , R . 
N . , Robertson , S . E . , van Rijsbergen , C . J . , Williams , P . W . ( eds . ) Information Retrieval Research . London :
Butterworths , 172-191.
Zhang , H . J . ; Low , C . Y . ; Smoliar , S . W . and Zhong , D . 
(1995) Video Parsing , Retrieval , and Browsing : An Integrated and ContentBased Solution  . proceedings of ACM Multimedia 95 . San Francisco , CA , p .  15-24 . 

