Information Classification and Navigation
Based on 5W1H of the Target Information
Takahiro Ikeda and Akitoshi Okumura and Kazunori Muraki 
C&C Media Research Laboratories , NEC Corporation
4-1-1 Miyazaki , Miyamae-ku , Kawasaki , Kanagawa 216
Abstract
This paper proposes a method by which 5Wl H(who , when , where , what , why , how , and predicate ) information is used to classify and navigate Japanese-language texts  . 5 WlH information , extracted from text data , has an access platform with three functions : episodic retrieval  , multidimensional classification , and overall classification . In a six-month trial , the platform was used by 50 people to access 6400 newspaper articles . The three functions proved to be effective for office documentation work and the precision of extraction was approximately  82%  . 
1 Introduction
In recent years , we have seen an explosive growth in the volume of information available through online networks and from large capacity storage devices  . High speed and largescale retrieval techniques have made it possible to receive information through information services such as news clipping and keyword-based retrieval  . However , information retrieval is not a purpose in itself , but a means in most cases . In office work , users use retrieval services to create various documents such as proposals and reports  . 
Conventional retrieval services do not provide users with a good access platform to help them achieve their practical purposes  ( Sakamoto , 1997; Lesk et al ,  1997) . They have to repeat retrieval operations and classify the data for themselves  . 
To overcome this difficulty , this paper proposes a method by which 5Wl H(who , when , where , what , why , how , and predicate ) information can be used to classify and navigate Japanese-language texts  .   5WlH information provides users with easy-to -understand classification axes and retrieval keys because it has a set of fundamental elements needed to describ events  . 
In this paper , we discuss common information retrieval requirements for office work and describe the three functions that our access platform using  5WlH information provides : episodic retrieval , multidimensional classification , and overall classification . We then discuss 5Wl H extraction methods , and , finally , we report on the results of a six-month trial in which  50 people , linked to a company intranet , used the platform to access newspaper articles . 
2 Retrieval Requirements In an
Office
Information retrieval is an extremely important part of office work  , and particularly crucial in the creation of office documents  . The retrieval requirements in office work can be classified into three types  . 
Episodic viewpoint : We are often required to make an episode  , temporal transition data on a certain event . For example , " Company X succeeded in developing a two -gigabyte memory " makes the user want to investigate what kind of events were announced about Company X's memory before this event  . The user has to collect the related events and then arrange them in temporal order to make an episode  . 
Comparative viewpoint : The comparative viewpoint is familiar to office workers  . For example , when the user fills out a purchase request form to buy a product  , he has to collect comparative information on price  , performance and so on , from several companies . Here , the retrieval is done by changing retrieval viewpoints  . 
Overall viewpoint : An overall viewpoint is necessary when there is a large amount of classification data  . When a user produces a technical analysis report after collecting electronics-related articles from a newspaper over one year  , the amount of data is too large to allow global tendencies to be interpreted such as when the events occurred  , what kind of companies were involved , and what type of action was required . Here , users have to repeat retrieval and classification by choosing appropriate keywords to condense classification so that it is not too broad -ranging to understand  . 
571 lEpisodic retrieval
I Overall classification I
Figure 1:   5WIH classification and navigation 3   5WIH Classification and
Navigation
Conventional keyword-based retrieval does not consider logical relationships between keywords  . For example , the condition , " NEC&semiconductor & produce " retrieves an article containing " NEC formed a technical alliance with B company  , and B company produced semiconductor X . "Mine et al and Satoh et al reported that this problem leads to retrieval noise and unnecessary results  ( Mine et al , 1997; Satoh and Muraki ,  1993) . This problem makes it difficult to meet the requirements of an office because it produces retrieval noise in these three types of operations  . 
5 WlH information is who , when , where , what , why , how , and predicate information extracted from text data through the  5WlH extraction module using language dictionary and sentence analysis techniques  .   5WlH extraction modules assign 5WlH indexes to the text data . The indexes are stored in list form of predicates and arguments  ( when , who , what , why , where , how ) ( Lesketai . , 1997) . The 5WlH index can suppress retrieval noise because the index considers the logical relationships between keywords  . For example , the 5WlH index makes it possible to retrieve texts using the retrieval condition " who:NEC&what : semiconductor & predicate : produce  . "It can filter out the article containing " NEC formed a technical alliance with B company  , and B company produced semiconductor X . " Based on 5Wl Hinformation , we propose a 5WlH classification and navigation model which can meet office retrieval requirements  . The model has three functions : episodic retrieval  , multidimensional classification , and overall classification ( Figure 1) . 
3.1 Episodic Retrieval
The 5WlH index can easily doep is odic retrieval by choosing a set of related events and arranging  96  . 10 NEC adjusts semiconductor production downward . 

NEC postpone semiconductor production plant construction  . 
NEC shifts semiconductor production to 64 Megabit next generation DRAMs . 
NEC invests ? 40 billion for next generation semiconductor production  . 
NEC semiconductor production 18% more than expected . 
Figure 2: Episodic retrieval example
W ~ PCHDI
NEC . . . . . . .
X ~; ... ... ...
PC .....

Figure 3: Multidimensional cassification example the events in temporal order  . The results are readable by users as a kind of episode  . For example , an NEC semiconduct or poduction episode is made by retrieving texts containing " who : NEC & what : semiconductor&predicate:product " indexes and sorting the retrieved texts in temporal order  ( Figure 2 )  . 
The 5WlH index can suppress retrieval noise by conventional keyword-based retrieval such as " NEC & semiconductor & produce  . " Also , the result is an easily readable series of events which is able to meet episodic viewpoint requirements in office retrieval  . 
3 . 2 Mu l t i - d imens iona l C lass i f i ca t ion The  5WlH index has seven-dimension aiaxes for classification  . Texts are classified into categories on the basis of whether they contain a certain combination of  5WlH elements or not . Though 5WlH elements creates even-dimensional space , users are provided with a two-dimensional matrix because this makes it easier for them to understand text distribution  . Users can choose a fundamental viewpoint from 5WlH elements to be the vertical axis . The other elements are arranged on the horizontal axis as the left matrix of Figure  3 shows . Classification makes it possible to access data from a user's comparative viewpoints by combining  5WlH elements . 
For example , the cell specified by NEC and PC shows the number of articles containing NEC as a " who " element and PC asa " what " element  . 
Users can easily obtain comparable data by switching their fundamental viewpoint from the 
NF ~ opens a new internet service.
Electric . . . .
Company " A ..... Cotp , develops a new computer.
BInc . puts a portable terminal on the market , Communi-JC Telecommunication starts a virtual market  . 
cation ~, . .~ D Telephone sells a communication adapter . 
Figure 4: Overall classification example " who " viewpoint othe " what " viewpoint  , for example , as the right matrix of Figure 3 shows . This meets comparative viewpoint requirements in office retrieval  . 
3.3 Overall Classification
When there are a large number of 5WlH elements , the classification matrix can be packed by using a thesaurus  . As 5WlH elements axe represented by upper concepts in the thesaurus  , the matrix can be condensed . Figure 4 has an example with six " who " elements which are represented by two categories  . 
The matrix provides users with overall classification as well as detailed subclassification through the selection of appropriate hierarchical levels  . This meets overall classification requirements in office retrieval  . 
4  5W1H Information Extraction 5W1H extraction was done by a case-based shallow parsing  ( CBSP ) model based on the algorithm used in the VENIEX , Japanese information extraction system ( Muraki et al ,  1993) . CBSP is a robust and effective method of analysis which uses lexical information  , expression patterns and case-markers in sentences  . Figure 5 shows the detail on the algorithm for CBSP . 
In this algorithm , input sentences are first segmented into words by Japanese morphological-ysis  ( Japanese sentences have no blanks between words . ) Lexical information is linked to each word such as the part-of-speech  , root forms and semantic categories . 
Next ,   5WlH elements are extracted by proper noun extraction , pattern expression matching and case-maker matching  . 
In the proper noun extraction phase , a 60   050-word proper noun dictionary made it possible to indicate people's names and organization names as " who " elements and place names as " where " elements  . For example , NEC and China are respectively extracted as a " who " element and a " where " procedure CBSP  ; begin Apply morphological nalys is to the sentence  ; for each word in the sentence do begin if the word is a people's name or an organization name then 
Mark the word as a " who " element and push it to the stack  ; else if the word is a place name then Mark the word as a " where " element and push it to the stack  ; else if the word matches an organization name pattern then 
Mark the word as a " who " element and push it to the stack  ; else if the word matches a date pattern then
Mark the word as a " when " element and push it to the stack  ; else if the word is a noun then if the next word is ? ~? or  t2 then Mark the word and the kept unspecified elements as " who " elements and push them to the stack  ; if the next word is ~: or ~= then Mark the word and the kept unspecified elements as " what " elements and push them to the stack  ; else Keep the word as an unspecified element ; else if the word is a verb then begin Fix the word as the predicate lement of a  5WlH set ; repeat
Pop one marked word from the stack ; if the 5WlH element corresponding to the mark of the word is not fixed then 
Fix the word as the 5WlH element corresponding to its mark ; else break repeat ; until stack is empty ; end end end
Figure 5: The algorithm for CBSP element from the sentence , "NEC d?q~~~/fik*-No ( NEC produce semiconductors in China . ) " In the pattern expression matching phase , the system extracts words matching predefined patterns as " who " and " when " elements  . There are several typ-information . 
" Who " elements " What " elements " Predicate " elements Present Absent Total Present Absent Total Present Absent Total Overall Correct  5423   71   5494   5653   50   5703   6042   5   6047   5270 Error 414   490   904   681   14   695   55   296   351   1128 Total 5837   561   6398   6334   64   6398   6097   301   6398   6396 Precision 92  . 9% 12 . 7% 85 . 9% 89 . 2% 78 . 1% 89 . 1% 99 . 1% 1 . 7% 94 . 5% 82 . 4% ical patterns for organization ames and people 's names  , dates , and places ( Muraki et al ,  1993) . For example , nouns followed by ~ J : ( Co . , Inc . Ltd . ) and ~-~ ( Univ . ) mean they are organizations and " who " elements  . For example , 1998~4J~18~(April 18 , 1998) can be identified as a date . " When " elements can be recognized by focusing on the pattern for  ( year )  , ) ~( month ) , and ~( day ) . 
For words which are not extracted as 5WlH elements in previous phases , the system decides its 5WlH index by case marker matching . The system checks the relationships between Japanese particles  ( case markers ) and verbs and assigns a 5W1H index to each word according to rules such as 7~ is a marker of a " who " element and ~ is a marker of a " what " element  . In the example " AJ : 7~ X ~ r ~ ( Company Asellsproduct X . ) , " company A is identified as a " who " element according to the case marker  7  ) ~ if it is not specified as a " who " element by proper noun extraction and pattern expression matching  . 
5 WlH elements followed by a verb ( predicate ) are fixed as a 5WlH set so that a 5WlH set does not include two elements for the same 5WlH index . A 5WlH element belongs to the same 5W1H set as the nearest predicate after it . 
5 In fo rmat ion Access P la t fo rm 5WlH information classification and navigation works in the information access platform  . The platform disseminate suers with newspaper information through the company intranet  . The platform structure is shown in Figure 6 . 
We brobots collect newspaper articles from specified URLs everyday  . The data is stored in the database , and a 5Wl Hindex data is made for the data . Currently , 6398 news articles are stored in the databases . Some articles are disseminated to users according to their profiles  . Users can browse all the data through WWW browsers and use  5WlH classification and navigation functions by typing sentences or specifying regions in the browsing texts  . 
l ~ ID is semination ~
If
I?IIimoosi ; o , ~ a't a ~ a ~ JIN ' DEX \] l I retrieval





Figure 6: Information access interface structure 5WlH elements are automatically extracted from the typed sentences and specified regions  . The extracted 5WlH elements are used as retrieval keys for episodic retrieval  , and as axes for multidimensional classification and overall classification  . 
5 . 15W1H Information Extraction " When , "" who, . . . . what , " and " predicate " information has been extracted from  6398 electronics industry news articles since August ,  1996 . We have evaluated extracted information for 6398 news headlines . The headline average length is approximately 12 words . Table 1 shows the result of evaluating " who , "" what , " and " predicate " information and overall extracted information  . 
In this table , the results are classified with regard to the presence of corresponding elements in the news headlines  . More than 90% of " who , "" what , " and " predicate " elements can correctly be extracted with our extraction algorithm from headlines having such elements  . On the other hand , the algorithm is not highly precise when there is no corresponding element in the article  . The errors are caused by picking up other elements despite the absence of the element obe extracted  . However , the errors hardly affect applications such as episodic re-[~/lon~]":~?Wl[~/lllS]-~ [ ~ t ~ N ~  ;   ; ' X~'~4~n , ' DRAU ' . -: ~/ Yt "--~' ~ CM Figure 7: Episodic retrieval example ( 2 ) trieval and multidimensional classification because they only add unnecessary information and do not remove necessary information  . 
The precision independent of the presence of the element is from  85% to 95% for each , and the overall precision is 82 . 4% . 
5.1.1 Episodic Retrieval
Figure 7 is an actual screen of Figure 2 , which shows an example of episodic retrieval based on headline news saying  , " NEC ~ ) ~-~? ) ~::~: J : 018% ~ ( NEC produces 18% more semiconductors han expected . ) " The user specifies the region , " NEC ~ ) ? ~ i ~ k ? ) ~ i  ~ ( NEC produces semiconductors ) " n the headline for episodic retrieval . A " who " element NEC , a " what " element ~ i ~$ ( semiconductor ) , and a " predicate " element ~ ( produce ) are episodic retrieval keys . The extracted results are NEC's semi-conductor production story  . 
The upper frame of the window lists a set of headlines arranged in temporal order  . In each article , NEC is a " who " element , the semiconductor is a " what " element and production is a " predicate " element  . By tracing episodic headlines , the user can find that the semicon ductor market was not good at the end of  1996 but that it began turning around in 1997  . The lower frame shows an article corresponding to the headline in the upper frame  . When the user clicks the 96/10/21 headline , the complete article is displayed in the lower frame  . 
5 . 1 . 2 Mult i - dimensional Classification Figures 8 and 9 show multidimensional classification results based on the headline  , "NEC ? A ~?? B~?HB~-g "4' ~ Y --~? ) ~] ~ J ~$ ~ ~ . - ~( NEC , A Co . , and B Co . are developing encoded data recov- .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . Hiilillllill li IIIII1[11iiii111 I : ~"=================== ~ I Figure 8: Multidimensional classification example ( 2 )   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . IIIIHflfl IIIIIIII ) [ i1'~?~i[96/0?/1T]D$~:I~i . ~ . ~g~'~:l'C~x~'>Y , -7-~--~ ; ~ ~ Figure 9: Multidimensional classification example ( 3 ) ery techniques . ) . " Who " elements are " NEC , A Co . , and B Co . " listed on the vertical axis which is the fundamentalx is in the upper frame of Figure  8  . " What " elements are "~-~? . ( encode ) , ~*-( data ) , [] ~( recovery ) , and ~( technique ) . " h " predicate " element is a " r,~(develop) . " What " and " predicate " elements are both arranged on the horizontal axis in the upper frame of Figure  8  . When clicking a cell for " who ": NEC and " what ": ~   ( encode )  , users can see the headlines of articles containing the above two keywords in the lower frame of Figure  8  . 
When clicking on the " What " cell in the upper ! ' ii  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ? ~" iIUI "' U ~ ~ i ~ ~, ~, .   .   .   .   .   . 
~ . . .  :~ . :~ ~::: :::::~:::~!::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: : : : ~ : : ~ : ~ : ~ : ~ m~t ~  . i l . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . U . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . E !:::: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . : : : : : " Ui ! ~ i . . . . . . . ; Il ~,: 11~1 ~ ~ .   .   .   .   .   .  ~ : - :  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . :- i-2---~7--~ .   .   .   .   .   .  :  .   .   .   .   .   . i - ~ .   .   .   .   .   . 
[: : ~ IFT """ T:: . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ~" - "? " " ' : - : ' -7 : : ' : :~  . . . . . . . . . . . . : " ~  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . ~'"~:7'' U .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  : ,~" " ' " "  .   .   .   . 
L :: ~:: ;  :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: : ~ : " ::: '::::::~:::: :::::::::::::::::  ~1~1~""~  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  -  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  ~  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  :  . . . . . . . . . . . . '  , ' T ' " ~" : :--~ Y '' mi " " ~" " Figure 10: Overall classification for 97/4 news Figure 11: Overall subclassification for 97/4 news frame of Figure 8  , the user can switch the fundamental axis from " who " to " what "  ( Figure 9 , upper frame ) . By switching the fundamental x is , the user can easily see classification from different viewpoints  . On clicking the cell for " what " : ~ P . ( encode ) and " predicate ": ~2~( develop) , the user finds eighthead lines ( Figure 9 , lower frame ) . The user can then see different company activitie such as the  97/04/07 headline ; " C~i ~ of zff'-~'~ . ~ ~ f ~ g@~:~ ( CCompany has developed at a transmission encoding technology using a satellite  )  , " shown in the lower frame of Figure 9 . 
In this way , a user can classify article headlines by switching  5WlH viewpoints . 
5.1.3 Overall Classification
Overall classification is condensed by using an organization and a technical thesaurus  . The organization thesaurus has three layers and 2800 items , and the technical thesaurus has two layers and 1000 technical terms . " Who " and " what " elements are respectively represented by the upper classes of the organization thesaurus and the technical thesaurus  . The upper classes are vertical and horizontal elements in the multidimensional classification matrix  . " Predicate " elements are categorized by several frequent predicates based on the user's priorities  . 
Figure 10 shows the results of overall classification for 250 articles disseminated in April ,  1997 . 
Here , " who " elements on the vertical axis are represented by industry categories instead of company names  , and " what " elements on the horizontal axis are represented by technical fields instead of technical terms  . On clicking the second cell from the top of the " who " elements  , ~] ~ Jt  ~ ( electrical and mechanical ) in Figure 10 , the user can view subcategorized classification on electrical and mechanical industries as indicated in Figure  11  . Here ,  ~ :  ( electrical and mechanical ) is expanded to the subcategories ; ~ J ~ ( general electric ) ~_ ~ ( power electric) , ~ I ~ ( home electric) ,  ~ . ~ j ~( communication ), and so on . 
6 Current Status
The information access platform was exploited during the MIIDAS  ( Multiple Indexed Information Dis-semination and Acquisition Service  ) project which NEC used internally ( Okumura et al ,  1997) . The DEC Alpha workstation ( 300 MHz ) is a server machine providing 5WlH classification and navigation functions for 50 users through WWW browsers . 
User interaction occurs through CGI and JAVA programs  . 
After a six-month trial by 50 users , four areas for improvement become vident . 
1 )   5WlH extraction : 5WlH extraction precision was approximately 82% for newspaper headlines . The extraction algorithm should be improved so that it can deal with embedded sentences and compound sentences  . 
Also , dictionaries should be improved in order to be able to deal with different domain such as patent data and academic papers  . 
2 ) Episodic retrieval : The interface should be improved so that the user can switch retrieval from episodic to normal retrieval in order to compare retrieval data  . 
Episodic retrieval is based on the temporal sorting of a set of related events  . At present , geographic arrangement is expected to become a branch function for episodic retrieval  . It is possible to arrang each event on a map by using  5WlH index data . This would enable users to trace moving events uchas the onset of a typhoon or the escape of a criminal  . 
3 ) Multidimensional classification : Some users need to edit the matrix for themselves on the screen  . 

Moreover , it is necessary to insert new keywords and delete unnecessary keywords  . 
7 Related Work
SOM ( Self-Organization Map ) is an effective automatic classification method for any data represented by vectors  ( Kohonen ,  1990) . However , the meaning of each cluster is difficult to understand intuitively  . 
The clusters have no logical meaning because they depend on a keyword set based on the frequency that keywords occur  . 
Scatter/Gather is clustering information based on user interaction  ( Hearst and Pederson , 1995; Hearst et al ,  1995) . Initial cluster sets are based on keyword frequencies  . 
GALOIS/ULYSSES is a lattice-based classification system and the user can browse information on the lattice produced by the existence of keywords  ( Carpineto and Romano ,  1995) . 
5WlH classification and navigation is unique in that it is based on keyword functions  , not on the existence of keywords . 
Lifestream manages email by focusing on temporal viewpoints  ( Freeman and Fertig ,  1995) . In this sense , this idea is similar to our episodic retrieval though the purpose and target are different  . 
Mine et al and Hyodo and Iked are ported on the effectiveness of using dependency relations between keywords for retrieval  ( Mine et al , 1997; Hyodo and
Ikeda , 1994).
As the 5WlH index is more informative than simple word dependency  , it is possible to create more functions . More informative indexing such as semantic indexing and conceptual indexing can theoretically provide more sophisticated classification  . 
However , this indexing is not always successful for practical use because of semantic analysis difficulties  . Consequently 5WlH is the most appropriate indexing method from the practical viewpoint  . 
8 Conclusion
This paper proposed a method by which 5Wl H(who , when , where , what , why , how , and predicate ) information is used to classify and navigate Japanese-language txts  . 5 WlH information , extracted from text data , provides an access platform with three functions : episodic retrieval  , multidimensional classification , and overall classification . 
In a six-month trial , the platform was used by 50 people to access 6400 newspaper articles . 
The three functions proved to be effective for office documentation work and the extraction precision was approximately  82%  . 
We intend to make a more quantitative evaluation by surveying more users about the functions  . We also plan to improve the 5W1H extraction algorithm , dictionaries and the user interface . 

We would like to thank Dr . Satoshi Goto and Dr.
Takao Watanabe for their encouragement and continued supporthroughout this work  . 
We also appreciate the contribution of Mr.
Kenji Satoh , Mr . Takayoshi Ochiai , Mr . Satoshi Shimokawara , nd Mr . Masahito Abeto this work . 

C . Carpineto and G . Romano .  1995 . A system for conceptual structuring and hybrid navigation of text database  . In AAAI Fall Symposium on AI Application in Knowledge Navigation and Retrieval  , pages 2025 . 
E . Freeman and S . Fertig .  1995 . Lifestreams : Organizing your electric life . In AAAI Fall Symposium on AI Application in Knowledge Navigation and Retrieval  , pages 38-44 . 
M . A . Hearst and J . O . Pederson .  1995 . Revealing collection structure through information access interface  . 
In Proceedings of IJCAI'95, pages 2047-2048.
M . A . Hearst , D . R . Karger , and J . O . Pederson .  1995 . 
Scatter/gather as a tool for navigation of retrieval results  . In AAAI Fall Symposium on AI Application in Knowledge Navigation and Retrieval  , pages 65-71 . 
Y . Hyodo and T . Ikeda .  1994 . Text retrieval system used on structure matching . The Transactions of The Institute of Electronics , Information and Communication
Engineers , J77-D-II(5):1028-1030.
T . Kohonen .  1990 . The self-organizing map . In Proceedings of IEEE , volume 78 , pages 1059-1063 . 
M . Lesk , D . Cutting , J . Pedersen , T . Noreanlt , and M . Koll .  1997 . Real life information retrieval : commercial search engines  . In Proceedings of SIGIR'97, page 333, July . 
T . Mine , K . Aso , and M . Amamiya .  1997 . Japanese document retrieval system on www using dependency relations between words  . In Proceedings of PA-
CLING '97, pages 290-215, September.
K . Muraki , S . Doi , and S . Ando .  1993 . Description of the veniex system as used for muc -r  . In Proceedings of MUCS , pages 147-159, August . 
A . Okumura , T . Ikeda , and K . Muraki .  1997 . Selective dissemination finformation based on a multiple-ontology  . In Proceedings of IJCAI'97 Ontology Workshop , pages 138-145 , August . 
H . Sakamoto .  1997 . Natural language processing technology for information  . In JEIDANLP Workshop,

K . Satoh and K . Muraki .  1993 . Penstation for idea processing . In Proceedings of NLPRS'93, pages 153-158,


