A Framework for Customizable Generation of Hypertext 

Benoit Lavoie and Owen Rambow
CoGenTex , Inc.
840 Hanshaw Road , Ithaca , NY 14850, USA
benoit , owen ~ cogentex , com
Abstract
In this paper , we present a framework , PRE-SENTOR , for the development and customization of hypertext presentation generators  . PRE-SENTOR offers intuitive and powerful declarative language specifying the presentation at different levels : macroplanning  , microplanning , realization , and formatting . PRESENTOR is implemented and is portable cross platform and cross-domain  . It has been used with success in several application domains including weather forecasting  , object modeling , system description and requirements summarization . 
1 Introduction
Presenting information through text and hypertext has become a major area of research and development  . Complex systems must often deal with a rapidly growing amount of information  . 
In this context , there is a need for presentation techniques facilitating a rapid development and customization of the presentations according to particular standards or preferences  . Typically , the overall task of generating a presentation is decomposed into several subtasks including : macro planning or text planning  ( determining output content and structure )  , microplanning or sentence planning ( determining abstract target language resources to express content  , such as lexical items and syntactic constructions and aggregating the representations  )  , realization ( producing the text string ) and formatting ( determining the formatting marks to insert in the text string  )  . Developing an application to present the information for a given domain is often a time -consuming operation requiring the implementation from scratch of domain communication knowledge  ( Kittredge et al ,  1991 ) required for the different generation subtasks . In this technical note and demo we present a new presentation framework  , PRE-SENTOR , whose main purpose is to facilitate the development of presentation applications  . PRE-SENTOR has been used with success in different domains including object model description  ( Lavoie et al ,  1997) , weather forecasting ( Kittredge and Lavoie ,  1998 ) and system requirements summarization ( Ehrhart et al , 1998; Barzilay et al ,  1998) . PRESENTOR has the following characteristics , which we believe are unique in this combination : ? PRESENTOR modules are implemented in Java and C  ++  . It is therefore asily portable cross platform . 
? PRESENTOR modules use declarative knowledge interpreted at runtime which can be customized by non-programmers without changing the modules  . 
? PRESENTOR uses rich presentation plans ( or exemplars )   ( Rambow et al ,  1998 ) which can be used to specify the presentation at different levels of abstraction  ( rhetorical , conceptual , syntactic , and surface form ) and which can be used for deep or shallow generation  . 
In Section 2 , we describe the overall architecture of PRESENTOR  . In Section 3 to Section 6 , we present he different specifications used to define domain communication knowledge and linguistic knowledge  . Finally , in Section 7 , we describe the outlook for PRESENTOR . 
2 PRESENTOR Architecture
The architecture of PRESENTOR illustrated in Figure  1 consists of a core generator with several associated knowledge bases  . The core generator has a pipeline architecture which is similar to many existing systems  ( Reiter ,  1994 ) : an incoming request is received by the generator interface triggering sequentially the macroplanning  , microplanning , realization and fi-
Core Generator
Domain Data , Manager
Macro-Planner ~- i
Y\[Micro-Planner ~. ~1
I_Realizer ( Real pro)i " i
Configurable Knowledge

Figure 1: Architecture of PRESENTORnally the formatting of a presentation which is then returned by the system  . This pipeline architecture minimizes the interdependencies b-tween the different modules facilitating the upgrade of each module with minimal impact on the overall system  . It has been proposed that a pipeline architecture is not an adequate model for NLG  ( Rubin off ,  1992) . However , we are not aware of any example from practical applications that could not be implemented with this architecture  . One of the innovations of PRE-SENTOR is in the use of a common presentation structure which facilitates the integration of the processing by the different modules  . The macro-planner ceates a structure and the other components add to it  . 
All modules use declarative knowledge bases distinguished from the generator engine  . This facilitates the reuse of the framework for new application domains with minimal impact on the modules composing the generator  . As a result , PRESENTOR can allow non-programmers to develop their own generator applications  . 
Specifically , PRESENTOR uses the following types of knowledge bases : ? Environment variables : an open list of variables with corresponding values used to specify the configuration  . 
? Exemplars : a library of schema-like structures ( McKeown , 1985; Rambow and Korelsky ,  1992 ) specifying the presentation to be generated at different levels of abstraction  ( rhetorical , conceptual , syntactic , surface form ) . 
? Rhetorical dictionary : a knowledge base indicating how to realize rhetorical relations linguistically  . 
? Conceptual dictionary : a knowledge base used to map language-independent conceptual structures to language-specific syntactic structures  . 
? Linguistic grammar: , transformation rules specifying the transformation fsyntactic structures into surface word forms and punctuation marks  . 
? Lexicon : a knowledge base containing the syntactic and morphological ttributes of lexemes  . 
? Format style : formatting specifications associated with different elements of the presentation  ( not yet implemented )  . 
As an example , let us consider a simple case illustrated in Figure  2 taken from a design summarization domain . Hyperlinks integrated in the presentation allow the user to obtain additional generated presentations  . 
Data Base
Pcoject ProjAF-2
System DBS ys
Si ~ eRa ~ stein
Host Gauss
SoftFDBH gr
Si~e Syngapour
Host Jakarta
SoftFDBCIt
Description ef FDB Mgr
FDBM gr is a software component which is deployed on host Gauss  . 
FDBM~r~ns as is a server and a daemon and is written in C  ( ANSI ) and JAVA . 
.  .   .   .   .   . Figure 2i Presentation Sample The next sections present he differentypes of knowledge used by PRESENTOR to define and construct the presentation of Figure  2  . 
3 Exemplar Library
An exemplar ( Rambow et al , 1998; White and Caldwell , 1998) is a type of schema ( McKeown , 1985; Rambow and Korelsky , 1992) whose purpose is to determine , for a given presentation request , the general specification of the presentation regarding its macro structure  , its content and its format . One main distinction between the exemplars of PRESENTOR and ordinary schemas is that they integrate conceptual  , syntactic and surface form specifications of the content  , and can be used for both deep and shallow generation  , and combining both generality and simplicity . An exemplar can contain dif-optional except for the name of the exemplar : ? Name : Specification of the name of the exemplar  . 
? Parameters : Specification of the arguments passed in parameters when the exemplar is called  . 
? Conditions of evaluation : Specification of the conditions under which the exemplar can be evaluated  . 
? Data : Specification of domain data instantiated at runtime  . 
? Constituency : Specification of the presentation constituency by references to other exemplars  . 
? Rhetorical dependencies : Specification of the rhetorical relations between constituents  . \] ? Features specification : Open list of features  ( names and values ) associated with an element of presentation . These features can be used in other knowledge bases such as grammar  , lexicon , etc . 
? Formatting specification : Specification of HTML tags associated with the presentation structure constructed from the exemplar  . 
? Conceptual content specification : Specification of content at the conceptual level  . 
? Syntactic content specification : Specification of content at the lexicosyntactic level  . 
? Surface form content specification : Specification of the content  ( any level of granularity ) at the surface level . 
? Documentation : Documentation of the exemplar for maintenance purposes  . 
Once defined , exemplars can be clustered into reusable libraries  . 
Figure 3 illustrates an exemplar , soft-description , to generate the textual description of Figure 2 , Here , the description for a given object $ SOFT , referring to a piece of software , is decomposed into seven constituent so introduce a title  , two paragraph breaks , and some specifications for the software type , its host(s ) , its usage ( s ) and its implementation lan-\]guage ( s )  . In this specification , all the constituents are evaluated . The result of this evaluation creates even presentation segments added as constituents  ( daughters ) to the current growthpoint in the presentation structure being generated  . Referential identifiers ( ref1, ref2, . . . , ref4 ) assigned to some constituents are also being used to specify a rhetorical relation of elaboration and to specify syntactic on-junction  . 
Exemplar :\[
Name : soft-description
Param:\[$SOFT\]
Const:\[AND\[title ( $ SOFT ) paragraph-break (   ) object-type ( SSOFT ) : refls of t-host ( $ SOFT ) : ref2 paragraph-break (   ) soft-usage ( $ SOFT ) : ref3soft-language ( $ SOFT ) : ref4\]
Rhet :\[ ( refl R-ELABORATION ref2 )   ( ref3CONJUNCTION ref4 )  \]
Desc:\[Describe the software \]
Figure 3: Exemplar for Software Description Figure 4 illustrates an exemplar specifying the conceptual specification of an object type  . 
The notational convention used in this paper is to represent variables with labels preceded by a $ sign  , the concepts are uppercase English labels preceded by a  #sign  , and conceptual relations are lower case English labels preceded by a  #sign  . In Figure 4 the conceptual content specification is used to built a conceptual tree structure indicating the state concept  #HAS-TYPE has as an object $ OBJECT which is of type $ TYPE  . This variable is initialized by a call to the function ikrs  . get Data ( $ OBJECT  #type ) defined for the application domain . 
Exemplar :\[
Name : object-type
Param : \[$ OBJECT\]
Var:\[STYPE = ikrs . getData($OBJECT#type)\]
Concept : \[ #HAS-TYPE (  #object $ OBJECT  #type $ TYPE )  \]
Desc:\[Describe the object type\]
Figure 4: Exemplar for Object Type 4 Conceptual Dictionary PRESENTOR uses a conceptual dictionary for the mapping of conceptual domain-specific rep-representations  . This mapping ( transition ) has the advantage that the modules processing conceptual representations can be unabashedly domain-specific  , which is necessary in applications , since a broadcoverage implementation fa domain -independent theory of conceptual representations and their mapping to linguistic representations i still far from being realistic  . 
Linguistic representations found in the conceptual dictionary are deep-syntactic structures  ( DSyntSs ) which are conform to those that REAL PRO ( Lavoie and Rambow ,  1997) , PRE-SENTOR'S sentence realizer , takes as input . The main characteristics of a deep-syntactic structure  , inspired in this form by I . Mel'~uk's Meaning-Text Theory ( Mel'~uk ,  1988) , are the following : ? The DSyntS is an unordered ependency tree with labeled nodes and labeled arcs  . 
? The DSyntS is lexicalized , meaning that the nodes are labeled with lexemes ( uninflected words ) from the target language . 
? The DSyntS is a syntactic representation , meaning that the arcs of the tree are labeled with syntactic relation such as " subject "  ( represented in DSyntSs as I )  , rather than conceptual or semantic relation such as " agent "  . 
? The DSyntS is a deep syntactic representation , meaning that only meaning-bearing lexemes are represented  , and not function words . 
Conceptual representations ( ConcSs ) used by PRESENTOR are inspired by the characteristics of the DSyntSs in the sense that both types of representations are unordered tree structures with labelled arcs specifying the roles  ( conceptual or syntactic ) of each node . However , in a Conc S , concepts are used instead of lexemes , and conceptual relations are used instead of relations  . The similairies of the representions for the ConcSs and DSyntSs facilitate their mapping and the sharing of the functions that process them  . 
Figure 5 illustrates a simple case of lexicalization for the state concept  #HAS-TYPE introduced in the exemplar defined in Figure  4  . If the goal is a sentence , BE1 is used with $ OBJECT as its first ( I ) syntactic actant and $ TYPE as its second ( II )  . If the goal is a noun phrase , a complex noun phrase is used ( e . g . , software component FDBM gr) . The lexicalization can be controlled by the user by modifying the appropriate lexical entries  . 
Lexicalization-rule :\[
Concept :  #HAS-TYPE
Cases :\[ Case :\[ #HAS-TYPE (  #object $ OBJ#type $ TYPE ) \]<-->\[BE1 ( I$OBJ
II $ T~E)\]\[goal:S\]\[\]
Case :\[ #HAS-TYPE (  #object $0 BJ  #type  #TYPE ) \]<-->\[#TYPE ( APPEND$0BJECT ) \]\]\[ goal:NP\]\[\]
Figure 5: Conceptual Dictionary Entry 5 Rhetorical Dictionary PRESENTOR uses a rhetorical dictionary to indicate how to express the rhetorical relations connecting clauses using syntax and/or lexical means  ( cue words )  . Figure 6 shows a rule used to combine clauses linked by an elaboration relationship  . This rule combines clauses FDBM gr is a software component and FDB Mgr is deployed on host Gauss into FDBM gr is a software component which is deployed on host Gauss  . 
Rhetorical-rule :\[
Relation : R-ELABORATION
Cases :\[
Case :\[ R-ELABORATION ( nucleus $ V ( I$XII$Y ) satellite $ Z ( I $ l ) \]<-->\[$ V ( ISXIISY ( ATTRSZ )   )  \] \]
Figure 6: Rhetorical Dictionary Entry 6 Lexicon and Linguistic Grammar The lexicon defines different linguistic characteristics of lexeme such as their categories  , government patterns , morphology , etc . , and which are used for the realization process . The linguistic grammars of PRESENTOR are used to transform a deep-syntactic representation i to ation marks composing a sentence  . The format of the declarative lexicon and of the grammar rules is that of the REAL PRO realizer  , which we discussed in ( Lavoie and Rambow ,  1997) . We omit further discussion here . 
7 Status
PRESENTOR is currently implemented in Java and C ++  , and has been used with success in projects in different domains  . We intend to add a declarative specification of formatting style in the near future  . 
A serious limitation of the current implementation is the hct that the configurability of PRESENTOR at the microplanning level is restricted to the lexicalization and the linguistic realization of rhetorical relations  . Pronominal-ization rules remain hard coded heuristics in the microplanner but can be guided by features introduced in the presentation representations  . 
This is problematic since pronominalization is often domain specific and may require changing the heuristics when porting a system to a new domain  . 
CoGenTex has developed a complementary alternative to PRESENTOR  , EXEM PLARS ( White and Caldwell ,  1998 ) which gives a better programmatic ontrol to the processing of the representations that PRESENTOR does  . While EX-EMPLARS focuses on programmatic extensibility  , PRESENTOR fOCUS on declarative representation specification  . Both approaches are complementary and work is currently being done in order to integrate their features  . 

The work reported in this paper was partially funded by AFRL under contract  F30602-92-C-0015 and SBIR F30602-92-C-0124  , and by US-AFMC under contract F30602-96-C-0076 . We are thankful to R . Barzilay , T . Caldwell , J . De-Cristofaro , R . Kittredge , T . Korelsky , D . Mc-Cullough , and M . White for their comments and criticism made during the development of PRE- 


Barzilay , R . , Rainbow , O . , McCullough , D , Korel-sky , T . , and Lavoie , B .  (1998) . Design Expert : A Knowledge-Based Tool for Developing System-Wide Properties  , In Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , Ontario , Canada . 
Ehrhart , L . , Rainbow , O . , Webber F . , McEnerney , J . , and Korelsky , T .   ( 1998 ) Design Expert : Developing System-Wide Properties with Knowledge-Based Tools  . Lee Scott Ehrhart , Submitted . 
Kittredge , R . and Lavoie , B .  (1998) . Meteo Co-gent : A Knowledge-Based Tool For Generating Weather Forecast Texts  , In Proceedings of Amer-ican Meteorological Society AI Conference  ( AMS-98 )  , Phoenix , AZ . 
Kittredge , R . , Korelsky , T . and Rambow , R .  (1991) . 
On the Need for Domain Communication Kowl-edge , in Computational Intelligence , Vol 7 , No 4 . 
Lavoie , B . , Rainbow , O . , and Reiter , E .  (1997) . Customizable Descriptions of Object-Oriented Models  , In Proceedings of the Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  ( ANLP'97 )  , Washington , DC . 
Lavoie , B . and Rainbow , O .  (1997) . Real Pro-A Fast , Portable Sentence Realizer , In Proceedings of the Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing ( ANLP'97), Washington , DC.
Mann , W . and Thompson , S .  (1987) . Rhetorical Structure Theory : A Theory of Text Organization  , 
ISI technical report RS-87-190.
McKeown , K . (1985). Text Generation , Cambridge
University Press.
Mel'~uk , I . A .  (1988) . Dependency Syntax : Theory and Practice . State University of New York Press,
New York.
Rambow , O . , Caldwell , D . E . , Lavoie , B . , McCullough , D . , and White , M .  (1998) . Text Planning : Communicative Intentions and the Conventional-ity of Linguistic Communication  . Ip reparation . 
Rainbow , O . and Korelsky , T .  (1992) . Applied Text Generation , In Third Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , pages 40-47 , Trento , 

Reiter , E .  (1994) . Hasa Consensus NL Generation Architecture Appeared  , and is it Psycholinguisti-tally Plausible ? In Proceedings of the  7th International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , pages 163-170 , Maine . 
Rubinoff , R .  (1992) . Integrating Text Planning and Linguistic Choice by Annotating Linguistic Structures  , In Aspects of Automated Natural Language Generation  , pages 45-56 , Trento , Italy . 
White , M . and Caldwell , D . E .  (1998) . EXEM-PLARS : A Practical Exensible Framework for Real-Time Text Generation  , In Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Natural Language
Generation , Ontario , Canada.

