Anchoring Floating Quantifiers
in Japanese-to-English Machine Translation
Francis Bond , tDaniela Kurz * and Satoshi Shira it
tNTT Communication Science Laboratories
24 Hikaridai , Seikacho , Sorakugun , Kyoto , Japan , 619-0237 bond , shirai ? cslab , kecl . nit . co . jp Department of Computational Linguistics , University of the Saarland Postfach 1150 , D-66041 Saarbrficken , Germanykurz?coli , uni-sb , de
Abstract
In this paper we present an algorithm to anchor floating quantifiers in Japanese  , a language in which quantificational nouns and numeral-classifier combinations can appear separated from the noun phrase they quantify  . The algorithm differentiates degree and event modifiers from nouns that quantify noun phrases  . It then finds a suitable anchor for such floating quantifiers  . To do this , the algorithm considers the part of speech of the quantifier and the target  , the semantic relation between them , the case marker of the antecedent and the meaning of the verb that governs the two constituents  . The algorithm has been implemented and tested in a rule-based Japanese-to-English machine translation system  , with an accuracy of 76% and a recall of 97% . 
1 Introduction
One interesting phenomenoni Japanese is the fact that quantifiers can appear in two main positions  , as premodifier in a noun phrase (1) , or ' floating ' as adjuncts to the verb phrase , typically in preverbal position (2) . 1, 2(1) watashi-wa 3-ko-nokgki-wo tabeta
I-TOP3-CL-ADN cake-ACC ate
I ate three cakes ( 2 ) watashi-wa kgki-wo 3-kotabeta
I-TOP cake-ACC3-CLate
I ate three cakes
Quantifier ' float ' of numeral-classifier combinations is widely discussed in the linguistic  liter-1Quantifiers are shown in bold , the noun phrases they quantify are underlined . 
2 This phenomenon exists in other languages , such as Korean . We will , however , restrict our discussion to
Japanese in this paper.
ature .   3 Much of the discussion focuses on identifying the conditions under which a quantifier can appear in the adjunct position  . The explanations range from configurational ( Inoue , 1983; Miyagawa , 1989) to discourse based ( Downing , 1996; Alam ,  1997) , we shall discuss these further below . There has been almost no discussion of other floating quantifiers  , such as quantificational nouns . 
We call the process of identifying the noun phrase being quantified by a floating quantifier ' anchoring ' the quantifier  . The necessity of anchoring floating quantifiers for many natural language processing tasks is widely recognized  ( Asahioka et al , 1990; Bond et al ,  1996) , and is important not only for machine translation but for the interpretation of Japanese in general  . However , although there are several NLP systems that incorporate some solution to the problem of floating quantifiers  , to the best of our knowledge , no algorithm for anchoring floating quantifiers has been given  . We propose such an algorithm in this paper . The algorithm uses information about case -marking  , sentence structure , part-of-speech , noun and verb meaning . The algorithm has been implemented and tested within the Japanese-to-English machine translation system ALT-J/E  ( Ikehara et al ,  1991) . 
The next section describes the phenomenon of quantifier float in more detail  . We then propose our algorithm to identify and anchor floating quantifiers in Section  3  . The results of implementing the algorithm in ALT -J/E are  dis-3The name'float'comes from early transformational accounts  , where the quantifier was said to ' float ' out of the noun phrase  . Although this analysis has largely been abandoned  , and we disagree with it , we shall continue with accepted practice and call a quantifier in the adjunct position a floating quantifier  . 
1 52 cussed in Section 4 and some remaining problems identified . The conclusion summarises the implementation f the algorithm and highlights some of its strengths  . 
2 Quantifier float in Japanese
First we will give a definition of quantifiers . Semantically , quantifiers are elements that serve to quantify , or enumerate , some target . The target can be an entity , in which case the number of objects is quantified  , or an action , in which case the number of events ( i . e . iterations of the action ) are quantified . The quantification can be by a cardinal number , or by a more vague expression , like several or many . 
In Japanese , quantifiers ( Q ) axemainly realised in two ways : numeral -classifier combinations  ( XC ) and quantificational nouns ( N )  . 
Note that these nouns are often treated as adverbs  , as they typically function as adjuncts that modify verbs  , a function prototypically carried out by adverbs . They can however head noun phrases , and take some case-markers , owe classify them as nouns . 
Numeral classifiers form a closed class , although a large one . Japanese and Korean both have two or three hundred numeral classifiers  ( not counting units )  , although typically individual speakers use far less  , between 30 and 80 ( Downing ,  1995 ,  346) . 
Syntactically , numeral classifiers are a subclass of nouns . The main property distinguishing them from prototypical nouns is that they cannot stand alone  . Typically they postfix to numerals , forming a quantifier phrase , although they can also combine with the quantificational prefixs ~" some " or the interrogative nani " what ":  ( 3 ) 2-hiki " 2 animals " ( Numeral )   ( 4 ) s ~- hiki " some animals " ( Quantifier )   ( 5 ) nan-biki " how many animals " ( Interrogative ) Semantically , classifiers both classify and quantify the referent of the noun phrase they collocate with  . 
Quantificational nouns , such as takusan " much / many " , subete " all " and ichibu " some " , only quantify their targets , there is no classification involved . 
Numeral classifier combinations appear in seven major patterns of use  ( following Asahioka et al ( 1990 ) ) as shown below ( T refers to the quantified target noun phrase , m is a case marker ):
Type FormXCN prenominal Q-noT-m++appositive TQ-m+-floating T-mQ++ 
QT-mp artitive T-noQ-m++attributive QT-m+- anaphoric T-m ?- predicative T-waQ-da ? - Table  1: Types of quantifier constructions Noun quantifiers cannot appear in the appositive  , attributive , anaphoric and predicative complement patterns . 
In the prenominal construction the relation between the target noun phrase and quantifier is explicit  . For numeral-classifier combinations the quantification can be of the object denoted by the noun phrase itself as in  ( 6 )  ; or of a subpart of it as in ( 7 )   ( see Bond and Paik ( 1997 ) for a fuller discussion )  . For nouns , only the object denoted by the noun itself can be quantified  . 
(6 ) 3-ts ~- notegami3-CL-ADN letter 3 letters ( 7 )   3-rnai-no tegami 3-CL-ADN letter a 3 page letter In the partitive construction the quantifier restricts a subset of a known amount : e  . g . , tegami-no3-ts ~" three of the letters " . This is a very different construal to the prenominal construction  . Only rational quantificational nouns can appear in the partitive construction  . 
The floating construction , on the other hand , has the same quantificational meaning as the prenominal  . Two studies indicate that there are pragmatic differences  ( Downing , 1996; Kim ,  1995) . Pre-nominal constructions typically are used to introduce important referents  , with non-existential predicates , while floating constructions typically introduce new number information  . In addition floating constructions are used more common in spoken text  . 
We will restric the following discussion to the difference between the prenominalnd floating uses  . 
2 . 1 Rest r i c t ions on quant i f ie r f loat There have been many attempts to describe the situations under which the floating construction is possible  , almost all of which only consider numeral -classifier constructions  . 
The earliest generative approaches suggested that the target in the floating construction must be either subject or object  . Inoue (1983) pointed out that quasi-objects , noun phrases marked with the accusative case marker but failing other tests for object hood  , could also be targets . 
Miyagawa ( 1989 ) gives a comprehensive configurational explanation  , where the target and quantifier must mutually c -command each other  ( that is , neither the target nor the quantifier dominates the other  , and the first branching node that dominates either one  , dominates the other ) . The restriction to nominative and accusative targets is explained by proposing a difference in structure  . Verb argument sub-categorized for in the lexicon are noun phrases  , where the case marker is a clitic and thus can be c-commanded  , whereas adjuncts are headed by their markers , to form postpositional phrases which are thus not available as targets  . 
The c-command relation is applied to both the noun phrases themselves and traces  . Quan-tifiers can be scrambled ( moved from their base position after their target  ) leaving a trace if the target is an affected Theme NP  , and the target and quantifier are governed by the verb that assigns this thematic role  . Thus quantifiers associated with affected themes can move within the sentence  . Affected themes are things that axe " changed , created , converted , extinguished , consumed , destroyed org otten-rid of " . 
Miyagawa (1989 ,  57 ) proposes a syntactic test for affectiveness : affected themes can occure in the intransitive resultative construction-te-aru  . 
Alam ( 1997 ) looks at the problem from a different angle , and proposes that only quantifiers which are interpreted " distributively or as a quantified event " can float  , as they take wide scope beyond the NP . A quantified noun phrase will also quantify the event if the noun phrase measures-out the event  , where " direct internal arguments undergoing change in the event described by the verb measure out the event " a very similar description to that of affected theme  . However , Jackendoff ( 1996 ) has shown that a wide variety of arguments can measure out processes  , not just subjects and objects , but also the complements of prepositional phrases . 
Which case-roles measure out the process can be pragmatically determined as well as lexically stipulated  , so it is not a simple matter to determine which arguments are relevent  . 
The excellent distributional nalys is of Downing ( 1996 ) shows that actual cases of floating tend to be absolutive  , that is quantifiers largely float from intransitive subjects  ( 67% ) or direct objects of transitive verbs ( 24% ) rather than from transitive subjects ( 4% ) or indirect objects ( 1% )  . 
On the question of why quantifiers appear outside of the noun phrases they quantify  , there have been two explanations : Discourse new information floats to the preverb focus position  ( Downing , 1996; Kim ,  1995) , quantifiers float from noun phrases that ' measure out ' an event  ( Alam ,  1997) . 
We speculate that there may be a performance based reason  . Hawkins ( 1994 ) has shown that many phenomena claimed to be discourse related are in fact largely due to performance  . 
However we have not yet compiled sufficient empirical evidence to show this conclusively  . 
3 An a lgor i thm to ident i fy and anchor f loa t ing quantifiers The proposed algorithm is outlined in Figure  1  . 
In our implementation it is appplied to each of one or more candidate outputs of a Japanese dependency parser as part of the semantic ranking  . 
3 . 1 Ident i fy potent ia l f loat ing quant i f iers The first step is to identify potential floating quantifiers  . 
Every adjunct case element headed by a noun is checked  . All numeral classifier combinations are potential candidates  . 
An adjunct must must meet two conditions to be considered a floating quantificational nouns  , one semantic and one syntactic . The semantic criterion is that one of the noun's senses must be 
Identify potential floating quan ~ ifiers ( QP ) \[ Numeral-classifier or Quantificational Noun \]
Identify potential anchors ( NP ) \[ nominative or accusative \]
Discard bad combinations\[semanticanomalies , degree modifiers , event modifiers \]
Rank remaining combinations
Prefer accusative
Prefer anchor on the left
Prefer closest
Anchor the best candidate pair ( s)
Figure 1: Algorithm to anchor floating quanti-tiers subsumed by quanta  , few/some , all-part . 
The syntactic criterion is that the part of speech subcategory must be one of degree or quantifie radverbial  . 4 We use the GoiTaikei ( Ikehara et al ,  1997 ) to test for the senses and Miyazaki et al ( 1995 ) for the syntactic lassifi-cation . 
3.2 Identify potential anchors
All noun phrases that matched a case-slot marked with-ga  ( nominative ) or - o ( accusative ) are accepted as potential anchors . This is the traditional criterion given for potential anchors  . 
Note even if the surface marker is different , for example when the case marker is over written by a focus-marker such as-wa " topic "  , the ' canonical ' case marker will be found by our parser  . 
Noun phrases marked with-hi(dative ) , have been shown to be permissible candidates , but we do not allow them . Such sentences are , however , rare outside linguistics papers . We found no such candidates in the sentences we examined  , and Downing (1996 , 239) found only one inninety six examples . When we tried allowing dative noun phrases , it significantly reduced the performance of our algorithm : every dative noun phrase selected was wrong  . If we could determine which noun phrases measure -out the action  , then they should also be considered as 4This part of speech category actually includes both true adverbs and adverb-like nouns  . 
candidates , but we have no way to identify them at present . 
3.3 Discardbad combinations
Some combinations of anchor and quantifier can be ruled out  . We have identified three cases : semantically anomalous cases  ; sentences where the quantifier modifies the verb as a degree modifier  ; and sentences where the quantifier modifies the verb as a frequency modifier  . 
3.3.1 Semantically anomalous cases
Singular noun phrases In Japanese , pronouns and names are typically marked with a collectiviser  ( such as-tachi ) if there are multiple referents ( see e . g . Martin (1988, 143-154)) . 
A pronoun or name not so marked character is -tically has a singular interpretation  . For names this can be overridden by a numeral -classifier combination  ( 8 )  , although it is rare , but not by an quantificational noun (9) . 
(8) Matsuo-san-ga 3-nnshabetta
Matsuo-HON-NOM 3-CLs poke 3 Matsuosspoke ( 9 ) Matsuo-san-gatakusanshabetta
Matsuo-HON-NOM many spoke
Matsuospoke a lot
In all the texts we examined , we found no examples of names modified by floating numeral-classifier combinations  . We therefore block all pronouns and names not modified by a collec-tiviser from serving as anchors to floating quantifiers  . 
In Japanese , there is not a clear division between pronouns and common nouns  , particularly kin-term such as oj is an " grandfather/oldman "  . Pronouns can be modified in the same way as common nouns  , and kin-terms are often used to refer to nonk in . Pronouns modified by quantifiers need to be translated by more general terms as in  ( 10 )  . 
(10 ) kanojo-tachi-ga 3-nin kitashe-COL-NOM 3-CL came ? 3 she came
The 3 girlscame
Classifier semantic restrictions For numeral classifiers  , the selectional restrictions of the classifier can be used to disallow certain only be used to modify event-nouns such as shokuji " meal " or fish in " earthquake "  . However , the semantics are very complicated , and there is a great deal of variation , as a classifier can select not just for the object denoted by its target but also a subpart of it  . In addition , classifiers can be used to select meanings figuratively  , coercing a new interpretation of their head . Bond and Paik ( 1997 ) suggest a way of dealing with this in the generative lxical framework of Pustejovsky  ( 1995 ) but it requires more information about the conceptual structure of noun phrases than is currently available  . 
For the time being , we use a simple table of forbidden combinations . For example point o " point " will not be used to quantify nouns denoting agent  , place or abstract noun . 
3.3.2 Degree modification
Noun quantifiers can be used as degree modifiers as well as quantifying some referent  . If the predicate is used to state a property of the potential anchor  , then a noun quantifier will char-acteristically be a degree modifier  . 
We use the verbal semantic attributes given in the GoiTaikei  ( Ikehara et al , 1997) to test for this relationship . Anchoring will be blocked either if the potential anchor is nominative and the verbal semantic attribute is one of attribute transfer  , existence , attribute or result or if the anchor is accusative and the verbal semantic attribute is physical/attribute transfer  . 
Sentence ( ii ) shows this constraint in action : ( 11 ) ko domo-gasukosh is a muichild-NOM a little cold * A few children are cold 
The child is a little cold 3 . 3 . 3 Event modi f icat ion The final case we need to consider is where the noun quantifier can quantify the event or the affected theme of the event  , such as (12) . In Japanese , either reading is possible when the quantifier is in preverbal position  . Anchoring the quantifier is equivalent to choosing the theme reading  . 
(12 ) kare-wak~ki-wo takusantabeta he-TOP cake-NOM muchate 
Heatecake a lot
Heate a lot of cake ( event ) ( theme)
Examining our corpus showed the theme reading to be the default  . Of course , if the event is modified elsewhere , for example by a temporal modifier , then different readings are possible . The system in which our implementation was tested lacks a system for event quantification  , so we were not able to implement any constraint for this phenomenon  . We therefore implemented the theme reading as our default  . Note that , for stative verbs with permanent reading such as shiru " know "  , there is almost no difference between the two readings  ( 13 )  . 
(13) watashi-wa ratengo-wo sukoshi
I-TOP Latin-ACC a little shitte-iru know
Iknow a little Latin
Iknow Latina little 3 . 4 Rank and select candidates If there are more than two combinations  , the following heuristics are used to choose which one or ones to choose  . 
Prefer accusative : A combination with an accusative anchor gets two points : This is to allow for the absolutive bias  . 
Prefer left anchor : If the anchor is to the left of the quantifier score it with one point : Quantifiers tend to float to the right of their anchors  . 
Prefer closest : Subtract one for each intervening quantifier : Closer targets are better  . 
Finally select he highest scoring combination and eliminate any combinations that include the chosen quantifier and anchor  . If there is still a combination left ( e . g . there were two quantifiers and two targets ) then select it as well . 
These heuristics rule out crossing combinations in the rare instances of two quantifiers and two candidates  . 



Anchored Not anchored
Good Bad Good Bad
Nouns(N ): 12270
Num-Cls(XC):167111
Total : 289181
Table 2: Test results 3.5 Anchoring
Once the best combinations are chosen , the quantifier can be anchored to its target . We consider the best way to represent this would be by showing the semantic relation in a separate level from the syntax  , in a similar way to the architecture outlined by Jackendoff  ( 1997 )  . 
Our implementation is in a machine translation system and we simply rewrite the sentence so that the floating quantifier becomes an prenominal modifier of its target  , marked with the adnominal case marker-no . The resulting modifier is labeled as ' anchored ' , to allow special processing during the transfer phase  . 
4 Results and Discussion
The algorithm was tested on a 3700 sentence machine translation test set of Japanese sentences with English translations  , produced by a professional human translator . A description of the test set and its design is given in Ikehara et al  ( 1994 )  . 
Overall ,   56 possible combinations were found and 37 anchored in 3700 sentences : Table 2  . 
Of these , 9 were anchored that should not have been , and 1 was not anchored that should have been . The accuracy ( correctly an-chored/anchored ) was 76% ( 28/37 )  , and the recall ( correctly anchored/should be anchored ) was 97% ( 28/29 )  . 
The major source of errors was from parsing errors in the system as a whole  . All of the badly anchored numeral-classifiers combinations were caused by this  . In this case , the algorithm has not degraded the system performance  , it would have been a bad result anyway . 
There were three problems with the algorithm itself  . In one case an anaphoric quantifier was mistaken as a floating quantifier  , in another the verbal semantic attribute check for degree modification gave a bad result  . Finally there was one case where the default blocking for semantic anomalies blocked a good combination  . 
Translation of floating quantifiers Note that anchoring a floating quantifier is only the first step toward translating it  . Special handling is sometimes needed to translate the anchored quantifiers  . 
For example , Japanese has some universal pronouns that can standalone as full noun phrases  ( 14 ) or act as floating quantifiers ( 15 ) : e . g . , minna " everyone ", zen ' in " all members " . 
When they are anchored , the information about the denotation of the head carried by the pronoun is redundant  , and should not be translated . A special rule is required for this . 
(14) min na-gas or ou everyone-NOM gather
All members gather.
(15 ) membd-gamin nasor oum embers-NOM everyone gather
All the members gather.
* Everyone's members gather.
Further work
The proposed algorithm forms a solid base for extensions in various ways  . 
1 . Combine it with a fuller system of event semantics  . 
2 . Make the treatment of classifier-target semantics more detailed  , so that in built semantic restrictions can be used instead of a table of forbidden combinations  . 
3 . Use the results of the algorithm to help choose between candidate parses and integrate it with the resolution of zero pronouns  . 
4 . Test the algorithm on other languages , for example Korean . 
5 Conclusion
We have presented an algorithm to anchor floating quantifiers in Japanese  . The algorithm proceeds as follows . First identify potential floating quantifiers : either numeral classifier combinations or quantificational nouns  . Then identify potential anchors : all accusative or nominative noun phrases  . In appropriate combinations are deleted , either because of a semantic because the quantifier is interpreted as a degree or event modifier  . Finally , possible combinations are ranked , with the accusative candidate being the best choice  , then the closest and leftmost . The algorithm is robust and uses the full power of currently available detailed semantic dictionaries  . 

The authors thank Tim Baldwin , Yukie Kuribayashi , Kyonghee Paik and the members of the NTT Machine Translation Research Group for their discussion and comments on this paper and earlier versions  . The research was carried out while Daniela Kurz visited the NTT Communication Science Laboratories  . Francis Bond is currently also enrolled part time as a doctoral candidate at the University of Queens-land's Center for Language Teaching & Research  . 

Yukiko Sasaki Alam .  1997 . Numeral classifiers as adverbs of quantification . In Ho-Min Sohn and John Haig , editors , Japanese/Korean Linguistics , volume 6 , pages 381-397 . CSLI . 
Yoshimi Asahioka , Hideki Hirakawa , and Shinya Amano .  1990 . Semantic lassification and an analyzing system of Japanese numerical expressions  . IPSJ SIGNotes90-NL-78, 90(64):129-136, July . ( in Japanese) . 
Francis Bond and Kyonghee Paik .  1997 . Classifying correspondence in Japanese and Korean  . In 3rd Pacific Association for Computational Linguistics Conference : PA  CLING-97  , pages 58-67 . Meisei University , Tokyo,

Francis Bond , Kentaro Ogura , and Satoru
Ikehara .  1996 . Classifiers in Japanese-to-English machine translation  . In 16th International Conference on Computational Linguistics :  COLING96  , pages 125-130 , Copenhagen , August . ( cmp-lg/9608014) . 
Pamela Downing and Michael Noonan , editors.
1995 . Word Order in Discourse , volume 30 of Typological Studies in Language . John Benjamins . 
Pamela Downing .  1995 . The anaphoric use of classifiers in Japanese . In Downing and Noo-nan ( Downing and Noonan ,  1995) , pages 345-375 . 
Pamela Downing .  1996 . Numeral Classifier Systems , the case of Japanese . John Benjamins , Amsterdam . 
John A . Hawkins .  1994 . A performance theory of order and constituency , volume 73 of Cambridge studies in linguistics . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 
Satoru Ikehara , Satoshi Shirai , Akio Yokoo , and Hiromi Nakaiwa .  1991 . Toward an MT system without pre-editing-effects of new methods in ALT-J/E--  . In Third Machine Translation Summit : MT Summit III  , pages 101-106 , Washington DC . ( cmp-lg/9510008) . 
Satoru Ikehara , Satoshi Shirai , and Kentaro Ogura .  1994 . Criteria for evaluating the linguistic quality of Japanese to English machine translations  . Journal of Japanese Society for Artificial Intelligence  ,  9(4):569-579 . 
( in Japanese).
Satoru Ikehara , Masahiro Miyazaki , Satoshi Shirai , Akio Yokoo , Hiromi Nakaiwa , Kentaro Ogura , Yoshifumi Ooyama , and ? oshihiko Hayashi .  1997 . GoiTaikei--A Japanese Lexicon . Iwanami Shoten , Tokyo . 5 volumes . 
Kazuko Inoue , editor .  1983 . Nihongo-no Ki-honkouzou ( Basic Japanese Structure )  . San-seido , Tokyo . ( in Japanese) . 
Ray Jackendoff .  1996 . The proper treatment of measuring out , telicity and perhaps even quantification i English  . Natural Language and Linguistic Theory ,  14:305-354 . 
Ray Jackendoff . 1997. The Architecture of the
Language Faculty . MIT Press.
Alan Hyun-Oak Kim .  1995 . Word order at the noun phrase level in Japanese : quantifier constructions and discourse functions  . In Downing and Noonan ( Downing and Noonan ,  1995) , pages 199-246 . 
Samuel E . Martin .  1988 . A Reference Grammar of Japanese . Tuttle . 
Shigeru Miyagawa . 1989: Structure and Case Marking in Japanese , volume 22 of Syntax and Semantics . Academic Press , Amsterdam . 
Masahiro Miyazaki , Satoshi Shirai , and Satoru Ikehara .  1995 . A Japanese syntactic ategory system based on the constructive process theory and its use  . Journal of Natural Language Processing ,  2(3):3-25 , July . ( in Japanese) . 
James Pustejovsky .  1995 . The Generative Lexicon . MIT Press . 


In diesem Papier be schreiben wite in en Algo -rithmus zur Resolution von'floating quantifiers ' imJapanischen  . Japanischisteine Sprache , inder quantifizier ende Adverbieno der Kombi -nationenaus Numeral + Klassifikatoryon der Nominal phrase  , fiir diesie quantifizier enge-trennt werden kSnnen  , d . h . siemi is sennicht in unmittel barer linearer Abfolgestehen  . 
Der Algorithmus unterscheidet Grad-und
Ereignis modifi_katorenyon Adverbialen , die fiir Nominal phrase n quantifizieren und resolviert denrichtigenAntezedentenf'tirjeden ' floating quantifier '  . Zur Anbindung andierichtige Nominal phrase finden die folgen den Parameter Beriick sichtigung : Wortart der Quantifikators und des Antezedenten  , die semantische Rlation zwischen diesen beiden , die Kasusmaxkierungen des Antezedenten und die Semantik des Verbs  , dasso wo hl den Quantifikatorals auch dessen
Antezedenten regiert.
Der Algorithm us wurde implementiert undine in em regel-basier ten Japanisch/Englischem 
U'bersetzungs system evaluiert.
:_-5 ,  7 6 %~0~ , 97% ?) ~ A ~ 7 ~ b - ~ - ~ - ~_v_-7-~z ~ , -~ = q - ~ , ~&-~-~76% ~~-~497% 4~@~-~r4 . 

