Tense and Connective Constraints on the Express ion of Causality 
Pascal Amsili

Universit 6 Paris 7
2, pl . Jussieu , case 7003
F-75251 PARIS Cedex05, France
Pascal.Amsili@linguist.jussieu , fr

Corinne Rossari
Universlt 6 de Gen~ve,
Facult 6 des Lettres , dpt de Linguistique
2, rue de Candolle,
CH-1211GENI~VE4,Switzerland
Corinne . Rossari@lettres , unige , ch
Abstract
Starting from descriptions of French connectives ( in particular " donc " - - - therefore )  , on the one hand , and aspectual properties of French tenses pass4 simple and imparfait on the other hand , we study in this paper how the two interact with respect othe expression of causality  . It turns out that their interaction is not free . Some combinations are not acceptable , and we propose an explanation for them . These results apply straightforwardly to natural language generation : given as input two events related by a cause relation  , we can choose among various ways of presentation ( the parameters being ( i ) the order , ( ii ) the connective ,   ( iii ) the tense ) so that we are sure to express a cause relation , without generating either an incorrect discourse or an ambiguous one  . 
1 Introduction
The work reported in this paper aims at determining which constraints hold on the interaction between the expression of causality  ( with or without connective ) and aspectual properties of the eventualities and of the tenses used to express them  . As a matter of fact , it turns out that , at least in French , the choice of one of the two tenses pass4simple ( PS ) or impar/ait ( IMP ) is not neutral with respect othe expression of causality  , in particularealised by means of the connective " donc "  ( the ref0 re )  . 
It has been observed that even when concerned only with temporal localisation  , it is not enough to characterize tnses if one do not take into accounthe effects of discourse relations between eventualities  1:   ( 1a-b )   ( Molendijk ,  1996) ; it has also been observed that the use of the 1We use the term eventuality to refer to either events  , states or processes , as is traditional since ( Bach ,  1981) . 
connective " donc " is itself subjecto various acceptability constraints  ( lc-d )   ( Jayez ,  1998) . 
(1) a . Paul attrapa une contravention.
I 1roulaitave c plaisir
Paul got fined . He was driving with pleasure 2b . Paul attrapaune contravention . 
I1 roulait tropvite
Paul got fined . He was driving to of a stc . Labranche cassa . 
Paul tom bait donc dans levide
The branch broke.
Paul was therefore falling downd . Sa premiere deman defut refus 6 e . 
I1enr6 digeait doncune autre
His first application was refused.
He was therefore writing another one
Our objective in this paper is twofold : we want to study systematically the interaction between the various parameters we have mentionned  , in order to provide a general expla-nation for the acceptabilities that have been observed  , and we also want these explanations be formulated in terms of " conditions of use "  , so that our results are exploitable for text gen -eration  . As a matter of fact , the choice of an appropriate form to express a cause relation between events has proved a non trivial problem  ( Danlos , 1987; Danlos ,  1998) . Two parameters have been identified as playing an important role : first  , the order of presentation ( cause before consequence , or the contrary ) , and second ,   2The contrast between PS and IMP is only roughly parallel to that between simple past and past progressive : e  . g . , the translation into French of a simple past can be either PS or IMP  . We translate systematically IMP into past progressive  , ven when the glose does not have the same aspectuo-temporal properties as the French original  . Similarly , " therefore " is only roughly equivalent to " done "  . 
48 the presence ( or absence ) of a connective 3 . The examples we deal within this paper suggest that tenses  , at least in French and in particular the choice between PS and IMP must also be taken into account  . 
The assumptions we make for this work are the following  . 
We assume the view on discourse adopted within the SRDT framework  ( Asher , 1993): in a coherent discourse , sentences are linked by discourse relations , which help finding anaphor antecedents , computing temporal localisations , etc . Here , we are concerned only with two discourse relations  , both involving causality . We call the first one result , as in ( Lascarides and Asher ,  1993) , it holds between two sentences when the main eventuality of the first one is the cause of the main eventuality of the second one  . 
We assume here a very open notion of causality that we don't want to refine  . 4 We call the other one explanation , it holds between two sentences when the cause is presented after its consequence  , thus playing an explanation role for the first sentence  . This configuration i interaction with " donc " has been studied in  ( Rossari and Jayez , 1997) where it is called " causal abduction " . 
We adopt as a basis for the description of IMP the proposal made in the DRT framework  ( Kamp and Rohrer , 1983; Kamp and Reyle ,  1993) , amended with proposals made in French literature , in particular concerning the anaphoric properties of this tense  ( Tasmowski-De Ryck , 1985; Vet and Molendijk ,  1985;
Molendijk , 1994).
At last , we adopt the description of the connective " donc " which is elaborated  , in terms of conditions of use and semantic effects  , in ( Jayez and Rossari ,  1998) . 
We start by considering discourses where a cause is presented after its consequence  ( i . e . , an explanation discourse relation should hold ) . We observe that a PS-IMP sequence is sufficient o achieve the explanation effect  , but that this sequence is constrained by the type of causality  3  ( Danlos ,  1988 ) shows the influence of many others parameters , like the voice active vs . passive , the presence of a relative clause , etc . 
4 For instance , we assume that causality holds between a branch breaking and John's falling  ( direct )  , but also between Jean's repairing his car and his driving it  ( indirect )  . 
at stake . We also notice that connectives do not seem to interfere with tenses in this case  ( ? 2 )  . 
We then examine discourses where the cause is presented before the consequence  . In the absence of connective , we observe that none of the acceptable forms automatically convey causality  ( ? 3 . 1) . With the connective " donc " , causality is imposed by the connective , but in its turn it brings new constraints (?3 . 2) . For each set of examples , we provide a general explanation and draw conclusions for text generation  . 
2 Consequence-Cause Configuration 2 . 1 Data Even if a causality ( the second sentence introducing the cause of the first one  ) is pragmatically possible in all these examples , we observe that a sequence PS-PS imposes in French a temporal sequence interpretation : in all the examples  ( 3 )  , the main eventuality of the second sentence is interpreted as temporally located after the one of the first sentence  , and this is strictly incompatible with a causality  , where cause must precede its effect . Notice that here Ps in French behaves differently from simple past in English  . 5(3) a . Jeantomba . Labranche cassa
Jeanfell . The branch broke b . Jean attrapaune contravention . 
Ilroula tropvite
Jean got fined . He drove to of a stc . Mariecria . Jeanlui cassala figure
Marie cried . Jean hither d . Jean prits avulture . Illar@para
Jeantook his car . He repair edit e . Jeans es al it . Ilr@parasavoiture Jean dirtied himsel ? He repaired his car Now  , if one chooses , with the same order of presentation , the tense combination PS-IMP , the causality effect is easily achieved . This is the case for the examples (4) . 
(4) a . Jean attrapa une contravention.
I1 roulait tropvite
Jeangotafine . He was driving to of as tb . Mariecria . Jeanlui cassaitla figure
Marie cried . Jean was hitting her 5The translation of the ambiguous example ( 2a )   ( Lascarides and Asher ,  1993 ) is not ambiguous in French where no causal interpretation is available  ( 2b )  . 
(2) a . Johnfell . Maxpushed him.
b . Jeantomba . Maxlepoussa.

However , this choice is not always applicable , since it can give rise to unacceptable forms : ( 5 ) are either incorrect , or do not convey causality . 
(5) a . @ Jeantomba . Labranche cassait
Jeanfell . The branch was breaking b . @ Jean prits a voiture . Illar6 para it Jean took the car . He was repairing it The connective " donc " can be used in such configurations  , without changing acceptability . 
The denoted relation in this case concerns both the epistemic level  ( attitudinal ) and the descriptive level ( propositional )   ( Jayez and Rossari ,  1998) . We consider in this paper only uses of " donc " where the epistemic level does not change fondamentaly the relation  .  6 2 . 2 Discuss ion We think that these acceptabilities can be explained if one takes into account two principles : one concerns causality itself in connection with aspectuality  , the other concerns the French IMP'Sability to act as an aspectual operator  . 
2.2.1 Causality
To account for the contrast between (4) and (5) , we have to be more specific about the way causality can hold between eventualities  . Let us assumel is the cause of e2 . We can distinguish two cases : 1 . el has to be completed to be the cause of e2 . 
For instance , the breaking of the branch has to be completed before Jean can fall  ; Jean's car has to be repaired before he can drive it  . 
2 . it is not necessary forel to be completed to be the cause of  e2  . For instance , starting to reparise nough to be the cause of one's getting dirty  ; driving too fast is enough to get a fine , independantly of the completion of el . 
We call the first case accomplished causality.
Notice that this distinction is independant of the aspectual class of the verb describing the eventuality  . It is only a matter of world knowledge . 
6In this configuration , " car " ( . for ) is the nonmarked connective . Its introduction does not change notably the acceptability jugements  , we leave the examination of its specific on straints for another study  . 
2.2.2 IMP as an aspectual operator
One of the most important properties of IMP is that it imposes an imperfective  ( durative , nonaccomplished ) view on the eventuality ( Vet ,  1980) . The way this effect operates can be described the following way  , assuming the usual partition of predicates into the four Vendler's  ( 1967 ) aspectual classes . 
States , activities These eventualities , either homogenious ( tates ) or not ( activities )  , are nonterminative , in the sense that they do not have a natural term  ( end )   ( e . g . , to know the truth--state , to run--activity ) . Then IMP is entirely compatible , thus have no particular effect . 
Achievements , accomplishments These are characterised by the existence of a natural term  . The imperfective point of view brought by IMP imposes a change of point of view on the term of the eventuality  . 
As for accomplishments , we can assume that they can be decomposed into several stages  , according to ( Moens and Steedman , 1988): first a preparatory phase , second a culmination ( or achievement )   ( we are not concerned here with the result state )  . We can then say that IMP refers only to the preparatory phase  , so that the term of the eventuality loses all relevance  . This explains the socalled imperfective paradox : it is possible to use IMP even though the eventuality never reaches its term :  ( 6 ) a .   I1 traver sait larue quand la voiture l ' a 6cras6 He was crossing the street when the car hit him b  . * I1 traversalar uequ and la voiture l'a 6cras6
He crossed the street when the car hit him As for achievements  , we can assume that they are reduced to a culmination  . Then IMP can only be interpreted by stretching this culmination  , transforming a fundamen-taly punctual event into a processor activity  . Then there is no more natural term for such a stretched event  . 
2.2.3 Causality and aspect
So , when we have a nonaccomplished causality , i . e . , when it is possible to state the cause rela-IMP does not impose further constraint  , and the sequence PS-IMP is always correct , and conveys the appropriate causality effect . This is the case for the examples (4 ,  7) , where an explanation discourse relation is infered  . 
(7) Jeans es al it . I 1r fipara its a voiture Jean got dirty . He was repairing his car On the contrary , if we have an accomplished causality , i . e . if the cause event has to be completed to be a cause for the other event  , then IMP is never possible , for even with terminative eventualities ( the branch breaking , fixing the car ) , it has the effect of blocking the terminativity , and a causal interpretation is no longer possible  ( 5 )  . 
The contrast ( 8 ) can thus be easily explained : in ( 8a )  , we have a lexically punctual event , made durative by the IMP . But going through are dlight has to be completed to risk a fine  ; in (8b ) , we have an activity , and it is sufficient o have started it to risk a fine  . 
(8) a ., Jean attra paune contravention.
I 1brfllait unfeurouge
Jeangotafine . He was going through are dlight b . Jean attrapaune contravention . 
I1 brfilaitles feux rouges
Jeangotafine . He was going through the red lights 2 . 3 App l i ca t ion The consequences of the observations and the hypotheses made earlier  , when it comes to text generation , are the following : If one wants to present wo eventualities related by a cause relation  , so that the consequence is presented before the cause  , leading to an explanation interpretation of the discourse  , one should obey the following principles : 1 . APS-PS combination is not appropriate . 
2 . APS-IMP combination conveys causality , provided that we have a nonaccomplished causality  . Otherwise , the PS-IMP combination is not valid . 
We should note again that these constraints are not lexical  , in the sense that they do not rely on aspectual classes  , but rather on world knowledge . 
3 Cause-Consequence Configuration
Let us now turn to the other mode of presentation , namely the one where cause is presented before its consequence  . We first consider cases without connectives , and see that good accept-abilities go along with higher ambiguity : correct example do not always convey causality  ( ? 3 . 1) . Then we consider the use of the connective " donc  "  , and observe that it changes the acceptabilities ( ? 3 . 2) . 
3.1 Without connective 3.1.1 Data
The first observation is that it is possible to use a PS-PS sequence  . In the absence of other discourse clues , such a sequence is interpreted in French as a temporal sequence relation  . Such a temporal interpretation is compatible with  , but of course does not necessary imply , a cause relation . 
(9) a .



Labranche cassa . I1tomba dans levide
The branch broke . He fell down
Paul vits a demandere jet ~ e.
II enr ~ digeauneautre
Paul's application was rejected.
He wrote another one
I1 rut nomm ~ PDG .
I1 contr 61 at outle per sonnel
He was appointed chairman.
He had control over the whole staff
I1 appuy a surlad ~ tente . Le coup part it.
He pressed the trigger . The gunwent off Changing the PS-PS sequence into a PS-IMP changes only marginally the acceptabilities  , and the same observation as before holds : these discourses do not necessarily imply causality  . 
(10)a . Labranche cassa.
I1 tombait duns levide
The branch broke . He was falling down b . Paul vits a demandere jet ~ e . 
I1enr ~ digeaituneautre
Paul's application was rejected.
He was writing another one c.I1fut nomm ~ PDG.
I1 contr 61 ait toutle personnel
He was appointed chairman.
He was having control over the whole staff d . ? I1 appuy a surlad ~ tente . 
Le coup partait.
He pressed the trigger.
The gun was going off as backgroundis courses , where the IMP of the second sentence is seen as introducing a background situation holding before and after the event introduced in the first sentence  . This interpretation , often given as the default one for IMP-PS sequences  ( Kamp and Rohrer ,  1983) , is nevertheless only available when world knowledge does not exclude it  ( 10 a )  . In any case , such an interpretation is incompatible with a causal interpretation  . 
3.1.2 Discussion
So it turns out that PS-IMP sequences can have in general two interpretations : one where the two events follow each other  , and this interpretation is thus compatible with a causality interpretation  , and another one where the eventuality described by the IMP sentence overlaps with the event given before  . 
This can be explained if one assumes the operation of IMP as described in  ( Molendijk ,  1994) , in a DRT framework , itself inspired by ( Reichenbach ,  1947) . 
One of the features of IMP is to state the simultaneousness of the eventuality described with some reference point  ( henceforth Rpt )  , located in the past of the speech time . This operation can be called anaphoric , since IMP needs some other point given by the context  . This is clearly what happens with the background effect  . But it has also been shown , in particular by Tasmowski-DeRyck (1985) , that there are some uses of IMP ( called imparfait derupture --" breaking IMP " ) which are not strictly anaphoric , in the sense that the Rpt cannot be identified with any previously introduced event  . Rather , it seems that such uses of IMP strongly entail the existence of an implicit Rpt  , distinct from the events already introduced . It is also observed that this ability of IMP to bring with it a Rpt is constrained  . In particular , there must be a way to connect his Rpt to the other eventualities of the discourse  . Molendijk ( 1996 ) shows that this connection can be a causal relation  . It has also been observed that an implicit Rpt is always temporally located after the last event introduced  . So this is compatible with a causality interpretation  . 
3.1.3 Application
From a text generation point of view , the observations we have just made cannot be easily exploited : obviously  , in a Cause-Consequence configuration , all the tense combinations we have seen are not informative nough  , and cannot be used , if one wants to guarantee that the concept of causality is conveyed by the discourse  . 
It is thus necessary to be more explicit , for instance by adding a connective . This is what we are concerned within the next section  . 
So , if we leave a part the PS-PS sequence , what we have seen so far in ? 2 is that the tense combination is sufficient o convey a causality relation in Consequence-Cause configurations  , and then the connectives do not impose further constraints and do not change what is conveyed  . 
The situation in this section ( ? 3 ) is in a waysy metrical : in a Cause-Consequence configuration  , the tense configuration is not sufficient , so that adding a connective is necessary . But , as we see in the next section , there are further constraints on the connectives . 
3 . 2 With the connective " doric "3 . 2 . 1 Data One can observe that " donc " is perfectly compatible with PS-PS sequences like the ones in  ( 9 )  . 
What is more surprising is that adding " donc " to the PS-IMP sequence xamples we have seen  ( 10 ) clearly changes the acceptabilities : ( 11 ) a . ? ? Labranche cassa . I1 tombait donc dans levide The branch broke . He was therefore falling down b . Paul vits a demandere jet ~ e . II enr ~ digea it doricune autre Paul's application was rejected  . He was therefore writing another one c . I 1fut nomm ~ PDG . I1 contr 61 ait donct outle per sonnel
He was appointed chairman . He was therefore having control over the whole staff d  . ? ? I1 appuy a surlad ~ tente . 
Le coup part ait donc.
He pressed the trigger . The gun was therefore going off The clearer contrast concerns cases where the second sentence contains an activity verb  . In such cases , the introduction of " donc " leads systematically to bad sentences  . On the contrary , it seems that " donc " is always compatible with state and accomplishment verbs  . 
As for achievements , it seems that the introduction of " donc " also yields bad sentences  , but IMP without connective is already slightly problematic  , as we have seen in (10d ) . We come back to this point later . 
3.2.2 Discussion
We are not yet able to provide a completely elaborated explanation for these observations  . What we propose here is a list of possible answers  , suggested by more finegrained considerations on data  . 
Note however that from the previous observation we can draw the principle that we can generate sentences in a Cause-Consequence configuration  , with a PS-IMP sequence , and the connective " doric " but the aspectual class of the verb has to be taken into account  . It leads to acceptable sentences only with accomplishments and states  . 
It is clear that aspectual classes play a role , which is not surprising , and this is the reason why all our example lists comprise each time one verb from each aspectual class  . 
The most problematic on trast concerns the difference between activities and accomplishments  . The connective " donc " seems to work very well with accomplishments and very bad with activities  , even though accomplishments can be seen as composed of an activity followed by a culmination  . One possible explanation could rely on the observation that the result relation brought by " donc " holds not at the propositionnal level  , not even at the aspectual ( i . e . , point of view on events ) , but rather at an attitudinal level ( Rossari and Jayez ,  1997) . Besides , one can observe that what distinguishes activities and accomplishments is not the nature itself of the eventuality  , but rather the fact that one expects/considers the culmination of it in one case and not in the other  . So this can be seen as a difference of ( propositional ) attitude over the eventualities . We are presently working on the elaboration of a proposal based on this viewpoint  . It is also worth observing that the temporal interval that lies between a cause and its consequence might play a role  , as suggested by ( Jayez ,  1998) , especially for this contrast between activities and accomplishments  . 
As for achievements , we have already noted that their compatibility with IMP is not entirely established  , for reasons coming from the punctual nature of achievements  . It is also worth noting that there is an affinity between achievements and " imparfait derupture "   ( Tasmowski-De Ryck ,  1985) . Of course , as suggested by its name , such use of IMP introduces a sort of break in the discourse  , which is of course compatible with causality , but might not be compatible with the way " donc " operates  , requiring a strong connection between two utterances  . 
4 Conclusion
Summary We summarize our observations in the table  1  . We consider in this table all the possible configurations one has when the three following parameters vary  . 
1 . Order of presentation : el before e2 or the other way around ( assuming el is the cause of e e )  . 
2 . Presence of a connective " donc " or " car " .  7 3 . Use of PS or IMP . 
Table 1: Ways of expressing " CAUSE(el , e2)"
When D.R . How
Always rese ~ S . Donce ~ sexpe ~ ~ . Car 7 e ~ S
Pse~SSH Ce1.
ntre~s.e ~ P
Sometimes C1 rese ~'. Donce ~ P
C2 expe ~. ( CarT/?)e ~ MP
Nevere ~ M ".( Donc/I ~) e ~
Pse~S e.~.
e~p . ( Car 7/0) e ~ ~

CI : e2:state or accomplishment
C2: nonaccomplished causality
Among the combinations , some are always possible ( which does not mean they always convey causality )  , some are never possible , that is , either uninterpretable or incompatible with causality  . Some are sometimes possible , depending on various constraints as shown in this paper  . Notice that we mention in this table some configurations we have not considered so far  , namely configurations with an IMP-PS sequence . 
rAs we have already said , we are only concerned in this paper with " donc " and mention " car " only for the sake of completeness  . 

We mention them here only for the sake of completeness  , since they can never be used to express causality . 
The second column of the table gives the discourse relation associated with each configuration  . In some cases , it is a cause relation , either in one direction ( result-res ) or in the other ( explanation-exp )  . The other cases are compatible with a cause relation  , without conveying it , which is noted in the table as " suc " ( for temporal succession ) or " ntr " ( neutral-for ambiguous cases between background or temporal succession  )  . 
Conclusion This paper shows that the interaction of constraints coming from tenses and connect i  . vesi rather delicate to characterize , even in the limited domain of the expression of causality  . It also shows , however , that it is possible to draw from the linguistic haracterisation of these enough principles to be able to generate discourses conveying causality with good guaranties on the achieved effect  , and control over the influence of tenses often neglected in this respect  . 
We are presently studying the treatment of other connectives  , and the extension to other tenses . 

We wish to thank Laurent Roussarie , as well as the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper  . 
References
Nicholas Asher .  1993 . Reference to Abstract Objects in Discourse . Kluwer Academic Publisher . 
Emmon Bach .  1981 . On time , tense and aspect : An essay on english metaphysics  . In Peter Cole , editor , Radical Pragmatics , pages 62-81 . Academic Press , New York . 
Laurence Danlos .  1987 . The Linguistic Basis of Text Generation . Cambridge University

Laurence Danlos .  1988 . Connecteur set relations causales . Langue Franfaise , 77:92-127 . 
Laurence Danlos .  1998 . Causal relations in discourse : Event structure and event coreference  . In Pierrette Bouillon and Frederica Busa , editors , Studies within the Generative Lexicon Framework . CUP Press . to appear . 
Jacques Jayez and Corinne Rossari .  1998 . Laport@es@mantiqued'unconnecteur pragma -tique  . Cahiers del ' Institut de Linguistique de
Louvain . to appear.
Jacques Jayez .  1998 . Les approches formelles del'ench at nent des temps  . L'exemple de la
SDRT . Manuscript.
Hans Kamp and Uwe Reyle .  1993 . From discourse to logic . Kluwer Academic Publisher . 
Hans Kamp and Christian Rohrer .  1983 . Tense in texts . In R . B ~ uerle , C . Schwarze , and A . von Stechow , editors , Meaning , Use and Interpretation of Language , pages 250-269 . 
De Gruyter , Berlin.
Alex Lascarides and Nicholas Asher . 1993.
Temporal interpretation , discourse relations and common sense entailment . Linguistics and Philosophy , 16(5):437-493 . 
Marc Moens and Marc Steedman .  1988 . Temporal ontology and temporal reference . Computational Linguistics , 14(2):15-28 . 
Arie Molendijk .  1994 . Tense use and temporal orientation : the ' pass@ simple ' and ' imparfait ' of french  . In C . Vet and C . Vetters , editors , Tense and Aspect in Sentence and Discourse , pages 21-47 . De Gruyter . 
Arie Molendijk .  1996 . Anaphore et imparfait : lar@f@rence globale ? dessituations pr@-suppos@es ou impliqu@es  . Cahiers Chronos , 1:109-123 . 
Hans Reichenbach .  1947 . Elements of symbolic logic . McMillan , New York . 
Corinne Rossari and Jacques Jayez .  1997 . Con-necteurs decons@quencet port@es@man-tique . Cahiers de Linguistique Franfaise , 19:233-265 . 
Liliane Tasmowski-De Ryck .  1985 . L ' imparfaitave cets an srupture . Langue Franfaise , 67:59-77 . 
Zeno Vendler .  1967 . Linguistics and Philosophy . Cornel University Press , Ithaca , N . Y . 
CoVet and Arie Molendijk .  1985 . The discourse functions of past tenses of french . In V . Lo Cascio and C . Vet , editors , Temporal Structure in Sentence and Discourse , pages 133-159 . For is . 
CoVet .  1980 . Temps , aspect et adverb es de temp senfranfa is contempora in  . Droz,


