Constraints over Lambda-Structures in Semantic
Under specification
Markus Egg and Joachim Niehren * and Peter Ruhrberg and Feiyu Xu 
Department of Computational Linguistics /* Programming Systems Lab 
Universit / it des Saarlandes , Saarbriicken , Germany
egg , peru , feiyu ~ coli , uni-sb , de
niehren ~ ps,uni-sb , de
Abstract
We introduce a first-order language for semantic underspecification that we call Constraint Language for Lambda-Structures  ( CLLS )  . AA-structure can be considered as a A-term up to consistent renaming of bound variables  ( a-equality )  ; a constraint of CLLS is an underspecified description of a A-structure  . CLLS solves a capturing problemom ni present in underspecified scope representations  . CLLS features constraints for dominance , lambdabinding , parallelism , and anaphoric links . Based on CLLS we present a simple , integrated , and underspecified treatment of scope , parallelism , and anaphora . 
1 Introduction
A central concern of semantic underspecification ( van Deemter and Peters ,  1996 ) is the underspecification f the scope of variable binding operator such as quantifiers  ( Hobbs and Shieber , 1987; Alshawi , 1990; Reyle ,  1993) . 
This immediately raises the conceptual problem of how to avoid variable-capturing when instantiating underspecified scope representations  . In principle , capturing may occur in all formalisms for structural underspecification which represent binding relations by the coordination of variables  ( Reyle , 1995; Pinkal , 1996; Bos , 1996; Niehren et al , 1997a ) . Consider for instance the verb phrase in ( 1 ) Manfred\[vFknows every student\]An underspecified description of the compositional semantics of the VP in  ( 1 ) might be given along the lines of ( 2 ) :  ( 2 ) X - - Cl ( Vx ( student ( x ) -+C2 ( know ( Z , x ) ) ) ) The metavariable X in ( 2 ) denote some tree representing a predicate logic formula which is underspecified for quantifier scope by means of two placeholders  C1 and C2 where a subject-quantifier can be filled in , and a placeholder Z for the subject-variable . The binding of the object-variable x by the object-quantifier Vx is coordinated through the name of the object-variable  , namely ' x ' . Capturing occurs when a new quantifier like 3x is filled in C2 whereby the binding between x and Vx is accidentally undone  , and is replaced with a binding of x by 3x . 
Capturing problems raised by variable coordination may be circumvented in simple cases where all quantifiers in underspecified descriptions can be assumed to be named by distinct variables  . However , this assumption becomes problematic in the light of parallelism between the interpretations of two clauses  . Consider for instance the correction of ( 1 ) in ( 3 ) :  ( 3 ) No , Hans\[vP knows every student \] The description of the semantics of the VP in  ( 3 ) is given in ( 4 ) :  ( 4 ) Y = C3 ( Vy ( student ( y ) -+C4 ( know ( Z ' , y )   )   )   ) But a full understanding of the combined clauses ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) requires a grasp of the semantic identity of the two VP interpretations  . 
Now , the VP interpretations ( 2 ) and ( 4 ) look very much Mike but for the different object -variable  , namely'y ' instead of ' x ' . This illustrates that in cases of parallelism , like in corrections , different variables in parallel quantified structures have to be matched against each other  , which requires some form of renaming to be done on them  . While this is unproblematic for fully specified structures  , it presents serious problems with underspecified structures like  ( 2 ) and ( 4 )  , as there the names of the vari-Any attempto integrate parallelism with scope underspecification thus has to cope with conflicting requirements on the choice of variable names  . Avoiding capturing requires variables to be renamed apart but parallelism needs parallel bound variables to be named alike  . 
We avoid all capturing and renaming problems by introducing the notion of A-structures  , which represent binding relations without naming variables  . AA-structure is a standard predicate logic tree structure which can be considered as a A-term or some other logical formula up to consistent renaming of bound variables  ( a-equality )  . Instead of variable names , a A-structure provides a partial function on tree -nodes for expressing variable binding  . An graphical illustration of the A-structure corresponding to the A-term Ax  . like(x,x ) is given (5) . 
(5) (', Axlike(x , x)
Formally , the binding relation of the A-structure in ( 5 ) is expressed through the partial function A ( 5 ) defined by A ( 5 ) (v2 ) = v0 and A ( 5 ) (v3 ) = v0 . 
We propose a first-order constraint language for A -structures called CLLS which solves the capturing problem of underspecified scope representations in a simple and elegant way  . CLLS subsumes dominance constraints ( Backofen et al . , 1995 ) as known from syntactic processing ( Marcus et al ,  1983 ) with tree-adjoining grammars ( Vijay-Shanker , 1992; Rogers and Vijay-Shanker ,  1994) . Most importantly , CLLS constraints can describe the binding relation of a A-structure in an underspecified manner  ( in contrast to A-structures like ( 5 )  , which are always fully specified ) . The idea is that A-binding behaves like a kind of rubber b and that can be arbitraryly enlarged but never broken  . E . g . ,  ( 6 ) is an underspecified CLLS-description of the A -structure  ( 5 )  . 
Xo , ~* X ~ AA(X ~) = X4A . ~. ? Xo
Xl : lam(X2) A//lain IX1 (6) X2, ~* X3A '* X2
IZ3: , ke(X , Xs )^,
X4: varAX 5: varvar ,, ~. ~ X4 vat ~ X 5
The constraint ( 6 ) does not determine a unique A-structure since it leaves e  . g . the space between the nodes X2 and X3 underspecified . 
Thus , (6) may eventually be extended , say , to a constraint that fully specifies the A -structure for the A-term in  ( 7 )  . 
(7) Ay . Az . and ( person(y ), like ( y , z))
Az intervenes between Ay and an occurrence of y when extending  ( 6 ) to a representation f ( 7 ) without the danger of undoing their binding . 
CLLS is sufficiently expressive for an integrated treatment of semantic underspecification  , parallelism , and anaphora . To this purpose it provides parallelism constraints  ( Niehren and Koller , 1998) of the form X/X' ,   , ~Y/Y I reminiscent to equality up to constraints ( Niehren et al . , 1997a ) , and anaphoric bindings constraints of the form ante  ( X ) =X' . 
As proved in ( Niehren and Koller ,  1998) , CLLS extends the expressiveness of context unification  ( Niehren et al , 1997a ) . It also extends its linguistic coverage ( Niehren et al , 1997b ) by integrating an analysis of VP ellipses with anaphor as in  ( Kehler ,  1995) . Thus , the coverage of CLLS is comparable to Crouch ( 1995 ) and Shieber et al ( 1996 )  . We illustrate CLLS at a benchmark case for the interaction of scope  , anaphora , and ellipsis (8) . 
(8) Mary read a books he liked before Suedid.
The paper is organized as follows . First , we introduce CLLS in detail and define its syntax and semantics  . We illustrate CLLS in sec . 3 by applying it to the example ( 8 ) and compare it to related work in the last section  . 
2 A Constraint Language for
A-Structures ( CLLS )
CLLS is an ordinary first-order language interpreted over A-structures  . A-structures are particular predicate logic tree structures we will introduce  . We first exemplify the expressiveness of CLLS . 
2.1 Elements of CLLS
AA-structure is a tree structur extended by two additional relations  ( the binding and the linking relation )  . We represent A-structures as graphs . Every A-structure characterizes a unique A-term or a logical formula up to consistent renaming of bound variables  ( a-equality )  . 
E . g . , the A-structure ( 10 ) characterizes the higher-order logic ( HOL ) formula ( 9 )  . 
354 (9) ( many ( language )) ( Ax . speak ( x ) (jolm ) )  ( 10 ) many ~ Two things are important here : the label ' ~' represents explicitly the operation of function application  , and the binding of the variable x by the A -operator Axis represented by an explicit binding relation A between two nodes  , labelled as varandlain . As the binding relation is explicit , the variable and the binderneed not be given a name or index such as x  . 
We can fully describe the above A-structure by means of the constraints for immediate dominance and labeling X : f  ( X 1 ,   .   .   . , Xn ), ( e . g . 
X1:@(X2,) (3) and X3: lam(X4) etc . ) and binding constraints A(X ) = Y . It is convenient to display such constraints graphically  , in the style of (6) . The difference of graphs as constraints and graphs as A-structures i important since underspecified structures are always seen as descriptions of the A-structures that satisfy them ? Dominance  . As a means to underspecify A-structures , CLLS employs constraints for dominance X ~* Y . Dominance is defined as the transitive and reflexive closure of immediate dominance  . We represent dominance constraints graphically as dotted lines  . E . g . , in ( 11 ) we have the typical case of undetermined scope . It is analysed by constraint (12) , where two nodes X1 and X2 , lie between an upper bound Xo and a lower bound X3  . The graph can be linearized by adding either a constraint  XI~*X2 or X2~*X1  , resulting in the two possible scoping readings for the sentence  ( 11 )  . 
(11) Every linguist speaks two Asian languages.
(12) .....". X.o.
?" ~ X'2 e_lt_a_l,' . x4"'"' . .-" l  " . .  . . ? ,, ~ var ~-~ speak Paral le l ism . (11) may be continued by an elliptical sentence , as in (13) . 
(13) Two Europea nones too.
We analyselliptical constructions by means of a parallelism constraint of the form  ( 14 ) X , /X p ~ Y d Y p which has the intuitive meaning that the semantics Xs of the source clause  ( 12 ) is parallel to the semantics Yt of the elliptical target clause  , up to the exceptions X p and Y p , which are the semantic representations of the so called parallel elements in source and target clause  . In this case the parallel elements are the two subject 

(11 ) and ( 13 ) together give usa ' Hirschbiihler sentence ' ( Hirschbiihler ,  1982) , and our treatment in this case is descriptively equivalent to that of  ( Niehren et al , 1997b ) . Our parallelism constraints and their equality up to constraints have been shown to be  ( non-trivially ) intertranslatable ( Niehren and Koller ,  1998 ) if binding and linking relations in A-structures are ignored  . 
For the interaction of binding with parallelism we follow the basic idea that binding relations should be isomorphic between two similar substructures  . The cases where anaphora interact with ellipsis are discussed below  . 
Anaphoric links . We represent anaphoric dependencies in A -structures by another explicit relation between odes  , the linking relation . An anaphor ( i . e . a node labelled as an a ) may be linked to an antecedent ode , which may be labelled by a name or var , or even be another anaphor . Thus , links can form chains as in (15) , where a constraint such as ante ( X3 ) = X2 is represented by a dashed line from X3 to X2 . 
The constraint (15) analyzes (16) , where the second pronoun is regarded as to be linked to the first  , rather than linked to the proper name : ( 15 ) like ? ~ ~ ~ i ~ 2 rnother_of ~ ana ~ X3 ( 16 ) John is aid oe ~ liked his jmother analoguously to a semantics for lambda terms  , 1 linked nodes get identical denotations . Intuitively , this means they are interpreted as if names , or variables with their binding relations , would be copied down the link chain . It is crucial though not to use such copied structures right away : the link relation gives precise control over strict and sloppy interpretations when anaphors interact with parallelism  . 
E . g . ,  ( 16 ) is the source clause of the many-pronouns-puzzle , a problematicase of interaction of ellipsis and anaphora  . ( Xu ,  1998) , where our treatment of ellipsis and anaphora was developed  , argues that link chains yield the best explanation for the distribution of strict/sloppy readings involving many pronouns  . 
The basic idea is that an elided pronoun can either be linked to its parallel pronoun in the source clause  ( referential parallelism ) or be linked in a structurally parallel way ( structural parallelism )  . This analysis agrees with the proposal made in ( Kehler , 1993; Kehler ,  1995) . It covers a series of problematicases in the literature such as the many-pronouns-puzzle  , cascaded ellipsis , or the five-reading sentence ( 17 ) :  ( 17 ) John revised his paper before the teacher did , and so did Bill The precise interaction of parallelism with binding and linking relations is spelled out in sec  . 

2.2 Syntax and Semantics of CLLS
We start with a set of labels E = @2 , lamI'var0'ana0' before2 , mary O , read O ,   ,   ,   . , ranged over by \] ji , with arity i which may be omitted . The syntax of CLLS is given by : : := XJ(Xl, .   .   . , X ,)(\] J " ES)
IX <* Y
IA(x ) = Y
Iante(X ) = Y
IX/X'~Y/Y'\[~A ~'
The semantics of CLLS is given in terms of first order structures L  , obtained from underlying tree structures , by adding relations eL for each CLLS relation symbol ? E ~*  , A ( . ) =", ante( . )= . , / . ~-/-, :@ , : lam , : vat, . . . .
1 We abstain from giving such a semantics here , as we would have to introduce types , which are of no concern here , to keep the semantic simple . 
A ( finite ) tree structure , underlying L , is given by a set of nodes u , u ' ,   . . . connected by paths ~ r,~ff , . . . ( possibly empty words over positive integers ) , and a labelling \] junction I from nodes to labels  . The number of daughters of a node matches the arity of its label  . The relationship Y : fL(Vl , . . . , Yn ) holds iff l(v ) = \]j and v . i = vi for i = 1 . .n , where v . ~r stands for the node that is reached from v by following the path  7r   ( if defined )  . To express that a path lr is defined on a node v in L we write v  . rSL . We write ~ r < r ' for ~ r being an initial segment of  7d   . The dominance relation v < ~ v ' holds if 37 rv . Tr = v' . If ~ r is nonempty we have proper dominance v <+ v  '  . 
AA-structure L is a tree structure with two ( partially functional ) binary relations AL ( ' ) = " , for binding , and ante L (') = ' , for anaphor-to-antecedent linking . We assume that the following conditions hold : ( 1 ) binding only holds between variables ( nodes labelled var ) to A-binders ( nodes labelled lain )  ; (2) every variable has exactly one binder ; (3) variables are dominated by their binders ;   ( 4 ) only anaphors ( nodel labelled an a ) are linked to antecendents ; (2) every anaphor has exactly one antecendent ; (5) antecedents are terminal nodes ; (6) there are no cyclic link chains ;   ( 7 ) if a link chain ends at a variable then each anaphor in the chain must be dominated by the binder of that variable  . 
The not so straightforward part of the semantics of CLLS is the notion of parallelism  , which we define for any given A-structure Las follows : iff there is a path ~  r0 such that : 1  .   rr0 is the " exception path " from the top node of the parallel structures the the two exception positions : v = Vl  . ~ roAv~=v2 . ~ ro2 . the two contexts , which are the trees below Vl and v2 up to the trees below the exception positions v and v ~  , must have the same structure and labels :
Vr-~0 < r~((v , . ~$ L~v2 . rSL)A(V l . Tr . ~ L = : ~ l(V l . Tr)----l(v2 . Tr )))) 3 . there are no'hanging'binders from the contexts to variables outside them : VvVv '*+' *' AL  ( v ' ) = v )  ~ ( Vl < ~ LV < ~ LV l < ~ LVA 4 . binding is structurally isomorphic within the two contexts :  5  . two variables in identical positions within their context and bound outside their con-~_  . ~ . : y , . " text must be bound by the same binder : ,--~' ~ . I ~- ~ v , , w -( , , o > , , /-'% : *-1x . , ( AL(Vl . rr ) = v ? ~ AL(v2 . ~ r ) = v ) ~' ana?X , 2~~: . 
6 . two anaphors in identical positions within ~ x . .
their context must have isomorphic links x " .
resents the semantics of the elided part of the target clause  . ) (18)  . . X9" .   .   .   . ' b~xt ? " , xT go ::: within their context , or the target sentence anaphor is linked to the source sentence anaphor : Vv V Tr-  mr0_<Tr AVl . Tr,~LAanteL(Vl . Tr ) = v = :> (37 r'(v = vl . ~ r'A-=rr0<rr'AanteL(v = . rr)----v2nr')
Vante L(u2 . r)=Ul . rr ) 3 Interaction of quantifiers , anaphora , and ellipsis In this section , we will illustrate our analysis of a complex case of the interaction of scope  , anaphora , and ellipsis . In the case (8) , both anaphor and quantification iteract with ellipsis  . 
(8) Mary read a books he liked before Suedid.
(8) has three readings ( see ( Crouch , 1995) for a discussion of a similar example ) . In the first , the indefinite NP a books heliked takes wide scope over both clauses  ( a particular book liked by Mary is read by both Mary and Sue  )  . In the two others , the operator before outscopes the indefinite NP . The two options result from the two possibilities of reconstructing the pronouns he in the ellipsis interpretation  , viz . , ' strict ' ( both read some book that Mary liked ) and ' sloppy ' ( each read some books he liked herself )  . 
The constraint for (8) , displayed in (18) , is an underspecified representation f the above three readings  . It can be derived in a compositional fashion along the lines described in  ( Niehren et al . , 1997b ) . Xs and Xt represent the semantics of the source and the target clause  , while X16 and X21 stand for the semantics of the parallel elements ( Mary and Sue ) respectively . For readability , we represent the semantics of the complex NP a books he liked by a triangle dominated by  X2  , which only makes the anaphoric content 212 of the pronoun she within the NP explicit . The anaphoric relationship between the pronoun she and Mary is represented by the linking relation between  X12 and X16  . ( X20 rep-?read ~ ~7~1 ~ Xz6

The first reading , with the NP taking wide scope , results when the relative scope between XI and XI5 is resolved such that XI dominates X15  . The corresponding solution of the constraint is visualized in  ( 19 )  . 
(19) z a , x = , r e a d ~ ' ~ v a r ~ - . X " z ~ read ~ var ~' ~ j The parallelism constraint Xs/Xl6  , , ~Xt/X21 is satisfied in the solution because the node X t dominates a tree that is a copy of the tree dominated by X s  . In particular , it contains a node labelled by var , which has to be parallel to Xlr , and therefore must be A-linked to X3 too . 
The other possible scoping is for XlS to dominate X1  . The two solutions this gives rise to a redrawn in  ( 20 ) and ( 21 )  . Here X1 and the interpretation of the indefinite NP directly below enter into the parallelism as a whole  , as these nodes lie below the source node X s . Thus , there are two anaphoric nodes : X12 in the source and its ' copy ' II12 in the target semantics . For the copy to be parallel to XI2 it can either have a link to X12 to have a same referential value ( strict reading , see ( 20 ) ) or a link to X21 that is structurally parallel to the link from X12 to X16  , and hence leads to the node of the parallel element Sue  ( sloppy reading , see (21)) . 
357 (20) ~ x ,
I ""~" r , ary . ,, X ~6" ~ . ' ~/ sue*_X 4 Related Work CLLS allows a uniform and yet internally structured approach to semantic ambiguity  . We use a single constraint formalism in which to describe different kinds of information about the meaning of an utterance  . This avoids the problems of order dependence of processing that for example Shieber et al  ( 1996 ) get by interleaving two formalisms ( for scope and for ellipsis resolution )  . Our approach follows Crouch ( 1995 ) in this respect , who also includes parallelism constraints in the form of substitution expressions directly into an underspecified semantic formalism  ( in his case the formalism of Quasi Logical Forms QLF  )  . We believe that the two approaches are roughly equivalent empirically  . But in contrast o CLLS , QLF is not formalised as a general constraint language over treelike representations of meaning  . QLF has the advantage of giving a more direct handle on meanings themselves-at the price of its relatively complicated model theoretic semantics  . 
It seems harder though to come up with solutions within QLF that have an easy portability across different semantic frameworks  . 
We believe that the ideas from CLLS tie in quite easily with various other semantic formalisms  , such as UDRT ( Reyle , 1993) and MRS ( Copestake et al ,  1997) , which use dominance relations similar to ours , and also with theories of Logical Form associated with GB style grammars  , such as ( May ,  1977) . In all these frameworks one tends to use variable -coordination  ( or coindex-ing ) rather than the explicit binding and linking relations we have presented here  . We hope that these approaches can potentially benefit from the presented idea of rubber bands for binding and linking  , without having to make any dramatic changes . 
Our definition of parallelism implements some ideas from Hobbs and Kehler  ( 1997 ) on the behavior of anaphoric links . In contras to their proposal , our definition of parallelism is not based on an abstract notion of similarity  . Furthermore , CLLS is not integrated into a general theory of abduction  . We pursue a more modestaim at this stage , as CLLS needs to be connected to " material " deduction calculi for reasoning with such underspecified semantic representation in order to make progress on this front  . We hope that some of the more adhoc features of our definition of parallelism  ( e . g . axiom 5 ) may receive a justification or improvement in the light of such a deeper understanding  . 
Context Unification . CLLS extends the expressiveness of context unification  ( CU )   ( Niehren et al , 1997a ) , but it leads to a more direct and more structured encoding of semantic constraints than CU could offer  . There are three main differences between CU and CLLS  . 
1 ) In CLLS variables are interpreted over nodes rather than whole trees  . This gives us a direct handle on occurrences of semantic material  , where CU could handle occurrences only indirectly and less efficiently  . 2) CLL Savoids the capturing problem . 3) CLLS provides explicit anaphoric links , which could not be adequately modeled in CU . 
The insights of the CU-analysis in ( Niehren et al , 1997b ) carry over to CLLS , but the awkward second-order quations for expressing dominance in CU can be omitted  ( Niehren and Koller ,  1998) . This omission yields an enormous simplification and efficiency gain for processing  . 
Tractability . The distinguishing feature of our approach is that we aim to develop efficiently treatable constraint languages rather than to apply maximally general but intractable formalisms  . We are confident that CLLS can be implemented in a simple and efficient manner  . 
First experiments which are based on high-level concurrent constraint programming have shown promising results  . 
358 5 Conclusion
In this paper , we presented CLLS , a first-order language for semantic underspecification  . It represents ambiguities in simple underspecified structures that are transparent and suitable for processing  . The application of CLLS to some difficult cases of ambiguity has shown that it is well suited for the task of representing ambiguous expressions in terms of underspecification  . 

This work was supported by the SFB378 ( project CHORUS ) at the Universit ~ tdes Saarlandes . The authors wish to thank Manfred Pinkal , Gert Smolka , the commentators and participants at the Bad Teinach workshop on underspecification  , and our anonymous reviewers . 
References
Hiyan Alshawi .  1990 . Resolving quasilogical form . Computational Linguistics , 16:133-144 . 
R . Backofen , J . Rogers , and K . Vijay-Shanker.
1995 . A first-order axiomatization of the theory of finite trees  . J . Logic , Language , and Information , 4:5-39 . 
Johan Bos .  1996 . Predicate logic unplugged . In Proceedings l Oth Amsterdam Colloquium , pages 133-143 . 
Ann Copestake , Dan Flickinger , and Ivan
Sag .  1997 . Minimal Recursion Semantics . An Introduction . Manuscript , available at ftp://csli-ftp . stanford , edu/linguistics/sag/mrs , ps . gz . 
Richard Crouch .  1995 . Ellipsis and quantification : A substitutional pproach  . In Proceedings
EACL'95, pages 229-236, Dublin.
Paul Hirschbiihler .  1982 . VP deletion and across the board quantifier scope  . In J . Pustejovsky and P . Sells , editors , NELS 12, Univ . of

Jerry R Hobbs and Andrew Kehler .  1997 . A theory of parallelism and the case of VP -ellipsis  . 
In Proceedings ACL'97, pages 394-401, Madrid.
J . R . Hobbs and S . Shieber .  1987 . An algorithm for generating quantifier scoping . Computational Linguistics , 13:47-63 . 
Andrew Kehler .  1993 . A discourse copying algorithm for ellipsis and anaphora resolution  . In
Proceedings of EACL.
Andrew Kehler .  1995 . Interpreting Cohesive Forms in the Context of Discourse Inference  . 
Ph.D . thesis , Harvard University.
M . Marcus , D . Hindle , and M . Fleck .  1983 . D-theory : Talking about talking about trees . In Proceedings of the 21st ACL , pages 129-136 . 
Robert May .  1977 . The Grammar of Quantifi-cation . Doctoral dissertation , MIT , Cambridge

Joachim Niehren and Alexander Keller . 1998.
Dominance Constraints in Context Unification , January . http://w~w,ps . un?-sb . de/Papers/abstracts/Dominance , html . 
J . Niehren , M . Pinkal , and P . Ruhrberg . 1997a . 
One quality up to constraints over finite trees , context unification , and one-step rewriting . 
In Proceedings 14th CADE . Springer-Verlag,

J . Niehren , M . Pinkal , and P . Ruhrberg . 1997b . 
A uniform approach to underspecification ad parallelism  . In Proceedings ACL'97, pages 410-417, Madrid . 
Manfred Pinkal .  1996 . Radical underspecification . In Proceed . l Oth Amsterdam Colloquium , pages 587-606 . 
Uwe Reyle .  1993 . Dealing with ambiguities by underspecification : construction  , representation , and deduction . Journal of Semantics , 10:123-179 . 
Uwe Reyle .  1995 . Coindexing labelled DRSs to represent and reason with ambiguities  . In S . Peters and K . van Deemter , editors , Semantic Ambiguity and Underspecification . CSLI Publications , Stanford . 
J . Rogers and K . Vijay-Shanker .  1994 . Extracting trees from their descriptions : an application to tree-adjoining grammars  . Computational Intelligence , 10:401-421 . 
Stuart Shieber , Fernando Pereira , and Mary Dalrymple .  1996 . Interaction of scope and ellipsis . Linguistics and Philosophy , 19:527-552 . 
Kees van Deemter and Stanley Peters . 1996.
Semantic Ambiguity and Underspecification.
CSLI , Stanford.
K . Vijay-Shanker .  1992 . Using description of trees in tree adjoining grammar framework  . 
Computational Linguistics , 18.
Feiyu Xu .  1998 . Underspecified representation and resolution of ellipsis  . Master's thesis , Universit ~ it des Saarlandes . http://www . col ? . 
uni-sb.de /' feiyu/thesis , html.

