A Freely Available Morphological Analyzer , Disambiguator
and Context Sensitive Lemmatizer for German
Wolfgang Lezius
University of Paderbom
Cognitive Psychology
D-33098 Paderborn


Reinhard Rapp
University of Mainz
Faculty of Applied Linguistics
D-76711 Germersheim
rapp@usun1.fask.uni-

Manfred Wettler
University of Paderbom
Cognitive Psychology
D-33098 Paderborn



In this paper we present Morphy , an integrated tool for German morphology , part-of-speech tagging and context-sensitive lemmatization  . Its large lexicon of more than 320 , 0 00 wordforms plus its ability to process German compound nouns guarantee a wide morphological coverage  . Syntactic ambiguities can be resolved with a standard statistical part-of-speech tagger  . By using the output of the tagger , the lemmatizer can determine the correct root even for ambiguous word forms  . The complete package is freely available and can be downloaded from the World Wide Web  . 

Morphological analysis is the basis for many NLP applications  , including syntax parsing , machine translation and automatic indexing . 
However , most morphology systems are components of commercial products  . Often , as for example in machine translation , these systems are presented as black boxes , with the morphological analysis only used internally  . This makes them unsuitable for research purposes . To our knowledge , the only wide coverage morphological lexicon readily available is for the English language  ( Karp , Schabes , et al ,  1992) . 
There have been attempts to provide free morphological analyzers to the research community for other languages  , for example in the MULTEXT project ( Armstrong , Russell , et al ,  1995) , which developed linguistic tools for six European languages  . However , the lexicons provided are rather small for most language ~  . In the case of German , we hope to significantly improve this situation with the development of a new version of our morphological analyzer 

In addition to the morphological analyzer , Morphy includes a statistical part-of-speech tagger and a context-sensitive lemmatizer  . It can be downloaded from our website as a complete package including documentation and lexicon  ( http://www-psycho . uni-paderborn . de/lezius/) . 
The lexicon comprises 324 , 000 wordforms based on 50 , 500 stems . Its completeness has been checked using Wahrig Deutsches WOrter-buch  , a standardictionary of German ( Wahrig ,  1997) . Since Morphy is intended not only for linguists , but also for second language learners of German , the current version has been implemented with Delphi for a standard Windows  95 or Windows NT platform and great effort has been put in making it as user friendly as possible  . For UNIX users , an export facility is provided which allows generating a lexicon of fullforms together with their morphological descriptions in text format  . 
1 The Morphology System
Since German is a highly inflectional language , the morphologicallg or ithms used in Morphy are rather complex and cannot be described herein detail  ( see Lezius ,  1996) . In essence , Morphy is a computer implementation f the morphological system described in the Duden grammar  ( Drosdowsky ,  1984) . 
An overview on other German morphology systems , namely GERTWOL , LA-Morph , Morph , Morphix , Morphy , MPRO , PC-Kimmo Morpholympics ( Hausser ,  1996) . The Morpho-lympics were an attempt to compare and evaluate morphology systems in a standardized competition  . Since then , many of the systems have been further developed . The version of Morphy as described here is a new release  . Improvements over the old version include an integrated part-of-speech tagger  , a context-sensitive lemmatizer , a2 . 5 times larger lexicon and more user-friendliness through an interactive Win-dows-environment  . 
The following subsections describe the three submodules of the morphological analyzer  . 
These are the lexical system , the generation module and the analysis module . 
1.1 Lexical System
The lexicon of Morphy is very compact as it only stores the baseform for each word together with its inflection class  . Therefore , the complete morphological information for 324 , 0 00 wordforms takes less than 2 Megabytes of disk space . 
In comparison , the text representation of the same lexicon , which can be generated via Mor-phy's export facility  , requires 125 MB when full morphological descriptions are given . 
Since the lexical system has been specifically designed to allow a user-friendly extension of the lexicon  , new words can be added easily . To our knowledge , Morphy is the only morphology system for German whose lexicon can be expanded by users who have no specialist knowledge  . When entering a new word , the user is asked the minimal number of questions necessary to infer the grammatical features of the new word and which any native speaker of German should be able to answer  . 
1.2 Generation
Starting from the root form of a word and its inflection type as stored in the lexicon  , the generation system produces all inflected forms  . 
Morphy's generation algorithms were designed with the aim of producing  100% correct output . 
Among other morphological characteristics , the algorithms consider vowel mutation ( Haus-H/i user )  , shift between B and ss ( FaB-Fasser ) , e-omission ( segeln-segle ) , infixation of infinitive markers ( weggehen-wegzuge hen )  , as well as pre-and infixation of markers of participles  ( gehen-g . e gangen ; wegge hen-wegg . egangen) . 
1.3 Analysis
For each word form of a text , the analysis system determines its root , part of speech , and - if appropriate-its gender , case , number , person , tense , and comparative degree . It also segments compound nouns using a longest -matching rule which works from right to left and takes linking letters into account  . To compound German nouns is not trivial : it can involve baseforms and/or inflected forms  ( e . g . Haus-meister but H~i user-meer) ; in some cases the compounding is morphologically ambiguous  ( e . g . Stau-becken means water reservoir , but Staub-ecken means dust corners ) ; and the linking letters e and s are not always determined phonologically  , but in some cases simply occur by convention ( e . g . 
Schwein-e-bauch but Schwein-s-blase and

Since the analysis system treats each word separately  , ambiguities cannot be resolved at this stage . For ambiguous word forms , all possible lemmat and their morphological descriptions are given  ( see Table 1 for the example Winde )  . If a wordform cannot be recognized , its part of speech is predicted by a guesser which makes use of statistical data derived from German suffix frequencies  ( Rapp ,  1996) . 
morphological description lemma
SUBNOMSINFEMW inde
SUBGENSINFEMW inde
SUBDATSINFEMW inde
SUBAKK SINFEM Winde
SUBDATSIN MAS Wind
SUBNOMPLUMAS Wind
SUBGENPLUMAS Wind
SUBAKK PLU MAS Wind
VERSINIPE PRA winden
VERSIN 1 PEKJ1 winden
VERSIN 3PEKJI winden
VERSINIMP winden
Table 1: Morphological nalys is for W inde.
Morphy's algorithm for analysis is motivated by linguistic considerations  . When analyzing a word form , Morphy first builds up a list of possible roots by cutting off all possible prefixes and suffixes and reverses the process of vowel mutation if umlauts are found  ( shifts between Blooked up in the lexicon , and - if found-all possible inflected forms are generated  . Only those roots which lead to an inflected form identical to the original wordform are selected  ( Lezius ,  1996) . 
Naturally , this procedure is much slower than a simple algorithm for the lookup of wordforms in a full form lexicon  . It results in an analysis speed of about 300 wordforms per second on a fast PC , compared to many thousands using a fullform lexicon  . However , there are also advantages : First , as mentioned above , the lexicon can be kept very small , which is an important consideration for a PC -based system intended for Internet-distribution  . More importantly , the processing of German compound nouns and the implementation fderivation rules - although only partially completed at this stage-fits better into this concept  . For the processing of very large corpora under UNIX  , we have implemented a lookup algorithm which operates on the Morphy-generated fullform lexicon  . 
The coverage of the current version of Mor-phy was evaluated with the same test corpus that had been used at the Morpholympics  . This corpus comprises about 7 . 8 00 wordforms in total and consists of two political speeches  , a fragment of the LIMAS-corpus , and a list of special word forms . The present version of Morphy recognized 94 . 3%, 98 . 4%, 96 . 2%, and 88 . 9% of the wordforms respectively . The corresponding values for the old version of Morphy  , with a 2 . 5 times smaller lexicon , had been 89 . 2%, 95 . 9%, 86 . 9%, and 75 . 8% . 
2 The Disambiguator
Since the morphology system only looks at isolated wordforms  , words with more than one reading cannot be disambiguated  . This is done by the disambiguator or tagger , which takes context into account by considering the conditional probabilities of tag sequences  . For example , in the sentence " he opens the can " the verb -reading of can may be ruled out because a verb cannot follow an article  . 
After the success of statistical part-of-speech taggers for English  , there have been quite a few attempts to apply the same methods to German  . 
Lezius , Rapp & Wettler ( 1996 ) give an overview on some German tagging projects . Although we considered a number of algorithms , we decided to use the trigram algorithm described by Church  ( 1988 ) for tagging . It is simple , fast , robust , and - among the statistical taggers-still more or less unsurpassed in terms of accuracy  . 
Conceptually , the Church-algorithm works as follows : For each sentence of a text  , it generates all possible assignments of part-of -speech tags to words  . It then selects that assignment which optimizes the product of the lexical and contextual probabilities  . The lexical probability for wordN is the probability of observing part of speech X given the  ( possibly ambiguous ) word N . The contextual probability for tagZ is the probability of observing part of speech Z given the preceding two parts of speech X and Y  . It is estimated by dividing the trigram frequency XYZ by the bigram frequency XY  . In practice , computational limitations do not allow the enumeration of all possible assignments for long sentences  , and smoothing is required for infrequent events . This is described in more detail in the original publication  ( Church ,  1988) . 
Although more sophisticated algorithms for unsupervised learning-which can be trained on plaintext instead on manually tagged corpora- are well established  ( see e . g . Merialdo , 1994), we decided not to use them . The main reason is that with large tagsets , the sparse-data-problem can becomes osevere that unsupervised training easily ends up in local minima  , which can lead to poor results without any indication to the user  . 
More recently , in contrast to the statistical taggers , rule-based tagging algorithms have been suggested which were shown to reduce the error rate significantly  ( Samuelsson & Voutilainen ,  1997) . We consider this a promising approach and have started to develop such a system for German with the intention of later inclusion into 

The tagset of Morphy's tagger is based on the feature system of the morphological analyzer  . 
However , some features were discarded for tagging . For example , the tense of verbs is not considered . This results in a set of about 1000 different tags . A fragment of 20 , 000 words from the Frankfurter Rundschau Corpus , which we have been collecting since 1992 , was tagged with this tagset by manually selecting the correct choice from the set of possibilities generated we refer to this corpus as the training corpus  . Of all possible tags , only 456 actually occurred in the training corpus . The average ambiguity rate was 5 . 4 tags per word form . 
The performance of our tagger was evaluated by running it on a  5000-word test sample of the Frankfurter Rundschau-Corpus which was di-stinct from the training text  . We also tagged the test sample manually and compared the results  . 
84 . 7% of the tags were correctly tagged . Although this result may seem poor at first glance  , it should be noted that the large tagsets have many fine distinctions which lead to a high error rate  . If a tagset does not have these distinctions , the accuracy improve significantly . In order to show this , in another experiment we mapped our large tagset to a smaller set of  51 tags , which is comparable to the tagset used in the Brown Corpus  ( Greene & Rubin ,  1971) . As a result , the average ambiguity rate per word decreased from  5  . 4 to 1 . 6, and the accuracy improved to 95 . 9% , which is similar to the accuracy rates reported for statistical taggers with small tagsets in various other languages  . Table 2 shows a tagging example for the large and the small tagset  . 

Ich PROPER NOMSIN 1PE meine VER 1PE SIN meine POS AKKS IN FEM ATT
Frau SUBAKK FEMSIN
SZE large tagset small tagset
PROPER

POSATT


Table 2: Tagging example for both tagsets.
3 The Lemmatizer
For lemmatization ( the reduction to baseform ) , the integrated design of Morphy turned out to be advantageous  . In the first step , the morphology-module delivers all possible lemmata for each word form  . Secondly , the tagger determines the grammatical categories of the word forms  . If , for any of the lemmata , the inflected form corresponding to the wordform in the text does not agree with this grammatical category  , the respective lemma is discarded . For example , in the sentence " ich meine meine Frau " ( " I mean my wife " )  , the assignment of the two middle words to the verb meinen and the possessive pronoun mein is not clear to the morphology system  . 
However , since the tagger assigns the tag sequence " pronoun verb pronoun noun " to this sentence  , it can be concluded that the first occurrence of meine must refer to the verb meinen and the second to the pronoun mein  . 
Unfortunately , this may not always work as well as in this example  . One reason is that there may be semantic ambiguities which cannot be resolved by syntactic onsiderations  . Another is that the syntactic information delivered by the tagger may not be finegrained enough to resolve all syntactic ambiguities  , l Do we need the finegrained distinctions of the large tagset to resolve ambiguities  , or does the rough information from the small tag set suffice ? To address these questions  , we performed an evaluation using another test sample from the Frankfurter Rund-schau-Corpus  . 
We found that-according to the Morphy lexicon- of all  9  , 893 wordforms in the sample ,  9 , 198 (93 . 0%) had an unambiguous lemma . Of the remaining 695 word forms ,   667 had two possible lemmat and 28 were threefold ambiguous ( Table 3 gives some examples )  . Using the large tagset ,   616 out of the 695 ambiguous wordforms were correctly lemmatized ( 88 . 6%) . The corresponding fiures for the small tagset were slightly better :  625 out of 695 ambiguities were resolved correctly ( 89 . 9%) . When the error rate is related to the total number of wordforms in the text  , the accuracy is 99 . 2% for the large and 99 . 3% for the small tagset . 
The better performance when using the small tag set is somewhat surprising since there are a few cases of ambiguities in the test corpus which can only be resolved by the large tagset but not by the small tagset  . For example , since the small tagset does not consider a noun 's case  , gender , and number , it cannot decide whether Filmen is derived from der Film  ( " the film " ) or from dasFilmen ( " the filming " )  . On the other hand , as shown in the previou section , the tagging accuracy is much better for the small tagset  , which is an advantage in lemmatization ad obviously compensates for the lack of detail  . 
I For example the verb fuhren can be either a subjunctive form of fahren  ( " to drive " ) or a regular form of fiihren ( " to lead " )  . Since neither the large nor the small tagset consider mood  , this ambiguity cannot be resolved . 

However , we believe that with future improvements in tagging accuracy lemmatization based on the large tagset will eventually be better  . 
Nevertheless , the current implementation f the lemmatizer gives the user the choice of selecting between either tagset  . 
Begriffen Begriff , begreifen
Dank danken , dank(prep.), Dank
Gartengaren , Garten
Trotz Trotz , trotzen , trotz
Weise Weise , weise , weisen
Wunder Wunder , wundern , wund
Table 3: Wordforms with several lemmata.

In this paper , a freely available integrated tool for German morphological analysis  , part-of-speech tagging and context sensitive lemmatization was introduced  . The morphological analyzer is based on the standard Dudengrammar and provides wide coverage due to a lexicon of  324  , 0 00 wordforms and the ability to process compound nouns at runtime  . It gives for each word form of a text all possible lemmat and morphological descriptions  . The ambiguities of the morphological descriptions are resolved by the tagger  , which provides about 85% accuracy for the large and 96% accuracy for the small tagset . The lemmatizer uses the output of the tagger to disambiguate wordforms with more than one possible lemma  . It achieves an overall accuracy of about 99 . 3% . 

The work described in this paper was conducted at the University of Paderborn and supported by the Heinz Nix dorf-Institute  . The Frankfurter Rundschau Corpus was generously donated by the Druck-und Verlagshaus Frankfurt am Main  . 
We thank Gisela Zunker for her help with the acquisition and preparation of the corpus  . 

Armstrong , S . ; Russell , G . ; Petitpierre , D . ; Robert , G . 
(1995) . An open architecture for multilingual text processing  . In : Proceedings of the ACL SIGDAT Workshop . From Texts to Tags : Issues in Multilingual Language Analysis  , Dublin . 
Church , K . W .  (1988) . A stochastic parts program and noun phrase parser for unrestricted text  . Second Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , Austin , Texas ,  136143 . 
Drosdowski , G . ( ed . ) (1984) . Duden . Grammatik der deutschen Gegenwarts sprache . Mannheim :

Greene , B . B . , Rubin , G . M .  (1971) . Automatic Grammatical Tagging of English . Internal Report , Brown University , Department of Linguistics :
Providence , Rhode Island.
Hausser , R . ( ed . ) (1996) . Linguistische Verifikation . 
Dokumentation zur Ersten Morpholympics.
Niemeyer : Ttibingen.
Karp , D . ; Schabes , Y . ; Zaidel , M . ; Egedi , D .  (1992) . 
A freely available wide coverage mophologicai analyzer for English  . In: . Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  . Nantes , France . 
Lezius , W .  (1996) . Morphologie system Morphy . In : R . Hausser ( ed . ): Linguistische Verifikation . Do-kumentation zur Ersten Morpholympics . Niemeyer :
T fibingen . 2535.
Lezius , W . ; Rapp , R . ; Wettler , M .  (1996) . A morphology system and part-of-speech tagger for German  . In : D . Gibbon ( ed . ): Natural Language Processing and Speech Technology  . Results of the 3rd KON VENS Conference , Bielefeld . Berlin :
Mouton de Gruyter . 369-378.
Merialdo , B .  (1994) . Tagging English text with a probabilistic model . Computational Linguistics , 20(2), 155-171 . 
Rapp , R .  (1996) . Die Be rechnungy on Assoziation en : ein korpus linguistischer Ansatz  . Hildesheim : Olms . 
Samuelsson , C . , Voutilainen , A .  (1997) . Comparing a linguistic and a stochastic tagger . Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the ACL and 8th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL . 
Wahrig , G .  (1997) . Deutsches W Orterbuch . Gtiters-loh : Bertelsmann . 
Appendix : Abbreviations
AKK accusative PLU plural
ATT attributive usage POS possessive
DAT dative PRA present tense
FEM feminine PRO pronoun
GEN genitive SIN singular
IMP imperative SUB noun
KJI subjunctive 1 SZE punctuation mark
MAS masculine VER verb
NOM nominative 1PE 1st person
PER personal 3PE 3rd person
Diemorphologische Analyseisteine wichtige Grundlage vieler Anwendungen zur Verarbei-tung nattirlicher Sprache  , be is piels weise desSyntax-Parsing oder der maschinellen Uberset-zung  . Leiderwurd endiever fiigbaren Systemeh ~ iufig fi irreinkommer zielle Zweckeentwickeltoder sindals Best and teile  gr66erer Paketenichteinzelnlauff ~ ihig . Nachunseren Information enstehtle diglich far das Englische einum fassen-des und dennoch frei verf tigbares morphologi-sches Lexikon zur Verftigung  . 
Allerdings gabes Versuche , auch for and ereSprachen freiver f'tig bare Morphologie program-mebereitzustellen  . Be is piels weise wurde im Rahmen des von der Europ ~ iischen Union  gef6r-derten MULTEXT-Projektese in morphologi-schesTool entwickelt  , dasf'tir sechs Amtsspra-chen , darunter auchDeutsch , konzipiert wurde . 
Diebereitgestellten Lexikas indjedo chinden meisten F ~ ille nicht sehrum fangreich  . 
Demgegentiber umfa6t das Lexikon deraktu-ellen Version unseres Morphologie-Tools Mor-phyetwa  50  . 500 St~imme unddamittiber 32 0 . 000 Vollformen . Eswurdean handes Wah-rig-W ~ Srter buchesmit 120 . 000 Stichw 6rternauf Vollst ~ in digkeitiber priift , wobeije do chext remselte neoder alsveralt et be trachtete WSr ternicht be riick sich tigtwurden  . Zudemwurden Kompo-sitain der Regel nichtin das Lexikon aufge-nommen  , dasievon Morphy zur Laufzeitzer legt werden . 
Nebender morphologischen Analyse und
Syntheseenth ~ ilt Morphyeinen Wortarten-Tagger so wie einen kontext sensitiven Lemmati-sierer  . Dadas Programmnicht nurftir Lingui-sten , sondern auch zur Untersttitzung des Fremdsprachener werbeskonzipiertist  , wurde Morphyf'tir Standard-PCs unter Window sent -wickelt  . F fir An wender and erer Betriebs system e besteht die MS glichkeit  , e in Vollformen lexikon im Text format zu exportieren  . 

