Identifying Syntactic Role of Antecedent in Korean Relative 
Clause Using Corpus and Thesaurus Information
Hui-Feng Li , Jong-Hyeok Lee , Geunbae Lee
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Pohang University of Science and Technology San 31 Hyoja-dong , Nam-gu , Pohang 790-784 , Republic of Koreahflee@madonna . postech . ac . kr,jh lee , gblee)@postech . ac . kr
Abstract
This paper describes an approach to identifying the syntactic role of an antecedent in a Korean relative clause  , which is essential to structural disambiguation a d semantic analysis  . In a learning phase , linguistic knowledge such as conceptual cooccurrence patterns and syntactic role distribution of antecedents is extracted from a largescale corpus  . Then , in an application phase , the extracted knowledge is applied in determining the correct syntactic role of an antecedent in relative clauses  . Unlike previous research based on cooccurrence patterns at the lexical level  , we represent cooccurrence patterns with concept ypes in a thesaurus  . In an experiment , he proposed method showed a high accuracy rate of  90  . 4% in resolving am-biguitie s of syntactic role determination fantecedents  . 
1 Introduction
A relative clause is the one that modifies an antecedent in a sentence  . To determine the syntactic role of the antecedent in a verb argument structure of relative clause is important in parsing and structural disambiguation  ( Li et al ,  1998) . While applying case frames of a verb for structural disambiguation  , identifying the role of antecedent will affecthe correctness of struc-tural disambiguation impressively  . 
In this paper , we will describe a method of identifying the syntactic role of antecedents  , which consists of two phases . First , in the learning phase , conceptual patterns ( CPs ) and syntactic role distribution of antecedents are extracted from a corpus of  6 million words , the Korean Language Information Base ( KLIB ) . 
The conceptual patterns reflec the possible case restriction of a verb with conceptypes  , while the syntactic role distribution shows the preference of syntactic role of antecedents of a verb  . 
Second , in the application phase , the syntactic role of an antecedent is decided using CPs and the syntactic role distribution  . 
In regards to the rest of this paper , Section 2 will review the problems and related work . 
Section 3 will describe a statistical approach of conceptual pattern extraction from a large corpus as knowledge for determining syntactic roles  . Section 4 will describe how to identify syntactic roles using conceptual patterns and syntactic role distribution of antecedents in the corpus  . Section 5 will then present an experimental evaluation of the method  . The last section makes a conclusion with some discussion  . 
The Yale Romanization is used to represent Korean expressions  . 
2 Problems and Related Work
In English , it is possible to recognize the syntactic role of antecedents by their position  ( trace ) in relative clauses and the valency information of verbs  . For example , the syntactic role of an antecedent man can be recognized as subject of the relative clause in a sentence " He is the man who lives next door " and as object in a sentence " He is the man whom Imet  . " The relative pronoun such as who , whom , that , whose , and which can also be used in identifying the role of antecedents in relative clauses  . 
However , it is not a trivial work to identify the syntactic role of antecedents in Korean relative clauses  . Korean is such a head final language that the antecedent comes after the relative clause  . The rest of this section will describe three main characteristics of Korean relative clauses that make it difficult to determine the syntactic role of their antecedents  . The first characteristics that unlike English , Korean lacks relative words corresponding to English-  .  ,  .   .   .  ? ? ,  .  = ,  .   .  , ?  .  ?  . ? o ? o , o . op Figure 1: Syntactic dependency tree for ( 1 ) relative pronouns . Instead , an adnominal verb ending follows its verb stem of a relative clause modifying an antecedent  . The adnominal verb ending does not provide any information about the syntactic role of antecedent  . For example , the relative clause kang-ey sehulu- ( flow in a river ) in sentence ( 1 ) modifies the antecedent m wul- ( water )  , while adnominal verb ending-nun provides no clue about the syntactic role of the antecedent m wul  ( water )  . Figure 1 shows the syntactic dependency tree ( SDT ) of sentence ( 1 )  . We need to decide the syntactic role of the antecedent m wul-  ( water ) in the argument structure of the verb hulu- ( flow ) when applying case frames of the verb for structural disambiguation  . The dependency parser ( Lee ,  1995 ) only gives the syntactic relation mod between them  , which should be regarded as subject in the relative clause  . 
(1) nanunkang-eyse hulu-nunm wul-lulpo att-ta.
( I saw water that flowed in a river.)
As the second characteristic , the syntactic role of an antecedent cannot be determined by word order  . This is because Korean is a relatively free word -order language like Japanese  , Russian , or Finnish , and also because some arguments of a verb may be frequently omitted  . 
In sentence (2) , for example , the verb of relative clause nolay-lulp wulless - ten  ( where \[ I \] sanga song\[at the place \] ) have two arguments\[I \] and\[place\] omitted  . Thus , the antecedent ko s- ( place ) might be identified as subject or adverbial in the relative clause  . 

I'I
Figure 2: System architecture ( 2 ) no lay-lulp wulless-tenkos-ey na-nunkass-ta . 
(I went to the place where \[ I \] sang a song \[ a the place \]  . ) The th i rd character ist ic ofKorean relative clauses is that the case particle of an antecedent  , that indicates the syntactic role in the relative clause  , is omitteduring relativization . In fact , in a relatively free-word order language , the case particles are very important to the syntactic role determination  . 
Due to lack of syntactic lues , it is very difficult to construct general rules for identifying the syntactic role of antecendents  . Thus , the corpus-based method has been prefered to the rule-based one in solving the problem of syntactic role determination iKorean relative clauses  . Yang and Kim ( 1993 ) proposed a corpus-based method , where , for each noun/verb pair , its word cooccurrence and subcategorization scores are extracted at lexical level  . Park and Kim ( 1997 ) described a method of semantic role determination of antecedents using verbal patterns and statistic information from a corpus  . These word cooccurrence patterns are all at lexical level  , so we have to construct a large amount of word cooccurrence patterns and statistical information before applying to a real largescale problem  . Actually , the system performance mainly relies on the domain of application  , the number of word cooccurrence patterns extracted  , and the size of corpus . 

In the following sections , we will describe an approach to acquiring statistical information at conceptual level rather than at lexical level from a corpus using conceptual hierarchy in the Kadokawa thesaurus titled New Synonym Dictionary  ( Ohno and Hamanishi ,  1981) , and also describe a method of syntactic role determination using the extracted knowledge  . The system architecture is shown in Figure 2 . 
3 Ext ract ion of S ta t i s t i c In fo rmat ion f rom Corpus First  , for each of 100 verbs selected by order of frequency in the KLIB ( Korean Language Information Base ) corpus of 6 million words , its syntactic relational patterns ( SRPs ) of the form ( Noun , Syntactic relation , Verb ) are extracted from the corpus . Then , the nominal words in the SRPs are substituted with their corresponding concept codes at level  4 of the Kadokawa thesaurus . A nominal word may have multiple meaning such as C1  , C2 ,   . . . , Cn . However , since we cannot determine which meaning of the nominal word is used in a SRP  , we uni-1 formly addn to the frequency of each concept code  . Through this processing , the syntactic relational pattern ( SRP ) changes into the conceptual frequency pattern ( CFP )  , (< C1 , f l > , < C2 , f2> ,  .   .   .   , < Crn , fm > , SRj , Vk ) , where Ci represents a concept code at level four of the Kadokawa thesaurus  , fi indicates the frequency of the code Ci , and SRj shows a syntactic relation between these concept codes and verb Vk  . 
These patterns are then generalized by a concept type filter into more abstract conceptual patterns  ( CPs )  , ( el , C2 ,   . . . , Cn , SRj , Vk ) ll < j < 5, 1_<k < 100 . Unlike in CFPs , the concept code in the more generalized CPs may be not only at level four  ( denoted as L4 )  , but also at level three ( L3) and two ( L2) . In addition to the CPs , we also extrac the syntactic role distributiion of antecedents  . 
3.1 Retrieving Syntactic Relational
Patterns from Corpus
Unlike the conventional parsing problem whose main goal is to completely analyze a whole sentence  , the extraction of syntactic relational patterns ( SRPs ) aims to partially analyze sentences and thus to get the syntactic relations between nominals and verbs  . For this , we designed a partial parser , the analysis result of which is obviously not as precise as that of a full-parser  . 
However , it can provide much useful information . For the set of 100 verbs , a total of 282 , 216 syntactic relational patterns ( SRPs ) was extracted from the KLIB corpus . During the generalization step , the problematic patterns are filtered out . 
In Korean , the syntactic relation of nominal words toward a verb is mainly determined by case particles  . During the extraction of SRPs(Ni , SRj , Vk ) , we only consider the syntactic relation SRjs determined by  5 types of case particles : nominative ( - i/ka/kkeyse )  , accusative (- ul/lul ) , and three adverbial (- ey/eyn un , se/eyse/eysenun , -to/ulo/ulonun ) . 
3 . 2 Conceptual Pattern Extraction 3 . 2 . 1 Thesaurus H ierarchy For the purpose of type generalization of nominal words in SRPs  , the Kadoka wathes aur ustitled NewSynonym Dictionary  ( Ohno and Hamanishi , 1981) is used , which has a four-level hierarchy with about 1 , 000 semantic classes . 
Each class of upper three levels is further divided into  10 subclasses , and is encoded with a unique number . For example , the class'stationary ' at level three is encoded with the number  96 and classified into ten subclasses , Figure 3 shows the structure of the Kadokawa thesaurus . 
To assign the concept code of Kadoka wathesaurus to Korean words  , we take advantage of the existing Japanese-Korean bilingual dictionary  ( JKBD ) that was developed for a Japanese-Korean MT system called COBALT-J/K  . The bilingual dictionary contains more than 120 , 000 words , the meaning of which is encoded with the concept codes that are at level four in the Kadokawa thesaurus  . Thus , Korean words in the SRPs are automatically assigned their corresponding concept codes of level four through JKBD  . 
3.2.2 Principle of Generalization
We encoded the nouns in SRPs extracted by the parser with concept codes from the Kadokawa thesaurus  , and examined histograms of the frequency of concept codes  . We observed that the frequency of codes for different syntactic relations of a verb showed very different distribution shapes  . This means that we could use the distribution of concept codes  , together with their frequencies as clues for conceptual pattern ex- 

II i IIIII i I ? I : ; J ~ s 6 ~I ? ' IIItIIIII 1 I"i IIIIIIIIo ~ ( ~ 1 e~z~u  ~ oss qt~6   w'9 isl O~9 ~ o 9~1   9~1   9~   ~4 I ~ S6  ~  9Sa   9~ Figure 3: Concept hierarchy of Kadoka wa thesau rustraction . From the histograms of codes of both subject and object relational patterns for the verb tten a - ta  ( leave )  , we observed that concept codes about human ( codes from 500 to 599 ) appear most frequently in the role of subject , and codes of position ( from 100 to 109) , codes of place ( from 700 to 709 ) and codes of building ( from 940 to 949 ) appear most often in the role of object . 
For each verb Vk , we first analyzed the cooccurrence frequencies fi of concept codes Ci of noun N  , and then computed an average frequency fave , t and standardeviation at around lave , t , at level g ( denoted as Lt ) of the concept hierarchy . We then replaced fi with its associated z-score k $  , e . k $ , e is the strength of code frequency fatLt , and represents the standard deviation above the average of frequency fave  , t . Referring to Smadja's definition ( Smadja ,  1993) , the standardeviation at at Lt and strength kf , t of the code frequencies are defined as shown in formulas  1 and 2  . 
nt2 :_ fow , t ) at = V nt-1 (1) k $ , , , ,t = fi , t-fave , t(2) at where f i , t is the frequency of concept code Ci at L t of Kadokawathesaurus  , fave , t is the average frequency of codes at Lt , nt is the number of concept codes at Lt . 
3.2.3 Code Generalization
The standardeviation at at Lt characterizes the shape of the distribution of code frequen-Level Threshold of standard deviation O'O Tl Threshold of subj obj adv l  adv2   adv3 Strengthko , t
L 42.0 8.0 0.5 0.1 0.9 k 0, 4= 4.0
L 36.0 16.0 1.5 2.0 2.0k 0,3 = l.0
L23 0.05 0.01 5.0 4.0 10.0 ko , 2=-0.60
Table 1: Thresholds of the filtercies . If al is small , then the shape of the histogram will tend to be flat  , which means that each concept code can be used equally as an argument of a verb with syntactic role SRi  . If at is large , it means that there is one or more codes that tend to be peaks in the histogram  , and the corresponding nouns for these concept codes are likely to be used as arguments of a verb  . The filter in our system selects the patterns that have a variation larger than threshold  a0  , t , and pulls out the concept codes that have a strength of frequency larger than threshold  k0  , l . 
If the value of the variation is small , than we can assume there is no peak frequency for the nouns  . The patterns that are produced by the filter should represent the conceptypes of extracted words that appear most frequently as syntactic role SRi with verb Vk  . 
We later analyzed the distribution of frequency f /in CFPjs to produce an average frequency fave  , t and standard deviation at . Through experimentation , we decided the threshold of standard deviation a 0 , t and strength of frequency k0 , t as shown in Table 1 . 
The lower the value of threshold k0 , t is assigned , the more concept codes can be extracted as conceptual patterns from the CFPs  . We maintained a balance between extracting conceptual codes at low levels of the conceptual hierarchy for the specific usage of conceptype and extract in general conceptypes for enhancing overall system performance  . These values may be variable in different application  . 
In Table 2 , we enlist the conceptypes that have more than 5 appearances in the CFP of verb ttena-ta ( leave )  . The strength of frequencies for generalization is calculated with formula  2  . 
1 - 0 . 932 kl , 4= 2 . 82513 = 0 . 024 ( freq . ) ( freq . ) ( freq . ) ( freq . ) ( freq . ) ( freq . ) 061 ( 10 )  086 ( 7 )  117 ( 5 )  118 ( 7 )  158 ( 5 )  160 ( 5 )  179 ( 5 )  324 ( 5 )  410 ( 12 )  411 ( 14 )  430 ( 16 )  436 ( 5 )  480 ( 7 )  481 ( 8 )  482 ( 9 )  500 ( 23 )  501 ( 31 )  503 ( 31 )  507 ( 35 508 ( 30 )  511 ( 11 )  513 ( 8 )  514 ( 8 )  515 ( 5 )  516 ( 5 )  519 ( 6 )  521 ( 15 )  522 ( 19 )  523 ( 10 )  525 ( 7 )  530 ( 5 )  535 ( 6 )  540 ( 15 )  550 ( 7 )  572 ( 8 )  576 ( 9 )  580 ( 7 )  581 ( 7 )  590 ( 8 )  591 ( 5 )  595 ( 12 )  814 ( 9 )  822 ( 5 )  828 ( 5 )  830 ( 5 )  833 ( 7 )  941 ( 8 )  997 ( 7 )  998 ( 6 ) other ( 427 ) * No . of codes : n4 = 932* Average freq . : f a , . , e , 4= 932/1000 = 0 . 932* Standard deviation : at = 2 . 8 21530 *' other ' in the table means the total freq . of nouns less than 5 * The numbers in brackets are the frequencies of code appearance Table  2: Conceptypes and frequencies in CFP ( < Ci , fi > , subj , ttena-ta ) 12-0 . 932k 12,4--2 . 82513 - 3 . 9176 14 - 0 . 932k 14,4-2 . 82513 - 4 . 626 Since the value of k0,4 is set at 4 . 0 , as shown in Table 1 , the concept codes with frequencies of more than 13  , as the equation for k 14 , 4 shows , are selected as generalized conceptypes at L4 . 
After abstraction at L4 , the system performs generalization at L3 . It remove selected frequencies , such as frequency 14 of code 411 in Table 2 , and sums up the frequencies of the remaining concept codes to form the frequency of higher level group  . For example , the system removes the frequency for code 411 from the group 410  ( 12 )  ,  411(14) ,  412(3) ,  413(0) ,  414(0) ,  415(0) ,  416(1) ,  417(0) ,  415(0) ,  419(0) , then sums up the frequencies of the remaining codes for a more abstract code of  41  . The frequency of code 41 then becomes 16 . Through this process , the system performs a generalization at L3 for the more abstractypes of the concept . The system calculates ae and strength Kf , e , selects the most promising codes , and stores conceptual patterns ( C1 , C2 , C3 ,   . . . , SRj , Vk ) as the knowledge source for syntactic role determination in real texts  , where concepty peC i is created by the generalization procedure  . After generalization of the CFP patterns for the subject role of the verb ttena-ta  ( leave )  , the produced conceptual patterns are : (411 , 430 ,  500 ,   . . . , 06, 11,  . . . , 99, 1, subj , ttena-ta ) . 
3.3 Syntactic Role Distribution of

In ( Yang et al ,  1993) , they defined subcategorization score ( SS ) of a verb considering the verb argument structure in a corpus  . They asserted that the SS of a verb represents how likely a verb might have a specific grammatical complement  . 
We observed from analyzing the corpus that we cannot infer the syntactic roles of antecedents from subcategorization scores since the syntactic role distribution of verb arguments in a corpus is so different from the syntactic role distribution of antecedents due to the property of free word language  . In Korean , an argument of a verb could be omitted , and so the subcategorization score don't provide possible trend of the role of antecedent in many cases  . For example , 26 . 8% of arguments of the verb ttena-ta ( leave ) are used as subjects , and 54 . 4% are used as objects , but 74 . 4 1% of antecedents of the verb are of subject role , and 6 . 9% are of object role . 
Although the distribution of antecedents i necessary to our task  , we cannot automatically retrieve the syntactic role distribution of them from the corpus  . We extracted relative clauses for specific verbs from the corpus  , and then counted the number of syntactic roles of the antecedents manually by language trained people  . Since there are about 200 to 500 relative clauses for each verb in the corpus , it is possible to check this information . This information is represented by relative score RSk  ( SR i ) of syntactic role SRi for antecedents of verb Vk as is shown bellow and is used in syntactic role determination as described in section  4: 
RSk ( SR i ) -freqk ( SR i )   ( 3 ) freq ( Vk ) where freq ( Vk ) are the frequency of verb Vk of relative clauses , and freqk ( SR i ) is the frequency of syntactic role SRi of antecedents in relative clauses including verb Vk in the corpus  . 
4 Identifying Deep Syntactic

While determining syntactic relation for antecedents of relative clauses  , the system checks the argument structure of the verb in a relative clause first  , and then records the empty ( or omitted ) arguments of the verb in relative 4+2 penalty ( l . O ) 2 + 3 penalty(0 . 5) 4+2 penahy (0 . 5) Figure 4: Conceptual similarity computation
Syntactic No . of Percentage Accuracy relation appearances ( % )   ( % ) subject 1 , 087 object adverb ( - ey ) adverb ( - eyse ) adverb ( do ) total 1 , 772 61 . 34% 24 . 32% 6 . 82% 1 . 08% 6 . 44% 100% 90% 92% 89% 92% 89% 90 . 4% Table 3: The test results of syntactic role determination for antecedents clause referring to the verb valency information  . 
The antecedent that the verb phrase is modifying can be one of these empty arguments  . 
An antecedent ( a noun ) usually has one or more meanings , which causes ambiguity in determining the correct syntactic relation between the antecedent and a verb  . 
We assume that an antecedent has meanings C1 , C2 , C3 ,   . . . , Cn , and that CP i is a conceptual pattern ( P1 , P2 ,   . . . , Pro , SR i , Vk ) corresponding to syntactic relation SP ~ of verb Vk  . The evaluation score SIMi(Np , Vk ) of an antecedent Np that can be syntactic role SRi with verb Vk is defined as formula  4  , and conceptual similarity Csim(Cw , Pj ) between concept Cw and Pj as formula 5 . 
SIMI(Np , Vk ) = rnax(Csirn(Cw , Pj )) 1 < w < n , 1 ~ j ~_m (4) Csim(Cw , Pj ) 2* level ( MSCA(Cw , Pj ) ) = ? ispenalty ( 5 ) level ( Cw ) + level ( Pj ) where MSCA ( Cw , Pj ) in Csim(Cw , Pj ) represents the most specific common ancestor ( MSCA ) of concepts Cw and Pj in the Kadokawa concept hierarchy  . Level ( Cw ) refers to the depth of concept Cw from the root node in the concept hierarchy  . Is_a Penalty is a weight factor reflecting that C was a descendant of Pj is preferable to other cases  . Conceptual similarity computation with formula 5 is shown in
Figure 4.
Based on these definitions , the syntactic relation SRj between antecedent Np and verb Vk can be calculated as follows:  1  . Let R = SP ~\[ SR i is a syntactic relation of an empty  ( or omitted ) argument in the relative clause of Irk , 1 < i < 5 . 
2 . For each conceptual pattern CP i of verb Vk of which SRi is in R  , and for each concept code Pi in CP i , compute SIMi(Np , Vk ) . 
3 . Determine the syntactic relation of antecedent Np to SRj on the condition that 
SIMj(Np , Vk ) has the largest value in SIMi(Np , Vk)\[1<i<5 and SRj in R . 
If two or more SIMi(Np , Vk ) have the same value , decide syntactic role referring to the higher relative score RSk  ( SR i ) of the syntactic role of the verb Vk . 
Here , syntactic relation can be one of subj , obj , advl , adv2 , and adv3 . The symbol s adv l , adv2 , and adv3 represent adverbs with case particles-ey , - eyse , and - lo , respectively . 
5 Experimental Evaluation
An informal way to evaluate the correctness of syntactic relation determination is to have an expert examine the test patterns and source sentences that the patterns appears  , and give his/her judgment about the correctness of the results produced by the system  . In our experiment , the correctness of syntactic and conceptual relation determination was evaluated manually by humans who were well trained in dependency syntax  . 
As a test set , we extracted 1 , 7 72 sentences that included relative clauses for the 100 verbs from 1  . 5 million word corpora of integrated Korean information base and test books of primary school  . The distribution of syntactic relation of antecedents among them and the test results were shown in Table  3  . There were 1,087 antecedents (61 . 34%) that were of subject role . 
The baseline accuracy of the problem is 61.34%.
That is , if we always select subject role for antecedents , the accuracy will reach 61 . 34% . 

Our system showed 90 . 4% of accuracy on average in syntactic relation identification  , which shows that the conceptual patterns and relative score of syntactic relation produced in the first phase can be a good source for determining the syntactic relation of an antecedent  . 
Through experiment , we observed several factors that affect the performance of the system  . 
First , the multiple meanings of a noun will affect the frequency distribution of concept codes  . 
In our system , we cope with this problem by adjusting the threshold of standard deviation and strength value  . The second problem is the sparseness of corpus domain  . If the corpus for learning is specified as a certain domain  , it will greatly increase the validity of conceptual patterns  . If we use a sense tagged corpus in the learning stage  , we can achieve high accuracy in syntactic relation determination  . 
6 Concluding Remarks
This paper describes an approach for syntactic role determination between an antecedent and a verb in relative clause for semantic analysis  . This method consists of two phases . In the first phase , the system extracts conceptual patterns and syntactic role distribution of antecedents from a large corpus  . In the second phase , the system applies the extracted conceptual patterns as knowledge in determining correct syntactic relations for structural disambiguation and semantic analysis in MT system for CG generation  . 
Unlike previous research that calculates ta -tistical information at a lexical level for every pair of words  , which may require a lot of space to store resulting patterns  , we represent those cooccurrence patterns with concept types of Kadokawa thesaurus  . The problematic concept types are filtered out by the type generalization procedure  . We used a corpus of 6 million words for conceptual pattern extraction . 
Our method can cope with the general scope of texts  . In the experiment evaluation , the proposed method showed a high accuracy rate of  90  . 4% in identifying the syntactic role of antecedents  . 
The method described in this paper can be used in resolving syntactic role of antecedents in relative clauses of other free word order languages  , and can also be used in generating selectional restrictions of case frames of verbs  . 

Lee , J . H . and G . Lee .  1995 . A Dependency Parser of Korean based on Connec -tionist/Symbolic Techniques  . Lecture Notes on Artificial Intelligence 990 , pages 95-106 . 
Springer-Verlag , Berlin.
Li , H . F . , J . H . Lee and G . Lee .  1998 . Conceptual Graph Generation from Syntactic Dependency Structures in an MT Environment  . 
( to be published by Computer Processing of
Oriental Languages in 1998).
Ohno , S . and M . Hamanishi .  1981 . New Synonym Dictionary , Kadokawa Shoten , Tokyo ( written in Japanese) . 
Park , S . B . and Y . T . Kim .  1997 . Semantic Role Determination in Korean Relative Clauses Using Idiomatic Patterns  . In Proceedings of 17th International Conference on Computer Processing of Oriental Languages  , pages 16 . 
Hong Kong.
Smadja , F .  1993 . Retrieving Collocations from Text : Xtract , Computational Linguistics ,  19(1):143-177 . 
Yang , J . and Y . T . Kim .  1993 . Identifying Deep Grammatical Relations in Korean Relative Clauses Using Corpus Information  . In Proceedings of Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim Symposium  '93  , pages 337-344 . Tae-
Jon , Korea.

