Dialect MT : A Case Study between Cantonese and Mandarin 
Xiaoheng Zhang
Dept . of Chinese & . Bilingual Studies , The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hung Hom , Kowloon
Hong Kong


Machine Translation ( MT ) need not be confined to interlanguage activities . In this paper , we discuss inter-dialect MT in general and Cantonese-Mandarin MT in particular  . Mandarin and Cantonese are two most important dialects of Chinese  . The former is the national lingua franca and the latter is the most influential dialect in South 
China , Hong Kong and overseas . The difference in between is such that mutual intelligibility is impossible  . This paper presents , from a computational point of view , a comparative study of Mandarin and Cantonese at the three aspects of sound systems  , grammar rules and vocabulary contents , followed by a discussion of the design and implementation f a dialect MT system between them  . 

Automatic Machine Translation ( MT ) between different languages , such as English , Chinese and Japanese , has been an attractive but extremely difficult research area  . Overforty years of MT history has seen limited practical translation systems developed or commercialized in spite of the considerable development in computer science and linguistic studies  . High quality machine translation between two languages requires deep understanding of the intended meaning of the source language sentences  , which in turn involves disambiguation reasoning based on intelligent searches and proper uses of a great amount of relevant knowledge  , including common sense ( Nirenburg , et . al .  1992) . The task is so demanding that some researchers are looking more seriously at machine-aided human translation as an altemative way to achieve automatic machine translation  ( Martin , 1997a , 1997b ) . 
Translation or interpretation is not necessarily an interlanguage activity  . In many cases , it happens among dialects within a single language  . 
Similarly , MT can be inter-dialect as well . In fact , automatic translation or interpretation seems much more practical and achievable here since inter-dialect difference is much less serious than interlanguage difference  . Inter-dialect MT ' also represents a promising market  , especially in China . In the following sections we will discuss inter -dialect MT with special emphasis on the pair of Chinese Cantonese and 
Chinese Mandarin.
1 Dialects and Chinese Dialects
Dialects of a language are that language's systematic variations  , developed when people of a common language are separated geographically and socially  . Among this group of dialects , normally one serves as the lingua franca , namely , the common language medium for communication among speakers of different dialects  . Inter-dialect differences exist in pronunciation , vocabulary and syntactic rules . 
However , they are usually insignificant in comparison with the similarities the dialects have  . It has been declared that dialects of one language are mutually intelligible  ( Fromkin and
Rodman 1993, p . 276).
Nevertheless , this is not true to the situation in China . There are seven major Chinese dialects : the Northern Dialect  ( with Mandarin as its standard version )  , Cantonese , Wu , Min , Hakka , Xiang and Gan ( Yuan ,  1989) , that for the most part are mutually unintelligible  , and inter-dialect 1In this paper , MT refers to both computer-based translation and interpretation  . 
1 460 translation is often found indispensable for successful communication  , especially between Cantonese , the most popular and the most influential dialect in South China and overseas  , and Mandarin , the lingual franca of China . 
2 Linguistic Consideration of Dialect

Most differences among the dialects of a language are found in their sound inventory and phonological systems  . Words with similar written forms are often pronounce differently in different dialects  . For example , the same
Chinese word " ~7 ; ~ "  ( Hong Kong ) is pronounced xi anglgang32 in Mandarin , but hoengl gong 2 in Cantonese . There are also lexical differences although dialect share most of their words  . Different dialects may use different words to refer to the same thing  . For example , the word " umbrella " is ~~: ( yu3san3 ) in Mandarin , and ~( zel ) in Cantonese . Differences in syntactic structure are less common but they are linguistically more complicated and computationally more challenging  . For example , the positions of some adverbs may vary from dialect to dialect  . To express " Yougo first ", we have
Mandarin : ni3xianlzou3 (1) you first go
Cantonese:nei5hang4sinl ( 2 ) yougo first Comparative sentences represent another case where syntactic difference is likely to happen  . 
For example the English sentence " Aistaller than B " is expressed as 

A ~\[', B
Abi3 Bgaol (3) 2In this paper , pronunciation of Mandarin is presented in Hanyu Pinyin Scheme  ( LICASS ,  1996) , and Cantonese in Yueyu Pinyin Scheme ( LSHK ,  1997) . Numbers are used to denote tones of syllables . 
Yueyu Pinyin is based on Hanyu Pinyin . That means , across the two pinyin schemes , words with different pinyin symbols are normally pronounced differently  . 
Athan Btall

A ~ ~_ B
Agoulg wo 3B (4)
At all more B
Sentences with double objects often follow different word orders  , too . In a Mandarin sentence with two objects , the one referring to person ( s ) must be put before the other one . Yet , many dialects allow the order to be reversed , for example :
Mandarin : wo 3 xianlgel 3 talqian 2
If irst give him money
I will give him some money first.
Cantonese:ngo3bei2cin4 keoi5sinl
I give money him first
Differences in word pronunciation and wordforms can be represented in a bi-dialect dictionary  . For example , for Cantonese-
Mandarin MT , we can use entries like word ( pron ,  \ [~ , ni3\] ,  \[+~ , nei5\])% you word(vi , \[ x - ~ , zou 3\] ,  \[ , ~ , hang4\])% go word(n , \[~ , hang2\] ,  \[ , ~ , hang4\])% row word(adv ,  \[5~ , xianl\] ,  \ [~ , s in 1\])% first word(n , \[~ j ~ : , yu3san3\] , \[' . ~ , , , , zel \] ) % ubbrella where the word entry flag " word " is followed by three arguments : the part of speech and the corresponding words  ( in Chinese characters and pinyins ) in Mandarin and in Cantonese . English comments are marked with "%" . 
Morphologically , there are some useful rules for word formation . For example , in Mandarin , the prefixes "~_" ( gongl ) and "\] ~ g " ( xiong2 ) are formale animals , and " fl ~" ( mu3 ) and " llt ~" ( ci2 ) female animals . But in most souther n China dialects , the suffixes " ~/0 h ~ i " and "0 . ~/~ : ~'' are often used instead . For examples bulYox :



Mandarin ~=
Cantonesez ~=$_ ~
And Cantonese " ~"
Daddy : ~_tt = ( gonglniul) , ~__( ngau 4 gungl) , ( mu3niu2) , ( ngau4naa2) . 
is for calling , e.g.,
Elder brother : 1  ~ , ~: ( Cantonese) , ~ J : ~ J : ( Mandarin ) . 
The problem caused by syntactic difference can be tackled with linguistic rules  , for example , the rules below can be used for Cantonese -Mandarin 
MT of the previous example sentences :
Rule 1: NP xianl VP <--> NP VPs in l
NP first VP <--> NP VP first
Rule 2:bi3 NP ADJP <--> ADJP go3 NP than more Rule 3:gei3   ( % give ) Operson Othing < --> bei2 ( % give ) Othing Operson Inter-dialect syntactic differences largely exists in word orders  , the key task for MT is to decide what part ( s ) of the source sentence should be moved , and to where . It seems unlikely for words to be moved over long distances  , because dialects normally exist in spoken , short sentences . 
Another problem to be considered is whether dialect MT should be direct or indirect  , i . e . , should there be an intermediate language/dialect ? It seems indirect MT with the lingua franca as the intermediate representation medium is promising  . The advantage is twofold : ( a ) good for multi-dialect MT ; Co ) more useful and practical as a lingua franca is a common and the most influential dialect in the family  , and may be the only one with a complete written system  . 
Still another problem is the forms of the source and target dialects for the MT program  . 
Most MT systems nowadays translate between written languages  , others are trying speech-to-speech translation . For dialects MT , translation between written sentences i not that admirable because the dialects of a language virtually share a common written system  . On the other hand , speech to speech translation involves speech recognition and speech generation  , which is a challenging research area by itself . It is worthwhile to take a middle way : translation at the level of phonetic symbols  . There are at least three major reasons : ( a ) The largest difference among dialects exists in sound systems  .   ( b ) Phonetic symbol translation is a prerequisite for speech translation  .   ( c ) Some dialect words can only be represented in sound  . In our case , pinyins have been selected to represent both input and output sentences  , because in China pinyins are the most popular tools to learn dialects and to input Chinese characters to computers  . Chinese pinyin schemes , for Mandarin and for ordinary dialects are romanized  , i . e . , they virtually only use English letters , to the convenience of computer processing . Of course , pinyin-to-pinyin translation is more difficult than translation between written words in Chinese block characters because the former involves linguistics analysis at all the three aspects of sound systems  , gramma rules and vocabulary contents instead of two  . 
3 The Problem of Ambiguities
Ambiguity is always the most crucial and the most challenging problem for MT  . Since inter-dialect differences mostly exist in words  , both in pronunciation and in characters , our discussion will concentrate on word disambiguation for Cantonese-Mandarin MT  . In the Cantonese vocabulary , there are about seven thousand to eight thousand i a lect words  ( including idioms and fixed phrases )  , i . e . , those words with different character forms from any Mandarin words  , or with meanings different from the Mandarin words of similar forms  . These dialect words account for about one third of the total Cantonese vocabulary  . In spoken Cantonese the frequency of use of Cantonese dialect words is close to  50 percent ( Li , et . al . , 1995, p236) . 
Because of historical reasons , Hong Kong Cantonese is linguistically more distant from Mandarin than othe regions in Mainland China  . 
One can easily spot Cantonese dialect articles in Hong Kong newspapers which are totally unintelligible to Mandarin speakers  , while Mandarin articles are easily understood by Cantonese speakers  . To translate a Cantonese article into Mandarin , the primary task is to deal with the Cantonese dialect words  , especially those that do not have semantically equivalent counterparts in the target dialect  . For example , the Mandarin Jf~(ju2 , orange ) has a much larger coverage than the Cantonese ~ e  ~  ( g watl )  . In addition to the Cantonese ~ t ~ , the Mandarin also includes the fruits Cantoneser fers to as ~ I  ~  ( gaml ) and ~ ( caang2 )  . On the other hand , the
Cantonese ~ semantically covers the
Mandarin ~( go , walk ) and ~( row).
Translation at the sound or pinyin level has to homophones of a word in the source dialect may not have their counterpart synonyms in the target dialect pronounced as homophones as well  . For example , the words ~: ~( bana ) and ~_ . 
(intersection ) are both pronounced xi angljiaol in Mandarin , but in Cantonese they are pronounced hoenglziul and so englgaaul respectively  , though their written characters remain unchanged . 
To tackle these ambiguities , we employs the techniques of hierarchical phrase analysis  ( Zhang and Lu , 1997) and word collocation processing ( Sinclair ,  1991) , both rule-based and corpus-based . Briefly speaking , the hierarchical phrase analysis method firstly tries to solve a word ambiguity in the context of the smallest phrase containing the ambiguous word  ( s )  , then the next layer of embedding phrase is used if needed  , and so on . As a result , the problem will be solved within the minimally sufficient context  . To further facilitate the work , large amount of commonly used phrases and phrase schemes are being collected into the dictionary  . 
Furthermore , interaction between the users and the MT system should be allowed for difficult disambiguation  ( Martin , 1997a ) . 
4 System Design and Implementation
A rudimentary design of a Cantonese-Mandarin dialect MT system has been made  , as shown in Figure 1 . The system takes Cantonese Pinyin sentences as input and generates Mandarin sentences in Hanyu Pinyin and in Chinese characters  . The translation is roughly done in three steps : syntax conversion  , word disambiguation and source-target words substitution  . The knowledge bases include linguistic rules , a word collocation list and a bi-dialect MT dictionary  . 
A simplified example will make the basic ideas clearer  . Suppose the example word entries and transformational rules in Section  2 are included in the MT system's knowledge base . 
Example sentence (2) in Cantonese , i . e . , nei5 hang4 sinl ~ , ~7" ~  ( 2 ) yougo first is given as input for the system to translate into Mandarin  . Because the input sentence contains the time adverb " sianl "  ( first )  , according to grammar rules , it is syntactically different from its counterpart in Mandarin  . According to the flow chart , the Cantone sepiny in sentence is converted into a Mandarin structure  . Rule 1 in the knowledge base is applied , producing nei5 sinl hang4 you first go Then the dictionary is accessed . The Cantonese word ~ ( hang4 ) corresponds to two Mandarin words , i . e . , 7T ~( vi . go , walk ) and ~ T ( n . row ) . 
According to Rule 1 , the verb Mandarin word is selected . And the individual Cantonese words in the sentence are substituted with their Mandarin counterparts  , a target Mandarin sentence ni 3 xianl zou3 you first go like sentence ( 1 ) is then correctly produced . 
Input a Cantonese pinyin sentence

MT linguistic kNo ~ rules
C 1.~structure .\[
WordV'\[colocation / ~' list . ~ x\[Cantonese dialect words II , , J NN\]disambiguiting withrespect to \[ ~ Mandarin words  1  , ~ . ._ . 
Cantonese-l ,/ III
Mandarin ~ dictionary I ' ~ . \[ Substitute Cantonese words \["\] with Mandarin words in pinyin land in characters  . 
Output Mandarin sentence data/controlflw > knowledge base asssment Figure  1: A Design for Cantonese-Mandarin MT Similarly , with transformational rule 13 , a more complicated Cantonese sentence like goulgwo3   wo3   ge3   yan4   bei2   cin4   keoi5 sinlt all more mePART person give money him first can be correctly translated into Mandarin : than metall PART persons first give him money Those who are taller than me will give him some money first  . 
We are in the progress of implementing an inter -dialect MT prototype  , called CPC , for translation between Cantonese and Putonghua ( i . e . , Mandarin ) , both Cantonese-to-Putonghua and Putonghua-to -Cantonese  . Input and output sentences are in pinyins or Chinese characters  . 
The programming languages used are Prolog and Java  . We are doing Cantonese-to-Putonghua first , based on the design . At its current state , we have built a Cantonese-Mandarinbi-dialect dictionary of about  3000 words and phrases based on some well established books  ( e . g . , Zeng , 1984; Mai and Tang ,  1997) , ( When completed , there will be around 10 , 000 word entries ) and a handful of rules . A Cantonese-Mandarin dialect corpus is also being built  . The program can process sentences of a number of typical patterns  . The funded project has two immediate purposes : to facilitate language communication ad to help Hong Kong students write standard Mandarin Chinese  . 

Compared with interlanguage MT , inter-dialect
MT is much more manageable , both linguistically and technically . Though generally ignored , the development of inter-dialect MT systems is both rewarding and more feasible  . 
The present paper discusses the design and implementation f dialect MT systems at pinyin and characterlevels  , with special attention on the Chinese Mandarin and Cantonese  . When supported by the modem technology for multimedia communication of the Intemet and the WWW  , dialect MT systems will produce even greater benefits  ( Zhang and Lau ,  1996) . 
Nonetheless , the research reported in this paper can only be regarded as an initial exploratory step into a new exciting research area  . There is larger oom for further research and discussion  , especially in word disambiguation and syntax analysis  . And we should also notice that the grammars of ordinary dialects are normally less well described than those of lingua francas  . 

The research is funded by Hong Kong Polytechnic University  , under the project account number of 0353   131   A3   720  . 

From k in V . and Rodman R . (1993) An Introduction to Language (5th edition ) . Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers , Orlando , Florida , USA . , p .  276 . 
Li X . , Huang J . , Shi Q . , Mai Y . and Chen D .   ( 1995 ) Guangzhou Fangyan Janjiu ( Research in Cantonese Dialec O . Guangdong People's Press , Guangzhou,
China , p . 236.
LICASS ( Language Institute , the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences )   ( 1996 ) Xiandai Hanyu Cidian ( Contemporary Chinese Dictionary )  . Commercial
Press , Beijing , China.
LSHK ( 1997 ) Yueyu Pinyin Zibiao ( The Chinese Character List with Cantonese Pinyin )  . Linguistic
Society of Hong Kong , Hong Kong.
Mai Y . and Tang B .   ( 1997 ) Shiyong Guangzhouhua Fenlei Cidian ( A Practical Semantically-Classified Dictionary of Cantonese  )  . Guandong People's Press,
Guangzhou , China.
Martin K .   ( 1997a ) The proper place of men and machines in language translation  . Machine
Translation , 1-2/12, pp . 323.
Martin K . (1997b ) It's still the proper place . Machine
Translation , 1-2/12, pp . 35-38.
Nirenburg S . , Carbonell J . , Tomita M . and Goodman K . 
(1992 ) Machine Translation : A Knowledge-Based Approach . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , San Mateo,
California , USA.
Sinclair J . (1991) Corpus , Concordance and
Collocation . Collins , London , UK.
Yuan J .   ( 1989 ) Hanyu Fangyan Gaiyao ( Introduction to Chinese Dialects )  . Wenzi Gaige Press , Beijing,

Zeng Z . F .   ( 1984 ) Guangzhouhua-Putonghua Koyuci Duiyi Shouee ( A Translation Manual of Cantonese-Mandarin Spoken Words and Phrases  )  . Joint
Publishing , Hong Kong.
Zhang X . and Lau C . F .   ( 1996 ) Chinese inter-dialect machine translation on the Web  . In " Collaboration via the Virtual Orient Express : Proceedings of the Asia-Pacific World Wide Web Conference " S  . Mak , F . 
Castro & J . Bacon-Shone , d . , Hong Kong University , pp .  419--429 . 
Zhang X . and LuF .   ( 1997 ) Intelligent Chinese pinyin-character conversion based on phrase analysis and dynamic semantic collocation  . In " Language Engineering ", L . Chen and Q . Yuan , ed . , Tsinghua University Press , Beijing , China , pp .  389-395 . 

