Using Language Resources in an Intelligent
Tutoring System for French
Chadia Moghrabi (*)
D6 partment d ' informatique
Universit 6 de Moncton
Moncton , NB,
E1A3E9, Canada
moghrac@umoncton.ca

This paper presents a project that investigates to what extent computational linguistic methods and tools used at GETA for machine translation can be used to implement novel functionalities in intelligent computer assisted language learning  . Our intelligent tutoring system project is still in its early phases  . The learner module is based on an empirical study of French as used by Acadian elementary students living in New-Brunswick  , Canada . Additionally , we are studying the state of the art of systems using Artificial Intelligence techniques as well as NLP resources and/or methodologies for teaching language  , especially for bilingual and minority groups . 
(*) On sabbatical leave at GETA-CLIPS , Grenoble , Francefor 1997 1998 . 
define the learner model . Then , in the last section we propose the system's general architecture and an overview some of its activities  ; particularly those that counteract Anglicisms by double generating examples in standard French and in the local dialect using linguistic resources usually used in machine translation  . 

The project that we have started is intended for the minority French speaking Acadian community living in Atlantic Canada  . In many families , parents used to go to English schools and sometimes cannot adequately help their children in their school work  . Children , who now go to French schools , often switch back to English for their leisure activities because of the scarcity of options open to them  . Many of these children use English syntax as well as borrowed vocabulary quite frequently  . In brief , this setting of language learning is not that of a typical native speaker  . 
We begin our presentation with a literature review of related work in Intelligent Tutoring Systems  ( ITS ) particularly on Computer
Assisted Language Learning ( CALL and
Intelligent CALL ) followed by the principles that this community is now expecting from system builders  . In the following sections we summarize an empirical study that helped us To our knowledge  , there are no systems that use machine translation tools for generating two versions of the same language instead of multilingual generation  . Another novelty is in the pedagogical approach of exposing the learner to the expert model and to the learner model in a comparative manner  , thus helping to clarify the sources of error . 
1 Artificial Intelligence
Language Learning and
Among the first milestones in Intelligent Tutoring Systems  ( ITS ) was Carbonell ' system ( 1970 ) that used a knowledge base to check the student's answers and to allow him/her to interact in " natural anguage "  . BUGGY , by Brown and Burton ( 1978 ) is another system more oriented towards student error diagnostic  . At around the same period researchers were starting to put also some emphasis on the teaching strategies adopted in the system such as in WEST  , Burton & Brown (1976) . 
It's with such works and many others later , that Intelligent Tutoring Systems ' architecture was more or less separated into four modules : an expert's model  , a learner's model , a teacher's model , and an interface , Wengers (1987) . 
However , language learning had its own specific difficulties that were not generalized in other ITS systems  . How to represent the linguistic knowledge in the expert and learner models ? How to implement parsers that can process teaching strategies that are appropriate for language learning ? These are some of the issues of high interest  , Chanier , Reni6& Fouquer 6 (1993) . 
Recent system show how researchers are being more open top sycholinguistic  , pedagogical nd applied linguistic theories . For example , The ICICLE Project is based on L2 learning theory ( McCoy et al , 1996); Alexia ( Selva et al , 1997) and FLUENT ( Hamburger and Hashim , 1992) are based on constructivism , Mr . Collins ( Bull et al . , 1995 ) is based on four empirical studies in an effort to " discover " student errors and their learning strategies  . 
Another tendency , that is very noticeably parallel to that of NLP , is the development of sophisticated language resources such as dictionaries for language  ( lexical ) learning as exemplified by CELINE at Grenoble ( Men6zo et al ,  1996) , the SAFRAN project ( 1997 ) and The Reader at Princeton University ( 1997 ) which uses WordNet , or real corpuses as in the European project Camille  ( In graham et al ,  1994) . 
The literature review lead us to believe in the following basic principles :  P1  . Language is learned in context through communication and experience  , Chanier (1994) . 
P2 . Language is learned in the natural order from receptive to productive  . 
P3 . Grammatical forms ought to be taught through language patterns  . 
P4 . Vocabulary learning means learning the words and their limitations  , probability of occurrences , and syntactic behavior around them , Swartz & Yazdani (1992) . 
2 An Empirical Study for
Learner Model
In an effort to gain some insight into the projected linguistic model  , an empirical study on the population of elementary students in the City of Moncton  , New Brunswick , Canada was completed 1 . The study consisted of one-on-one interviews where the children were presented with images having very few possible This work was done by A  . S . Picole t-Cr6 pault with inherPhD thesis . 
interpretations . The only question that was asked was " Qu ' est-ce quec'est ? "  ( What is this ? )  . 
In the next sections , we will examine the children's answers concerning relative clauses  . 
2.1 Subject Relative Clauses
When the children were asked about the main subject in the picture  , the answers were acceptable in standard French , showing that they had no problems in using relative clauses with qui  . Following are some examples :
I . C'est une chienne quiboit ; 2 . C'estunchienquiboit duiait ; Some of the answers showed other elements concerning lexical use :  3  . C'estungargon quikick laballe . 
( Use of an English verb ) 4 . C'est unefi ilequibot teleball on . 
( Use of an inappropriate verb ) 5 . C'est unpapa ets on garqon . 
( Bypassing strategy ) 2 . 2 Object Relative Clauses In this part of the experiment  , he object of the picture was the center of the questions  . 
Following are some of the answers with the most frequent errors or bypassing strategies  , they are marked with a * ; the sentences with italics are the acceptable ones :  6  . C'estleliv requelegar conlit . 
*7. C'estleliv requise faitlire parl a fille.
*8. C'estlelivrehlafille.
*9. C'estleiivrequ'elle litdedans.
*10. C'est unlivre , lafille litle livre.
The errors seen in these examples constitute around fifty percent of the answers given by first grade children and are reduced to around thirty percent in sixth grade  . Answers 7 and 10 are examples of bypassing strategies i . e . ; the use of a different verb or another sentence structure as a means for avoiding relative clauses  . 
Answer 8 shows a common use of the preposition h instead of de  . Answer 9 is also representative of the frequent use of prepositions at the end of the sentence  . 
2.3 Complex Relative Clauses
The following examples give a brief survey of the use of indirect object relative clauses : a vec lequel/laquelle  , sur le quel/la quelle , ~ qui , and dont:11 . C'estlecray on a vecle quelelle 6 crit . 
*12. C'estlecrayon qui~crit.
* 13 . C'estlecrayon qu ' ilsesert pourses de voirs . 
887 14 . C'est labranches urla quelle estl ' oise au "15 . C'estune branchequel'oise auchantesur . 
"16. C'estune brancheque I'oiseau estassis.
17. C'est legar qon ~ quile monsieur parle.
*18. C'estlegar qonquis ' as so its urune chaise.
"19. C'est legar qon que le monsieur parle.
20. C'est lamais on dont lafemmer Sve.
*21. C'est lamaison queladamerSve.
*22. C'est lamais on quela madamer Svede.
2.4 Error Summary
By looking at these examples , it is evident that complex relative clauses are rather unknown to the children  . They show that the easiest particles for them are qui and que even when misused as in answer  12  . 
It can also be concluded that they use que in a nonstandard manner every time they need to use complex relative clauses  . Otherwise they use a bypassing strategy by separating the sentence into two parts as in " C ' estune branche et unoiseau "  , or by using another verb that allows quias in 18 . 
3 General System Overview
The system we are building has a mixed initiative , multiagent architecture . Mixed initiative because we want the system to serve both the teacher and the student  , in both teaching and in learning modes . For example , the teacher could favor certain activities such as presenting examples of " nonstandard French sentences " and opposing them to English structures in a effort to show the children some Anglicisms  ; or may be choose a specific micro-world , such as Holloween or Christmas so that the exercises would be closer to children's real daily experience  ( principle P1 )  . 
The syntactic graph and the lexicon are annotated with probabilities on usually faulty expressions in order to intensify the explanation or the number of examples and exercises on those particular parts  ( principles P3 and P4 )  . 
We do not intend to build a fully free learning environment  . The environment is partially structured . The user chooses where to start by clicking on a hot-button picture  . He/she chooses the micro domain and the wanted activities  . 
However , unexpected " popup " activities would come upon the screen from time to time  ( style "
Tip of the day " or " T Vad . ").
As this system is being built for young children , not every single word is expected to be typed on the keyboard  . Following are some examples of the look and feel of our system :  1  . Children can pick activities from graphical images on the screen  . 
2 . Corpuses or extracts from children stories are equipped with hyperlinks to word meanings or grammar usage explanations  . 
3 . Puzzle playing where words have assigned shapes according to their functions  . Fitting the puzzle means placing the words in the correct order  . 
4 . Picking words they like and asking the system to make up a sentence  ; All the above possibilities are optional . This allows the teacher to take responsibility of the degree of unstructured or of focused learning  . 
4 GETA's Used Resources
For many years GETA has been working on MT systems from and into French  . An impressive core of linguistic knowledge is available but has not yet been experimented on in building language learning software  , though work is underway for integration of heterogeneous NLP components  , Boitet & Seligman (1994) . Ariane for example , uses special purpose rule-writing formalisms for each of its morphological and lexical modules both for analysis and for generation  , with a strict separation of algorithmic and linguistic knowledge  , Hutchins & Somers (1992) . 
The following modules from GETA were used in our experiment  2  :
A . Morphological agent.
-ATEF for the morphological analysis sub-agent.
-SYGMOR for the morphological generation sub -agent  . 
B . Lexical agent.
-EXPANSF for lexical expansion-TRANSF for translation into standard 

C . ROBRA in its multilevel analysis-for syntactic tree definitions and manipulations - for logico-semantic functions  2 This work was done by Anne Sarti within her
Master's degree.

The first series of experiments were alized using GETA's resources concentrate on double analysis /generation of standard French and nonstandard local French  . The corpus consisted of the sentences collected during the empirical study  ( see section 2 )  . 
Figures 1 and 2 show an example of the annotated trees created by Ariane during this 
C'est la maison queladamer ~ vede
I? , coroo , Cu '"'' Cfs ( gov ) fs ( gov ) cat ( r ) cat ( v ) ~-- u ~ ( ' ~- a . ')\] o , , .   .   .   .   . 
fs ( das ) fs ( gov ) cat ( d ) ? double generation of Acadian French and
Standard French.
These two graphs how how straightforward was the use of language resources for highlighting similarities and/or differences in these two dialects  . Thas a megrammar can be used by incrementing its rules to include new/different sentence structures  . The lexicon can be augmented similarly . 
fs ( gov ) cat ( d ~ ~ ) fs ( es ) cat ( n ) fs ( gov ) cat v ~ . ~ ,  (~ , ~ fs ( gov ) ~ fs ( reg )   ) cat ( s ) Figure \]: Annotated tree for a sentence in nonstandard French  . 
C'est lamais on dont ladamer & vek ( gn ) fs ( atsuj ) rl ( trlO ) ~ ul ( ' co-pron ' )   .   ) ul ( '6 tre ' ) ul ( ' lo-art ' )  ?  ( ul ( ' maison ' ) cat ( r ) fs ( gov ) ~ t ( v ~ ~ ) ~ cat ( ~ . ~ ts ( gov ) fs ( des ) fsgov ) k ( gn ) fs ( suj ) rul ( ' maison ' ) ~ ul ( ' le-art ' ) ul ( ' clame ' ) ? ~ ul ( ' r ~ ver ' ) fs ( gov ) / ~_ ~ ~ cat ( d ) s ( des ) ts ( gov ) cat ( v ) ts ( gov ) Figure 2: Annotated tree for a sentence in standard French . 

Another alternative would be to consider the nonstandard French as a completely new language from all points of view  . In this case only the formalisms at GETA would be exploited not the existing linguistic data  . 

We have presented in this paper an ongoing software development project that is still in its early phases  . In the introduction and in the first sections , we have argued for the positive effects of computers on language learning and the nonsome of the issues that researchers in the field are hoping to see implemented from a computation alnd a pedagogical point of view  . 
We have also seen , through an empirical study , the kinds of linguistic difficulties that a minority group is encountering  . In such a case one cannot help but to think about the advantages that technology can offer  , especially in an erawhere Language resources are ready for the pick  . We have opted to use the highly formalized and parameterized resources at GETA in an effort to develop a quickly functional prototype that we can immediately submit for on the ground testing  . 

Our thanks go to the Canadian Language
Technology Institute CLTI , Universit 6 de Moncton , and to TPS Moncton for partially financing this project  . 

Boitet , C . & Seligman , M .   ( 1994 ) The ' White Board ' Architecture : a way to integrate heterogeneous components of NLP systems  , Proc . Coling 94,
Kyoto , 1994.
Brown , J . S . & Burton , R . R .   ( 1978 ) Diagnostic models for procedural bugs in basic mathematical skills  . 
Cognitive Science , 2, pp . 155-191.
Bull , P . , Pain , H . & Brna , P . (1995) Mr . Collins : Student Modeling in Intelligent Computer Assisted Language Learning  , Instructional Science ,  23 , pp . 65-87 . 
Burton , R . R . & Brown , J . S .   ( 1976 ) A tutoring and student modeling paradigm for gaming environments ? Computer Science and Education  , ACM SIGCSE
Bulletin , 8/1, pp . 236-246.
Carbonell , J .   ( 1970 ) A I in CAI : An artificial intelligence approach to computer-assisted instruction ? IEEE Transactions on Man-Machine Systems  , I 1/4 , pp .  190-202 . 
Chanier , T . , Reni6, D . & Fouquer 6, C . ( Eds . ) (1993) Sciences Cognitives , lnformatique t Apprent is sage des Langues . In " Proceedings of the workshop
SCIAL '93".
Chanier , T . (1994) Special Issue Introduction , JAI-ED ,  5/4 , pp . 417-428 Hamburger , H . & Hashim , R . (1992 ) Foreign Language Tutoring and Learning Environment  , In " Intelligent Tutoring Systems for Foreign Language Learning  , Swartz & Yazdani , eds . , Springer-Verlag . 
Holland , V . M . , Kaplan , J . D . , & Sams , M . R . ( eds . ) (1995) Intelligent Language Tutors , Theory Shaping Technology , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah , 
N . J .,384 p.
Hutchins , W.J . & Somers , H . L . (1992) An
Introduction to Machine Translation , Academic Press , 
San Diego , CA , 361p.
Ingraham , B . , Chanier T . & Emery , C .   ( 1994 ) CAMILLE : A European Project to Develop Language Training for Different Purposes  , in Various Languages on a Common Hypermedia Framework  , Computers and Education ,  23/1&2 , pp . 107-115 . 
McCoy , K . F . , Pennington , C . A . , & Suri , L . Z .   ( 1996 ) English Error Correction : A Syntactic User Model Based on Principled " mal-rule " Scoring  , Proc . Fifth International Conference on User Modeling . Kailua,
Hawaii , pp . 5966.
Men6zo , J . , Genthial , D . & Courtin , J .   ( 1996 ) Reconnaissance spturi-lexicales dans CELINE , unsystdme multi-agents de d~tection et correction deserreurs  , Proc . "Letraitement automatiqueds languesetses applications industrielles  TAL+AI'96"  , 2 , 
Moncton , Canada.
Moghrabi , C . & de Finney , J .   ( 1989 ) PARDA : Un Programmed ' Aide ~ laR~daction du Discours Argument ~  , Journal Canadien des Sciences derlnformation , , 3/4 , pp .  103-109 . 
Picolet-Cr6 pault , A . S .   ( 1996 ) Strategies deremplacement et de contournement chezl'enfant de  6   12 ans , In " Revuede 10i~mes   journ6es delinguistique der Univ . Laval , Quebec , Canada ? SAFRAN Project (1997) http://admin . ccl . umist . ac . 

Selva , T . , Issac , F . , Chanier , T . , Fouquer 6, C .   ( 1997 ) Lexical Comprehension and Production in the ALEXIA System  , Proc . Language Teaching and Language Technology , Univ . of Groningen . 
Swartz , M . L . & Yazdani , M . ( eds . )  ( 19992 ) Intelligent Tutoring Systems for Foreign Language Learning : The Bridge to International Communication ?  , NATO
Series , Springer-Verlag , 1992.
The Reader , http://www . cogsci . princeton . edu/-wn/current/reader . html Wengers , E .   ( 1987 ) Artificial Intelligence and Tutoring Systems . Morgan Kaufmann , Los Altos , CA . 

