Multilingual Computational Semantic Lexicons in Action : The 
WYSINN WYG Approach to NLP
Evelyne Viegas
New Mexico State University
Computing Research Laboratory
Las Cruces , NM 88003

viegas ? crl , nmsu.edu
Abstract
Much effort has been put into computational lexicons over the years  , and most systems give much room to ( lexical ) semantic data . However , in these systems , the effort put on the study and representation of lexical items to express the underlying continuum existing in  1  ) language vagueness and polysemy , and 2) language gaps and mismatches , has remained embryonic . A sense numeration approach fails from a theoretical point of view to capture the core meaning of words  , let alne relate word meanings to one another , and complicates the task of NLP by multiplying ambiguities in analysis and choices in generation  . In this paper , I study computational semantic lexicon representation from a multilingual point of view  , reconciling different approaches to lexicon representation : i  ) vagueness for lexemes which have a more or less finer grained semantics with respect o other languages  ; ii ) underspecification for lexemes which have multiple related facets  ; and , iii ) lexical rules to relate systematic polysemy to systematic ambiguity  . I build on a What You See Is Not Neces-sarily What You Get  ( WYSINN WYG ) approach to provide the NLP system with the " right " lexical data already tuned towards a particular task  . In order to do so , I argue for a lexical semantic approach to lexicon representation  . I exemplify my study through a crosslinguistic investigation spatially-based x-pressions  . 
1 A Cross-linguistic Investigation on
Spatially-based Expressions
In this paper , I argue for computational semantic lexicons as active knowledge sources in order to provide Natural Language Processing  ( NLP ) systems with the " right " lexical semantic representation to accomplish a particular task  . In other words , lexicon entries are " pre-digested ' , via a lexical processor , to best fit an NLP task . This What You See ( in your lexicon ) Is Not Necessarily What You Get ( as input to your program )   ( WYSIN-NWYG ) approach requires the adoption of a symbolic paradigm  . Formally , I use a combination of three different approaches to lexicon representations :  ( 1 ) lexicosemantic vagueness , for lexemes which have a more or less finer grained semantics with respect o other languages  ( for instance n in Spanish is vague between the Contact and Container senses of the Location  , whereas in English it is finer grained , with on for the former and in for the latter ) ; (2) lexicosemantic underspecification , for lexemes which have multiple related facets ( such as for instance , do or which is underspecified with respect to its A perture or Physical Object meanings  )  ; and , (3) lexical rules , to relate systematic polysemy to systematic ambiguity  ( such as the Food OrAnimal rule for lamb )  . 
I illustrate the WYSINN WYG approach via a crosslinguistic investigation  ( English , French , Spanish ) on spatially-based expressions , as lexicalised , for instance , in the prepositions in , above , on ,   .   .   .   , verbs traverser , (" go " across ) in French , predicative nouns mont de , ( going up ) in French , or in adjectives up right . Processing spatially-based x pressions in a multilingual environment is a difficult problem as these lexemes exhibit a high degree of polysemy  ( in particular for prepositions ) and of language gaps ( i . e . , when there is not a one-to-one mapping between languages  , whatever the linguistic level ; lexical , semantic , syntactic , etc ) . Therefore , processing these expressions or words in a multilingual environment minimally involves having a solution for treating :  ( a ) syntactic divergences , wim a cross--+traverser . . . hlanage in French ( cross . . . swimming ); ( b ) semantic mismatches , river translates into fleuve , rivi ~ reinFrench ; and ( c ) , cases which lie in between clearcut cases of language gaps  ( stand--+setenir debout/setenir , lie--~setenirallongg/setenir ) . Researchers have dealt with a ) and/or b ) , whereas WYSINN WYG presents a uniform treatment of a  )  , b ) and c) , by allowing words to have their meanings vary in context  . 
In this paper , I restrict my crosslinguistic study to the ( lexical ) semantics of words with a focus on spatially -based x pressions  , and consider literal or non-figurative meanings only  . In the next sections , I address representational problems which must be solved in order to best capture the phenom-a lexical semantic viewpoint  . I then present hree different ways of capturing the phenomena : lexicosemantic vagueness  , lexicosemantic underspecification and lexical rules  . 
1.1 The Language Gap Problem
Upon a close examination of empirical data , it is often difficult to classify a translation pair as a syntactic divergence  ( e . g . , Dorr , 1990; Levin and Nirenburg ,  1993) , as in helimped up the stairs ~ il montales marchesenboitant  ( French )   ( he went up the stairs limping ) or a semantic mismatch ( e . g . , Palmer and Zhibiao , 1995; Kameyama et al ,  1991) , as in lie , stand ~ setenir ( French ) . Moreover , lie and stand could be translated as set enir couchg/allong d  ( belying ) and set enir debout ( be up ) respectively , thus presenting a case of divergence , or they could both be translated into French as set enir  , thus presenting a case of conflation , ( Talmy ,  1985) . Depending on the semantics of the first argument , one might want to generate the divergence , ( e . g . , setenir de-bout/couche '), or not ( e . g . , se tenir ) , thus considering setenir as a mismatch as in ( 1 ) :  ( 1 ) Pablose tenaitau milieu de la chambre . 
(Sartre )   ( Pablostood in the middle of the bedroom . ) In order to account for all these language variations  , one cannot " freeze " the meanings of language pairs  . In section 2 . 1 , I show that by adopting a continuum perspective , that is using a knowledge-based approach where I make the distinction between lexical and semantic knowledge  , cases in between syntactic divergences and semantic mismatches  ( set enir ) can be accounted for in a uniform way . Practically , the proposed method can be applied to interlingua pproaches and transfer approaches  , when these latter encode a layer of semantic information  . 
1 . 2 The Lex icon Representat ion Prob lem Within the paradigm of knowledge-based approaches  , there are still lexicon representation issues to be addressed in order to treat these language gaps  . 
It has been well documented in the literature of this past decade that a sense enumeration approach fails from a theoretical point of view to capture the core meaning of words  ( e . g . , ( Ostler and Atkins ,  1992) , ( Boguraev and Pustejovsky ,  1990) ,  . . ) and complicates from a practical viewpo in the task of NLP by multiplying ambiguities in analysis and choices in generation  . 
Within Machine Translation ( MT ) , this approach has led researchers to " add " ambiguity in a language which did not have it from a monolingual perspective  . Ambiguity is added at the lexical level within transfer based approaches  ( " riverl " --+ " rivi ~ re " ; " river 2"--~" fleuve ") ; and at the semantic level within interlingua based approaches  ( " rivi ~ re " -- + RIVER-DESTINATION : RIVER ; " fleuve " RIVER-DESTINATION : SEA ; " river " --+ RIVERDESTINATION : SEA , RIVER ) , whereas again " river " in English is not ambiguous with respect o its destination  . 
In this paper , I show that ambiguity can be minimised if one stops considering knowledge sources as " static " ones in order to consider them as active ones instead  . More specifically , I show that building on a computational theory of lexicosemantic vagueness and underspecification which merges computational concerns with theoretical concerns enables an NLP system to cope with polysemy and language gaps in a more effective way  . 
Let us consider the following simplified input semantics  ( IS ) :  ( 2 ) Position State ( Theme:Plate , Location : Table ) , This can be generated in Spanish as Elplatoesta enlames a  ; where Location is lexicalised as en in
Figure 1.
To generate (2) into English , requires the system to further specify Location for English as LocCon-tact  , in order to generate The plate is on the table , where on 1 corresponds to the Spanish enl , subsense of en , as shown in Figure 1 . 
; T
L ' -' h
LkN ~ atltm desfinathmI ~ ath..
: l(x'~Contac ', ~- .   . ~ tain ~ ~ Lc ~ ContaJn cri~1 11 ( ~ L ~ Building ' b ~' ~ ont ; ~t " " gthr?ul ~ h / // / / // Fre~e ~: mrl dar ~ Idan ~  sur2 dans ~ Ic-long-~k Ii-trax ~ r ~ cl ? = ; : ~ lh ; onlttin2 on 2 in ml " alon ~ lih mu ~ hl-- . . . .
:.., ._Lb ? instrument ? n 6
Figure 1: Subset of the Semantic Types for Prepositions From a monolingual perspective  , there is no need to differentiate in Spanish between the  3 types of Location as LocContact , Loc Container and Loc Build-ing , as these distinctions are irrelevant for Span-1 . However , within a multilingual framework , it becomes necessary to further distinguish Location  , in order to generate English from (2) . In the next sections , I will show that lexical semantic hierarchies are better suited to account for polysemous lexemes than lexical or semantic hierarchies alone  , for multilingual ( and monolingual ) processing . 
2 The WYSINN WYG Approach
I argue that treating lexical ambiguity or polysemy and language gaps computationally requires  1  ) finegrained lexical semantic type hierarchies , and 2 ) to allow words to have their meanings vary in context  . 
Much effort has been put into lexicons over the years  , and most systems give more room to lexical data . However , most approaches to lexicon representation in NLP systems have been motivated more by computational concerns  ( economy , efficiency ) than by the desire for a computational linguistic account  , where the concern of explaining a phenomenon is as important as pure computational concerns  . In this paper , I adopt a computational linguistic perspective , showing however , how these representations are best fitted to serve knowledge-driven NLP systems  . 
2.1 A Continuum Perspective on Language

I argue that resolving language gaps ( divergences , mismatches , and cases in between ) is a generation issue and minimally involves : 1 ) using a knowledge-based approach to represent the lexical semantics of lexemes  ;  2 ) developing a computational theory of lexicosemantic vagueness  , underspecification , and lexical rules ; In this paper , I only address lexical representational issues , leaving the generation issues ( such as the use of planning techniques , the integration of the process in lexical choice ) aside ) I illustrate through some examples below , how a compositional semantics approach , e . g . knowledge-based , can help in dealing with language gaps . 2I will use the French ( set enir ) and English ( stand , lie ) simplified entries below , in my illustration of mismatches between the generator and the lexicons  . 
Semantic types are coded in the sense feature : 1Generation issues are fully discussed in ( Beale and Vie-gas ,  1996) . This first implementation of some language gaps has a very limited capability for the treatment of vagueness and underspecifieation  ; although it takes advantage of the semantic type hierarchy  , it still lacks the benefit of having the lexical type hierarchy presented here  . 
2Note that absence of compositionality , such as in idioms kick the ( proverbial ) bucket or syntagmatic expressions heavy smoker , is coded in the lexicon . 
\[key:"se-tenir 3" , form:\[orth:\[exp:"setenir "\]\] , sense:\[sem:\[name:Position-state \ ]   ,   .   .   . \]\[ key:"stand2" , form :\ [ orth:\[exp:"stand"\]\] , sense:\[sem:\[name:PsVertical\ ]   .   .   .   . \]\[key:"fief " , form :\ [ orth:\[exp:"lie"I\] , sense:\[sem:\[name:PsHorizontal\] .   .   .   . \] Figure 2 illustrates a subset of the Semantic Type Hierarchy  ( STH ) common to all dictionaries and of two subsets of the Lexical Type Hierarchy  ( LTH ) for
French and English.
~' ~.... ~ STH *. ???, ?,,/\
Position State Horizontal Vertical ' ~ Vertle 1 : : ~ bel
English . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . LTH . . . . . . . . . . . Link between STH and LTHsTLink ( Translation Link ) between language LTHs Figure 2: Example of an STH linked to a Fragment of the French and English LTHs  . 
I illustrate below three main types of gaps between the input semantics  ( IS ) to the generator and the lexicon entries ( LEX ) of the language in which to generate . I focus on the generation of the predicate : ( i ) IS-LEX exact match Generating , in French , from the simplified IS below (3) , (3) Position State ( agent : john , against : wall ) is easy as there is a single French word in ( 3 ) that lex-icalises the concept Position State , which is set enir . 
Therefore setenir is generated in Johnse tenait con-treletour  ( John was / ( stood ) against he wall )  . 
1323 ( ii ) IS-LEX vagueness Generating , in French , from the partial IS below (4) , (4) PsYertical ( agent : john , against : wall ) needs extra work from the generator , with respect to the lexicon entry for French . In Figure 2 , one can see in STH that Ps Vertical is a subtype of Po-sition State  , which has a mapping in LTH for French to se-tenir3  . This illustrates a case of vagueness between English and French  . In this case , the generator will generate the same sentence Johnsetenait contrelemur  , as is the case for the exact match in ( i ) . Note that generating the divergence set enait debout  ( standup right ) although correct and grammatical , would emphasise the position of John which was not necessarily focused in  ( 4 )  . The divergence can be generated by " composing " Ps Vertical as Po-sition State  ( lexicalised as set enir ) and Vertical ( lexicalised as debout )  . 
( iii ) IS-LEX Underspecification Generating , in French , from the partial IS below (5) , (5) PsYertical(agent:john , against : vall , time : tl ) & Ps Horizontal ( agent : john , against : wall , time:t2 )  &  tl<t2 needs extra work from the lexicon processor , with respect o the entries presented here , as one does not want to end up generating Johnse tint contrele murpu is ilsetint contre lemur  ( John was against the wall then he was agains the wall  )  . Because of the conjunctions here , one cannot just consider set enir as vague with respectolie and stand  . This illustrates a lexicon in action , where the lexical processor must process set enir as underspecified : Position State-+Ps Vertical V Ps Horizontal The lexical processor will thus produce the divergences set enir debout  ( stand ) and set eniral long d ( lying ) to generate ( with some generation processing such as lexical choice  , ellipsis , pronominalisation , etc ) Johnsetenait ( debout ) e on trele murpuiss ' all onge a contrel ui ( John was standing agains the wall then helied against it  )  . 
Where the continuum perspective comes in , is that we do not want to " freeze " the meanings of words once and for all  . As we just saw , in French one might want to generate set enir debout or just set enir depending on the semantics of its arguments and also depending on the context as in  ( 5 )  . 
In the WYSINN WYG approach , words are allowed to have their " meanings " vary in context  . In other words , the literal meaning ( s ) coded in the lexicon is/are the " closest " possible meaning  ( s ) of a word within the STH context , and by enriching the discourse context ( dc ) , one ends up " specialising " or " generalising " the meaning  ( s ) of the word , using formally two hierarchies : semantic ( STH ) and lexical ( LTH )  , enabling differentypes of lexicon representations : vagueness  , underspecification adlexical rules . 
2 . 2 A Tru ly Mul t i l ingua l H ierarchy Multilingual exicons are usually monolingual lexicons connected via translation links  ( T links )  , whereas truly multilingual lexicons , as defined by ( Cahill and Gazdar ,  1995) , involven 4-1 hierarchies , thus involving an additional abstract hierarchy containing information shared by two or more languages  . Figure 3 illustrates the STH which is shared by all lexicons  ( French , English , Spanish , etc ) , and the lexical MLTH which involves the abstract hierarchy shared by all LTHs  . 
grHT

Pr . perly--~lnteiner ? ~ mtacl
I /
ILTHt'Lll~4MInI,~C . nla~I -,: .   . . . .  .   .   . .:  .   .   .   .   .   . 
i . " , , " , : " . f " , . . " .
i ~ ~2, , , , .   . ~'~'"//'- prep ~,~~, . ;~,~  .   .   .   .   .   . ~ ~ oo . . L Figure 3: Subset of the Multilingual Hierarchy for

The lexicons themselves are also organised as language lexical type hierarchies  ( Spanish LTH , English LTH in Figure 3) . For instance , the English dictionary ( eng-lexeme ) has the English prepositions ( eng-prep ) as one of its subtypes , which itself has as subtypes all the English prepositions  ( along , through , on , in ,   . . . ) . These prepositions have in turn subtypes ( for instance , on has onl , on 2 ,   . . . ) , which can themselves have subtypes ( onll , on 12 ,   . . . ) . All these language dependent LTHs inherit part of their information from a truly Multilingual Lexical Type Hi-by all lexicons  . There might be several levels of sharing , for instance , family-related language sharing . 
Lexical types are linked to the STH via their language LTH and the MLTH  , so that these lexicons can be used by either monolingual or multilingual processing  . The advantages of a MTLH extend to 1 ) lexicon acquisition , by allowing lexicons to inherit information from the abstract level hierarchy  . This is even more useful when acquiring family -related languages  ; and 2) robustness , as the lexical processors can try to " make guesses " on the assignment of a sense to a lexeme absent from a dictionary  , based on similarities in morphology or orthography  , with other family-related language lexemes ,  2 . 3 Vagueness , Underspecification and
Lexical Rules
The STH along with the LTH allow the lexicographers to leave the meaning of some lexemes as vague or underspecified  . The vagueness or underspecification typing allows the lexical processor to specialise or generalise the meaning of a lexeme  , for a particular task and on a needed basis . Formally , generalisation and specialisation can be done in various ways  , as specified for instance in ( Kameyama et al ,  1991) , ( Poesio ,  1996) , ( Mahesh et al ,  1997) . 
2.3.1 Lexicon Vagueness
A lexicon entry is considered as vague when its semantics is typed using a general monomorphic type covering multiple senses  , as is the case of the French entry " se-tenir 3" , or the Spanish preposition en , as represented in (6) . 
(6)\[key:"en " , form :\ [ orth:\[exp:"en"\] .   .   .   . 
sense:\[sem:\[name:Location 3 .   .   .   . \] It is at processing time , and only if needed , that the semantic type Location for en can be further processed as LocContact  , Loc Container ,   . . . to generate the English prepositions ( on , at, . . . ) . 
Lexicon vaguenessi represented by mapping the citation form lex of any word x appearing in a corpus to a semantic monomorphic type m  , which belongs to STH . Let us consider MAPS , the function which links lext oSTH , dca discourse context where lex can appear , and_the immediate type/sub-typer-lation between types of STH  , then : ( 7 ) x is vague iff 3 rnESTH:rn = MAPS ( dc , lex(x )) A3n , oESTH:nEmAoC_rnAn?oA
VrESTH:rErn:/~qESTH:qCr 3I have not investigated this issue yet , but see ( Cahill ,  1998 ) for promising results with respect omaking guesses on phonology  . 
In other words , lexisvague , if misina type/sub-type relation with all its immediate subtypes  . 
2 . 3 . 2 Lex icon Underspec i f i ca t ion The meaning of a lexeme is considered as underspeci-fled when its semanticsire presented via a polymor-phic type  , which presents a disjunction of semantic types , 4 thus covering different polysemou senses , as is the case of the Spanish preposition " por " in  ( 8 )  , and typical examples in lexical semantics , such as do or which is typed as PHYSICAL_OBJECT -OR- 
APERTURE . 5 (8)\[key:"por ' , form :\[ orth:\["exp:"por'\] .   .   .   . 
sense:\[sem:\[name:Through;Along\] .   .   .   . \] It is at processing time only , and on a needed basis only , that the semantic type Through-OR-Along for pot can be further processed as either Through  , or Along ,   . . . , thus allowing the generator or analyser to find the appropriate representation depending on the task  . Disambiguating " por " to generate English , requires that the lexeme be embedded within the discourse context  , where the filled arguments of the prepositions will provide semantic information under constraints  . For instance , walk and river could contribute to the disambiguation of pot as Along  . 
Lexicon underspecification is represented by mapping lex  ( the citation form of a word x ) to a semantic polymorphic type p , which belongs to STH , then : ( 9 ) x is underspecifled iff 3 pESTH:rn = MAPS ( dc , I ex ( x ) )A 3s C STH : p = Vs A Card ( s ) >_2 In other words , lexis underspecified , if p is a disjunction of types , and no type/sub-typerlation is required . 
4See ( Sanfillippo , 1998) and ( Buitelaar ,  1997 ) for different computational treatments of underspecified representations  . 
The former deals with multiple subcategorisations ( whereas I am also interested in polysemou senses )  , the latter includes homonyms , which I agree with Pinkal ( 1995 ) should be left apart . 
5 1 believe that lexicosemantic underspecification is concerned with polysemous lexemes only  ( such as door , book , e~c ) and not homonyms ( such as bank as financial-bank or river-bank ) called H-Type ambiguous in ( Pinkal ,  1995) . I believe the H-Type ambiguous lexemes should be related via their lexical form only  , while their semantic types should remain unrelated  , i . e . , there is no needs to introduce a " disjunction fallacy " as in  ( Poesio ,  1996) . It might be the case that homonyms require pragmatic underspecification as suggested  , for instance , in ( Nunberg ,  1979) , but in any case are beyond the scope of this paper  . 
1325 2.4 Lexical Rules
Lexical rules ( LRs ) are used in WYSINN WYG to relate systematic ambiguity to systematic polysemy  . 
They seem more appropriate than underspecification for relating the meanings of lexeme such as " lamb " or " haddock " which can be either of type Animal or Food  ( Pustejovsky ,  1995 , pp .  224) . LRs and their application time in NLP have received a lot of attention  ( e . g . , Copestake and Briscoe , 1996; Viegas et al . , 1996) , therefore , I will not develop them further in this paper , as the rules themselves activated by the lexical processor produce different entries  , with neither type/sub-typerlations nor disjunction between the semantic types of the old and new entries  . In WYSINN WYG , lexicon entries related via LRs are neither vague nor underspecified  . For instance , the " grinding rule " of Copestake and Briscoe for linking the systematic Animal-Food polysemy as in mutton // sheep or in French where we have a conflation in mout on  , allows us to link the entries in English and subsenses in French  , without having to cope with the semantic " disjunction fallacy problem " of  ( Poesio ,  1996) . 
3 Conclusions - Perspectives
I have argued for active knowledge sources within a knowledge-based approach  , so that lexicon entries can be processed to best fit a particular NLP task  . I adopted a computational linguistic perspective in order to explain language phenomena such as language gaps and polysemy  . I argued for semantic and lexical type hierarchies  . The former is shared by all dictionaries , whereas the latter can be organised as a truly multilingual hierarchy  . In that respect , this work differs from ( Han et al ,  1996 ) in that I do not suggest an ontology per language  , but argue on the contrary for one semantic hierarchy shared by all dictionaries  . 6 Other works which have dealt with mismatches , e . g . , ( Dorr and Voss ,  1998 ) with their interling u and knowledge representations  , ( S~rasset , 1994) with his " interlinguac-ceptations " , or ( Kameyama , et al1991) with their infons , cannot account for cases which lie in between clear cut cases of divergences and mismatches such as the example " setenir " discussed in this paper  . 
I have shown that enabling lexicon entries to be typed as either lexically vague or underspecified  , or linked via LRs , allows us to account for the variations of word meanings in different discourse contexts  . Most of the works in computational lexical semantics have dealt with either underspecification or LRs  , trying to favour one representation ver the other  . There was previously no computational treat-6However   , I do not preclude that there might be different views on the semantic hierarchy depending on the languages considered : " filters " could be applied to the STH to only show the relevant parts of it for some family-related languages  . 
ment of lexical semantic vagueness . In discourse approaches and formal semantics , the use of underspecification i terms of truth values led researchers  , when applying their research to individual words , to the " disjunction fallacy problem " , where a person who went to the bank , ended up going to the ( financial-institution OR river-shore )  , whatever this object might be ! , instead of a ) going to the financial-institution ORb ) going to the river-shore . 
In this paper , I have presented the usefulness of each representation  , depending on the phenomenon covered . I showed the need to consider underspecification for polysemous items only  , leaving homonyms to be related via their lexical forms only  ( and not their semantics )  . I believe that LRs have room for polysemous lexeme such as the lamb example  , as here again one could not possibly imagine an animal being  ( food-OR-animal ) in the same discourse context . 7 Finally , lexical vagueness enables a system to process lexical items from a multilingual viewpoint  , when a lexeme becomes ambiguous with respect o another language  . From a multingual perspective , there is no need to address the " sor orites paradox "  ( Williams on ,  1994) , which tries to put a clearcut between values of the same word  ( e . g . , not tall . . . tall ) . 
It is important onote that WYSINN WYG accepts redundancy in the lexicon representations : lexemes can be both vague and underspecified or either one  . 
One could object that the WYSINN WYG approach is knowledge intensive and puts the burden on the lexicon  , as it requires one to build several type hierarchies : a STH shared by all languages and a LTH per language which inherits from the MLTH  . 
However , the advantages of the WYSINN WYG approach are many  . First , by using the MLTH , acquisition costs can be minimised , as a lot of information can be inherited by lexicons of family-related languages  . This multilingual approach has been successfully applied to phonology by  ( Cahill and Gazdar ,  1995) . Second , the task of determining the meaning of words requires human intervention  , and thus involve some subjectivity . WYSINN WYG presents a good way of " reconciling " different lexicographers ' viewpoints by allowing a lexical processor to specialise or generalise meanings on needed basis  . As such , whether a lexicographer decides to sense-tag"en " as Location or creates the subsenses " enl " and "  en2" remains a virtual difference for the NLP system . Finally , and most important , WYSIN-NWYG presents a typing environment which accounts for the flexibility of word meanings in context  , thus allowing lexicon acquirers to map words to their " closest " core meaning within STH  ( e . g . , " se 7The fact that some culture seat " living " creatures would require to type these lexemes using underspecification  ( food-OR-animal ) instead of a lexical rule in their cultures . 
1326 tenir " ~ Position State ) and use mechanisms ( uch as generalisation , specialisation ) to modulate their meanings in context ( e . g . , " setenir " -- ~ Ps Vertical) . 
In other words , WYSINN WYG helps not only in sense selection but also in sense modulation  . 
Furthere search involves investigating representation formalisms  , as discussed in ( Briscoe et al ,  1993 ) to best implement these type inheritance hierarchies  . 
4 Acknowledgements
This work has been supported in part by DoDunder contract number  MDA-904-92-C-5189  . I would like to thank my colleagues at CRL for commenting on a former version of this paper  . I am also grateful to John Barnden , Pierrette Bouillon , Boyan Onyshkevysh , Martha Palmer , and the anonymous reviewers for their useful comments  . 
References
S . Beale and E . Viegas .  1996 . Intelligent Planning meets Intelligent Planners . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Gaps and Bridges : New Directions in Planning and Natural Language Generation  , at
ECAI'96, Budapest , 59-64.
B . Boguraev and J . Pustejovsky .  1990 . Knowledge Representation and Acquisition from Dictionary  . 
Coling Tutorial , Helsinki , Finland.
T . Briscoe , V . de Paiva and A . Copestake ( eds ) . 
1993. Inheritance , Defaults , and the Lexicon.
Cambridge University Press.
P . Buitelaar .  1997 . A Lexicon for Underspecified Semantic Tagging . In Proceedings of the Siglex Workshop on Tagging Text with Lexical Semantics : Why  , What , and How ? , Washington DC . 
L . Cahill and G . Gazdar .  1995 . Multilingual Lexicons for Related Lexicons . In Proceedings of the 2nd DTI Language Engineering Conference . 
L . Cahill .  1998 . Automatic extension of a hierarchical multilingual lexicon  . In Proceedings of the Second Multilinguality in the Lexicon Workshop  , sponsored by the 13th biennial European Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( ECAI-98 )  . 
A . Copestake and T . Briscoe .  1996 . Semi-Productive Polysemy ans Sense Extension . In
Journal of Semantics , vol . 12.
B . Dorr .  1990 . Solving Thematic Divergences in Machine Translation  . In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguists  . 
C . Han , F . Xia , M . Palmer , J . Rosenzweig .  1996 . 
Capturing Language Specific Constraints on Lexical Selection with Feature-Based Lexicalized Tree -Adjoining Grammars  . in Proceedings of the International Conference on Chinese Computing Singapore  . 
M . Kameyama , R . Ochitani and S . Peters .  1991 . Resolving Translation Mismatches With Information Flow  . In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  . 
R . Keefe and P . Smith . ( eds ) 1996 . Vagueness : a Reader . A Bradford Book . The MIT Press . 
L . Levin and S . Nirenburg .  1993 . Principles and Idiosyncrasies in MT Lexicons , In Proceedings of the 1993 Spring Symposium on Building Lexicons for Machine Translation  , Stanford , CA . 
K . Mahesh , S . Nirenburg and S . Beale .  1997 . If You Have It , Flaunt It : Using Full Ontological Knowledge for Word Sense Disambiguation  . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation  . 
G . Nunberg .  1979 . The Non-uniqueness of Semantic Solutions : Polysemy  . Linguistics and Philosophy 3 . 
N . Ostler and S . Atkins .  1992 . Predictable meaning shift : Some linguistic properties of lexical implication rules  . In Pustejovsky and Bergler ( eds . ) Lexical Semantics and Knowledge Representation . 
Springer Verlag.
M . Palmer and W . Zhibiao .  1995 . Verb Semantics for EnglishChinese Translation . Machine Translation , Volume 10, Nos12 . 
M . Pinkal . 1995. Logic and Lexicon . Oxford.
M . Poesio .  1996 . Semantic Ambiguity and Perceived Ambiguity . In K . van Deemter and S . Peters ( eds . ) Semantic Ambiguity and Underspecification . 
J . Pustejovsky .  1995 . The Generative Lexicon . MIT

A . Sanfillippo .  1998 . Lexical Underspecification ad Word Disambiguation  . In E . Viegas ( ed . ) Breadth and Depth of Semantic Lexicons . Kluwer Academic Press . 
G . S ~ rasset .  1994 . SUBLIM : unsyst ~ meuni-versel debases lexicales multilingueset NADIA : saspdcialisation aux bases lexicales interlingues par acceptions  . PhD . Thesis , GETA , Universit ~ de Grenoble . 
L . Talmy .  1985 . Lexicalization Patterns : semantic structure in lexical forms  . In Shopen ( ed) , Language Typology and Syntactic Description III . 

E . Viegas , B . Onyshkevych , V . Raskin and S . Nirenburg .  1996 . From Submit to Submitted via Submission : on Lexical Rules in Large-scale Lexicon Acquisition  . In Proceedings of the 34th Annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , CA . 
C . Voss and B . Dorr .  1998 . Lexical Allocation in IL-Based MT of Spatial Expressions  . In P . Olivier and K . -P . Gapp ( eds . ) Representation and Processing of Spatial Expressions  . Lawrence Erlbaum

T . Williams on . 1994. Vagueness . Routledge.

