An Intelligent Multi-Dictionary Environment
Gdb or Pr6sz6ky

K6smfirkiu.8., H-1118 Budapest , Hungary
proszeky @ morphologic.hu

Anopen , extendible multi-dictionary system is introduced in the paper  . It supports the translator in accessing adequate ntries of various bi - and monolingual dictionaries and translation examples from parallel corpora  . Simultaneously an unlimited number of dictionaries can be held open  , thus by a single interrogation step , all the dictionaries ( translations , explanations , ynonyms , etc . ) can be surveyed . The implemented system ( called MoBiDic ) knows morphological rules of the dictionaries ' languages  . Thus , never the actual ( inflected ) words , but always their lemmas-that is , the right dictionary entries - are looked up . MoBi Dichasanopen , multimedial architecture , thus it is suitable for handling not only textual  , but speaking or picture dictionaries , as well . 
The same system is also able to find words and expressions in corpora  , dynamically providing the translators with examples from their earlier translations or other translators ' works  . MoBiDic has been designed for translator work groups  , where the translators ' own glossaries ( built also with the help of the system ) may also be dis-seminated among the members of the group  , with different access rights , if needed . The system has a TCP/IP-based client-server implementation for various platforms and available with a gradually increasing number of dictionaries for numerous language pairs  . 
Introduction " The whole world of translation is opening up  , to new possibilities , and to technological ndmeth-odological change " ( Kingscott 1993 )  . Some years after the above claim , we see that software tools for translators , even the most recent ones , do not yet guarantee perfect solutions to automatic translation  . More and more systems introduce , however , new facilities to the translator working in a computational environment  . As Hutchins says , " the best use must be made of those systems that are available  , and the producers and developers must be encouraged to improve and introduce new facilities to meet user needs  . "  ( Hutchins 1996 ) It is almost a common place that texts-books , newspapers , letters , official memos , brochures , any type of publications , reports , etc . -in the nineties are written , sent , read and translated with the help of the electronic media  . Consequently , traditional information sources , like paper-based dictionaries , and lexicons , are no longer as much a part of the translation environment  . 
Electronic dictionaries for most developers just mean  , however , to make the wellknown paper dictionary image appear on the computer screen  . 
It is easy to understand why we say that dictionary computerization does not mean producing ma-chine-readable vrsions of traditional printed dictionaries  , but the combination of the existing lexical resources with up-to-date language technology  . 
On the other hand , there is a question whether we have to continue in the traditional way of developing new-and different-lexicons for any new application /system  , starting from scratch every time and therefore consuming time  , money and man power , or is it new lexicons . 
In what follows , timely to think of the possibility of making the effort to converge  , trying to avoid unnecessary duplications and - where possible-building on what already exists  ( Calzolari 1994 )  . Consequently , in the near future we have to combine the two above needs : making existing showing the strategy how to develop we try to argue for changes in development strategies of electronic translation dictionaries  . Today's lingware technology can-and must-use dynamic actions  , like morphosyntactic analysis , lemmatization , spellchecking , and so on . On the other hand , dictionaries can never be full in any sense , therefore we have to make parallel multi -dictionary access possible  . It means that a single dictionary lookup should use an unlimited number of lexical resources that are available for the translator  . 
1 The MoBiDic Lookup System
To start with the most natural activity concerning dictionaries is searching them for a single word  . 
There is no problem if it can be found among the head words of the dictionary  , that is , when the input string can match . But sometimes the translator starts the lookup process by clicking an inflected word form of an open document hat cannot be found among the head words  . For the user it is aboring and time-consuming task to type the lexical form  , that is , the one accepted letter-by-letter by the dictionary  . To make the system able to find the stem of the input word form automatically  , MoBiDic uses a lemmatizer that provides the dictionary lookup module with the stem  ( s ) to be found ( Figure 1 )  . 
Translators frequently want to find the word as a part of multiword expressions or idioms  . If the user does not know whether the actual word is part of some phrasal compound or idiom  , the traditional paper dictionaries are very difficult to use  . Namely , if the word in question is the socalled head word of a multiword expression  , it can be found easily . In case it is not the head word , one has to know the phrasal compound the word is a part of  , but it is a typical " Catch 22" Situation : if the expression is known why to search the dictionary for it ? MoBiDic helps the user to find all the multiword expressions containing the actual word's stem  , independently whether it is a head word or not . E . g . not only ' lead'but both ' dog ' and ' // fe ' provide us  ( among others ) with the multiword expression ' lead a dog's life ' that can be found under ' lead ' only in a paper dictionary  . In other words , users of the traditional dictionaries k : ~: rm ~ IIIIII  . . ! D I :, . . I
I . N~kit~os2"lel?esselkimer , lel ~' P , vegi ~/ alI . ( k ~ eft . ) liekallilleilli14 1tt/ddllaNtlil , 1 ~ ~ a migliia ~ s - [ elmz [ . ~](v # . ) ~ sgel~eitet2 . ( hezuk 6I ) elme ~#,, t ~ ivo2 ~ k .   16me ltyleer am~ekem~ei ~ l [[[[[[[ [ gmnim [ ii[m  3  , ~ au)l ; k~akul 4 . kiallzik , elels : ~, ~ haravadeusgekss:en 5 . elfoID ", elt ~ mik , elv ~ zeu ~ en~c ~ 6 . v ~ gz ~ d ~ au ~ em ~ e ~ ~ .   .  7 . our e ~ . )(~ mi~e)t~ek~ik , ( ~ mit ) haj ~ r ~ l , (' emit ) he jla ~ zem ~ echnet , seLqPlangeii ~ ra ~ iuaza ~ rve ausgei ~ . oche ~ ~ I9 . au ~ e ~ emlu  #enkiboci ~ t
Figure 1
Lookup of a morphologically complex inflected form : ' ausgegangen'ia German-Hungarian dictionary  . 
are supposed to know the expression ( what's more : the keyword of the expression ) to find it in the lexicon . Search for ' lead a dog's life ' through its components gives the following result in 
MoBiDic : lead lead , leads , leading , led 27 occurrences in expressions of the basic dictionary  , dog dog , dogs , dog's , dogs ' 21 occurrences in expressions of the basic dictionary  , lifelife , lives , life's , lives ' 77 occurrences in expressions of the basic dictionary  , lead AND life 5 occurrences in expressions of the basic dictionary  , dogAND life 2 occurrences in expressions of the basic dictionary  , lead AND dog 1 occurrence in expressions of the basic dictionary , lead a dog's life I occurrence as an expression i the basic dictionary  . 
' Bi ' is somewhat misleading in the name Mo-BiDic . Bilingual in this sense means that the source and the target language are not the same types of object for the program  . For MoBiDic , source language is the language the morphology of which has to be known  , to provide the user with adequate output . The output is expected to be in the target language-the characters  , the alphabetic order , etc . of which has to be known to make the hits appear on the screen inadequate format  . 
Of course , the source and target languages can be the same , e . g . in explanatory or etymological dictionaries ( Figure 2 )  . 

Figure 2
Hungarian explanation of ' acceptable quality level ' in the English-Hungarian Economical Explanatory Dictionary  . 
There is an another sort of monolingual dictionary  , the synonym dictionary . The translator frequently wants to use a synonym ( antonym , hypernym , hyponym ) of the actual word . An intelligent software tool , like MorphoLogic's Helyette1 , is the combination of a thesaurus ( synonym dictionary )  , a morphological nalyzer and a generator , because the output is re-inflected according to the morphological information contained by the input wordform  . The-socalled inflectional-thesaurus works as follows: 
INPUT : came
ANALYSIS : came=come+Past
STEM : come
SYNONYM : go
SYNTHESIS : go + Past = went
OUTPUT : went
There are special sorts of information in a dictionary  . For example , pronunciation is ot typically needed for translation  , but can be useful for language learners . Pronunciation of the word is , therefore , an information that should be switched on and off  , according to the user's needs . In an electronic dictionary it is expected that not only the written phonetic transcription  , but also the spoken output can be heard . If the dictionary supports multimedia , explanatory pictures can help understand the word  , even for professionals , not for language learners only ( Fig .  3) . 
If the translator makes a spelling error , first a speller starts , and then the corrected word form is sent to the dictionary lookup system  . 
Examples do belong to the entries of large , professional paper dictionaries . In electronic dic-To be combined with MoBiDic in the near future  . 
tionaries occurrences of the word in texts of other authors  , or wants to see bilingual texts with their aligned translations : monolingual or aligned bilingual corpus  , a freetext search module and a lemmatizer . 
2 Dictionaries in MoBiDic
The lexicographic basis for MoBiDic is supplied by various publishing houses  . More precisely , MorphoLogic has licenses to almost 50 dictionaries already published in paper format of miscellaneous topics  , diverse sizes and many language pairs . The user can choose which dictionary to use in general  , and which of them open actually . Currently , if all the available dictionaries are open , MoBiDic handles approximately 1 million lexical entries . 
Some of the dictionaries , mainly the terminological ones , have usually a very simple list-based structure . Dictionaries shown by Figure 1 and Figure 2 , however , appear on the screen with the traditional paper dictionary image  . It is done by using SGML representations and an online SGML-RTF conversion  . MoBiDic can do exact structural search not influenced by the layout at all  . 
Generally , the original lexical resource-even it has been available in electronic format-did not use SGML  . For this reason , a special system for a semiautomatic conversion of some formatted text files containing dictionary data to SGML format has been developed for the MoBiDic environment  . This system is not available for the end-users , it serves industrial purposes . 2 First , in order to enable selective access to the information in dictionary entries  , a thorough structural analysis is done , while inconsistent and faulty entries are marked . They are corrected later , manually . The resulting SGML-annotate dictionaries are enhanced with the necessary indexes  . They are lemma-variants and expanded subentries made with the help of existing language technology modules  ( Pr6szrky 1994 )  . 
Users like to work with their own little vocabularies  , glossaries , and the professional translator is usually asked to use official translation  2 See http://www . morphologic . hu/esgml . htm glossaries are generally never published , but there is a need to us them in the same environment  . 
MoBiDic is able to treat user dictionaries containing any type of information sources  ( lexicons , encyclopediasnd dictionaries ) . 
Figure 3' grapes ' ( from the PicDIC picture dictionary ) with pronunciation in MoBiDic "_t :1 ~ u ~` t"ii + , + ~ I + ? dmy [' dju:tl]nIkb teless+g , feladat2 on/off ~ ~ olg/datban , fz syeletes ls zolg/daton ~ vfal 3 vlan 4 ~freevimamentes
IllE , , ~ . h"I~lv6mIl cladatI"1 duty [ Benldn9 ( SGML]l
I__.~lau %, lau W.essISG ULII--I
I = IId , ~ pnformatics [ SGML
I-~"""~iL,tsGuui
Figure 4
Search for the ( lemma of ) ' duties ' in a set of English-
Hungarian dictionaries
The strength of this method is that user dictionaries are looked up for a word exactly when other dictionaries  , thus translator's remarks can also be read when other dictionaries provide the user with their translation equivalents  . Here we have to emphasize again that MoBiDic is not yet another electronic dictionary  , but a multi-dictionary environment where a single word is sent to every open dictionary by a single mouse click  . In Figure 4 the user started from the word form " duties ' , and eight dictionaries ( that are open and contain English either on the source or the target side  ) send translations to the screen . 
3 Implementation Features
The most recent development is MoBiDic's cli-ent -server implementation  . Its server side ( Windows NT , Unix and Novell ) consists , in fact , of two servers : the linguistic server and the dictionary server  . The user interface and screen handling modules will take place on the  ( Win , Mac , Linux , 
Java , etc .) client side.
There are many software modules of other vendors on the marke that can also be combined with MoBiDic through its well-defined application programming interface  ( API )  . With the help of this API the user can communicate to the other modules from MoBiDic without leaving it  . Because of technical and legal reasons , it can , of course , be done in collaboration with the developer of the product in question  . The picture dictionary shown by Figure 4 is a working example : the vocabulary part of the  ( also commercial ) CALL program called PicDIC is available for MoBiDic users from the familiar environment  . 
Translators who generally use their favorite word -processor while translating can use Mo-BiDic from their word-processing tools with the help of the included macros  . Another important issue is that users can use their CDROM drive for other purposes while translating  . Namely , Mo-BiDic has minimal space requirement because of its compression method  3  , therefore the full dictionary system can be copied to the hard disk : thus the CD drive is freed and can be used for other purposes  . 
4 Comparison with other methods
There are several dictionary programs both in laboratories and on the market  , but only some of them share the socalled " intelligent " features with MoBiDic  . Rank Xerox developed in the COMPASS and Locolex projects a prototype that accesses enhanced and structurally elaborated dictionaries with an intelligent  , context-sensitive 3 Average 12 Mb/dictionary . 
1070 lookup procedure , presenting the information to the user through an attractive graphical interface  . 
( Feldweg and Breidt1996) Unlike MoBiDic , it does not have access to more than one dictionary at the same time  . Consequently , user dictionaries are not supported . SGML is , however , used both in the dictionary and the corpus modules  . There is a focus on the intelligent treatment of multiword units in the IDAREX formalism  ( Breidt et al 1996 )  . Another project with similar aims is GLOSSER . Its prototype ( Nerbonn et al .  1997 ) carries out a morphological analysis of the sentence in which the selected word occurs and a stochastic disambiguation f the word class information  . This information is then matched against a ( single , but SGML ) dictionary and corpora . The GLOSSER prototype displays context dependent translations and on request  , examples from the available corpora . Neither of the above developments nor other web dictionary services  ( e . g . 
Word Bot ) share all the important features with MoBiDic : client-server architecture  , multi-dictionary access , user dictionary handling , parallel ( and intelligent ) dictionary and corpus lookup . What's more , MoBiDic is commercially also available , that is tested by thousands of " real " end-users . 

MoBiDic is a multi-dictionary translation environment based on a client-server architecture  . It consists of the following main parts : linguistic server  , dictionary server and the client with the graphical user interface  . There are several benefits : ( 1 ) the linguistic server is dictionary independent and language  dependent4  ;   ( 2 ) the dictionary server has intelligent access to various sorts of dictionaries  ( from SGML to multimedia ) and bilingual corpora ; 4 Recently , English , German , Hungarian , Polish , Czech and Romanian morphological components are available for the MoBiDic users  . Descriptions for further languages are under development  , see the website http://www . morphologic . hu for the actualist of languages . 
(3 ) simultaneously an unlimited number of dictionaries can be held open  , thus by a single interrogation step , all the dictionaries ( with translations , explanations , ynonyms , etc . ) can be surveyed ;   ( 4 ) the translators ' own glossaries built with the help of the system may also be disseminated  ( as new dictionaries , with the needed copyrights ) among other users , if needed ;   ( 5 ) it has an open architecture and a well-defined

(6 ) it has been implemented and is available with a gradually increasing number of dictionaries for numerous language pairs  . 
MoBiDic is , therefore , not a research project only , but a set of translation tools for a wider public . 

Breidt . E . , F . Segond and G . Valetto ( 1994 ) Local Grammars for the Description of MultiWord Lexe-mes and Their Automatic Recognition in Texts  . Papers in Computational Lexicography , Linguistics Institute , HAS , Budapest , pp .  1928 . 
Calzolari , N . (1994) Issues for Lexicon Building . In : A . 
Zampolli , N . Calzolari & M . Palmer ( eds . ) Current Issues in Computational Linguistics : In Honour of Don Walker  . Kluwer/Giardini Editori , Pisa , pp . 

Feldweg , H . and E . Breidt .   ( 1996 ) COMPASS-An Intelligent Dictionary System for Reading Text in a Foreign Language  . Papers in Computational Lexicography , Linguistics Institute , HAS , Budapest , pp . 

Hutchins , J . (1996) Introduction . Proceediings of the EAMT Machine Translation Workshop  , Vienna , pp . 

Kingscott , G . (1993) Applications of Machine Translation . In : Transfer reneces sest . . . ( Current Issues of Translation Theory ) , Szombathely , pp .  239-248 . 
Nerbonne , L . Karttunen , E . Paskaleva , G . Pr6szrky and T . Roosmaa ( 1997 ) Reading More into Foreign Languages . Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , Washington . .
Pr6szrky , G .   ( 1994 ) Industrial Applications of Unification Morphology  . Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing  , Stuttgart , pp .  157-159 . 

