
Coherence in Spoken Discourse *
Heike Tappe and Frank Schilder
Computer Science Department
Hamburg University
Vogt-Krlln-Str .30
D-22527 Hamburg

schiIder@informatik.uni-hamburg , de

This paper explores the possibilities and limits of a discourse grammar applied to spontaneous speech  . 
Most discourse grammars ( e . g . SDRT , Asher , 1993; RST , Mann & Thompson ,  1988 ) tend to be descriptive theories of written discourse which presuppose a coherent structure  . This structure is the outcome of a goal directed planning process on the part of the producer  . In order to obtain a better understanding of the planning process we analyse spoken discourse elicited in an experimental setting  . Subjects describe the pixel-per-pixel development of sketch-maps on a computer screen  . This forces the speakers to conceptualise the perceived state of affairs  , plan their discourse , and produce a description of the drawing at the same time  . Thus we find evidence for the planning process in the recorded at a and can show that the discourse structures are less globally coherent than those underlying written text  . 
In our paper we discuss to what extent a flexible discourse grammar based on a Tree Description Grammar  ( TDG )   ( Schilder , 1997) can handle such data . 
I Introduction
We investigate in this paper to what extent a discourse grammar is capable of analysing spontaneous speech that is obviously not as well structured as written text  . The example text discussed contains questions and remarks which do not seem to be part of the discourse  . Nevertheless , we believe that the entire spoken discourse is to be represented by one discourse structure  . Evidence for this assumption comes from the observation that anaphoric references are made between questions which apparently * This work is partly funded by the German Science Foundation  ( DFG )  , research project ' Conceptualization Processes in Language Production : an Empirically Founded Model on the Basis of Event Description '  ( Funding Number : HA 1237/10-1 )  . 
comment on the planning process and the actual description of the sketch-map  . 
Following Schilder ( 1997 ) a discourse grammar based on a Tree Description Grammar  ( TDG )   ( Kallmeyer ,  1996 ) is used for the analysis of an example text . TDG is employed to encode the dynamics of the discourse structure  . Other discourse theories like Segmented Discourse Representation Theory  ( SDRT )   ( Asher ,  1993 ) or Rhetorical Structure Theory ( RST )   ( Mann & Thompson , 1988) offer only a descriptive x planation . 
The remaining part of the paper is organised as follows  . Section 2 contains a description of the experimental setting in which the example discourse was obtained  ( Habel and Tappe , forthcoming ) . Section 3 provides an outline of the example before a short introduction to the discourse grammar is given in section  4  . Section 5 offers the formalisation of the example discourse and section  6 concludes and describes areas for ongoing research  . 
2 Method and material 2.1 Method
Subjects were presented with sketch-maps . These were previously drawn by students who had been asked to sketch the route between the Computer Science Department and the main campus of their university  . Since the two landmarks are approximately 6 kmapart , all of the sketch-maps included some means of transport  . The drawings were made on a drawing table t and subsequently stored on a computer hard-disc  . In the verbalisation-phase replays of the drawings were used as stimulus material  . A new group of subjects was presented with one of the drawings  . They had to carefully watch what happened and simultaneously describe what they were seeing  , while the graphical objects became visible on the previously empty screen in the same chronological order they were produced  . The verbalisers were familiar with the route between the two Uni-rial they were going to be confronted with  . 
2.2 Material
For the present analysis we chose a fragment of one of the online-verbalisations  , consisting of the first seven utterances describing the sketch-map segment that is illustrated in figure  1  . 
Figure 1: The sketch-map
The graphical objects in this sketch represent the following objects : the Computer Science department and the streets leading from the building  . This part of the sketch-map is described by a 32 year old , right-handed computer scientist . 
3 Analysis of the text fragment
The text fragment contains a variety of features that are characteristic of spoken rather than of written discourse  . In this section we will look at each of the utterances in greater detail and show how the discourse coherence is maintained by the speaker  . He starts talking as soon as he sees the rectangle being drawn on the screen  . The first utterance ( U 1 ) can be characterised as a statement about the speaker's current mental state : UI : Ja  , ich weiBj as chonworumes geht , ( Yes , I already know what this is all about , ) The speaker hereby expresses a self-belief the content of which can be circumscribed as follows : I  ( the speaker ) know which states-of-affairs I am about osee on the computer screen  . This utterance serves as a kind of background for what follows  . With his statement , the speaker commits himself to prove that he really knows what is going on  . With the subsequent utterance ( U2 ) he demonstrates that he has at least some intuition about the stimulus material : He assigns the rectangle the name of the depicted realworld object  . 
U2: also daswird dasInformatikgebtiude . . . mit der Be-schreibung dane ben .   ( well this is going to be the building of the Computer Science department  . . , with the annotation extoit ) Accordingly , he fulfills part of the felicity conditions that accompany assertions about the possession of knowledge  , i . e . heel aborates on the content of his belief-state . The elaboration-relation between ( U 1 ) and ( U2 ) is triggered by the discourse marker also . With the next utterance the speaker adds further information to his states-of-affairs-description  . 
U 3: und die Stra Sendie jet ztange fangen wer denzu malen  . . . ( and the streets that are now started to be drawn . . . ) Therefore , we can categorise the relation between ( U2 ) and ( U3 ) as a narration-relation . This relation does not add a new perspective or a new theme to the ongoing discourse  , but rather supports its continuation . On contrast ,   ( U4 ) establishes abreak in the ongoing discourse . The discourse marker eigent lich signals that the speakers has build up an expectation about the continuation of the drawing event on the basis of his belief state  . 
U4: Eigent lich wiir deicher warten , (Actually I would expect ) The content of the belief state is -- as mentioned before -- that the speaker believes to know what will be drawn  . Yet , this belief state ends here , because even though the speake rightly interprets the developing double lines to represent streets  ( cf . U3 above ) his further expectation is not met . The content of this expectation is expressed in ( U5 ) :  U5: da Birgend wo die Bushalte stelle noch eingez eich netwird  , daim . . . ( that the bus stop was drawn into it somewhere , there in the . . .   ) Obviously the speaker expects that the drawing will contain a symbol representing a bus-stop near to the building  . This is not the case . Therefore the rhetorical relation between ( U4 ) and ( U 1 ) is that of a termination . We see that rhetorical relations do not necessarily hold between adjacent utterances only  , but that an utterance may open a subtree that can be closed off by an utterance that is verbalised a couple of utterances later  .   ( U5 ) breaks off with a prepositional phrase that lacks the location argument  (  . . . daim . . . ) . The speaker is quite obviously insecure about the name of the street that contains the bus-stop  . 
(U6) reveals his insecurity.
U6: ( a ) wieheist dasDing , heist das Gazellenkamp ? ( b ) Ja , ne ? . . . ( what is it called , is it called Gazellenkamp ?
Yes , isn't it ? ...)
The structure in U6 is very typical for spoken dis-discourse , but the verbalisation of vocabulary search and planning processes  . We hold that the interrogative intonation functions as a signal  , allowing the integration of a substructure that is not connected to the previous discourse via a prototypical rhetorical relation  . The substructure itself can be interpreted as a meta-comment about the ongoing mental processes  . This substructure is closed off by ( U7 ) which begins with a ber ( ' but ' )  . 
U7: Aber . . . . keine Bushaltestelle ( But . . . no bus stop ) This discourse marker allows the speaker to return to the branching node of the discourse structure where the digression was introduced  . 
4 Discourse grammar 4 . 1 Tree descriptions A definition of TDG is given by Kallmeyer  ( 1996 ) who introduces tree descriptions consisting of constraints for finite labelled trees  . A dominance relation ( <~* ) betwee node labels indicates that these two labels can be equated or have a path of arbitrary length inserted between them  . The second relation betwee nodes is the parent relation  ( <~ ) which is irreflexive , asymmetric and intransitive . 
The tree's root node D labelled kl in figure 2 , for example , dominates another node labelled k2 . 
According to the definition of <~* these two nodes may be equal or an arbitrary number of other nodes may be inbetween them  . An adjoining operation k l : D

Ik 2: Dk 3: Dk 4: D

Iks:D
Ikr : S
Figure 2: A labelled tree description is easily defined because of this property  . Further tree descriptions can be inserted between such nodes  . The descriptions which are , formally speaking , negation-free formulae of constraints on the nodes  , are conjoined . The nodes where the adjunction takes place are set to equal  . i ~ Figure 3 shows an example . 
4.2 A flexible discourse grammar
According to Schilder (1997) , feature value structures are added to the tree logic in order to enrich it with rhetorical relations and further discourse information  . One nonterminal symbol is used for the D ( is course ) segments , whereas the terminals are the

Two features are added to the tree description to encode the semantic ontent of the sentence and the ' topic ' information expressed in a discourse  . Firstly , Sgets associated with the meaning of a sentence via a feature CONT  ( ENT ) containing all discourse referents and the conditions imposed on them  . 2 Secondly , a feature PROMI ( NENT ) is added that is used to define the notion of openness within a discourse  . This feature refects the fact that one situation described by an utterance  ( e . g . situation el described by U1 ) is subordinated by another one when combined via a rhetorical relation  . It furthermore exhibits the restriction of the further utterances to the right frontier of the discourse tree  ( cf . ( Webber , 1991)) . 
For the discourse structure two types of tree descriptions have to be distinguished  . One tree structure allows attachment on two levels of the right frontier of the tree  . This tree is called subordinated tree and the structure is schematically indicated in figure  2  . The other one is a subordinating structure that is triggered by discourse relations such as narration or result  . Further attachment is only possible at the last uttered sentence  .   3   5 Formalisation The discourse structure obtained for the first three sentences of the example text is reflected in figure  3  . At first an elaboration relation is established between  ( U 1 ) and ( U2 )  . The impose discourse structure ( i . e . a subordinated tree as in figure 2 ) allows attachment at two levels . Note furthermore that the elaboration relation holds between the mental state of the producer  ( i . e . I already know what this is all about ) and the description of what is happening on the screen  . 4 ( U3) is connected with ( U2) via narration . The adjunction operation in figure 3 shows how the 2We presume that his content is represented by a discourse representation structure as standard DRT would predict  ( Kamp and Reyle ,  1993) . 
3See the rightree in figure 3.
4These rhetorical relations are underlined in the figure to highlight their different status  . 




Io
Il ' IET : narr(I-~\],)J
I , ,

Is\[CONT:\[\]\]
Figure 3: Two discourse segments combined
D\[ROM ,
Inewly generated sentence is incorporated in the current discourse structure  . 
Although the production took place under a certain amount of pressure  , the right frontier principle was never violated . The speaker never went back or made anaphoric references to discourse referents being behind this frontier  . 
Having demonstrated how the production of the discourse structure can be formally described for the first three utterances  , we now want to focus on a particularly interesting problem exhibited by the sequence  ( U4 ) to ( U 6 )  . This sequence contains rhetorical questions , which describe the ongoing planning process of the speaker  . 5The sequence starts with an expectation ( i . e . ( U4)) the subject utters . Again the proposition expressed is related to the mental state of the speaker  . Interestingly enough , he has to return to the top level of the discourse tree and continue from there  . Consequently , the discourse segment containing ( U2 ) and ( U3 ) is ' cutoff ' and not available for further attachment  . 
Embedded within the expectation is an utterance describing the ongoing planning and searching process  . The verbalised questions reflect here ques to the ment a lexicon and the mental map the subject has got of this area  . 
The discourse grammar consequently has to be SNote that such a sequence would never be found in a written text  . 
extended in order to maintain a coherent discourse structure for the modelling of the producer  . Thus rhetorical relations describing planning processes are introduced  . With these , the discourse grammar becomes capable of representing a coherent discourse structure for the spoken language despite the fact that the entire discourse segment does not seem as coherent as written text  . 
Figure 4 contains the discourse structure after the search for the street name has come to an end  . One rhetorical relation introduce disp ( lan ) _comment which describes the ongoing planning process  . It also involves a search for the correct word in the lexicon  . The rhetorical quest ( ion ) is asked whether the correct word has been chosen and this question answered by the subject  . The summarising yes , isn't it ( i . e .   ( U6b ) ) ends the search process and closes the discourse structure at the right frontier  . 
Interestingly enough , the clue given by the discourse marker but uttered in  ( U7 ) is absolutely essential . The speaker indicates with this marker that he wants to return to the top level of the discourse tree and to add a contrast relation to the expectation  . 
The construction of the discourse structure continues therefore at the top level of the tree in figure  4  . 
6 Conclusion
We have shown that spoken discourse can be formalised by a discourse grammar based on TDG  . 
Even planning processes that surface as rhetor-



DIpRoMI:\[~\]\]\[RI~T:term(\[~\],\[~)
Is\[oT
D !


D\[PROMI:\[~\]
RHET : p_corament(\['~'\],\[~ .   .   .   .   .   .  - - - - -  .   .  - _ ____
D\[PROMI : fffl\]
IS\[CONr : S\]
D\[PROMI:\[~\]
RHET : quest(\['~'\],\[~
D\[PROMI:I-~-I\]
IS\[coNr : r~\]
Figure 4: The planning process within the discourse structure ical questions can be incorporated into the discourse structure generated  . Newrhetorical relations were introduced that should prove useful for NLP-applications  . In ongoing research we focus on the interaction between planning sequences  , discourse structure and intentional structure . 

Nicholas Asher .  1993 . Reference to abstract Objects in Discourse , volume 50 of Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy . Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht . 
Christopher Habel and Heike Tappe . forthcoming.
Processes of segmentation and linearization in describing events  . In Ch . von Stutterheim and R . Meyer-Klab unde , editors , Processes in language production . 
Laura Kallmeyer .  1996 . Underspecification iTree Description Grammars . Arbeitspapiere des Sonderforschungsbereichs 340   81  , University of
Tiibingen , Ttibingen , December.
Hans Kamp and Uwe Reyle .  1993 . From Discourse to Logic : Introduction to Modeltheoretic Semantics of Natural Language  , volume 42 of Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy . Kluwer Academic
Publishers , Dordrecht.
William Mann and Sandra Thompson . 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory : Toward a functional theory of text organisation n  . Text , 8(3):243-281 . 
Frank Schilder .  1997 . Temporal Relations in English and German Narrative Discourse  . Ph . D . 
thesis , University of Edinburgh , Centre for Cognitive Science . 
Bonnie L . Webber .  1991 . Structure and ostension in the interpretation of discourse deixis  . Language and Cognitive Processes , 6(2):107-135 . 

