DiMLex : A lexicon of discourse markers
for text generation and understanding
Manfred Stede and Carla Umbach
Technische Universitgt Berlin
Projektgruppe KIT
Sekr . FR 610
Franklinstr . 28/29
D-10587 Berlin , Germany
email : stede\[umbach@cs.tu-berlin.de
Abstract
Discourse markers ( ' cue words ' ) are lexical items that signal the kind of coherence relation holding between adjacent text spans  ; for example , because , since , and for this reason are different markers for causal relations  . Discourse markers are a syntactically quite heterogeneous group of words  , many of which are traditionally treated as function words belonging to the realm of grammar rather than to the lexicon  . But for a single discourse relation there is often a set of similar markers  , allowing for a range of paraphrases for expressing the relation  . To capture the similarities and differences between these  , and to represent them adequately , we are developing DiMLex , a lexicon of discourse markers . 
After describing our methodology and the kind of information to be represented in DiMLex  , we briefly discuss its potential applications in both text generation and understanding  . 
1 Introduction
Assuming that text can be formally described ( and represented ) by means of discourse relations holding between adjacent portions of text  ( e . g . , \[ Mann , Thompson 1988\]) , we use the term discourse marker for those lexical items that  ( in addition to nonlexical mean such as punctuation  , aspectual and focus shifts , etc . ) can signal the presence of a relation at the linguistic surface  . Typically , a discourse relation is associated with a wide range of such markers  ; consider , for instance , the following variety of CON-CESSIONS , which all express the same underlying propositional content  . The words treated here as discourse markers are underlined  . 
We were in So Ho ; nevertheless\[nonethelessIhowever\]still\ ] yet  , we found a cheap bar . 
We were in So Ho , but we found a cheap baranyway.
Despite the fact that we were in So Ho , we found a cheap bar . 
Notwithstanding the fact that we were in
So Ho , we found a cheap bar.
Although we were in So Ho , we found a cheap bar.
If one accepts these sentences as paraphrases , then the various discourse markers all need to be associated with the information that they signal a concessive relationship between the two propositions involved  . Next , the finegrained differences between similar markers need to be represented  ; one such difference is the degree of specificity : for example  , but can mark a general CONTRAST or a more specific CONCESSION  .  ~ , ~ e believe that a dedicate discourse marker lexicon holding this kind of information can serve as a valuable resource for natural anguage processing  . Our efforts in constructing that lexicon are described in Section  2  . 
From the perspective of text generation , ot all paraphrases listed above are equally felicitous in specific contexts  . In order to choose the most appropriate variant , a generator needs knowledge about he finegrained differences between similar markers for the same relation  . 
Furthermore , it needs to account for the interactions between marker choice and other generation decisions and hence needs knowledge about the syntagmatic constraints associated with different markers  . We will discuss this perspective in Section 3 . 
From the perspective of text understanding , a sophisticated system should be able to derive the discourse relations holding between adjacent text spans  , and also to notice the additional semantic and pragmatic implication stemming from the usage of a particular discourse marker  . 
We will briefly characterize such applications in
Section 4.
12382 Buildinga Discourse Marker
Lexicon 2.1 The idea
The traditional distinction between content words and function words  ( or open-class and closed-class items ) relies on the stipulation that the former have their " own " meaning independent of the context in which they are used  , whereas the latter assume meaning only in context  . Then , content words are assigned to the realm of the lexicon  , whereas function words are treated as a part of grammar  . 
For dealing with discourse markers , we do not regard this distinction as particularly helpful  , though . As we have illustrated above and will elaborate below  , these words can carry a wide variety of semantic and pragmatic overtones  , which render the choice of a marker meaning -driven  , as opposed to a mere consequence of structural decisions  . Furthermore , a number of lexical relations that are customary used to assign structure to the universe of " open class " lexical items  , most prominently synonymy , ple-sionymy (" near-synonymy ") , antonymy , hyponymy and polysemy , can be applied to discourse markers as well : ? Synonymy : It can be argued that true synonyms do not exist at all  . However , the German word so bz war and obsch on ( both more formal variants of obwohl = although ) certainly come very close to being synonymous . 
? Plesionymy : although and though , according to Martin \[1992\] , differ informality ; although and even though differ in terms of emphasis  . 
? Antonomy : if/unless , according to Barker\[1994\] , have opposite polarity , as in He will not attend unless he finishesh is paper vs  . 
He will attend if he finishes his paper.
? Hyponomy : Some markers are more specific than others  ; recall the example of but given above . Knott and Mellish \[1996\] deal with the issue of " taxonomizing " discourse markers  . 
? Polysemy : Other than being more or less specific  , some markers can signal quite different relations  ; e . g . , while can be used for
TEMPORALCO-OCCURRENCE , and also for

Accordingly , we propose that the proper place for describing discourse markers is a dedicated lexicon that provides a classification of their syntactic  , semantic and pragmatic features and characterizes the relationships between similar markers  . To this end , our group is developing a Discourse Marker LEX icon  ( DiMLex )  , which aims at assembling the various information associated with markers and describing it on a uniform level of representation  . Our initial focus is on German , but English will also be a target language . 
2.2 Methodology
Methodological considerations pertain to the two tasks of determining the set of words we regard as discourse markers and thus are to be included in the lexicon  , and determining the lexical entries for these words  . 
Finding the " right " set of discourse markers is not an easy task  , since the common lexicographic practice of taking part of speech as the primary criterion for inclusion or exclusion does not apply  . Knott and Mellish \[1996\] provide an apt summary of the situation . Their ' test for relational phrases ' is a good start  , but geared towards the English language ( we are investigating German as well )  , and furthermore it catches only items relating clauses  ; in Despite the heavy rain , we went for a walk it would not detect a cue phrase  . 
To arrive at a more comprehensives t , we began by consulting standard grammar such'as Quirk et al  \[1972\] and Helbig and Buscha \[1991\]  , which provide descriptions of function words grouped according to semantic lass--but these are far from " complete "  . A very good source for German is \[ Brauss et al . in prep . \] , which investigates a huge set of connectives from a grammatical viewpoint  . 
As for determining lexical descriptions , the research literature offers a large number of helpful  , even though quite heterogeneous , sources . 
There are several detailed studies of individual groups of markers  , such as \[ Vander Linden , Martin 1995\] for PURPOSE markers . Besides , the Linguistics literature offers finegrained analyses of individual markers  , which are far to onumerous to list . We are drawing upon all these sources , trying to place them in a single unified framework  . The overall goal can be characterized as the aim to synthesize two strands of re-?"Top-down ": Text linguistics considers markers as a means to signal coherence  , and provides us within sights on the semantic and pragmatic properties of marker classes  . 
?" Bottom-up ": Grammars as well as the linguistic research literature provide syntactic  , semantic and stylistic properties of individual markers  , comparative studies of related markers , etc . 
2.3 The lexicon
Although our classification of lexical features is still under development  , we give here a tentative list of such features in order to illustrate the range of phenomena under consideration  . The list is loosely ordered from syntactic to semantic and pragmatic features  ; for now , we do not explicitly assign such categories . 
The part of speech of a marker ( conjunctive , subordinating conjunction , coordinating conjunction , preposition ) determines the possibilities of positioning the marker within the constituent : conjunctives  ( especially the German ' Konjunktional adverbien ' ) can float to various positions , whereas the positions of others are fixed . The linear order of the conjuncts is fixed for some markers and flexible for others  ; this is independent of the aforementioned two features  . 
Some marker show a specific behavior towards negation  , e . g . , the German sondern ( which corresponds to certain uses of but ) requires an explicit negation in the antecedent clause  . Some markers impose constraints on tense and aspect of the clauses  , either by requiring specific tem-poral/aspectual ttributes in one clause  , or by constraining the relationship between the two conjuncts  ( e . g . , after ) . 
Several grammar suggest classifications of markers according to the semantic relation they express : adversative  , alternative , substitution , causal , conditional , etc . Within these groups , some markers exhibit opposite polarity , i . e . , have an incorporated negation or not ( e . g . , if versus unless ) . Commentabilitys a feature that often distinguishes a single marker within a semantic class in that it can be negated or focused on by scalar particles  ( e . g . , in German , the causal weil is commentable , whereas denn is not ) . 
Moving towards pragmatics , the intention behind using a marker can vary . A wellknown example is the contrast between German aber and sondern  ( in English , they both correspond to but ) , where the former merely states a contrast , whereas the latter corrects an assumption on the hearer'side  ( e . g . ,\[ Helbig , Buscha 1991\]) . 
Another dimension concerns the presuppositions associated with markers  ; a wellknown case is the contrast between because and since  , where only the latter marks the subsequent proposition as given  . The German CAUSE markers well and denn differ in terms of the illocutions they connect : the former applies to propositions  , the latter to epistemic judgements\[Brausse et al  , in prep . \] . Certain very similar markers differ only stylistically  . One German example was given above , and another one is the English not with standing , which is more formal than despite but moreover is more flexible in positioning  , as it can be postponed . 
The final but crucial feature to be mentioned here is the discourse relation expressed by a marker  . RST\[Mann , Thompson 1988\] offers an inspiring theory of such relations , but we do not fully subscribe to this account . Rather , we think that the relationship between semantic relations  ( see above ) and pragmatic ones needs to be clarified ( e . g . , lasher 1993\]) , which can be done by teasing apart the various dimensions incoporated in RST's definitions  , for example in the spirit of Sanders et al \[1992\]  . 
Once the range of dimensions has been described , we will deal with questions of representation ; we envisage using some inheritance-based formalism that allows for a compact representation of individual descriptions  , hy-ponymic relations between them , and polysemous entries . 
3 Using DiMLex in text generation
Present text generation systems are typically not very good at choosing discourse markers  . Even though a few systems have incorporated some more sophisticated mappings for specific relations  ( e . g . , in DRAFTER\[Paris et al .  1995\]) , there is still a general tendency to treat discourse marker selection as a task to be performed as a " side effect " by the grammar  , much like for other function words such as prepositions  . 

To improve this situation , we propose to view discourse marker selection as one subtask of the general lexical choice process  , so that--to continue the example given above- -one or another form of CONCESSION can be produced in the light of the specific utterance parameters and the context  . Obviously , marker selection also includes the decision whether to use any marker at all or leave the relation implicit  ( e . g . , \[ Di Eugenio et al 1997\]) . When these decisions can be systematically controlled  , the text can be tailored much better to the specific goals of the generation process  . 
The generation task imposes a particular view of the information coded in DiMLex : the entry point to the lexicon is the discourse relation to be realized  , and the lookup yields the range of alternatives . But many markers have more semantic and pragmatic on straints associated with them  , which have to be verified in the generator's input representation for the marker to be a candidate  . Then , discourse markers place ( predominantly sntactic ) constraints on their immediate context , which affects the interactions between marker choice and other realization decisions  . And finally , markers that are still equivalent after evaluating these constraints are subject to a choice process that can utilize preferential  ( e . g . stylistic ) criteria . 
Therefore , under the generation view , the information in DiMLex is grouped into the following three classes : -- Applicability conditions : The necessary conditions for using a discourse marker  , i . e . , the features or structural configurations that need to be present in the input specification  . 
-- Syntagmatic on straints : The constraints regarding the combination of a marker and the neighbouring constituents  ; most of them are syntactic and appear at the beginning of the list given above  ( part of speech , linear order , etc . ) . 
-- Paradigmatic features : Features that label the differences between similar marker sharing the same applicability conditions  , such as stylistic features and degrees of emphasis  . 
Very briefly , we see discourse marker choice as one aspect of the sentence planning task  ( e . g . ,\[ Wanner , novy 1996\]) . In order to account for the intricate interactions between marker choice and other generation decisions  , the idea is to employ DiML ex as a declarative resource supporting the sentence planning process  , which comprises determining sentence boundaries and sentence structure  , linear ordering of constituents ( e . g . , the matizations ), and lexical choice . All these decisions are heavily interdependent , and in order to produce truly adequate text , the various realization options need to be weighted against each other  ( in contrast to a simple , fixed sequence of making the types of decisions ) , which presupposes a flexible computational mechanism based on resources as declarative as possible  . This generation approach is described in more detail in a separate paper \[ Grote  , Stede 1998\] . 
4 Us ing D iMLex in text unders tand ing In text understanding  , discourse marker serve as cues for inferring the rhetorical or semantic structure of the text  . In the approach proposed by Marcu\[1997\] , for example , the presence of discourse markers is used to hypothesize individual textual units and relations holding between them  . Then , the overall discourse structure tree is built using constraint satisfaction techniques  . For tasks of this kind , DiMLex can supply the set of cue words to be looked for and support the initial disambiguation of cues in the text  . Depending on the depth of the syntactic and semantic analysis carried out by the text understanding system  , different features provided by DiMLex can be taken into account  . Certain structural configurations can be tested without any deep understanding  ; for instance , the German marker w ~ ihrend is generally ambiguous between a CONTRAST and a TEMPORAL COOCCURRENCE reading  , but when followed by a noun phrase , only the latter reading is available ( wi ih rend corresponds not only to the English while but also to during  )  . 
Similarly , we envisage applications of DiM-Lex for dialogue processing  . For example , within the VERB MOBIL project , Stede and Schmitz \[1997\] have analysed the various pragmatic functions that German discourse particles fulfill in dialogue  ; many of these particles are discourse markers , and DiMLex can provide valuable information for their disambiguation  , which in turn facilitates the recognition of underlying speech acts  . 
1241 5 Summary and Outlook
Discourse markers , words that signal the presence of a coherence relation between adjacent text spans  , play important roles in human text understanding and production  . Due to their being classified as " noncontent words " or " function words "  , however , they have not received sufficient attention in natural language processing yet  . In response to this situation , we are assembling pieces of information on German and English discourse markers from grammars  , dictionaries , and the linguistics research literature . 
This information is classified and organized into a discourse marker lexicon  , DiMLex . 
The first phase of our project runs until mid-1999 . At present , we are on the theoretical side focusing our attention on German CONTRAST and CONCESSION markers  ; on the implementational side , we have assembled a generation test bed that allows for exploring the role of DiMLex in producing paragraph-size text  . By the end of the first phase , we plan to have completed a system that produces German and English text  , with a prototypical DiMLex specified for contrastive markers  . For a potential follow upphase of the project , we envisage enlarging DiMLex to other groups of markers  ; working out systematic lexical representations within a suitable formalism  ; and giving more attention to the requirements for text understanding in addition to those of generation  . 
References
N . Asher . Reference to abstract objects in Discourse . 
Dordrecht : Kluwer , 1993.
K . Barker . " Clause-level relationship analysis in the TANKA system  . " Technical report , Dept . of Computer Science , University of Ottawa , TR-94-07 ,  1994 . 
U . Brausse , E . Breindl-Hiller , R . Pasch . " Handbuchder deutschen Konnektoren . "Institut fiir deutsche Sprache , Mannheim . In preparation . 
B . Di Eugenio , J . Moore , M . Paolucci . " Learning features that predict cue usage . " In: . Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the ACL and 8th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL , 
Madrid , July 1997.
B . Grote , M . Stede . " Discourse marker choice in sentence planning . " To appear in : Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , Niagara-on-the-lake/Canada ,  1998 . 
G . Helbig , J . Buscha . Deutsche Grammatik : E in H and buch f ~ r den Aus Mnder unterricht  . Berlin , Leipzig : Langenscheidt , Verlag Enzyklop ~ . die , 1990 . 
A . Knott , C . Mellish . " A feature-based account of the relations ignalled by sentence and clause connectives  . " In : Language and Speech 39 (23), 1996 . 
W . Mann , S . Thompson . " Rhetorical structure theory : Towards a functional theory of text organization  . "In:TEXT , 8:243-281, 1988 D . Marcu . " The rhetorical parsing of natural language text  . " In : Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the ACL and 8th Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL , Madrid , July 1997 . 
J . Martin . English Text-System and Structure.
Philadelphia/Amsterdam : John Benjamins , 1992.
C . Paris , K . Vander Linden , M . Fischer , A . Hartley , L . Pemberton , R . Power , D . Scott . " A support tool for writing multilingual instructions  . " In : Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence  ( IJCAI-95 )  , Montreal ,  1995 . 
R . Quirk , S . Greenbaum , G . Leech , J . Svartvik . 
A Grammar of Contemporary English . Harlow :
Longman , 1992(20 thed.)
T . Sanders , W . Spooren , L . Nordman . " Towards a taxonomy of coherence relations . " In : Discourse
Processes 15, 1992.
M . Stede , B . Schmitz . " Discourse particles and routine formulas in spoken language translation  . " In : Proceedings of the ACL/ELSNET Workshop on Spoken Language Translation  , Madrid ,  1997 . 
K . Vander Linden , J . Martin . " Expressing rhetorical relations in instructional text " In : Computational 
Linguistics 21(1):29-58, 1995.
L . Wanner , E . Hovy . " The Health Doc sentence planner . " In : Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , Her-stmonceux Castle , June 1996 . 

