A Concept-based Adaptive Approach to Word Sense

Jen Nan Chen Jason S . Chang
Department of Computer Science Department of Computer Science 
National Tsing Hua University National Tsing Hua University 
Hsinchu 30043, Taiwan Hsinchu 30043, Taiwan
jnchen@mcu.edu.twjschang@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Word sense disambiguation for unrestricted text is one of the most difficult tasks in the fields of computational linguistics  . The crux of the problem is to discover a model that relates the intended sense of a word with its context  . This paper describes a general framework for adaptive conceptual word sense disambiguation  . Central to this WSD framework is the sense division and semantic relations based on topical analysis of dictionary sense definitions  . 
The process begins with an initial disambiguation step using an MRD-derived knowledge base  . An adaptation step follows to combine the initial knowledge base with knowledge gleaned from the partial disambiguated text  . Once the knowledge base is adjusted to suit the text at hand  , it is then applied to the text again to finalize the disambiguation result  . 
Definitions and example sentences from
LDOCE are employed as training materials for WSD , while passages from the Brown corpus and Wall Street Journal are used for testing  . We report on several experiments illustrating effectiveness of the adaptive approach  . 
1 Introduction
Word sense disambiguation for unrestricted text is one of the most difficult tasks in the fields of computational linguistics  . The crux of the problem is to discover a model that relates the intended sense of a word with its context  . It seems to be very difficult , if not impossible , to statistically acquire enough word-based knowledge about a language necessary to build a robust system capable of automatically disambiguating senses in unrestricted text  . For such a system to be effective , a great deal of balanced materials must be assembled in order to cover many idiosyncratic aspects of the language  . There exist three issues in a lexicalized statistical word sense disambiguation  ( WSD ) model-data sparseness , lack of a level of abstraction , and static learning strategy . 
First , word-based models have a plethora of parameters that are difficult to estimate reliably even with a very large corpus  . Under-trained models lead to low precision . Second , word-based models lack a degree of abstraction that is crucial for a broadcoverage system  . Third , a static WSD model is unlikely to be robust and portable  , since it is very difficult to make a single static model relevant to a wide variety of unrestricted texts  . Recent WSD systems have been developed using word -based model for specific limited domain to disambiguates nses appearing in usually easy context  ( Leacock , To well , and Voorlees 1996 ) with a lot of typical salient words . For unrestricted text , however , the context tends to be very diverse and difficult to capture with a lexicalized model  , therefore a corpus-trained system is unlikely to port to new domains and run off the shelf  . 
Generality and adaptiveness are therefore key to a robust and portable WSD system  . A concept-based model for WSD requires less parameter and has an element of generality built in  ( Liddy and Paik 1993 )  . Conceptual classes make it possible to generalize from word-specific context in order to disambiguate a word sense appearing in a particularly unfamiliar context in term of word recurrences  . An adaptive system armed with an initial lexical and conceptual knowledge base extracted from machine-readable dictionaries  ( MRDs )  , has two strong advantages over static lexicalized models trained using a corpus  . First , the initial substantial portion of text can be disambiguated precisely  . Second , based on the result of initial disambiguated text  . Subsequently , the knowledge base is adjusted to suit the text at hand  . The adjusted knowledge base is then
Machine Readable Dictionary \]
Machine Readable Thesaurus
Initialized Knowledge Base
Word Sense Lexicalnd Conceptual Context .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
bank-GEO river lakel and ...
GEOMOTION bank-MONEY money account bill ...
MONEY COMMERCE . . . ~edText~~fPartiallyTaggedText"l/~f 12" ~n ? ~ te ~ Is ~ : := fff ~ nb ~ h beaknf ~"" t ~ 21 Iooted stud ~"--' I . investig , ot ~: na , f ~ lY/c ? h . , cck . ~ u ~ CR2 ME . -~// ? I3 . a deer near the riverbank . , . ~/" I3 . a deer/ANIMAL near the river banldGEO . . . Ii\[,4 Ab . .~,olc J i ( " 4 . Abank ~ , o , e)/ , ~ Adapted Knowledge Base I Word_Sen::Lexicalnd Conceptual Context NI ~ bank-GEO river lakel and deer near  . . . I
GEOMOTION - - ~ I ~ L . . . \[ N
Ibank-MONEY money accountb ~ gation check fraudi  \ 
MONEY COMMER CECRIME . . . -- j\)
WSD Result \] fl . . . . investigation of bank/MONEY check fraud/CRiME . . .  ~ / / /  2  . . . . looted/CRIME stores and robbed/CRIME banks /MONEY  . . . . I /  3 . . . . a deer/ANIMAL near the river bank/GEO . . I . 
/4. Abank/GEOvole/ANIMAL/,er"-k
Figure I General framework for WSD using MRD.
disambiguation , an adaptation step is taken to make the knowledge base more relevan to the task at hand  , leading to broader and more precise WSD . 
Figure 1 lays out the general framework for an adaptive conceptual WSD approach  , under which this research is being carried out . The learning process described here begins with a step of knowledge acquisition from MRDs  . 
With the acquired knowledge , the system reads the input text and starts the step of initial disambiguation  . Adaptive step follows to combine the initial knowledge base with knowledge gleaned from the partially applied to the text again to finalize the disambiguation result  . For instance , Figure 1 shows the initial contextual representation ( CR ) extracted from the Longrnan Dictionary of Contemporary English  ( Protor 1978 , LDOCE ) for the GEO-bank sense contained both lexical and conceptual information : l and  , river , lake ,   . . . u GEO , MOTION . . . .  . The initial CR is informative nough to disambiguate a passage containing a deer near the river bank in the input text  . The initial disambiguation step produce sense tagging of deer ~ ANIMAL and bank ~ GEOGRAPHY  , but certain instances of bank are left untagged for lack of relevant WSD in the context of vole is unresolved since there is no information linking ANIMAL context to GEOGRAPHY sense of bank  . The adaptation step adds deer and ANIMAL to the contextual representation for GEO-bank  . The enriched CR therefore contains information capable of disambiguating the instance of bank in the context of vole to produce final disambiguation result  . 
2 Acquiring Conceptual Knowledge from MRD In this section we apply a socalled Top Sense algorithm  ( Chen and Chang 1998 ) to acquire CR for MRD senses . The current implementation of Top Sense uses the topical information in Longman Lexicon of Contemporary English  ( McArthur 1992 , LLOCE ) to represent WSD knowledge for LDOCE senses . In the following subsections we describe how that is done  . 
2.1 Contextual Representation from

Dictionary is a text whose subject matter is a language  . The purpose of dictionary is to provide definitions of word senses  , and in the process it supply knowledge not just about the language  , but the world ( Wilks et al 1990) . A good-sized dictionary usually has a large vocabulary and good coverage of word senses useful for WSD  . However , short MRD definitions and examples perse lack a level of abstraction to function effectively as a contextual representation of word sense  . On the other hand , the thesaurus organizes word senses into a fixed set of coarse semantic categories and thus could potentially be useful as the basis of a conceptual CR of word sense  . 
To get the best of both worlds of dictionary and thesaurus  , we propose to link an MRD sense to thesaurus categories to produce conceptual representation of its context  . Content words extracte directly from the definition sentence of a word sense can be put to use as the word-level contextual representation f that particular word sense  . 
One way of producing such conceptual CR is to link MRD senses to their relevant hesaurus senses and categories  . These links furnish the MRD senses with information necessary for building a conceptual CR  . We will describe one such approach under which each MRD sense is linked to a relevant thesaurus ense according to its defining words  . The linked thesaurus sense , unlike the isolated MDR sense , falls within a certain semantic category . 
Consequently , we can establish relations between defining words and semantic ategory that eventually lead to conceptual CR  . 
With the word lists in a thesaurus category cast as a document representing a certain subject matter or topic  , the task of constructing conceptual representation f context for a certain MRD sense bears a striking resemblance to the document retrieval task in information retrieval  ( IR ) research . Relatively well-established IR techniques of weighting terms and ranking documents are applied to build a list of topics that are most relevant o the definition of each MRD sense  . This list of ranked topics , for a particular word sense , forms a vectorized conceptual representation f context in the space of all possible topics  . 
2.2 Illustrative Example
One example is given in this subsection to illustrate how Top Sense works  . 
Example 1. Conceptual representation of an
LDOCE senseer ane . l . n . 1 , a machine for lifting and moving heavy objects by means of a very strongrope or wire fastened to a movable arm  ( JIB )  . 
For the most relevant topics to finegrained sense , we get the following ranked list Hd(EQUIPMENT ) , Ha ( MATERIALS ) , Ma ( MOVING) . 
Furthermore , the definition and examples of a particular sense on the surface level seldom are information sufficient ore present context of the sense  . For instance , the words machine , lift , move , heavy , object , strong , rope , wire , fasten , movable , arm , jibin the definition of the sense , crane . l . n . 1 , are hardly enough contextual information to resolve acrane  . l . n . 1 instance in the Brown corpus shown below : Unsinkable slowed and stopped  , hundreds of brilliant white flares swaye deerily down from keening shriek  , the anti-aircraft guns coughed and chattered- and above it all motors roared and the bombs came whispering and wailing and crashing down among the ships at anchor at Bad  . They had come from airports in the Balkans , these hundred-odd Junkers88's . 
They hadwinged over the Adriatic , they had taken Bariby complete surprise and now they were battering her  , attacking with deadly skill . 
They had ruined the radarwarning system with their window  , they had made themselves invisible above their flares  . And they also had the lights of the city , the portwall lanterns , and a shorecrane's potlight to guide on . 
However , with a level of abstraction made possible by using a thesaurus  , it is not difficult to build a conceptual CR of word sense  , which is intuitively more effective for WSD . For instance , based on LLOCE topics , the conceptual CR(EQUIPMENT , MATERIALS , MOVING ) derived from the definition of crane . l . n . 1 , is general enough to characterize many salient words appearing in the context of the crane  . l . n . 1 instance , including motor ( EQUIPMENT ) , lantern ( EQUIPMENT ) , and flare ( EQUIPMENT , MATERIALS ) . 
3 The Adaptive WSD Algorithm
We sum up the above descriptions and outline the procedure for the algorithm in this section  . 
In what follows an adaptive disambiguation algorithm based on classbased approach will be described  . Next , we give an illustrative example to show how the proposed algorithm works for unrestricted text  . 
3.1 The algorithm
The proposed algorithm starts with the step of initial disambiguation using the contextual representation CR  ( W , S ) derived from the MRD for the sense S of the head entry W  . A step of adaptation followed to produce a knowledge base from the partially disambiguated text  . 
Finally , the undisambiguated part is disambiguated according to the newly acquired knowledge base  . The following algorithm gives a formal and detailed description of adaptive WSD  . 
Algorithm Adapt Sense
Step I : Preprocess the context and produce a list of lemmatized content words 
CON(W ) in a polysemous word W's context.
Step 2: For each sense S of W , compute the similarity between the context representation CR  ( W , S ) and topical context CON(W ) . 
Sim(CR(W,S ), CON(W ))
E(w , ., + w , ) where teM
Ew ,, + Ew,'t GCR(W.S)"t ~ CON(W)
M = CR(W,S')NCON(W),
Wt , s = weight of a contextual word t with sense S in CR  ( W , S ) , X , = distance from t to W in number of words . 
Step 3: For each word W , choose a relevant sense Sw if passes a preset hreshold then construct triples T =  ( W , S , CON(W )) . 
S tep4: Compute a new set of contextual representation CR ( W , S ) = u\[ueCON(W ) and ( W , S , CON ( W ) )e T  Step S : Infer remaining less relevant sense for 
WinCON 3.2 Illustrative Example
Consider the following passage from the Brown corpus:  . . . Of cattle in a pasture without hrow in '' em together for the purpose was called a " pasture count "  . The counters rode through the pasture count in ' each bunch of grazin ' cattle  , and drifted it back so that it didn't get mixed with the uncounted cattle ahead  . This method of count in ' was usually done at the request  , and in the presence , of a representative of the bank that held the papers against the herd  . The notes and mortgages were spoken of as " cattle paper "  . 
A " book count " was the sell in ' of cattle by the books  , commonly resorted to in the early days , sometimes much to the profit of the seller . This led to the famousay in ' in the Northwest of the " books won't freeze "  . This became a common by word durin ' the . . . 
In our experiment , we observed that hold and paper are related to both MONEY and ROAD sense in the initial knowledge base  . 

Thus , this instance of bank is left unresolved in the initial disambiguation step  . The adaptation step discovers that both hold and paper cooccur with some 
MONEY-bank instances in the partially disambiguated text  . Therefore , the system is able to correctly resolve this bank instance to MONEY sense  . 
4 Experiments and Discussions 4 . 1 Experiment In our experiment , we use the materials of text windows of 50 words to the left and 50 words to the right of thirteen polysemous words in the Brown corpus and a sample of Wall Street Journal articles  . All instances of these thirteen words are first disambiguated by two human judges  . For these thirteen words under investigation , only nominal senses are considered . The experimental results show that the adaptive algorithm disambiguated correctly  71% and 77% of these test cases in the Brown corpus and the WSJ sample  . Table 1 provides further details . However , there are still room for improvement in the area of precision  . 
Evidence have shown that by exploiting the constraint of socalled " one sense per discourse  , " ( Gale , Church and Yarowsky 1992b ) and the strategy of bootstrapping ( Yarowsky 1995 )  , it is possible to boost coverage , while maintaining about he same level of precision  . 
4.2 Discussions
Although it is often difficult to compare studies on different ext domain  , genre and experimental setup , the approach presented here seems to compare favorably with the experimental results reported in previous WSD research  . Luk ( 1995 ) experiments with the same words we use except the wordbank and reports that there are totally  616 instances of these words in the Brown corpus ,   ( slightly less than the 749 instances we have experimented on )  . The authore ports that 60% of instances are resolved correctly using the definition-based concept cooccurrence  ( DB CC ) approach . Leacock et al ( 1996 ) report that precision rate of 76% for disambiguating the word line in a sample of
WSJ articles.
One of the limiting factors of this approach is the quality of sense definition in the MRD  . 
Short and vague definitions tend to lead to inclusion of inappropriate topics in the contextual representation  . Using inferior CR , it is not possible to produce enough and precise samples in the initial step for subsequent adaptation  . 
Tablel ( a ) Disambiguation results for thirteen ambiguous words in Brown corpus  . 
Word  #of senses bank 8 bass 2 bow 5 : cone 2 duty 2 ! galley 3 linterest 4 issue 4 \] mole 2 sentence 2 slug 5 star 6 taste 3 

Precision  #of instances
Without With adaptation adaptation  #of correct 68   71   16   16   3   3   14   14   67   69   4   4   213   228   67   88   2   2   30   30   4   6   28   29   36   36   552   596   65  . 2% 70 . 5%
Tablel ( b ) Disambiguation results ambiguous words in
Journal articles.
Word  #of senses bank 8 bass 2 bow 5 one 2 duty 2 galley 3 interest 4 issue 4 mole 2 sentence 2 slug 5 star 6 taste 3 

Precision for thirteen
Wall Street  #of instances
Without With adaptation adaptation  #of correct 350   353   2   2   19   22   123   127   181   177   11   12   3   2   3   3   692   698   76  . 6% 77 . 3% adaptation is most effective when a high -frequency word with topically contrasting senses is involved  . For low-frequency sense such as EARTH , ROW , and ROAD senses of bank , the approach does not seem to be very effective . 
For instance the following passage containing an instance of bank has the ROW sense but our algorithm fails to disambiguate it  . 
. . . They slept - Mynheer with a marvelously high -pitched snoring  , the damnsea horseivoryteeth watching him from a bedside table  . In the ball room below , the dark had given way to moon light coming in through the bank of french windows  , it was a delayed moon , but now the sky had cleared of scudding black and the stars sugared the silver-graysky  . 
Martha Schuyler , old , slow , careful of foot , came down the great stair case , dressed in her best lace-drawn black silk , her jeweled shoe buckles held forward . 
Non-topical sense like ROW-bank can appeared in many situations  , thus are very difficult to captured using a topical contextual representation  . Local contextual representation might be more effective  . 
Infrequent and nontopical senses are problematic due to data sparseness  . However , that is not specific to the adaptive approach , all other approaches in the literature suffer the same predicament  . Even with a static knowledge acquired from a very large corpus  , these senses were disambiguated at a considerably ower rate  . 
S Related approaches
In this section , we review recent WSD literature from the prospective of types of contextual knowledge and different representational schemes  . 
5.1 Topical vs . Local Representation of
Context 5.1.1 Topical Context
With topical representation of context , the context of a given sense is reviewed as a bag of words without structure  . Gale , Church and Yarowsky ( 1992a ) experiment on acquiring topical context from substantial bilingual training corpus and report good results  . 
5.1.2 Local Context
Local context includes the structured information on word order  , distance , and syntactic feature . For instance , the local content of a line from does not suggest the same sense for the word line as a line for does  . 
Brown et al ( 1990 ) use the trigram model as a way of resolving sense ambiguity for lexical selection in statistical machine translation  . 
This model makes the assumption that only the previous two words have any effect on the translation  , thus word sense , of the next word . 
The model attacks the problem of lexical ambiguity and produces satisfactory results  , under some strong assumption . A major problem with trigram model is that of long distance dependency  . Dagan and Itai ( 1994 ) indicate that two languages are more informative than one  ; an English corpus is very helpful in disambiguating polysemous words in Hebrew text  . Local context in the form of lexical relations are identified in a very large corpus  . 
Brown , et al ( 1991 ) describe a statistical algorithm for partitioning word senses into two groups  . The authors use mutual information to find a contextual feature that most reliably indicates which of the senses of the French ambiguous word is used  . The authors report a 20% improvement in the performance of a machine translation system when the words are first disambiguated this way  . 
5.2 Static vs . Adaptive Strategy
Of the recent WSD systems proposed in the literature  , almost all have the property that the knowledge is fixed when the system completes the training phase  . That means the acquired knowledge never expands during the course of disambiguation  . Gale , et al ( 1992a ) report hat if one had obtained a set of training materials with errors no more than twenty to thirtypercent  , one could iterate training material selection just once or twice and have training sets that had less than ten percent errors  . The adaptive approach is somehow similar to their idea of incremental learning and to the bootstrap approach proposed by Yarowsky  ( 1995 )  . However , both approaches are still considered static models which are changed only in the training phase  . 
242 6 Conclusions
We have described a new adaptive approach to word sense disambiguation  . Under this learning strategy , first contextual representation for each word sense is built from the sense definition in MRD and represented as a weighted-vector of concepts represented as word lists in a thesaurus  . Then the knowledge base is applied to the text for WSD in an adaptive fashion to improve on disambiguation precision  . 
We have demonstrated that this approach as the potential of outperforming established static approaches  . This performance is achieved despite the fact no lengthy training time or a very large corpus is required  . It is evident hat the WSD algorithms proposed herein are simple  , take up little time and space , and most importantly , require no human intervention i all phases of WSD  . Sense tagging of training material , knowledge acquisition from training data , and disambiguation all are done automatically . 

This work is partially supported by ROCNSC grants  84-2213-E-007-023 and NSC 85-2213-E-007-042  . We are grateful to Betty Teng and Nora Liu from Longman Asia Limited for the permission to use their lexicographical resources for research purpose  . Finally , we would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for many constructive and insightful suggestions  . 

Brown , P . F . , S . A . Della Pietra , V . J . Della Pietra , and R . L . Mercer (1991) . Word-sense disambiguation using statistical methods  . In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp 264-270 . 
Chen , J . N . and J . S . Chang (1998) . Topical clustering of MRD senses based on information retrieval techniques  . Special Issue on Word Sense Disambiguation , Computational Linguistics ,  24(1) , pp 61-95 . 
Dagan , I . and A . Itai (1994) . Word Sense Disambiguation Using a second language monolingual corpus  . Computational Linguistics , 20(4), pp 563-596 . 
Gale , W . A . , K . W . Church , and D . Yarowsky (1992a ) . Using bilingual materials to develop word sense disambiguation methods  . In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation  , pp 101-112 . 
Gale , W . A . , K . W . Church and D . Yarowsky (1992b ) . One sense per discourse . In Proceedings of the Speech and Natural Language Workshop  , pp 233-237 . 
Leacock , C . , G . Towell , and E . M . Voorlees (1996) . 
Towards building contextual representations of word senses using statistical models  . In B . 
Boguraev and J . Pustejovsky , editor , Corpus Processing for Lexical Acquisition . MIT Press,
Cambridge , MA.
Liddy , E . D . and W . Paik (1993) . Document filtering using semantic information from a machine readable dictionary  . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Very Large Corpora  , pp20-29 . 
Luk , A . K .  (1995) . Statistical sense disambiguation with relatively small corpora using dictionary definitions  . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics , pp 181-188.
McArthur , T .  (1992) . Longman lexicon of contemporary English . Longman Group ( Far East)
Ltd ., Hong Kong.
Proctor , P . ( ed . ) (1978) . Longman dictionary of contemporary English . Harlow : Longrnan Group . 
Wilks , Y . A . , D . C . Fass , C . M . Guo , J . E . McDonald , T . Plate , and B . M . Slator (1990) . Providing tractable dictionary tools . Machine Translation , 5, pp 99-154 . 
Yarowsky , D .  (1995) . Unsupervised word sense disambiguation rivaling supervised methods  . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pp 189-196 . 

