Possessive Pronominal Anaphor Resolution in Portuguese Written Texts 
Iv and r6 Paraboni , Vera Lficia Strube de Lima
PUCRS-Instituto de Inform ~ itica
Av . Ipiranga , 6681 prrdio 16
90619-900-PortoAlegreRS-Brasil
phone #555 1320-3500/3611 Fax#55513203621
paraboni@tca.com.br , vea@andros.inf.pucrs.br

This paper describes a proposal for
Portuguese possessive pronominal anaphor ( PPA ) resolution , a problem little considered so far . Particularly , we address the problem of Portuguese 3rd person intrasentential PPAsseu/sua/seus/suas ( his/her/their / its , for human and nonhuman subjects in English ) , which constitute 30% of pronominal occurrences in our corpus ( Brazilian laws about environment protection )  . Considering some differences between PPAs and other kinds of anaphors  , such as personal or demonstrative pronouns , we define three knowledge sources ( KSs ) for PPA resolution : surface patterns ( taking in account factors such as syntactic parallelism  )  , possessive relationship rules and sentence centering  . 
These knowledge sources are organized in a blackboard architecture for PPA resolution  , which provides both knowledge and procedure distribution among autonomous entities  ( reflexive agents )  , each of them specialized in a particular aspect of the problem solving  . The proposal has been implemented and its results are discussed at the end of the work  . 
1. Introduction
Most work on anaphor resolution apply syntactic constraints  ( c-command , gender and number agreement , etc ) to select for human
English ), pronominal ( Brazilian protection).
the appropriate anaphoric referent . However , these constraints are not suitable for possessive pronominal anaphor  ( PPA ) resolution in Portuguese , which requires a more specific approach . 
This paper describes a resolution strategy for a problem little considered so far  , PPAs " seu/sua/seus/suas"(his/her/their/its , and nonhuman subjects in which constitute 3   0% of occurrences in our corpus laws about environment 
The paper is structured as follows.
We present some characteristics of
Portuguese PPAs ( section 2) . We then describe some factors in PPA resolution and the way these factors can determine PPAs antecedents  ( section 3 )  . Factors are implemented as knowledge sources in a blackboard architecture  ( section 4 )  , and finally we present the results of our implementation  ( section 5 )  . 
2. The PPA resolution problem
From the interpretation point of view,
PPAs are widely different from other kinds of anaphors  , such as personal or demonstrative pronouns . In this section we present some specific characteristics of Portuguese PPAs " seu/sua/seus /suas "  , by means of generic examples in natural anguage . Some of these examples , however , may be inappropriate in " his/her/their/its " . 
First , we notice the lack of gender or number agreement between PPAs and their antecedents  . The English version of example 1 has a trivial solution , based on syntactic constraints , but the Portuguese version is ambiguous : Ex 1: Jo ~ of aloua Maria so breseu cachor ro . 
( Johntold Mary about his dog).
Example 2 shows that PPAs can occur in several grammatical ( usually , nonsubject ) positions . Besides , in example 3 , we notice that PPAs can refer to different segments of a " NP-of-NP-of-NP  . . . " chain . 
This kind of structure , with several NPs in the same chain , is typical in our domain . 
Ex 2: Joaoviuum cachor rotraz en doseu jomal Iseu filhote  .   ( John sawadog bringing his newspaper I its puppy )  . 
Ex3: Opai do garot in hoven deusua casa . ( The father of the little boy sold his house ) . 
O do no doc ~ oven de use u carro Ise ufil hote . ( The owner of the dog sold his car \[ its puppy ) . 
In some situations , PPAs like shown in example 2 and 3 can be solved by applying semantic knowledge , since PPAs establish possessive relationships ( in concrete or figurative sense ) between objects in discourse . For example , a human being can usually possess " hiscar " , but a dog cannot . 
However , we have found in our corpus several PPAs , namely abstract anaphors , which cannot be particularly related to any semantic object  . For example , we have PPAs such as " their importance " , their relevance " , etc . Similarly , we have found also some abstract antecedents , uchas " the problem " , " the importance " , etc . 
Finally , we notice that , in our corpus , we have to treat long and complex sentence structures  , which are typical in the domain ( laws ) that we are dealing with . Thus , despite
PPAs in our corpus are mostly ( 99% ) intrasentential , there is a high number of candidates for each anaphor  . 
3. Factors in PPA resolution
This section describes a minimal set of factors in PPA resolution  , based on corpus investigation . These factors will be considered in place of traditional syntactic constraints  , which are not suitable for our present problem , as shown in section 2 . In our proposal , because of the structural complexity of sentences in the domain  , we have adopted a practical approach , based on simple heuristic rules , with a view to avoiding syntactic and semantic analysis  . 
Similar strategies have been adopted in several recent works in anaphore solution  , such as T . Nasukawa (1994), R . Mitkov (1996), R . Vieira & M . Poesio (1997) and others . 
We have defined 6 simple factors in
PPA resolution ( F1 to F6) based on syntactic , semantic and pragmatic knowledge , aiming to determine PPAs antecedents in our specific domain  . As a secondary goal , we apply our proposal also to PPAs in a different domain  ( see section 5 )  . Factors , enunciated as heuristic rules , will act as constraints ( F1 to F5 ) or preferences ( F6 )  , as established by
J . Carbonell (1988).
3.1. Syntactic level
Since typical syntactic on straints are not suitable for PPA resolution  , in our approach we have limited the role of syntactic knowledge to simple heuristic rules based on surface patterns  . Surface patterns are typical expressions in the domain  , which gave information about PPAs antecedents . To each relevant surface pattern , we have associated a heuristic rule . Some of these success , the most probable antecedent , whereas others can only exclude a specific candidate :  F1 - in the pattern < NP and I or PPA > , < NP > must be elected the most probable antecedent of < PPA >  . Ex : " John and his dog " ; F2-in the pattern < of NP . . . of PPA > , < NP > must be elected the most probable antecedent of < PPA >  . This rule deals with some cases of syntactic parallelism  . Ex : " the death of Suzy , of her children and . . . "; such as < city owns habit ants > , < ecosystemowns natural resources > etc . 
In order to apply this kind of knowledge to the whole corpus  , we have defined object classes and possible possessive relationships among them  . For example , for the anaphor " their hunt " in our corpus , there is a semantic rule which expects only a member of the class < animals > as a suitable antecedent  . Typical members of this class would be " birds " , " mammals " and all related expressions found in our corpus  . 
Based on this organization we have defined another factor in PPA resolution :  F3 - in the patter < NP of PPA > , < NP > is not a valid candidate for < PPA > . Ex : in " the death of hisson " , " death " is not a valid candidate ; F4-in the pattern < NP of NP of NP . . . of NP > , only the full chain and the last NP can be considered candidates for PPAs antecedents  , i . e . , NPs in the middle of the chain can be discarded . This rule adapts the study developed by L . Kister (1995) for NP chains in French , and it constitutes an important mechanism for reducing the high number of candidates in our current problem  . 
3.2. Semantic level
Heuristic rules based on surface patterns are not sufficient to discriminate among a large set of candidates  , as we found in our domain . Thus , we also use semantic knowledge in order to increase the results  . 
Our semantic approach considers possessive relationship rules in the form < Obj  1 owns
Obj2 > , used to represent " part of " relationships between typical entities of the domain  , according to J . Pustejovsky's (1995) semantic theory . For example , in our corpus some PPAs can be solved with knowledge 
F 5 There must be a valid possessive relationship between a PPA and its antecedent  . 
3.3. Pragmatic level
Working together , surface patterns and possessive relationships can deal with many PPAs found in our corpus  , but we still have two problems to be solved : semantic ambiguity among two or more acceptable candidates and abstract anaphors/antecedents  , which cannot be solved by simply applying possessive relationship rules  . 
For these cases , and possibly for some other cases not included in previous rules  , we suggest a pragmatic factor , adapted from S . 
Brennan's et al (1987) centering algorithm.
Although sentence center plays a crucial role in many works in anaphore solution  , usually limiting the number of candidates to be considered  , we notice that , because PPAs can refer to almost any NP in the sentence  ( rather than , for example , personal pronouns , which are often related to the sentence center ) , pragmatic knowledge plays only a secondary-but still important-role in our approach  . 
We have adapted basic aspects of center algorithm , considering subject/object preference , and domain concepts preference , estimate the most probable center for intrasentential PPAs  . Thus , in case of ambiguity among candidates ( after applying factors F1 to F5 )  , we will consider the estimated center as the preferable PPA antecedent  . This constitutes our final rule : F6 -the sentence center will be preferred among remaining candidates  . 
4. A distributed architecture for
PPA resolution
Factors have been grouped in three knowledge sources  ( KSs )  , as part of a blackboard architecture , based on D . 
Corkill's (1991) work , as shown in figure 1.
KSs are independent module specialized in different aspects of PPA resolution problem  ( surface patterns , possessive relationships , sentence center ) , providing both knowledge and procedure distribution among autonomous entities  ( specialists )  . 
Since in our proposal knowledge and procedure are represented by heuristic rules  , KSs have been implemented as reflexive agents , according to S . J Russel & P . Norvig (1995) work . A reflexive agent is a rule-based entity , which acts according to the perceived environment  ( the blackboard structure )  . 
The blackboard is a global database containing information about the problem 
PPA ( PPA ) to be solved : sentence structure information and a set of hypotheses  ( candidates ) to be evaluated by specialists ( KSs )  . The specialists watch the blackboard , looking for a PPA problem to be solved , and evaluate the given data . Specialists can elect , discard or assign preferable candidates , according to their condition-action rules . 
The resolution process is coordinated by PPA solver agent  , a specialist in PPA resolution . When the PPA solver agent receives a PPA resolution requirement  , it writes the initial data ( in our current implementation , for intrasentential PPAs , all previous NPs in the sentence are considered as part of the initial set of candidates  ) onto the blackboard and activates the specialists . 
After each contribution , the PPA solver evaluates the number of remaining candidates and the possible need for further contributions  . At the end of the cycle , in case of ambiguity , the PPA solver will choose the preferred candidate  , as determined by the sentence center specialist . 
The motivations for adopting a blackboard architecture are the benefits of heterogeneous knowledge distribution and independence among KSs  . These benefits will allow us to expand the architecture  , adding new factors in PPA resolution or even adding new specialists  , dedicated to different anaphoric phenomena . 
blackboard hypotheses hiplhiP2hip3hiP4hip5 . . . . . hip . 









Figure i-a distributed architecture for PPA resolution 
We have examined 198 PPAs from a corpus on Brazilian laws about environment protection  . As a result of our implementation , we have achieved a success rate of 92 , 97% . 
We evaluate this result as very successful , considering the small set of factors taken in account  . 
We have also examined PPAs in a second text genre , taking sentences from magazine scientific articles  . Within these texts , we have taken 100 intrasentential PPAs , and our strategy has chosen a correct antecedent in  88% of the cases . This deterioration , as a consequence of some different surface pattern occurrences  , i to be expected in a new text genre . 
As a future work , we aim to expand the architecture , by means of adding new specialists and improving the control mechanism  , in order to solve intersentential PPAs and different kinds of pronouns  , such as demonstrative and personal . 

This work was sponsored by
CNP q/Protem grant 68008 1/95-0 , as part of the NALA MAS-Natural Language Multiagent systems-project  . 

Brennan , S.E ., Friedman , M.W . & Pollard,
C . J . (1987) A centering approach to pronouns . In : proceedings of the 25th ACL . 
Carbonell , J.G . & Brown , R . D . (1988)
Anaphora Resolution : A Multi-Strategy
Approach . In : proceedings of
COLING '88, Budapest , Hungary.
Corkill , D.D . (1991). Blackboard Systems . AI
Expert 6(9): 40-47 Sept 91.
Kennedy , C . & Boguraev , B . (1996)
Anaphora for Everyone : Pronominal
Anaphora Resolution without a Parser . In : proceedings of COLING'96, Copenhagen,

Kister , L . (1995) Accessibilit 6Pronominale des DET . N1 de(DET . ) N2: leR 61 edela
D6 termination . Lingvistica e
Investigationes XIX:I.107-121. John
Benjamins Publ . Co ., Amsterdam.
Mitkov , R . (1996) Attacking Anaphora on
All Fronts . In : A . Ramsey ( ed .). Artificial
Intelligence : Methodology , Systems,
Applications . IOS Press..
Nasukawa , T . (1994) Robust Method of
Pronoun Resolution using Full-text
Information . In : proceedings of
COLING'94, Kyoto , Japan.
Pustejovsky , J . (1995) The Generative
Lexicon . MIT Press , Cambridge.
Russel , S.J .& Norvig , P . (1995) Artificial
Intelligence : a modern approach.
Prentice-Hall , New Jersey.
Sauvage-Wintergerst , C .   ( 1992 ) Parall ~ lismeet Traitement Automatique des Langues : 
Application it l ' Analyse des Enonc~s
Elliptiques . Universit 6 de Paris-Sud ( Phd thesis) . 
Stuckardt , R .   ( 1996 ) Anaphor Resolution and the Scope of Syntactic Constraints  . In : proceedings of COLING'96, Copenhagen,

Vieira , R . & Poesio , M .   ( 1997 ) Processing definite descriptions in corpora . 
University of Endinburgh , Scotland.

