Flow Network Models for Word Alignment and Terminology 
Extraction from Bilingual Corpora
l ~ ricGaussier
Xerox Research Centre Europe 6 , Chemin de Maupertuis 38240 Meylan F . 

Abstract
This paper presents a new model for word alignments between parallel sentences  , which allows one to accurately estimate different parameters  , in a computationally efficient way . An application of this model to bilingual terminology extraction  , where terms are identified in one language and guessed  , through the alignment process , in the other one , is also described . An experiment conducted on a small English-French parallel corpus gave results with high precision  , demonstrating the validity of the model . 
1 Introduction
Early works , ( Gale and Church , 1993; Brown et al ,  1993) , and to a certain extent ( Kay and R6s cheisen ,  1993) , presented methods to ex-~ . :'~ . ctbi '_ . ' i ~ gua ! le ~ cons of words from a parallel CO l'p~s , relying on the distribution of the words in the set of parallel sentences  ( or other units )  . 
( Brown et al ,  1993 ) then extended their method and established a sound probabilistic model series  , relying on different parameters describing how words within parallel sentences are aligned to each other  . On the other hand , ( Dagan et al . , 1993) proposed an algorithm , borrowed to the field of dynamic programming and based on the output of their previous work  , to find the best alignment , subject to certain constraints , between words in parallel sentences . A similar algorithm was used by ( Vogel et al ,  1996) . 
Investigating alignments at the sentence level allows to clean and to refine the le~cons otherwise extracted from a parallel corpus as a whole  , pruning what ( Melamed , 1996) calls " indirect associations " . 
Now , what differentiates the models and algorithms proposed are the sets of parameters and constraints they rely on  , their ability to find an appropriate solution under the constraints defined and their ability to nicely integrate new parameters  . We want to present here a model of the possible alignments in the form offlow networks  . This representation allows to define different kinds of alignments and to find the most probable or an approximation of this most probable alignment  , under certain constraints . Our procedure presents the advantage of an accurate modelling of the possible alignments  , and can be used on small corpora . We will introduce this model in the next section . Section 3 describes a particular use of this model to find term translations  , and presents the results we obtained for this task on a small corpus  . Finally , the main features of our work and the research directions we envisage are summarized in the conlcusion  . 
2 Alignments and flow networks
Let us first consider the following a ) Jgned sentences , with the actual alignment be ween words I : Assuming that we have probabilities of associating English and French words  , one way to find the preceding alignment is to search for the most  1All the examples consider English and French as the source and target languages  , even though the method we propose is independent of the language parunder consideration any given English  ( resp . French ) word is associated to one and only one French ( resp . English ) word . We can view a connection between an English and a French word as a flow going from an English to a French word  . The preceding constraint state that the outgoing flow of an English word and the ingoing one of a French word must equal  1  . We also have connections entering the English words  , from a source , and leaving the French ones , to a sink , to control the flow quantity we want to go through the words  . 
2.1 Flow networks
We meet here the notion of flow networks that we can formalise in the following way  ( we assume that the reader has basic notions of graph theory  )  . 
Definition 1: let G = (17 , E ) be a directed connected graph with m edges . A flow in G is a vector = (91 , ~2 , " ~ m ) T  ~ Rm ( where T denotes the transpose of a matrix ) such as , for each vertex iEV :
E ( 1 ) u e ~+ ( i ) uew- ( i ) where w + ( i ) denotes the set of edges entering vertex i , whereas w - ( i ) is the set of edges leaving vertex i . 
We can , furthermore , associate to each edge u of G = ( V , E ) two numbers , b ~ , and eu with b ~ , _ < c , , , which will be called the lower capacity bound and the upper capacity bound of the edge  . 
Definition 2: let G = (1/' . . E ) be a directed connected graph with lower and upper capacity bounds  . We will say that a flow 9 in G is a feasible flow in G if it satisfies the following capacity constraints : 
Vu ~ E , b~<9~<cu(2)
Finally , let us associate to each edge u of a directed connected graph G =  ( V , E ) with capacity intervals \ [ b ~ ; c ~\] a cost % , representing the cost ( or inversely the probability ) to use this edge in a flow . We can define the total cost ,  7 ? 9 , associated to a flow 9 in G as follows : ? ( a ) uEEDefinition 3: let G = ( V , E ) be a connected graph with capacity intervals Ibm ; c ~\] , u 6E and costs % , u 6E . We will call minimal cost flow the feasible flow in G for which  7 x ?2 is minimal . 
Several algorithms have been proposed to compute the minimal cost flow when it exists  . We will not detail them here but refer the interested reader to  ( Ford and Fulkerson , 1962; Klein ,  1967) . 
2.2 Alignment models
Flows and networks define a general framework in which it is possible to model alignments between words  , and to find , under certain con-stralnts , the best alignment . We present now an instance of such a model , where the only parameters involved are associat ion probabil-ities between English and French words  , and in which we impose that any English , respectively French word , has to be aligned with one and only one French , resp . English , word , possibly empty . We can , of course , consider different constraints . The constraints we define , though they would yield to a complex computation for the EM algorithm  , do not privilege any direction in an underlying translation process  . 
This model defines for each pair of aligned sentences a graph G  ( V , E ) as follows : ? V comprises a source , a sink , all the English and French words , an empty English word , and an empty French word , ? E comprises edges from the source to all the English words  ( including the empty one )  , edges from all the French words ( including the empty one ) to the sink , an edge from the sink to the source , and edges from all English words ( including the empty one ) to all the French words ( including the empty one )  2 . 
? from the source to all possible English words ( excluding the empty one )  , the capacity intervalis\[1;1\] ,   2The empty words account for the fact that words may not be aligned with other ones  , i . e . they are not exph citely translated for example . 
445? from the source to the empty English word , the capacity intervalis\[O ; maz(le ,  1/)\] , where lI is the number of French words , and l ~ the number of English ones , ? from the English words ( including the empty one ) to the French words ( including the empty one )  , the capacity intervalis\[0;1\] , ? from the French words ( excluding the empty one ) to the sink , the capacity intervalis\[1;1\] . 
? from the empty French word to the sink , the capacity interval is \[0; rnaz(l ~ , l /)\] , ? from the sink to the source , the capacity interval is \[0; max(le , l /)\] . 
Once such a graph has been defined , we have to assign cost values to its edges , to reflect the different association probabilities  . We will now see how to define the costs so as to relate the minimal cost flow to a best alignment  . 
Let a be an alignment , under the above constraints , between the English sentences , and the French sentence f ~ . Such an alignment a can be seen as a particular elation from the set of English words with their positions  , including empty words , to the set of French words with their positions , including empty words ( in our framework , it is formally equivalent to consider a single empty word with larger upper capacity bound or several ones with smaller upper capacity bounds  ; for the sake of simplicity in the formulas , we consider here that we add as many empty words as necessary in the sentences to end up with two sentences containing le+l/words  )  . An alignment hus connects each English word , located in position i , el , to a French word , in position j , fj . We consider that the probability of such a connection depends on two distinct and independent probabilities  , the one of linking two positions , p(%(i ) = a ~) , and the one of linking two words , p(a~(ei ) = f ~) . We can then write : le+lIP(a , e~ , f ~) = IIP (%( i ) = ail(a , e , f ) ~-1) i=1 le+lIrI p(a , ~( ei ) = f ~ , l(a , e , f ) ~-~) i=1 (4) where P ( a , e~ , f  ~ ) is the probability of observing the alignment a together with the English and French sentences  , es and f ~ , and ( a , e , f ) ~-1 is a shorthand for ( al ,   . ., ai-1, e l , .   . , el-l , fal, . ', f a ,- i ) . 
Since we simply rely in this model on association probabilities  , that we assume to be independent , the only dependencies lying in the possibilities to associate words across languages  , we can simplify the above formula and write : le + l  1 P ( a , e ,   , f , ) =\]- I p(ei , f  ~ ilal ) i1 ( 5 ) i = 1 where a ~-1 is a shorthand for ( al ,  . .,ai-1) . 
p(ei , f  ~ , ) is a shorthand for p(a~(ei ) = f ~ , ) that we will use throughout the article . Due to the constraints defined , we have : p(ei , f  ~ , \[ a ~) = 0 if ai Ea ~-1 , and p(ei ,  ? , ) otherwise . 
Equation ( 5 ) shows that if we define the cost associated to each edge from an English word ei  ( excluding the empty word ) to a French word fj ( excluding the empty word ) to be 7~ =- ln p ( ei , fj ) , the cost of an edge involving an empty word to be e  , an arbitrary small positive value , and the cost of all the other edges ( i . e . the edges from SoP and SiP ) to be 1 for example , then the minimal cost flow defines the alignment a for which P  ( a , es , fs ) is ma~mum , under the above constraints and approximations . 
We can use the following general algorithm based on maximum likelihood under the maximum approximation  , to estimate the parameters of our model : . 


set some initial value to the different parameters of the model  , for each sentence pair in the corpus , compute the best alignment ( or an appro~-mation of this alignment ) between words , with respect o the model , and update the counts of the different parameters with respect to this alignment  ( the ma~mum likelihood estimators for model free distributions are based on relative frequencies  , conditioned by the set of best alignments in our case  )  , go back to step 2 till an end condition is reached . 

This algorithm converges after a few iterations . Here , we have to be carefull with step 1 . 
In particular , if we consider at the beginning of the process all the possible alignments to be equiprobable  , then all the feasible flows are minimal cost flows  . To avoid this situation , we have to start with initial probabilities which make use of the fact that some associations  , occurring more often in the corpus , should have a larger probability . Probabilities based on relative frequencies , or derived fl ' om the measure defined in ( Dunning ,  1993) , for example , allow to take this fact into account . 
We can envisage more complex models , including distortion parameters , multiword notions , or information on part-of-speech , information derived from bilingual dictionaries or from thesauri  . The integration of new parameters is in general straigth forward  . For multiword notions , we have to replace the capacity values of edges connected to the source and the sink with capacity intervals  , which raises several issues that we will not address in this paper  . We rather want to present now an application of the flow network model to multilingual terminology extraction  . 
3 Mu l t i l i ngua l te rmino logy ext rac t ion Several works describe methods to extract terms  , or candidate terms , in English and/or French ( Justeson and Katz , 1995; Daille , 1994; Nkwenti-Azeh ,  1992) . Some more specific works describe methods to align noun phrases within parallel corpora  ( Kupiec ,  1993) . The underlying assumption beyond these works is that the monolingually extracted units correspond to each other crosslingually  . Unfortunately , this is not always the case , and the above methodology suffers from the weaknesses pointed out by  ( Wu , 1997) concerning parse-parse-match procedures . 
It is not however possibie to fully reject the notion of grammar for term extraction  , insofar as terms are highly characterized by their internal syntactic structure  . We can also admit that lexical affinities between the diverse constituents of a unit can provide a good clue for termhood  , but le ~ calaffinities , or otherwise called collocations , affect different finguistic units that need anyway be distinguished  ( Smadja ,  1992) . 
Moreover , a study presented in ( Gaussier ,  1995 ) shows that terminology extraction in English and in French is not symmetric  . In many cases , it is possible to obtain a better approximation for English terms than it is for French terms  . This is partly due to the fact that English relies on a composition of Germanic type  , as defined in ( Chuquet and Palllard , 1989) for example , to produce compounds , and of Romance type to produce free NPs , whereas French relies on Romance type for both , with the classic PP attachment problems . 
These remarks lead us to advocate a mixed model , where candidate terms are identified in English and where their French correspondent is searched for  . But since terms constitute rigid units , lying somewhere between single word notions and complete noun phrases  , we should not consider all possible French units , but only the ones made of consecutive words . 
3.1 Model
It is possible to useflow network models to capture relations between English and French terms  . But since we want to discover French units , we have to add extra vertices and nodes to our previous model  , in order to account for all possible combinations of consecutive French words  . We do that by adding severalayers of vertices , the lowest layer being associated with the French words themselves  , and each vertex in any upper layer being linked to two consecutive vertices of the layer below  . The uppest layer contains only one vertex and can be seen as representing the whole French sentence  . We will call a fertility graph the graph thus obtained  . Figure 1 gives an example of part of a fertility graph ( we have shown the flow values on each edge for clarity reasons  ; the brackets delimit a nultiword candidate term ; we have not drawn the whole fertility graph encompassing the French sentence  , but only part of it , the one encompassing the unit largeur debande utilis de  , where the possible combinations of consecutive words are represented by A  , B , and C ) . 
Note that we restrict ourselves to le:d calwords ( nouns , verbs , adjectives and adverbs ) , not trying to align grammatical words . Furthermore , we rely on lemmas rather than inflected from s , thus enabling us to conflate in one form all the variants of a verb for example  ( we have keeped large ur ~ al ~ SFS Figure 1: Pseudo-alignment within a fertility graph inflected forms in our figures for readability reasons  )  . 
The minimal cost flow in the graphs thus defined may not be directly usable  . This is due to two problems : 1 . first , we can have ambiguous associations : in figure 1 , for example , the association between bandwidth and largeur de bande can be obtained through the edge linking these two units  ( type 1 )  , or through two edges , one from bandwidth to largeur debande . , and one from b and width to either largeur or hap . de ( type 2) , or even through the two edges from b and width to largeur and bande  ( type 3 )  ,  2 . secondly , there may be conflicts between connections : in figure  1 both largeur debande and tdld communications are linked to b and width even though they are not contiguous  . 
To solve ambiguous associations , we simply replace each association of type 2 or 3 by the equivalent type 1 association 3  . For conflicts , we use the following heuristics : first select the conflicting edge with the lowest cost and assume  3We can formally define an equivalence relation , in terms of the associations obtained , but this is beyond the scope of this paper . 
that the association thus defined actually occurred  , then rerun the minimal cost flow algorithm with this selected edge fixed once and for all  , and redo these two steps until there is no more conflicting edges  , replacing type 2 or 3 associations as above each time it is necessary . 
Finally , the alignment obtained in this way will be called a solved alignment  4  . 
3.2 Experiment
In order to test the previous model , we selected a small bilingual corpus consisting of  1000 aligned sentences , from a corpus on satellite telecommunications . We then ran the following algorithm , based on the previous model : 1 . tag and lemmatise the English and French texts , mark all the English candidate terms using morphosyntactic rules encoded in regular expressions  ,  2 . build a first set of association probabilities , using the likelihood ratio test defined in ( Gaussier ,  1995) ,  3 . for each pair of aligned sentences , construct the fertility graph allowing a candidate term of length n to be aligned with units of lenth  ( n2 ) to ( n + 2 )  , define the 4Once the solved alignment is computed , it is possible to determine the word associations between aligned units  , through the application of the process described in the previous section with multiword notions  . 
4 48 costs of edges linking English vertices to French ones as the opposite of the logarithm of the normalised sum of probabilities of all possible word associations defined by the edge  ( for the edge between multiple ( el ) access ( e2 ) to the French unit acc~s ( fl ) mulit ple ( f2 ) it is ? ( ~ i , j p(ei , fj ))) , all the other edges receive an arbitrary cost value  , compute the solved alignment , and increment the count of the associations obtained by overall value of the solved align -nlent  ,  4 . select the fisrt i00 unit associations according to their count , and consider them as valid . Goback to step 2 , excluding from the search space the associations selected  , till all associations have been extracted . 
3.3 Results
To evaluate the results of the above procedure , we manually checked each set of associations obtained after each iteration of the process  , going from the first 100 to the first 500 associations . 
We considered an association as being correct if the French expression is a proper translation of the English expression  . The following table gives the precision of the associations obtained  . 
N . Assoc . Prec.
1 00   98   200   97   300   96   400   95   500   90   1: Gener M results Table The associations we are faced with represent different linguistic units  . Some consist of single content words , whereas others represent multiword expressions . One of the particularity of our process is precisely to automatically identify multiword expressions in one language  , knowing units in the other one . With respecto this task , we extracted the first two hundred multiword expressions from the associations above  , and then checked wether they were valid or not . 
We obtained the following results :
N . Assoc . Prec.

Table 2: Multiword notion results
As a comparison , ( Kupiec ,  1993 ) obtained a precision of 90% for the first hundred associations between English and French noun phrases  , using the EM algorithm . Our experiments with a similar method showed a precision around  92% for the first hundred associations on a set of aligned sentences comprising the one used for the above experiment  . 
An evaluation on single words , showed a precision of 9870 for the first hundred and 97% for the first two hundred . But these figures should be seen in fact as lower bounds of actual values we can get  , insofar as we have not tried to extract single word associations from multiword ones  . Here is an example of associations obtained . 
telecommunication satellites at elllited e tdld communication communication satellite satelllite detdld communication news at ellite system nouve ausyst~me de satellite syst~me de satellite nouve ausyst ~ medesatelliteenti ~rement ouve au operating fsstele communication lik exploiterlalia sondetdld communication du sfsimplement miseenoeuvre wave length longueur d ' on cle offer of frir  , proposer operation exploitation , opdration The empty words ( prepositions , determiners ) were extracted from the sentences . In all the cases above , the use of prepositions and determiners was consistent all over the corpus  . There are cases where two French units differ on a preposition  . In such a case , we consider that we have two possible different ranslations for the English term  . 
4 Conclusion
We presented a new model for word alignment based on flow networks  . This model allows us to integrate differentypes of constraints in the search for the best word alignment within aligned sentences  . We showed how this model can be applied to terminology extraction  , where candidate terms are extracted in one language  , in the other one . Our procedure presents three main differences over other approaches : we do not force term translations to fit within specific patterns  , we consider the whole sentences , thus enabling us to remove some ambiguities , and we rely on the association probabilities of the units as a whole  , but also on the association probabilities of the elements within these units  . 
The main application of the work we have described concerns the extraction of bilingual lexicons  . Such extracted lexicons can be used in different contexts : as a source to help le~-cographers build bilingual dictionaries in technical domains  , or as a resource for machine aided human translation systems  . In this last case , we can envisage several ways to extend the notion of translation unit in translation memory systems  , as the one proposed in ( Lang ~ et al ,  1997) . 
5 Acknowledgements
Most of this work was done at the IBM-France Scientific Centre during my PhD research  , under the direction of Jean-Marc Lang , , to whom I express my gratitude . Many thanks also to Jean-Pierre Chanod , Andeas Eisele , David Hull , and Christian Jacquemin for useful comments on earlier versions  . 
References
Peter F . Brown , Stephen A . Della Pietra , Vincent J . Della Pietra , and Robert L . Mercer . 
1993 . The mathematics of statistical machine translation : Parameter estimation  . Computational Linguistics , 19(2) . 
H . Chuquet and M . Paillard .  1989 . Approche linguistique desprobl@mes de traduc -tionanglais-fran~ais  . Ophrys . 
Ido Dagan , Kenneth W . Church , and
William A . Gale .  1993 . Robust bilingual word alignment for machine aided translation  . In Proceedings of the Workshop on Very Large Corpora  . 
B ~ atrice Daille .  1994 . Approche mixtepourl ' extraction determinologie : statistiquelx-icaleet filtreslinguistiques  . Ph . D . thesis,
Univ . Paris 7.
T . Dunning .  1993 . Accurate methods for the statistics of surprise and coincidence  . Computational Linguistics , 19(1) . 
L . R . Ford and D . R . Fulkerson .  1962 . Flows in networks . Princeton University Press . 
William Gale and Kenneth Church .  1993 . A program for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora  . Computational Linguistics , 19(1) . 
\] ~ ricGaussier .  1995 . Mod@lestatistiques et pa-trons morphosyntaxiques pour l'extraction de lexiques bilingues de termes  . Ph . D . thesis,
Univ . Paris 7.
John S . Justeson and Slava M . Katz . 1995.
Technical terminology : some linguistic properties and an algorithm for identification in text  . Natural Language Engineering , 1(1) . 
Martin Kay and M . R6 scheisen .  1993 . Text-translation alignment . Computational Linguistics , 19(1) . 
M . Klein .  1967 . A primal method for minimal cost flows , with applications to the assignment and transportation problems  . Management Science . 
Julian Kupiec .  1993 . An algorithm for finding noun phrase correspondences in bilingual corpora  . In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  . 
Jean-Marc Lang@ , \] ~ ricGaussier , and B ~ atrice Daill .  1997 . Bricks and skeletons : some ideas for the near future of maht  . Machine Translation , 12(1) . 
Dan I . Melamed .  1996 . Automatic onstruction of clean broad coverage translation lexicons  . 
In Proceedings of the Second Conference of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas  ( AMTA )  . 
Basile Nkwenti-Azeh .  1992 . Positional and combinational characteristics of satellite communications terms  . Technical report , CC1-
UMIST , Manchester.
Frank Smadja .  1992 . How to compile a bilingual collocational lexicon automatically  . 
In Proceedings of AAAI-92 Workshop on
Statistically-Based NLP techniques.
Stephan Vogel , Hermann Ney , and Christoph
Tillmann .  1996 . Hmm-based word alignment in statistical translation  . In Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics.
Dekai Wu .  1997 . Stochastic inversion transduction grammars and bilingual parsing of parallel corpora  . Computational Linguistics , 23(3) . 

