A step towards the detection of semantic variants of terms in 
technical documents
Thierry Hamon and Adeline Nazarenko
Laboratoired ' Informatique de Paris-Nord
Universit ~ Paris-Nord
Avenue JB Clement
93430 Villetaneuse , FRANCE
thierry.hamon@lipn.univ-parisl3.fr
a deline . nazarenko@lipn.univ-parisl3.fr
C~cile Gros
EDF-DER-IMA-TIEM-SOAD
1 Avenue du G~n ~ ral de Gaulle
92141 Clamart CE DEX , FRANCE

Abstract
This paper reports the results of a preliminary experiment on the detection of semantic variants of terms in a French technical document  . 
The general goal of our work is to help the struc -turation of terminologies  . Two kinds of semantic variants can be found in traditional terminologies : strict synonymy links and fuzzier relations like see-also  . We have designed three rules which exploit general dictionary information to infer synonymy relations between complex candidate terms  . The results have been examined by a human terminologist  . The expert has judged that half of the overall pairs of terms are relevant for the semantic variation  . 
He validated an important part of the detected links as synonymy  . Moreover , it appeared that numerous errors are due to few misinterpreted links : they could be eliminated by few exception rules  . 
1 Introduction 1 . 1 S t ructur ing a terminology The work presented here is a part of an industrial project of Technical Document Consulta-tion System  ( Gros et al , 1996) at the French electricity company EDF . The goal is to develop tools to help a terminologist in the construction of a structured terminology  ( cf . figure 1) providing : ? terms of a domain , i . e . simple or complex lexical units pointing out accurate concepts in a technical document  , ( Bourigault ,  1992) ; ? semantic links such as the see-also relation . 
This can be viewed as a two-step rocess . The candidate terms ( i . e . lexical units which can be terms if a domain expert validates them  ) are first automatically extracted from the technical document with a Terminology Extraction Software  ( LEXTER )   ( Bourigault ,  1992) . The list of candidate terms is then structured into a semantic network  . We focus on the latter point by detecting semantic variants  , especially synonyms . 
lignea ~ rienne ( overhead line )
See_also : D ~ parta ~ overhead outlet)
Synonym : Liaison ~ lectrique a ~ rienne ( overhead electric link ) 
Ligne simple ( single circuit line )
Is_a : Lignea ~ rienne ( overhead line )
Ligne multiterne ( multiple circuitline ) ls_a : Lignea ~ rienne ( overhead line ) Synonym : Ligne double ( double circuitline ) Figure 1: Example of a structured terminology in the electric domain  . 
In order to build a structured terminology , we thus attempt to link candidate terms extracted from a French technical document  1  . 
For instance , from synonym such as matgriel ( equipment ) /dquipement ( fittings )  , marche ( running ) /fonctionnement ( working ) and normal ( normal ) / bon ( right )  , we infer a synonymy link between candidate terms mat drield lec-trique  ( electric equipment ) /dquipement dlec-trique ( electrical fittings ) and marchen or male ( normal running ) /bonfonctionnement ( right working )  . 
As the terms used in this paper have been extracted from French documents  , their translation , especially for the synonymy , does not always how the same nuance than originally  . 
498 modNe(model):<1>canon(canon) , ~talon ( standard ) , exemplaire ( copy ) , example ( example ) , plan(plan)<2>sujet(subject ) , maquette(maquette ) < 3> h ~ ros(hero ) , type(type ) < 4> 4 chantillon ( sample) , specimen ( sample ) < 5> standard ( standard ) , type ( type ) , prototype ( prototype ) < 6> maquette ( model ) < 7> gabarit ( size )  , moule ( mould ) , patron ( pattern ) Figure 2: Example of a word entry from the dictionary Le Robert  . 
1 . 2 Using a general language dictionary for specialized corpora As domain specific semantic information is seldom available  , our aim is to evaluate the relevance and usefulness of general semantic resources for the detection of synonymy between candidate terms  . 
For this study , we used a French general dictionary Le Robert supplied by the Institut National de la Langue Franqaise  ( IN a LF )  . It provides synonyms and analogical words distributed among the different senses  ( cf . figure 2) of each word entry . It is exploited as a machine-readable synonym dictionary  . 
We use a 200   000 word corpus about electric power plant . Its size is typical of the technical documents . It is very technical if one considers the dictionary lemma coverage for this corpus  ( 45% )  . Concerning two other available documents dealing with software engineering and electric network planning  , the dictionary lemma coverage is respectively of65% and 57%  . In that respect he chosen corpus is the worse case for this experiment  . 
The present corpus has been analyzed by the Terminology Extraction Software LEX-TER which extracted  12   043 candidate terms ( 2831 nouns , 597 adjectives and 8615 noun phrases ) . Each complex candidate term ( ligned ' alimentation , supply line ) is analyzed into a head ( ligne , line ) and an expansion ( a limenta-tion , supply ) . It is part of a syntactic network ( cf . figure 3) . 
2 Method for the detect ion of synonymous te rms The terminological variation include morphological  ( fiectional , derivational ) variants , syntactic variant ( coordinated and compound terms ) but also semantic variant ( synonyms , hyperonyms ) of controlled terms . In this experiment , we attempto infer synonymy links between candidate terms  . 
2 . 1 Semantic variation and synonymy relat ion Semantic variation The semantic variation includes relations  ( e . g . synonymy and see-also ) between words of the same grammatical category , even if one may also take into consideration phenomena such as elliptic relations or combination of synonymy and derivation relations  ( e . g . heat and thermal ) where the categories may be different . 
Fuzzier relation such as the traditional see-also relations of terminologies are also very useful  . Once a link is established between two terms , it is sometimes easy to interpret for the terminology users  . Moreover , for applications such as document retrieval , the link itself is often more important than its very type  . 
Synonymy We use a synonymy definition close to that of WordNet  ( Miller et al ,  1993) . 
It is defined as an equivalence relation between terms having the same meaning in a particular context  . The transitivity rule cannot be applied to the links extracted from the dictionary  . 
Indeed , while the synonymy is sometimes very contextual in the dictionary  , the links appear in the data without context information and would produce a great deal of errors  . Thus , for instance , the synonymy links between the adjectives polaire  ( polar ) and glacial ( icy ) and the adjectives glacial ( cold ) and insensible ( insensitive ) would allow to deduce a wrong synonym link between polaire and insensible  . 
Moreover , tests carried out on dictionary samples show that the relevant links which ligne  ( line ) lignea@rienne ( overhead line ) ?ligne simple ( single line ) ligned ouble ( double line ) ligned ' alimentation
H ( supply line )( . . . ) ligne a~rienne haute tension ( hight voltage overhead line ) lignea ~ riennemoyenne tension ( middle voltage overhead line ) alimentation ( supply ) capacit @ detrans it delaligne ( transit capacity of the line ) cof it d ' invest is sement del aligne ( cost of invest is sement of the line ) d 6 clenchement delaligne longueur delaligne ( size of the line ) puissance caract@ristiqued laligne ( caracteristic power of the line ) or dreded ~ clenchement ( order of tripping ) delaligne ( of the line )   . . . ) Figure 3: Fragment of the syntactic network ( H = head , E = expansion ) . 
Number of simple terms extracted
Number of retained words at the filtering step
Percentage of retained words at the filtering step
Nouns Adjectives Total 2   831   597   3   428   1   134   408   1   542   40%   68%   45% Table 1: Coverage of the corpus by the dictionary . 
could be added thanks to the transitivity rules already exist in the dictionary  . For instance the following words are synonymous pairwise : lo-gement  ( accommodation )  , demeure ( residence ) , domicile ( residence ) and habitation ( house ) . 
We consider all links provided by the dictionary as expressing synonymy relation between simple candidate terms and design a two-step automatic method to infer links between complex candidate terms  . 
2 . 2 F i rs t step : Dict ionary data f i l ter ing In order to reduce the database  , we first filter the relevant dictionary links for the studied document  . For instance , the link mat driel ( equipment ) /dquipement ( fittings ) is selected because its both ends , materiel and 6quipement exist in the studied corpus . For this document ,   3   369 synonymy links between 1   542 simple terms are preserved . 
Table 1 shows the results of the filtering step in regard to the coverage of our corpus by the dictionary  . 
2 . 3 Second step : Detect ion o f synonymous candidate terms Assuming that the semantics and the synonymy of the complex candidate terms are compositional  , we design three rules to detect synonymy relations between candidate terms  . Considering two candidates terms , if one of the following conditions is met , a synonymy link is added to the terminological network : - the heads are identical and the expansions are synonymous  ( collecteur g~ndral ( general collector ) /collecteur commun ( common collector ) ) ; -the heads are synonymous and the expansions are identical  ( mat drield lectrique ( electric equipment ) /dquipement ~ lectrique ( electrical fittings ) ) ; -the heads are synonymous and the expansions are synonymous  ( marchen or male ( normal running ) /bonfonctionnement ( right working ) ) ; strap to detect synonymy links between complex candidate terms  . Then , we iterate the process by including the newly detected links in our base until no new link can be found  . In the present experiment , he process ends up after three iterations . 
3 Results and study of the detected links 3 . 1 Various detected links Synonymy links 396 links between complex candidate terms ( i . e . noun phrases ) are inferred by this method . An expert of the domain validated 37% of them ( i . e . 146 links , cf . table 2 ) as real synonymy links : hauteur d'eau ( water height ) / niveaud'eau ( level of water )  , d~t ~ ri-oration notable ( notable deterioration ) /d 6gra-dation importante ( important damage )   ( cf . figure 4) . 
Number Percentage
Validated links 146 37%
Unvalidated links 250 63%
Total 396 100%
Table 2: Results of the link validation.
Most of the synonymy links between candidate terms are detected at the first iteration  ( 383 liens out of 396 )  . The majority of the validated links are given by the two first rules :  89 validated links out of 206 with the first rule ( admission d ' air ( air in take ) /entrded ' air ( air entry ) ) , 49 out of 105 with the second ( to it flottant ( floating roof ) /to ilmobile ( movable roof ) and collecteur gdndral ( general collector ) /colleeteur commun ( common collector ) ) . Obviously , the last rule has a lower precision rate : 8 out of 85   ( faussemanoeuvre ( wrong operation ) /mau-valse manipulation ( bad handling ) ) . However , it infers important links which are difficult to detect by hand  . 
Other useful links On the whole , the expert judged that half of the detected links are useful for the terminology structuration even if here jected some of them as real synonymy links  ( cf . 
figure 5) . Our method detects differentypes of links : meronymy  , antonymy , relations between close concepts , connected parts of a whole mechanism , etc . 
The meronymy links are the most numerous after synonymy  ( rapport des ~ ret d ( safety report ) /analyse des ~ ret d ( safety analysis ) ) . In the previous example , whereas rapport ( report ) and analyse ( analysis ) are given as synonyms by the general anguage dictionary  ( which is contextfree )  , their technical meanings in our document are more specific  . Therefore , rapport des~ret disameronym rather than a synonym of analyse des ~ ret d in the studied document  . 
Other detected links allow to group the candidate terms which refer to related concepts  . 
For instance , we detected a link between the device ligned e vidange  ( draining line ) and the place point depurge ( blow-downpoint ) which is relevant since a draining line ends at a blow-downpoint  . Likewise , it is useful to link find evidange ( draining end ) which designates an operation and destination des purges  ( blow-down destination ) which is the corresponding equipment . 
The expert considered that the link between the candidate terms  ( commandemd-canique ( mechanical control ) /or dreautomatique ( automatic order ) ) expresses an antonymy relation , although it is infered from the synonymy relation of the dictionary m deanique  ( mechanical ) /automatique ( automatic )  . It appears that those adjectives have a particular meaning in the present corpus  . Therefore , every link detected from this " synonymy " link is an antonymy one  . 
Those links express various relations sometimes difficult to name  , even by the expert . 
Such links are important in a terminology.
3.2 Polysemy , elision and metaphor
Most real errors are due to the lack of context information for polysemic words and the noisy data existing in the dictionary  . For instance the French word temps means either time or weather  . According to the dictionary , temps ( weather ) is a synonym of temperature ( temperature )  2 , but this meaning is excluded from the present corpus  . Since we cannot distinguish the different meanings  , the synonymy of temps/time and temperature is taken for granted  . Temps attendu ( expected time ) and tempdrature attentive ( expected tempera-2 It would be more precise to interpretias analogous words  . 

Term 1Term 2d ~ t ~ rioration notable ( notable deterioration ) faussemanoeuvre ( wrong operation ) action del'op ~ rateur ( action of the operator ) capacit ~ interne ( internal capacity ) capacit ~ totale ( total capacity ) capacit ~ utile ( useful capacity ) limite de solubilit ~ ( limit of solubility ) marche manuelle ( manual running ) tests p ~ riodiques ( periodic tests ) hauteur d'eau ( water height ) panneau de commande ( control panel ) d~gradation importante ( important damage ) mauvaise manipulation ( bad handling ) intervention del'op6 rateur ( intervention of the operator ) volume interne ( internal volume ) volume total ( total volume ) volume utile ( useful volume ) seuilde solubilit 6 ( solubility threshold ) fonctionnement manuel ( manual working ) essais p ~ riodiques ( periodic trials ) niveaud'eau ( level of water ) tableau de commande ( control board ) Figure 4: Examples of synonymy links between complex candidate terms  . 
Term 1Term 2 essaien usine ( test in plant ) ligned evidange ( draining line ) fonction d ' untemps ( fonction of a time ) froid normal ( normal cold ) rapport desfire t ~ ( safety report ) solution d ' acide borique ( solution of boricacid ) temperature attendue ( expected temperature ) temperature normale ( normal temperature ) organes de commande ( control devices ) grosd ~ bit ( big flow ) activit ~ importante ( important activity ) commandem ~ canique ( mechanical control ) risques de corrosion ( risk of corrosion ) experienced ' exploitation ( experiment of exploitation ) point depurge ( blow-downpoint ) effet d ' une temperature ( effect of a temperature ) refroid is sement correct ( correct cooling ) analyse desfire t ~ ( safety analysis ) dissolution del'acide borique ( dissolving of the boricacid ) temps attend u ( expected time ) temps normal ( normal time ) org an esd ' or dre ( order devices ) pleind ~ bit ( full flow ) activit ~ ~ lev~e ( high activity ) or dreautomatique ( automatic order ) risques de destruction ( risk of destruction ) 
Figure 5: Examples of rejected linksture ) are thus given as synonymous . This type of wrong links is rather important in the list presented to the expert : between  10 to 20 links out of 396  . 
On the contrary , about ten wrong links are due to the elision of common terms in the domain  . For instance , the term activit d ( activity ) which actually corresponds to the term radioac -tivit d  ( radioactivity ) in the document is given as a synonym of gnergie ( energy ) in the dictionary . 
between complex candidate terms.
We have detected links such as activit dhaute ( high activity ) /hauted nergie ( highenergy )  . 
As regards metaphor , we have observed that it preserve semantic relation  . For instance , in graph theory , the link ( arbre ( tree ) /feuille ( leaf ) ) can be inferred from the meronyny information of general dictionary  . 
Those types of wrong links are easily identified during the validation  . Some exceptions rules can be designed to first regroup those links plan to use dictionary definitions  . 
3.3 Evaluation
The inferred links express not only synonymy , but also other relations which may be difficult to name  . Apart from real errors , these fuzzy see-also relations are useful in the context of a consultation system  . 
The results of this first experiment are encouraging  . Although the precision rate and the number of links are low  ( 37% , 396 links ) , the use of complementary methods ( e . g . detection of syntactic variants ) would allow to propagate these links and increase their number  . Also , the use of other knowledge sources or different methods  ( Habert et al ,  1996 ) is necessary to increase precision rate and find links between more technical candidate terms  . 
As regards the improvement of such a method , the terminology acquisition by an expert will take tens of hours while the automatic extraction takes one hour and the validation of the links has been done in two hours  . 
The main difficulty is to evaluate the recall in the results because there is no standard reference in that matter  , giving the overall relevant relations in the document  . One may think that the comparison with links manually detected by an expert is the best evaluation  , but such manual detection is subjective . Regarding the validation by several experts , it is wellknown that such validation would give different results depending on the background of each expert  ( Szpakowicz et al ,  1996) . So , we are reduced to compare our results with those obtained by different methods even though they are not perfect either  . We are planning to compare the clusters found by our method with the clustering one of  ( Assadi ,  1997 ) to study how the results overlap and are complementary  . 
4 Related works
The variant detection in specialized corpora must be taken into account for information retrieval  . This complex operation involves the semantic as well as the morphological and syntactic level  . ( Jacquemin ,  1996 ) design a unification-based partial parser FASTER which analyses raw technical text while metarules detect morphosyntactic variants of controlled terms  ( blood cell , blood mononuclear cell ) . By using morphological and part-of-speech modules  , the system are extended to the verbal phrases ( tree cutting , tree have been cut down ) ( Klavans et al ,  1997) . Dealing with syntactic paraphrase in the general anguage  , ( Dras ,  1997 ) propose a similar representation by using the STAG formalism to detect syntactic related sentences  . Because we deal with the semantic level , our work is complementary of those . 
Semantic variation is rarely studied in specialized domains  . Works on word similarity and word sense disambiguation are generally based on statistical methods designed for large or even very large corpora  ( Hindle , 1990; Agirre and Rigau ,  1996) . Therefore , they cannot be applied for technical documents which usually are medium size corpora  . However , dealing with already linguistic filtered data , ( Assadi ,  1997 ) aims at statistically build rough clusters supposing that similar candidate terms have similar expansions  . Then he relies on human expertise for the semantic interpretation  . It differs from our work which tries to automatically explicit the semantic relations  . In order to disambiguate noun objects in a short text  ( 30000 words )  , ( Li et al ,  1995 ) design heuristic rules using semantic similarity information in WordNet and verbs as context  . Their system disambiguate an encouraging number on noun-verb pairs if one consider single and multiple sense assigned to a word  . 
In ( Basili et al ,  1997) , the lexical knowledge base WordNet ( Miller et al ,  1993 ) is used as a bootstrap for verb disambiguation . They tune it to the domain of the studied document by taking into account he contexts in which the verbs are used  . This tuning leads both to eliminate certain semantic ategories and to add new ones  . For instance , the category contact is created for the verb to record  . The resulted sense classification is thus a better description of the verb specialized meanings  . 
Our symbolic and dictionary-based approach is close that of  ( Basili et al ,  1997) . They both use general anguage information ( traditional dictionary vs . WordNet ) for specialized corpora . However , their goals differ : disambiguation vs . semantic relation identification . 
503 5 Conclusion and future works
The use of a synonym dictionary and the rules of synonymous candidate terms detection we have designed allow to extract an encouraging number of links in a very technical corpus  . An expert validated these links . More than one third of the detected links are synonymy relations  . 
Beside synonymy , our method detects various kinds of semantic variants  . Wrong links due to the polysemy can be easily eliminated with exception rules by comparing selectional patterns and generalized contexts  ( Basili et al , 1993; Grishman and Sterling ,  1994) . 
Our work shows that general semantic data are useful for the terminology structuration and the synonym detection ia corpus of specialized language  . The result show that semantic variants can be automatically detected  . Of course , the number of acquired links is relatively low but our method is not to be used in isolation  . 

This work is the result of a collaboration with the Direction des Etudes et Recherche  ( DER ) d ' Electric it ~ de France ( EDF )  . We thank Marie-Luce Picard from EDF and Benoit Habert from ENS Fontenay-StCloud for their help  , Didier Bourigault and Jean-Yves Hamon from the Institut de la Langue Fran ~ aise  ( IN a LF ) for the dictionary and Henry Boccon-Gibod for the validation of the results  . 

E . Agirre and G . Rigau .  1996 . Word sense disambiguation using conceptual density  . In Proceedings of COLING'96, pages 1622,
Copenhagen , Danmark.
H . Assadi .  1997 . Knowledge acquisition from texts : Using an automatic clustering method based on noun -modifie relationship  . In Proceedings of ACL'97- Student Session,
Madrid , Spain.
Roberto Basili , Maria Teresa Pazienza , and Paola Velardi .  1993 . Acquisition of selectional patterns in sublanguages  . Machine
Translation , 8:175-201.
Roberto Basili , Michelangelo Della Rocca , and Maria Teresa Pazienza .  1997 . Contextual word sense tunig and disambiguation . Applied Artificial Intelligence , 11:235-262 . 
D . Bourigault .  1992 . Surface grammatical analysis for the extraction of terminological noun phrases  . In Proceedings of COLING'92 , pages 977-981 , Nantes , France . 
Mark Dras .  1997 . Representing paraphrases u-ing synchronous tree adjoining rammars  . In proceedings of the 1997 Australian NLP Summer Workshop , Syndney , Australia . 
Ralph Grishman and John Sterling .  1994 . Generalizing automatically generated selectional patterns  . In Proceedings of Coling'94 , volume 3 , pages 742-747 , Kyoto . 
C . Gros , H . Assadi , N . Aussenac-Gilles , and A . Courcelle .  1996 . Task models for technical documentation accessing  . In Proceedings of EKAW'96, Nottingham . 
Beno~t Habert , Elie Naulleau , and Adeline Nazarenko .  1996 . Symbolic word clustering for medium-size corpora . In Proceedings of COLING'96 , volume 1 , pages 490-495 , 
Copenhagen , Danmark , August.
D . Hindle .  1990 . Noun classification from predicate-argument structures  . In Proceedings of ACL'90 , pages 268-275 , Pittsburgh , 

C . Jacquemin .  1996 . A symbolic and surgical acquisition of terms through variation  . In E . Riloff et G . Scheler S . Wermter , editor , Connectionist , Statistical and Symbolic Approaches to Learning /or Natural Language 
Processing , pages 425-438, Springer.
J . Klavans , C . Jacquemin , and E . Tzoukermann .  1997 . A natural language approach to multiword term conflation  . In Proceedings of the third Delos Workshop- CrossLanguage 
Information Retrieval.
Xiaobin Li , Stan Szpakowicz , and Stan Matwin.
1995 . WordNet-based algorithm word sense disambiguation  . I Proceedings of IJCAI-95 , pages 1368-1374 , Montreal , Canada . 
G.A . Miller , R . Beckwith , C . Fellbaum,
D . Gross , and K . Miller .  1993 . Introduction to WordNet : An online lexical database  . 
Technical Report CSL Report 43, Cognitive
Science Laboratory , Princeton.
Stan Szpakowicz , Stan Matwin , and Ken
Barker .  1996 . WordNet-based word sense disambiguation that works for short texts  . 
Technical Report TR-96-03 , Department of Computer Science , University of Ottawa , Ontario , Canada . 

