Unlimited Vocabulary Grapheme to Phoneme Conversion for 
Korean TTS
Byeongchang Kim and WonI1 Lee and Geunbae Lee and Jong-Hyeok Lee
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Pohang University of Science & Technology
Pohang , Korea
bckim , bdragon , gblee,jhlee)@postech.ac.kr
Abstract
This paper describes a grapheme-to-phoneme conversion method using phoneme connectivity and CCV conversion rules  . The method consists of mainly four modules including morpheme normalization  , phrase-break detection , morpheme to phone me conversion and phoneme connectivity check  . 
The morpheme normalization is to replace non -Korean symbols into standard Korean graphemes  . The phrase-break detector assigns phrasebreaks using part-of-speech  ( POS ) information . In the morpheme-to-phoneme conversion module , each morpheme in the phrase is converted into phonetic patterns by looking up the morpheme phonetic pattern dictionary which contains candidate phonological changes in boundaries of the morphemes  . Graphemes within a morpheme are grouped into CCV patterns and converted into phonemes by the CCV conversion rules  . 
The phoneme connectivity table supports grammaticality checking of the adjacent wo phonetic morphemes  . 
In the experiments with a corpus of 4 , 973 sentences , we achieved 99 . 9% of the grapheme-to-phoneme conversion performance and  97  . 5% of the sentence conversion performance . The full Kore an TTS system is now being implemented using this conversion method  . 
1 Introduction
During the past few years , remarkable improvements have been made for high -quality text-to-speech systems  ( van Santen et al ,  1997) . 
One of the enduring problems in developing high -quality text-to-speech system is accurate grapheme-to-phoneme conversion  ( Divay and Vitale ,  1997) . It can be described as a function mapping the spelling of words to their phonetic symbols  . Nevertheless , the function in some alphabetic languages needs ome linguistic knowledge  , especially morphological nd phonological , but often also semantic knowledge . 
In this paper , we present a new grapheme-to-phoneme conversion method for unlimited vocabulary Kore an TTS  . The conversion method is divided into mainly four modules  . Each module has its own linguistic knowledge . Phrase-break detection module assigns phrase breaks onto part-of-speech sequences using morphological knowledge  . Word-boundaries before and after phrasebreaks should not be coarticulated  . So , accurate phrase-breaks sign-ments are essential in high quality TTS systems  . In the morpheme-to-phoneme conversion module , boundary graphemes of each morpheme in the phrase are converted to phonemes by applying phonetic patterns which contain possible phonological changes in the boundaries of morphemes  . The patterns are designed using morphological nd phonotactic knowledge  . 
Graphemes within a morpheme are converted into phonemes by CCV  ( consonant consonant vowel ) conversion rules which are automatically extracted from a corpus  . After all the conversions , phoneme connectivity able supports the grammaticality of the adjacency of two phonetic morphemes  . This grammaticality comes from
Korean phonology rules.
This paper is organized as follows . Section 2 briefly explains the characteristics of spoken Korean for general readers  . Section 3 and 4 introduces our grapheme-to-phoneme conversion method based on morphologicalnd phonological knowledge of Korean  . Section 5 shows experiment results to demonstrate he performance and Section  6 draws some conclusions . 
675 2 Features of Spoken Korean
This section briefly explains the linguistic har -acteristics of spoken Korean before describing the architecture  . 
A Korean word ( calle deojeol ) consists of more than one morpheme with clearcut morpheme boundaries  ( Korean is an agglutinative language )  . Korean is a postpositional language with many kinds of noun-endings  , verb-endings , and prefinal verb-endings . These functional morphemes determine the noun's case roles  , verb's aspect/tenses , modals , and modification relations between words . The unit of pause in speech ( phrasebreak ) is usually different from that in written text . No phonological change occur between these phrase breaks  . Phonological changes can occur in a morpheme , between morphemes in a word , and even between words in a phrasebreakas described in the  30 general phonological rules for Korean ( Korean Ministry of Education ,  1995) . These changes include consonant and vowel assimilation  , dissimilation , insertion , deletion , and contraction . For example , noun " kag-ryo " pronounced as " kangnyo " ( meaning " cabine t " ) is an example of phonological change within a morpheme  . Noun plus noun-ending " such + gwa " , in which " such " means " charcoal " and " gwa " means " and " in English  , is sounded as " sudggwa " , which is an example of the inter-morpheme phonological change  . " Ta-seosgae " , which means " five items " , is sounded as " tase otggae " , in which phonological changes occur between words  . In addition , phonological changes can occur conditionally on the morphotactic environments but also on phonotactic environments  . 
3 Architecture of the
Grapheme-to-Phoneme Converter
Part-of-speech ( POS ) tagging is a basic step to the grapheme-to -phoneme conversion since phonological changes depend on morphotactic and phonotactic environments  . The POS tagging system have to handle out-of -vocabulary  ( OOV ) words for accurate grapheme-to-phoneme conversion of unlimited vocabulary  ( Bechet and E1-Beze ,  1997) . Figure 1 shows the architecture of our grapheme-to-phoneme converter integrated with the hybrid POS tagging system  ( Lee et al ,  1997) . The hybrid POS tagging system employs generalized OOV word handling mechanisms in the morphological analysis  , and cascade statistical and rule-based approaches in the two-phase training architecture for POS disambiguation  . 
table JI connectivity checker " reefing Figure 1: Architecture of the grapheme-to-phoneme converter in TTS applications Each morpheme tagged by the POS tagger is normalized by replacing non-Korean symbols by Korean graphemes to expand numbers  , abbreviations , and acronyms . The phrase-break detector segment she POS sequences into several phrases according to phrase-break detection rules  . In the phoneme converter , each morpheme in the phrase is converted into phoneme sequences by consulting the morpheme phonetic dictionary  . The OOV morphemes which are not registered in the morpheme phonetic dictionary should be processed in two different ways  . The graphemes in the morpheme boundary are converted into phonemes by consulting the morpheme phonetic pattern dictionary  . The graphemes within morphemes are converted into phonemes according to CCV conversion rules  . To model phoneme's connectabli-ties between morpheme boundaries  , the separate phoneme connectivity table encodes the phonological changes between the morpheme with their POS tags  . Outputs of the grapheme-to-phoneme converter , that is , phonemes e-fed to the lower level signal processing module of TTS systems  . Next section will give detail descriptions of each component of the grapheme-to-phoneme converter  . The hybrid POS tagging system will not be explained in this paper  , and interested readers can see the reference ( Lee et al . , 1997) . 
4 Component Descriptions of the
Converter 4.1 Morpheme Normalization
The normalization replaces non-Korean symbols by corresponding Korean graphemes  . Non-Korean symbols include numbers ( e . g .  54, -12, 5,400, 4 . 2), dates ( e . g . 20/1/97, 20-Jan-97), times ( e . g . 12:46), scores ( e . g . 74:64), mathematical expressions ( e . g . 4+5,1/3), telephone numbers , abbreviations ( e . g . km , ha ) and acronyms ( e . g . UNESCO , OECD ) . Especially , acronyms have two types : spelled acronyms such as OECD and pronounced ones like a word such as UNESCO  . 
The numbers are converted into the corresponding Korean graphemes using deterministic finite automata  . The dates , times , scores , expressions and telephone numbers are converted into equivalent graphemes using their formats and values  . The abbreviations and acronyms are enrolled in the morpheme phonetic dictionary  , and converted into the phonemes using the morpheme-to-phoneme conversion module  . 
4.2 Phrase-Break Detection
Phrase-break boundaries are important to the subsequent processing such as morpheme-to-phoneme conversion and prosodic feature generation  . Graphemes in phrase-break boundaries are not phonologically changed and sounded as their original corresponding phonemes in Korean  . 
A number of different algorithms have been suggested and implemented for phrasebreak detection  ( Black and Taylor ,  1997) . The simplest algorithm uses deterministic rules and more complicated algorithms can use syntactic knowledge and even semantic knowledge  . We designed simple rules using break and POS tagged corpus  . We found that , in Korean , the average length of phrases is 5 . 6 words and over 90% of breaks are after 6 different POS tags : conjunctive ending , auxiliary particle , case particle , other particle , adverb and adnominal ending . The phrase-break detector assigns breaks after these  6 POS tags considering the length of phrases . 
4.3 Morpheme-to-Phoneme Conversion
The morphemes registered in the morpheme phonetic dictionary can be directly converted into phonemes by consulting the dictionary entries  . However , separate method to process the OOV morphemes which are not registered in the dictionary is necessary  . We developed a new method as shown Figure 2 . 
Apply direct morpheme-to-phoneme conversion and phonological connectivity assignment 
Morphemet ~ muee ~ dictionary
Convert graphemes in morpheme boundaries and assign phonological connectivity 
Moq~emephonea edictionary
Ill Ill
Convert graphemes within morphemes CCV conversion rule  1   , i Figure 2: Morpheme-to-phoneme conversion for unlimited vocabularies The morpheme phonetic dictionary contains POS tag  , morpheme , phoneme connectivity ( left and right ) and phoneme sequence for each entry . We try to register minimum number of morpheme in the dictionary  . So it contains only the morphemes which are difficult to process using the next OOV morpheme conversion modules  . Table 1 shows example entries for the common oun " pang - gabs "  , meaning " price of a room " in hotel reservation dialogs  . The common oun " pang-gabs " can be pronounced as " pang-ggam "  , pang-ggab " or " pang-g gabss " according to first phoneme of the adjacent morphemes  . 
To handle the OOV morphemes , morpheme phonetic pattern dictionary is developed to contain all the general patterns of Korean POS tags  , morphemes , phoneme connectivity and phoneme sequences . Boundary phonemes of the OOV morphemes can be converted to their candidate phonemes  , and the phonological connectivity for them can be acquired by consulting this morpheme phonetic pattern dictionary  . 

Table 1: Example entries of the morpheme phonetic dictionary POS tag morpheme phoneme sequence left connectivity right connectivity common oun pang - gabspang-ggam'p ' no change'bs'changed to ' m ' common noun pang-gabspang-ggab'p'no change'bs'changed to'b'commonounpang -gabspang-g gabss'p'no change'bs'changed to ' bss ' Table  2: Example entries of morpheme phonetic pattern dictionary POS tag morpheme phoneme sequence left connectivity right connectivity t  , d t t , nirregular verb irregular verb irregular verb irregular verb t  , Z

Y , Ztt , Z

Y , Z't'changed to'tt''t'changed to'tt' no change no change'd'changed to'n'no change'd'changed to'n'no change Example entries corresponding to their regular verb " teud "  , meaning " hear " , are shown in Table 2 . Metacharacters , ' Z ' , 'Y ' , ' V ' , '*' designate single consonant , consonant except silence phoneme , vowel , any character sequence with variable length in the order  . The table shows that the first grapheme't'can be phonologically changed to ' tt ' according to the last phoneme of the preceding morpheme  ( left connectivity )  , and the last grapheme'd'can be phonologically changed to ' n ' according to the first phoneme of the following morpheme  ( right connectivity )  . 
The morpheme phonetic pattern dictionary contains similar  1  , 9 92 entries to model the general phonological rules for Korean  . 
The graphemes within a morpheme for OOV morphemes are converted into phonemes using the CCV conversion rules  . The CCV conversion rules are the mapping rules between grapheme to phoneme in character trigram forms which are in the order of consonant  ( C ) consonant ( C ) vowel ( V ) spanning two consecutive syllables . 
The CCV rules are designed and automatically learned from a corpus reflecting the following 
Korean phonological facts.
? Korean is a syllable-base language , i . e . , Korean syllable is the basic unit of the graphemes and consists of first consonant  , vowel and final consonant ( CVC ) . 
? The number of possible consonants for each syllable can be varied in grapheme-to-phoneme conversion  . 
? The number of vowels for each syllable is not changed  . 
? Phonological changes of the first consonant are only affected by the final consonant of the preceding syllable and the following vowel of the same syllable  . 
? Phonological changes of the final consonant are only affected by the first consonant of the following syllable  . 
? Phonological changes of the vowel are not affected by the following consonant  . 
The boundary graphemes of the OOV morphemes are phonologically changed according to the POS tag and the boundary graphemes of the preceding and following morphemes  . On the other hand , the inner grapheme conversion is not affected by the POS tag  , but only by the adjacent graphemes within the same morpheme  . The CCV conversion rules can model the fact easily  , but the conventional CC conversion rules ( Park and Kwon , 1995) cannot model the influence of the vowels . 
4.4 Phoneme Connectivity Check
To verify the boundary phonemes ' con-nectablity to one another  , the separate phoneme connectivity table encodes the phonologically connectable pair of each morpheme which has phonologically changed boundary graphemes  . 
This phoneme connectivity table indicates the grammatical sound combinations in Korean nectivity information  . 
The morpheme-to-phoneme conversion can generate a lot of phoneme sequence candidates for single morpheme  . We put the whole phoneme sequence candidates in a phoneme graph where a correct phoneme sequence path can be selected for input sentence  . The phoneme connectivity check performs this selection and prunes the ungrammatical phoneme sequences in the graph  . 
5 Implementation and Experiment
Results
We implemented simple phrase-break detection rules from break and POS tagged corpus collected from recording and transcribing broadcasting news  . The rules reflec the fact that average length of phrases in Koreanis  5  . 6 words and over 90% of breaks are after 6 specific POS tags , described in the texts . 
We constructed a 1 , 9 92 entry morpheme phonetic pattern dictionary for OOV morpheme processing using standard Korean phonological rules  . The morpheme phonetic dictionary was constructed for only the morphemes that are difficult to handle with these standard rules  . 
The two dictionaries are indexed using POS tag and morpheme pattern for fast access  . To model the boundary phonemes ' connectablity to one another  , the phoneme connectivity able encodes 626 pair of phonologically connectable morphemes . 
The 2030 entry rule set for CCV conversion was automatically earned from phonetically transcribed  9  , 773 sentences . The independent phonetically transcribed 4 , 9 73 sentences are used to test the performance of the grapheme-to-phoneme conversion  . Of the 4,973 sentences , only 2 . 5% are incorrectly processed ( 120 sentences out of 4 , 973) , and only 0 . 1% of the graphemes in the sentences are actually incorrectly converted  . 
6 Conclusions
This paper presents a new grapheme-to-phoneme conversion method using phoneme connectivity and CCV conversion rules for unlimited vocabulary Korean TTS  . For the efficient conversion , new ideas of morpheme phonetic and morpheme phonetic pattern dictionary are invented and the system demonstrates remarkable conversion performance for the unlimited vocabulary texts  . Our main contributions include presenting the morphologically and phonologically conditioned conversion model which is essential for morphologically and phonologically complex agglutinative languages  . The other contribution is the grapheme-to-phoneme conversion model combined with the declarative phonological rule which is well suited to the given task  . We also designed new CCV unit of grapheme-to -phoneme conversion for unlimited vocabulary task  . The experiments show that grapheme-to-phoneme conversion performance is  97  . 5% in sentence conversion , and 99 . 9% in each grapheme conversion . We are now working on incorporating this grapheme -to-phoneme conversion into the developing TTS systems  . 

F . Bechet and M . E1-Beze .  1997 . Automatic assignment of part-of-speech to out-of -vocabulary words for text-to-speech processing  . In Proceedings of the EUROSPEECH'97 , pages 983-986 . 
Alan W . Black and Paul Taylor .  1997 . Assigning phrase breaks from part-of-speech sequences  . In Proceedings of the EU-
ROSPEECH'97, pages 995-998.
Michel Divay and Anthony J . Vitale .  1997 . Algorithms for grapheme-phoneme translation for English and French : Applications  . Computational Linguistics , 23(4) . 
Korean Ministry of Education .  1995 . Korean Rule Collections . Taehan Publishers . ( in Korean ) . 
Geunbae Lee , Jeongwon Cha , and Jong-Hyeok Lee .  1997 . Hybrid POS tagging with generalized unknown word handling  . In Proceedings of the IRAL'97, pages 43-50 . 
S . H . Park and H . C . Kwon .  1995 . Implementation to phonologic alteration module for a Korean text-to-speech  . In Proceedigns of the ~th conference on Korean and Korean information processing  . ( in Korean ) . 
Jan P . H . van Santen , Richard W . Sproat,
Joseph P . Olive , and Julia Hirschberg.
1997. Progress in Speech Synthesis . Springer-


