A Text Understander that Learns
Udo Hahn &: Klemens Schnattinger
Computational Linguistics Lab , Freiburg University
Werthmann platz 1, D-79085 Freiburg , Germany
hahn , schnattinger@coling.uni-freiburg , de
Abstract
We introduce an approach to the automatic acquisition of new concepts fi'om natura language texts which is tightly integrated with the underlying text understanding process  . The learning model is centered around the ' quality ' of different forms of linguistic and conceptual evidence which underlies the incremental generation and refinement of alternative concept hypotheses  , each one capturing a different conceptual reading for an unknown lexical item  . 
1 Introduction
The approach to learning new concepts as a result of understanding natural language texts we present here builds on two different sources of evidence -- the prior knowledge of the domain the texts are about  , and grammatical constructions in which unknown lexical items occur  . While there may be many reasonable interpretations when an unknown item occurs for the very first time in a text  , their number rapidly decreases when more and more evidence is gathered  . Our model tries to make explicit the reasoning processes behind this learning pattern  . 
Unlike the current mainstream in automatic linguistic knowledge acquisition  , which can be characterized as quantitative , surface-oriented bulk processing of large corpora of texts  ( Hindle , 1989; Zernik and Jacobs , 1990; Hearst , 1992; Manning ,  1993) , we propose here a knowledge-intensive model of concept learning from few  , positive-only examples that is tightly integrated with the non-learning mode of text understanding  . Both learning and understanding build on a given core ontology in the format of terminological assertions and  , hence , make abundant use of terminological reasoning . The ' plain'text understanding mode can be considered as the instantiation and continuous filling d~udrs  , y ~ trw ~ Hyl~si~space-j
Hyputh csistspal.'c-nIQ*mlifi ~ r
Q*mlity ~, l ~* In e
Figure 1: Architecture of the Text Learner of roles with respect osing le concepts already available in the knowledge base  . Under learning conditions , however , a set of alternative concept hypotheses has to be maintained for each unknown item  , with each hypothesis denoting a newly created conceptual interpretation tentatively associated with the unknown item  . 
The underlying methodology is summarized in Fig .  1 . The text parser ( for an overview , cf . 
BrSker et al ( 1994 ) ) yields information from the grammatical constructions in which an unknown lexical item  ( symbolized by the black square ) occurs in terms of the corresponding dependency parse tree  . The kinds of syntactic on-structions ( e . g . , genitive , apposition , comparative ) , in which unknown lexical items appear , are recorded and later assessed relative to the credit they lend to a particular hypothesis  . The conceptual interpretation of parse trees involving unknown lexical items in the domain knowledge base leads to the derivation of concept hypotheses  , which are further enriched by conceptual annotations  . These reflect structural patterns of consistency , mutual justification , analogy , etc . relative to already available concept descriptions in the domain knowledge base or other hypothesis spaces  . This kind of initial evidence , in particular its predictive " goodness " for the learning task  , is represented by corresponding sets of linguistic and conceptual qual- 
CMDC ~ QDz
Cu DC Zu Dz
VR . CdeAz\[RZ(d)C_Cz
RnSR znSzcln(d,d ') en zl de Cz
RIG(d,d')?nzId'?Cz)
Tablel : Some Concept and
Role Terms
Axiom Semantics
A-CAz = Cza:CazECz
Q-RQZ = RZ aRb(az , bz ) ER z
Table 2: Axioms for
Concepts and Rolesity labels . Multiple concept hypotheses for each unknown lexical item are organized in terms of corresponding hypothesis paces  , each of which holds different or further specialized conceptual readings  . 
The quality machine estimates the overall credibility of single concept hypotheses by taking the available set of quality labels for each hypothesis into account  . The final computation of a preference order for the entire set of competing hypotheses takes place in the qualifier  , a terminological classifier extended by an evaluation metric for quality-based selection criteria  . The output of the quality machine is a ranked list of concept hypotheses  . The ranking yields , in decreasing order of significance , either the most plausible concept classes which classify the considered instance or more general concept classes subsuming the considered concept class  ( cf . Schnattinger and Hahn (1998) for details) . 
2 Methodological Framework
In this section , we present hemajor methodological decisions underlying our approach  . 
2.1 Terminological Logics
We use a standard terminological , KL-ONE-style concept description language , here referred to as C : D ? ( for a survey of this paradigm , cf . 
Woods and Schmolze (1992)) . It has several constructors combining atomic concepts  , roles and individuals to define the terminological theory of a domain  . Concepts are unary predicates , roles are binary predicates over a domain A , with individuals being the elements of A . We assume a common set-theoretical semantics for C7  ) ?- an interpretation Z is a function that assigns to each concept symbol  ( the set A ) a subset of the domain A , Z:A-+2n , to each role symbol ( the set P ) a binary relation of A , Z:P--+2~?n , and to each individual symbol ( the set I ) an element of A , Z : I - - + A . 
Concept terms and role terms are defined inductively  . Table 1 contains some constructors and their semantics , where C and D denote concept terms , while R and S denote roles . R z ( d ) represents the set of role fillers of the individuald  , i . e . , the set of individuals e with ( d , e ) ER z . 
By means of terminological xioms ( for a subset , see Table 2 ) a symbolic name can be introduced for each concept to which are assigned necessary and sufficient constraints using the definitional operator '" =  . A finite set of such axioms is called the terminology or TBox  . Concepts and roles are associated with concrete individuals by assertional axioms  ( see Table 2 ; a , b denote individuals ) . A finite set of such axioms is called the world description or ABox  . An interpretation Z is a model of an A Box with regard to a TBox  , iffZ satisfies the assertional and terminological xioms  . 
Considering , e . g . , a phrase such as ' The switch of the Itoh-Ci-8 . .' , a straightforward translation into corresponding terminological concept descriptions i illustrated by:  ( el ) switch . 1: SWITCH(P2) I toh-Ci-8HAS-SWITCH switch . 1  ( P3 ) HAS-SWITCH-- ( OuTPUTDEVLJINPUTDEVUIHAS-PARTISwITCH
STORAGEDEV t3 COMPUTER)
Assertion P1 indicates that the instances witch . 1 belongs to the concept class SWITCH . 
P2 relates I to h-Ci-8 and switch . 1 via the relation HAS-SWITCH . The relation HAS-SWITCH is defined , finally , as the set of all HAS-PART relations which have their domain restricted to the disjunction of the concepts OUTPUTDEV  , 
INPUTDEV , STORAGEDEV or COMPUTER and their range restricted to SWITCH  . 
In order to represent and reason about concept hypotheses we have to properly extend the formalism of C~?  . Terminological hypotheses , in our framework , are characterized by the following properties : for all stipulated hypotheses  ( 1 ) the same domain A holds , (2) the same concept definitions are used , and ( 3 ) only different assertional axioms can be established  . These conditions are sufficient , becaus each hypothesis is based on a unique discourse entity  ( cf . 
(1)) , which can be directly mapped to associated instances  ( so concept definitions are stable ( 2 ) ) . Only relations ( including the ISA-relation ) among the instances may be different ( 3 )  . 

Axiom Semantics ( a:C ) hazECzn(aRb)h(az , bz ) ER zh
Table 3: Axioms in CDf .. hvp ?
Given these constraints , we may annotate each assertional axiom of the form ' a : C ' and ' aRb ' by a corresponding hypothesis label h so that  ( a:C ) hand ( aRb ) h are valid terminological expressions . The extended terminological language ( cf . Table 3) will be called CD ?~ y~? . 
Its semantics is given by a special interpretation function Zh for each hypothesis h  , which is applied to each concept and role symbol in the canonical way : Zh : A--+  2zx   ; Zh : P--+2 AxA . 
Notice that the instances a , bare interpreted by the interpretation function Z  , because there exists only one domain ? x . Only the interpretation of the concept symbol C and the role symbol R may be different in each hypothesis h  . 
Assume that we want to represent two of the four concept hypotheses that can be derived from  ( P3 )  , viz . I to h-Ci-S considered as a storage device or an output device  . The corresponding
A Box expressions are then given by: ( I to h-Ci-8HAS-SWITCH switch . 1) h ,   ( Itoh-Ci-8: STORAGE DEV ) h1 ( I to h-Ci-8HAS-SWITCH switch . 1 ) h2 ( I to h-Ci-8: OUTPUTDEV ) h ~ The semantics associated with this A Box fi ' agment has the following form : ~ h  , ( HAS-SWITCH ) -" ( I to h-Ci-8 , switch . l),
Zhx(STORAGEDEV ) mItoh-Ci-8,
Zha(OuTPUTDEV)"-0
Zh ~( HAS-SWITCH ): ( I to h-Ci-8, switch.l),
Zh2(STORAGEDEV ) = 0, : ~ h . .(OUTPUTDEV ) :  Itoh-Ci-8 2 . 2 Hypothesis Generation Rules As mentioned above , text parsing and concept acquisition from texts are tightly coupled  . 
Whenever , e . g . , two nominals or a nominal and a verb are supposed to be syntactically related in the regular parsing mode  , the semantic interpreter simultaneously evaluates the conceptual compatibility of the items involved  . Since these reasoning processes are fully embedded in a terminological representation system  , checks are made as to whether a concept denoted by one of these objects is allowed to fill a role of the other one  . If one of the items involved is unknown , i . e . , a lexical and conceptual gap is encountered , this interpretation mode generates initial concept hypotheses about the class membership of the unknown object  , and , as a consequence of inheritance mechanisms holding for concept taxonomies  , provides conceptual role information for the unknown item  . 
Given the structural foundations of terminological theories  , two dimensions of conceptual learning can be distinguished -- the taxonomic one by which new concepts are located in conceptual hierarchies  , and the aggregation alone by which concepts are supplied with clusters of conceptual relations  ( these will be used subsequently by the terminological cassifier to determine the current position of the item to be learned in the taxonomy  )  . In the following , let target . conbean unknown concept denoted by the corresponding lexical item tar-get  . lex , base . conbea given knowledge base concept denoted by the corresponding lexical item base  . lex , and let target . lex and base . lexbe related by some dependency relation . Furthermore , in the hypothesis generation rules below variables are indicated by names with leading ' ?'  ; the operator TELL is used to initiate the creation of assertional axioms in  C7  ) ? hyp ? . 
Typical linguistic indicators that can be exploited for taxonomic integration are appositions  ( ' . . the printer @ A @ . . '), exemplification phrases (' . . printers like the @ A @ . . ') or nominal compounds ( ' . . the @ A @ printer . . 1 . These constructions almost unequivocally determine '@ A@'  ( target . lex ) when considered as a proper name 1to denote an instance of a PRINTER ( tar-get . con ) , given its characteristic dependency relation to ' printer '  ( base . lex ) , the conceptual correlate of which is the concept class PRINTER  ( base . con ) . This conclusion is justified independent of conceptual conditions  , simply due to the nature of these linguistic constructions  . 
The generation of corresponding concept hypotheses i achieved by the rule sub-hypo  ( Table 4 )  . Basically , the type of target . con is carried over from base . con ( function type-of ) . In addition , the syntactic label is asserted which characterizes the grammatical construction figuring as the structural source for that particular  hy-1Such a part-of-speech ypothesis can be derived from the inventory of valence and word order specifications underlying the dependency grammar model we use  ( BrSker et al ,  1994) . 
478 sub-hypo ( target . con , base . con , h , label ) ? type := type-of(base . con)
TELL ( target . con : ? type ) hadd-label((target . con : ? type ) h , label ) Table 4: Taxonomic Hypothesis Generation Rule pothesis ( h denotes the identifier for the selected hypothesis pace  )  , e . g . , APPOSITION , EXEMPLI-
FICATION , or NCOMPOUND.
The aggregational dimension of terminological theories is addressed  , e . g . , by grammatical constructions causing case frame assignments  . 
In the example ' . . @ B @ is equipped with 32 MB of RAM . .' , role filler constraints of the verb form ' equipped ' that relate to its PATIENT role carry over to '@ B ~' '  . After subsequent semantic interpretation of the entire verbal complex  , '@ B @' may be anything that can be equipped with memory  . Constructions like prepositional phrases (' . . @ C @ from IBM . . ') or genitives (' . .
IBM's@C@ . . ~ in which either target . lexorbase . lexoccur as head or modifier have a similar effect  . Attachments of prepositional phrases or relations among nouns in genitives  , however , open a wider interpretation space for '@ C~' than for '@ B~'  , since verbal case frames provide a higher role selectivity than PP attachments or  , even more so , genitive NPs . So , any concept that can reasonably be related to the concept IBM will be considered a potential hypothesis for '@ C~-"  , e . g . , its departments , products , Fortune 500 ranking . 
Generalizing from these considerations , we state a second hypothesis generation rule which accounts for aggregational patterns of concept learning  . The basic assumption behind this rule , perm-hypo(cf . Table 5), is that target . confills ( exactly ) one of then roles of base . conit is currently permitted to fill ( this set is determined by the function porto-f iller  )   . Depending on the actual linguistic construction one encounters  , it may occur , in particular for PP and NP constructions , that one cannot decide on the correct role yet . Consequently , several alternative hypothesis paces are opened and target  . co ~ is assigned as a potential filler of the ith role  ( taken from ? role Set , the set of admitted roles ) in its corresponding hypothesis space . As a result , the classifier is able to derive a suitable concept hypothesis by specializing target  . con according to the value restriction of base . con'sith role . The function member-of ? roleSet := perm-fille r  ( target . con , base . con , h ) ? r :=\ [? roleSetI
FORALL ? i := ? rDOWNTO1DO ? role l := member-of ( ? role Set ) ? roleSet := ? roleSet\?rolei
IF ? i=1
THEN ? hypo := h
ELSE ? hypo:=gen-hypo(h)
TELL ( base . con ? role i target . con ) ? hypo add-label((base . con ? role i target . con ) ? hypo , label ) Table 5: Aggregational Hypothesis Generation Rule selects a role from the set ? role Set  ; gen-hypo creates a new hypothesis space by asserting the given axioms of hand outputs its identifier  . There upon , the hypothesis pace identified by ? hypo is augmented through a TELL operation by the hypothesized assertion  . As for sub-hypo , perm-hypo assigns a syntactic quality label ( function add-label ) to each it h hypothesis indicating the type of syntactic construction in which target  . lex and base . lex are related in the text , e . g . , CASEFRAME , PPAT-
TACH or GENITIVENP.
Getting back to our example , let us assume that the target Itoh-Ci-8 is predicted already as a PRODUCT as a resulto f preceding interpreta-tion processes  , i . e . , I to h-Ci-8: PRODUCT holds . 
Let PRODUCT be defined as:
PRODUCT--
VHAS-PART . PHYSICAL OBJE CTI1 VHAS-SIZE . SIZE\["1 VHAS-PRICE . PRICE i-IVH AS-WEIGHT . WEIGHT At this level of conceptual restriction , four roles have to be considered for relating the target  Itoh-Ci-8 - asatentative PRODUCT-to the base concept SWITCH when interpreting the phrase ' The switch of the  Itoh-Ci-8   . . ' . Three of them , HAS-SIZE , HAS-PRICE , and HAS-WEIGHT , are ruled out due to the violation of a simple integrity constraint  ( ' switch ' does not denote a measure unit )  . Therefore , only the role HAS-PART must be considered in terms of the expression  Itoh-Ci-8 HAS-PART switch . 1(or , equivalently , switch . 1 PARTOFI to h-Ci-8) . Due to the definition of HAS-SWITCH(cf . P3, Subsection 2 . 1) , the instantiation of HAS-PART is specialized to HAS-SWITCH by the classifier  , since the range of the HAS-PART relation is already restricted to SWITCH  ( P1 )  . Since the classifier aggressively pushes hypothesizing to be maximally specific  , the disjunctive concept referred to in is split into four distinct hypotheses  , two of which are sketched below . Hence , we assume Itoh-Ci-8 to deuote either a STORAGEDE vice or an OUTPUTDE vice or an INPUTDE vice or a COMPUTER  ( note that we also include parts of the ISA hierarchy in the example below  )  . 
( I to h-Ci-8: STORAGEDEV ) h , , ( Itoh-Ci-8 : DEVICE)h ~ ,  . ., ( Itoh-C i-8 HAS-SWITCH switch . 1) h~(I to h-Ci-8:OUTPUTDEv)h ~ , ( Itoh-Ci-8: DEVICE ) h2 ,  . ., ( Itoh-Ci-8 HAS-SWITCH swilch . 1)h~, . . . 
2.3 Hypothesis Annotation Rules
In this section , we will focus on the quality assessment of concept hypotheses which occurs at the knowledge base level only  ; it is due to the operation of hypothesis annotation rules which continuously evaluate the hypotheses that have been derived from linguistic evidence  . 
The M-Deduction rule ( see Table 6 ) is triggered for any repetitive assignment of the same role filler to one specific conceptual relation that occurs in different hypothesis paces  . This rule captures the assu , np tion that a role filler which has been multiply derived at different occasions must be granted more strength than one which has been derived at a single occasion only  . 
EXISTSOl , O2, R , hl , h ~ . : ( OlRo2) hlA(OlRo2)h ~ A hi~h ~
TELL ( olRo ~_) h ~: M-DEDUCTION
Table 6: The Rule M-Deduction
Considering our example at the end of subsection 2 . 2, for ' I to h-Ci-8' the concept hypotheses
STORAGEDEV and OUTPUTDEV were derived independently of each other in different hypothesis spaces  . Hence , DEVICE as their common superconcept has been multiply derived by the classifier in each of these spaces as a result of transitive closure computations  , too . Accordingly , this hypothesis is assigned a high degree of confidence by the classifier which derives the conceptual quality label M-DEDUCTION :  ( Itoh-Ci-8: DEVICE ) hiA ( Itoh-Ci-8: DEVICE ) h ~= := > ( Itoh-Ci-8: DEVICE ) hi:M-DEDUCTION The C-Support rule ( see Table 7 ) is triggered whenever , within the same hypothesis pace , a hypothetical relation , RI , between two instances can be justified by another elation  , R2 , involving the same two instances , but where the role fillers occur in ' inverted ' order  (   R1 and R2 need not necessarily be semantically inverse relations  , as with ' buy ' and ' sell ~ . This causes the generation of the quality label C -SuPPORT which captures the inherent symmetry between concepts related via quasi-inverse relations  . 
EXISTSO l ,  02 , R1 , R2 , h : ( olR1 o2) h^(02R2ol)h^ftl#R~~+=~
TELL ( OlR1 o2) h:C-SuPPORT
Table 7: The Rule C-Support
Example: ( Itoh SELL Sltoh-Ci-8 ) hA ( I to h-Ci-8DEV ELOPED-BYI to h ) h ( ltoh SELL Sltoh-Ci-8 ) h:C-SuPPORT Whenever an already filled conceptual relation receives an additional  , yet different role filler in the same hypothesis pace  , the Add-Filler rule is triggered ( see Table 8) . This application-specific rule is particularly suited to our natural language understanding task and has its roots in the distinction between mandatory and optio  , lalcase roles for ( ACTION ) verbs . 
Roughly , it yields a negative assessment in terms of the quality label ADDFILLER for any attempt to fill the same mandatory case role more than once  ( unless coordinations are involved )  . Iu contra distinction , when the same role of a non-ACTION concept ( typically denoted by nouns ) is multiply filled we assign the positive quality label SUPPORT  , since it reflects the conceptual proximity a relation induces on its component fillers  , provided that they share a common , non-ACTION concept class . 
EXISTS01 , 02 ,  03 , R , h: ( 01 R0 2 ) hA ( 01 R03 ) hA ( 01: ACTION ) h === V
ITELL (01 Ro ~_) h:ADD FILLER
Table 8: The Rule Add Filler
We give examples both for the assignmeut of an ADDFILLER as well as for a SUPPORT label : 
Examples : ( produces . 1: ACTION ) hA ( produces . 1 AGENT l to h ) hA ( produces . 1 AGENTIBM ) h(produces . 1 AGENTI to h ) h : ADDFILLER ( ltoh-Ci-8: PRINTER ) hA ( I to h-Ct : PRINTER ) hA ( Itoh SELLSI to h-Ci-8 ) hA ( I to h SELLSI to h-C t ) hA ( ltoh:-~AcTION ) h ( Itoh-Ci-8: PRINTER ) h:SUPPORT The criteria from which concept hypotheses are derived differ in the dimension from which they are drawn  ( grammatical vs . conceptual evidence ) , as well as the strength by which they lend support to the corresponding hypotheses  ( e . g . , apposition vs . genitive , multiple deduction vs . additional role filling , etc . ) . In order to make these distinctions explicit we have developed a " quality calculus " at the core of which lie the definition of and inference rules for quality labels  ( cf . Schnattinger and Hahn (1998) for more details ) . A design methodology for specific quality calculi may proceed along the following lines :  ( 1 ) Define the dimensions from which quality labels can be drawn  . In our application , we chose the set I:Q := ll ,   .   .   .   , Ira of linguistic quality labels and CQ := cl ,   .   .   . , c~of conceptual quality labels .   ( 2 ) Determine a partial ordering p among the quality labels from one dimension reflecting different degrees of strength among the quality labels  .   ( 3 ) Determine a total ordering among the dimensions . 
In our application , we have empirical evidence to grant linguistic criteria priority over conceptual ones  . Hence , we state the following constraint : VlELQ , VcECQ : l > p c The dimension I : Q . Linguistic quality labels reflect structural properties of phrasal patterns or discourse contexts in which unknown lexical items occur  2 -- we here assume that the type of grammatical construction exercises a particular interpretative force on the unknown item and  , at the same time , yields a particular level of credibility for the hypotheses being derived  . Taking the considerations from Subsection 2 . 2 into account , concrete xamples of high-quality labels are given by APPOSITION or NCOMPOUND labels  . Still of good quality but already less constraining are occurrences of the unknown item in a CASE FRAME construction  . 
Finally , in a PPATTACH or GENITIVENP construction the unknown lexical item is still less constrained  . Hence , at the quality level , these latter two labels ( just as the first two labels we considered ) form an equivalence class whose elements cannot be further discriminated  . So we end up with the following quality orderings  :   2In the future , we intend to integrate additional types of constraints  , e . g . , quality criteria reflecting the degree of completeness v  . partiality of the parse . 
NCOMPOUND----pAPPOSITION
NCOMPOUND>p CASE FRAME
APPOSITION > pCASE FRAME
CASEFRAME > pGENITIVENP
CASEFRAME > pPPATTACH
GENITIVENP = pPPATTACH
The dimension CQ . Conceptual quality labels result from comparing the conceptual representation structures of a concept hypothesis with already existing representation structures in the underlying domain knowledge base or other concept hypotheses from the viewpoint of structural similarity  , compatibility , etc . The closer the match , the more credit is lent to a hypothesis . A very positive conceptual quality label , e . g . , is M-DEDUCTION , whereas ADDFILLER is a negative one . Still positive strength is expressed by SUPPORT or C-SuPPORT  , both being indistinguishable , however , from a quality point of view . Accordingly , we may state:
M-DEDUCTION > p SUPPORT~-DEDUCTION > pC-SuPPORT
SUPPORT--pC-SuPPORT
SUPPORT > pADDFILLEK
C-SuPPORT > pADDFILLER 2 . 5 Hypothesis Rank ing Each new clue available for a target concept o be learned results in the generation of additional linguistic or conceptual quality labels  . So hypothesis paces get incrementally augmented by quality statements  . In order to select the most credible one ( s ) among them we apply a two-step procedure ( the details of which are explained in Schnattinger and Hahn  ( 1998 ) ) . First , those concept hypotheses are chosen which have accumulated the greatest amount of high-quality labels according to the linguistic dimension ?: Q  . 
Second , further hypotheses are selected from this linguistically plausible candidate set based on the quality ordering underlying CQ  . 
We have also made considerable fforts to evaluate the performance of the text learner based on the quality calculus  . In order to account for the incrementality of the learning process  , a new evaluation measure capturing the system's online learning accuracy was defined  , which is sensitive to taxonomic hierarchies . The results we got were consistently favorable , as our system outperformed those closest in spirit  , CAMILLE ( Hastings , 1996) and ScIsoR ( Rauetder of 8% . Also , the system requires relatively few hypothesis paces  ( 2 to 6 on average ) and prunes the concept search space radically , requiring only a few examples ( for evaluation details , cf . Hahn and Schnattinger (1998)) . 
3 Related Work
We are not concerned with lexical acquisition from very large corpora using surface-level collocational data as proposed by Zernik and Jacobs  ( 1990 ) and Velardi et al ( 1991 )  , or with hyponym extraction based on entirely syntactic criteria as in Hearst  ( 1992 ) or lexicosemantic associations ( e . g . , Resnik (1992) or Sekine et al (1994)) . This is mainly due to the fact that these studies aim at a shallower level of learning  ( e . g . , selectional restrictions or thematic relations of verbs  )  , while our focus is on much more finegrained conceptual knowledge  ( roles , role filler constraints , integrity conditions ) . 
Our approach bears a close relationship , however , to the work of Mooney (1987) , Berwick (1989) , Rau et al (1989) , Gomez and Segami (1990) , and Hastings (1996) , who all aim at the automated learning of word meanings from context using a knowledge-intensive approach  . But our work differs from theirs in that the need to cope with several competing concept hypotheses and to aim at a reason-based selection in terms of the quality of arguments i not an issue in these studies  . Learning from realworld texts usually provides the learner with only sparse and fragmentary evidence  , such that multiple hypotheses are likely to be derived and a need for a hypothesis evaluation arises  . 
4 Conclusion
We have introduced a solution for the semantic acquisition problem on the basis of the automatic processing of expository texts  . The learning methodology we propose is based on the incremental assignment and evaluation of the quality of linguistic and conceptual evidence for emerging concept hypotheses  . No specialized learning algorithm is needed , since learning is a reasoning task carried out by the classifier of a terminological reasoning system  . However , strong heuristic guidance for selecting between plausible hypotheses comes from linguistic and conceptual quality criteria  . 
Acknowledgements . We would like to thank our colleagues in the CLIF group for fruitful discussions  , in particular Joe Bush who polished the text as a native speaker  . K . Schnatting er is supported by a grant from DFG ( Ha 2097/3-1 )  . 
References
R . Berwick .  1989 . Learning word meanings from examples . In D . Waltz , editor , Semantic Structures . , pages 89-124 . Lawrence Erlbaum . 
N . BrSker , U . Hahn , and S . Schacht . 1994.
Concurrent lexicalize dependency parsing : the PARSETALK model  . In Proc . of the COLING'94 . 
Vol . I , pages 379-385.
F . Gomez and C . Segami .  1990 . Knowledge acquisition from natural anguage for expert systems based on classification problem -solving methods  . 
Knowledge Acquisition , 2(2):107-128.
U . Hahn and K . Schnattinger .  1998 . Towards text knowledgengineering . In Proc . of the AAAI '98 . 
P . Hastings .  1996 . Implications of an automatic lexical acquisition system  . In S . Wermter , E . Riloff , and G . Scheler , editors , Connectionist , Statistical and Symbolic Approaches to Learning for Natural Language Processing  , pages 261-274 . Springer . 
M . Hearst .  1992 . Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text corpora  . In Proc . of the
COLING'92. Vol.2, pages 539-545.
D . Hindle .  1989 . Acquiring disambiguation rules from text . In Proc . of the ACL'89, pages 26-29 . 
C . Manning .  1993 . Automatic acquisition of large subcategorization dictionary from corpora  . In
Proc . of the ACL'93, pages 235-242.
R . Mooney .  1987 . Integrated learning of words and their underlying concepts  . In Proe . of the
CogSci'87, pages 974-978.
L . Rau , P . Jacobs , and U . Zernik .  1989 . Information extraction and text summarization using linguistic knowledge acquisition  . Information Processing
Management , 25(4):419-428.
P . Resnik .  1992 . A classbased approach to lexical discovery . In Proe . of the ACL'92, pages 327-329 . 
K . Schnattinger and U . Hahn .  1998 . Quality-based learning . In Proc . of the ECAI'98, pages 160-164 . 
S . Sekine , J . Carroll , S . Ananiadou , and J . Tsujii . 
1994 . Automatic learning for semanticolloca-tion . In Proc . of the ANLP'94, pages 104-110 . 
P . Velardi , M . Pazienza , and M . Fasolo .  1991 . 
How to encode semantic knowledge : a method for meaning representation ad computer-aided acquisition  . Computational Linguistics , 17:153-170 . 
W . Woods and J . Schmolze .  1992 . The KL-ONE family . Computers ~ Mathematics with Applications ,  23(2/5):133-177 . 
U . Zernik and P . Jacobs .  1990 . Tagging for learning : collecting thematic relations from corpus  . In Proc . of the COLING'90 . Vol . 1, pages 3439 . 

