Definiteness Predictions for Japanese Noun Phrases * 
Julia E . Heine
Computer linguistik
Universit ~ it des Saarlandes
66041 Saarbriicken


Abstract
One of the major problems when translating from Japanese into a European language such as German or English is to determine definiteness of noun phrases in order to choose the correct determiner in the target language  . Even though in Japanese , noun phrase reference is said to depend in large parts on the discourse context  , we show that in many cases there also exist linguistic markers for definiteness  . We use these to build a rule hierarchy that predicts  79  , 5% of the articles with an accuracy of 98 , 9% from syntactic-semantic properties alone , yielding an efficient preprocessing tool for the computationally expensive context checking  . 
1 Introduction
One of the major problems when translating from Japanese into a European language such as German or English is the insertion of articles  . 
Both German and English distinguish between the definite and indefinite article  , the former , in general , indicating some degree of familiarity with the referent  , the latter referring to something new . Thus by using a definite article , the speaker expects the hearer to be able to identify the object he is talking about  , whilst with the use of an indefinite article , a new referent is introduced into the discourse context  ( Heim ,  1982) . 
In contrast , the reference of Japanese noun phrases depends in large parts on the discourse " I would like to thank my colleagues Johan Bos  , Bj SrnGambiick , Yoshiki Mori , Michael Paul , Manfred Pinkal , C . J . Rupp , Atsuko Shimada , Kristina Striegnitz and Karsten Worm for their valuable comments and support  . 
This research was supported by the German Ministry of Education  , Science , Research and Technology ( BMBF ) within the Verbmobil framework under grant no . 01 IV 701R 4 . 
context , taking a previous mention of an object and all properties that can be inferred from it  , as well as world knowledge as indicators for definite reference  . Any noun phrase whose referent cannot be recovered from the discourse context will in turn be taken as indefinite  . However , noun phrases can also be explicitly marked for definiteness  , forcing an interpretation of the referent independent of the discourse context  . In this way , it is possible to trigger accommodation of previously unknown specific referents  , or to get an indefinite reading even if an object of the same type has already been introduced  . 
For machine translation , it is important of inda systematic way of extracting the syntactic and semantic information responsible for marking the reference of noun phrases  , in order to correctly choose the articles to be used in the target language  . 
For this paper , we propose a rule hierarchy for this purpose , that can be used as a preprocessing tool to context checking  . All noun phrases marked for definiteness in any way are assigned their referential property  , leaving the others underspecified . 
After giving a short outline of related work in the next section  , we will introduce our rule hierarchy in section 3 . The resulting algorithm will be evaluated in section  4  , and in section 5 we will address implementational issues . Finally , in section 6 we give a conclusion . 
2 Related Work
The problem of article selection when translating from Japanese into any language requiring the use of articles has only been addressed systematically by a few authors  . 
( Murata and Nagao ,  1993 ) define a heuristic rule base for definiteness assignment  , consisting of 86 weighted rules . These rules use surface in-tial property of each noun  . During processing , each applicable rule assigns confidence weights to the three possible referential properties ' definite '  , ' indefinite ' and ' generic ' . These values are added up for each property , and the one with the highest score will be assigned to the noun in question  . If no rule applies , the default value is ' indefinite ' . This approach assigns the correct value in 85 , 5% of the cases when used with the training data , and 68 , 9% with unseen data . 
( Bond et al ,  1995 ) show how the percentage of noun phrases generated with correct use of articles and number in a Japanese to English machine translation system can be increased by applying heuristic rules to distinguish between ' generic '  , ' referential ' and ' a scriptive ' uses of noun phrases  . These rules are ordered in a hierarchical manner , with later rules over ruling earlier ones . In addition , for each noun phrase use there are specific rules  , based on linguistic information , that assign definiteness to the noun phrases . Overall , in their system , insertion of the correct article can be improved by  12% yielding a correctness level of 77%  . 
In contrast to these approaches relying on monolingual indicators alone  , ( Siegel ,  1996 ) proposes to assign definiteness during the transfer process  . In a first stage , all lexically defined definiteness attributes are assigned  . To all cases not covered by this , a set of preference rules is applied , if their translation equivalent in the target language is a noun  . In addition to linguistic indicators from both the source and target language  , the rules also take a stack of referents mentioned previously in the discourse into account  . This combined approach is very successful , assigning the correct definiteness attributes to 98% of all relevant noun phrases in the training data . 
In the approach described in the next section , we have taken up the idea of using both linguistic and contextual information for the assignment of definiteness attributes to Japanese noun phrases  . However , instead of using merely a rule base , we propose a monotone algorithm based on a linguistic rule hierarchy followed by a context checking mechanism  . 
3 The Rule Hierarchy
The rule hierarchy we introduce in this paper has been devised from a systematic survey of some data from a Japanese corpus consisting of appointment scheduling  dialogues3 Since dialogues in this domain tend to be short , on average consisting of just 14 utterances , most definite references have to be introduced by way of accommodation rather than referring back to the discourse context  . Moreover , references to events have a particular tendency to be nonspecific  , i . e . stating their existence rather than explicating their identity  . Non-specific references are by definition indefinite  , whether the referent has been previously introduced to the context or not  . 
Neither accommodation nor nonspecific reference can be realized without linguistic indicators  , since they would otherwise interfere with the context-based distinction between definite and indefinite reference within a discourse  . 
The appointment scheduling domain is therefore ideal for a case study aimed at extracting linguistic indicators for definiteness  . 
3.1 Overview
Explicit marking for definiteness takes place on several syntactic levels  , namely on the noun itself , within the noun phrase , through counting expressions , or on the sentence level . For each of these syntactic levels , a set of rules can be defined by generalizing over the linguistic indicators that are responsible for the definiteness attributes carried by the noun phrases in the corpus  . Each of these rules consists of one or more preconditions  , and a consequent that assigns the associated e finiteness attribute to the respective noun phrase when the preconditions are met  . 
As it turns out , none of the rules defined on the same syntactic level interfere with each other  , since they either assign the same value , or their preconditions cannot possibly be met at the same time  . Thus the rules can be grouped together into classes corresponding to the four  1In this survey , all the noun phrases from 10 dialogues were analyzed in detail , determining the regularities that led to definiteness predictions  . These were then formulated into a set of rules and arranged in a hierarchical manner to rule out wrong predictions  . A more detailed description of the methods used and a full list of the rules can be found in  ( Heine ,  1997) . 
520 syntactic levels they are defined on . There is a clear hierachy between the four classes  , with all rules of one class given priority over all rules on a lower level  , as shown in figure 1 . Note that even though the rule classes are defined in terms of syntactic levels  , the sequence of rule classes in our hierarchy does not correspond in any way to syntactic structure  . 
nominal phrase noun rules otherwise I clausal rules I otherwise I 
NP rules I otherwise I counting expressions otherwise definiteness attribute definiteness attribute definiteness attribute definiteness 
Dattribute context checking definite default value 
D in definite
Figure 1: Definiteness Algorithm 3 . 2 Noun rules On the noun level , the lexical properties of the noun or one of its direct modifiers can determine the reference of the noun in question  . 
There are a number of nouns , that can be marked as definite on their lexical properties alone  , either because they refer to a unique referent in the universe of discourse  , or because they carry some sort of indexical implications  . 
The referent is thus described uniquely with respect to some implicitly mentioned context  . 
For example , there exist a number of nouns that implicitly relate the referent with either the hearer or the speaker  , depending on the presence or absence of honorifics  2  , respectively . In the appointment scheduling domain , the most frequently used words of this class are ( go ) yotei ( your / my schedule )  ,   ( o ) kangae ( your / my opinion ) and ( go ) tsugoo ( for you/me )  . 
Indexical time expressions like konshuu ( this week ) or raigatsu ( next month ) refer to a specific period of time that stands in a certain relation to the time of utterance  . Even though they do not necessarily have to stand with an article in the target language  , the reference is still definite , as in the following example : ( 1 ) raishuu desu ne next week to be isn't it ' That is  ( the ) next week , isn't it ? ' The interpretation of a modified noun is typically restricted to a specific referent by the modification  , thus making it definite in reference . 
Restrictive modifiers of this type are , for example , specifiers like demonstratives and possessives , as well as time expressions and attributive relative clauses  , as shown in the following examples . 
(2 ) took a no shuu desutenth GEN week to be ' That is the week of the tenth  .  '  ( 3 ) nijuurokuni chikara hajimarut wenty sixth from to begins huuwaika gades hook a week TOPIC how to be QUESTION  2In Japanese , there are two honorific prefixes , go and o , that can be used to politely refer to things related to the hearer  . However , there are no such prefixes to humbly refer to things relating to one self  . 
5 21 ' How is the week beginning the 26th ?' However , indefinite pronouns , as for example hoka ( another ) , also fall into the category of modifiers , but explicitly assign in definite reference to the noun they modify  . These are usually used to introduce a new referent into a context already containing one or more referents of the same type  . 
(4 ) hokano hierabashite it a daite mo different day choose receive also i in desuga good DISCREL ' Could I ask you to choose a different day ?' At present  , there are nine rules belonging to the noun class , only one of which assigns in definite reference whilst all others assign definite reference to the noun in question  . 
3.3 Clausal rules
On the sentence level , verbs may carry strong preferences for the definiteness of one or more of their arguments  , omewhat in the way of domain specific patterns . Generally , these patterns serve to specify whether a complement to a certain verb is more likely to be definite or indefinite in a semantically unmarked interpretation  . For example , in a sentence like 5 , kaigi gahaitte or imasu corresponds to the pattern ' EVENT gahairu '  ( ' have an EVENT scheduled ' )  , where the scheduled event denoted by EVENT is indefinite for the unmarked reading  . 
(5) kayoobi wa go go sanji made
Tuesday TOPICpm 3 o'clock until kaigi ga haitte or imasu node meeting NOM have scheduled since ' since I have a meeting scheduled until  3 pm on Tuesday ' On the other hand , in sentence 6 , kaigigaowarimasu is an instance of the pattern ' EVENT gaowaru '  ( ' the EVENT will end ' )  , where , in the unmarked reading , the event that ends is presupposed to be a specific entity  , whether it is previously known or not . 
(6 ) juunijini kaigiga 12 o'clock at meeting NO Mowarim as unode to end since ' since the meeting will end at  12 o'clock ' The object of an existential question or a negation is by default indefinite  , since these sentence types usually indicate the ( non ) existence of the noun in question . Thus , for example , in the two sentence patterns'x waari masuka ' ( ' Is the rean x ?' ) and ' xwaarimasen ' ( ' There is no x . ') the object instantiating x is indefinite , unless marked otherwise . 
In addition to these sentence patterns , there are a number of nouns that can be followed by the copula suru to form a light verb construction  . These constructions usually come without a particle and are treated as compound verbs  , as for example uchia wase suru (' to arrange ') . 
However , these nouns can also occur with the particle o , as in uchia waseosuru , introducing an ambiguity whether this expression should be treated as a light verb construction or as a normal verb complement structure  . Since this ambiguity can best be resolved at some later point  , the noun should be marked as being indefinite , irrespective of whether it will eventually be generated as a noun or a verb in the target language  . 
(7) raishuui koode next week from .   .   , onward suchia waseos hitai arrangement ACC want to maken desuga 
DISCREL ' I would like to make a narrangement from next week on wards ' To override any of these default values  , the noun will have to be explicitly marked , using any of the markers on the noun level . Thus we take the clausal rules to be between the toplevel noun rules and all other rules further down the hierarchy  . 
From the appointment scheduling domain , eight sentence patterns were extracted , where six assign the default indefinite and two indicate definite reference  . Thus , together with the this class . 
3.4 Noun phrase rules
The postpositional particles that complete a noun phrase in Japanese serve primarily as case markers  , but can also influence the interpretation of the noun with respect to definiteness  . 
However , the definiteness predictions triggered by the use of particles can be fairly weak and are easily overridden by other factors  , thus placing the rules emerging from these patterns near the bottom of the hierarchy  . 
The main postpositions indicating definite reference are the topicalization particle wain its noncontrastive uses  , the boundary markers kara ( from ) and made ( to ) and the genitive marker no , especially in conjunction with hoo(side ) , as indicated by the following examples . 
( s ) chotto i doonojik an unfortunately transfer GEN time gator enaiyoo desune 
NOM take not DISCREL ' Unfortunately , there is no time for the transfer .  '  ( 9 ) genkoonohoomadatochuu manuscriptGEN side not yet ready dankai desu kere domo state to be DISCREL ' The manuscript is not ready yet  . ' All of the four noun phrase rules in the current framework indicate definite reference  . 
3.5 Counting expressions
As it turns out , there is one more level to the rule hierarchy . Even though counting expressions are semantically modifiers  , they do not syntactically modify the noun itself but rather the entire noun phrase  . They do not have to be adjacent o the noun phrase they modify  , since they are marked by a counting suffix indicating the type of objects counted  . 
~ This means , that definite reference is indicated by the main use of the particle wa  , namely as a topic marker , stressing the discourse referent the conversation is about  . 
There is another , contrastive use of wa , which introduces something in contrast o another discourse referent  . Naturally , this use may introduce a related , albeit previously unknown -- and thus indefinite -- referent  . 
(10 ) nijuuhachinic higagog on it went yeighth NOM afternoon in kaigigaikken haitte or imasu meeting ACC one be scheduled ' There is one/a meeting scheduled on the twentyeight h  . ' Semantically , counting expression simply the existence of a certain number of the objects counted  , in the same way that the indefinite article does . These expressions are therefore taken to be indefinite by default  , but can be made definite by any of the other rules  . Counting expressions thus make up a class of their own on the lowest level of the hierarchy  . 
3.6 Underspecified values
As might be expected from the concept of preprocessing  , there will be a number of noun phrases that cannot be assigned a definiteness attribute by any of the rules described above  . 
These will remain underspecified for definiteness until an antecedent can be found for them by the context checking mechanism  , or until they are assigned a default value . 
By introducing a value for underspecification , it is possible to postpone the decision whether a noun phrase should be marked definite or indefinite  , without losing the information that it must be marked eventually  . Since default values are only introduced when a value is still underspecified after the assignment mechanism has finished  , there is no need to ever change a value once it has been assigned  . This means , that the algorithm can work in a strictly monotone manner  , terminating as soon as a value has been found . 
4 Evaluation 4 . 1 Per fo rmance of the a lgor i thm The performance of our framework is best described in terms of recall and precision  , where recall refers to the proportion of all relevant noun phrases that have been assigned a correct definiteness attribute  , whilst precision expresses the percentage of correct assignments among all attributes assigned  . 
The hierarchy was designed as a preprocess to context checking  , extracting all values that can be assigned on linguistic grounds alone  , but leaving all others underspecified . It is therefore correct incorrect precision noun rules clausal rules NP rules count rules total  159   62   53   1   275   99  , 4% 60 53 1 272 2 0 0 3 96 , 8% 100% 100% 98 , 9%
Table 1: Precision of the rules to be expected that its coverage  , i . e . the percentage of noun phrases assigned a value by the hierarchy  , is relatively low . However , since we propose that the decision algorithm should be monotone  , it is vitally important for the precision to be as near to  100% as possible . Any wrong assignments at any stage of the process will inevitably lead to incorrect ranslation results  . 
To evaluate the hierarchy , we tested the performance of our rule base on 20 unseen dialogues from the corpus . All noun phrases in the dialogues were first annotated with their definiteness attributes  , followed by the list of rules with matching preconditions  . As a second step , the rules applicable to each noun phrase were ordered according to their class  , and the prediction of the one highest in the hierarchy was compared with the annotated value  . 
In the test data , there are 346 noun phrases that need assignment of definiteness attributes  .   4 Table 1 shows the number of noun phrase occurrences covered by each rule class  , i . e . the number of times one of the noun phrases was assigned a definiteness attribute by any of the rules from each class  . This value was then further divided into the number of correct and incorrect assignments made  . From this , the precision was calculated , dividing the number of values correctly assigned by the number of values assigned at all  . Overall , with a precision of 98 , 9% , the aim of high accuracy has been achieved . 
Dividing the number of correct assignments by the number of noun phrases that need  assign-4Additionally   , there are 388 time expressions ( i . e . 
dates , times , weekdays and times of day ) that under certain conditions also need an article during generation  . 
However , these were excluded from the statistics , since nearly all of them were found to be trivially definite  , somehow artificially pushing the recall of the rules in the hierarchy up to  88  , 8% . 
ment , we get a recall of 78, 6% . Thus , within the appointment scheduling domain , the hierarchy already accounts for 79 , 5% of all relevant noun phrases , leaving just 20 , 5% for the computationally expensive context checking  . 
Of the 71 noun phrases left underspecified , 40 have definite reference , suggesting ' definite ' as the default value if the hierarchy was to be used as the sole means of assigning definiteness attributes  . This means , that a system integrating this algorithm with an efficient context checking mechanism should have a recall of at least  90%  , since this is what can already be achieved by using a default value  . 
4.2 Comparison to previous approaches
The performance of our framework has been found to be better than both of the heuristic rule based approaches introduced in section  2  , even before context checking . However , our framework was defined and tested on the restrictive domain of appointment scheduling  . 
Most of the really difficult cases for article selection  , as for example generics , do not occur in this domain , whilst both ( Murata and Nagao , 1993) and ( Bond et al ,  1995 ) build their theories around the problem of identifying these  . 
There are no statistics on the performance of their systems on a corpus that does not contain any generics  . 
The transfer-based approach of ( Siegel ,  1996 ) also covers data from the appointment scheduling domain  , using both linguistic and contextual information for assigning defininteness  . However , her results can still not be compared with our approach  , since we do not have any figures on how high the recall of our algorithm is with context checking in place  . In addition , the performance data given for our hierarchy was derived from unseen data rather than the data that were used to draw up the rules  , as in
Siegel's case.

Even though no direct comparison is possible because of the differentest methods and data sets used  , we have been able to show that an approach using a monotone rule hierarchy that can be easily integrated with a context checking mechansim leads to very good results  . 
5 Implementation
The current framework has been designed as part of the dialogue and discourse processing component of the Verb mobil machine translation system  , a largescale research project in the area of spontaneous speech dialogue translation between German  , English and Japanese ( Wahlster ,  1997) . Within the modular system architecture , the dialogue and discourse processing is situated inbetween the components for semantic construction  ( Gamb~ck et al . , 1996 ) and semantic-based transfer ( Dorna and Emele ,  1996) . It uses context knowledge to resolve semantic representations possibly underspecified with respect osyntactic or semantic ambiguities  . 
At this stage , all the information eeded for definiteness assignment is easily accessible  , enabling the rules in our hierarchy to be implemented one-to-one as simple implications  . Since all information is accessible at all times , the application of the rules can be ordered according to the hierarchy  . Only if none of the rules given in the hierarchy are applicable  , will the context checking process be started . If an antecedent can be found for the relevant noun phrase  , it will be assigned e finite reference , otherwise it is taken to be indefinite . 
The algorithm will terminate as soon as a value has been assigned  , thus ensuring monotonicity and efficiency , as 45% of all noun phrases are already assigned a value by one of the noun rules at the top of the hierarchy  . 
6 Conclusion
In this paper , we have developed an efficient algorithm for the assignment of definiteness attributes to Japanese noun phrases that makes use of syntactic and semantic information  . 
Within the domain of appointment scheduling , the integration of our rule hierarchy reduces the need for computationally expensive context checking to  20  , 5% of all relevant noun phrases , as 79 , 5% are already assigned a value with a precision of  98  , 9% . 
Even though the current framework is to a large extent domain specific  , we believe that it may be easily extended to other domains by adding appropriate rules  . 
References
Francis Bond , Kentaro Ogura , and Tsukasa Kawaoka .  1995 . Noun phrase reference in Japanese-to-English machine translation  . In Sixth International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation  , pages 114 . 
Michael Dorna and Martin C . Emele . 1996.
Semantic-based transfer . In Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Computational
Linguistics , volume 1, pages 316-321,
Kcbenhavn , Denmark . ACL.
Bj SrnGamb ~ ck , Christian Lieske , and Yoshiki Mori .  1996 . Underspecified Japanese semantics in a machine translation system  . In Proceedings of the 11th Pacific Asia Conference on Language , Information and Computation , pages 53-62 , Seoul , Korea . 
Irene Heim .  1982 . The Semantics of Definite and Indefinite Noun Phrases  . Ph . D . thesis,
University of Massachusetts.
Julia E . Heine .  1997 . E in Algorithmus zur Bestimmung der Definithe its wertejapanis-chef Nominal phrasen  . Diplomarbeit , Uni-versit ~ tdes Saarlandes , Saarbrficken . available at : http://www . coli . uni-sb . de /--, heine/arbeit . ps . gz ( in German ) . 
Masaki Murata and Makoto Nagao .  1993 . De-termination of referential property and number of nouns in Japanese sentences for machine translation into English  . In Proceedings of the Figh International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine 
Translation , pages 218-225.
Melanie Siegel .  1996 . Preferences and defaults for definiteness and number in Japanese to German machine translation  . In Byung-Soo Park and Jong-Bok Kim , editors , Selected Papers from the 11th Pacific Asia Conference on Language , Information and Computation . 
Wolfgang Wahlster .  1997 . Verbmobil-Erken-nung , Analyse , Transfer , Generierung und Synthese von Spontans prache . Verbmobil
Report 198, DFKI GmbH . ( in German).

