The Logical Structure of Binding
Ant6nio Branco
DFKI and Univ . of Lisbon
Dep . Inform ~ itica , Fac . Ci~ncias , Campo Grande , 1700 Lisboa , Portugal
Antonio . Branco@di.fc.ul.pt

A log . ical recasting of B . inding Theory is performed as an enhancing step tor the purpose ot its gull and lean declarative implementation  . A new insight on sentential an aptioric processes i presented which may suggestively be c % ptured by the slogan binding conclitions are me effect of phase quantification on the universe of discourse referents  . 

Due to its central role in natural language and its intriguing proper t  . i es , reference and an ap'h or resolution has been a central topic for NLP research  . Given the intensive attention devoted to this subject  ,   . it can however be said that sential anaphor or ocessmg has been quite overlooked  , when compare dio the amount of research effort put in tackling nonsentential anaphoric dependencies  . This tends to be so because there seems to be a more or less implicit assumption that no substantial difference xists between the two ~ cesses  1  . 
ile this may be arguably true for . the heuristics involved in picking out a given antecedent from a list of suitable candidates  , a more s . ubtle point asks . itself to be made when we focus on the syntactic onditions which sentential anaohoric relations comply with  , but from which nonsenfential ones are exempt . 
In theoretical linguistics these grammatical conditions are grouped under the hea  . ding of Binding Theory . . In computational linguistics however , tlaoug . n there have been a few papers directly concerned with meimplementation of this theory  , mainstream research tends t 9 disregard its conceptual , grammatical or practical modularity . When it comes to define algorithm .   . for . setting up the list of suitable candidates from which the antecedent should be chosen  , binding conditions , holding just at the sententia level , are most otten put on a par with any other kind of conditions  , morphological , semantic , pragmatic , etc . ~ which hold for an aptioric relations at both sentential and nonsentential level  . 
The interesting p . oint to be made in this connection is at , it the modularity ot grammatical knowledge is to been sured in a sound reference resolution system  , more attention should be paid to previous attempts of implementing  , Binding Theory . . It would then become ewdent that mis theory , in its current formulation , appears , as , a , piece of formalised grammatical Know Je ~ agewnicn no we vere scapes a full and lean declarative implementation  . 
In fact , implementation efforts concerning Binding Theory 2bring to light what tend to bee E ! ipsed by . 
mainstream clean theoretical formulations ot it . Behindt . he apparent declarative aspect of its definition under the formot a set of binding principles  ( plus definitions of associated concepts , e . g . o-command , o-bound , local IAs entry points into bibliography vd References in Grosz et al  . 
(95) and Botley et al (96).
-' Vd . Chomsky (81) , Correa (88) , lngria et al (89) , Fong (90) , Giorgi et al (90) , Pianesi (91) . 
domain , etc . ) , there is a set of procedures which turn out to be an essential p  . artot the theory : after parsing being completed , ( it in ~ lexation : assign ln . dices to NPs ;   ( ii ) filtering : store the indexed tree it the indexation respects binding principles  , reject otherwise ;   ( iii ) recursion : repeat ( i ) with a new assignment until all possible assignments are exhausted  . 
T . his sort of resistance to declarative encompassing is also ap  . o arent when one consider show Binding The or Z is hani:lled in grammatical theories developed on top ot constraint based formalisms and particularly concerned with computational implement a ' bility  , lille LFG or

As to HPSG , it has passed quite unnoticed that its Binding Theory is the only piece of the grammar fragment not encoded in its own formalism  . In the Appendix of the foundational book ( Pollard and Sag ~9"4 ) ) , where the fragment of grammar developed along tts  700 pp . is encoded in the adopted formalism , Binding Theory_escapes such encoding . Bredenkamp (96) and Backot'en et al . (96) subsequent elaboration on this . is . suejmplied that som . e . k i . 'nd pf essential limitation ot the torm all smmight have been reacnea and that HPSG  . Binding Theory is still waiting to be accommpdate ~ into HPS  . G grammars .   .   .   .   .   . 
Ast Othe UP ~ tormula Uonott ~ lnd mgl neory , it requires the integration of inside-out equations  , a sp6cial purpose extension to the general' declarative fbrmalism  . And even though initial scepticism about their tractabili  . ty was dissipated by Kaplan and Maxwell \[88) , the recent survey , of l ~ acKoten et al (96) repo . rts that no implementeH formalism , and no implemented grammar , is known to handle LFG
Bin . ding Theory ........
In this connection the central aimot the research to Depres  . ented here is to render possible a lean declarative implementation fB in ding Theory in constraint based formalisms without resorting to specific complex mechanisms  . This involves two steps . First , as a sort of enhancing step back , a new account , of Bindinglheory , is setup . Second , by the exhibition ot aft example ~ the new shape of the theory is shown to support full declarative implementation in basic HPSG formalism  . Due to sp . ace constraints , this . paper is mostly concerned with the first , while the latter receives just a rough sketch in last section  , being develope ~ lin future papers . 
1 Preliminaries 1 . 1 The Square of Opposition Recent cross linguistic research  , e . g . Xue , Pollard and Sag (94) and Branco and Marrafa (97) , IL as shown that the binding ability of long -distance renexives  . is not reducible to recursive concatenation of short distance relations  , as it has been assumed in GB accounts , but that it is ruled by a fourth binding principle :  ( 1 ) Principle ZA no-commanded anaphoric pronoun must beo-bound  . 
181  ( 2 ) Z : B : x is bound compatible x is locally free . I contradictory 1 implies 1 contradictory
C : contrary A : x is freex is locally bound This new perspective on long-distance reflexives had an important impact in the whole shape of Binding Theory  . Branco and Marra fanoted still that the four principles can be arranged in a classical Aristoteli  . ans ~ u are at oppositions , as in (2) . This su~zgest shat the Binding Theory may have an unsuspec '  ( td underlying quantificational structure . The present paper aims at snowing that there is such structure and at determining its basic lines  . 
1.2 Phase Quantification
Barwise and Cooper ( 81 ) seminal work gave rise to a uitful research tradition where Generalised Quantiller Theory has been applied to the analysis of naturall and e " " = uag q  . uant ~ fican on . These author suggested that a universal characterisation fNL nominal quantification could be formally given by means of  , formal prop , erties defined in that theory . Th . 'e property to live on was postulated as being the most prominent one ~ admittedly constituting the common specific nature at all nominal quantifiers  . 
L . ater , Loebner ( 87 ) suggested a criterion to ascertain the quantih cat , onal nature at natural language expressions in general  . That is the property that , for a one place second order operator Q expressed by a given exc ~ ression  , there be a corresponding dual operator THls ' duality -"?- based perspective on the essence of natural langua  , , .  , . ~ , equantificau on permitted to extend quann ~fication suorted  19 the determiners all , some . 
can on well beyond the classic cases of nominal q PP  .   . most many , etc . , namely ~ y covering also the realms of tempora ' litv and Doss'ibility  . Moreover , items like still/already ,   , and others ( enough ~ too , scaling adjectives , man)/few , etc . ) though they do not lend themselves tobe straightforwardly analysed in terms of set  . quantification , they can also b . ~arranged in a square of duality . The formalization at the semantics at these aspectua \] items by Loebner led tq the enlarging of the notion at quantin cation through the introduction at the new concept of phase cmantification  . 
He noted that still and alr eacl v express dual sm2 , ,d that they are corners , of a square of , d , uality . Let P be she is a sleep " and - P ' she is a wake ' , durative propositions which are the arzuments of the semanuc operators corresponding to a Tready and still  . Then : ( 3 ) She is already a sleep iff it is not the case that she is still a wake  . 
ALREADYP iff-STILL-P
Further similar tests can be made in order to show that these aspectual items enter the following square of duality :  ( 4 ) inner still negau on . not yet/q , eOU~rOUt~"negauon/dual negau on no longe ) ~' ~---~ ~ already inner neganon In order to ~et a formalization of  ( 4 )  , Loebner noted that alreac ~ ,  . should be taken as convey . in ~ the information that there is a phase of not -P which has sta  ( ted before a given reference time tO and might be IOll OWe Olay at most one phase P which reaches tall tu  . 
This can be displayed in a time axis by means of the diagram in  ( 5 )  . 
(5) tOtO
P-P~p P still Pnot yet PtOtO
P-P~pP no longer P already P
Similar diagrams for the meaning of the other aspectual phase quantitiers at this square of duality are easily intemretable  . Inner negation results in exchanging the positive and the negative semiphases  , while outer negati9nc . oncerns the . decision whether the parameter to tails Into the hrst or the second semiphase  . 
Phase quantifiers in general ( already , scaling a . djectives , etc . )  . were thus characterised as requiring two ingredients :  ( i ) a property P , which defines a positive phase in a sequence of two opposi\[ephases  ; ( ii ) ap . a rameter point . The four types at quantifiers just ~ liffer in presupposing that either the positive or the negative semiptiase  , co . mesfirt_and in stating that the parameter point tm~srata the tirst or into the second semiphase  .   .   .   .   . 
Next Loebner showed that the semantics of phase ~ o U antifiers sketched in the diagrams above can be rmalised in such a way that " a square of duality formed b ~  , the generalised q . uanti . fiers X X . some '( D , X ~/ X X . every(D,X ) turns out to t~esu . b jacent to the square of duality of already ~ still . In order to do it , he just needed the auxiliary , notion at starting , point at the relevant semiphase . This is rendered as the intimum at the set of the closest predecessors of the parameter po  . i . ntpt which , form an unint . errt ~ pted linear sequence w ~ th property P , or ~ P ( . termed Libl(K , pt ) lay Loelaner ) : (6) GSI(R , pt ) = df in fxIx < pt&R ( x ) & Vy ( x < y < p t&R ( y ) - - ~ V z ( x < z < y - - - - ~ R ( z ) ) ) The semantics of the fouro has equantifiers above can then  . be rendered in the following way , making p t = t Otar the parameter point and R = P or R =- P :  ( 7 ) still : XP . every '( Xx . (GSI(P , a ) < x < t0), P ) already : XP . some '( Xx . (GSI(-P , a ) < x < t0), P ) not yet : XP . no'(Xx . (GSI(-P , a ) < x < t0), P ) no longer : XP . not every '( Xx . (GSI(P , a)<x<t0) , P )   2 The Logic of Binding Taking Loebner's view on quantification  , our goal in this section is to make apparent the quantificational structure of binding by showing that on a par with the square o ! opposition  , of (2) binding , principles form a , squa 4" . e of d . dality , we are going tDus to argue . that olna in . g prlnciptes are out the reflex ot the ph . as equant in cational nature oI corresponding nominal expressions : reflexives  , prg . no . uns , long-distance reflexives and R-expressions will be shown to express phase quantiners acting on the grammatical oon queness axis  . 
182 2 . 1 Phase quantification ingredients In order to show that the above referred nominals  . express , phase quantifi . erst . he relevant . components mvoJveam pnase . quantm . cat lonsnored t~e . ment mea . 
lne relevant scale here Is not the continuous nnear ~  . rder of mo . ments of time , as for still ~ already , but alscrete part la ~ order made o Ims course rererents  ( ct . 
DRT ) arramzed according to the relative obliqueness of grammatical functions  . Note that in multiclausal constructions there is the corresponding subordination of different clausal obliqueness hlerarchles  ( for the salve or comparalgility with diagrams ( 3 ) involving time arrow , Hassedm ~ ams for obliqueness are displayed with a turn of  90~right   ) :  ( 8 ) Kimsaid Leesaw Max . 
Ok1m
Note also that the relation " less oblique than " may not be linear :  ( 9 ) Kimsaid Lee , who saw Max , hit Norma . 
O--------O Ok1n
OO
Im
The sequence of two oEposite semiphases is defined by a  , prooerty 1-' . Contrarily to what happens with . alread 3, w fie . r . e operator ( quantifier ) . and o~r and ( aura Uve proposmon ) are rendereclp . ymtterent expressions , m binding p . hase , quantification . meoper a nuris also contnbute O by . the noml na ~ expressing the operator , i . e . expressing the binding phase quantiner . 
For a given nominal NP is determined by the relative position of N in the scale  . For a discourse referent r corresponding to N , semiphase P is a linear stretch containing only elements that  . are less than or equal to r in the obliqueness order  , that is discourse reterents correspondi . ng to . , nomin . also-commanding N . .
Moreover , its emlpnase . rIs . presuppose cl to precede semiphase-P , P is such that the last successorm it is local wrttor  ; and if semiphase-P is presupposed , to precedes seml phase P , P is such . tha . t the first predecessor in It is local wrttor . In both cases tide closest ~ nei ~ hbour or semiphase-P has to be local wrtr  , where the notion of locality has the usual sense given in the definition of binding principles :  ( 10 ) P ( x ) iff defx < r&Vy\[ ( -P ( y ) &  ( x -< y or y -< x ) )---- ) x is local wrtr\]As to the parameter point , in binding . .p . has equantification , it is the discourse reterent a winch is the antecedent of r  . 
2.2 Binding phase quantifiers
We can now formalise phase quantification subjacent to nominals  . Let us start with an anaphoric expression N like himself  ( 11 ) Kim said Lee thinks Max/hit himself / . 
* Kim said Lee/thinks Max hit himself/.
QA : XP . some'(Xx . (GSI(-P , a ) < x < a ), P ) . a Po ! k . . . .




N can thus be inte . rpreted as presupposing that a semi D hase-P precedes a semip fiase P and requiring that the p  . arameter point occurs , in the . ! atter ~ ttiatis , the antecedent a ~ s to be round in . s . em~pn ~ eramong the discourse referents corresponding to Uaelo calo-commanders of r  , the discreferent corresp gnd . ing tqN3 . 
This is captured by_the definition oItide pna:s . e . quantifier QA . Sanstaction . of QA ( P ) obtain siH between the bottom ottide uninterrupted linear sequence-t-'most close to me parameter p  . omt/antecedent a and a inclusive there is at ' least one~liscourse referent in P  . Given-P . P , this amounts to requiring that a be in P , and that a be a localo-commander of r . 3 Next , it is then easy to see how the phase quantificational force or a pronominal expression N should be formalised :  ( 12 ) * Kim said Lee thinks Max/hit him / . 
Kim said Lee/thinks Maxhithim/.
QB:XP . no'(Xx . (GSI(~P , a ) < x < a) , P ) _p ~ a ~: ~ p Here the parameter point a occurs in semiphase-P  , which amounts to the antecedent being picked 9utside t , n . eset of loc~o-commanders . QB(P ) . Is satisnea it tno discourse reterent between the bottom otme uninterrupted  , linear sequence-Pre . orec . lose to the oar a meteri ~ olnt/antecedent a and a Inclusive IsInr '  . 
Given . -P . P , this . amount . s to requiring that a be , in semiplms e ~1 ~ , and mata be not a localo-commanoer of r . 
Like in diagram of (11) , ~P is taken here as the complement set o IP . All discourse reterents which are not " localo -commanders of rare in it  , either o-commanding rornot . Notice that set-P includes also discourse referents Xl  . vXn introduced by previous sentences or the extralinguistic on text  , which in constructions similar to ( l'2) b . accounts for possible aeictic readings of the pronoun  . Below , when studying . R . -expressions ~ we , wlll see why . the possible nonlinearity ot meot ~ li . qu . enessorizler will led . us . to consider that -1: is sljglatly more complex than just me complement se_to tr '  . _Coming now to long-distance reflexives , ruled by . the fourth binding principle in (1) , we get the following formalisation : ( 13 ) \[ Oamigo de Kim \] idiss eque ele pr6prioi a chaque
Leewu Max .   ( Portuguese ) \[ Kim's friend\]/saidLDRi thinks Lees aw Max . 
*\[ Oamigo de Kimi \] disseque ele pr6prioi a chaque
Leeviu Max.
\[ Kim'sifriend\]s aid LDRi thinks Lees aw Max.
Qz : XP . every ' ( Xx . ( GSI(P , a ) < x_<a ), P ) ~ aP_p

Ixnk 3For the sake of simplicity , agreement requirements between N and its antecedent are overlooked here  . 

Here , like for short-distance reflexives in (11) , a is required to occur in P though the presupposition ow is  . t . 13 at semiphase P is fpIlowe . d by ~~ m . ipnase ?, r ' . 
laKmg . m to account the de/m . mono It-mt ~ u ) , meantecedent of N is thus required to Dean o-comma3a  . ger Qocalorn . ot ) of N . The semantics PLP . 13 asequantiner ~ Z~s such tpat , to rQZ(r ') to . Desa Usned , between me bottom oI the uninterrupted linear sequence V more close to the parameter point /antecei\[lenta and ainclusive every  . . discourse referent is in P . This amounts to requmn g that a be in semiphase P , and that a beano-commander or r . 
Finally R-expressions call to be formalised as the fourth phase quantifier of  ( 7 ) :  ( 14 ) \[ Kim'sifriend\]said Kimithinks Lees aw Max . 
*\[ Kim's friend\]/said Kimi thinks Lees aw Max.
Qc : hP . not every ' ( Xx . ( GSI(P , a ) < x < a ), P)
P-Poma )
The parameter point a is required to occur in-P , which means that a cannot be a no-commander ( local or not ) of r . This renders the same condition as expressed by Principle C  , that R-expressions befree , though it also encodes an uncommon assumption agout the referential autonomy of R-expressions  . Here , like for other more obvious dependent reference ? nominals  , the interpretation . of l , ~- expressions is . taken as being dependent on the interpretation ot other expressions or on the salience of discourse referents made available by the communicative context  . Taking an extreme example in order to support the plausibility of  . this view and awkwardly , ab ' 6 reviate a deep philosophical discussion , one should notice that even a proper name is not a unique label of a given individual ~ once knowing who is the person called John  ( out ot those we know that are named John ) depends on the context . 
Note that like in previous diagrams , -P is taken in ( 14 ) just as the complement set of P . However , QC asks finally for a serious ponderation o ) this and a more accurate definition of-P for phase quantin cation in nonlinear orders  , where it is possible that not all elements are comparable  . .  .   .   .   .   . 
Port ~ c(P ) to be satisfied , between the t ~ ot to mo\[i - and the parameter point/antecedentain clusive not every discourse referent is in P  . Since we have here the p . resupposition P . -P , and given P is an uninterru . pted linear sequence , this would-amount to requiring that a bein-P . 
It is wortb noting then that i . f we keep-P simply as the complemen . tset of r' , the interpretation o !~- expressions is however not adequately predicted by ~ c  ( P )  . 
(15) John said Kimj thinks Lees aw Max.
P-Pa-...~lon
P-P~:.........m
Let D be Ix : GSI(P , a ) < x < . a ~ t.he domain of . Qc.
Taking (15) b . , it is easy to check that in constructiops like ( . IS)a , Disalways empty . In fact , it is not the case that GS . I(P , a ) < as a = xl-is not comparab . leto any element ot 1-' , and a fortiori it is not comparable to the bottom . of P . Consequently , every '( D , P ) is trivially true whatever discourse referent xn we take as antecedent for r  , and not every '( D , P ) is trivially false . 
The interpretation of . (1 . 5) a , sketched in (15) b . would thus be incorrectly ruled out . 
What these consideration seem then to suggest is that  , when p h . as equantification opera . teso . n nonlinear orders , negatm not theooer and r'~s slightly more complext tian sim_ple Bop lean negation rendering the complements e  . t . W . .e are thus . taugmt la . at negation qf . P involves also the lilting ot the comolement set o ~ L'  , P_L , with_1_equaltor , the top of P , when P . -P . It is easy to check with diagra . .m (15)c . that this specification of-P makes it possible to satisfy Qc  ( P ) in exactly the correct constructions . 
2.3 The Binding Square of Duality
Fol ! owing Loebner's claim that logical duality is the cardinal property to recognise the quant ~h cational character  9f nat . uralanguage expressions , we are thus led to the vmw that the interpret a U on or ponquant in cational dennite nominals ~ s  . . . ruled by their phase quantin cational I orce over the obliqueness order  . 
Since ~ he defining formulas of binding quantiners result from  . (7) just by assigning P the ~ lefinition . in (10) and taking the . p . a rameter point , pt to be to e antecedent a , ~ tisw~th no su . rpnse that we get the following square of duality for binding quantitmrs :  ( 16 ) ~ inner , - , x/Z neg at mn ~/ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ outer outer -/ dual / ne ~ at mnnegau on /__/ q--CinnerQA negation  3 Consequences This new conception of binding seems to have important consequences not only in terms of the understandimz of dependent reference mechanisms captured by Binding Theory but also in terms of our conception o  . f generalised quantification in natura \] language  , of the twofold semantic apacity , ot nominal express mns , referential and quantificational , and may be even of the . nature of grammar devices . Here we cannot do but to limit ourselves to hint how a lew central i  . ss . uesusual \] y assgciated to binding are handled , u . nder this new viewpoint , bet ~ e we proceed to bnetly ~ consider its consequences tor the implementation ot Binding Theory in constraint based grammars  . 
3.1 Further insights into binding ...
Parameterization It is wellknown that though binding principles are assumed to hold universally mall languages  , final " grammatical geometry " between lanRuage to language  .   .   .   .   .   . 
Da\[rymple (9 . 3) pointed out that this is . oue . to l . anguage specific ccTndit ! on si . mpinging ~), on the eligibimy or t . neanteceoe . nt(wnemeritisa ~ ubiect . or not ) and ~ l ~ ) the range 9 t the local domain ( whether it ~ snnite , tensed ,   . etc . ) . Asto(i ) , Branco and Marrafa ( 97 ) showed that it~s a conseqgence of a lexical property of the precticates  , whose ot ~ liqueness . hierarchy may be either linear or nonlinear . Esto(ii ) , t0 is variation may accommogated in the definiu on , ot property P in 00 . ), in particular in the de . finitiqn of loca ~ w . rttqr . , to proyl ( Je for each part lcu ! arlanguage . ~ oths plu . hons are oertectly contluent w~th . the uList and pomt . that binding v . aria . tions across language are the resultot parameter lzatlon  . 
Lexical gaps 4It is also wellknown th . at although . 
t ~ et our binding principles , are claimed to be universal mere are . languages wnicn nave not all the corresponding tour type of nominals  . For instance , English is not known fo have long-distance reflexives  . 
In e answer I or this oe comes now quite simple : like what happens in other squares of duality  , it is possible that no \[ ever)/ , corner of the . square IS le~calized . 
9 oe one rt~s/)qls cusses at . length t . ne Issue . m~ngusn , ~ or instance , it is noted mat the square or ouauty concerning deontic possibility involving right h  . appens nave only two le_xic_alized . corners , right and duty . , r ~ xe . mp tion , and Iogophoricity Al SO worm considering here is the borderline case where the maximum shrink of semiphase P occurs  , i . e . when P is the singl . et on whose sole el e . ment is r , the . discourser . eterent whose interpretation ~ s to Deanchored Dy nnolng an antecedent to r~t  .  _  . 
Oiven the definition of binding phase quantitlers  ~  , me maximum shripk . of P into a . singl . et on attects significantly only the quantifiers wlaere the parameter poln U antecedent a is to be found in P  , namely QA and QZ . In these cases , for a to be in Pan~l-mequant in cation to 0e satisfied , a can only be r , r being thus its own antecedent . Consequently . ~, although the Quantification is satisfied , a ' . meaningftila . nc . hor . mg of the discourse referent r is still to be accomplished since by the sole effect of  . quantification satisfaction r is iustanchored to itself  . Admittedly , an overarching inte ~ retability requirement imposes that the significant anchoring of nominals be consummated  , which , i . nduces in present case an exception allogop nor lc ettect : tor mean ap  . nor ( snort or Io . ng-distance ), tqt ) elnterpreted, . and given t . nats at ls . t . act . lo not its t ) lnding constramt is ensured , It should thus freely . find an antecedent outside any specific restriction  . 
This constitutes th . us an explanation for the exemption restrictions in the definitions o I rrinciples  . A and L and so called logophoric effects associated  . to exempt anaphor . s . Restrictions . which appeared until no . wto , ~ . mere . stlp . ulations recewe in this approach a pnn ciple a jusntt cat lon  . 
3.2 ... for a lean implementation
The new conception of . Binding Theory presented in is paper is currently being inte~ated " in an HPSG grammar implemented in ProFI  . T1 . 54 . . Space lim . its restrict us here to a very . prier rau on meot . matimplementation , which wall be fully presented in tuturet papers . 
T . heine resting pqintt 9 note in t . his connectip . n . is . th . at menew insight ! n too in mng phenomena elicited t ~ y the discovery of  . t 0 eirquant in . cation a \] nature seems , to constitute a breakthrough to t t . nedes ideratum or giving Binding Theory alean declarative implementation  . 
Adopting a pnnciple based semantics in fine with Frank and Reyle  ( 95 )  , the central goal is not any more 4 Though it is empirically not necessary , for the sake of uniformity , when-P . P , the order-theoretic dual of this specification of -P can be assumed  . 
9 of ilterco index . ations between NPs in postprocessing ut rather to identi  . ty the relevant sets ol discourse reterents against which satistation ot the binding phase fluantitlc  . at lonexpresse . d by . NPs is check . ed .   . .  . 
in practical term . s that m yolves first . _collecting discourse reterents into set values ot specific teatures  , requiring a minor extension to " HPSG feature declaration  . S . econd , giyen the possible . nonlocal nature ot the elements ot a given set , in order to avoid term in a . tion problems " some . mechanism of delaying constrmnts at lstactlon has to be ensured  . 
Conclusions f Thoere search . reported here present a cogent , argument r the quantm cat lonal nature ot sentent laldependent reference relations among nominals  . This radically new conception of binding appears as a decisive step  . 
~ w~f lsa full le an dec Iara . tive , encompassi_ng or . ~inaingl neoryi . n constrain . t based g . ram . mars . It may have also opened . new intriguing directions 3or the research on natural anguage generalised quantitl  . cation ~ on the . apE arent two lold semantic . capacity . ot nominals , reterential and quantill cational , or on the nature of grammar devices . 
Acknowledgements l Sfsecial thanks are due to Palmira Marrafa and Hanszkoreit for their advice and discussion and to Berthold Crysmann for his detailed comments  . 

Chomsky (81) , Lectures on Government and Binding , Foils , 

Correa (88) , " A Binding Rule for Government-binding Parsing " , 
COLING'88 Proceedings.
Backofen , Becker , Calder , Capstick , Diui , Dtirre , Erbach , Estival , Manandhar , Mineur , van Noord , Oepen and Uszkoreit (96) , Final Report of EAGLES Formalisms Working Group . 
Barwise and Cooper (81) , Generalized Quantifiers and Natural
Language , L&P 4, 159-219.
Botley , Glass , McEnery and Wilson , eds .  (96) , Proceedings of Discourse Anaphora and Resolution Colloquium  , Lancaster

Branco and Marrafa (97) , " Long-Distance Reflexives and the Binding Square of Opposition "  , 4th International Conf . on HPSG . 
Bredenkamp (96) , Towards a Binding Theo , T for HPSG , PhD dissertation , Univ . of Essex . 
Dalrymple (93) , The Syntax of Anaphoric Binding , CSLI , Stanford . 
Erbach (95), ProFIT 1.54 User's Guide , DFKI.
Fong (90) , " Freeln dexation : Combinatorial Analysis and a Compositional Algorithm "  , Proceedings of ACL Meeting ,  105-110 . 
Frank and Reyle (95) , " Principle Based Semantics for HPSG " , 
Proceedings of EACL'95 Meeting.
Giorgi , Pianesi and Satta (90) , " A Computational Approach to Binding Theory " , Proceedings of COLING'90 ,  16 . 
Grosz , Joshi and Weinstein (95) , " Centering : A Framework for Modelling the Local Coherence of Discourse "  , Compututional
Linguistics 21.
lngria and Stallard (89) , A Computational Mechanism for Pronominal Reference  , Proceedings of ACL Meet it , g ,  262-271 . 
Kaplan and Maxwell (88) , " An Algorithm for Functional
Uncertainty ", Proc . t ~ fCOLING '88.
Loebner (87) , " Quantification as a Major Module of Natural Language Semantics "  , in Croenendijk , Jongh and Stokhof , eds . , Studies in DRT and the Theory of Generalized Quantitiers  . Foils,

Pianesi (91) , " Indexing and Referential Dependencies within Binding Theory "  , Proceedings of EACLCm!\]erence ,  39-44 . 
Pollard and Sag (94) , Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar , 
CSLI , Stanford.
Xue , Pollard and Sag . (94), " A New Perspective on Chinese Ziji " . 
Proceedings of the West Coast Co , !ference on Formal
Linguistics , vol . 13, CSLI , Stanford.

