Aligning Articles in TV News casts and Newspapers
Yasuhiko Watanabe
Ryukoku University
Seta , Otsu
Shiga , Japan
Yoshihiro Okada
Ryukoku Univ.
Seta , Otsu
Shiga , Japan
Kengokaneji
Ryukoku Univ.
Seta , Otsu
Shiga , Japan
Makoto Nagao
Kyoto University
Yoshida , Sakyoku
Kyoto , Japan
watanabe@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp
Abstract
It is important to use pattern information ( e . g . TV news casts ) and textual information ( e . g . newspapers ) together . For this purpose , we describe a method for aligning articles in TV news casts and newspapers  . In order to align articles , the alignment system uses words extracted from telops in TV news casts  . The recall and the precision of the alignment process are  97% and 89%  , respectively . 
In addition , using the results of the alignment process , we develop a browsing and retrieval system for articles in TV news casts and newspapers  . 
1 Introduction
Pattern information and natural anguage information used together can complement and reinforce each other to enable more effective communication than can either medium alone  ( Feiner 91 )   ( Nakamura 93 )  . One of the good examples is a TV news cast and a newspaper  . In a TV news cast , events are reported clearly and intuitively with speech and image information  . On the other hand , in a newspaper , the same events are reported by text information more precisely than in the corresponding TV news cast  . Figure 1 and Figure 2 are examples of articles in TV news casts and newspapers  , respectively , and report the same accident , that is , the airplane crash in which the Commerce Secretary was killed  . However , it is difficul to use newspapers and TV news casts together without aligning articles in the newspapers with those in the TV news casts  . In this paper , we propose a method for aligning articles in newspapers and TV news casts  . In addition , we show a browsing and retrieval system for aligned articles in newspapers and TV news casts  . 
2 TV News casts and Newspapers 2 . 1 TV News casts In a TV news cast , events are generally reported in the following modalities : ? image information  , ? speech information , and ? text information ( telops ) . 
In TV news casts , the image and the speech information a remain modalities  . However , it is difficult to obtain the precise information from these kinds of modalities  . The text information , on the other hand , is a secondary modality in TV news casts , which gives us : ? explanations of image information  , ? summaries of speech information , and ? information which is not concerned with the reports  ( e . g . a time signal ) . 
In these three types of information , the first and second ones represent the contents of the reports  . 
Moreover , it is not difficult to extract text information from TV news casts  . It is because a lots of works has been done on charactere cognition and layout analysis  ( Sakai93 )   ( Mino 96 )   ( Sato 98 )  . 
Consequently , we use this textual information for aligning the TV news casts with the corresponding newspaper articles  . The method for extracting the textual information is discussed in Section  3  . 1 . But , we do not treat the method of character recognition in detail  , because it is beyond the main subject of this study  . 
2.2 Newspapers
A text in a newspaper article may be divided into four parts : ? headline  , ? explanation of pictures , ? first paragraph , and ? the rest . 
In a text of a newspaper article , several kinds of information are generally given in important order  . 
In other words , a headline and a first paragraph in a newspaper article give us the most important information  . In contrast othis , the rest in a newspaper article give us the additional information  . Consequently , headlines and first paragraphs contain more significant words  ( keywords ) for representing the contents of the article than the rest  . 

Telops in these tople ~: topright : middle left : middle right : bottom left : 
TV news images
All the passengers , including
Commerce Secy Brown , were killed crush point , the forthday [ Croatian Minister of Domestic Affairs ] " All passengers were killed " [ Pentagon ] The plane was off course  . " accident under bad weather condition " . 
Commerce Secy Brown , Tu-zla , the third day Figure 1: An example of TV news articles ( NHK evening TV news casts ; April ,  4 , 1996) On the other hand , an explanation of a picture in an article shows uspersons and things in the picture that are concerned with the report  . For example , in Figure 2 , texts in bold letters under the picture is an explanation of the picture  . Consequently , explanations of pictures contain many keywords as well as headlines and first paragraphs  . 
In this way , keywords in a newspaper article are distributed unevenly  . In other words , keywords are more frequently in the headline , the explanation of the pictures , and the first paragraph . In addition , these keywords are shared by the newspaper article with TV news casts  . For these reasons , we align articles in TV news casts and newspapers using the following clues : ? location of keywords in each article  , ? frequency of keywords in each article , and ? length of keywords . 
1382 '  . : L .   .  ) : ' ' ? 7:  . ' -~4~-- Summary of this article : On Apt 4 , the Croatian Government confirmed that Commerce Secretary Ronald H  . Brown and 32 other people were all killed in the crash of a US Air Force plane near the Dubrovnik airport in the Balkanson Apt  3  ,  1996 . It was raining hard near the airport at that time . 
A Pentagon spokesman said there are no signs of terroristact in this crash  . The passengers included members of Brown's staff , private business leaders , and a correspondent for the New York Times . 
President Clinton , speaking at the Commerce Department , praised Brown as ' one of the best advisers and ablest people Iever knew  . ' On account of this accident , Vice Secretary Mary Good was appointed to the acting Secretary  . In the Balkans , three U . S . officials on a peace mission and two U . S . soldiers were killed in Aug 1995 and Jan 1996 , respectively . 
(Photo ) Commerce Secy Brown got of familitary plane Boeing  737 and metsoldiers at the Tuzla airport in Bosnia . The plane crashed and killed Commerce Secy Brown when it went down to Dubrovnik  . 
Figure 2: An example of newspaper articles ( As a hi Newspaper ; April ,  4 , 1996) 3 Aligning Articles in TV
News casts and Newspapers 3 . 1 Extracting Nouns from Telops An article in the TV newscast generally shares many words  , especially nouns , with the newspaperaticle which reports the same event  . Making use of these nouns , we align articles in the TV news cast and in the newspaper  . For this purpose , we extract nouns from the telops as follows : Step  1 Extract texts from the TV images by hands . 
For example , we extract " Okina waken Ohlach iff ' from the TV image of Figure  3  . When the text is a title , we describe it . It is not difficult to find title texts because they have specific expression patterns  , for example , an underline ( Figure 4 and a topleft picture in Figure 1 )  . In addition , we describe the follow-Figure 3: An example of texts in a TV news cast : " Okinawa kenOMachiji  ( Ohta , Governor of Oki-nawa Prefecture ) " asushu-intsukahe ( The House of Rep . will pass the provisional budget tomorrow ) " ing kinds of information : ? size of each character ? distance between characters ? position of each telop in a TV image Step  2 Divide the texts extracted in Step 1 into lines . Then , segmen these lines at the point where the size of character or the distance between characters changes  . For example , the text in Figure 3 is divided into " Okina waken ( Okinawa Prefecture ) " , " Ohta ( Ohta ) " , and " chiji ( Governor ) " . 
Step 3 Segment the texts by the morphological n-alyzer JUMAN  ( Kurohashi 97 )  . 
Step 4 Analyze telops in TV images . Figure 5 shows several kinds of information which are explained bytelops in TV News casts  ( Watanabe 96 )  . In ( Watanabe 96) , a method of semantic analysis of telops was proposed and the correct recognition of the method was  92  % . 
We use this method and obtain the semantic interpretation of each telop  . 
Step 5 Extract nouns from the following kinds oftelops . 
? telops which explain the contents of TV images ( except " time of photographing " and " image data  "  ) ?telops which explain a fact It is because these kinds oftel ops may contain adequate words for aligning articles  . On the contrary , we do not extract nouns from the other kinds of telops for aligning articles  . 
For example , we do not extract nouns from telops which are categorized into a quotation of a speech in Step  4  . It is because a quotation of a speech is used as the additional  infor-1  . explanation of contents of a TV image ( a ) explanation of a scene ( b ) explanation of an element i . person ii . group and organization iii . thing ( c ) bibliographicn formation i . time of photographing ii . place of photographing iii . image data 2 . quotation of a speech 3 . explanation of a fact ( a ) titles of TV news ( b ) diagram and table ( c ) other 4 . information which is not concerned with a report ( a ) currentime ( b ) broadcasting style ( c ) names of an announcer and reporters Figure 5: Information explained by telops in TV

Figure 6: An example of a quotation of a speech : " kono kuni wozen shins as eru chansu woata et ehoshii  ( Give meachance to develop our country ) "mation and may contain inadequate words for aligning articles  . Figure 6 shows an example of a quotation of a speech . 
3.2 Extraction of Layout Information in
Newspaper Articles
For aligning with articles in TV news casts , we use newspaper articles which are distributed in the Internet  . The reasons are as follows:
II newspaper\[titleIpier ' expl " Ifir . tp&r . \[th .   .   .   . t the number of the articles in the TV news casts 143 the number of the corresponding article pairs 100 the number of the pairs of aligned articles 109 the number of the correct pairs of aligned articles  97 Figure 7: The results of the alignment ? articles are created in the electronic form  , and ? articles are created by authors using HTML which offers embedded codes  ( tags ) to designate headlines , paragraph breaks , and so on . 
Taking advantage of the HTML tags , we divide newspaper articles into four parts : ? headline  , ? explanation of pictures , ? first paragraph , and ? the rest . 
The procedure for dividing a newspaper article is as follows  . 
1. Extract a headline using tags for headlines.
2 . Divide an article into the paragraphs using tags for paragraph breaks  . 
3 . Extract paragraphs which start " T\]:~>> ( sha-shin , picture ) " as the explanation of pictures . 
4 . Extract the top paragraph as the first paragraph . The others are classified into the rest . 
3 . 3 P rocedure for Al igning Art ic les Before aligning articles in TV news casts and newspapers  , we chose corresponding TV news casts and newspapers  . For example , an evening TV news cast is aligned with the evening paper of the same day and with the morning paper of the next day  . We aligned articles within these pairs of TV news casts and newspapers  . 
The alignment process consists of two steps . First , we calculate reliability scores for an article in the TV news casts with each article in the corresponding newspapers  . Then , we selec the newspaper article with the maximum reliability score as the corresponding one  . If the maximum score is less than the given threshold  , the articles are not aligned . 
As mentioned earlier , we calculate the reliability scores using these kinds of clue information : ? location of words in each article  , ? frequency of words in each article , and ? length of words . 
If we are given a TV news article z and a newspaper article y  , we obtain the reliability score by using the words k  ( k-1 . . . N ) which are extracted from the
TV news article z:
SCORE(z , y ) =
N42 ~ ~ w(i , j ) , hap , r(i , k ) , fTv(j , k ) " length(k ) k = l i=1 j = l where w(i , j ) is the weight which is given to according to the location of word k in each article  . We fixed the values of w(i , j ) as shown in Table 1 . As shown in Table 1 , we divided a newspaper article into four parts : ( 1 ) title , (2) explanation of pictures , (3) first paragraph , and (4) the rest . Also , we divided texts in a TV news casts into two : ( 1 ) title , and (2) the rest . It is because keywords are distributed unevenly in articles of newspapers and TV news casts  , haper(i , k ) and fTv(j , k ) are the frequencies of the word k in the location of the newspaper and in the location j of the TV news  , respectively , length(k ) is the length of the word k . 
4 Experimental Results
To evaluate our approach , we aligned articles in the following TV news casts and newspapers : ? NHK evening TV news cast  , and ? As a hinewspaper ( distributed in the Internet )  . 
We used 143 articles of the evening TV news casts in this experiment  . As mentioned previously , articles in the evening TV news casts were aligned with articles in the evening paper of the same day and in the morning paper of the next day  . Figure 7 shows the results of the alignment . In this experiment , the threshold was set to 100 . We used two measures for evaluating the results : recall and precision  . The recall and the precision are 97% and 89% , respectively . 
One cause of the failures is abbreviation of words.
For example , " shinyo-kinko ( credit association ) " is abbreviated to " shink in " . In our method , these words lower the reliability scores . To solve this problem , we would like to improve the alignment performance by using dynamic programming matching method for string matching  .   ( Tsunoda 96 ) has reported that the results of the alignment were improved by using dynamic programming matching method  . 
In this experiment , we did not align the TV news articles of sports , weather , stock prices , and foreign 2 ,  ; :
Interface Retrieval Database
Figure 8: An example of a sports news article : " sen-balsu kaimaku  ( Inter-high school baseball game start ) " exchange . It is because the styles of these kinds of TV news articles are fixed and quite different from those of the others  . From this , we concluded that we had better align these kinds of TV news articles by the different method from ours  . As a result of this , we omitted TV news articles the title text of which had the special underline for these kinds of TV news articles  . For example , Figure 8 shows a special underline for a sports news . 
5 Browsing and Retrieval System for Articles in TV News casts and 

The alignment process has a capability for information retrieval  , that is , browsing and retrieving articles in TV news casts and newspapers  . As a result , using the results of the alignment process , we developed a browsing and retrieval system for TV news casts and newspapers  . Figure 9 shows the overview of the system . The important points for this system are as follows : ? ? Newspaper articles and TV news articles are cross-referenced  . 
? A user can consult articles in TV news casts and newspapers by means of the dates of broadcasting or publishing  . 
? A user can consult newspaper articles by full text retrieval  . In the same way , user can consult TV news casts which are aligned with retrieved newspaper articles  . In other words , content based retrieval for TV news casts is available  . 
? Newspaper articles are written in ttTML . In addition to this , the results of the alignment process are embedded in the HTML texts  . As a result , we can use a WWW browser ( e . g . 
! browser ___J " IV news articles
GUI ~ r-alignment [ i ~ ~ . . . . information ] retrieval I ~ Newspaperartlcles i browser " q"-'CGI script---  . / ~ TML document J
Figure 9: System overview
Netscape , Internet Explorer , etc ) for browsing and retrieving articles in TV news casts and newspapers  . 
A user can consult articles in newspapers and TV news casts by full text retrieval in this way : when the user gives a query word to the system  , the system shows the titles and the dates of the newspaper articles which contain the given word  . At the same time , the system shows the titles of TV news articles which are linked to the retrieved newspaper articles  . 
For example , a user obtains 13 newspaper articles and 4 TV news articles when he gives " saishutsu ( annual expenditure ) " as a query word to the system . One of them , entitled " General annual expenditure dropped for three successive years "  ( June ,  4 ,  1997) , is shown in Figure 10 . The newspaper article in Figure 10 has an icon in the above right , looks like an opening scene of a TV news article . The icons shows this article is linked to the TV news article  . When the user select this icon , the system shows the TV news article " Public work costs were a seven percent decrease "  ( the top left window in
Figure 10).

Feiner , McKeown : Automating the Generation of Coor -dinated Multimedia Explanations  , IEEE Computer , 
Vol . 24 No . 10, (1991).
Nakamura , Furukawa , Nagao : Diagram Understanding Utilizing Natural Language Text  ,   2nd International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition  ,  (1993) . 
Kurohashi , Nagao:3UMAN Manual version 3 . 4 ( in Japanese ), Nagao Lab . , Kyoto University , (1997)* . 
Mino : Intelligent Retrieval for Video Media ( in Japanese )  , Journal of Japan Society for Artificial Intelligence 
Vol .ll No.l , (1996).
1 The source file and the explanation ( in Japanese ) of Japanese morphological naly zer JUMAN can be obtained using anonymous FTP from ffp://pine  . kuee . kyoto-u . ac . jp/pub/juman/juman3 . 4 . tar . gz  ~ . 7: . , llgil ~ iixJf~i-alaJ ! . o)~ . ~lg-i ~ J (7[(1) ~1 ~! I-~?2-, m . 3! . ~7', ~" TL . ,- . *' UI ? ~ . q . Yg . U .  , ~  .   .   .   . 
Figure 10: An output of the reference system for articles in TV news cast and newspapers : " Public work costs were a seven percent decrease " and " General annual expenditure dropped for three successive years " Sakai : A History and Evolution of Document Information Processing  ,   2nd International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition  ,  (1993) . 
Sato , Hughes , and Kanade : Video OCR for Digital News Archive , IEEE International Workshop on Content-based Access of Image and Video Databases  ,  (1998) . 
Tsunoda , Ooishi , Watanabe , Nagao : Automatic Alignment between TV News and Newspaper Articles by Maximum Length String between Captions and Article Texts  ( in Japanese )  , IPSJ-WGNL 96-NL-115 ,  (1996) . 
Watanabe , Okada , Nagao : Semantic Analysis of Telops in TV News casts  ( in Japanese )  . IPSJ-WGNL 96-
NL-116, (1996).

