Target Word Selection as Proximity in Semantic Space 
Scott McDonald
Centre for Cognitive Science , University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place , Edinburgh EH8 9LW , Scotland
scottm ~ cogsci , ed.ac.uk

Lexical selection is a significant problem for wide-coverage machine translation : depending on the context  , a given source language word can often be translated into different target language words  . In this paper I propose a method for target word selection that assumes the appropriate ranslation is more similar to the translated context than are the alternatives  . Similarity of a word to a context is estimated using a proximity measure in corpus-derived " semantic space "  . The method is evaluated using an EnglishSpanish parallel corpus of colloquial dialogue  . 
1 Introduction
When should Spanish detener translate to English arrest and when to stop ? This paper explores the problem of lexical selection in machine translation  ( MT ) : a given source language ( SL ) word can often be translated into different arget language  ( TL ) words , depending on the context . 
Translation is difficult because the conceptual mapping between languages is generally not one-to - one  ; e . g . Spanish reloj maps to both watch and clock . ASL word might be trans-latable by more than one TL option  , where the choice is based on stylistic or pragmatic rather than semantic riteria  . Alternative TL choices also exist for SL words that are ambiguous from the monolingual point of view  ; e . g . English firm can be translated by Spanish firme , estricto , s 61 idoor compa ~ ia . 
1.1 Semantic Space Models
In this paper I take a statistical approach to lexical selection  , under the working assumption that the translated linguistic context can provide sufficient information for choosing the appropriate target  . I define the appropriate target as the candidate " closest " in meaning to the local TL context  , where local context refers to a window of words centered on the " missing " TL item  . 
To estimate the similarity in meaning between a word and the bag of words forming a context  , the semantic properties of words are first represented as their patterns of cooccurrence in a large corpus  . Viewing a word as a vector in highdimensional " semantic space " allows distributional similarity  ( or " semantic distance " ) to be measured using a standard vector similarity metric  . The assumption that distributional similarity corresponds to the psychological concept of semantic relatedness has proved useful in NLP  ( e . g . Schtitze ,  1992) , and for psycholinguistic modelling ( e . g . Landauer & Dumais , 1997) . 
One way to estimate the semantic distance between a local discourse context and a target word is to measure the proximity between the centroid vector created from the words in the context and the target word vector  . This approach was used successfully by Schiitze ( 1992 ) in a small-scale word sense disambiguation experiment  . However , in this approach the distributional properties of the words making up the local context are not taken into account  . 
The centroid method establishes one position ( the mean ) on each dimension to use in the dist-ance estimate  , without considering the variability of the values on all dimensions  . If there is a large amount of noise in the context  ( semantically irrelevant words )  , the centroid is influenced equally by these words as by words that are relevant to the correct arget  . Weighting the dimensions of the space according to variability allows a semantic distance measure to be influenced less by irrelevant dimensions  ( Kozimo & Ito ,  1995) . 
It is clear that this method relies on the hypothesis that the region of semantic space defined by the translated context " overlaps " to a greater degree with the preferred target than with the alternative choices  . The main purpose of the present investigation was to determine the extent hat this hypothesis was supported  . 
1.2 Related Work
Dagan and Itai ( 1994 ) have also addressed the lexical selection problem from the TL point of view  . Their algorithm uses information about local cooccurrence probabilities for all possible TL pairs of words that can result from translating each pair of words  ( verb/noun plus argument/modifier ) in the SL sentence , and only significant . In work aimed at lexical choice in generation , Edmonds ( 1997 ) uses information about significant local cooccurrences to choose which of a set of synonyms i most typical in a given context  . The present paper differs from these approaches in that local cooccurrence behaviour is not considered relevant  , but rather an estimate of semantic relatedness between the TL context and each candidate translation  . 
2 Experiment
To assess the proposed semantic distance ( SD ) method for target word selection , I used an EnglishSpanish parallel corpus I for testing and evaluation  . Several features of a real MT system were incorporated in order that the experiment mimic the type of information available to the lexical selection component  . Investigation was restricted to the translation of content words : common ouns  , verbs , adjectives and adverbs . 
2.1 Materials and Procedure
The test corpus was an English language movie script that had been translated into Spanish on a line-by-line basis  . A random sample of 170 lines was extracted from the Spanish half of the corpus  , and each content : word in this SL subcorpus was looked up in the online version of Langenscheidt ' s New College English Spanish Bilingual Dictionary  .   2 Experimental items were chosen and a bilingual lexicon  ( see Figure 1 ) formed from the information in the dictionary , subject othe following constraints : ? The SL word had two or more potential translations  . 
? A potential translation was defined as a listed translation matching the SL word in POS class  ( and for verbs , invalency ) . This simulates the information available from parsing or tagging  . 
? Only word-to-word translations were considered . Multiword units in the SL text or listed as a translation were excluded  . 
? Very low frequency SL words and listed translations  ( a lexeme frequency of less than 1/million in the 10M wordspoken part of the British National Corpus \ [ BNC\]  ) were excluded . 
t The English half of the corpus consisted of the closed-caption text incorporated with the video release of Fearless  ( Warner Bros/Spring Creek Productions ,  1993) . 
The parallel corpus was provided by TCC
Communications Corporation , Victoria , B C , Canada . 
2 http://www . gm smuc , de/english/look , html detener~s to parrest detain delay hold mejorar ~ improve increase precio ~ price cost value worth Figure  1  . Example bilingual lexical entries . 
The translations given in the parallel corpus for 13 SL items were not listed in Langenscheidt's . 
This was due to the directionality of bilingual dictionaries-entries are created from the TL point of view - and the fact that the direction of original translation was opposite to that used for building the testing lexicon  . These translations were incorporated into the bilingual lexicon  . A total of 99 experimental items were compiled . 
For each SL item , the corresponding TL translation was located in the parallel corpus and all TL content words within a  +25 word window were extracted to form the local discourse context  . Cooccurrence vectors for each lemmatised context word meeting the frequency threshold were created from a lemmatised version of the spoken part of the BNC  . Vectors were constructed by advancing a window of  +3 words through the corpus , and for each word recording the number of times each of  446 index words occurred within the window . This procedure produced a 446-dimension semantic space . Finally , cooccurrence counts were replaced with their loglikelihood values  , which effectively normalizes the vectors . Parameter settings were taken from McDonald ( 1997 )  . 
Vectors for the translation candidates were created using exactly the same method  . 
Compared to a practical MT system , the lexical selection simulation makes several simplifying assumptions  . For one , two or more items in the same SL sentence are treated as if all other items are already correctly translated  . Secondly , the use of forward context means that a word is left untranslated until a prespecified number of following words are translated  . Finally , the bilingua lexicon listed 4 . 2 translation candidates per entry on average . Many of the alternatives could be described as stylistic variants  , and might not be present in an actual MT lexicon . 
2.2 Calculating Semantic Distance
The proximity of each translation candidate to the bag of words forming the local TL context was measured as described below  , and the " closest " target was chosen . The method for scaling each dimension of the space was adapted from Kozimo and Ito  ( 1995 ) in order to deemphasize dimensions irrelevant o the local is high  , then this dimension is considered to be less relevant than a component with lower variability  , and the semantic distance measure should take this into account  . 
The relevance ri for each dimension is defined as the ratio of the standardeviation si of the distribution formed by dimension i  , for all local context words LC , over the maximum standard deviation Smax for LC : siri = 

For each candidate translation t the vector representing each word c in LC is moved to a new position in the space according to a function of r and its current distance from t : c'=ci+r i  ( ti-ci ) If r is large , then any difference in the value of component i between t and LC is made less prominent than if r is small  . Finally , semantic distance is calculated as the mean cosine of the angle between target and each word c in LC:  1 ~ cos ( t , c ') SD(t , LC ) = iL ~ c , ~ Lc2 . 3 Results and Discussion Performance was evaluated against the actual English translation aligned with each Spanish item  . Two baseline measures were used for comparison : accuracy expected by random selection  , and word frequency ( WF ; selection of the translation candidate with the highest corpus frequency  )  . The semantic distance method made 57/99 correct choices ( 57 . 6% ) whereas the frequency method better edit slightly  , choosing the aligned translation 59 times (59 . 6%) . 
Expected chance performance was 22 . 9% . Of the errors made by WF , SD corrected 15% , and WF corrected 19% of the SD method's errors . 
In about one-quarter of the errors made by the SD method  , the selected candidate and the " correct " translation seemed equally acceptable in the context  . This can be seen more clearly in an example TL context for trabajo  ( Figure 2 )  . 
There appears to be little information available in the context in order to prefer work over the closely related job  . 
Performance was assessed at the level of 100% applicability-the SD method was used for every item  . Future work will investigate the use of a confidence estimate : if the evidence for 


Ud . es muy de dicado asutraha Jo.
.. to go back to the office.
what's your name ? i'm john wilken son.
why were you on the plane ? on business.
you ' revery committed to your < X).
you goahead and finish your story , please.
we were taking a vacation -- my sister , me , and our kids . 
you know--no husbands.
we saw . . .
Figure 2 . Example discourse context for alignment trabajo ~ work  . X indicates the target word position . 
preferring one candidate over another is weak , an alternative selection method should be used . 
3 Conclusion
A preliminary investigation of a method for lexical selection in MT was presented  . The assumption that the preferred translation of a translationally ambiguous SL word is the one closest in semantic distance to its translated context gave encouraging results  , taking into account he impoverished nature of the information available in spoken language context  . 

This work was supported by awards from
NSERC Canad and the ORS scheme , and in part by ESRC grant  #R000237419 . Thanks to Chris Brew and Mirella Lapata for valuable comments  . 

Dagan , I . & A . Itai .  1994 . Word sense disambiguation using a second language monolingual corpus  . 
Computational Linguistics , 20:563-596.
Edmonds , P .  1997 . Choosing the word most typical in context using a lexical cooccurrence nt work  . In Proceedings of the 35th ACU8th EACL , Madrid . 
Kozima , H . & A . Ito .  1995 . Context-sensitive measurement of word distance by adaptive scaling of a semantic space  . In Proceedings of RANLP-95 , pages 161-168 , Tzigov Chark , Bulgaria . 
Landauer , T . K . & S . T . Dumais .  1997 . A solution to Plato's problem : the Latent Semantic Analysis theory of acquisition  , induction , and representation f knowledge . Psychological Review , 104:211-240 . 
McDonald , S .  1997 . Exploring the validity of corpus-derived measures of semantic similarity  . Paper presented at the 9th Annual CCS/I-ICRC Postgraduate
Conference , University of Edinburgh.
Schtitze , H .  1992 . Dimensions of meaning . In Proceedings of Supercomputing '92 , pages 787-796 , New York : Association for Computing Machinery . 

