Consonant Spreading in Arabic Stems
Kenneth R . BEESLE Y
Xerox Research Centre Europe
Grenoble Laboratory
6, chemin de Maupertuis
38240 MEYLAN

Ken . Beesley@xrce.xerox , com
Abstract
This paper examines the phenomenon of consonant spreading in Arabic stems  . Each spreading involves a local surface copying of an underlying consonant  , and , in certain phonological contexts , spreading alternates productively with consonant lengthening  ( or gemination )  . 
The morphophonemic triggers of spreading lie in the patterns or even in the roots themselves  , and the combination of a spreading root and a spreading pattern causes a consonant obe copied multiple times  . The interdigitation of Arabic stems and the realization of consonant spreading are formalized using finite-state morphotactics and variation rules  , and this approach has been successfully implemented in a largescale Arabic morphological nalyzer which is available for testing on the Internet  . 
1 Introduction
Most formal analyses of Semitic languages , including Arabic , defend the reality of abstract , unpronounceable morphemes called ROOTS , consisting usually of three , but sometimes two or four . consonants called RADICALS . The classic examples include k tb ( ~ .   , D ~) 1 , appearing in a number of words having to do with writing  , books , schools , etc . ; and drs(~9z ) , appearing in words having to do with studying , learning , teaching , etc . Roots combine non-concatenatively with PATTERNS to form STEMS  , a process known informally as INTERDIGITA-TION or INTERCALATION  . We shall look first at Arabic stems in general before examining GEMINATION and SPREADING  , related phenomena wherein a single underlying radical is real-~The Arabic-script examples in this paper were produced using the Arab TeX package for TEX and DTEX by Prof  . Dr . Klaus Lagally of the University of Stuttgart . 
daras durisdarn ' as duruus diraasa ( t ) darraas madrasa ( t ) madaarismadrasiy ytadriis'study '' be studied '' teach''lessons''study''eager student '' school''schools''scholastic '' instruction ' verb verb verb noun noun noun noun noun noun adj-like noun Figure  1: Some stems built on root drsized multiple times in a surface string  . Semitic morphology , including stem interdigitation and spreading , is adequately and elegantly formaliz-able using finite-state rules and operations  . 
1.1 Arabic Stems
The stems in Figure 12 share the drs root morpheme , and indeed they are traditionally organized under adrsheading in printed lexicons like the authoritative Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic of Hans Wehr  ( 1979 )  . 
A root morpheme liked rs interdigitates with a pattern morpheme  , or , in some analyses . 
with a pattern and a separate vocalization morpheme  , to form abstract stems . Because interdigitation involves pattern elements being inserted between the radicals of the root morpheme  , Semitic stem formation is a classic example of nonconcatenative morphotactics  . 
Separating and identifying the component morphemes of words is of course the core task of morphological analysis for any language  , and analyzing Semitic stems is a classic challenge  2The taa ~ marbuu . ta , notated here as ( t ) , is the feminine ending pronounced only in certain environments  . 
Long consonants and long vowels are indicated here with gemination  . 
117 for any morphological analyzer.
1 . 2 In terd ig i ta t ion as In tersect ion Finite state morphology is based on the claim that both morphotactics and phonologi-cal /orthographical variation rules  , i . e . the relation of underlying forms to surface forms  , can be formalized using finite-state automata ( Kaplan and Kay , 1981; Karttunen , 1991; Kaplan and Kay ,  1994) . Although the most accessible computer implementations  ( Koskenniemi , 1983; Antworth , 1990; Karttunen ,  1993 ) of finite-state morphotactics have been limited to building words via the concatenation of morphemes  , the theory itself does not have this limitation . In Semitic morphotactics , root and pattern morphemes ( and , according to one's theory , perhaps separate vocalization morphemes ) are naturally formalized as regular languages , and stems are formed by the intersection , rather than the concatenation , of these regular languages . Such analyses have been laid out elsewhere ( Kataja and Koskenniemi , 1988; Beesley , 1998a ; Beesley , 1998b ) and cannot be repeated here . For present purposes , it will suffice to view morphophonemic ( underlying ) stems as being formed from the intersection of a root and a pattern  , where patterns contain vowels and C slots into which root radicals are  , intuitively speaking , " plugged " , as in the following Form I per-~ct active and passive verb examples  . 
Root : dr skt bqti
Pattern : CaCaCCaCCaCaC
Stem : daraskatabqatal
Root : dr sktbqt1
Pattern : Cu CiCCu CiCCu CiC
Stem : duriskutibqutil
Prefixes and suffixes concatenate onto the stems in the usual way to form complete  , but still morphophonemic , words ; and finite-state variation rules are then applied to map the morphophonemic strings into strings of surface phonemes or orthographic M characters  . For an overview of this approach , see Karttunen , Kaplan and Zae-hen (1992) . 
Following Harris (1941) and Hudson (1986) , and unlike McCarthy (1981) , we also allow the patterns to contain non-radical consonants as in the following perfect active Form V II  , Form
VIII and FormX examples.
Form VII Form VIII Form X
Root : ktbktbktb
Pattern : n Ca Ca CC ta Ca CstaCCa C
Stem : nkatabktatabstaktab
In this formalization , noun patterns work exactly like verb patterns , as in the following examples :
Root : ktbktbktb
Pattern : Ci Ca a CC u C u C C u u C
Stem : kitaabkutubmaktuub
Gloss : " book " " books " letter "
Where such straightforward intersection of roots and patterns into stems would appear to break down is in cases of gemination and spreading  , where a single root radical appears multiple times in a surface stem  . 
2 Arabic Consonant Gemination and
Spreading 2 . 1 Geminat ion in Forms I I and V Some verb and noun stems exhibit a double realization  ( a copying ) of an underlying radical , resulting in gemination 3 or spreading at the surface level . Looking at gemination first , it is best known from verb stems known in the European tradition as Forms II and V  , where the middle radical is doubled . Kay's ( 1987 ) pattern notation uses a G symbol before the C slot that needs to be doubled  .   4   3Gemination i Arabic words can alternatively be analyzed as consonant lengthening  , as in Harris ( 1941 ) and as implied by Holes ( 1995 )  . This solution is very attractive if the goal is to generate fully-voweled orthographical surface strings of Arabic  , but for the phonological examples in this paper we adopt the gemination representation as used by phonologists like McCarthy  ( 1981 )  . 
4Kay's stem-building mechanism , using a multitape transducer implemented in Prolog  , sees G on the pattern tape and writes a copy of the middle radical on the stem tape without consuming it  . Then the following C does the same but consumes the radical symbol in the usual way  . Kay's analysis in fact abstracts out the vocaliza- 
Pattern : CaGCaCCaGCaC
Stem : kattab darras
In the same spirit , but with a different mechanism , our Form II and Form V patterns contain an X symbol that appears after the consonant slot to be copied  . 
Root : ktbdrs
Pattern : CaCXaCC a CX a C
Stem : katXabdarX as
As in all cases , the stem is formed by straightforward intersection  , resulting in abstract stems like dar X as . The X symbol is subsequently realized via finite -state variation rules as a copy of the preceding consonant in a phonological grammar  ( / darras / ) or , in an orthographical system such as ours , as an optionally writtens hadd a diacritic(~r , ~ . ~) . Finite state rules to effect such limited local copying are trivially written  , s2 . 2 Gemination/Spreading in Form IXS preading , which appears to involve consonant copying over intervening phonemes  , is not so different from gemination ; and indeed it is common in " spreading " verb stems for the spreading to alternate productively with gemination  . 
The best known example of Arabic consonant spreading is the verbal stem known as Form IX  ( the same behavior is also seen in Form XI , Form XIV , Form QIV and in several noun forms ) . A typical example is the root dhm(~ , 0 z ) , which in Form IX has the meaning " become black " . 
Spreading is not terribly common in Modern Standard Arabic  , but it occurs in enough verb and noun forms to deserve  , in our opinion , full treatment . In our lexicon of about 4930 roots , tion , placing it on a separate transducer tape , but this difference is not important here . For extensions of this multitape approach see Kiraz  ( 1994 ;  1996) . The current approach differs from the multitape approaches in formalizing roots  , patterns and vocalizations as regular languages and by computing  ( " linearizing " ) the stems at compile time via intersection of these regular languages  ( Beesley , 1998a ; Beesley , 1998b ) . 
5See , for example , the rules of Antworth ( 1990 ) for handling the limited reduplication seen in Tagalog  . 
by d&.~,4.
hmr-Ji*Ch wl~3Cdhm ~, 0 . ~ rbd ~ ~ . 3rf d .  0~, ~ . .)~ zrq ~ . ~  . 3 z w r . ~  . ~  . ) smr . ~ ~ . 
swd ~. ~
J ' q r .9 ~ j
J ' mt . 3, js . fr . ~ Ju " s . hb  ~ . oo " " C ~ g brA ' - ? . tq tmi *, Dk md ~ ~ .   2 ' become white '' turn red '' blush '' be cross-eyed '' squint''become green''be moist '' become black '' become as hen '' glower''drip''scatter'breakup''be blue in color ' ' alienate '' become brown '' become black '' be off air complexion '' turn gray '' turn yellow/pale '' becomered dish '' be crooked'bebent''bedust-colored '' be dark-colored '' becomes mutty/dark ' Figure  2: Roots that combine with Form IX patterns 20 haveForm IX possibilities ( see Figure 2 )  . 
Most of them ( but not all ) share the general meaning of being or becoming a certain color  . 
McCarthy (1981) and others ( Kay , 1987; Kiraz , 1994; Bird and Blackburn ,  1991 ) postulate an underlying Form IX stem for dhm that looks liked hamam  , with a spreading of the final m radical ; other writers like Beeston ( 1968 ) list the stem as d hamm , with a geminated or length-ened final radical . In fact , both forms do occur in full surface words as shown in Figure  3  , and the difference is productively and straightforwardly phonological  . For perfect endings like + a ( ' he ' ) and + at ( ' she ' )  , the final consonant is geminated ( or " lengthened " , depending on your formal point of view ) . If , however , the suffix begins with a consonant , as in + tu(T ) or + ta (' you , masc . sg . '), then the separated or true spreading occurs . 
From a phonological view , and reflecting the dhaniam+tu-~2 ~ . ~!' I turned black ' Figure 3: FormIX Gemination vs . Spreading notation of Beeston , it is tempting to formalize the underlying Form IX perfect active pattern as CC a CX so that it intersects with root dhm to form dham X  . When followed by a suffix beginning with a vowel such as + a or + at  , phonologically oriented variation rules would realize the X as a copy of the preceding consonant  ( /dhamm / )  . Arabic abhors consonant clusters , and it resorts to various " cluster busting " techniques to eliminate them  . The final phonological realization would include an epen the ti-cal/?i/on the front  , to break up the dh cluster , and would treat the copied mas the onset of a syUable that includes the suffix :/? id-ham-rna /   , or , orthographically ,  ~ . 2b . ~! . When followed by a suffix beginning with a consonant  , as in dham X+tu , the three-consonant cluster would need to be broken up by a not here penthetic vowel as in / ? id-ha-rnam-tu /  , or , orthographically ,  "~ . ~!  . However , for reasons to become clearer below when we look at bilit-eral roots  , we defined an underlying Form IX perfect active pattern CC a CaX leading to abstract stems like dhama X  . 
2.3 Other Cases of Final Radical
Gemination/Spreading
Other verb forms where the final radical is copied include the rare Forms XI and XIV  . Root lh j ( . ~ ~ ~ ) intersects with the FormXI perfect active pattern CCa a CaX to form the abstract stem lhaa ja X  ( " curdle "/" coagulate " )  , leading to surface forms like/?il-haaj-ja /   (  . ~5~!) and/?il-haa-jaj-tu/(-,~ . ~!) that vary exactly as in Form IX . The same holds for roots h b ( , . ? . ~ ~ , , ), which takes both Form IX(s . haba X ) and Form XI ( shaaba X ) , both meaning " becomered dish " . In our lexicon , one root q % (~ r ' ~ . d ) takes form XIV , with patterns like the perfect active CC an CaX and imperfect active CC an CiX  ( " be pige on-breasted " )  . Other similar FormXIV examples probably exist but are not reflected in the current dictionary  . 
Aside from the verbal nouns and participles of Forms IX  , XI and XIV , other noun-like patterns also involve the spreading of the final radical  . These include CiCCiiX and Ca-Caa CiiX , taken by roots nhr ( . ; ~ ~3) , meaning " skilled/experienced " , and r~d(~\[_~) meaning " coward/cowardly " . The CaCaaCiiX pattern also serves as the broken ( i . e . irregular ) plural for CuCCuuX stems for the roots z~r (  . ~ ~5) meaning " ill-tempered ", shr ( . J ~0") meaning " thrush/blackbird " , 1yd(~~_J ) meaning " chin " , and thr ( . ~ ~  . ~) and t . xr ( . j  ~ . b ), both meaning " cloud " . When an X appears after along vowel as in t . uxruu X , it is always realized as a full copy of the previous consonant as in/tux ruur /  ( _ ;  . % ~9d ,), 1 lo matter what follows . 
2.4 Middle Radical
Gemination/Spreading
Just as Forms II and Vinvolve gemination of the middle radical  , other forms including FormXII involve the separated spreading of the middle radical  . A preceding diphthong , like a preceding long vowel , causes X to be realized as a full copy of the preceding consonant  , as shown in the following examples . 





Gloss : hdb
CCawXaChdaw Xabhdawdab
FormXII perfect active " be vaulted " " be embossed " ~ OOt:X~n 
Pattern : CCawXiC
Stem : x faw X in
Surface : xfaw ~ in
Form : Form XII imperfect active
Gloss : " berough "





Gloss : xdbmuCCawXiC muxdawXibmux dawdib
FormXII active participle " become green "$"? o  .  "
Figure 4: Biliteral Form I Stems
Root : xdr
Pattern : CCi iXaaC
Stem : xdii Xaar
Surface : xdiidaar
Form : Form XII verbal noun
Gloss : " become green "
A number of nouns have broken plurals that also involve spreading of the middle radical  , contrasting with gemination i the singular . 
xff " bat "$ ? xufXaaf ~ u 4.
singular gemination xff " bats " plural spreading x af a a X i if ?  . 2:~/2~ . A""::dbr " hornet " dabXuur_)~ . 
singular gemination dbr " hornets " plural spreading daba a Xiir  . ~ . ~ U3A few other patterns show the same behavior . 
While not especially common , there are more roots that take middle-radical -spreading noun patterns than take the better -known Form IX verb patterns  . 
3 Biliteral Roots
As pointed out ill McCarthy (1981, p . 396-7), the gemination vs . spreading behavior of Form IX stems is closely paralleled by Form I stems involving traditionally analyzed " bilit-eral " or ': geminating " roots such as tm  ( also characterized as tmm ) and sm ( possibly smm ) and many others of the same ilk . As shown in Figure 4 , these roots show Form I gemination with suffixes beginning with a vowel vs  . full spreading when the suffix begins with a consonant  . However Form IX is handled , these parallels strongly suggest hat the exact same underlying forms and variations rules should also handle the form I of biliteral roots  . 
However , the Form I perfect active pattern , in the current notation , is simply CaCaC ( or
Root : ktbktb
Pattern : CaCaCCaCaC
Lexicahkatab+akatab+tu
Surface : katabakatabtu
Orthography : "3
Figure 5: Ordinary Form I behavior
Root : tmX tmX
Pattern : CaCaCCaCaC
Lexical : tama X + at a maX+tu
Surface : tammatamamtu ? O ~ " Orthography : 5/ Figure 6: Biliteral tm formalized as tmX idiosyncratically for some roots  , CaCu Cor Ca CiC) . As shown in Figure 5 , there is no evidence , for normal triliteral roots like ktb , that any kind of copying is specified by the Form I pattern itself  . 
Keeping CaCaCas the Form I perfect active pattern  , the behavior of biliteral roots falls out effortlessly if they are formalized not assrn and t in  , nor as smm and tram , but as smX and tmX , with the copying-trigger X as the third radical of the root itself  . Such roots intersect in the norm Mway with triliteral patterns as in Figure  6  , and they are mapped to appropriate surface strings using the same rules that realize 
Form IX stems.
4 Rules
The TWOLC rule ( Karttunen and Beesley , 1992) that maps an X , coming either fl'om roots like tmX or from patterns like Form IXC CaCaX  . 
into a copy of the previous consonant is the following  , where Cons is a grammar-level variable ranging freely over consonants  , Long Vowel is a grammar-level variable ranging freely overlong vowels and diphthongs  , and C is an indexed local variable ranging over the enumerated set of consonants  . 
X:C <=>: C\:Cons+_~+:Cons ; : CL ong Vowel_ ; : CX::_ ; where C in ( bt0 j h x d 6 r z s f d ; 6 x f q k i m n h w y ) ; one for each enumerated consonant , realizes underlying X as surface C if and only if one of the following cases applies :  6 * First Context : X is preceded by a surface C and one or more non-consonants  , and is followed by a suffix beginning with a consonant  . This context matches lexical dhama X+tu , realizing X asm ( ultimately written " , /~/ , L  ~ . ~!), but not dhama X+a , which is written ~ . ~! . 
-Second Context : X is preceded by a surface C and along vowel or diphthong  , no matter what follows . This maps lexical daba a Xiirto dabaabiir ( . tU-%) . 
? Third Context : X is preceded by a surface C , another X and any symbol , no matter what follows . This matches the second Xinsam Xa X+tu and samXaXWa to produce samXam+tu and samXam+a respectively  , with ultimate orthographical realizations such as ~" and "~? ~  . 
In the current system , where the goal is to recognize and generate orthographical words of Modern Standard Arabic  , as represented in ISO 8859-6 , UNICODE or an equivalent encoding , the default or " elsewhere " case is for X to be realized optionally as as hadd a diacritic  . 
5 Mu l t ip le Cop ies o f Rad ica ls When a biliteral root likes mX intersects with the Form II pattern CaCXaC  , the abstract result is the stem sam X a X . The radical mgets geminated ( or lengthened ) once and spread once to form surface phonological phonological strings like/samma ma/nd/ sammamtu /  , which become orthographical-~and " ~ respectively  . And if both roots and patterns can contain X , then the possibility exists that a copying root could combine with a copying pattern  , requiring a full double spreading of a radical in the surface string  . This in fact happens in a single example ( in the present lexicon ) with ~ The full rule contain several other contexts and fine distinctions that do not bear on the data presented here  . 
For example , the w in the set C of consonants must be distinguished from the w-like offg lide of diphthongs  . 
Root : mkX
Pattern : CaCaaXiiC
Abstract stem : maka aXiiX
Surface : makaakiik
Gloss : " shutles "
Figure 7: Double Consonant Spreading the root m kX , which combines legally with the noun pattern CaCaa Xii Casin Figure  7  . In the surface string makaakiik (" shuttles ") , orthographically ? A  ~ , the middle radical k is spread twice . The variation rules handle this and the smX examples without difficulty  . 
6 System Status
The current morphological analyzer is based on dictionaries and rules licensed from an earlier project at ALPNET  ( Beesley ,  1990) , rebuilt completely using Xerox finite-state technology  ( Beesley , 1996; Beesley , 1998a ) . The current dictionaries contain 4930 roots , each one handcoded to indicate the subset of patterns with which it legally combines  ( Buckwalter ,  1990) . Roots and patterns are intersected ( Beesley , 1998b ) at compile time to yield 90 , 000 stems . Various combinations of prefixes and suffixes , concatenated to the stems , yield over 72 , 000 , 000 abstract words . Sixty-six finite-state variation rules map these abstract strings into fully-voweled orthographical strings  , and additional trivial rules are then applied to optionally delete short vowels and other diacritics  , allowing the system to analyze unvoweled , partially voweled , and fully-voweled orthographical strings . 
The full system , including a Java interface that displays both input and output in Arabic script  , is available for testing on the Internet at http : // www  . xrce . xerox , com/research/mltt/arabic / . 


Evan L . Antworth .  1990 . PC-KIMMO : a two-level processor for morphological analysis  . 
Number 16 in Occasional publications in academic computing . Summer Institute of Linguistics , Dallas . 
Kenneth R . Beesley .  1990 . Finite state description of Arabic morphology . In Proceedings of the Second Cambridge Conference on Bilingual Computing in Arabic and English  , 
September 57. No pagination.
Kenneth R . Beesley .  1996 . Arabic finite-state morphological nalysis and generation  . In COLING ' g6 , volume 1 , pages 8994 , Copenhagen , August 59 . Center for Sprogteknologi . 
The 16th International Conference on Computational Linguistics  . 
Kenneth R . Beesley . 1998a . Arabic morphological analysis on the Internet . In ICEMCO-98, Cambridge , April 1718 . Centre for Middle Eastern Studies . Proceedings of the 6th International Conference and Exhibition on Multilingual Computing  . Paper number 3 . 1 . 1; no pagination . 
Kenneth R . Beesley . 1998b . Arabic stem morphotactics via finite-state intersection  . Paper presented at the 12th Symposium on Arabic Linguistics , Arabic Linguistic Society ,  67
March , 1998, C , hampaign , IL.
A . F . L . Beeston .  1968 . Written Arabic : an approach to the basic structures  . Cambridge
University Press , Cambridge.
Steven Bird and Patrick Blackburn .  1991 . A logical approach to Arabic phonology . In
EACL-91, pages 8994.
Timothy A . Buckwalter .  1990 . Lexicographic notation of Arabic noun pattern morphemes and their inflectional features  . In Proceedings of the Second Cambridge Conference on Bilingual Computing in Arabic and English  , 
September 57. No pagination.
Zelig Harris .  1941 . Linguistic structure of Hebrew . Journal of the American Oriental Society ,  62:143-167 . 
Clives Holes .  1995 . Modern Arabic : Structures , Functions and Varieties . Longman , London . 
Grover Hudson .  1986 . Arabic root and pattern morphology without tiers . Journal of Linguistics , 22:85-122 . Reply to McCarthy : 1981 . 
Ronald M . Kaplan and Martin Kay . 1981.
Phonological rules and finite-state transducers . In Linguistic Society of America Meeting Handbook  , Fifty-Sixth Annual Meeting , New
York , December 2730. Abstract.
Ronald M . Kaplan and Martin Kay . 1994.
Regular models of phonological rule systems.
Computational Linguistics , 20(3):331-378.
Lauri Karttunen and Kenneth R . Beesley . 1992.
Two-level rule compiler . Technical Report ISTL-92-2 , Xerox Palo Alto Research Center , 
Palo Alto , CA , October.
Lauri Karttunen , Ronald M . Kaplan , and Annie Zaenen .  1992 . Two-level morphology with composition . In COLING'92, pages 141-148,
Nantes , France , August 2328.
Lauri Karttunen .  1991 . Finite state constraints . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Current Issues in Computational Linguistics  , Penang , Malaysia , June 1014 . Universiti Sains Malaysia . 
Lauri Karttunen .  1993 . Finite state lexicon compiler . Technical Report ISTL-NLTT-1993-04-02 , Xerox Palo Alto Research Center , 
Palo Alto , CA , April.
Laura Kataja and Kimmo Koskenniemi . 1988.
Finitestate description of Semitic morphology : A case study of Ancient Akkadian  . In
COLING'88, pages 313-315.
Martin Kay .  1987 . Nonconcatenative finite-state morphology . In Proceedings of the Third Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 210 . 
George Kiraz .  1994 . Multitape two-level morphology : a case study in Semitic nonlinear morphology  . In COLING'94, volume 1, pages 180-186 . 
George Anton Kiraz .  1996 . Computing prosodic morphology . In COLING'96 . 
Kimmo Koskenniemi .  1983 . Two-level morphology : A general computational model for wordform recognition and production  . Publication 11 , University of Helsinki , Department of General Linguistics , Helsinki . 
John J . McCarthy .  1981 . A prosodic theory of nonconcatenative morphology . Linguistic Inquiry , 12(3):373-418 . 
Hans Wehr . 1979. A Dictionary of Modern
Written Arabic . Spoken Language Services , Inc . , Ithaca , NY , 4 edition . Edited by J . Milton Cowan . 

