Computational Lexical Semantics , Incrementality , and the So-called
Punctuality of Events
Patrick CAUDAL
TALANA , UFRL , Universit 6 Pads 7
2, place Jussieu
75251 Paris Cedex05, France
caudal@linguist.jussieu.fr

The distinction between achievements and accomplishments i known to be an empirically important but subtle one  . It is argued here to depend on the atomicity ( rather than punctuality ) of events , and to be strongly related to incrementality ( i . e . , to event-object mapping functions ) . A computational treatment of incrementality and atomicity is discussed in the paper  , and a number of related empirical problems considered  , notably lexical polysemy in verb-argument relationships  . 
Introduction
Ever since Vendler (1957) introduced it , the socalled punctuality of achievements has been the object of many theoretical contests  . After having demonstrated that punctuality actually breaks up into two  , distinct notions , namely non-durativity and atomicity , I will argue here for a compositional semantic account of the latter  . I will show that ( non- ) atomicity interacts closely with the notion of incrementality  , as formulated in Dowty (1991) , and that this property of verbs should be lexically encoded  , although it is subject both to semantics and pragmatics-driven variations  . I will finally discuss the formal specifications an NLP system could use to make predictions about atomicity and incrementality  . 
1 . On Vendler's so-called achievements Vendler ( 1957 ) defined achievements and accomplishments a respectively punctual and durative  . He based his claims on two main tests , noting that at < time expression > adverbials combine with achievements but not accomplishments  , whereas finish combines with accomplishments but not achievements :  ( 1a ) At what time did your each the top ? At no on sharp  . 
( lb ) At what moment did you spot the plane ?
At 10:53A.M.
(2a )* John finished leaving.
(2b ) John finishe drawing the circle.
Dowty ( 1986 ) and Moens and Steedman ( 1988 ) decisively questioned the coherence of the class of achievement verbs  , arguing that not all of them are non-durative . As noted above , Vendler identifies punctual events through the conjunction of the  ( positive ) at and ( negative ) finish tests . However , they do not always yield comparabler sults : ( 3a )   ( 3b )   ( 4a )   ( 4b ) 
Karpovbeat Kasparovat1 0.00 P.M.
* The Alliesbeat Germany at I0.00 P.M.
* Karpov finished beating Kasparov
The Allies finished beating Germany.
The attest fails to characterize ( 3b ) as an achievement because it is durative , whereas ( 3a ) passes this very test because it is non-durative . 
On the contrary , the fnish test in ( 4 ) yields an identical result for the beating of a chess player and that of a whole nation  . It appears thus that the finish test does not indicate non-durativity  , contrary to the attest , which refuses durative events , and that telic events such as ( 3b ) fall outside Vendler's classification , since they fail both the finish test ( unlike accomplishments )   . AND the attest ( unlike achievements ) . Since it events such as (3b ) , durativity should not be considered as a necessary property of achievements  . The salient common point between ( 3a ) and ( 3b ) is that both events lack proper subparts , i . e . , are atomic . Atomicity should thus be regarded as the defining property of achievements  ; it can be tested with finish . 
2. Atomicity as a semantic issue
Many authors , including Verkuyl (1993) and Jackendoff (1996) , have denied atomicity any semantic ontent , and have argued that it is a pragmatic category . I do not intend to claim here that atomicity is not subject to pragmatic constraints  . The following examples identify one such constraint  , i . e . , the relative size of arguments of verbs of consumption :  ( 5a )   ( Sb ) ? ? John finished eating the rasp berry . 
The bird finished eating the rasp be rry.
(5a ) suggests that rasp berries are so small with respectoa human'eater ' that eat denotes an atomic event  . But the same does not hold true of birds ( cf . (5b )) . No attention will be paid to this kind of pragmatic on straint in this paper  . 
Yet I will demonstrate here that atomicity does possess a semantic ontent  , and that therefore it can be regarded as an aspectual category  . 
Consider the following examples ~: ( 6a ) * The soldier finished crossing the border . 
(6b ) The soldiers finished crossing the border.
(7a )* John finished slamming the door open.
(7b ) John finished slamming the doors open.
The plural NPs the soldiers and the doors possess proper subparts  , along which the crossing and slamming events in ( 6b ) and ( 7b ) are measured , making those events non-atomic ( there are several distinct subevents of one door being slammed  , and of one soldier crossing the border ) ; compare with the atomic (6a ) and (7a ) , where those very NPs are singular . The variation in noun quantification being a semantic one  , 1 Similar examples were proposed by Declerck ( 1979 )  , but were discussed in terms of durativity , and not of atomicity . 
atomicity should clearly receive some form of semantic ontent  . Moreover , it should be noted that atomic events are not compatible with the progressive perfect  , whereas non-atomic ones freely combine with its :   ( 8a ) * The soldier has been crossing the border . 
( OK with iterative , non-atomic reading )   ( 8b ) The soldiers have been crossing the border . 
Those facts support a semantic view of atomicity 3 . 
3 . Towards a semantic account : ( non- ) atomicity and incrementality The above data suggests an interesting solution to this puzzle : atomicity seems to be related to the notion of inerementality  , as formulated in Dowty ( 1991 )   ( see also graduality in Krifka 1992 )  . To my knowledge , the concept of incrementality ( originally proposed to account for the telicity of events  ) has never been discussed in the light of that of atomicity  , although this is an obvious thing to do , both concepts being about the present or absence of subevents in the internal structure of events  . I will undertake to bridge this gap here . 
3 . 1 Incrementality and delimiting arguments Dowty defines incrementality as a property of verbs whose development can be measured along the inner structure of one of their arguments  ( which he calls incremental theme )  ?  ( 9 ) John drank a glass of beer . 
In (9) , the development of the drinking event can be measured along the subparts of the glass of beer  . Each subpart of the incremental theme argument is mapped onto a subpart of the  2 Complementary tests such as the different readings of in etc  . will not be studied here for want of space . 
3 Caudal ( 1998 ) discusses at length related examples involving collection-referring ouns  ( e . g . , orchestra or regiment ) , and shows that they behave similarly , cf . The regiment finished crossing the border . 
498 corresponding event ( a fact which Dowty ( 1991 ) and Krifka ( 1992 ) refers to a sevent-object homomorphism )  . Dowty ( 1991 ) rejects ostensibly the possibility to treat as incremental themes the patient arguments of socalled punctual  ( i . e . , achievement ) verbs , such as slamopen . According to him , incremental themes should be able to undergo a gradual change of state  4  . Unfortunately , Dowty does not consider examples such as (7b ) , which exhibit an incremental behaviour although they include this very kind of patient argument  . I will therefore reject Dowty's objection , and regard (7b ) as incremental . 
It follows naturally from the above definition that incrementality entails non-atomicity : it implies that a situation's development possesses proper subparts  , and therefore that it is non-atomic . But does non-atomicity entail incrementality , conversely ? I . e . , are those two notions equivalent ? If not , how should they be connected ? In order to answer those questions in the following sections  , I will make use of a rough feature-based notation :\[+ /- ATM\]will express atomicity/non -atomicity  , and\[+/-INC\]incrementality/non -incrementality  . 
3.2 Non-atomicity with incrementality
I will call delimiting arguments the arguments of a verb serving as ' measures '  ( or ' odometers ' ) for the corresponding event ( e . g . the internal arguments of drink or slam open ) . It should be noted that this term is broader than that of incremental theme  , since it includes e . g . , patient arguments of socalled punctual verbs , which Dowty refused to regard as incremental themes  . 
For the sake of simplicity , I will focus in this paper exclusively on internal delimiting arguments :  ( lOa )   ( lOb )   ( lla )   ( llb ) 
John finished eating his apple.
John finished eating his apples.
* John finished throwing his stone.
John finished throwing his stones.
4Cf . Dowty (1991:568): Many traditional Themes . . . are not Incremental Themes . Many achievement verb sentail a definite change of state in one of their arguments  . . . but never in distinguishable separate stages , i . e . subevents . 
(10) shows that eat can be \[- ATM\] , \[+ INC \] both with a definite singular and plural delimiting argument  , whereas (11) shows that throw can be \[- ATM\] , \[+ INC\] only with a definite plural delimiting argument  . The development of eating his apple is measured in  ( 10 a ) along the quantity of apple remaining to eat , whereas that of throwing his stones in ( lib ) is measured along the successive individual stones being thrown away  . I will extend the notion of incrementality to this latter kind of event-object mapping  . 
Under this view , incrementality arises from delimiting arguments , and not only for e incremental themes . However , I will distinguish two types of incrementality , here by preserving a distinction between Dowty's incrementality and the extension I proposed  . I will call m-incrementality ( for quantity of matter-incremental i ~ ) the type of incrementality exhibited by ( 10 a ) and i-incrementality ( for individual-ineremental it v ) that exhibited by ( lib )  . At least two classes of verbs can be distinguished in this respect " verbs like eat are capable of m-incrementality  , i . e . , incrementality with individual-referring delimiting arguments  ( they have an incremental themes in the sense of Dowty  )  , whereas verbs like throw are only capable of i -incrementality  , i . e . , incrementality with collection-referring delimiting arguments  ( they lack an incremental theme in the sense of Dowty  )  . Of course , non-atomicity can follow from eitheriorm -incrementality  . 
Another type of incremental non-atomic events can be found in path-movement verbs :  ( 12 ) Mary walked the Appalachian trail . 
( Tenny 1994)
The development of the walking event can be measured along the explicit path argument the Appalachian trail in  ( 12 )  . It is therefore \[- ATM\],\[+ INC\] . White ( 1994 ) proposed a generalized path based incremental theme role to account for the semantic behaviour of both patient and path delimiting arguments  , fairly akin to the present one , since it crucially relies on a similar individual /quantity of matter distinction  . One could conclude at this point that sufficient to predict  ( non- ) atomicity , and that non-atomicity and incrementality are equivalent notions  . If that is right , then nonincremental events should be non-atomic . However , I will show in 3 . 3 that it is not the case . 
3 . 3 Non-atomicity without inerementality Some non -atomic events lack a delimiting argument  , so that the type of non-atomicity involved seems unrelated to incrementality :  ( 13 ) John finishe digesting his pudding . 
(14) John finished cooking the chicken.
(15 ) John finished registering hisson at the university  . 
Contrary to (10) and ( llb ) , neither (13) ,   ( 14 ) nor ( 15 ) are ( necessarily ) measured along the subparts of their patient arguments  .   ( 13 ) and ( 14 ) are rather measured along the state of the latter  , which vary as time passes . In this sense , his pudding and the chicken do not behave like delimiting arguments  , and those non-atomic situations are nonincremental  ( \[-ATM\] , \[-INC\]) . 
Some sort of nonargument alodometer seems to be required  . In the case of (13) and (14) , digest and cook receive a scalar result state , i . e . , one that varies as time passes : John's chicken becomes  ( as a whole ) closer to being ( finally ) cooked as time passes in ( 14 )  , and John's pudding gradually turns ( as a whole , and not bit by bit ) into nutriments inside hiss to mach in ( 13 )   ( see Caudal ( 1999a/b ) for a treatment of such data )  . I will refer to this kind of incremental-like reading as scalarity  . If one considers (15) , things are somewhat different , as there exists some sort of predetermined series of stages through which one should pass in order to register at the university : John's sonis closer and closer to being registered at the university as his father goes through them  . I will refer to this kind of data as gradual scenarios  . 
I will turn now to the computational treatment of incremental non-atomic events  ( section 4 )  , before suggesting some ways of accounting for nonincremental non-atomic ones  ( section 5 )  . 
4 . A formal , computational treatment of incremental non-atomic events A formal and computational treatment of incremental non-atomic events will be formulated here  , relying on model theoretic logics and on the Generative Lexicon framework  ( GL henceforth ; see Pustejovsky (1995) for an introduction ) . I will first discuss a few theoretical notions related to the internal structure of objects and events  , in order to formalize mandi-incrementality . I will leave a side the treatment of incremental path-arguments  , referring the interested reader to
White (1994).
4 . 1 Internal structure of objects and events : Link 's partof operators Following Link  ( 1983 )  , I will oppose individuals ( i . e . , the denotata of nouns referring to individual entities  ) and collections ( i . e . , the denotata of definite plural NPs , collectives , etc . ; see Caudal (1998a )) . Let A be the domain of entities ( events or objects )  , structured as a semilattice . Let individual_ . part_of be a partial order relation on individual entities  ( henceforthi-part or < i )  , connecting an individual to the collection it belongs to  . Let Idibe the join operation on individuals and collections  , ya collection and x an individual , such that x is an i-part of y . The definition of the meronymic operator < i was formulated by Link as follows:  ( 16 ) Vx , y\[x<i Y ---> xU iy = y\]Following again G . Link , I will define similarly a partial order relation on non-individual parts  , m-part ( or -< m ) , which connects an individual and its non -individual parts  ( e . g . as lab of stone to a rock ) . All those operators will apply both to events and objects in the model  ( events being reified )  . As a consequence , collection-referring NPs as well asi-incremental events are endowed with i-parts  , whereas individual-referring NPs and m -incremental events possessm-parts  . 
I will argue that incrementality depends both on lexical information and structural composition  . 
Whether events will receive ( or not ) an incremental reading is determined at the structural level  , depending on the interaction of pragmatic on straints  )  . I will now describe the lexical component of this compositional procedure  . 
4.2 Encoding incrementality within the
Generative Lexicon framework
I will propose here to encode lexically whether verbs are capable of m-incrementality or i -incrementality  . It should be noted that although the ability to exhibitm-incrementality seems to be a constant lexical property  , any potentially incremental verb can receive an i -incremental reading  ( but recall that not all verbs can be read incrementally  )  . In the spirit of Krifka's object-event mapping functions  ( see K_rifk a 1992 )  , I will assume an i-in caspectual semantic role function that relates the i-parts of an argument to the development of an event  ( causing it to become i-incremental with an appropriate delimiting argument  )  , and am-inc function that relates them-parts of an argument o the development of an event  ( causing it to be comem-incremental with an appropriate delimiting argument  )  . The following event/object mapping predicate MAP -I  ( applying only to i-in caspectual roles ) can be derived from Krifka's
MAP-O/E ( mapping to objects/events ) predicates ( ee Krifka 1992:39 ) by replacing his standard partial order operator with--<i:  ( 17 ) MAP-I:VR\[MAP-I ( R ) ~ MAP-Ei ( R ) ^ MAP-Oi ( R ) \] VR\[MAP-Ei ( R ) ~- ~ V e , x , x '\ [ R(e , x ) ^ x ' < ix - - - - >
He'\[e'<ie^R(e ', x')\]\]
VR\[MAP-Oi(R)<--->Ve , e' , x\[R(e , x )^ e'<ie--->q x'\[x'<ix^R(e' , x ' ) \]\] A similar formulation can be given form -incrementality  ; replace --< i with-<min (17) . 
Thus , by combining Link's part of operators with Krifka 's event-object mapping functions  , atomicity construal functions can be formulated . 
Finally , GL will provide us with the proper computational lexical machinery in which to insert those functions : ! will propose to encode those aspectual roles within the argument structure  ( ARG STR ) feature in GL , by making them bear directly on the relevant argument position  . The following entries for eat and throw illustrate such an encoding for internal arguments  ( again , external arguments are left aside for the sake of simplicity  ) : throw:ARGSTR =
EVENTSTR =
QUALIA = eat
ARGSTR =
EVENTSTR =
QUALIA = ~ GI = x-'ind
G2y:Ind , i-inc(y , el ) ~ i = e ~: throw_a~t2e2:Binary_RS tag ~
AGENTIVE = throw_act(ez , x , y ) ~ A ~ G1 = x = indG2 y : ind , m-inc(y , ex)2e2: binary-RS tage ~
AGENTIVE = eat act(ex , x , y ) = / i-inc(x , e ) indicates that the internal structures of subevent e and argument x are related by an homorphic mapping  . If x possesses proper subparts , thene will be incremental ; the whole point remains that incrementality is lexically licensed but structurally construed  . The Binary_RS tage subevent refers to the complex result state  ( Result Stage ; cf . Caudal 1999b ) attached to a transition such as eat . Its binary structure x presses a change-of-state . I will now consider some difficulties related to lexical polysemy and verb-argument relationships  . 
4.3 Lexical polysemy and incrementality
I assume here that the incrementality function si -inc/m-inc are lexically specified  . Yet the full story is a lot more complicated . Much data suggests that those functions can be modified or determined  ( when they are lexically underspecified ) in context . An overview of a number of problems and a tentative treatment within GL will be proposed here  . 
4.3.1 Co-composition and inerementality
The machinery proposed above is not sufficient to account for subtle cases of lexical polysemy originating in the interaction between the verb and its arguments  . Some data would be best treated in terms of co -compostion within GL  5  :  5 Roughly , co-composition refers to cases of lexical polysemy in which a lexical item receives a ' new  '   ( 18 b ) * Lemoteurache vade produire unbruit dtrange . 
The engine finished emitting a strange noise.
Yannigache vade produires on article.
Yannig finished writing his paper.
The French verb produire yields an i-incremental reading in  ( 18 a )  , vs . am-incremental reading in (18b ) . Arguably , produire means ' to cause to come into existence  '  , and therefore makes use of the content of the AGENTIV Equalia role  ( i . e . , the qualia role indicating how a type is brought into existence  ) of its internal argument to determine the corresponding ' creation ' event  . The AGENTIVE roles of bruit and article can be represented as follows:  ( 19 ) F brult ARGI = . . sound I I A R S T R = ~ UALIA AGENT IVE = ~4 t_sound ( e , y , x ) J(20) IA Rrticle
GSTR = ARGI = x:infoI
UALIA = AGENTIVE = write(e , y , x ) ~
By virtue of the co-composition operation involving event specified in the AGENTIVE of bruit and article  , produire interacts differently with its internal argument  , and receives different event structures . The e~_e_so ~- a a(e , y , z ) event in ( 19 ) comes along an i-inc function mapping the internal argument x onto e  , while the wrie e(e , y , x ) event in (20) comes along an , -- inc function mapping z onto e . In fact , the whole event structure of those AGENTIVE roles together with their incrementality functions override those lexically specified by default for produire  . 
Another limit of GL until recent work ( cf . Asher and Pustejovsky 1999 ) was its inability to construe more versatile qualia role information  . 
Consider the following case of co-composition : sense  ( i . e . , one not considered to be lexicalized ) through the contribution of another lexical item with which it combines  . See Pustejovsky (1995) . 
(2la ) Yannig finished hiding the bike.
(2lb ) * Yannig finished hiding the truth.
Hidex arguably means ' to remove x from accessibility '  , and obviously the notion of ' accessibility ' diverges when x is a physical object  ( 21 a ) or a proposition ( 21b )  . This kind of phenomenological information might been coded in the FORMAL role for the corresponding supertypes and triggered in this context  , but a detailed implementation still has to be worked out  . See Asher and Pustejovsky ( 1999 ) for a discussion of such issues . 
4.3.2 Other cases of polysemy
Last but not least , many cases of apparent polysemy in the incrementality functions actually arise from the coercion of affected arguments :  ( 22 a ) Yannig a finide rangers a chambre . 
Yannig finished tidying up his room.
(22b )* Yannig a finide rangers on livre.
( gradual scenarios being left aside )
Yannig finished putting a way his book.
Ranger receives an incremental reading with chambre in  ( 22 a )  , and no incremental reading in (22b ) , so that it seems to be properly neither i -incremental norm-incremental  . The way out of this puzzle is the following : ranger is lexically encoded as capable of i -incrementality but not of m-incrementality  , and the aspectual polysemy of rangers a chambre originates in the polysemy of chambre  . Although there is no question that chambre normally refers to an individual  , its meaning is coerced into a collective one in ( 22 a )  . More precisely , chambre is coerced from an individual reale state sense  ( immovable_physobj ) to a collection sense involving the individual objects possibly enclosed within a room  ( movable_phys_obj )  , since only the latter is compatible with ranger . 
One way of accounting for such coercions within GL would be to associate with the CONST qualia role of chambre such a collection of instances of the movable_phys__obj type  , the
CONST role describing the meronymic constitution of a type  . 

In fact , the ability to trigger this very kind of coercion seems to be a general property of verbs addressing their arguments through their FORMAL role  ( i . e . , requiring natural types - centrally defined through their CONST and FORMAL- and not functional types-centrally defined through their AGENTIVE and TELIC  ; see Pustejovsky 1999) . Such verbs are usually able to access their arguments ' semantics as individuals through their FORMAL role  , and as collections of individuals through their CONST role  , if the FORMAL individual does not meet the selectional restrictions imposed by the verb  , or other semantic on straints . See Caudal (1998) for detailed evidence of this , and for a tentative solution within GL to the problems raised by the polysemy of collective nouns  ( e . g . , regiment , police and forest ) , which exhibit a similar behaviour , i . e . , can either efer to individuals or to collections  . Finally , it should be noted that homeomeronymic nouns ( i . e . , whose parts and whole refer to the same lexical type  , e . g . estate or property seen as l and surfaces , or quantity of matter nouns , such as gold or milk ; see Winston et al ( 1987 ) ) offer other interesting properties w . r . t , to incrementality/atomicity . I will not discuss them here for want of space . 
To put it in a nutshell , even prima facie individual-referring ouns such aschambre can behave like collection-referring ones under certain circumstances  , making i-incremental readings of normally atomic events possible  . Let us move now to some concluding remarks about nonincremental non-atomic events  . 
5 . On the formal treatment of nonincremental non -atomic events 
I have shown above that the notion of incrementality fell short of explaining the non -atomicity of  ( 13 )  ,  (14) , and (15) . I will suggest here a solution based on an extended conception of result states  . 
The nonincremental , non-atomic events discussed in 3 . 3 seem to fall into at least two distinct subclasses : scalar events  ( cf . (13)/(14)) vs . " gradual scenario " events ( cf .  (15)) . I will focus on the former class , the latter class originating clearly in a pragmatic phenomenon  6  . 
It should be noted that many resultative constructions  ( e . g . , pound the metal flat ; see Levin and Rappaport 1995 ) also receives calar readings , making the phenomenon a fairly widespread one . 

It is a fact that the notions of affectedness and incrementality/event-object mapping do not apply to scalar events  . Affectedness indicates that an argument under goes an incremental  ( cf . 
eat ) or a definite change of state ( cf . throw ) , and not a gradual bu___!t total one , as in the case of scalar verbs ( their delimiting arguments are gradually changing as a whole  , and not bit by bit ) .   ( 14 ) is telic and non-atomic because the chicken goes through successive states of ' cookedness '  ( i . e . , result states ) before reaching a final state , and not because of some event-object mapping function in the spirit of Krifka  ( 1992 )  . Therefore , the telicity of scalar events can only be explained by reference to this scalar change of state  , which entails itself a scalar result state . Encoding a richer information about result states in the lexical entries of such verbs  , as proposed in Caudal (1999a/b ) , would allow us to account elegantly for this kind of non-atomic  , nonincremental , telic readings of events . 
This new conception of result states provide us with a unified account  7 of ( non ) -atomicity , incrementality and telicity-a result which generalized paths cannot achieve for reasons exposed above  , and others not discussed here . 
Indeed , even the nonincremental , non-atomic event studied in 3 . 3 ( except (15) , but then again this is a pragmatic issue ) can also be accounted for in this manner , and path-argument verbs can also be analysed in terms of result states if changes of location undergone by arguments are treated as changes-of -state  . 
6 Note that contrary to scalar events and incremental events  , " gradual scenarios " do not combine with the progressive perfect  , of . * John has been registering hisson at the university  . This fact suggests that they should be set apart from other non-atomic events  , and possibly receive subevents of a different kind  . 
7See Caudal (1999b ), where incremental vs . scalar
RS tages are introduced.


It has been demonstrated in this paper that the socalled punctuality of achievements should be reduced to the notion of atomicity  . Formal means to calculate it within an NLP system have been discussed  ; see White ( 1994 ) for a computational implementation of related interest  , in a similar spirit . The machinery exposed above can be used to predict whether an event should be considered as an accomplishment  ( non-atomic event ; possesses subevents ) or an achievement ( atomic event ; lacks any subevent ) . 
The above developments revealed that ( non- ) atomicity is at least partly amenable to a compositional semantic procedure  , and does not fall altogether under the scope of pragmatics  . It has been shown to be directly related to incrementality in many cases  , though not in all cases . In order to construe incremental non-atomic events  , I proposed to encode m-incrementality vs . i-incrementality in the lexicon , before discussing the accessibility of the internal structure of delimiting argument NPs  ; I suggested a solution to the problems raised by the polysemous internal structure of certain nouns  . Finally , atentative result-state based account of nonincremental non-atomic events has been proposed  . I even claimed that it can explain all types of non-atomicity and even incrementality in a unified way  , and therefore might surpass all the existing accounts of event structure  . 

Asher , N . and J . Pustejovsky (1999) The
Metaphysics of Words in Context . Ms ., Brande is

Caudal , P .   ( 1998 ) Using Complex Lexical Types to Model the Polysemy of Collective Nouns within the Generative Lexicon  . Proceedings of DEXA98 , IEEE Computer Society , Los Alamitos , pp .  154-160 . 
Caudal , P .   ( 1999a ) Resultativity in French-A Study in Contrastive Linguistics  . Paper presented at the 29 t ~ Linguistic Symposium on Romance Languages , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , 
MI , April.
Caudal , P .   ( 1999b ) Result Stages and the Lexicon : The Proper Treatment of Event Structure  . 
Proceedings of the 9 th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics , Bergen , Norway , June.
Declerck , R .  (1979) . Aspect and the bounded/unbounded ( telic/atelic ) distinction . 
Linguistics 17, pp . 761-794.
Dowty , D .   ( 1986 ) The Effects of Aspectual Class on the Temporal Structure of Discourse : Semantics or Pragmatics ? Linguistics and Philosophy  ,  9 , pp .  37-61 . 
Dowty , D .   ( 1991 ) Thematic ProtoRoles and Argument Selection . Languages 67/3, pp .  547-619 . 
Jackendoff , R . (1996) The Proper Treatment of Measuring Out , Telicity and Perhaps Event Quantification in English  . Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory , 14, pp . 305-354.
Krifka , M .   ( 1992 ) Thematic Relations as Links between Nominal Reference and Temporal Constitution  . In Lexical Matters , I . Sag and A . 
Szabolsci , eds . , CSLI , Stanford , CA , pp .  29-53 . 
Levin , B . and M . Rappaport Hovav (1995)
Unaccusativity : At the Syntax-Lexical Semantics
Interface . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA.
Link , G .   ( 1983 ) The Logical Analysis of Plurals and Mass Terms . in R . Baiierle , C . Schwarze and A . 
von Stechow ( eds .), Meaning , Use and
Interpretation of Language , Walter de Gruyter,
Berlin , pp . 302-323.
Moens , M . and M . Steedman ( 1988 ) Temporal Ontology and Temporal Reference . Computational
Linguistics , 14/2, pp . 15-28.
Pustejovsky , J . (1995) The Generative Lexicon . MIT
Press , Cambridge , MA.
Pustejovsky , J . (1999) Decomposition and Type Construction . Ms . , Brandeis University . 
Tenny , C .   ( 1994 ) Aspectual Roles and the Syntax-Semantics Interface  , Kluwer , Dordrecht . 
Vendler , Z . (1957) Verbs and Times . The
Philosophical Review , 66, pp . 143-160.
Verkuyl , H . (1993) A Theory of Aspectuality.
Cambridge University Press , Cambridge.
Winston , M . E . , R . Chaffin and D . Hermann ( 1987 ) A taxonomy of part-whole relations . Cognitive
Science , 11, pp . 417-444.
White , M .   ( 1994 ) A Computational Approach to Aspectual Composition  . Unpublished Ph . D . 
dissertation , Institute for Research in Cognitive Science , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia . 

Many thanks to James Pustejovsky for the very fruitful discussions we had about incrementality  . 

