Semantic Analysis of Japanese Noun Phrases :
A New Approach to Dictionary-Based Understanding
Sadao Kurohashi and Yasuyuki Sakai
Graduate School of Informatics , Kyoto University
Yoshida-honmachi , Sakyo , Kyoto , 606-8501, Japan
kuro0i , kyoto-u , ac.jp
Abstract
This paper presents a new method of analyzing Japanese noun phrases of the form  N1 no 5/2  . The Japanese postposition or oughly corresponds to of  , but it has much broader usage . The method exploits a definition of N2 in a dictionary . For example , rug by no coach can be interpreted as a person who teaches technique in rugby  . We illustrate the effectiveness of the method by the analysis of  300 test noun phrases . 
1 Introduction
The semantic analysis of Japanese noun phrases of the form  N1 no N2 is one of the difficult problems which cannot be solved by the current efforts of many researchers  . Roughly speaking , Japanese noun phrase N1 no N2 corresponds to English noun phrase N2 of N1  . However , the Japanese postposition o has much broader usage than of as follows : watashi'I'no kuruma ' car'tsukue'desk'noashi'leg ' gray no seihu ku ' uniform ' possession whole-part modification senmon ka ' expert ' no chousa ' study ' agentrug by no coach subject yakyu ' baseball'no senshu'player ' categorykaze ' cold ' no virus resultryokou ' travel'no jyunbi'preparation ' purpose to ranpu ' card ' notejina ' trick ' instrument The conventional approach to this problem was to classify semantic relations  , such as possession , whole-part , modification , and others . 
Then , classification rules were crafted by hand , or detected from relation-tagged examples by a machine learning technique  ( Shimazu et al , 1987; Sumita et al , 1990; Tomiura et al ,  1995;
Kurohashi et al , 1998).
The problem in such an approach is to set up the semantic relations  . For example , the above examples and their classification came from the IPA nominal dictionary  ( Information-Technology Promotion Agency , Japan ,  1996) . 
Is it possible to find clear boundaries among subject  , category , result , purpose , instrument , and others ? No matter how finegrained relations we set up  , we always encounter phrases which are on the boundary or belong to two or more relations  . 
This paper proposes a completely different approach to the task  , which exploits semantic role information of nouns in an ordinary dictionary  . 
2 Semantic Roles of Nouns
The meaning of a word can be recognized by the relationship with its semantic roles  . In the case of verbs , the arguments of the predicates constitute the semantic roles  , and a considerable number of studies have been made  . For example , the case grammar theory is a semantic valence theory that describes the logical form of a sentence in terms of a predicate and a series of case-labeled arguments such as agent  , object , location , source , goal ( Fillmore ,  1968) . Furthermore , a wide-coverage dictionary describing semantic roles of verbs in machine readable form has been constructed by a great deal of labor  ( Ikehara et al ,  1997) . 
Not only verbs , but also nouns can have semantic roles . For example , coach is a coach of some sport ; virus is a virus causing some disease . Unlike the case of verbs , no semantic-Relation Noun Phrase N1 no N2 Verb Phrase
Semantic-role rug by no coach , kaze ' cold ' no virus , tsukue'desk'noashi'leg ' , ryokou'travel'nojyunbi'preparation'hon -wo'book-Ace'yomu'read'Agent senmonka ' expert'nochousa'study'kare-ga'he-NOM ' yomu'read'Possession watashi'I'nokuruma ' car'Belonginggakkou'school'no sensei ' teacher ' Timeaki ' autumn ' no hatake ' field '   3ji-ni ' at 3 o'clock ' yomu'read'Place Kyotonoraise ' store ' heya-de ' in room ' yomu ' read ' Modification gray no sei huku ' uniform ' is oide ' hurriedly'yomu'read'huzoku'attached'no neji'screw'ki ' wooden'no hako'box ' 
Complement kimonojyosei ' lady ' nobel-sho ' Nobelprize'nokisetsu'season'role dictionary for nouns has been constructed so far  . However , in many cases , semantic roles of nouns are described in an ordinary dictionary for human being  . For example , a Japanese dictionary for children , Reikai Shougaku Koku-gojiten ( abbreviated to RSK )   ( Tadil ~ ,  1997) , gives the definition of the word coach and virus as follows  1: coach a person who teaches technique in some sport virus a living thing even smaller than bacteria which causes infectious disease like influenza If an NLP system can utilize these definitions as they are  , we do not need to take the trouble in constructing a semantic-role dictionary for nouns in the special format for machine-use  . 
3 Interpretation of N1 no N2 using a
Dictionary
Semantic-role information of nouns in an ordinary dictionary can be utilized to solve the difficult problem in the semantic analysis of  N1   1Although our method handles Japanese noun phrases by using Japanese definition sentences  , in this paper we use their English translations for the explanation  . In some sense , the essential point of our method is language -independent  . 
no N2 phrases . In other words , we can say the problem disappears . 
For example , rug by no coach can be interpreted by the definition of coach as follows : the dictionary describes that the noun coach has an semantic role of sport  , and the phrase rug by no coach specifies that the sport is rug by  . That is , the interpretation of the phrase can be regarded as matching rug by in the phrase to some sport in the coach definition  . Furthermore , based on this interpretation , we can paraphrase rug by no coach into a person who teaches technique in rug by  , by replacing some sport in the definition with rug by  . 
Kaze ' cold ' no virus is also easily interpreted based on the definition of virus  , linking kaze ' cold ' to infectious disease . 
Such a dictionary-based method can handle interpretation of most phrases where conventional classification-based analysis failed  . As a result , we can arrange the diversity of N1 no N2 sense simply as in Table 1  . 
The semantic-role relation is a relation that N1 fills in an semantic role of N2  . When N2 is an action noun , an object-action relation is also regarded as a semantic-role relation  . 
On the other hand , in the agent , possession and belonging relations , N1 and N2 have a weake relationship . In theory , any action can be done by anyone ( my study , his reading , etc . ); his feeling , etc . ) ; and anyone can belong to any organization ( I belong to a university , he belongs to any community , etc . ) . 
The difference between the semantic-role r- lation and the agent  , possession , belonging relations can correspond to the difference between the agent and the object of verbs  . In general , the object has a stronge relationship with a verb than the agent  , which leads several asymmetrical linguistic phenomena  . 
The time and place relations have much clearer correspondence to optional cases for verbs  . A modification relation is also parallel to modifiers for verbs  . If a phrase has a modification relation , it can be paraphrased into N2 is N1 , like gray no seihu ku ' uniform ' is paraphrased into seihu ku ' uniform ' is gray  . 
The last relation , the complement relation is the most difficult to interpret  . The relation between N1 and N2 does not come from Nl'S semantic roles , or it is not so weak as the other relations . For example , kimonojyosei ' lady ' means alady wearing a kimono  , and no bel-sho'Nobelprize'nokisetsu'season ' means a season when the Nobel prizes are awarded  . Since automatic interpretation f the complement relation is much more difficult than that of other relations  , it is beyond the scope of this paper . 
4 Analysis Method
Once we can arrange the diversity of N1 no N 2 senses as in Table 1  , their analysis becomes very simple , consisting of the following two modules : 1 . Dictionary-based analysis ( abbreviated to DBA hereafter ) for semantic-role rlations . 
2 . Semantic feature-based analysis ( abbreviated to SBA hereafter ) for some semantic-role relations and all other relations  . 
After briefly introducing resources employed , we explain the algorithm of the two analyses . 
4.1 Resources 4.1.1 RSK
RSK ( Reikai Shougaku Kokugojiten ), a
Japanese dictionary for children , is used to find semantic roles of nouns in DBA . The reason why we use a dictionary for children is that  , generally speaking , definition sentences of such a dictionary are described by basic words  , which helps the system finding links between N1 and a semantic role of a head word . 
All definition sentences in RSK were analyzed by JUMAN  , a Japanese morphological naly zer , and KNP , a Japanese syntactic and case analyzer ( Kurohashi and Nagao , 1994; Kurohashi and Nagao ,  1998) . Then , agenus word for a head word , like a person for coach were detected in the definition sentences by simple rules : in a Japanese definition sentence  , the last word is a genus word in almost all cases  ; if there is a noun coordination at the end , all of those nouns are regarded as genus words . 
4.1.2 NTT Semantic Feature

NTT Communication Science Laboratories ( NT TCS Lab ) constructed a semantic feature tree , whose 3 , 000 nodes are semantic features , and a nominal dictionary containing about 300 , 000 nouns , each of which is given one or more appropriate semantic features  . Figure 1 shows the upper levels of the semantic feature tree  . 
SBA uses the dictionary to specify conditions of rules  . DBA also uses the dictionary to calculate the similarity between two words  . Suppose the word X and Y have a semantic feature Sx and Sy  , respectively , their depth is dx and dy in the semantic tree , and the depth of their lowest ( most specific ) common node is de , the similarity between X and Y , sire(X , Y ) , is calculated as follows : sire(X , Y ) = ( dcx2)/(dx+dy) . 
If Sx and Sy are the same , the similarity is 1 . 0, the maximum score based on this criteria . 
4.1.3 NTT Verb Case Frame

NT TCS Lab also constructed a case frame dictionary for  6  , 000 verbs , using the semantic features described above . For example , a case frame of the verb kakou-suru ( process ) is as follows : N1 ( AGENT ) - gaN2 ( CONCRETE ) -wokako . u-suru ' N1 process N2' where ga and wo are Japanese nominative and accusative case markers  . The frame describes


AGENTPLACE/\
HUMANORGANIZATION



ABSTRACTEVENT ABSTRACT RELATION

TIME POSITION QUANTITY ....
Figure 1: The upper levels of NTT Semantic Feature Dictionary  . 
that the verb kakou-suru takes two cases , nouns of AGENT semantic feature can fill the ga -case slot and nouns of CONCRETE semantic feature can fill the wo-case slot  . KNP utilizes the case frame dictionary for the case analysis  . 
4.2 Algorithm
Given an input phrase N1 no N2 , both DBA and SBA are applied to the input , and then the two analyses are integrated . 
4.2.1 Dictionary-based Analysis
Dictionary based-Analysis ( DBA ) tries to find a correspondence between N1 and a semantic role of N2 by utilizing RSK , by the following process : 1 . Lookup N2 in RSK and obtain the definition sentences of N2  . 
2 . For each word w in the definition sentences other than the genus words  , do the following steps : 2 . 1 . When w is a noun which shows a semantic role explicitly  , like ko to g-ara ' thing ' , monogoto ' matter ' , nanika ' something ' , and N1 does not have a semantic feature of HUMAN or TIME  , give 0 . 9 to their correspondence 2 . 
2 . 2 . When w is other noun , calculate the similarity between N1 and w by using
NTT Semantic Feature Dictionary ( as described in Section 4 . 1 . 2) , and give 2For the present , parameters in the algorithm were given empirically  , not optimized by a learning method . 
the similarity score to their correspondence.
2 . 3 . When w is a verb , it has a vacant case slot , and the semantic constraint for the slot meets the semantic feature of 
N1, give 0.5 to their correspondence.


If we could not find a correspondence with 0 . 6 or more score by the step 2 , lookup the genus word in the RSK , obtain definition sentences of it , and repeathestep 2 again . 
( The looking up of a genus word is done only once . ) Finally , if the best correspondence score is 0 . 5 or more , DBA outputs the best correspondence , which can be a semantic-role relation of the input  ; if not , DBA outputs nothing . 
For example , the inputrug by no coach is analyzed as follows ( figures attached to words indicate the similarity scores  ; the underlined score is the best ) :  ( 1 ) rug by no coach coach a person who teaches technique0  . 21 in some sport 1 . 0 Rugby , technique and sport have the semantic feature SPORT  , METHOD and SPORT respectively in NTT Semantic Feature Dictionary  . The lowest common node between SPORT and METHOD is ABSTRACT  , and based on these semantic features , the similarity between rugby and technique is calculated as  0  . 21 . On the other hand , lated as 1 . 0, since they have the same semantic feature . The case analysis finds that all case slots of teach are filled in the definition sentence  . 
As a result , DBA outputs the correspondence between rugby and sport as a possible semantic-role relation of the input  . 
On the other hand , buns ho'writings ' not at-suj in ' expert ' is an example that  N1 corresponds to a vacant case slot of the predicate outstanding :  ( 2 ) bunshou ' writings ' not atsuj in ' expert ' expert a person being outstanding  ( at ? 0 . 50 ) Puroresu'prowrestling'nochukei'relay'is an example that the looking up of a genus word broadcast leads to the correct analysis :  ( 3 ) puroresu ' prowrestling ' no chukei ' relay ' relaya relay broadcast broadcasta radioo  . oor television o . opresentation of news 0 . 48, entertainment 0 . 87, musico . so and others 4 . 2 . 2 Semantic Feature-based Analysis Since diverse relations in  N1 no N2 are handled by DBA , the remaining relations can be detected by simple rules checking the semantic features of  N1 and/or N2  . 
The following rules are applied one by one to the input phrase  . Once the input phrase meets a condition , SBA outputs the relation in the rule , and the subsequent rules are not applied any more . 
1 . NI:HUMAN , N2: RELATIVE - - ~ semantic-role(relative)e . g . kare'he'no oba ' aunt'2 . NI:HUMAN , N2: PERSONAL . _RELATION--~semantic-role ( personal relation ) e . g . kare'he'no tomodachi'friend'3 . NI:HUMAN , N2: HUMAN--~modifica-tion(apposition ) e . g . gakusei'student'nokare'he ' 4 . NI : ORGANIZATION , N2: HUMAN ~ belonging e . g . gakkou'school'no sensei'teacher ' 5 . NI:AGENT , N2:EVENT ~ agente . g . senmonka ' expert ' no chousa ' study ' 6 . NI:MATERIAL , N2: CONCRETE - -+ modifica-tion(material)e . g . ki'wood'no hako'box '7 . NI:TIME , N2:*3___+timee . g . aki ' autumn ' no hatake ' field'8 . NI:COLOR , QUANTITY , or FIGURE , g2:* modification e . g . gray no seihu ku ' uniform '9 . gl :*, N2: QUANTITY ~ semantic-role ( at-tribute)e . g . hei'wall'no takasa'height'10 . gl :* , N2: POSITION ~ semantic-role(posi-tion)e . g . tsukue'desk'nomigi'right'11 . NI:AGENT , Y2:*~possessione . g . watashif no kuruma ' car ' 12 . NI : PLACE or POSITION , N2:*---* placee . g . Kyotonomise'store ' The rules 1 ,  2 , 9 and 10 are for certain semantic-role relation . We use these rules because these relations can be analyzed more accurately by using explicit semantic features  , rather than based on a dictionary . 
4.2.3 Integration of Two Analyses
Usually , either DBA or SBA outputs some relation . In rare cases , neither analysis outputs any relation , which means analysis failure . When both DBA and SBA output some relations , the results are integrated as follows ( basically , if the output of the one analysis is more reliable  , the output of the other analysis is discarded ) : If a semantic-rolerlation is detected by SBA , discard the output from DBA . 
Else if the correspondence of 0 . 95 or more score is detected by DBA , discard the output from SBA . 
Else if some relation is detected by SBA , discard the output from DBA if the correspondence score is  0  . 8 or less . 
In the case of the following example , rojin ' old person ' no shozo ' portrait ' , both analyses were accepted by the above criteria . 
3,., meets any noun.

Table 2: Experimental results of N1 no N2 analysis . 
Relation ( R )
Semantic-role ( DBA )
Semantic-role ( SBA )






Correct R is correct , but the R was detected , detected correspon-but incorrect dence was incorrect 
R was not detected , though R is possibly correct 137   19   21   19   15  - -  2   0   10  - -  1   2   32  - -  7   0   12  - -  1   2   20  - -  1   0   23  - -  7   2   20  - -  3   21   ( 4 ) rojin ' old person ' no shozo ' portrait '
DBA : portrait a painting 0 . 17 or photograph 0 . 17 of a face 0 . 1s or figure 0 . 0 of real person 0 . s4 SBA:NI:AGENT ,   N2 :*----+ possession DBA interpreted the phrase as a portrait on which an old person was painted  ; SBA detected the possession relation which means an old person possesses a portrait  . One of these interpretations would be preferred epending on context  , but this is a perfect analysis expected for
N1 no N2 analysis.
5 Experiment and Discussion 5 . 1 Exper imenta l Eva luat ion We have collected 300 test N1 no N2 phrases from EDR dictionary ( Japan Electronic Dic-tionary Research Institute Ltd  . , 1995) , IPA dictionary ( Information-Technology Promotion Agency , Japan ,  1996) , and literatures on N1 no N2 phrases , paying attention so that they had enough diversity in their relations  . Then , we analyzed the test phrases by our system , and checked the analysis results by hand . 
Table 2 shows the reasonably good result both of DBA and SBA  . The precision of DBA , the ratio of correct analyses to detected analyses  , was 77% (=137/(137+19+21)); the recall of DBA , the ratio of correct analyses to potential semantic-role relations  , was 78% (=137/(137+19+19)) . The result of SBA is also good , excepting modification relation . 
Some phrases were given two or more relations . On average , 1 . 1 relations were given to one phrase . The ratio that at least one correct relation was detected was  81%   ( =242/300 )  ; the ratio that all possibly correct relations were detected and no incorrect relation was detected was  73%   ( =219/300 )  . 
5.2 Discussion of Correct Analysis
The success ratio above was reasonably good , but we would like to emphasize many interesting and promising examples in the analysis results  . 
(5 ) mado ' window'no curtain ' curtain ' curtain a hanging cloth that can be drawn to cover a  window1  . 0 in a room 0 . s3, to divide a room 0 . s3, etc . 
(6 ) osetsuma ' living room ' no curtain ' curtain ' curtain a hanging cloth that can be drawn to cover a  window0  . s2 in a room 1 . 0, to divide a room 1 . 0, etc . 
(7 ) oya'parent'noisan'legacy'lagacy property left on the death of the owner  0  . s 4 Mado ' window ' no curtain mustembarrass conventional classification-based methods  ; it might be place , whole-part , purpose , or some other relation like being close . However , DBA can clearly explain the relation . O setuma ' living room ' no curtain is another interestingly analyzed phrase  . DBA not only interprets it in a simple sense , but also provides us with more interesting information that a curtain might be being used for partition in the living room  . 

The analysis result of oya'parent'noisan ' legacy ' is also interesting  . Again , not only the correct analysis , but also additional information was given by DBA . That is , the analysis result tells us that the parent died  . Such information would facilitate intelligent peformance in a dialogue system analyzing : User : I bought a brand-new car by the legacy from my parent  . 
System : Oh , when did your parent die ? I didn't know that . 
By examining these analysis results , we can conclude that the dictionary-based understanding approach can provide us with much richer information than the conventional classification-based approaches  . 
5.3 Discussion of Incorrect Analysis
It is possible to classify some of the causes of incorrect analyses arising from our method  . 
One problem is that a definition sentence does not always describe well the semantic roles as follows:  ( 8 ) shiire ' stocking ' no saikaku ' resoucefulness ' resoucefulness the ability to use one's head  0  . 1s cleverly Saikaku ' resourcefulness ' can be the ability for some task  , but the definition says nothing about that . On the other hand , the definition of sain ou ' talent'is clearer about the semantic role as shown below  . Concequently , shii~e'stocking'no sainou'tMent'can be interpretted correctly by DBA  . 
(9 ) shiire ' stocking ' no sainou ' talent'talent power and skill  , esp . to do something 0 . 9 0 This represents an elementary problem of our method  . Out of 175 phrases which should be interpreted as semantic -rolerlation based on the dictionary  ,   13 were not analyzed correctly because of this type of problem  . 
However , such a problem can be solved by revising the definition sentences  , of course in natural language . This is a humanly reasonable task , very different from the conventional approach where the classification should be reconsidered  , or the classification rules should be modified . 
Another problem is that sometimes the similarity calculated by NTT semantic feature dictionary is not high enough to correspond as follows :  ( 10 ) ume ' umef lowers ' nome is ho'famous place ' famous place a place being famous for scenery  0  . 20, etc . 
In some cases the structure of NTT semantic feature dictionary is questionable  ; in some cases a definition sentence is to origid ; in other cases an input phrase is a bit metaphorical  . 
As for SBA , most relations can be detected well by simple rules  . However , it is not possible to detect a modification relation accurately only by using NTT semantic feature dictionary  , because modifier and non-modifier nouns are often mixed in the same semantic feature category  . 
Other proper resource should be incorporated ; one possibility is to use the dictionary definition of  N1  . 
6 Related Work
From the viewpoint of semantic roles of nouns , there have been several related research conducts : the mental space theory is discussing the functional behavior of nouns  ( Fauconnier ,  1985) ; the generative lexicon theory accounts for the problem of creative word senses based on the qualia structure of a word  ( Pustejovsky ,  1995) ; Dahl et al ( 1987 ) and Macleod et al ( 1997 ) discussed the treatment of nominalizations . Compared with these studies , the point of this paper is that an ordinary dictionary can be a useful resource of semantic roles of nouns  . 
Our approach using an ordinary dictionary is similar to the approach used to creat MindNet  ( Richardson et al ,  1998) . However , these-manit canalysis of noun phrases is a much more specialized and suitable application of utilizing dictionary entries  . 
7 Conclusion
The paper proposed a method of analyzing Japanese N1 no N2 phrases based on a dictionary , interpreting obscure phrases very clearly . 
The method can be applied to the analysis of compound nouns  , like baseball player . Roughly speaking , the semantic diversity in compound nouns is a subset of that in  N1 no N2 phrases . 
Furthermore , the method must be applicable to lated explanation in the paper naturally indicates the possibility  . 

The research described in this paper was supported in part by  JSPS-RFTF96P00502   ( The Japan Society for the Promotion of Science , Research for the Future Program ) and Grant-in-
Aid for Scientific Research 10143209.

Deborah A . DaM , Martha S . Palmer , and Rebecca J . Passonneau .  1987 . Nominalizations in PUNDIT . In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of ACL , pages 131-139 , Stanford , California . 
Gilles Fauconnier .  1985 . Mental Spaces : aspects of meaning construction i naturalan-guage  . The MIT Press . 
Charles J . Fillmore . 1968. The case for case.
Holt , Rinehart and Winston , New York.
Satoru Ikehara , Masahiro Miyazaki , Satoshi Shirai , Akio Yokoo , Hiromi Nakaiwa , Ken-tarou Ogura , and Yoshifumi Oyama Yoshi-hiko Hayashi , editors .  1997 . Japanese Lexicon . Iwanami Publishing . 
Information-Technology Promotion Agency , Japan .  1996 . Japanese Nouns : A Guide to the IPA Lexicon of Basic Japanese Nouns  . 
Japan Electronic Dictionary Research Institute Ltd  .  1995 . EDR Electronic Dictionary Specifications Guide . 
Sadao Kurohashi and Makoto Nagao .  1994 . A syntactic analysis method of long Japanese sentences based on the detection of conjunctive structures  . Computational Linguistics , 20(4) . 
Sadao Kurohashi and Makoto Nagao . 1998.
Building a Japanese parsed corpus while improving the parsing system  . In Proceedings of the First International Conference on Language Resources ~ Evaluation  , pages 719-724 . 
Sadao Kurohashi , Masaki Murata , Yasunori
Yata , Mitsunobu Shimada , and Makoto
Nagao .  1998 . Construction of Japanese nominal semantic dictionary using " ANOB " phrases in corpora  . In Proceedings of COLING-ACL '98 workshop on the Computational Treatment of Nominals  . 
Catherine Macleod , Adam Meyers , Ralph Grishman , Leslie Barrett , and Ruth Reeves . 
1997 . Designing a dictionary of derived nominals . In Proceedings of Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing  , Tzigov Chark , 

James Pustejovsky .  1995 . The Generative Lexicon . The MIT Press . 
Stephen D . Richardson , William B . Dolan , and
Lucy Vanderwende .  1998 . Mindnet : acquiring and structuring semantic information from text  . In Proceedings of COLING-
ACL'98.
Akira Shimazu , Shozo Naito , and Hirosato No-mura .  1987 . Semantic structure analysis of Japanese noun phrases wir had nominal particles  . In Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of ACL , pages 123-130 , Stanford , California . 
Eiichiro Sumita , Hitoshi Iida , and Hideo Ko-hyama .  1990 . Translating with examples : A new approach to machine translation  . In Proceedings of the 3rd TMI , pages 203-212 . 
Jyunichi Tadika , editor .  1997 . Reika Shougaku Kokugojiten ( Japanese dictionary for children )  . Sanseido . 
Yoichi Tomiura , Teigo Nakamura , and Toru Hi-taka .  1995 . Semantic structure of Japanese noun phrases NP no NP  ( in Japanese )  . 
Transactions of Information Processing Society of Japan  ,  36(6):1441-1448 . 

