Unifying Parallels
Claire Gardent
Computational Linguistics
University of the Saarland
Saarbriicken , Germany
claire 0 coli , uni-sb , de
Abstract
I show that the equational treatment of ellipsis proposed in  ( Dalrympl et al . , 1991 ) can further be viewed as modeling the effect of parallelism on semantic interpretation  . I illustrate this claim by showing that the account straightforwardly extends to a general treatment of sloppy identity on the one hand  , and to deaccented foci on the other . I also briefly discuss the results obtained in a prototype implementation  . 
1 Introduction ( Dalrymple et al , 1991; Shieber et al ,  1996 )   ( henceforth DSP ) present a treatment of VP-ellipsis which can be sketched as follows  . An elliptical construction ivolves two phrases ( usually clauses ) which are in some sense structurally parallel . Whereas the first clause ( we refer to it as the source ) is semantically complete , the second ( or target ) clause is missing semantic material which can be recovered from the source  . 
Formally the analysis consists of two components : the representation f the overall discourse  ( i . e . source and target clauses ) and an equation which permits recovering the missing semantics  . 
I Representation Equation ISAR ( T1 ,  ? ? ? , Tn)R(S1 ,  . . . , Sn ) = SIS is the semantic representation f the source  ,  $1 ,   .   .   . , Sn and T1, . . .   , Tn are the semantic representations of the parallel elements in the source and target respectively and R represents the relation to be recovered  . The equation is solved using Higher-Order Unification  ( HOU ) : Given any solvable equation M = N , HOU yields a substitution of terms for free variables that makes M and N equal in the theory of a/~v-identity  . 
The following example illustrates the workings of this analysis :  ( 1 ) Jonlikes Sarah and Peter does too . 
In this case the semantic representation ad the equation associated with the overall discourse ar e: 
Equation R(j ) = like(j , s)
For this equation , HOU yields the substitution 1: Rx . like(x , s ) and as a result , the resolved semantics of the target is :
Ax . like(x , s ) ( p)-like(p , s)
The DSP approach has become very influential in computational linguistics for two main reasons  . First , it accounts for a wide range of observations concerning the interaction of VP-ellipsis  , quantification and anaphora . Second , it bases semantic onstruction on a tool , HOU , which is both theoretically and computationally attractive  . Theoretically , HOU is well-defined and well-understood-this permits a clear understanding of both the limitations and the predictions of the approach  . Computationally , it has both a declarative and a procedural interpretation-this supports both transparency and implementation  . 
1As ( Dalrymple et al , 1991) themselves observe , HOU also yields other , linguistically invalid , solutions . 
For a proposal on how to solve this overgeneration problem  , see ( Gardent and Kohlhase , 1996b ; Gardent et al ,  1999) . 

In this paper , I start ( section 2 ) by clarifying the relationship between DSP's proposal and the semantic representation of discourse anaphors  . In section 3 and 4 , I then show that the HOU-treatment of ellipsis naturally extends to provide : ? A treatment of the interaction between parallelism and focus and * A general account of sloppy identity Section  6 concludes and compares the approach with related work  . 
2 Representing discourse anaphors
The maintenet of the DSP approach is that interpreting an elliptical clause involves recovering a relation from the source clause and applying it to the target elements  . This leaves open the question of how this procedure relates to sentence level semantic on struction and in particular to the semantic representation fVP-ellipsis  . Consider for instance the following example : ( 2 ) Jon runs but Peter doesn't . 
Under the DSP analysis , the unresolved semantics of ( 2 ) is ( 3 ) a and equation ( 3 ) b is setup . HOU yields the solution given in ( 3 ) c and as a result , the semantics of the target clause
Peter doesn't is (3) d.
(3) a . pos(run(jon )) AR(neg ) ( peter ) b . R(pos)(jon ) = pos(run(jon))c . 
d . Ox . O ( run ( x ) ) ( neg ) (peter ) neg ( run ( peter ) ) It is unclear how the semantic representation ( 3 ) a comes about . Under a Montague-type approach where syntactic a tegories map onto semantic types  , the semantic type of a VP-Ellipsis is ( et ) , the type of properties of individuals i . e . unary relations , not binary ones . And under a standard treatment of subject NPs and auxiliaries  , one would expect here presentation of the target clause to be neg  ( P ( peter ) ) not P ( neg ) (peter )  . There is thus a discrepancy between the representation DSP posit for the target  , and the semantics generated by a standard , Montague-style semantic on struction module . 
Furthermore , although DSP only apply their analysis to VP -ellipsis  , they have in mind a much broader ange of applications :\[  . . . \] many other elliptical phenomena and related phenomena subject o multiple readings akin to the strict and sloppy readings discussed here may be analysed using the same techniques  ( Dalrympl et al . , 1991, page 450) . 
In particular , one would expect the HOU-analysis to support a general theory of sloppy identity  . For instance , one would expect it to account for the sloppy interpretation  ( I'llkiss you if you don't want me tokiss you ) of ( 4 )  . 
(4 ) I'll\[help you \] 1 if you\[want metol\]2 . 
I ' llk is syou if you don't 2.
But for such cases , the discrepancy between the semantic representation generated by semantic construction and the DSP representation of the target is even more obvious  . Assuming help and kiss are the parallel elements , the equation generated by the DSP proposal is : R ( h ) = wt ( you , h(i , you )) --+ h(i , you ) and accordingly , the semantic representation f the target is -~ R ( k ) which is in stark contrast with what one could reasonably expect from a standard semantic on struction process namely : - ~ P  ( you ) -+ k ( i , you ) . 
What is missing is a constraint which states that the representation f the target must unify with the semantic representation generated by the semantic on struction component  . If we integrate this constraint into the DSP account  , we get the following representations and constraints :  ( 5 ) 
Representation SAR(T1, . . . , Tn)
Equations R(S1, . . . , Sn ) = S
R(T1, .   .   .   , Tn ) = T where T is the semantic representation generated for the target by the semantic on struction module  . The second equation requires that this representation Tunifies with the representation of the target postulated by DSP  . 
With this clarification in mind , example (2) is handled as follows . The semantic representation of the target clause is the representation one would expect from a standard Montague-style semantic onstruction process  . The equations are as given in ( 6 ) b-c where C represent she semantic shared by the parallel structures and P the VP-Ellipsis  . HOU then yields the solution in ( 6 ) d : the value of C is that relation shared by the two structures i  . e . a binary relation as in DSP . However the value of P ( the semantic representation f the VPE ) is a property-as befits a verbal phrase . 
(6) a . pos(run(jon )) A neg(P ( peter )) b . C(pos)(jon ) = pos(run(jon))c . C(neg ) ( peter ) = neg(P ( peter )) d . C -+ AOAx . O(run(x )), P ) ~ x . run(x)e . AO ) ~ xO(run(x )) ( neg ) ( peter ) neg(run(peter))- . +

In sum , provided one equation is added to the DSP system , the relation between the HOU-approach to VP -ellipsis and standard Montague-style smantic on struction becomes transparent  . Furthermore it also becomes immediately obvious that the DSP approach does indeed generalise to a much wider range of data than just VP-Ellipsis  . The key point is that there is now not just one , but several , free variables coming into play ; and that although the free variable C always represents the semantics shared by two parallel structures  , the freevari-able ( s ) occuring in the semantic representation of the target may represent any kind of unresolved discourse anaphors-not just ellipsis  . 
Consider the following example for instance : ( 7 ) Jon 1 took his 1wife to the station . No ,
BILL took his wife to the station.
There is no ellipsis in the target , yet the discourse is ambiguous between a strict and a sloppy interpretation  2 and one would expect he HOU-analysis to extend to such cases  . Which indeed is the case . The analysis goes as follows . 
~I assume that in the target ook his wife to the station is deaccented  . In such cases , it is clear that the ambiguity of his is restricted by parallelismi  . e . is a sloppy/strict ambiguity rather than just an ambiguity in the choice of antecedent  . 
As for ellipsis , anaphors in the source are resolved , whereas discourse anaphors in the target are represented using free variables  ( alternatively , we could resolve them first and let HOU filter unsuitable resolutions out  )  . 
Specifically , the target pronoun his is represented by the free variable X and therefore we have the following representation adequations : 
Representation tk(j , wife_of(j ), s)
Ark(b , wife_of(X ), s)
Equations C(j ) = tk(j , wife_of(j ), s)
C(b ) = tk(b , wife_of(X ), s)
HOU yields inter alia two solutions for these equations  , the first yielding a strict and the second , a sloppy reading : C < -- A z . tk(z , wife_of(j ), s ), X+-jC+--Az . tk(z , wife_of(z ) , s ) , X+-b Thus the HOU-approach captures cases of sloppy identity which do not involve ellipsis  . 
More generally , the HOU-approach can be viewed as modeling the effect of parallelism on interpretation  . In what follows , I substantiate this claim by considering two such cases : first  , the interaction of parallelism and sloppy identity and second  , the interaction of parallelism and focus . 
3 Parallelism and Focus
Since ( Jackendoff ,  1972) , it is widely agreed that focus can affect the truth-conditions of a sentence  3  . The following examples illustrate this , where upper-letters indicate prosodic prominence and thereby focus  . 
(8) a . Jononly introduced MARY to Sue.
b . Jononly introduced Mary to SUE.
Whereas ( 8a ) says that the only person introduced by Jonto Sueis Mary  ,   ( 8b ) states that the only person Jon introduced Mary to  , isSue . 
To capture this effect of focus on semantics , a focus value 4 is used which in essence , is the 3The term focus has been put to many different uses . 
Here I follow ( Jackendoff ,  1972 ) and use it to refer to the semantics of that part of the sentence which is  ( or contains an elemen that is ) prosodically prominent . 
a This focus value is defined and termed differently by different authors : Jackendoff  ( Jackendoff , 1972) calls it the presuppositional set , Rooth ( Rooth , 1992b ) the Alternative Set and Krifka ( Krifka , 1992) the Ground . 
5 1 set of semantic objects obtained by making an appropriate substitution in the focus position  . 
For instance , in ( Gaxdent and Kohlhase , 1996a ) , the focus value of ( 8a ) is defined with the help of the equation : I Focus Value Equation I Sere = X  ( F ) I where Sern is the semantic of the sentence without the focus operator  ( e . g . intro(j , m , s ) for (8)) , F represents the focus and X helps determine the value of the focus variable  ( written X ) as follows:
Definition 3.1 ( Focus value)
Let X =  Ax . ? be the value defined by the focus value equation and T be the type of x  , then the Focus value derivable from X , written X , is ? Jx wife . 
Given (8a ) , the focus value equation is thus ( 9a ) with solution ( 9b )  ; the focus value derived from it is ( 9c ) and the semantics of ( 8a ) is ( 9 d ) which given ( 9c ) is equivalent to ( 9e )  . 
(9) a . intro(j,m , s ) = X(m ) b . X+--Ax . intro(j,x,s)c . --X = intro(j,x , s)IxE wifed . VP\[PE-XAP-+P = intro(j,m,s)\]e . VP\[PE intro(j,x,s)IxE wife A
P ~ P = intro(j,m , s)\]
In English : the only proposition of the form John introduced x to Sue that is true is the proposition John introduced Mary to Sue  . 
Now consider the following example : (10) a . J on only likes MARY b . No , PETER only likes Mary . 
In a deaccenting context , the focus might be part of the deaccented material and therefore not prosodically prominent  . Thus in (10) b , the semantic focus Mary is deaccented because of the partial repetition of the previous utterance  . 
Because they all use focus to determine the focus value and thereby the semantics of sentences such as  ( 8a )  , focus de accenting is a challenge for most theories of focus  . So for instance , in the HOU-analysis of both ( Pulman , 1997) and ( Gaxdent and Kohlhase , 1996a ) , the right hand side of the focus equation for ( 10b ) becomes FV ( F ) where neither FV ( the focus value ) nor F ( the focus ) are known . As a result , the equation is untyped and cannot be solved by Huet's algorithm  ( Huet ,  1976) . 
The solution is simple : if there is no focus , there is no focus equation . After all , it is the presence of a focus which triggers the formation of a focus value  . 
But how do we determine the interpretation of ( 10b ) ? Without focus equation , the focus value remains unspecified and the representation of  ( 10b ) is:
VP\[PEF VAP-+P = like(p , m )\] which is underspecified with respect oF V . 
( Rooth , 1992a ) convincingly argues that deaccenting and VP -ellipsis are constrained by the same semantic redundancy constraint  ( and that VP-ellipsis is additionally subject to a syntactic on straint on the reconstructed VP  )  . Moreover , ( Gaxdent ,  1999 ) shows that the equational constraints defined in ( 5 ) adequately chaxacterise the redundancy constraint which holds for both VPE and deaccenting  . Now example ( 10b ) clearly is a case of deaccenting : because it repeats the VP of  ( 10 a )  , the VP only like smary in (10b ) is deaccented . Hence the redundancy constraint holding for both VPE and deaccenting and encoded in  ( 5 ) applies 5:
C(j ) = VP\[PG like O , x ) AP--+P = like(j , m)\]C(p ) = VP\[P \ [ PEFVAP-+P = like(p , m ) \] These equations axe solved by the following substitution : C + -- 
FV +-
Az . VP\[PE like(z , x ) AP--+P = like(z , m )\] , like(p , x ) so that the interpretation of ( 10b ) is correctly fixed to : VP\[PE like ( p , x ) AP--+P = like(p , m)\]
Thus , the HOU approach to deaccenting makes appropriate predictions about the interpretation of " second occurrence x pressions "  5For lack of space , I shorten like ( j , x ) IxG wife to like(j , x ) cases , the focus value of the source is inherited by the target through unification  . Intuitively , a sort of " parallelism constraint " is at work which equates the interpretation of the repeated material in an SOE with that of its source counterpart  . 
Such an approach is in line with ( Krifka ,  1992 ) which argues that the repeated material in an SOE is an anaphore solving to its source counterpart  . It is also partially in line with Rooth's account in that it similarly posits an initially underspecified semantics for the target  ; It is more specific than Rooth's however , as it lifts this underspecification by unification  . The difference is best illustrated by an example :   ( 11 ) ? ? J on only likes SARAH . No , PETER only likes Mary . 
Provided only likes Mary is deaccented , this discourse is ill-formed ( unless the second speaker knows Sarah and Mary to denote the same individual  )  . Under the HOU-analysis this falls out of the fact that the redundancy constraint cannot be satisfied as there is no unifying substitution for the following equations : 
C(j ) = VP\[PE like(j , x ) AP--+P = like(j , s)\]C(p ) = VP\[P ? FVAP--+P = like(p , m )\] In constrast , Rooth's approach does not capture the ill -formedness of  ( 11 ) as it places no constraint on the interpretation of PETER only likes Mary other than that given by the compositional semantics of the sentence namely : 
VP\[PEF VAP--+P = like(p , m ) \] where FV represent she quantification domain of only and is pragmatically determined  . Without going into the details of Rooth's treatment of focus  , let it suffice to say , that the first clause does actually provide the appropriate antecedent for this pragmatic anaphor so that despite its ill-formedness  , (11) is assigned a fullfledged interpretation . 
~ The terminology is borrowed from ( Krifka ,  1995 ) and refers to expressions which partially or totally repeat a previous expression  . 
Nonetheless there are cases where pragmatic liberalism is necessary  . Thus consider Rooth's notorious example : ( 12 ) People who GRO Wrice usually only
EA Trice
This is understood to mean that people who grow rice usually eat nothing else than rice  . But as the focus ( RICE ) and focus value ( Ax . eat(pwgr , x ) ) that need to be inherited by the target VP only EA Trice are simply not available from the previous context  , the redundancy constraint on deaccenting fails to predict this and hence  , fails to further specify the underspecified meaning of  ( 12 )  . A related case in point is: ( 13 ) We are supposed to TAKE maths and semantics , but I only LIKE semantics . 
Again the focus on LIKE is a contrastive focus which does not contribute information on the quantification domain of only  . In other words , although the intended meaning of the but-clause is o/all the subjects that I like  , the only subject I like is semantics , the given prosodic focus on LIKE fails to establish the appropriate set of alternatives namely : all the subjects that I like  . Such cases clearly involve inference , possibly a reasoning along the following lines : the but conjunction indicates an expectation denial  . The expectation is that if x takes maths and semantics then x likes maths and semantics  . This expectation is thus made salient by the discourse context and provides in fact the set of alternatives necessary to interpret only namely the set like  ( i , sem ) , like(i , maths ) . 
To be more specific , consider the representation of I only like semantics : VP\[PEF VAP--+P = like  ( i , sem ) \] By resolving FV to the set of propositions like  ( i , sem ) , like(i , maths ) , we get the appropriate meaning namely : VP\[PE like  ( i , sem ) , like(i , maths ) AP--+P = like ( i , sem)\]Following(Rooth , 1992b ) , I assume that in such cases , the quantification domain of both usually and only are pragmatically determined  . 

The redundancy constraint on deaccenting still holds but it plays no role in determining these particular quantification domains  . 
4 Sloppy identity
As we saw in section 2 , an important property of DSP's analysis is that it predicts sloppy/strict ambiguity for VP -Ellipsis whereby the multiple solutions generated by HOU capture the multiple readings allowed by natural language  . As ( Hobbs and Kehler , 1997; Hardt , 1996) have shown however , sloppy identity is not necessarily linked to VP -ellipsis  . Essentially , it can occur whenever , in a parallel configuration , the antecedent of an anaphor/ellips is itself contains an anaphor/ellipsis whose antecedent is a parallel element  . Here are some examples . 

J on 1/took his 1wife to the station \]2.
No , BILL/took his wife to the station \]2.
( Bill took Bill's wife to the station )
Jon 1 spent/hislpay check\] 2 but Peter saved it2  .   ( Peter saved Peter's pay-check ) I'll/help you \] 1 if you/want me to 1\]2 . 
I ' llk is syou if you don't 2 .   ( I'llkiss you if you don't want me tokiss you ) Because the HOU-analysis reconstructs the semantics common to source and target rather than  ( solely ) the semantics of VP-ellipses , it can capture the full range of sloppy/strict ambiguity illustrated above  ( and as ( Gardent ,  1997 ) shows some of the additional examples listed in ( Hobbs and Kehler ,  1997)) . Consider for instance example (16) . The ellipsis in the target has an antecedent want me to which itself contains a VPE whose antecedent  ( help you ) has a parallel counterpart in the target . As a result , the target ellipsis has a sloppy interpretation as well as a strict one : it can either denote the same property as its antecedent VP want me to help you  , or its sloppy copy namely want me to kiss you . 
The point to note is that in this case , sloppy interpretation results from a parallelism between VPs not as is more usual  , from a parallelism between NPs . This poses no particular problem for the HOU -analysis  . As usual , the parallel elements ( help and kiss ) determine the equational constraint so that we have the following equalities Z : C  ( h ) = wt ( you , h(i , you )) -+ h(i , you )
C(k ) = P ( you)--+k(i , you)
Resolution of the first equation yields
AR . wt(you , R(i , you )) --+ R(i , you ) as a possible value for C and consequently , the value for C(k ) is : C(k ) = wt(you , k ( i , you )) -+ k(i , ou ) Therefore a possible substitution for P is : P + -- x  . wt(x , k ( i , x ) ) and the VPE occurring in the target can indeed be assigned the sloppy interpretation x want me to kiss x  . 
Now consider example (15) . The pronoun it occurring in the second clause has a sloppy interpretation i that it can be interpreted as meaning Peter's pay check  , rather than Jon's pay check . In the literature such pronouns are known as pay check pronouns and are treated as introducing a definite whose restriction is pragmatically given  ( cf . e . g . ( Cooper , 1979)) . We can capture this intuition by assigning pay check pronouns the following representation : 
Pro ~-~) ~ Q . 3x\[P ( x ) AVy\[P ( y ) y = x \] AQ ( x ) \] with PEWj ~ ( e_+t ) ? That is , pay check pronouns are treated as definites whose restriction  ( P ) is a variable of type ( e--+ t )  . Under this assumption , (15) is assigned the following equations S : C(j , sp ) = 31x ~) c_of(x , j ) As p(j , x )\]
C(p , sa ) = 31x\[P ( x)Asa(p,x)\]
Resolving the first equation yields ; ~ y . )~O . 3xx ~) c_of(x , y ) AO(y , x )\] as a value for C , and therefore we have that : C(p , sa ) = 31 xbc_of(x , p ) As a(p , x)\]P + --) ~ y . pc_of(y , p ) That is , the target clause is correctly assigned the sloppy interpretation : Peter saved Peter's pay check  . 
7 For simplicity , I'veommitted polarity information . 
sI abbreviate ) ~ Q . 3 x\[P ( x)AVy\[P ( y)-+=x\]AQ(x)\]to)~Q . Blx\[P ( x)AQ(x)\] . 

Thus the HOU-treatment of parallelism can account for both pay check pronouns and examples such as  ( 16 )  . Though lack of space prevents showing how the other cases of sloppy identity are handled  , the general point should be clear : because the HOU-approach associate sloppy identity with parallelism rather than with VP-ellipsis  , it can capture a fairly wide range of data providing some reasonable assumptions are made about the representations of ellipses and anaphors  . 
5 Implementation
It is known that for the typed lambda-calculus , HOU is only semi-decidable so that the unification algorithm need not terminate for unsolvable problems  . Fortunately , the class of equations that is needed for semantic on struction is a very restricted class for which much better results hold  . In particular , the fact that free variables only occur on the lefthand side of our equations reduces the problem of finding solutions to higher-order matching  , a problem which is decidable for the subclass of third-order formulae  ( Dowek ,  1992) . 
These theoretical considerations have been put into practice in the research prototype CHoLI  , a system which permits testing the HOU-approach to semantic construction  . 
Briefly , the system can : parse a sequence of sentences and return its semantic representation  , interactively build the relevant equations ( parallel elements are entered by the user and the corresponding equations are computed by the system  ) and solve them by means of HOU . 
The test suite includes approximately one hundred examples and covers the following phenomena : ? VP-ellipsis and its interaction with anaphora  , proper nouns ( e . g . , Mary , Paul ) and control verbs ( i . e . , verbs such astry whose subject " control " i . e . , is coreferential with some other element in the verb complement  )  . 
? Deaccenting and its interaction with anaphora , VP-ellipsis , context and sloppy/strict ambiguity . 
? Focus with varying and ambiguous foci . It is currently being extended to sentences with multiple foci and the interaction with deaccenting  . 
As mentioned in section 2 the HOU-approach sometimes over generates and yields solutions which are linguistically invalid  . However as ( Gardent et al , 1999) shows , this shortcoming can be remedied using Higher -Order Colored Unification  ( HOCU ) rather than straight HOU . 
In CHOLI both an HOU and an HOCU algo-rithm can be used and all examples have been tested with and without colors  . In all cases , colors cuts down the number of generated readings to exactly these readings which are linguistically acceptable  . 
6 Conclusion
It should by now be clear that the DSP-treatment of ellipsis is better seen as a treatment of the effect of semantic parallelism : the equations constrain the interpretation of parallel structures and as a side effect  , a number of linguistic phenomena are predicted e . g . VPE-resolution , sloppy/strict ambiguity and focus value inheritance in the case of SOEs  . 
There are a number of proposals ( Hobbs and Kehler , 1997; Priist et al , 1994; Asher , 1993; Asher et al ,  1997 ) adopting a similar approach to parallelism and semantics of which the most worked out is undoubtly  ( Hobbs and Kehler ,  1997) . ( Hobbs and Kehler ,  1997 ) presents a general theory of parallelism and shows that it provides both a finegrained analysis of the interaction between VP-ellipsis and pronominal anaphor and a general account of sloppy identity  . The approach is couched in the " interpretation as abduction framework " and consists in proving by abduction that two properties  ( i . e . 
sentence or clause meaning ) are similar . Because it interleaves a co-recursion on semantic structures with full inferencing  ( to prove similarity between semantic entities )  , Hobbs and Kehler's approach is more powerful than the HOU-approach which is based on a strictly syntactic operation  ( no semantic reasoning occurs )  . Furthermore , because it can represent coreferences xplicitely , it achieves a better account of the interaction between VP-ellipsis and anaphora  ( in particular , it accounts for the infamous " missing reading puzzles " of ellipsis  ( Fiengo and May ,  1994)) . 
On the other hand , the equational approach naturally supports the interaction of distinct phenomena  . We have seen that it correctly captures the interaction of parallelism and focus  . 
Further a field , ( Niehren et al ,  1997 ) shows that context unification supports a purely equational treatment of the interaction between ellipsis and quantification whereas  ( Shieber et al ,  1996 ) presents a very extensive HOU-based treatment of the interaction between scope and ellipsis  . 

I wish to thank the ACL anonymous refer-tees for some valuable comments  ; and Stephan Thater , Ralf Debusman and Karsten Konrad for their implementation fCHoLI  . The research presented in this paper was funded by the DFG in  SFB-378  , Project C2 ( LISA) . 
References
Nicholas Asher .  1993 . Reference to abstract objects in discourse . Kluwer , Dordrecht . 
Nicholas Asher , Daniel Hardt , and Joan Bus-quets .  1997 . Discourse parallelism , scope and ellipsis . In Proceedings of SALT'97, Palo

Robin Cooper .  1979 . The interpretation of pronouns . In F . Heny and H . S . Schnelle , editors , Syntax and Semantics , number 10 , pages 61-93 . 
Mary Dalrymple , Stuart Shieber , and Fernando Pereira .  1991 . Ellipsis and higher-order unification . Linguistics ~ Philosophy , 14:399-452 . 
Gilles Dowek .  1992 . Third order matching is decidable . In Proceedings of the 7th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science  ( LICS-7 )  , pages 210 . IEEE Computer
Society Press.
Robert Fiengo and Robert May .  1994 . Indices and Identity . MIT Press , Cambridge . 
Claire Gardent and Michael Kohlhase . 1996a.
Focus and higher-order unification . In Proceedings of COLING'96, Copenhagen . 
Claire Gardent and Michael Kohlhase . 1996b.
Higher-order coloured unification and natural language semantics  . In Proceedings of
ACL'96, Santa Cruz.
Claire Gardent , Michael Kohlhase , and Karsten Konrad .  1999 . Higher-order coloured unification : a linguistic application  . Techniquet
Science Informatiques , 18(2):181-209.
Claire Gardent .  1997 . Sloppy identity . In Christian Retort , editor , Logical Aspects of Computational Linguistics , pages 188-207 . 

Claire Gardent .  1999 . Deaccenting and higher-order unification . University of the Saarland . 
Submitted for publication.
Daniel Hardt .  1996 . Dynamic interpretation of vpellips is . To appear in Linguistics and Philosophy . 
J . Hobbs and A . Kehler .  1997 . A theory of parallelism and the case of VP ellipsis  . In Proceedings of ACL , Madrid . 
Gdrard P . Huet .  1976 . Rdsolution d ' Equati?ns dans des Langages d'or dre 1  , 2 ,  . . . , w . Th~sed'Etat , Universit ~ de Paris VII . 
Ray S . Jackendoff .  1972 . Semantic Interpretation in Generative Grammar . The MIT

Manfred Krifka .  1992 . A compositional semantics for multiple focus constructions  . In Joachim Jacobs , editor , Informations struktur and Grammatik . Heidelberg . Sonderheft 4 . 
Manfred Krifka .  1995 . Focus and/or context : A second look at second occurence x pressions  . 
Unpublished Ms . University of Texas , Austin,

Joachim Niehren , Manfred Pinkal , and Peter
Ruhrberg .  1997 . A uniform approach to underspecification ad parallelism  . In Proceedings of ACL'97, pages 410-417, Madrid,

H . Priist , R . Scha , and M . van den Berg.
1994 . Discourse grammar and verb phrase anaphora . Linguistics ~ Philosophy , 17:261-327 . 
Steve Pulman .  1997 . Higher order unification and the interpretation of focus  . Linguistics
Philosophy , 20:73-115.
Mats Rooth . 1992a . Ellipsis redundancy and reduction redundancy . In Steve Berman and Arild Hestvik , editors , Proceedings of the Stuttgart Ellipsis Workshop , University of

Mats Rooth . 1992b . A theory of focus interpretation . Natural Language Semantics , pages 75-116 . 
Stuart Shieber , Fernando Pereira , and Mary Dalrymple .  1996 . Interaction of scope and ellipsis . Linguistics $ J Philosophy , 19:527-552 . 

