Discourse Relations : A Structural and Presuppositional Account Using 
Lexicalised TAG *
Bonnie Webber
Univ of Edinburgh

Alistair Knott
Univ of Otago

Matthew Stone
Rutgers Univ

Aravind Joshi
Univ of Pennsylvania
joshi@cis.upenn.edu

We show that discourse structure need not bear the full burden of conveying discourse relations by showing that many of them can be explained non -structurally in terms of the grounding of anaphoric presuppositions  ( Vander Sandt ,  1992) . This simplifies discourse structure , while still allowing the realisation of a full range of discourse relations  . This is achieved using the same semantic machinery used in deriving clause-level semantics  . 
1 Introduction
Research on discourse structure has , by and large , attempted to associate all meaningful relations between propositions with structural connections between discourse clauses  ( syntactic clauses or structures composed of them )  . Recognising that this could mean multiple structural connections between clauses  , Rhetorical Structure Theory ( Mann and Thompson ,  1988 ) simply stipulates that only a single relation may hold  . Moore and Pollack ( 1992 ) argue that both informational ( semantic ) and intentional relations can hold between clause simultan-eously and independently  . This suggests that factoring the two kinds of relations might lead to a pair of structures  , each still with no more than a single structural connection between any two clauses  . 
But examples of multiple semantic relations are easy to find  ( Webber et al ,  1999) . Having structure account for all of them leads to the complexities shown in Figure  1  , including the crossing dependencies shown in Fig . lc . These structures are no longer trees , making it difficult to define a compositional semantics  . 
This problem would not arise if one recognised additional  , nonstructural means of conveying semantic relations between propositions and modal * Our thanks to Mark Steedman  , Katja Markert , Gann Bierner and three ACL'99 reviewers for all their useful comments . 
operators on propositions . This is what we do here : Structurally , we assume a " b are bones " discourse structure built up from more complex elements  ( LTAG trees ) than those used in many other approaches . These structures and the operations used in assembling them are the basis for compositional semantics  . 
Stimulated by structural operations , inference based on world knowledge , usage conventions , etc . , can then make defeasible contributions to discourse interpretation that elaborate the non -defeasible propositions contributed by compositional semantics  . 
Non-structurally , we take additional semantic relations and modal operators to be conveyed through anaphoric presuppositions  ( Vander Sandt ,  1992 ) licensed by information that speaker and hearer are taken to share  . A main source of shared knowledge is the interpretation of the ongoing discourse  . Because the entity that licences ( or " discharges " ) a given presupposition usually has a source within the discourse  , the presupposition seems to link the clause containing the presupposition-bearing  ( p-bearing ) element o that source . However , as with pronominal and definite NP anaphora , while attentional constraints on their interpret -ation may be influenced by structure  , the links themselves are not structural . 
The idea of combining compositional semantics with defeasible inference is not new  . Neither is the idea of taking certain lexical items as anaphorically presupposing an eventuality or a set of eventualities : It is implicit in all work on the anaphoric nature of tense  ( cf . Partee (1984) , Webber (1988) , inter alia ) and modality ( Stone ,  1999) . What is new is the way we enable anaphoric presupposition to contribute to semantic relations and modal operators  , in a way ( a )
R1 R2
CICiCkCiCiCkCm(b ) ( c)
Figure 1: Multiple semantic links ( Rj ) between discourse clauses ( C i )  :  ( a ) back to the same discourse clause ; ( b ) back to different discourse clauses ; ( c ) back to different discourse clauses , with crossing dependencies . 
that does not lead to the violations of tree structure mentioned earlier  . tWe discuss these differences in more detail in Section  2  , after describing the lexicalised framework that facilitates the derivation of discourse semantics from structure  , inference and anaphoric presuppositions . Sections 3 and 4 then present more detailed semantic analyses of the connectives for example and otherwise  . Finally , in Section 5 , we summarize our arguments for the approach and suggest a program of future work  . 
2 Framework
In previous papers ( Cristea and Webber , 1997; Webber and Joshi , 1998; Webber et al ,  1999) , we have argued for using the more complex structures  ( elementary trees ) of a Lexicalized Tree-Adjoining Grammar ( LTAG ) and its operations ( adjoining and substitution ) to associate structure and semantics with a sequence of discourse clauses  . 2 Here we briefly review how it works . 
In a lexicalized TAG , each elementary tree has at least one anchor . In the case of discourse , the anchor for an elementary tree may be a lexical item  , punctuation or a feature structure that is lexically null  . The semantic ontribution of a lexical anchor includes both what it presupposes and what it asserts  ( Stone and Doran , 1997; Stone , 1998; Stone and Webber ,  1998) . A feature structure anchor will either unify with a lexical item with compatible features  ( Knott and Mellish ,  1996) , yielding the previous case , or have an empty realisation , though one 1One may still need to admit structures having both a link back and a link forward to different clauses  ( Gardent ,  1997) . 
But a similar situation can occur within the clause  , with relative clause dependencies - from the verb back to the relative pronoun and forward to a trace-so the possibility is not unmotivated from the perspective of syntax  . 
2We take this to be only the most basic level of discourse structure  , producing what are essentially extended descriptions of situations/events  . Discourse may be further structured with respect ospeaker intentions  , genre-specific presentations , etc . 
that maintains its semantic features.
The initial elementary trees used here correspond , by and large , to second-order predicate-argument structures - i . e . , usually binary predicates on propositions or eventualities - while the auxiliary elementary trees provide further information  ( constraints ) added through adjoining . 
Importantly , we bar crossing structural connections . Thus one diagnostic for taking a predicate argument to be anaphoric rather than structural is whether it can derive from a cross a structural link  . 
The relation in a subordinate clause is clearly structural : Given two relations  , one realisable as " Although o ?\[3 , the other realisable as " Because y ~5" , they cannotogether be realised as " Although ~ because y  \[3 & " with the same meaning as " Although o ? \[3  . Because y 8" . The same is true of certain relations whose realisation spans multiple sentences  , such as ones realisable as " On the one handoz . On the other hand 13 . " and " Not only T-But also & " Together , they cannot be realised as " On the one hando ? . Not only T . On the other hand 13 . But also & " with the same meaning as in strict sequence  . Thus we take such constructions to be structural as well  ( Webber and Joshi , 1998; Webber et al ,  1999) . 
On the other hand , the p-bearing adverb " then " , which asserts that one eventuality starts after the culmination of another  , has only one of its arguments coming structurally  . The other argument is presupposed and thus able to come from a cross a structural boundary  , as in (1) a . On the one hand , John loves Barolo . 
b . So he ordered three cases of the '97.
c . On the other hand , because he's broke , d . he then had to cancel the order . 
Here , " then " asserts that the " cancelling " event in  ( d ) follows the ordering event in ( b )  . Because the link to ( b ) crosses the structural link in the parallel construction  , we take this argument to come non-Now we illustrate briefly how short discourses built from LTAG constituents get their semantics  . 
For more detail , see ( Webber and Joshi , 1998; Webber et al ,  1999) . For more information on compositional semantic operations on LTAG derivation trees  , see ( Joshi and Vijay-Shanker ,  1999) . 
(2) a . You shouldn't trust John because henever returns what hebor rows  . 
b . You shouldn't trust John . He neve returns what hebor rows . 
C . You shouldn't rust John because , for example , he neve returns what hebor rows . 
d . You shouldn't trust John . For example , he never etums what hebor rows . 
Here A will stand for the LTAG parse tree for " you shouldn't trust John " and a  , its derivation tree , and B will stand for the LTAG parse tree for " he never returns what hebor rows " and  13  , its derivation tree . 
The explanation of Example 2a is primarily structural . It involves an initial tree ( y ) anchored by " because " ( Figure 2 )  . Its derived tree comes from A substituting at the lefthand substitution site of y  ( index 1 ) and B at the righthand substitution site ( index 3 )  . Semantically , the anchor of y ( " because " ) asserts that the situation associated with the argument indexed  3   ( B ) is the cause of that associated with the argument indexed  1   ( A )  . 
The explanation of Example 2b is primarily structural as well . It employs an auxiliary tree ( y ) anchored by " . " ( Figure 3) . Its derived tree comes from B substituting at the righthand substitution site  ( index 3 ) of )  , , and " f adjoining at the root of A ( index 0) . Semantically , adjoining B to A viay simply implies that B continues the description of the situation associated with A  . The general inference that this stimulates leads to a defeasible contribution of causality between them  , which can be denied without a contradiction-e . g . 
(3) You shouldn'trust John . Henever returns what hebor rows . But that's not why you shouldn't trusthim . 
Presupposition comes into play in Example 2c.
This example adds to the elements used in Ex-3The fact that he events deriving from ( b ) and ( d ) appear to have the same temporal relation in the absence of " then " just shows that ense is indeed anaphoric and has no trouble crossing structural boundaries it her  . 
ample 2a , an auxiliary tree anchored by " for example " (8) , which adjoins at the root of B ( Figure 4) . " For example " contributes both a presupposition and an assertion  , as described in more detail in Section 3 . Informally , " for example " presupposes a shared set of eventualities  , and asserts that the eventuality associated with the clause it adjoins to  , is a member of that set . In Example 2c , the set is licensed by " because " as the set of causes/reasons for the situation associated with its first argument  . 
Thus , associated with the derivation of ( 2c ) are the assertions that the situation associated with B is a cause for that associated with A and that the situation associated with B is one of a set of such causes  . 
Finally , Example 2d adds to the elements used in Example 2b   , the same auxiliary tree anchored by " for example  "   ( ~5 )  . As in Example 2b , the causality relation between the interpretations of B and A comes defeasibly from general inference  . Of interest then is how the presupposition of " for example " is licenced - that is  , what provides the shared set or generalisation that the interpretation of B is asserted to exemplify  . It appears to be licenced by the causal relation that has been inferred to hold between the eventualities denoted by B and A  , yielding a set of causes/reasons for A . 
Thus , while we do not yet have a complete characterisation of how compositional semantics  , defeasible inference and anaphoric presupposition i-teract  , Examples 2c and 2d illustrate one signific-ant feature : Both the interpretive contribution of a structural connective like " because " and the defeas-ible inference stimulated by adjoining can license the anaphoric presupposition fap-bearing element like " for example "  . 
Recently , Asher and Lascarides ( 1999 ) have described a version of Structured Discourse Repres-entation Theory  ( SDRT ) that also incorporates the semantic ontributions of both presuppositions and assertions  . In this enriched version of SDRT , a proposition can be linked to the previous discourse via multiple rhetorical relation such as background and defeasible consequence  . While there are similarities between their approach and the one presented here  , the two differ in significant ways : ? Unlike in the current approach  , Asher and Lascarides ( 1999 ) take all connections ( of both asserted and presupposed material ) to be structural attachment shrough rhetorical relations  . 
The relevant rhetorical relation may be inher-~\ [\] ~ ~ A because because Figure  2: Derivation of Example 2a   . The derivation tree is shown below the arrow , and the derived tree , to its right . 
0,," s

Figure 3: Derivation of Example 2b ent in the p-bearing element ( as with " too " ) or it may have to be inferred . 
? Again unlike the current approach , all such attachments ( of either asserted or presupposed material ) are limited to the right frontier of the evolving SDRT structure  . 
We illustrate these differences through Example 1 ( repeated below )  , with the p-bearing element " then " , and Example 5 , with the p-bearing element " too " . Both examples call into question the claim that material licensing presuppositions is constrained to the right frontier of the evolving discourse structure  . 
(4) a . On the one hand , John loves Barolo.
b . So he ordered three cases of the '97.
c . On the other hand , because he's broke , d . he then had to cancel the order . 
(5) ( a ) I have two brothers . (b ) John is a history major . (c ) He likes water polo , ( d ) and he plays the drums . ( e ) Bill is in high school . (f ) Hismain interest is drama . ( g ) He too studies history , ( h ) but he doesn't like it much . 
In Example 1 , the presupposition of " then " in ( d ) is licensed by the eventuality evoked by ( b )  , which would not be on the right frontier of any structural analysis  . If " too " is taken to presuppose shared knowledge of a similar eventuality  , then the " too " in Example 5 ( g ) finds that eventuality in ( b )  , which is also unlikely to be on the right frontier of any structural analysis  . 44 The proposal in ( Asher and Lascarides ,  1999 ) to alter an and Lascarides take it to presuppose a parallel rhet-orical relation between the current clause and something on the right frontier  . From this instantiated rhetorical relation , one then infers that the related eventualities are similar  . But if the right frontier constraint is incorrect and the purpose of positing a rhetorical relation like parallelisto produce an assertion of similarity  , then one might as well take " too " as directly presupposing shared knowledge of a similar eventuality  , as we have done here . Thus , we suggest that the insights presented in ( Asher and Lascarides , 1999) have a simpler explanation . 
Now , before embarking on more detailed analyses of two quite different p-bearing adverbs  , we should clarify the scope of the current approach in terms of the range of p-bearing elements that can create nonstructural discourse links  . 
We believe that systematic study , perhap starting with the 350 " cue phrases " given in ( Knott ,  1996 , Appendix A ) , will show which of them use presupposition in realising discourse relations  . It is likely that these might include : ? temporal conjunctions and adverbial connect-ives presupposing an eventuality that stands in a particular temporal relation to the one currently in hand  , such as " then " , " later " , " meanwhile " , " afterwards " , " beforehand "' ; ? adverbial connectives presupposing shared knowledge of a generalisation or set  , such existing SDRT analysis n response to a p -bearing element  , would seem superfluous if its only role is to restructure the right frontier to support the claimed RF constraint  . 

BA ~,\[\] ~, because for example.
y(because)o/I3B %%
Figure 4: Derivation of Example 2c
T for example.

OJo , , I3
I5 for example

Figure 5: Derivation of Example 2d as " for example " , " first . . . second . . . " , " for instance " ; ? adverbial connectives presupposing shared knowledge of an abstraction  , such as " more specifically " , in particular " ; ? adverbial connectives presupposing a complementary modal context  , such as " otherwise " ; ? adverbial connectives presupposing an alternative to the current eventuality  , such as " instead " and " rather " . 5 For this study , one might be able to use the structure-crossing test given in Section  2 to distinguish a relation whose arguments are both given structurally from a relation which has one of its arguments presupposed  .   ( Since such a test wo n't distinguish p-bearing connectives such as " meanwhile " from non -relationald verbial such as " at dawn " and " tonight "  , the latter will have to be excluded by other means  , such as the ( pretheoretical ) test for relational phrases given in ( Knott ,  1996) . ) ? 3 For example We take " For example , P " to presuppose a quantified proposition G , and to assert that his proposition is a generalisation of the proposition rc expressed by the sentence P  . ( We will write generalisation ( rt , G . ) A precise definition of generalisation is not necessary for the purposes of this paper  , and we will assume the following simple definition :  5Gann Bierner , personal communication ? generalisation ( rc , G ) iff ( i ) G is a quantified proposition of the form QI ( x , a(x ) , b(x )) ;   ( ii ) it allows the inference of a proposition Gr of the form  Q2   ( x , a(x ) , b(x )) ; and ( iii ) G ' is inferrable from G ( through a vingaweaker quantifier )  . 
The presupposed proposition G can be licensed in different ways  , as the following examples how : (6) a . John likes many kinds of wine . For example , helikes Chianti . 
b . John must be feeling sick , because , for example , he hardly at eathing at lunch . 
c . Because John was feeling sick , he did not for example go to work . 
d . Why don't we go to the National Gallery.
Then , for example , we can go to the White

Example 6 a is straightforward , in that the presupposed generalisation " John likes many kinds of wine " is presented explicitly in the text  . 6 In the remaining cases , the generalisation must be inferred . 
In Example 6b , " because " licenses the generalisation that many proposition support the  proposi-6Our definition of generalisation works as follows for this example : the proposition n introduced by " for example " is likes  ( john , chianti ) , the presupposed proposition G is many(x , wine(x ) , likes(john , x ) , and the weakened proposition GI is some ( x , wine(x ) , likes(john , x ) . ~ allows GI to be inferred , and G also allows G ~ to be inferred , hence generalisation ( rc , G ) is true . 
45 tion that John must be feeling sick , while in Example 6c , it licences the generalisation that many propositions follow from his feeling sick  . We can represent both generalisation suing the metalevel predicate  , evidence ( rt , C ) , which holds iff a premiser c is evidence for a conclusion C  . 
In Example 6d , the relevant generalisation involves possible worlds associated jointly with the modality of the first clause and " then "  ( Webber et al . , 1999) . For consistency , the semantic interpretation of the clause introduced by " for example " must make reference to the same modal base identified by the generalisation  . There is more on modal bases in the next section . 
4 Otherwise
Our analysis of " otherwise " assumes a modal semantics broadly following Kratzer  ( 1991  ) and Stone ( 1999 )  , where a sentence is asserted with respec to a set of possible worlds  . The semantics of " otherwise ct " appeals to two sets of possible worlds  . One is W0 , the set of possible worlds consistent with our knowledge of the real world  . The other , Wp , is that set of possible worlds consistent with the condition C that is presupposed  , t ~ is then asserted with respect to the complement set Wo-Wp  . Of interest then is C-what it is that can serve as the source licensing this presupposition  .   7 There are many sources for such a presupposition , including if-then constructions ( Example 7a-7b ) , modal expressions ( Examples 7c-7d ) and infinitival clauses ( Example 7 e )   ( 7 ) a . If the light is red , stop . Otherwise , gostraight on . 
b . If the light is red , stop . Otherwise , you might get run over c . Bob\[could , may , might\]be in the kitchen . 
Otherwise , try in the living room.
d.You\[must , should \] take a coat with you.
Otherwise you'llget cold.
e . It's useful to have a fallback position . Otherwise you'restuck . 
7There is another sense of " otherwise " corresponding to"in other respects "  , which appears either as an adjective phrase modifier  ( e . g . " He's anotherwise happy boy . ") or a clausal modifier ( e . g . , " The physical ayer is different , but otherwise it's identical to metropolitan networks  . ") . What is presupposed here are one or more actual properties of the situation under discussion  . 
each of which introduces new possibilities that are consistent with our knowledge of the real world  ( W0 )  , that may then be further described through modal subordination  ( Roberts , 1989; Stone and
Hardt , 1999).
That such possibilities must be consistent with Wo  ( i . e . , why the semantics of " otherwise " is not simply defined in terms of Wr  ) can be seen by considering the counterfactual variants of  7a-7d   , with " had been " , " could have been " or " should have taken " .   ( Epistemic " must " can never be counterfac-tual . ) Because counterfactuals provide an alternat-ive to reality  , We is not a subset of W0 - and we correctly predict a presupposition failure for " otherwise "  . For example , corresponding to 7 a we have: ( 8 ) If the light had been red , John would have stopped .  #Otherwise , hewent straight on . 
The appropriate connective here-allowing for what actually happened - is " as it is " or " as it was "  . 8As with " for example " , " otherwise " is compatible with a range of additional relations linking discourse together as a product of discourse structure and defeasible inference  . Here , the clauses in 7a and 7c provide a more complete description of what to do in different circumstances  , while those in 7b , 7 d and 7 e involve an unmarked " because " , as did Example 2d . Specifically , in 7d , the " otherwise " clause asserts that the hearer is cold across all currently possible worlds where a coat is not taken  . With the proposition understood that the hearer must not get cold  ( i . e . , that only worlds where the hearer is not cold are compatible with what is required  )  , this allows the inference ( modustollens ) that only the worlds where the hearer takes a coat are compatible with what is required  . As this is the proposition presented explicitly in the first clause  , the text is compatible with an inferential connective like " because "  .   ( Similar examples occur with " e pistemic " because  . ) Our theory correctly predicts that such discourse relations need not be left implicit  , but can instead be explicitly signalled by additional connectives  , as in 8There is a reading of the conditional which is not counterfactual  , but rather a piece of free indirect speech reporting on John's train of thought prior to encountering the light  . 
This reading allows the use of " otherwise " with John's thought providing the base set of worlds  W0  , and " otherwise " then introducing a complementary condition in that same context : If the light had been red  , John would have stopped . 
Otherwise , he would have carded straight on . But as it turned out , henever got to the light . 
46  ( 9 ) You should take a coat with you because otherwise you'llget cold  . 
and earlier examples.
(Note that " Otherwise P " may yield an implicature  , as well as having a presupposition , as in (10) John must be in his room . Otherwise , his light would be off . 
Here , compositional semantics says that the second clause continues the description of the situation partially described by the first clause  . General inference enriches this with the stronger  , but defeasible conclusion that the second clause provides evidence for the first  . Based on the presupposition of " otherwise " , the " otherwise " clause asserts that John's light would be off across all possible worlds where he was not in his room  . In addition , however , implicature related to the evidence relation between the clauses  , contributes the conclusion that the light in John 's room is on  . The point here is only that presupposition ad implicature are distinct mechanisms  , and it is only presupposition that we are focussing on in this work  . 
5 Conclusion
In this paper , we have shown that discourse structure need not bear the full burden of discourse semantics : Part of it can be borne by other means  . 
This keeps discourse structure simple and able to support a straight-forward compositional semantics  . 
Specifically , we have argued that the notion of anaphoric presupposition that was introduced by vander S and t  ( 1992 ) to explain the interpretation of various definite noun phrases could also be seen as underlying the semantics of various discourse connectives  . Since these presuppositions are licensed by eventualities taken to be shared knowledge  , a good source of which is the interpretation of the discourse so far  , anaphoric presupposition can be seen as carrying some of the burden of discourse connectivity and discourse semantics in a way that avoids crossing dependencies  . 
There is , potentially , another benefit to factoring the sources of discourse semantics in this way : while crosslinguistically  , inference and anaphoric presupposition are likely to behave similarly  , structure ( as in syntax ) is likely to be more language specific . Thus a factored approach as a better chance of providing a crosslinguistic account of discourse than one that relies on a single premise  . 
Clearly , more remains to be done . First , the approach demands a precise semantics for connect-ives  , as in the work of Grote (1998) , Grote et al (1997) , Jayez and Rossari (1998) and Lagerwerf (1998) . 
Secondly , the approach demands an understanding of the attentional characteristics of presuppositions  . In particular , preliminary study seems to suggest that p-bearing elements differ in what source can license them  , where this source can be located , and what can act as distractors for this source . In fact , these differences seem to resemble the range of differences in the information status  ( Prince , 1981; Prince , 1992) or familiarity ( Gundel et al , 1993) of referential NPs . Consider , for example : ( 11  ) I got in my old Volvo and set off to drive cross -country and see as many different mountain ranges as possible  . When I got to Arkansas , for example , Is topped in the Ozarks , although I had to borrow another car to see them because 
Volvosh and lebadly on steep grades.
Here , the definite NP-like presupposition of the " when " clause  ( that getting to Arkans as is shared knowledge ) is licensed by driving cross-country ; the presupposition of " for example " ( that stopping in the Ozarks exemplifies some shared generalisation  ) is licensed by seeing many mountain ranges , and the presupposition of " another " ( that an alternative carto this one is shared knowledge  ) is licensed by my Volvo . This suggests a corpus annotation effort for anaphoric presuppositions  , similar to ones already in progress on coreference  . 
Finally , we should show that the approach as practical benefit for NL understanding and/or generation  . But the work to date surely shows the benefit of an approach that narrows the gap between discourse syntax and semantics and that of the clause  . 

Nicholas Asher and Alex Lascarides .  1999 . The semantics and pragmatics of presupposition . 
Journal of Semantics , to appear.
Dan Cristea and Bonnie Webber .  1997 . Expect-ations in incremental discourse processing  . In Proc .   35 th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 88-95 , Mad-rid , Spain . Morgan Kaufmann . 
Claire Gardent .  1997 . Discourse tree adjoining grammars . Claus report nr . 89, University of the
Saarland , Saarbriicken.

Brigitte Grote , NilsLenke , and Manfred Stede.
1997 . Ma(r)king concessions in English and German . Discourse Processes , 24(1):87-118 . 
Brigitte Grote .  1998 . Representing temporal discourse markers for generation purposes  . In Coling/ACL Workshop on Discourse Relations and Discourse Markers  , pages 2228 , Montreal , 

Jeanette Gundel , N . A . Hedberg , and R . Zacharski . 
1993 . Cognitive status and the form of referring expressions in discourse  . Language , 69:274-307 . 
Jacques Jayez and Corinne Rossari .  1998 . Pragmatic connectives a predicates . In Patrick Saint-Dizier , editor , Predicative Structures in Natural Language and Lexical Knowledge Bases  , pages 306-340 . Kluwer Academic Press , Dordrecht . 
Aravind Joshi and K . Vijay-Shanker . 1999.
Compositional semantics with lexicalized tree -adjoining grammar  ( LTAG ) ? In Proc . 3rd Int'l Workshop on Compuational Semantics , Tilburg , 
Netherlands , January.
Alistair Knott and Chris Mellish .  1996 . A feature-based account of the relation signalled by sentence and clause connectives  . Language and
Speech , 39(2-3):143-183.
Alistair Knott .  1996 . A Data-driven Methodology for Motivating a Set of Coherence Relations  . Ph . D . thesis , Department of Artificial Intelligence , University of Edinburgh . 
Angelika Kratzer .  1991 . Modality . In A . von Stechow and D . Wunderlich , editors , Semantics : An International Handbook of Contemporary Research  , pages 639-650 . de Gruyter . 
Luuk Lagerwerf .  1998 . Causal Connectives have Presuppositions . Holland Academic Graphics , The Hague , The Netherlands . PhD Thesis , Cath-olic University of Brabant . 
William Mann and Sandra Thompson .  1988 . Rhet-orical structure theory . Text , 8(3):243-281 . 
Johanna Moore and Martha Pollack .  1992 . A problem for RST : The need for multilevel discouse analysis  . Computational Linguistics , 18(4):537-544 . 
Barbara Partee .  1984 . Nominal and temporal anaphora . Linguistics & Philosophy , 7(3):287-324 . 
Ellen Prince .  1981 . Toward a taxonomy of givennew information . In Peter Cole , editor , Radical Pragmatics , pages 223-255 . Academic Press . 
Ellen Prince .  1992 . The zpgletter : Subjects , definiteness and information-status . In Susan Thompson and William Mann , editors , Discourse Description : Diverse Analyses of a Fundraising 
Text , pages 295-325. John Benjamins.
Craige Roberts .  1989 . Modal subordination and pronominal anaphora in discourse  . Linguistics and Philosophy , 12(6):683-721 . 
Matthew Stone and Christine Doran .  1997 . Sentence planning as description using tree adjoining grammar  . In Proc .   35 th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 198-205 , Madrid , Spain . Morgan Kaufmann . 
Matthew Stone and Daniel Hardt .  1999 . Dynamic discourse referents for tense and modals . In Harry Bunt , editor , Computational Semantics , pages 287-299 . Kluwer . 
Matthew Stone and Bonnie Webber .  1998 . Textual economy through closely coupled syntax and semantics  . In Proceedings of the Ninth International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , pages 178-187 , Niagara-on-the-Lake , 

Matthew Stone .  1998 . Modality in Dialogue : Planning , Pragmatics and Computation . Ph . D . thesis , Department of Computer & Information Science , 
University of Pennsylvania.
Matthew Stone .  1999 . Reference to possible worlds . RuCCS report 49, Center for Cognitive
Science , Rutgers University.
Rob Vander Sandt .  1992 . Presupposition projection as anaphora resolution . Journal of Semantics , 9:333-377 . 
Bonnie Webber and Aravind Joshi .  1998 . Anchoring a lexicalized tree-adjoining grammar for discourse  . In Coling/ACL Workshop on Discourse Relations and Discourse Markers  , pages 86-92 , 
Montreal , Canada.
Bonnie Webber , Alistair Knott , and Aravind Joshi . 
1999 . Multiple discourse connectives in a lexicalized grammar for discourse  . In 3 ~d Int'l Workshop on Computational Semantics , pages 309-325 , Tilburg , The Netherlands . 
Bonnie Webber . 1988. Tense as discourse anaphor.
Computational Linguistics , 14(2):61-73.

