Measuring Conformity to Discourse Routines
in Decision-Making Interactions
Sherri L . Condon Claude G . ~ ech William R . Edwards
Department of English Department of Psychology Center for Advanced Computer Studies 
condo@usl.educe ch@usl.cduwre@cacs.usl.cdu
University of Southwestern Louisiana / Universit ~ desAcadiens 
Lafayette , LA 70504

In an effort to develop measures of discourse level management strategies  , this study examines a measure of the degree to which decision making interactions consist of sequences of utterance functions that are linked in a decision making routine  . The measure is applied to 100 dyadic interactions elicited in both face-to-face and computer-mediated nvironments with systematic variation of task complexity and message-window size  . Every utterance in the interactions is coded according to a system that identifies decision -makmg functions and other routine functions of utterances  . Markov analyses of the coded utterances make it possible to measure the relative fi'equencies with which sequences of  2 and 3 utterances trace a path in a Markov model of the decision routine  . These proportion suggest hat interactions in all conditions adhere to the model  , although we find greater conformity in the computer-mediated environments  , which is probably due to increased processing and attmfional demands for greater efficiency  , The results suggest that measures based on Markov analyses of coded interactions can provide useful measures for comparing discourse level properties  , for correlating discourse fatures with other textual features  , and for analyses of discourse management strategies  . 

Increasingly , research in computational linguistics has contributed to knowledge about the organization and processing of human interaction through quantitative analyses of annotated texts and dialogues  ( e . g . Carletta et al . , 1997; Cohen et al ,  1990 , Maier et al , 1997; Nakatani et al , 1995; Passonneau , 1996; Walker ,  1996) . This program of research presents opportunities to examine the relation between linguistic form and pragmatic functions using large corpora to test hypotheses and to detect covariance among discourse features  . For example , DiEugenio et al ( 1997 ) demonstrate that utterances coded as acceptances were more likely to corefer to an item in a previous turn  . Grosz and Hirschberg ( 1992 ) investigate intonational correlates of discourse structure  . These researchers recognize that discourse-level structures and strategies influence syntactic and phonological encoding  . The regularities observed can be exploited to resolve language processing problem such as ambiguity and coreference  , to integrate high level planning with encoding and interpretation strategies  , or to refine statistics-based systems . 
In order to identify and utilize discourse-based structures and strategies  , researchers need methods of linking observable forms with discourse functions  , and our focus on discourse management strategies has motivated similar goals  . Condon & (~ ech (1996a , b ) use annotated decision making interactions to investigate properties of discourse routines and to examine the effects of communication features uchas screen size on computer-mediated interactions  ( ~ ech & Condon ,  1997) . In this paper we present a method for measuring the degree to which an which not only allows more refined analyses of routine behavior  , but also permits finegrained comparison of discourses obtained under different conditions  . 
In our research , discourse routines have emerged as a fundamental strategy for managing verbal interaction  , resulting in the kind of behavior that researchers label adjacency pa Jrs such as question /answer or request/compliance as well as more complex sequences of functions  . 
Discourse routines occur when a particular actor function is routinely continued by another  , and as " predictable defaults , " routine continuations maximiz efficiency by requiring minimal encoding while receiving highest priority among possible interpretations  . 
Moreover , discourse routines can be exploited by failing to conform to routine expectations  ( Schegloff ,  1986) . Consequently , interactions will not necessarily conform to routines at every opportunity  , which raises the problem of measuring the extent o which they do conform 
Condon et al ( 1997 ) develop a measure based on Markov analyses of coded interactions  , ? and the measure is employed here with a larger corpus in which students engage in a more complex decision making task  . These measures provide evidence for the claim that participants in computer-mediated decision making interactions rely on a simple decision routine more than participants in face -to-face decision making interactions  . The measures suggest that conformity to the routine is not strongly affected by any of the other variables examined in the study  ( task complexity , screen size ) , even though some participants in the computer -mediated conditions of the more complex task adopted turn management strategies that would be untenable in face-to-face interaction  . 
Data Collection
The initial corpus of 32 interactions involving simple decision making tasks was obtained under conditions which were similar  , but not identical , to the conditions under which the 68 interactions involving a more complex task were obtained  . One obvious difference is that participants in the first study completed  2 simple tasks planning a social event ( a get away weekend , a barbe cue ) , while participants in the second study completed a single  , more complex task : planning a televised ceremon y to present the MTV music video awards  . 
Furthermore , all interactions in the first study were mixed sex pairs  , whereas interactions in the MTV study include mixed and sames expairs  . All participants were native English speakers at the University of Southwestern Louisiana who received credit in Introductory Psychology classes for their participation  . 
In both studies , the dyads who interacted face-to-faces at together at a table with a tape recorder  , while the pairs who interacted electronically we reseated at micro computers in separate rooms  . The latter communicated by typing messages which appeared on the sender's monitor as they were typed  , but did not appear on the receiver's monitor until the sender pressed a SEND key  . The software incorporated this feature to provide well-defined turns and to make it possible to capture and change messages in future studies  . 
In addition , to minimize message permanence and more closely approximate face-to-face interaction  , text . on the screen is always produced by only one participant at a time  . 
In the original study , the message area was approximately 4 lines long , and it was not clear how much this factor influenced our results  . Consequently , in the MTV study , the message area of the screen was either 4 ,  10 , or 18 lines . Other differences in the computer-mediated conditions of the two studies include differences in the arrangement of information on the screen such as a brief description of the MTV problem which remained at the bottom of the screen  . We also used an answer form in the first study , but not the second . More details about he communication systems in the two studies are provided Cond on & ~ ech  ( 1996a ) and ( ~ ech & Condon ( 1998 )  . 

Data Analysis
Face-to-face interactions were transcribed from audio recordings into computer files using a set of conventions established in a training manual  ( Condon & Cech ,  1992) . All interactions were divided into utterance units defined as single clauses with all complements and adjuncts  , including sentential complements and subordinate clauses  . Interjections like yeah , now , well , and ok were considered to be separate utterances due to the salience of their interactional  , as opposed to propositional , content . 
The coding system includes categories for request routines and a decision routine involving  3 acts or functions ( Condon ,  1986 , Cond on & (~ ech , 1996a , b ) . We believe that the decision routine observed in the interactions instantiates a more general schema for decision making that may be routinized in various ways  . In the abstract schema , each decision has a goal ; proposals to satisfy the goal must be provided , these proposals must be evaluated , and there must be conventions for determining , from the evaluations , whether the proposals are adopted as decisions . Routines make it possible to map from the general schema to sequences of routine utterance functions  . Default principles associated with routines can determine the encoding of these routine functions in sequences of utterances  . 
According to the model we are developing , a sequence of routine continuations is mapped into a sequence of adjacent utterances in one-to -one fashion by default  . If the routine specifies that arout in e continuation must be provided by a different speaker  , as in adjacency pairs , then the default is for the different speaker to produce the routine continuation immediately after the first pair-part  . Since these are defaults , we can expect that heymay be weakened or overridden in specific ircumstances  . At the same time , if our reasoning is correct , we should be able to find evidence of routines operating in the manner we have described  . 
(1 ) provides an excerpt from a computer-mediated interaction in which utterances are labeled to illustrate the routine sequence  . P1 and P2 designate first and second speaker ( an utterance that is a continuation by the same speaker is not annotated for speaker  )  . 
(1) a . P1:\[orientation \] who should w in best
Alternative ideo.
b . P2:\[suggestion \] Pres . of the united states c . PI:\[agreement\]okd . P2:\[orientation\]who else should nominate . 
e . \[ suggestion \] bush . goo-good oll so as is f . Pl:\[agreement\]soundsgood,\[ . . . 1 we and ( 2 ) provides an annotated excerpt from a face-to-face interaction  . 
(2) a . Pl :\[ orientation l who's going to win ? b . \[ suggestion \] Mariah?c . P2:\[ agreement \] yeah probably d . PI:\[orientation \] alright Mariahwins what song ? e  . P2:\[ suggestion \] uh Fantas yor whatever ? f . Pl:\[agreement \] that's it that's the same song I was thinking of g  . \[ orientation \] alright alternative ? h . \[ suggestion \] Alanis ? Codedas " Orients Suggestion  , " orientations , like ( la , 2a ) establish goals for each decision , while suggestions like ( lb , e ) and (2b , e , h ) formulate proposals within these constraints . 
Agreements like ( lc , f ) and (2c , f ) , which are coded " Agrees with Suggestion , " and disagreements ( " Disagrees with Suggestion " ) evaluate a proposal and establish consensus . 
The routine does not specify that a suggestion which routinely continues an orientation must be produced by a different speaker : the suggestion may be elicited from a different speaker  , as in ( la , b ) and (2d , e ) or it may be provided by the same speaker , as in ( ld , e ) and (2a , b ) . However , an agreement that routinely continues a suggestion is produced by a different speaker  , as ( lb , c ) , ( le , f ) , (2b , c ) and (2e , f ) at test . 
Other outine functions are also classified in the coding system  . Utterances coded as " RequestsAction " propose behaviors in the speech event such as  ( 3 )  . 
240 (3) a . well is tyour two down there ( oral ) b . ok , now we need to decide another b and to perform ( computer-mediated ) c . Give some suggestions ( computer-mediated ) metalanguage , and orientations somewhat less reliable . 
Results were
Utterances coded as " Requests Information " seek information ot already provided in the discourse  , as in ( la , 2a ) . Utterances that seek confirmation or verification of provided information  , however , are coded as " Requests Validation . " The category " Elaborates - Repeats " serves as a catch all for utterances with comprehensible content that do not function as requests or suggestions or as responses to these  . 
Two categories are included to assess affective functions : " Requests/Offers Personal Information " for personal comments not required to complete the task and " Jokes Exaggerates " for utterances that in jecthum or  . 
The category " Discourse Marker " is used for a limited set of forms : Ok  , well , anyway , so , now , let's see , and alright . Another category , Metalanguage , was used to code utterances about he talk such as  ( 3b , c) . 
In the initial corpus , the categories described above are organized into  3 classes :
MOVE , RESPONSE , and OTHER , and each utterance was assigned a function in each of these three groups of categories  . In cases involving no clear function in a class , the utterance was assigned a NoClear code . A complete list of categories i presented at the bottom of Figure  1 and more complete descriptions can be found in Condon and Cech  ( 1992 )  . In the modified system used to code the MTV corpus  , the criteria for classifying all of these categories remain the same  . 
The data were coded by students who received course credit as research assistants  . 
Coders were trained by coding and discussing excerpts from the data  . Reliability tests were administered frequently during the coding process  . Reliability scores were high ( 80100% agreement with a standard ) for frequently occurring move and response functions  , discourse markers , and the two categories designed to identify affective functions  . Scores for infrequent move and response functions  , In the initial study , the 16 face-to-face interactions produced a corpus of 4141 utterances ( ave . 259 per discourse) , while the 16 computer-mediated interactions consisted of 918 utterances ( ave .  57) . In the MTV study , the 8 face-to-face interactions produced 3593 utterances ( ave .  449) , the 20 interactions in the 4-line condition included 2556 utterances ( ave .  128) , the 20 interactions in the 10-line condition produced 3041 utterances ( ave .  152 ) and the 20 interactions in the 18-line condition included 2498 utterances ( ave .  125) . Clearly , completing the more complex MTV task required more talk  . 
Figure 1 presents proportions of utterance functions averaged per interaction for each modality in the initial study  . Analyses of variance that treated discourse ( dyad ) as the random variable were performed on the data within each of the three broad categories  , excluding the NoClear MOVE/RESPONSE /
OTHER functions where inclusion would force levels of the between-discourse factor to the same value  . We found no significant effect of problem t ?/ p e or order  ( for details see
Condon & Cech , 1996) . However , the interaction of function type with discourse modality was significant at the  . 001-level for all three ( MOVE , RESPONSE , OTHER ) function classes . Tests of simple effects of modality type for each function indicated that only four proportions were identical in the two modalities : Requests Validation in the MOVE class  , Disagrees in the RESPONSE class , and , in the OTHER class , Personal Information and

Figure 2 presents the proportions of utterance functions for the MTV corpus using the same categories of functions as in Figure  1  . 
The similarity of the results in the two figures is remarkable  , especially considering differences in methods of data collection described above  . First , it can be observed that 00 . 2 . 
": oo . 1.
.\ oIlIIII!I
MOVESRESPONSE SOTHER
IIiA dv , sosc . Aodtisi,
MOVESRESPONSE SOTHER
MOVEFUNCTIONS
SA Suggests Action
RA Requests Action
RV Requests Validation
RIRequest slaformation
ER Elaborates , Repeats
OTHERFUNCTIONS
DM Discourse Marker
MI , Metalanguage
OSOrients Suggestion
Pl Personal Information
Jig Jokes , Exaggerates
RESPONSE FUNCTIONS
ASA grees with Suggestion
DSD is agrees with Suggestion
CR Complies with Request
AO Acknowledges Only
Figure 1: Propo ~ ons of code categories in face-to-face ( squares ) and computer-mea~ated intractions ( asterisks ) in the original study the screen size in the MTV -condition did not influence the proportions of functions in the  4-line and 18-line conditions . The results in both those conditions are nearly identical  . Second , similar differences are obtained between face-to -face and computer-mediated conditions in both corpora  . For example , all of the computer-mediated interactions produced suggestions at a proportion of approximately  . 3 , while the face-to-face interactions produced suggestions at closer to half that frequency  . Similar patterns of difference between face-to -face and computer-Figure  2: Proportions of code categories in face-to-face ( Mangles )  , 4-line ( squares ) and 18-line ( circles ) conditions mediated conditions occur in both corpora for the  3 types of requests in the coding system , tOO . 
We anticipated an increase in discourse management functions due to the complexity of the task  , and the increase in metalanguage from . 05 to .   15 in the face-to-face conditions suggests hath e more complex task pressured participants to engage in more explicit management strategies  . In the computer-mediated interactions , the proportion of functions coded as metalanguage also increases with the complexity of the task  , though not as much . The greater proportion of discourse markers in the computer-mediated interactions also reflects an increase in discourse management activity for the more complex task  . 
The failure to observe an increase in the proportion of utterances coded as " Orients Suggestion " in the MTV interactions is probably a result of the emergence of a turn strategy not observed in the interactions with simpler decision making tasks  . Specifically , while all of the computer-mediated interactions in the initial study and many of the computer -mediated interactions in the MTV study latter display a strategy of employing long turns in which participants encoder outine functions for several decisions in the same turn  , as in (4) . 
(4 ) Best Female Video Either we could have Celine Dione's song rts all coming back to me or the other one that was in that movie up close and personal  . 
A any of the clips with her in them would be good.
To niBraxt on with that song . .gosh I can't hink of any of the names of anybody 's songs  . And show the same clip as before . What about jewel . Who will save yours oul . Personally I think she should win we could use the clip of her playing the guitar in the bathroom  . We need one more female singer . Did we pick who should present the award ? I think Bush should play after the award  . 
These more parallel management strategies can reduce the number of orientations if a single orientation can hold for several suggestions and a single agreement can accep them all  . Of course , this is exactly what happens when participants provide a list of suggestions in a shorturn  , too . Therefore , the parallel strategy is a minor modification of the decision routine  , but it may influence the proportions of routine functions by reducing the number of orientations and agreements  . 
In fact , the proportions of utterances coded as " Agrees with Suggestion " and " Complies with Request " are lower in the computer-mediated MTV interactions than in the computer-mediated interactions of the initial corpus  . Though these proportions are still slightly higher than those in the face-to-face MTV condition  , preserving the pattern observed in the initial corpus  , the differences are smaller . 
These differences are reflected even more dramatically if we compare the ratios of suggestions to agreements in the MTV corpus  . 
At approximately 1 . 5 , the ratio of suggestions to agreements in the face-to-face condition of the MTV study resembles the ratio in the face-to-face condition of the earlier study  ( 1 . 64) . 
Similarly , the ratio of suggestions to agreements in the computer-mediated interactions of the original study is  1  . 71 . In contrast , heratios of suggestions to agreements in the 4- and 18-line conditions of the MTV corpus are much larger , both at approximately 2 . 5 . We believe that much of the difference observed is the result of longer turns employing parallel decision management ihe MTV corpus  . 
These results raise the question of the extent o which the interactions conform to a model of the decision routine we have described  . The measure developed in Condon et al ( 1997 ) begins by combining the 3 code annotations as a triple and treating those triples as the output of a probabilistic source  . 
Then0- ,   1 st-and 2nd-order Markov analyses are performed on the resulting sequences of triples  . While the 0-order analyses simply give the proportions of each triple in the interactions  , the lSt-order analyses make it possible to examine adjacent pairs of triples to determine the probability that a particular combination of functions will be followed by another particular combination of functions  . 
Similarly , the 2hal-order analyses examine sequences of 3 utterances . 
Orientation ~ Suggestion ~ Agre_ement
Figure 3: A More Complex Decision Routine Based on Frequency Analyses Examination of the  2ha-order analyses in the original study revealed that all of the  7 most frequent sequences of 3 utterance strace a path in the model in Figure 3  . Using the model in Figure 3 , we then calculated the proportions of 0- ,   1 st-and 2nd-order sequences that race a path through the model . Of course , the 0-order frequencie simply provide the proportions of utterances that are coded as 
Markov Order Oral Electronic 0 ( Single Function )  1  ( Sequence of Two )  2  ( Sequence of Three )   . 34 ( . 09)  . 53 ( . 13)  . 16 ( . 06)  . 32 ( . 13)  . 07( . 04)  . 21( . 11 ) Table 1: Proportions of Utterance Events Averaged Per Discourse  ( Standard Deviations in Parentheses ) that Conform to the Model in Figure 3 from the
Original Corpus either orientations , uggestions or agreements , but the 1 st-and 2"a-order analyses make it possible to examine the extent o which pairs and sequences of  3 utterances conform to the model in Figure 3  . Table 1 presents the results of obtaining the measure just described from the initial corpus of face-to -face and computer-mediated interactions  . The proportions therefore reflect heaverage ( and standard eviation ) per discourse of events that conform to a sequence of routine continuations in Figure  3  . 
Since conforming to the model is less and less likely as more functions are linked in sequence  , it is not surprising that he proportions decrease as the order of the Markov analysis increases  . Still , it is encouraging that the proportions of routine continuations in the  1 st-order analyses are approximately equal to the proportions of suggestions in the two types of interactions  , since the latter provide an estimate of the number of opportunities to engage in the routine  . 
Table 2 presents the results of computing the same analyses on the face-to-face  , 4-line , 10-line , and 18-line computer-mediated interactions in the MTV corpus . The 0-order results are much the same for both corpora with about  1/3 of the utterances in face-to-face interactions functioning in the decision routine compared to ? in the computer-mediated interactions  . Similarly , proportions of utterance pairs that conform to the routine remain fairly close to the proportions of suggestions in each condition  . Screen size appears to have no effect on the results obtained with this measure  . 

The results are promising both as evidence for our theory of routines and as an initial attempt to devise a measure of conformity to routines  . 
In particular , the fact that an additional corpus with a more complex task has provided measures which are very similar to those obtained in the initial corpus increases our confidence that hese methods are tapping into some stable phenomena  . Moreover , the similarities of the conformity measures in Tables  1 and 2 occur in spite of the emergence
Marker Order
Discourse Modality
Oral 4-1me1 O-line 18-line 0 ( Single Function )  1  ( Sequence of Two )  2  ( Sequence of Three )   . 29 ( . 07)  . 50 ( . 12)  . 48 ( . 11)  . 45 ( . ll ) . 11 ( . 05)  . 27 ( . 10)  . 25 ( . 10)  . 21 ( . 11)  . 04 ( . 03)  . 17 ( . 10)  . 14 ( . 08)  . 12 ( . 10 ) Table 2: Proportions of Utterance Events Averaged Per Discourse  ( Standard Deviations in Parentheses ) that Conform to the Model in Figure 3 from the MT ~ Corpus managements rategies in which long turns encode decision sequences in parallel  . Though these strategies seem to have a strong effect on the ratio of suggestions to agreements in the computer-mediated interactions of the MTV corpus  , the conformity measures are still quite similar to the measures obtained in the computer-mediated interactions of the initial study  . 
The MTV data also confirm the result obtained in the original study that computer-mediated interactions rely more heavily on routines than face-to-face interactions  . The much higher conformity measures for all three Markov orders provide clear evidence for this claim with respect to the decision routine  . 
Moreover , a comparison of Figures l and 2 shows that the computer-mediated interactions have higher proportions of requests  , especially requests for information . If these proportions are indicative of the extent to which request routines are relied on in the interactions  , then these data also suppor the claim that computer-mediated interactions rely on discourse routines more than face-to-face interactions  . Given our claims about the effectiveness of discourse routines  , it makes sense that participants in an unfamiliar communication environment will employ their most efficient strategies  . 
The conformity measure that has been devise does not make use of all the information available in the Markov analyses  , and we continue to experiment with different measures  . 
It seems clear that Markov analyses can provide sensitive measures that will be useful for identifying differences between interactions and for measuring the effects of experimental factors on interactions  . 

Carletta , J . ; Dahlback , N . ; Reithinger , N . ; and Walker , M .  1997 . Standards for dialogue coding in natural language processing  . Report no . 167, Dagstuhl-

Cohen , P . R . ; Morgan , J . ; and Pollack , M . , eds .  1990 . 
Intentions in Communication . Cambridge , MA :
MIT Pr.
(~ ech , C . and Condon , S . 1998. Message Size
Constraints on Discourse Planning in
Synchronous Computer-Mediated
Communication . Behavior Research Methods , Instruments , & Computers ,  30 ,  255-263 . 
Condon , S . 1986. The Discourse Functions of OK.
Semiotica , 60:73-101.
Condon , S . , and ~ ech , C .  1992 . Manual for Coding Decision-Making Interactions . Rev .  1995 . 
Unpublished manuscript available at Discourse
Resource Initiative wcbs it cathttp://www . gcorgetown . edu/luperfoy/Discourse-

Condon , S . , and (~ ech , C . 1996a . Functional Comparison of Face-to-Face and Computer-Mediated Decision-Making Interactions  . In
Herring , S . ( ed .), Computer-Mediated
Communication : Linguistic , Social , and Cross-Cultural Perspectives . Philadelphia : John

Condon , S . , and (~ ech , C . 1996b . Discourse Management in Face-to-Face and Computer -Mediated Decision-Making Interactions  . 
Electronic Journal of Communication/La Revue
Electroni ~ ede Communication , 6, 3.
Condon , S ., Cech , C ., and Edwards , W . (1997)
Discourse routines in decision making interactions . Paper presented to AAAI Fall Symposium on Communicative Action in Humans and Machines  . 
Di Eugenio , B . ; Jordan , P . ; Thomason , R . ; and Moore , J .  1997 . Reconstructed intentions in collaborative problem solving dialogues  . Paper presented to AAAI Fall Syngx ~ umon Communicative Action in Humans and Machines  . 
Grosz , B . and Hirschberg , J .  1992 . Some intonational characteristics of discourse structure  . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Spoken Language Processing  , Banff , Canada (429-432) . 
Maier , E . ; Mast , M . ; and Lupeffoy , S . , ? ds . , Dialogue Processing inSpoken Language Systems , Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence . Springer Verlag . 
Nakatani , C . , Hirschberg , J . and Grosz , B .  1995 . 
Discourse structure in spoken language : Studies on speech corpora  . Paper presented to AAAI 1995 Spring Symposium Series : Empirical Methods in Discourse Interpretation ad Generation  . 
Passonneau , R .  1996 . Using centering to relax Grice an informational constraints on discourse anaphoric noun phrases  . Language and Speech , 39(2-3), 229-264 . 
Schegloff , E . 1986. The Routine as Achievement.
Human Studies , 9:111-151.
Walker , M (1996) . Inferring acceptance and rejection in dialog by default rules of inference  . Language and Speech , 39(2-3), 265-304 . 

