Using aggregation for selecting content
when generating referring expressions
John A . Bateman
Sprach-und Literatur wissenschaften
University of Bremen
Bremen , Germany
email : bateman0 un?-bremen,d
Abstract
Previous algorithms for the generation of referring expressions have been developed specifically for this purpose  . Here we introduce an alternative approach based on a fully generic aggregation method also motivated for other generation tasks  . We argue that the alternative contributes to a more integrated and uniform approach to content determination i the context of complete noun phrase generation  . 
1 Introduction
When generating referring expressions ( RE ) , it is generally considered necessary to provide sufficient information so that the reader/hearer is able to identify the intended referent  . A number of broadly related referring expression algorithms have been developed over the past decade based on the natural metaphor of ' ruling out distractors '  ( Reiter , 1990; Dale and Haddock , 1991; Dale , 1992; Dale and Reiter , 1995; Horacek ,  1995) . These special purpose algorithms constitute the ' standard ' approach to determining content for RE -generation at this time  ; they have been developed solely for this purpose and have evolved to meet some specialized problems  . In particular , it was found early on that the most ambitious RE goal--that of always providing the maximally concise referring expressione cessary for the context  ( ' full brevity ' ) - - is NP-haxd ; subsequent work on RE-generation has therefore attempted to steer a course between computational tractability and coverage  . One common feature of the favored algorithmic simplifications it heir incrementality : potential descriptions are successively refined  ( usually non-destructively ) to produce the final RE , which therefore may or may not be minimal . This is also often motivated on grounds of psychological pausibility  . 
In this paper , we introduce a completely different metaphor for determining RE-content that may be considered in contrast to  , or in combination with , previous approaches . The main difference lies in an orientation to the organization of a dataset as a whole rather than to individual components as reveale dur-ing incremental search  . Certain opportunities for concise expression that may otherwise be missed are then effectively isolated  . The approach applies results from the previously unrelated generation task of ' aggregation '  , which is concerned with the grouping together of structurally related information  . 
2 The aggregation-based metaphor
Aggregation in generation has hither to generally consisted of lists of more or less ad hoc  , or case-specific rules that group together paxtic u-lax prespecified configurations  ( cf . Dalianis and Hovy (1996) and Shaw (1998)) ; however Bateman et al ( 1998 ) provide a more rigorous and generic foundation for aggregation by applying results from data -summarization originally developed for multimedia information presentation  ( Kamps ,  1997) . Bateman et alset out a general purpose method for constructing ag-gregation lattices which succinctly represent all possible structural aggregations for any given dataset  .   1 The application of the aggregation-based metaphor to RE-content determination is motivated by the observation that if something is a ' potential distractor ' for some intended referent  , then it is equally , under appropriate conditions , a candidate for aggregation together with the intended referent  . That 1'Structural ' aggregation refers to opportunities for grouping inherent in the structure of the data and ignoring additional opportunities for grouping that might be found by modifying the data inferentially  . 
127 is , what makes something a distractor is precisely the same as that which makes it a potential co -member of some single grouping created by structural aggregation  . To see this , consider the following simple example discussed by Dale and Reiter  ( 1995 ) consisting of three objects with various properties  ( re-represented here in a simple association list format  ) : 2  ( ol ( type dog )   ( size small )   ( color ( 02  ( type dog )   ( size large )   ( color ( 03  ( type cat )   ( size small )   ( color To successfully refer to the first object ol  , sufficient information must be given so as to ' rule out ' the possible distractors : therefore  , type alone is not sufficient , since this fails to rule out o2 , nor is any combination of size or color sufficient  , since these fail to rule out 03 . Successful RE's are ' the small dog'or'the black dog ' and not ' the small one '  , ' the dog ' , or ' the black one ' . 
Considering the dataset from the aggregation perspective  , we ask instead how to refer most succinctly to all of the object sol  , o2 , o3 . 
There are two basic alternatives , indicated by bracketing in the following : 31 .   ( A ( small black and a large white ) dog ) and ( a small black cat )  . 
2 .   ( A small black ( dog and cat ) ) and ( a large white dog )  . 
The former groups together ol and o2 on the basis of their shared type , while the latter groups together ol and o3 on the basis of their shared size and color properties  . Significantly , these are just the possible sources of distraction that Dale and Reiter discuss  . 
The set of possible aggregations can be determined from an aggregation lattice corresponding to the dataset  . We construct the lattice using methods developed in Formal Concept Analysis  ( FCA )   ( Wille ,  1982) . For the example at hand , the aggregation lattice is built up as follows . The set of objects is considered as a relation table where the columns represent the object attributes and their values  , and the rows 2This style of presentation is not particularly perspic -uous but space precludes providing intelligible graphics  , especially for the more complex situations used as examples below  . In case of difficulties , we recommend quickly sketching the portrayed situation as a memor yaid  . 
3The exact rendering of these variants in English or any other language is not at issue here  . 
black ) ) white ) ) black ) ) represent the individual objects . Since the attributes ( e . g . , ' color ', ' size ', etc . ) can take multiple values ( e . g . , ' large ' , ' small ') , this representation of the data is called a mult ivalued context  . This is then converted into a one-valued context by comparing all rows of the table pairwise and  , for each attribute ( i . e . , each column in the table ) entering one distinguished value ( e . g . , T or 1 ) if the corresponding values of the attributes compared are identical  , and another distinguished value ( nilor 0 ) if they are not . 
The one-valued context for the object sol- o3 is thus : object pairs type size colorol- o2   1   0   0 ol- o3   0   1   1   o2-o3   0   0   0 This indicates that objects ol and o2 have equal values for their type attribute but otherwise not  , while ol and 03 have equal values for both their size and color attributes but not for their type attributes  . The one-valued context readily supports the derivation of formal concepts  . A formal concept is defined in FCA as an extension-intension pair  ( A , B ) , where the extension is a subset A of the set of objects and the intension is a subset B of the set of attributes  . For any given concept , each element of the extension must accept all attributes of the intension  . Visually , this corresponds to permuting any rows and columns of the one-valued context and noting all the maximally ' filled '  ( i . e . , containing l's or T's ) rectangles . A ' subconcept ' relation , ' < FCA ' , is defined over the set of formal concepts thus :   ( A , B ) < FCA(A* , B * ) iff ACA*~=~B*CBT hemain theorem of FCA then shows that < FCA induces a complete lattice structure over the set of formal concepts  . The resulting lattice for the present example is shown in Figure  1  . 
Each node is shown labeled with two pieces of information : the intension and the extension  . 
The intensions consist simply of the sets of properties involved  . The representations of the extensions emphasize the function of the nodes in the lattice--i  . e . , that the indicated objects ( e . g . , ol and o2 for the leftmost node ) are equal with respect o all the attributes contained in the intension  ( e . g . , type for the leftmost node ) . 
128 TYPEm(ol ) = m(o2)C > COLOR , SIZEm(ol ) = m(o3)
Figure 1: Simple aggregation lattice
This lattice may be construed as an aggregation lattice because the functional redundancies that are captured are precisely those redundances that indicate opportunities for structurally-induced aggregation  . The leftmost node shows that the attribute type may be aggregated if we describe ol together with  o2  , and the rightmost node shows that color , size may be aggregated when describing ol and o3 . 
Now , given the equivalence between aggregation possibilities and ' distractors '  , we can also use the lattice to drive RE-content determination  . Assume again that we wish to refer to object ol . In essence , a combination of attributes must be selected that is not subject to aggregation  ; any combination susceptible to aggregation will necessarily ' confuse ' the objects for which the aggregation holds when only one of the objects  , or co-aggregates , is mentioned . 
For example , the rightmost node shows that an RE with the content size & color  ( ol )   , e . g . , ' the small black thing ', confuse solando 3 . To select attributes that are appropriate , we first examine the minimal nodes of the lattice to see if any of these do not ' imping e '  ( i . e . , have no aggregation consequences : we make this more precise below  ) on the intended referent . In this case , however , all these nodes domentionol and so no strong preference for the RE-content is delivered by the dataset itself  . This appears to us to be the correct characterization f the reference situation : precisely which attributes are selected should now be determined by factors not attributable to ' distraction ' but rather ? by more general communicative goals involving discourse and the requirements of the particular language  . The resulting attribute combinations are then checked against the aggregation lattice for their referential effectiveness in a manner reminiscent of the incremental pproach of previous algorithms  . Selection of type is not sufficient but the addition of either color or size is  ( type ~ z color = ? and type ~ size = l )  . 
The reference situation is quite different when we wish to refer to either  o2 or o3  . For both of these cases there exists a non -impinging node  ( the right and leftmost nodes respectively )  . This establishes immediate attribute preferences based on the organizational properties of the data  . Content-determination for o2 should include at least size or color ( ' the white thing ' , ' the large thing ' ) and for o3 at least type ( ' the cat ' )  . These RE's are minimal . 
3 Examples of aggregation-driven
RE-content determination
In this section , we briefly summarize some more significant examples of RE-content determination using aggregation  . Length limitations will require some shortcuts to be taken in the discussion and we will not follow up all of the alternative RE's that can be motivated  . 
3.1 Minimal descriptions
Dale and Reiter ( 1995 ) consider a number of variant algorithms that deviate from full brevity in order to achieve more attractive computational behavior  . The first varianthey consider relies on a ' Greedy Heuristic '  ( Dale , 1989; Johnson ,  1974) ; they illustrate that this algorithm sacrifices minimality by constructing an RE for objectol in the context of the following properties concerning a set of seven cups of varying size  ( large , small ) , color(red , green , blue ) and material ( paper , plastic ) :  ( oi ( size large ) (color red ) (material plastic ) )  ( 02  ( size small ) (color red ) (material plastic ) )  ( 03  ( size small ) (color red ) (material paper ) )  ( 04  ( size medium ) (color red ) (material paper ) )  ( 05  ( size large ) (color green ) (material paper ) )  ( 06  ( size large ) (color blue ) (material paper ) )  ( 07  ( size large ) (color blue ) (material plastic ) ) The greedy algorithm produces ' the large red plastic cup ' although the true minimum description is ' the largered cup '  . 
The aggregation-based approach to the same data set provides an interesting contrast in result  . The aggregation lattice for the data is given in Figure  2  . The lattice is constructed as before : first by converting the multivalued context of the original dataset to a one-valued context and then by imposing the subconcept m  ( ol ) =m ( o2 ) = m ( o3 ) =rn ( o4 ) m ( ol ) =m ( o2 ) rn ( o3 ) =m ( o4"- . . . . . . . m(o6) ~ m(o7! . -'" SIZE m ( ol ) =m ( o5 ) = m ( o6 ) =m ( o7 ) rn ( ol ) =m ( o 7 rn ( o5 ) =m ( o6 ) Figure 2: Aggregation lattice for the ' seven cups ' example relation over the complete set of formal concepts  . The nodes of the lattice are also labeled as before  , although werely here on the formal properties of the lattice to avoid redundant labeling  . For example , the two sets of attribute equalities given for node  1   ( one relating o2 and o3 , the other relating o6 and o7 ) apply to both color ( inherited from node 2 ) and size ( inherited from node 4 )  ; we do not , therefore , repeat the labeling of properties for node 1 . Similarly , and due to the bidirectionality inherent in the subconcept definition  , the attribute equalities of node 1 are also ' inherited ' upwards both to node 2 and to node 4  . The attribute qualities of node 4 therefore include contributions from both node 1 and node 6  . We will generally indicate in the labeling only the additional information arising from the structure of the lattice  , and even then only when it is relevant othe discussion  . So for node 4 we indicate that ol , o5 ,   o6 and o7 now form a single attribute quality set made up of three contributions : one from node  1   ( o6 and o7 ) and two from node 6 . Their combination in a single set is only possible at node  4 because node 4 is a superconcept of both node 1 and node 6  . The other attribute quality set for node 1 ( o2 and o3 ) does not add further information at node 4 and so is left implicit in node 4's labeling . The labeling or non-labeling of redundant information has of course no formal consequences for the information contained in the lattice  . 
To determine RE-content appropriate for referring to object ol  , we again look for minimal ( i . e . , nearest he bottom ) concepts , or aggregation sets , that do not ' imping e ' onol . The only node satisfying this requirement is node  1  . This tells us that the set of possible co -aggregates for ol with respecto the properties size & color is empty  , which is equivalent to stating that there are no objects in the dataset which might be confused witholif size & color  ( ol ) forms the RE-content . Thus , ' the largered cuP'may be directly selected , and this is precisely the true minimal RE for this dataset  . 
3 . 2 Relat ional descript ions : rest r ic t ing recursion One early extension of the original RE -algorithms was the treatment of datasets involving relations  ( Dale and Haddock ,  1991) . 
Subsequently , Horacek ( 1995 ) has argued that the extension proposed possesses several deficits involving both the extent of coverage and its behavior  . In particular , Horace knotes that " it is not always necessary that each entity directly or indirectly related to the intended referent and included in the description be identified uniquely "  ( p49 )  . Partially to handle such situations , Horacek provides a further related algorithm that is intended to improve on the original and which he illustrates in action with reference to a rather more complex situation involving two tables with a variety of cups and bottles on them  . One table ( tl ) has two bottles and a cupon it , another ( t2) has only a cup . Information is also given concerning the relative positions of the cups and bottles  . 
The situation that Horacek identifies as problematic occurs when the reference task is to refer to the table tl and the the RE-algorithm has decided to include the bottles that are on this table as part of its description  . This is an appropriate decision since the presence of these bottles is the one distinguishing feature of the selected table  . But it is sufficient for the identification of tl for bottlest obementioned at all : there is no need for either or both of the bottles to be distinguished more specifically  . An RE-algorithm should therefore avoid attempting this additional  , unnecessary eference task . 
To form an aggregation lattice for this fact set , we extend our data representation to deal with relations as well as attributes  . This is limited to ' reifying ' the relations and labeling them with ' instance variables ' as commonly done in input expressions for generation systems  ( Kasper ,  1989) . For convenience , we also at this point fold in the type information di-  ( g8 ( predon ) (argl b2 ) (argltype bottle ) (arg2 tl ) (arg2type table ) )  ( g9 ( predon ) (argl cl ) (argltype cup ) (arg2 tl ) (arg2type table ) )  ( g10 ( predon ) (argl c2 ) (argltype cup ) (arg2 t2 ) (arg2type table ) )  ( gli ( predleft-of ) (argl bl ) (argltype bottle ) (arg2 cl ) (arg2type cup ) )  ( g12 ( predleft-of ) (argl cl ) (argltype cup ) (arg2 b2 ) (arg2type bottle ) )  ARG2TYPE  ? m ( g7 ) =m ( g8 ) =m ( glO ) IIARC2IIm ( g7 ) =m ( g8 ) =m ( g9 ) ' m ( g9 ) =m ( glO ) m ( g7 ) =m ( g8 )   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 
ARGITYPEm ( g8 ) =m ( gl1 ) m ( g10 ) =m ( g12 ) ARGIm ( g7 ) =m ( gl1 ) m ( g9 ) =m ( g12 ) Figure 3: Aggregation lattice for example from Horacek ( 1995 ) rectly as would be normal for a typed semantic representation  . This gives the set of facts g7-g12 shown at the top of Figure 3  . 4 Once the dataset is in this form , aggregation lattice construction may proceed as described above  ; the result is also shown in Figure 3 . This lattice reflects the more complex reference situation represented by the dataset and its possible aggregations : for example  , node 7 shows that the facts g7 , g8 , gg ,   gl0 may be aggregated with respect o both arg2type   ( ' table ': node 5 ) and pred ( ' on ': node 6 )  . Node 3 , in contrast , shows that the two distinct sets g9 , gl0 and g7 , g8 ( again inherited upwards from node 2 ) may both individually ( but not collectively ) also be aggregated with pred , arg2 type , and additionally with a rgl type ( ' cup ': node 4 )  . 
We first consider the reference task described by Horacek  , i . e . , identifying the object tl . Now that we are dealing with relations , the ob-?jects to be referred to generally occur as values of ' attributes '-- that is  , as entries in the data table -- rather than as entire rows  . In order to construct an appropriate RE we need to find relations that describe the intended referent and which do not allow aggregation with other  rela-4Note that this is then isomorphic to a set of SPL specifications of the form  ( g7/on : argl ( bl/bottle ) : arg2 ( tl/table )   )   , etc . 
tions describing other conflicting referents . We also need to indicate explicitly that the RE -content should not avail itself of the literal instance variables : these are to remain internal to the lattice and to RE-construction so that individuals remain distinct  . We therefore distinguish been ' public ' and ' private ' attributes : public attributes are available for driving linguistic expression  , private attributes are not . If we were not to impose this distinction , then referring expressions such as ' the table t l ' would be seen as appropriate and probably minimal descriptions !  5 An aggregation set that does hot involve a private attribute will be called a public concept  . 
The first step in constructing an RE is now to identify the relations/events in which the intended referent is involved--here  g7  , g8 , gg -- and to specify the positions ( both private and public ) that the referent holds in these . We call the set of potentially relevant relations  , the reference information source set ( ares ) . 
In the present case , the same argument position is held by the intended referent l for all RISS-members  , i . e . , privately arg2 and publicly arg2type : Next , we proceed as before to 5Note that this might well be appropriate behavior in some context--in which case the variables would be declared public  . 
131 find a non-impinging , minimal aggregate set.
However , we can now define ' non-impinging ' more accurately  . A non-impinging node is one for which there is at least one public supercon-ceptful filling the following condition : the required superconcept may not bring any RISS-non-member together as co -aggregate with any RISS-member drawn from the originating aggregation set with respect othe specified public attribute of the intended referent  . 
By these definitions both the minimal nodes of the lattice are non-impinging  . However , node 2 is more supportive of minimal RE's and we will only follow this path here  ; formal indications of minimality are given by the depth and number of paths leading from the node used for aggregation to the top of the aggregation lattice  ( since any resulting description then combines discriminatory power from each of its chains of superconcepts  ) and the number of additional facts that are taken over and above the original RISS-members  . Node 2 is therefore the ' default ' choice simply given a requirement of brevity  , although the generation process is free to ignore this if other communicative goals so decide  . 
There are two public superconcepts for node 2: both of nodes 7 and 3 inherit arg2type from node 5 but do not themselves contain a private attribute  . Of these only node 7 brings one of the originating RIss-members ( i . e . , g7 and g8 from node 2 ) into an aggregation set with a RISS nonmember ( gl0 )  . Node 2 is therefore non-impinging via node 3 . The attributes that may be aggregated at node 2 are arg2   ( node 2 < EVA8 )  , arg2 type (2 < FCA5) , pred(2 < FCA6) and argltype (2<: FCA4) . Since this includes arg2 , the private position of the intended referent , we know that the dataset does not support aggregation for  g7 and g8 with respect to any other distracting value for arg2  , and sog 7 and g8 , both collectively and individually , are appropriate and sufficient RE's fortl . 
? Rendering these in English would give us: g7 or g8 ' the table with a bottle on it'g ? plus g8 ' the table with some bottles on it ' The precise rendering of the bottles depends on other generator decisions  ; important here is only the fact that it is known that we do not need to uniquely identify which bottles are in question  . More identifying information for argl ( g8' ( predon )   ( arglb2 )   ( argltype bottle )   ( arg2 t2 ) (arg2type table ) )  ( g12' ( predleft-of )   ( arglc2 )   ( argltype cup )   ( arg2 b2 ) (arg2type bottle ) )
PRED ~ ARGITYPEm ( gS' ) =m ( gl1 ) m ( gl1 ) = m ( gl2' ) m ( g9 ) =m ( gl2' ) ARG2TYPEm ( gS , ) = nn(g9) EA3J2 , , ~ ARG1 m(gT)=m(gl 1 ) m(g7)=m(gl ~// ~ .   . ,,, . m(glO ) = m(gl2')
ARG2," m(gO ) = m(gl ) "- .   . "- J'n(g7) = m(g9)," .   .   .   .  -_@ , Figure 4: Aggregation lattice for modified example situation from Horacek  ( the bottles bl and b2 ) would be necessary only if an aggregation with other  arg2's   ( e . g . , other tables ) were possible , but it is not , and so the type information is already sufficient to produce an RE with noun wanted aggregation possibilities  . The aggregation-based approach will not , therefore , go on to consider further facts unless there is an explicit communicative intention to do so  . 
3 . 3 Relational descriptions : when further information is necessary In this final example we show that the behavior above does not preclude information being added when it is in fact necessary  . We show this by adapting Horacek's set of facts slightly to create a different aggregation lattice  ; we move one of the bottles ( b2 ) over to the other table t2 , placing it to the right of the cup . We show the modified facts and the new aggregation lattice in Figure  4  . Here a few concepts have moved in response to the revised reference situation : for example  , arg2 type ( node 3 ) is now a direct subconcept of pred indicating that in the revised dataset there is a functional relationship between the two attributes : all co-aggregates with respect o  arg2type are necessarily also co-aggregates with respect o pred  . In the previous example this did not hold because there were also facts with shared pred and nonshared  arg2type   ( fact sgll and g12: node 6 )  . 

We will again attemp to refer to the table t 1 to compare the results with those of the previous subsection  . To begin , we have a RISS of gT , gg with the intended referent in arg2 ( private ) and arg2 type ( public ) as before . We then look for non-impinging , most-specific nodes . Here , nodes 4 and 5 are both impinging . Node 4 is impinging in its own right since its anctions aggregation of both the RIss-members it mentions with non-members with respect to  arg2type   ( node 3 ) and argltype ( node 6 )  ; this deficit is then inherited upwards . Node 5 is impinging by virtue of its first and only available public superconcept  , node 3 , which sanctions as co-aggregates gT , g8~ , gg , gl 0 with respecto arg2 type . Neither node 4 nor node 5 can therefore support appropriate RE's . Only node 2 is non-impinging , since it does not sanction aggregation involving arg2type or arg2  , and is the only available basis for an effective RE with the revised dataset  . 
To construct the RE we take the RISS-member of node  2   ( i . e . , gT ) and consider it and the aggregations its anctions as candidate material  . Node 2 indicates that g7 may be aggregated with gll with respect oargl type  ; such an aggregation is guaranteed not to invoke a false referent for argl because it is non -impinging  . Moreover , we can infer that g ? alone is insufficient since nodes  3 and 4 indicate that g7 is a co-aggregate with facts with nonequal argl values  ( e . g . , gSr ), and so aggregation is in fact necessary . The RE then combines : ( g7 ( predon ) (argl bl ) (argltype bottle )   ( arg2 tl ) (arg2type table ) )  ( g11 ( predleft-of ) (argl bl ) (argltype bottle )   ( arg2 cl ) (arg2type cup ) ) to produce ' the table on which a bottle is to the left of a cup '  . This is the only RE that will identify the required table in this highly symmetri-?cal context  . No further information is sought because there are no further aggregations possible with respect o  arg2 and so the reference is unique ; it is also minimal . 
4 Discussion and Conclusion
One important feature of the proposed approach is its open-nature with respect to the rest of the generation process  . The mechanisms described attempt only to factor out one recurrent problem of generation  , namely organizing instantial data to reveal the patterns of contrast and similarity  . In this way , RE-generation is re-assimilated and seen in a somewhat more general light than previously  . 
In terms of the implementation ad complexity of the approach  , it is clear that it cuts the cake rather differently from previous algo-rithms /approaches  . Some cases of efficient reference may be read-off directly from the lattice  ; others may require explicit construction and trial of RE-content more reminiscent of the previous algorithms  . In fact , the aggregation lattice may in such cases be usefully considered in combination with those algorithms  , providing an alternative method for checking the consistency of intermediate steps  . Here one important difference between the current approach and previous attempts at maintaining consistency is the re-orientation from an incremental procedure to a more static'overview ' of the relationships present  , thus providing a promising avenue for the exploration of referring strategies with a wider ' domain of locality '  . 
This re-orientation is also reflected in the differing computational complexity of the approaches : the runtime behavior of the previous algorithms is highly dependent on the final result  ( number of properties known true of the referent , number of attributes mentioned in the RE ) , whereas the runtime of the current approach is more closely tied to the dataset as a whole  , particularly to the number of facts ( rid ) and the number of attributes ( ha )  . 
Test runs involving lattice construction for random datasets ranging from  10 to 120 objects , with a number of attributes ranging from 5 to 15 ( each with 57 possible values ) showed that a simple experimental algorithm constructed for uncovering the formal concepts constituting the aggregation lattices had a typical runtime approximately proportional to  nan2d   . Although worst-case behavior for both this and the lattice construction component is substantially slower  , there are now efficient standard algorithms and implementations available that mitigate the problem even when manipulating quite sizeable datasets  .   6 For the sizes of data 6A useful summary and collection of pointers to complexity results and efficient algorithms is given by Vogt complexity is not likely to present a problem  . 
Nevertheless , for larger datasets the approach given here is undoubtedly considerably slower than the simplified algorithms reported both by Dale and Reiter and by Horacek  . However , in contrast to those approaches , it relies only on generic , non-RE specific methods . 
The approach also , as suggested above , appears under certain conditions to effectively deliver maximally concise RE's  ; just what these conditions are and whether they can be systematically exploited remain for future research  . Finally , since the use of aggregation lattices has been argued for other generation tasks  ( Bateman et al ,  1998) , some of the ' cost ' of deployment may in fact turn out to be shared  , making a direct comparison solely with the RE -task in any case inappropriate  . Other generation constraints might then also naturally contribute to restricting the overall size of the datasets to be considered--perhaps even to within acceptable practical limits  . 

This paper was improved by the anonymous comments of reviewers for both the ACL and the European Natural Language Generation Workshop  ( 1999 )  . Remaining errors and obscu-rities are my own . 

John Bateman , Thomas Kamps , J Srg Kleinz , and Klaus Reichenberger .  1998 . Communicative goal-driven NL generation and datadrivengraphics generation : an architectural synthesis for multimedia page generation  . In Proceedings of the 1998 International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , pages 8-17 . Niagara-on-the-Lake , Canada . 
Robert Dale and Nicholas Haddock .  1991 . Generating referring expressions involving relations  . In Proceedings of the 1991 Meeting of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , pages 161-166 , Berlin . 
Robert Dale and Ehud Reiter .  1995 . Computational interpretations of the Gricean max- ( 1996 )  . Formal techniques for minimizing the size of the dataset that is used for further processing are also given  . 
ims in the generation of referring expressions.
Cognitive Science , 19:233-263.
Robert Dale .  1989 . Cooking up referring expressions . In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics  , Vancouver , 
British Columbia.
Robert Dale .  1992 . Generating referring expressions : constructing descriptions in a domain of objects and processes  . Bradford Books , MIT Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts . 
Hercules Dalianis and Eduard Hovy .  1996 . Aggregation in natural anguage generation . In Giovanni Adorni and Michael Zock , editors , Trends in natural anguage generation : an artificial intelligence perspective  , pages 88-105 . 

Helmut Horacek .  1995 . More on generating referring expressions . In Proceedings of the Fifth European Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , pages 43-58 , Leiden , The

D . Johnson .  1974 . Approximate algorithms for combinatorial problems  . Journal of Computer and Systems Sciences , 9 . 
Thomas Kamps .  1997 . A constructive theory for diagram design and its algorithmic implementation  . Ph . D . thesis , Darmstadt University of Technology , Germany . 
Robert T . Kasper .  1989 . A flexible interface for linking applications to PEN MAN'S sentence generator  . In Proceedings of the DARPA Workshop on Speech and Natural Language  . 
Ehud Reiter .  1990 . Generating descriptions that exploit a user's domain knowledge  . In R . Dale , C . Mellish , and M . Zock , editors , Current Research in Natural Language Generation . Academic Press , London . 
James Shaw .  1998 . Clause aggregation using linguistic knowledge . In Proceedings of the 1998 International Workshop on Natural Language Generation  , pages 138-147 . 
Niagara-on-the-Lake , Canada.
Frank Vogt .  1996 . Formale Begriffs analysemit C++ . Datenstrukturenud Algorithmen . 

R . Wille .  1982 . Restructuring lattice theory : an approach based on hierarchies of concept  . In I . Rival , editor , Ordered Sets , pages 445-470 . 
Reidel , Dordecht/Boston.

