Projecting Corpus-Based Semantic Links on a Thesaurus * 
Emmanuel Morin

2, chemin delahous in i ~ re-BP 92208
44322 NANTES Cedex3, FRANCE
morin@irin , univ-nantes.fr
Christian Jacquemin

BP 133
91403 ORSAY Cedex , FRANCE
jacquemin@limsi , fr
Abstract
Hypernym links acquired through an information extraction procedure are projected on multiword terms through the recognition of semantic variations  . The quality of the projected links resulting from corpus-based acquisition is compared with projected links extracted from a technical thesaurus  . 
1 Motivation
In the domain of corpus-based terminology , there are two main topics of research : term acquisition -- the discovery of candidate terms - - and automatic thesaurus construction -- the addition of semantic links to a term bank  . Several studies have focused on automatic acquisition of terms from corpora  ( Bourigault , 1993; Justeson and Katz , 1995; Daille ,  1996) . The output of these tools is a list of unstructured multiword terms  . On the other hand , contributions to automatic onstruction of thesauri provide classes or links between single words  . 
Classes are produced by clustering techniques based on similar word contexts  ( Schiitze ,  1993 ) or similar distributional contexts ( Grefenstette ,  1994) . Links result from automatic acquisition of relevant predicative or discursive patterns  ( Hearst , 1992; Basili et al , 1993; Riloff ,  1993) . Predicative patterns yield predicative relations such as cause or effect whereas discursive patterns yield non-predicative rlation such as generic/specific or synonymy links  . 
* The experiments presented in this paper were performed on \[ AGRO\]  , a1 . 3-million word French corpus of scientific abstracts in the agricultural domain  . The ter-merused for multiword term acquisition is ACABIT  ( Daille ,  1996) . It has produced 15 , 875 multiword terms composed of 4 , 194 single words . For expository purposes , some examples are taken from \[ MEDIC\] , a1 . 5 6-million word English corpus of scientific abstracts in the medical domain  . 
The main contribution of this article is to bridge the gap between term acquisition and thesaurus construction by offering a framework for organizing multiword candidate terms with the help of automatically acquired links between single-word terms  . Through the extraction of semantic variants , the semantic links between single words are projected on multiword candidate terms  . As shown in Figure 1 , the input to the system is a tagged corpus . A partial ontology between single word terms and a set of multiword candidate terms are produced after the first step  . In a second step , layered hierarchies of multiword terms are constructed through corpus-based conflation of semantic variants  . Even though we focus here on generic/specific relations  , the method would apply similarly to any other type of semantic relation  . 
The study is organized as follows . First , the method for corpus-based acquisition of semantic links is presented  . Then , the tool for semantic term normalization is described together with its application to semantic link projection  . The last section analyzes the results on an agricultural corpus and evaluates the quality of the induced semantic links  . 
2 Iterative Acquisition of Hypernym
Links
We first presenthesy stem for corpus-based information extraction that produces hypernym links between single words  . This system is built on previous work on automatic extraction of hypernym links through shallow parsing  ( Hearst , 1992; Hearst ,  1998) . In addition , our system incorporates a technique for the automatic generalization of lexicosyntactic patterns  . 
As illustrated by Figure 2 , the system has two functionalities :
Termer ~- ~0 ? ? ? ? ?/
Multiword terms

Single word hierarchy
Term nor rnalizer
Hierarchies of multiword terms
Figure 1: Overview of the system for hierarchy projection 1  . The corpus-based acquisition of lexicosyntactic patterns with respecto a specific conceptual relation  , here hypernym . 
2 . The extraction of pairs of conceptually related terms through a database of lexicosyntactic patterns  . 
Shallow Parser and Classifier
A shallow parser is complemented with a classifier for the purpose of discovering new patterns through corpus exploration  . This procedure inspired by ( Hearst , 1992; Hearst , 1998) is composed of 7 steps : 1 . Select manually are presentative conceptual relation  , e . g . the hypernym relation . 
2 . Collect a list of pairs of terms linked by the previous relation  . This list of pairs of terms can be extracted from a thesaurus  , a knowledge base or manually specified . For instance , the hypernym relation neo cortex
ISAvulnerable area is used.
3 . Find sentences in which conceptually related terms occur  . These sentences are lemmatized , and noun phrases are identified . They are represented as lexicosyntactic expressions  . For instance , the previous relation HYPERNYM ( vulnerable area , neo cortex ) is used to extract the sentence : Neuronal damage were found in the selectively vulnerable areas such as neo cortex  , striatum , hippo campus and tha-lamus from the corpus\[ MEDIC\]  . The sentence is then transformed into the following lexicosyntactic expression :  1 
NP find in NP such as LIST ( 1 ) 1 NP stands for a noun phrase , and LIST for a succession of noun phrases . 
. Find a common environment that generalizes the lexicoosyntactic expressions extracted at the third step  . This environment is calculated with the help of a function of similarity and a procedure of generalization that produce candidate lexicosyntactic pattern  . For instance , from the previous expression , and at least another similar one , the following candidate lexicosyntactic pattern is deduced : 
NP such as LIST (2) 5 . Validate candidate lexicosyntactic patterns by an expert  . 
6 . Use these validated patterns to extract additional candidate pairs of terms  . 
7 . Validate candidate pairs of terms by an expert , and go to step 3 . 
Through this technique , eleven of the lexicosyntactic patterns extracted from \[ AGRO \] are validated by an expert  . These patterns are exploited by the information extractor that produces  774 different pairs of conceptually related terms .   82 of these pairs are manually selected for the subsequent seps our study because they are constructing significant pieces of ontology  . 
They correspond to ten topics ( trees , chemical elements , cereals , enzymes , fruits , vegetables , polyols , polysaccharides , proteins and sugars ) . 
Automatic Classification of
Lexicosyntactic Patterns
Let us detail the fourth step of the preceding algorithm that automatically acquires lexicosyntactic patterns by clustering similar patterns  . 

Corpus - ~
Loxical preprocessoriBniT:Slp:iP : rs of terms ~ ~ Lemmadzed and tagged corpus ~ 
Database of lexicosyntactic patterns
Shallow parser + classifier
Information extractor
Lexicosyntactic patterns
Partial hierarchies of single-word terms

Figure 2: The information extraction system As described in item  3  . above , pattern ( 1 ) is acquired from the relation HYPER-NYM ( vulnerable area , neocortex ) . Similarly , from the relation HYPERNYM ( complication , infection ) , the sentence : Therapeutic complications such as infection  , recurrence , and loss of support of the articular surface have continued to plague the treatment of giant cell tumor is extracted through corpus exploration  . 
A second lexicosyntactic expression is inferred : NP such as LIST continue to plague NP  ( 3 ) Lexicosyntactic expressions ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) can be abstracted as : 2
A = AIA2" ? Aj ? ..Ak ? " An
HYPERNYM(Aj , Ak ), k > j+1 and (4)
B:B1B2"" Bj .   .   .   . Bk .   .   .   . Bn , HYPERNYM(Bj ,   , Bk , ) , k '> j'+1 (5) Let Sire(A , B ) be a function measuring the similarity of lexicosyntactic expressions A and B that relies on the following hypothesis : Hypothesis  2  . 1  ( Syntactic isomorphy ) If two lexicosyntactic expressions A and B represent he same pattern then  , the items Aj and Bj ,   , and the items Ak and Bk , have the same syntactic function . 
2Ai is the ith item of the lexicosyntactic expression A  , and n is the number of items in A . An item can be either a lemma , a punctuation mark , a symbol , or a tag ( NP , LIST , etc . ) . The relation k > j 41 states that there is at least one item between Aj and Ak  . 
I w i n l ( A ) i w i F q _ ) l n 2 f A w in 3(A ) I
A = A1A2 . . . . . . Aj . . . Ak . . . . . . . . . An
B = B1B2 . . . Bj ' ... . . . . . Bn'
Figure 3: Comparison of two expressions
Let Winl ( A ) be the window built from the first through j1 words , W in 2 ( A ) be the window built from words ranking from j + l th through k-lth words  , and W in 3 ( A ) be the window built from k+lth through nth words  ( see Figure 3 )  . 
The similarity function is defined as follows : i=1 The function of similarity between lexicosyntactic patterns Sim  ( Wini ( A )   , Wini ( B )   ) is defined experimentally as a function of the longest common string  . 
After the evaluation of the similarity measure , similar expressions are clustered . Each cluster is associated with a candidate pattern  . 
For instance , the sentences introduced earlier generate the unique candidate lexicosyntactic pattern : 
NP such as LIST (7)
We now turn to the projection of automatically extracted semantic links on multiword terms  . 33 For more information on the PROMI~THEE system , in The 774 hypernym links acquired through the iterative algorithm described in the preceding section are thus distributed :  24  . 5% between two multiword terms , 23 . 6% between two single-word terms , and the remaining ones between a single-word term and a multiword term  . Since the terms produced by the termer are only multiword terms  , our purpose in this section is to design a technique for the expansion of links between single-word terms to links between multiword terms  . Given a link between fruit and apple , our purpose is to infer a similar link between apple juice and fruit juice  , between any apple N and fruit N , or between apple N1 and fruit N2 with N1 semantically related to N 2  . 
Semantic Variation
The extension of semantic links between single words to semantic links between multiword terms is semantic variation and the process of grouping semantic variants is semantic normalization  . The fact that two multiword terms wlw2 and w 1~ w 2~ contain two semantically-related word pairs ( wl , w ~) and ( w2 , w  ~ ) does not necessarily entail that W l w2 and w~w ~ are semantically close . The three following requirements should be met : Syntactic isomorphy The correlated words must occupy similar syntactic positions : both must be head words or both must be arguments with similar thematic roles  . For example , procdddd'd laboration ( process of elaboration ) is not a variant d laboration d ' unemdthode ( elaboration of a process ) even though procddd and md thode are synonymous , because procddd is the head word of the first term while md thode is the argument in the second term  . 
Unitary semantic relationship The correlated words must have similar meanings in both terms  . For example , analysed uray on nement ( analysis of the radiation ) is not semantically related with analyse del ' influence  ( analysis of the influence ) even particular a complete description of the generalization patterns process  , see the following related publication : ( Morin ,  1999) . 
though rayonnement and influence are semantically related  . The loss of semantic relationship is due to the polysemy of ray-onnement in French which means influence when it concerns a culture or a civilization and radiation in physics  . 
Holistic semantic relationship The third criterion verifies that the global meanings of the compounds are close  . For example , the terms inspection desaliments ( food inspection ) and contr Slealimentaire ( food control ) are not synonymous . The first one is related to the quality of food and the second one to the respect of norms  . 
The three preceding constraints can be translated into a general scheme representing two semantically-related multiword terms : Definit ion  3  . 1  ( Semantic variants ) Two multiword terms W l W2 and W ~ l w~2 are semantic variants of each other if the three following constraints are satisfied :  4   1  . wl and Wll are head words and w2 and wl2 are arguments with similar thematic roles . 
2 . Some type of semantic relation $ holds between W l and w ~ and/or between  w2 and wl2   ( synonymy , hypernymy , etc . ) . The nonsemantically related words are either identical or morphologically related  . 
3 . The compounds wl w2 and Wrl wt2 are also linked by the semantic relation S . 
Corpusbased Semantic Normalization
The formulation of semantic variation given above is used for corpus-based acquisition of semantic links between multiword terms  . For each candidate term W l w2 produced by the ter-mer , the set of its semantic variants satisfying the constraints of Definition  3  . 1 is extracted from a corpus . In other words , a semantic normalization of the corpus is performed based on corpus-based semantic links between single words and variation patterns defined as all the  4wl   w2 is an abbreviated notation for a phrase that contains the two content words wl and  w2 such that one of both is the head word and the other one an argument  . 
For the sake of simplicity , only binary terms are considered , but our techniques would straightforwardly extend to nary terms with n >  3  . 
392 licensed combinations of morphological , syntactic and semantic links . 
An exhaustive list of variation patterns is provided for the English language in  ( Jacquemin ,  1999) . Let us illustrate variant extraction on a sample variation :  5 
Nt Prep N2-+
M(N1,N ) Adv ? A ? Prep_Ar.t?A?S(N2)
Through this pattern , a semantic variation is found between composition du fruit  ( fruit composition ) and composgschimiques de lagraine ( chemical compounds of the seed )  . It relies on the morphological relation between the nouns composg  ( compound ,   . h4(N1 , N )) and composition ( composition , N 1 ) and on the semantic relation ( part/whole relation ) between graine ( seed , S(N2)) and fruit ( fruit , N2) . In addition to the morphological nd semantic relations  , the categories of the words in the semantic variant composds Nchimiques Ade prepla Art graine N satisfy the regular expression : the categories that are realized are underlined  . 
Related Work
Semantic normalization is presented as semantic variation in  ( Hamon et al ,  1998 ) and consists in finding relations between multiword terms based on semantic relations between single-word terms  . Our approach differs from this preceding work in that we exploit domain specific corpus-based links instead of general purpose dictionary synonymy relationships  . Another original contribution of our approach is that we exploit simultaneously morphological  , syntactic , and semantic links in the detection of semantic variation in a single and cohesive framework  . 
We thus cover a larger spectrum of linguistic phenomena : morphosemantic variations such as contenuen is otope  ( iso topic content ) a variant ofteneuriso topique ( iso topic composition )  , syntactico-semantic variant such as contenuen is otope a variant often eure nisotope  ( iso topic content )  , and morpho-syntactico-semantic var-ants such as duretd de lavi and e  ( toughness of the meat ) a variant of rdsistance t larigid it d de la chair  ( lit . resistance and stiffness of the flesh ) . 
5The symbols for part of speech categories are N ( Noun )  , A ( Adjective ) , Art ( Article ) , Prep ( Preposition ) , 
Punc ( Punctuation ), Adv ( Adverb).
4 Pro jec t ion o f a Single Hierarchy on Mul t i - word Terms Depending on the semantic data  , two modes of representation are considered : a link mode in which each semantic relation between two words is expressed separately  , and a class mode in which semantically related words are grouped into classes  . The first mode corresponds to synonymy links in a dictionary or to generic/specific links in a thesauru such as  ( AGROVOC ,  1995) . The second mode corresponds to the synsets in WordNet  ( Fellbaum ,  1998 ) or to the semantic data provided by the information extractor  . Each class is composed of hyponym sharing a common hypernym--named co-hyponyms - - and all their common hypernyms  . The list of classes is given in Table 1 . 
Analysis of the Projection
Through the projection of single word hierarchies on multiword terms  , the semantic relation can be modified in two ways : Transfer The links between concepts  ( such as fruits ) are transferred to another conceptual domain ( such as juices ) located at a different place in the taxonomy . Thus the link between fruit and apple is transferred to a link between fruit juice and apple juice  , two hyponyms of juice . This modification results from a semantic normalization of ar-gument words  . 
Specialization The links between concepts ( such as fruits ) are specialized into parallel relations between more specific oncepts located lower in the hierarchy  ( such as dried fruits )  . Thus the link between fruit and apple is specialized as a link between dried fruits and dried apples  . This modification is obtained through semantic normalization of head words  . 
The Transfer or the Specialization of a given hierarchy between single words to a hierarchy between multiword terms generally does not preserve the full set of links  . In Figure 4 , the initial hierarchy between plant products is only partially projected through Transfer on juices or dryings of plant products and through Spe-cialization on fresh and dried plant products  . 
Since multiword terms are more specific than
Classes Hypernyrns and cc~hyponyms trees chemical element scere alsenzymes fruit solives apples vegetables polyols polys acchaxides proteins sugarsarbre  , bouleau , chine , drable , h ~ tre , or me , peuplier , pin , poirier , pommier , sap)n , dpicd adldment , calcium , potassium , magndsium , mang and se , so dium , arsenic , chrome , mercure , sdldnium , dtain , aluminium , fer , cad ) urn , cuivrec dr dale , mais , mil , sorgho , bld , org e , riz , avoine enzyme , as paxtate , lipase , prot dase fruit , banane , cerise , citron , figue , fraise , k i w i , no)x , olive , orange , poire , pomme , p ~ che , rais in fruit , olive , Amellau , Chemlali , Chdtoui , Lucques , Picholine , Sevillana , Sigoise fruit , pomme , Caxtland , Ddlicious , Empire , McIntoch , Spart an ldgume , asperge , carotte , concombre , haricot , pois , to mate polyol , glycdrol , sorbi tolpoly sacchari de , am ) don , cellulose , styre ne , dthylbenz ~ neprot dine , chitinase , glu canase , thaumat in-like , fibronectine , glu canase sucre , lactose , maltose , raffinose , glucose , saccharose p ( roduit v ~ g ~ talplant products ) cH ~ ale ~ pice fruitl ~ gurae ( cereal )   ( spice )   ( fruit )   ( vegetable ) ma ) ~ or etomate en dive ( maize )   ( b~y )   ( tomatoes )   ( chicory ) fruit a no yau fruit ~ p ~ p in spet it fruit ( stone frmts )   ( point fruits )   ( soft tnlits )   ( apples )   ( pears )   ( grapes )  ~  ( strawberries ) abricot cass is ( apricots )  "  ( black currants ) 
Specialization " ~ k

Transfer . ,~  1 " ~ fruit fraisIdgume frais fruitsecs dchage de c ~ ale\]s ~ chage de I~gume  ( fresh fruits )   ( freshvege tables )   ( dried / ~ ruits ) jusde . fruit ( cereal drying ) V ( vegetable drying )  / \  ( fruit juice )   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  ~  . . . . I ~ sdchagedecarotte fi~u~ee:~Cgsh ~ ? a=~ , ~ sc ~ c . ~, a carrotm Jusdeananas .   .  , . o  ~ . ~ '~7 . ' ~ ~ ~ / " N ~ ( dry " g ) ( ananasjuice)/\\ .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . "' ~" V ~/"%/ xk .   .   .   . Fsdcha ~ edelabananeraisinfraisraisinsecj\ ~secnage aenz X ' an an adin ~ P\ju ~ de raisin  ( rice drying ) \ Wryg ,   ( fresh grapes )   ( dried grapes ) jus depomme\ ( grapejuice )  \  ( apple juice ) ~ jusde poiresd chage del ' abricot ( peat juice )   ( a pricot drying ) Figure 4: Projected links on multiword terms ( the hieraxchy is extracted from ( AGROVOC , 1995)) single-word terms , they tend to occur less frequently in a corpus . Thus only some of the possible projected links axe observed through corpus exploration  . 
5 Evaluation
Projection of Corpus-based Links Table 2 shows the results of the projection of corpus -based links  . The first column indicates the semantic class from Table  1  . The next word links projected through Specialization  , the number of correct links and the corresponding value of precision  . The same values are provided for Transfer projections in the following three columns  . 
Transfer projections are more frequent ( 507 links ) than Specializations ( 77 links )  . Some classes , such as chemical elements , cereals and fruits are very productive because they are composed of generic terms  . Other classes , such as trees , vegetables , polyols or proteins , yield few semantic variations . They tend to contain more specific or less frequenterms  . 
The average precision of Specializations i relatively low  ( 58 . 4% on average ) with a high standard eviation ( between 16 . 7% and 100%) . 
Conversely , the precision of Transfers is higher (83 . 8% on average ) with a smaller standard deviation ( between 69 . 0% and 100%) . Since Transfers are almost ten times more numerous than Specializations  , the overall precision of projections i high : 80 . 5% . 
In addition to relations between multiword terms , the projection of single-word hierarchies on multiword terms yields new candidate terms : the variants of candidate terms produced at the first step  . For instance , sd chage de labanane ( bananadrying ) is a semantic variant of sd chage de fruits ( fruit drying ) which is not provided by the first step of the process  . As in the case of links , the production of multiword terms is more important with Transfers  ( 72 multiword terms ) than Specializations ( 345 multiword terms )   ( see Table 3 )  . In all ,   417 relevant multiword terms are acquired through semantic variation  . 
Comparison with AGROVOCL inks
In order to compare the projection of corpus-based links with the projection of links extracted from a thesaurus  , a similar study was made using semantic links from the thesaurus  ( AGROVOC ,  1995) .   6 The results of this second experiment are very similar to the first experiment  . Here , the preci-6(AGROVOC , 1995) is composed of 15 , 8 00 descriptors but only single-word terms found in the corpus\[AGRO\]are used in this evaluation  ( 1 , 580 descriptors ) . 
From these descriptors , 168 terms representing 4 topics ( cultivation , plant anatomy , plant products and flavor-ings ) axe selected for the purpose of evaluation . 
sion of Specializations isimilar (57 . 8% for 45 links inferred ) , while the precision of Transfers is slightly lower  ( 72 . 4% for 326 links inferred ) . 
Interestingly , these results show that links resulting from the projection of a thesaurus have a significantly lower precision  ( 70 . 6%) than projected corpus-based links (80 . 5%) . 
A study of Table 3 shows that , while 197 projected links are produced from 94 corpus-based links ( ratio 2 . 1) , only 88 such projected links are obtained through the projection of  159 links from AGROVOC ( ratio 0 . 6) . Actually , the ratio of projected links is higher with corpus-based links than thesaurus links  , because corpus-based links represent better the ontology embodied in the corpus and associate more easily with other single word to produce projected hierarchies  . 
6 Perspectives
Links between single words projected on multiword terms can be used to assist terminologists during semiautomatic extension of thesauri  . 
The methodology can be straightforwardly applied to other conceptual relation such as synonymy or meronymy  . 

We are grateful to Ga~lde Chalendar ( LIMSI) , Thierry Hamon ( LIPN ) , and Camelia Popescu ( LIMSI&CNET ) for their helpful comments on a draft version of this article  . 

AGROVOC .  1995 . Thdsaurus Agricole Multi-lingue . Organisation de Nations Unies pour l ' Alimentation et l ' Agriculture  , Roma . 
Roberto Basili , Maria Teresa Pazienza , and Paola Velardi .  1993 . Acquisition of selectional patterns in sublanguages  . Machine
Translation , 8:175-201.
Didier Bourigault .  1993 . An endogeneous corpus-based method for structural noun phrase disambiguation  . In EACL'93, pages 81-86, Utrecht . 
B ~ atrice Daille .  1996 . Study and implementation of combined techniques for automatic extraction of terminology  . In Judith L . Klavans and Philip Resnik , editors , The Balancing Act : Combining Symbolic and Statistical 
Classes Specialization Transfer
Occ . Correct occ . Precision ~ Occ . Correct occ . Precision trees chemical elements cereals enzymes fruit so lives apples vegetables polyols polys accharides proteins sugars  6   1   16  . 7% 3 3 100 . 0% 32 20 62 . 5% 4 1 25 . 0% 4 1 25 . 0% 3 2 66 . 7% 3 3 100 . 0% 101 99 98 . 0% 76 65 85 . 5% 29 20 69 . 0% 214 172 80 . 4% 10 8 80 . 0% 16 12 75 . 0% 3 3 100 . 0% 8 6 75 . 0% 34 26 76 . 5%
Total II 7745 58.4% 5074 2583.8%
Table 3: Production of new terms and correct links through the projection of links Corpus-based links Thesaurus-based links Terms Relations Terms Relations 
Initial links I\[9694
Specialization 723 0
Transfer 345 167
Total 417   197   162   159   49   18   256   70   305   88 Approaches to Language , pages 49-66 . MIT
Press , Cambridge , MA.
Christiane Fellbaum , editor .  1998 . WordNet : An Electronic Lexical Database . MIT Press,
Cambridge , MA.
Gregory Grefenstette . 1994. Explorations in
Automatic Thesaurus Discovery . Kluwer
Academic Publisher , Boston , MA.
Thierry Hamon , Adeline Nazarenko , and C~cile Gros .  1998 . A step towards the detection of semantic variants of terms in technical docu-meats  . In COLING-ACL'98, pages 498-504,

Marti A . Hearst .  1992 . Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text corpora  . In
COLING'92, pages 539-545, Nantes.
Marti A . Hearst .  1998 . Automated discovery of wordnet relations . In Christiane Fellbaum , editor , WordNet : An Electronic Lexical Database . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . 
Christian Jacquemin .  1999 . Syntagmatic and paradigmatic representation of term vaxia-tion  . In ACL'99, University of Maryland . 
John S . Justeson and Slava M . Katz . 1995.
Technical terminology : some linguistic properties and an algorithm for identification in text  . Natural Language Engineering , 1(1):9-27 . 
Emmanuel Morin .  1999 . Using Lexicosyntactic Patterns to Extract Semantic Relations between Terms from Technical Corpus  . In Proceedings , 5th International Congress on
Terminology and Knowledge Engineering ( TKE'99) , Innsbriick . 
Ellen Riloff .  1993 . Automatically constructing a dictionay for information extraction tasks  . 
In Proceedings ,   11th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 811-816 , Cambridge , MA . MIT Press . 
Hinrich Schiitze . 1993. Word space . In
Stephen J . Hanson , Jack D . Cowan , and Lee Giles , editors , Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems  5  . Morgan Kauff-mann , San Mateo , CA . 

