wayOU  Linked Data-Based Social Location
Tracking in a Large, Distributed Organisation

Mathieu dAquin, Fouad Zablith, and Enrico Motta

Knowledge Media Institute, The Open University, Milton Keynes, UK

{m.daquin,f.zablith,e.motta}@open.ac.uk

Abstract. While the publication of linked open data has gained momentum in large organisations, the way for users of these organisations to engage with these data is still unclear. Here, we demonstrate a mobile application called wayOU (where are you at the Open University) which relies
on the data published by The Open University (under data.open.ac.uk)
to provide social, location-based services to its students and members of
staff. An interesting aspect of this application is that, not only it consumes linked data produced by the University from various repositories,
but it also contributes to it by creating new connections between people,
places and other types of resources.

1 Introduction

The Open University1 is a large UK University dedicated to distance learning.
Apart from its main campus, it is distributed over 13 regional centres across the
country. As part of the LUCERO project (Linking University Content for Education and Research Online2), the Open University is publishing linked open data,
concerning people, publications, courses, places, and open educational material
from existing institutional repositories and databases, under data.open.ac.uk.3
While the collection, conversion, exposure and maintenance of linked data
in large organisations is slowly becoming easier, it is still an issue to get users
of these organisations to engage with the data in a way suitable to them and
that could also benefit to re-enforcing the data. Many applications of linked
data mostly concern the visualisation or exploration of available data for a particular purpose (see for example [1]), especially in mobile applications (see for
example [2] or [3]), or the use of linked data to accomplish a specific task (e.g.,
recommendation in DBrec [4]). Our goal is to provide features to users that not
only make use of linked data, but which usage would contribute in creating new
connections in the data, including currently implicit relations between people
and places.

We demonstrate wayOU (where are you at the Open University): a mobile
application developed for the Google Android platform4 that allows users of the

http://www.open.ac.uk
http://lucero-project.info
http://data.open.ac.uk
http://www.android.com

G. Antoniou et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2011, Part II, LNCS 6644, pp. 461465, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011

M. dAquin, F. Zablith, and E. Motta

Open University (members of staff and students) to keep track of the places in
which they have been on the main campus and the regional centres, and connect
this information to other aspects of their interaction with the organisation (their
workplace, meetings with colleagues, tutorials, etc.) This application relies on
the data available through the SPARQL endpoint of data.open.ac.uk to get information regarding places (buildings, floors) and people (identifier, network), as
well as the linked data published by the UK government regarding locations in
the UK (especially, data.ordnancesurvey.co.uk5). More importantly, it generates
and keeps track of information generated for each user regarding their current lo-
cation, usual workplace, history of visits at the Open University and the reasons
for these visits. In this way, it can be compared to the foursquare application6
working in a specific corporate environment and allowing to declare and expose
more complex connections between users and places in this environment.

In the next section, we give a general overview of the structure of the wayOU
application and in Section 3, we give more details about the way users interact
with it. We discuss in Section 4 the future work and challenges we identified from
our experience in building a social, mobile application based on linked data.

2 The wayOU Android Application

An overview of the architecture of the wayOU application is presented in Figure 1. The application can run on any Android enabled device (with at least
Android OS 1.6 installed). This part of the application is mainly in charge of
the interaction between the application and the user. It does not store any information locally (apart from basic settings such as the users identifier). The
information used and produced by the application is manipulated through an
ad-hoc SPARQL client, accessing 2 SPARQL endpoints:
data.open.ac.uk provides an open SPARQL endpoint with information regarding the places in the Open Universitys campus and regional centres,
especially regarding buildings and floors within buildings. It also contains
information regarding members of the Open University (especially publications and projects), as well as about other resources such as courses, au-
dio/video podcasts, open educational resources, etc. The SPARQL endpoint
from data.ordnancesurvey.co.uk is used to obtain information regarding the
location of buildings, based on their postcodes.7

A personal information store is used to store the information generated by
the application for each user, and to query it. It deploys a service to update
the store with RDF regarding the current location and activities of users
and a SPARQL endpoint which identifies the appropriate graph to query
depending on the identity of the user.

In addition, an option is available to export information from the private space
of the personal information store, to the public one of data.open.ac.uk.

http://data.ordnancesurvey.co.uk
http://foursquare.com

7 Postcode units in the UK identify small areas, often corresponding to a single street.
?

?

?
Fig. 1. Overview of the architecture of the wayOU Android application

3 Interface and Demonstration

In this section, we quickly go through the mobile interface of the wayOU appli-
cation, as a way to explain its features and behaviour.

wayOU appears as a standard application on an Android-enabled mobile de-
vice. It does not require any setting other than the identifier of the user to work
(the OUCU, Open University Computer Username, which is assigned to every
member of staff and student of the University. See below).

The Locations tab is the main view of the ap-
plication. It allows to enter the postcode, building name and floor level where the user is currently located. The postcode is automatically set
to the closest postcode in which the Open University has buildings. Each field provides suggestions for auto-completion based on relevant data
fetched from data.open.ac.uk: the building field
suggests buildings in the chosen postcode and
the floor field depends on the building field. In
this view, it is also possible to provide a reason for attending a specific place. Predefined reasons are given with auto-completion, and include
Meeting with somebody, Giving a Tutorial
for a course and Attending a tutorial for a
course. The second field provides values for autocompletion from the list of courses at The Open University or the list of people
in the users network, depending on the chosen reason.

M. dAquin, F. Zablith, and E. Motta

The history of all the places attended by the
user is also displayed as a list in the Locations tab. In this list, the user can quickly check
whether he or she has already been in a given
place, using the provided summary (postcode,
building name, floor level) and the picture automatically attached to each item in the list. Each
item links to a page describing the relationship
between the user and this particular location,
including the times he or she has attended it,
whether or not it is his/her workplace, and reasons for attending otherwise.

The profile tab allows the user to connect the
location information generated from the application to his/her identity at The Open Univer-
sity. The OUCU corresponds to the login of the
user on the OU network, and is used to generate
the URI identifying this particular user in the
data.open.ac.uk linked data space. The user is
also offered the possibility to declare his/her current location as his/her workplace, as well as to
export the personal information generated by the
application into the data.open.ac.uk space. This
corresponds to exposing this information as pub-
lic, so that it can be reused, for example, by the
applications generating profile pages for members
of staff of the University.

The notion of network is included in the application as a similar mechanism to the ones of
friends or contacts in other social applications.
Here, an initial list of members of the social network is populated from the list of collaborators of
the user, derived from the co-authors of his/her
papers, and people at the Open University work-
ing, or having worked, on the same projects. In
addition, new members of the network can be derived based on the data generated by the applica-
tion, because of users attending the same meetings or tutorials.

4 Conclusion, Future Work and Challenges

The wayOU application is currently being tested with selected users of the Open
University. It will be made progressively available to more users before being
fully opened, by the time of the conference. An interesting aspect of the wayOU
?

?

?
application is that it both relies on and contributes to a base of linked data in
a given organisation, and from which more information can be derived, possibly
leading to new applications (e.g., analysing the movement of people within the
organisation depending on their social network).

There are obvious challenges in building linked data-based mobile applica-
tions: while the mobile device is not required to realise complex computations,
the overhead created by communicating with SPARQL endpoints represents a
bottleneck. As the history of locations and the network of users grow, more
and more time is needed to obtain and transfer the information. This and other
challenges need be investigated in the future:
Dealing with complex privacy options. At the moment, the privacy options
permitted by the application are rather simple: everything is private unless explicitly exported to data.open.ac.uk. More complex settings would be desirable,
up to the possibility to define arbitrary complex access policies (for example:
give access to my current location on the campus, but not the regional centres,
to people I have written papers with in the last 3 years).
Integrating with other social platforms. An obvious next step for this
application is the integration with other social platforms, including for example
exporting the current location to Twitter8 or extending the users network based
on his/her Facebook9 account. The Open University has developed several social
network applications, including the Facebook course profile application10 which
could enhance and be enhanced by wayOU. Integrating such additional sources
of information requires more effort as they are not based on linked data, and
would make even more complex the privacy related issues described above.
A generic, reusable application. wayOU is developed specifically for users
at the Open University and relies on linked data resources present at the Open
University. However, adapting it for other organisations could be envisaged. Since
it is designed to use the specific resources, vocabularies and URI Schemes of
data.open.ac.uk, it is still unclear how much effort would be required.
