Personal Semantics: Personal Information Management 

in the Web with Semantic Technologies 

Salman Elahi 

Knowledge Media Institute (KMi), The Open University, UK 

s.elahi@open.ac.uk 

Abstract.  Every  web  user  has  several  online  profiles  through  which  personal 
information  is  exchanged  with  many  service  providers.  This  exchange  of 
personal  information  happens  at  a  pace  difficult  to  fully  comprehend  and 
manage without a global view and control with obvious consequences on data 
control,  ownership  and,  of  course,  privacy.  To  tackle  issues  associated  with 
current service-centric approaches, we propose a user-centric architecture where 
the interaction between a user and other agents is managed based on a global 
profile for the user, maintained in a profile management system and controlled 
by  the  user  herself.  In  this  PhD,  we  will  investigate  research  issues  and 
challenges in realizing such a system based on semantic technologies. 

1   Research Problem 

Web  users  maintain  several  online  profiles  across  e-commerce  websites,  social 
networks and others, making it difficult for them to realize how much information is 
exchanged and what happens to that information. In other words, web interactions are 
happening  in  a  one  to  many  mode,  where  different  agents,  with  different  statuses 
and relationships to the user take part and receive personal information. We refer to 
this  phenomenon  as  the  fragmentation  of  personal  data  exchange,  where  many 
different destinations of the data receive various fragments of personal information 
over time, without the user having a global view of her own data. 

The  problem  stems  from  the  model  these  online  interactions  are  based  upon,  i.e.  a 
service-centric  model,  where  everything  is  focused  on  the  needs  of  a  particular 
organization.  Current  research  suggests  a  rather  contrasting  model  to  address  these 
issues: a user-centric approach [1] where the interaction between a user and other agents 
is managed based on a global profile for the user, maintained in a profile management 
system and controlled by the user herself. Parts of this profile can be requested by various 
agents (websites), with the user being given the possibility to control these accesses and 
to keep track of them directly within the profile management system. In this PhD, we will 
investigate  research  issues  and  challenges  in  realizing  a  system  based  on  user-centric 
profiles,  and  show  how  semantic  technologies  can  support  users  in  making  sense, 
managing  and  controlling  their  exchanges  of  personal  data  on  the  Web  with  such  a 
system. 

G. Antoniou et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2011, Part II, LNCS 6644, pp. 492496, 2011. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011 
?

?

?
2   State of the Art 

Personal  information  management  as  defined  in  [2]  is  at  the  core  of  Semantic 
Desktops [3], which are concerned with the management of information produced and 
consumed by desktop applications. While there are significant overlaps, our approach 
focuses  on  personal  information  on  the  web  and  on  the  way  this  information  is 
exchanged  with  other  agents,  rather  than  on  the  management  of  information  in  the 
close, local environment of the user. 

Identity  management  shares  a  thin  boundary  with  the  aspects  of  personal 
information  management  we  are  looking  at.  The  most  popular  approach  for  user-
centric identity management is OpenID1. OpenID is a protocol that provides a unique 
ID  to  each  user  to  be  used  over  various  services.  It  therefore  supports  users  in 
reducing the distribution of their identity data. OAuth2 coupled with OpenID provides 
secure exchange of data without disclosing users credentials to third party websites. 
However,  OpenID  and  OAuth  are  essentially  concerned  with  the  problem  of 
authentication,  not  the  management  of  personal  information.  A  few  initiatives  are 
attempting  to  realize  user-centric  identity  management  frameworks,  including 
Windows  CardSpace3,  LiberryAlliance4,  Higgins  I-Card5,  etc.  These  frameworks 
provide central places for storing and managing personal information (i.e., profiles), 
to  which  external  websites  are  granted  access.  In  this  sense,  they  comply  with  our 
notion  of  user-centric  personal  information  management  system.  While  they  still 
suffer from a number of limitations (e.g., in iCard based frameworks, personal data is 
still  fragmented,  in  the  sense  that  profile  information  is  boxed  according  to  the 
websites requesting it). [4,5] concern flexible user profiles in mash up environments. 
They focus on domain independent models while [6,7] also discuss user models but 
with a focus on retail domain. FOAF+SSL [8] is an authentication protocol to provide 
secure exchange of distributed information. It uses the SSL layer in modern day Web 
browsers to create a secure conduit of information between two parties. FOAF+SSL is 
also in an initial phase of development and has not been widely adopted yet.  

3   Propose Approach and Methodology 

A  social  context  provides  a  very  comfortable  leverage  to  someone  to  represent  and 
manage  their  persona  in  different  real  world  interactions  as  compared  to  online 
interactions,  where  it  becomes  a  tedious  task  to  maintain  ones  identity  (personal 
information)  in  one  place  because  of  the  many  different  profiles  a  typical  web  user 
usually possesses with each service provider she interacts with. In this scenario, usercentric  profiles  seem  to  be  a  promising  solution  where  a  user  can  define  different 
contexts to disclose certain aspects of her profile depending on  what type of agents 

                                                           
1 http://www.openid.net 
2 http://www.oauth.net 

 http://www.microsoft.com/windows/products/winfamily/cardspace/ 
default.aspx 
4 http://www.projectliberty.org/liberty/about/ 
5 http://www.eclipse.org/higgins/ 

S. Elahi 

she is communicating with. However, the realization of a truly user-centric personal 
profile management system raises complex research issues and challenges, which we 
intend to tackle in this PhD, partly based on the use of semantic technologies. More 
precisely, we will focus on the technical and the user aspects [9]:   

  The technical aspects include in particular issues related to user modelling in an 
open,  web  environment:  how  to  integrate  multiple  profiles  into  one  global 
profile? How to manage access policies and access rights on user information, 
including  identifying  policy  conflicts  between  consumer  and  provider  and 
suggesting  ways  to  resolve  them?  How  to  make  a  users  interaction  more 
sophisticated  and  friendly  with  new  concepts?  How  to  represent  behavioural 
changes in the profile while maintaining consistency?  

  The user-related issues regard the way to integrate this user-centric approach in 
the  existing  social  environment  of  the  user:  How  much  of  a  profile  can  be 
constructed  with  already  available  user  information?  What  interaction  models 
are suitable to the management of large, global user profiles by web users? Will 
users  be  willing  to  invest  time  in  such  a  system?  What  mechanisms  are 
necessary to ensure trust in the profile providers? 

In practice, we envisage the combination of user-centric profile management with 
semantic technologies as a system where the user is offered the ability to manage one, 
integrated profile containing information potentially relevant to different agents she is 
communicating with: a semantic model of her personal information. Such a semantic 
model  of  personal  information  can  not  only  be  used  to  negotiate  terms  of 
communications  (access  policies)  with  different  service  providers  but  can  also  be 
reasoned upon, enabling a user to have a global coherent model of her data, helping 
her in making sense, managing and giving access to them. Through this approach, we 
intend to answer the following three questions: 

1. How to model a user? Different users would have different requirements to be 

able to flexibly structure, organize and represent their arbitrary data. 

2. How to model semantic access control over semantic data? We will be looking 
at how access control, and especially definition of access rights in user-centric 
profile  scenarios  is  realized  in  a  way  homogeneous  to  the  description  of  its 
semantic  data,  taking  benefit  from  the  flexible  data  model  and  inference 
capabilities provided by the Semantic Web technologies. 

3. How users would react to such a new approach? We will empirically study the 
impact  of  a  user-centric  profile  management  system  on  the  practices  of  data 
exchange, based on user surveys and on monitoring usages.  

The methodology to resolve these questions will consist of the following phases: 

1. Feasibility  studies:  The  idea  of  user-centric  profile  management  has  not  yet 
been tested in the open environment of the web, where thousands of exchanges 
happen  with  hundreds  of  websites  every  day.  In  the  next  section,  we  give  an 
overview of a first study where we reconstructed a global user profile from logs 
of a particular users activities on the web [10]. Such feasibility studies help us 
?

?

?
identifying  specific  technical  issues  related  to  the  combination  of  semantic 
technologies with user-centric profile management in a web environment.  

2. Contrasting  the  user-centric  approach  with  existing  models:  In  this  phase, 
we focus on the aspect of managing the flexible exchange and access to personal 
information using an ontological model. We are conducting another experiment 
by  creating  a  semantic  representation  of  the  current  information  and  access 
model of a large organization (The Open University), in order to contrast it with 
a  possible  user-centric  view  of  information  and  access.  The  Open  University 
represents  a  perfect  example  of  a  large-scale  distributed  organization  with 
multiple departments, a very large number of distance learning students and off 
campus employees. In this phase, we intend to demonstrate how a user-centric, 
semantic model of personal information and access policies provides added 
value  through  allowing  users  to  manage,  reason  upon  and  control  their  own 
information in a more transparent way than in an organization centric model.  

3. Tackling  specific  technical 

issues  and  prototyping:  We  propose  an 
architecture consisting of four evolving sub-frameworks. The profile framework 
will  provide  intuitive  interfaces  for  distributed  management  of  user-centric 
profiles. The policy framework acts as a security grid based on the intelligence 
provided  by  the  Semantic  framework,  which  assesses  user  behaviour  and 
provide recommendations to evolve the profile and keeps the cycle going. The 
policy  framework  derives  security  policies  based  on  the  rich  semantic 
information  about  the  agents  the  user  is  interacting  with  and  defines  access 
rights  on  the  contents  which  are  then  used  in  the  Content  framework  when  a 
request comes in for certain information from a consuming agent [9].  

4. Empirical study and evaluation: Along with the evaluation studies of phase 1 
and 2 we will be realise empirical studies where the prototype system developed 
in  the  previous  phase  will  be  used  within  an  organization  instead  of  the  usual 
information and access mechanisms. Through collecting both usage and survey 
data, we will be able to assess the benefit of the approach, and evaluate specific 
advantages gained through the use of semantic technologies. 

4   Initial Results 

In this section we discuss initial results obtained (during the first year of this part-time 
PhD). In [10], our objective was to collect all the fragments of personal information 
sent by a user during several weeks, and to try to reconstruct from these fragments a 
coherent  global  profile.  From  logs  of  HTTP  traffics  through  specifically  developed 
tools,  the  user  managed  to  create  36  profile  attributes  mapped  onto  1,108  data 
attributes. However, while this small and simple exercise proved to be satisfying the 
basic  hypothesis,  we  also  identified  few  research  issues  and  challenges  which  will 
need to be addressed to create more complex and flexible user profiles [10], including 
the  need  for  complex  and  sophisticated  profile  representations  (with  temporal  and 
multi-faceted  representations),  the  need  to  include  multiple,  external  sources  of 
information  to  enrich  the  profile  (including  information  about  the  accessing  agents) 
and the need for appropriate mechanisms for the definition of semantic access control 

S. Elahi 

model  over  semantic  data.  On  the  last  point,  we  are  currently  investigating  a 
prospective model for access control in a user-centric scenario, and applying it in the 
scenario of the Open Universitys information and access model. Through the use of 
an ontological model, and the possibility of employing inference upon such a model, 
we expect to obtain results showing how the user-centric approach can outsmart the 
organization-centric  approach,  providing  better  overviews  of  the  access  control 
aspects over the considered data and possibly detecting un-intended behaviours which 
normally remain hidden in an organization-centric view. 

5   Future Work 

The next major steps for this part-time PhD include completing the current work on 
Semantic policies and access rights in the next 4 months. The results obtained from 
this exercise will be used to develop a prototype profile management system based on 
the  user-centric  framework  discussed  earlier.  This  framework  will  employ  semantic 
technologies  to  provide  access  control  through  semantic  policies  with  evolvable 
profiles  representing  changing  needs  of  a  user  in  todays  online  interactions.  This 
phase will investigate and try to address the technical issues mentioned above. Social 
issues  will  be  investigated  in  the  next  phase  with  the  deployment  of  this  system  in 
place  of  the  Open  Universitys  usual  information  and  access  mechanisms  to  gather 
empirical evidence of how users interact with such a system and its impact on them. 
This empirical evidence will be used in the evaluation of the system. 
