Semantic Annotation of Images on Flickr

Pierre Andrews, Sergey Kanshin, Juan Pane, and Ilya Zaihrayeu

Department of Information and Communication Technology

{andrews,kanshin,pane,ilya}@disi.unitn.it

University of Trento Italy

Abstract. In this paper we introduce an application that allows its
users to have an explicit control on the meaning of tags they use when
uploading photos on Flickr. In fact, this application provides to the users
an improved interface with which they can add concepts to photos instead of simple free-text tags. They can thus directly provide semantic
tags for their photos that can then be used to improve services such as
search.

1 Introduction

The task of discovering the semantics of photos is still very difficult and hence,
automatic annotation with concepts is widely recognized as an extremely difficult issue [1]. It is thus preferable to ask the creators of the photos to annotate
them directly when they share them. As was demonstrated in [2], simple freetext annotations are not sufficient for performing good indexing and leveraging
semantic search.

In this paper we discuss an extension to a popular open source photo uploader
for the Flickr1 website that allows the annotation of image files with semantic
annotations without extra involvement from the user. One of the feature of this
tool is the bootstrapping of semantic annotations by extraction of the intrinsic semantics contained in the context in which the images reside on the local
computer of the user before uploading them to Flickr by using the technology described in [3]. The users can also manually provide semantic annotations through
an extended interface. These semantic annotations are linked to their meaning
in a knowledge organisation system such as Wordnet2.

The source code for the tools described in this paper is available freely at

https://sourceforge.net/projects/insemtives/.

2 Semantic Annotation Platform

The Semantic Annotation tool is built as an application on top of the INSEMTIVES platform. Interested readers are referred to [4] for details on this platform.

 This work has been partly supported by the INSEMTIVES project (FP7-231181,

see http://www.insemtives.eu).
http://www.flickr.com
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/

G. Antoniou et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2011, Part II, LNCS 6644, pp. 476480, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011
?

?

?
Fig. 1. Image properties with added concepts

The platform services are exposed through the INSEMTIVES platform APIs,
which can then be used by third party applications. The APIs are based on a
communication framework which represents a highly modular client-server architecture implemented using communication layer over JMS3 messaging protocol
as well as six other protocols, including REST4 and Web Service Notification.
The platform is divided in two main components: Structured Knowledge and
User and Communities. The Structured Knowledge component stores all artifacts in RDF following the semantic annotation model defined in [5]. The semantic store relies on OWLIM5 while the initial lexical resource is based on Wordnet
and DBPedia. The User and Communities component contains user profiles and
is responsible for maintaining provenance information of the annotations and
resources in the platform.

3 Semantic Photo Annotation

The semantic annotation application has been developed as an extension to the
JUploadr6 uploading tool for Flickr. This tool has been chosen as it is open
source and developed in Java which is the main development language for the
INSEMTIVES platform and makes the tool easily multi-platform.

3 Java Messaging Service, see http://java.sun.com/products/jms/

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_State_Transfer
http://www.ontotext.com/owlim/
http://www.juploadr.org/

P. Andrews et al.

jUploadr allows the user to queue photos for uploading on Flickr and set their
properties (see Figure 1). In particular, the tags, description and title, which are
the main metadata stored and displayed by the Flickr website.

3.1 Semi-automatic Semantic Annotation

Concept Tagging The INSEMTIVES Uploadr tool will try to understand where
the users have stored their photos and automatically add tags to them. For in-
stance, if the users have stored their photos in the folder: . . . /Pictures/Trips/
Trentino/Hike to Bondone-10-01-10/IMG 0001.jpg then the software will understand that these were photos of a trip in the Trentinos mountains and will
automatically propose relevant concepts (see Figure 1).

When a new photo is added to the upload batch, the following processing

takes place:

1. clean and split the photo path in phrases,
2. send the ordered set of phrases to the INSEMTIVES platform,
3. receive a set of tokens for each phrase with the corresponding concepts,
4. attach each identified concept to the photo to be uploaded as a semantic

annotation.

The cleaning of the path is performed to remove generic parts of the path
that might not contain interesting semantic information for bootstrapping. The
cleaning is specific to that particular type of media and the one applied for
image files is the following: 1. if the path starts with the name of the users home
directory, drop the beginning. 2. if the path starts with /media or /mnt, drop
the beginning. 3. if the path contains the word picture(s), Media, Photos
drop anything on the left of that word. Including that word. 4. treat as spaces.
Each section of the path (between path separators) is treated as a phrase 
i.e., a short sentence made of related tokens. The set of phrases in the path is sent
in an ordered way to the NLP service to be used as a context for disambiguation.
For instance, Hike to Bondone will be treated in the context of Trip and thus
hike will be disambiguated to a long walk usually for exercise or pleasure
instead of the amount a salary is increased7(see Figure 1).

These special tags have a meaning (or semantics) attached to them, a
summary of that meaning is always displayed next to the concept and if the user
hovers the mouse over one of them, its definition is displayed (see Figure 1).

Location Tagging. In the geo tab of the properties window for a photo, the user
can specify where the photo was taken. Once a location is specified for a photo, the
user can press the Find concepts button to ask the INSEMTIVES tool to find
automatically new concepts that relate to the location where the photo was taken
by looking at popular terms already used for this location on Flickr. These concepts
will then be added to the list of semantic tags in the Photo Info tab, where the
user can remove the ones that might not fit the photo.

7 These senses are taken from WordNet.
?

?

?
Fig. 2. Specifying Location of an Image

3.2 Manual Semantic Annotation

The user can also provide manual semantic annotations. When typing a free-text
tag, the user is given a list of possible concepts from the platform knowledge
base. Each concept is disambiguated by a summary word (see Figure 3.2a) and
hovering it provides its definition.

a) Concept Completion

b) Concept Disambiguation

For the concepts that were automatically proposed by the services described
earlier, the user can correct the disambiguation by selecting the right sense from
a drop-down list. Here also, a summary is shown and the user can display the
definition of the concept (see Figure 3.2b)) .

4 Semantic Search

On the Flickr website, photos can only be searched by keywords, hence, if a
photo is tagged with cat and another one with dog, these photos will not
be found when searching for animal.

However, if the photos were uploaded with the INSEMTIVES Uploadr and
were assigned the concepts cat and dog, then they can be retrieved with a
semantic search for animal. To do this, the INSEMTIVES Uploadr provides a
specific search interface as shown in Figure 3.

P. Andrews et al.

Fig. 3. Example of a Semantic Search. A search for journey found photos about a
trip.

5 Demonstration

The goal of the demonstration will be to show the extension of the standard
open source jUploadr application with the specific semantic annotation tools.
The demonstration will be split in two main scenarios:
Annotation of Photos the new tools for semantic annotation of images will be
demonstrated in a scenario showing the use of automatic concept extraction
from the local context, recommendation of concepts from the location and
manual input of concepts to annotate a photo.

Semantic Search for Photos once some photos have been annotated and uploaded on Flickr, we will demonstrate the semantic search tool that is able
to retrieve photos, no only on the tags attached to them, but also on the
concepts used for annotation, thus finding related photos by mapping synonymous terms to the same concept and by reasoning about the subsumption
relationship between concepts.

The visitors will also be shown how to download and install the tool for their
own use with their Flickr accounts so that they can upload ESWC11 photos
with semantic annotations.
