DataFinlandA Semantic Portal for Open and Linked

Datasets

Matias Frosterus, Eero Hyv onen, and Joonas Laitio

Semantic Computing Research Group (SeCo)
Aalto University and University of Helsinki

firstname.lastname@tkk.fi

http://www.seco.tkk.fi/

Abstract. The number of open datasets available on the web is increasing rapidly
with the rise of the Linked Open Data (LOD) cloud and various governmental efforts for releasing public data in different formats, not only in RDF. The
aim in releasing open datasets is for developers to use them in innovative appli-
cations, but the datasets need to be found first and metadata available is often
minimal, heterogeneous, and distributed making the search for the right dataset
often problematic. To address the problem, we present DataFinland, a semantic
portal featuring a distributed content creation model and tools for annotating and
publishing metadata about LOD and non-RDF datasets on the web. The metadata
schema for DataFinland is based on a modified version of the voiD vocabulary for
describing linked RDF datasets, and annotations are done using an online metadata editor SAHA connected to ONKI ontology services providing a controlled
set of annotation concepts. The content is published instantly on an integrated
faceted search and browsing engine HAKO for human users, and as a SPARQL
endpoint and a source file for machines. As a proof of concept, the system has
been applied to LOD and Finnish governmental datasets.

1 Metadata for Linked Datasets

Linked Data refers to data published on the web in accordance with four rules1 and
guidelines [2] that allow retrieving metadata related to data entities, and linking data
within and between different datasets. The datasets and their relations are represented
using RDF (Resource Description Framework) and entities are identified by Uniform
Resource Identifiers (URIs)2, which allows the use of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP) to retrieve either the resources themselves, useful descriptions of them, or links
to related entities [3].

The Linked Open Data community project3 has collected a large number of datasets
and mappings between them. However, little metadata about the datasets is provided
aside from short, non-uniform descriptions. As the number of linked datasets [8] grows,
this approach does not allow for easy understanding of what kind of dataset are offered,
who provides them, what is their subject, how they interlink with each other, possible

1 http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html
2 http://www.w3.org/TR/uri-clarification/
3 http://linkeddata.org

G. Antoniou et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2011, Part II, LNCS 6644, pp. 243254, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011

M. Frosterus, E. Hyv onen, and J. Laitio

licensing conditions, and so on. Such information should be available both to human
users as well as machines of the Semantic Web.

Aside from properly linked datasets in RDF format, various organizations have also
began publishing open data in whatever format they had it in. The governments of the
United States and the United Kingdom have been releasing their governmental data in
an open format4 and other governments are following suit. This provides another source
of datasets which have their own unique challenges in classifying and subsequently
finding them in that they are released in arbitrary formats with varying amounts of
associated metadata. Setting up a uniform schema and vocabulary for annotating these
datasets as well as providing effective search tools helps developers find these sets in
order to use them for new applications [6].

There are search engines for finding RDF and other datasets, such as ordinary search
engines, SWSE [11], Swoogle5, Watson6, and others. However, using such systems
based on the Google-like search paradigm it is difficult to get an idea of the whole
cloud of the offered datasets. Furthermore, finding suitable datasets based on different
selection criteria such as topic, size, licensing, publisher, language etc. is not supported.
To facilitate this, interoperable metadata about the different aspects or facets of datasets
is needed, and faceted search (also called view-based search) [19,9,12] can be used to
provide an alternative paradigm for string-based semantic search.

This paper presents DataFinland, a semantic portal for creating, publishing, and finding datasets based on metadata. In contrast to systems like CKAN7, the LOD-oriented
voiD8 (Vocabulary of Interlinked Datasets) metadata schema is used to describe datasets
with property values taken from a set of shared domain ontologies providing controlled
vocabularies with clearly defined semantics. Content is annotated using a web-based
annotation tool SAHA 39 connected to ONKI ontology services10 [22,21] that publish
the domain ontologies. SAHA 3 has been integrated with the lightweight multifaceted
search engine HAKO11 [16], which facilitates automatically forming a faceted search
and browsing application for taking in and discerning the datasets on offer. The annotation data itself is stored in RDF format, which makes combining the metadata about
different datasets from different sources simple. This means that it would be possible
to have several annotation projects for different sets of datasets, which could then be
combined as needed for searching purposes. As a proof of concept, the system has
been applied to describing the LOD cloud datasets and datasets in the Finnish Open
Data Catalogue Project12 complementing the linked open governmental datasets on a
national level. The demonstration is available online13 and the system received the first
prize in this years Apps4FinlandDoing Good With Open Data competition.

4 http://www.data.gov/ and http://data.gov.uk/
5 http://swoogle.umbc.edu/
6 http://watson.kmi.open.ac.uk/WatsonWUI/
7 http://www.ckan.net/
8 http://semanticweb.org/wiki/VoiD
9 http://www.seco.tkk.fi/services/saha/
10 http://www.onki.fi/
11 http://www.seco.tkk.fi/tools/hako/
12 http://data.suomi.fi/
13 http://demo.seco.tkk.fi/saha3sandbox/voiD/hako.shtml
?

?

?
In the following we will first present the general model and tools for creating and
publishing metadata about (linked) datasets, and then discuss the voiD metadata schema
and ontology repository ONKI presenting a controlled vocabulary. After this, the annotation tool SAHA for distributed semantic content creation is presented along with the
faceted publication engine HAKO. In conclusion, the main contributions of the paper
are listed, related work discussed, directions for future research proposed.

2 Overview of the Publication Process

Our solution for the process of producing metadata and publishing the annotated
datasets is depicted in Figure 1. The process begins with the publication of a dataset.
Metadata for the dataset is produced either by its original publisher or by a third party,
using an annotation tool, in our case SAHA 3. A metadata schema, in our case modified voiD, is used to dictate for the distributed and independent content providers the
exact nature of the metadata needed. Interoperability in annotation values is achieved
through shared ontologies that are used for certain property values in the schema (e.g.,
subject matter and publisher resources are taken from corresponding ontologies). The
ontologies are provided for the annotation tool as services, in our case by the national
ONKI Ontology Service (or by SAHA itself). Finally, the metadata about the datasets is
published in a semantic portal capable of using the annotations to make the data more
accessible to the end-user, be that a human or a computer application. For this part the
faceted search engine HAKO is used.

In the figure, we have marked the tools and resources used in our proof-of-concept

system in parentheses, but the process model itself is generic.

Fig. 1. The distributed process of producing and publishing metadata about (linked) datasets

M. Frosterus, E. Hyv onen, and J. Laitio

3 Metadata and Ontologies

From a semantic viewpoint, the key ingredients of general model presented above are
the metadata schema and domain ontologies/vocabularies used for filling in values in the
schema. As for the metadata schema, the Vocabulary of Interlinked Datasets (voiD), an
RDF vocabulary for describing linked datasets [1], seemed like a natural starting point
because it addresses specifically problems of representing linked data. It was therefore
chosen as a basis in our proof-of-concept system.

The basic component in voiD is a dataset, a collection of RDF triples that share a
meaningful connection with each other in the form a shared topic, source or host. The
different aspects of metadata that voiD collects could be classified into the following
three categories or facets:

1. Descriptive metadata tells what the dataset is about. This includes properties such
as the name of the dataset, the people and organizations responsible for it, as well as
the general subject of the dataset. Here voiD reuses other, established vocabularies,
such as dcterms and foaf. Additionally, voiD allows for the recording of statistics
concerning the dataset.

2. Accessibility metadata tells how to access the dataset. This includes information on
SPARQL endpoints, URI lookup as well as licensing information so that potential
users of the dataset know the terms and conditions under which the dataset can be
used.

3. Interlinking metadata tells how the dataset is linked to other datasets. This is done
by defining a linkset, the concept of which is depicted in Figure 2. If dataset :DS1
includes relations to dataset :DS2, a subset of :DS1 of the type void:Linkset is made
(:LS1) which collects all the triples that include links between the two datasets (that
is, triples whose subject is a part of DS1 and whose object is a part of :DS2).

Fig. 2. Modeling interlinking of datasets in voiD [1]

3.1 Extending voiD

In order to facilitate annotating also non-linked open datasets, we made some extensions to voiD. The most important of these was a class for datasets in formats other
than RDF. This void-addon:NonRdfDataset is similar to the void:Dataset but
?

?

?
does not have the RDF-specific properties such as SPARQL endpoint while including a
proprety for describing the format of the dataset, void-addon:format. The addition
of this class also resulted in modifications to most of the voiD properties to include
void-addon:NonRdfDataset in their domain specifications. Another addition to the
basic voiD in our system was dcterms:language that facilitates the multi-language
applications.

4 From Annotations to Faceted Search

Since the publishing of open data is not done by any central authority, annotating the
data should also be collaborative and community-driven. To this end the annotation
tools should be easy to use and publishing the results of the annotations should be
quick and easy.

Our solution to facilitating collaborative annotation of distributed communities is
based on the SAHA 3 metadata editor and the HAKO faceted search system [16]. In
addition, we use the ONKI Ontology Service [21,22] for providing ontological concepts
to annotations. These concepts, organized as hierarchical ontologies, also provide facets
classifying the subject matter and some other aspects of the datasets in focus. Using
ontologies instead of a free tagging system provides a controlled vocabulary with well
defined meanings as well as support for multiple languages. Furthermore, the semantic
relations can be used in further reasoning when the number of datasets gets very high.

4.1 SAHA 3 Metadata Editor

SAHA 3 is a metadata editor that allows for easy annotation of varied resources hiding
the complexities of RDF and OWL from the end users. It is easily configurable to different schemas and supports distributed, simultaneous annotation in different locations,
which is of paramount importance when using it in a community-driven environment
such as Linked Open Data. It also functions in a normal web browser needing no special
software to be installed.

The process of annotation itself is simple using SAHA 3. When a project has been
configured, the annotator is shown the main view of a project, which gives a general
overview of it. On the left side all the classes (as denoted by owl:Class) are listed, along
with the count of how many instances of that class exist in the project. New instances
can be created from this list as can be seen in Figure 3. The instances for any class can
be browsed and filtered to find the desired ones.

The resource view, shown in Figure 4, is a basic overview of a resource. There is a
resource view for each resource in the model. All the property values of the resource are
listed, except those that are configured to be hidden. The data cannot be edited here - to
do that the [edit] button must be pressed, which takes the user to the Annotation view.

When annotating an instance, the annotator is provided with a number of fields corresponding to the properties whose domain matches the class of the instance (see Figure 5). Depending on the range of a given property, the field takes in either free text
or instances. In the latter case the instances can be either ones defined in the current
project or chosen from linked ONKI ontologies. In both cases autocompletion[14][10]
is used to aid the annotator.

M. Frosterus, E. Hyv onen, and J. Laitio

Fig. 3. Overview of a Saha project

Fig. 4. Resource view of an instance in Saha

4.2 HAKO Faceted Search Engine

HAKO is a faceted search engine that can be used to publish a SAHA 3 project as a readily usable portal. The RDF data produced in SAHA 3 is exported into HAKO, which is
then configured to produce a portal matching the needs of the end user. The publisher
configures the classes whose instances are to be searched and whose properties form
the search facets for these instances.

The end result is a semantic portal supporting both faceted search as well as free text
search, which is done as a prefix search by default. For machine use, SAHA 3 also has
a SPARQL endpoint14 which can be used to access the metadata from the outside as a
service instead of accessing the HAKO portal human interface. The SPARQL interface
14 http://demo.seco.tkk.fi/saha/service/data/voiD/sparql?query={query}
?

?

?
can be used also internally in SAHA for providing semantic recommendation links
between data objects on the human interface.

4.3 DataFinland

DataFinland is the name given for the whole solution of combining SAHA 3 and
HAKO search portal with the extended voiD schema for creating, publishing, and finding datasets based on metadata.

When configuring SAHA 3 for voiD, the dcterms:subject was connected to the
ONKI instance of the General Finnish Ontology (YSO)15 with over 20,000 concepts.
The property dcterms:license was linked to an ONKI instance featuring six Creative Commons license types, but the system also allows for the defining of other license types as new instances of a simple license class. Its properties include of a free
text description of the license as well as a possible link to a webpage describing the
license further. Finally, dcterms:language was connected to the ONKI instance of
the Lingvoj16 vocabulary listing of the languages of the world.

The SAHA 3 annotation environment for voiD (depicted in Figure 5) allows for
the annotation of both RDF and non-RDF datasets as well as licenses, formats and
organizations. Licenses are additional licenses that the user may want to use aside from
the ready linked Creative Commons licenses. Formats are simple resources to identify
the format of the dataset, e.g. PDF, MS Word Document, etc. Finally, organizations
allows for a simple way of describing an organization or a person responsible for a
given dataset in the form of a title, free text description and a link to a homepage or a
similar information source.

HAKO was configured to search for both RDF and non-RDF datasets and to form
facets based on the license, language, format and subject properties. This way the enduser can, for example, limit his/her search to cover only Linked Open datasets by choosing the RDF format. In Figure 6 the user has selected from the facets on the left RDF
datasets concerning Information technology industry in the English language. Out of
the nine results provided by HAKO, the user has chosen Advogato to see its metadata.
A problem of faceted search with wide-ranging datasets is that facets tend to get very
large, which makes category selection more difficult. A solution to this is to use hierarchical facets. However, using the hierarchy of a thesaurus or an ontology intended
originally for annotations and reasoning may not be an optimal facet for information
retrieval from the end-users perspective [20]. For example, the top levels of large ontologies with complete hierarchies can be confusing for the end-users. Our planned
solution in the future is to provide the annotators with a simple tool for building hierarchies for the facets as a part of the annotation process. Another possible solution
would be to use some kind of an all-inclusive classification system as the top level of
the facets. There has been some discussion of a classification schema for open datasets
in the community, but no clear standard has risen. In the future we plan to explore the
possibility of using the Finnish Libraries classification system that is based on Dewey
Decimal Classification.

15 http://www.yso.fi/onki/yso/
16 http://www.lingvoj.org/

M. Frosterus, E. Hyv onen, and J. Laitio

Fig. 5. SAHA 3 annotation environment

5 Discussion

5.1 Contributions

This paper presented a distributed content creation model for metadata about datasets
published on the web. The model emphasizes and supports the idea that metadata
should be created in an interoperable way by the actors that publish the actual content.
Making metadata interoperable afterwards is usually more difficult and costly. [13] In
practice this requires support for using shared metadata schemas and domain ontolo-
gies/vocabularies, as well as a shared publication channel, a semantic portal. These
facilities are provided in our model by the combination of ONKI, SAHA and HAKO
tools.
?

?

?
Fig. 6. HAKO faceted search portal

One of the main challenges of any model dealing with dataset metadata is to motivate
dataset publishers to also publish semantically annotated metadata about their content.
Our work is driven by the hope that this social challenge can be addressed by making
annotating easy by online tools (such as SAHA and ONKI), and by providing the annotators with instant feedback on how their dataset is shown in the final semantic portal
(HAKO).

5.2 Related Work

There is a number of tools available for creating voiD descriptions. The voiD editor
ve17 and liftSSM18, an XSLT script that transforms a semantic sitemap in XML to
voiD RDF/XML format, but these allow building only rudimentary descriptions, which
should then be added to by manually editing the RDF file.

17 http://ld2sd.deri.org/ve/
18 http://vocab.deri.ie/void/guide#sec 4 3 Publishing tools

M. Frosterus, E. Hyv onen, and J. Laitio

As for datasets, there are a number of tools for finding Linked Open data. Semantic
Web Search Engine[11] (SWSE) takes a free text approach allowing the user to enter
a query string and returning entities from Linked Open datasets that match the query
term. Searching for whole datasets is not supported.

Aside from search tools intended for human users, there is a number of search indexes intended for applications, including Sindice [18], Watson [5] and Swoogle [7].
These provide APIs supporting the discovery of RDF documents based on URIs or key-
words. Sindice is intended for finding individual documents while Swoogle is used for
finding ontologies. Watson allows the finding of all sorts of semantic data and features
advanced filtering abilities intended for both machine and human users. However, none
of these search engines are very good for exploring what sorts of datasets are available
or for getting a whole picture of a given domain.

Governmental Open Data is widely published through CKAN19 (Comprehensive
Knowledge Archive Network), a registry for Open Data packages. CKAN provides support for publishing and versioning Open data packages and includes robust API support.
However, the metadata about the data packages is recorded utlizing free tagging which
does not support hierarchical, view-based search and does not contain semantic relation
data between different tags.

Finally, concurrently to our work, an interoperability format for governmental data
catalogues based on the dcat RDF vocabulary was proposed in [17]. There, the metadata
schema was based on existing metadata used in the data catalogues as opposed to the
LOD based voiD. Furthermore, this solution does not contain tools for editing metadata
nor link to existing ontologies for use in dataset descriptions. A faceted search using
Gridworks in combination with dcat was also proposed in [4].

The distributed semantic content creation and publishing approach, using shared
metadata schemas, ontology services, and semantic portals for publication, has been
originally developed in the semantic portals of the FinnONTO project [15].

5.3 Future Work
Our intention next is to propose the testing of the demonstrational system in the Finnish
open data catalogue project. Another future application prospect is to apply the system
for publishing metadata about scientific datasets for research. Additional distributed
annotation-publishing projects can be opened with little extra work using the tools pre-
sented; proposals are solicited by the authors of this paper.

Acknowledgements

This work was conducted as a part of the National Semantic Web Ontology project
in Finland20 (FinnONTO, 2003-2012), funded mainly by the National Technology and
Innovation Agency (Tekes) and a consortium of 38 public organizations and companies.
Furthermore, we would like to thank Tuomas Palonen for his annotation work on the
datasets for the demonstration and Petri Kola and Antti Poikola for fruitful discussions
on publishing open datasets.

19 http://www.ckan.net/
20 http://www.seco.tkk.fi/projects/finnonto/
?

?

