Biological Names and Taxonomies on the
Semantic Web  Managing the Change in

Scientific Conception

Jouni Tuominen, Nina Laurenne, and Eero Hyv onen

Semantic Computing Research Group (SeCo)

Aalto University School of Science and the University of Helsinki

firstname.lastname@aalto.fi

http://www.seco.tkk.fi/

Abstract. Biodiversity management requires the usage of heterogeneous
biological information from multiple sources. Indexing, aggregating, and
finding such information is based on names and taxonomic knowledge
of organisms. However, taxonomies change in time due to new scientific
findings, opinions of authorities, and changes in our conception about life
forms. Furthermore, organism names and their meaning change in time,
different authorities use different scientific names for the same taxon
in different times, and various vernacular names are in use in different
languages. This makes data integration and information retrieval difficult without detailed biological information. This paper introduces a
meta-ontology for managing the names and taxonomies of organisms,
and presents three applications for it: 1) publishing biological species
lists as ontology services (ca. 20 taxonomies including more than 80,000
names), 2) collaborative management of the vernacular names of vascular plants (ca. 26,000 taxa), and 3) management of individual scientific
name changes based on research results, covering a group of beetles.
The applications are based on the databases of the Finnish Museum of
Natural History and are used in a living lab environment on the web.

1 Introduction

Exploitation of natural resources, urbanisation, pollution, and climate changes
accelerate the extinction of organisms on Earth which has raised a common
concern about maintaining biodiversity. For this purpose, management of information about plants and animals is needed, a task requiring an efficient usage of heterogeneous, dynamic biological data from distributed sources, such
as observational records, literature, and natural history collections. Central resources in biodiversity management are names and ontological taxonomies of
organisms [1,19,20,3,4]. Animal ontologies are stereotypical examples in the semantic web text books, but in reality semantic web technologies have hardly
been applied to managing the real life taxonomies of biological organisms and
biodiversity on the web. This paper tries to fill this gap.1
1 We discuss the taxonomies of contemporary species, not phylogenetic trees that
model evolutionary development of species, where humans are successors, e.g., of
dinosaurs.

G. Antoniou et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2011, Part II, LNCS 6644, pp. 255269, 2011.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011

J. Tuominen, N. Laurenne, and E. Hyv onen

Managing taxonomies of organisms provides new challenges to semantic web
ontology research. Firstly, although we know that lions are carnivores, a subclass
of mammals that eat other animals, the notion of species in the general case is actually very hard to define precisely. For example, some authors discuss as many as
22 different definitions of the notion of species [16]. Secondly, taxonomic knowledge changes and increases due to new research results. The number of new organism names in biology increases by 25,000 every year as new taxa to science are
discovered [11]. At the same time, the rate of changes in existing names has accelerated by the implementation of molecular methods suggesting new positions to
organisms in taxonomies. Thirdly, biological names are not stable or reliable identifiers for organisms as they or their meaning change in time. Fourthly, the same
name can be used by different authors to refer to different taxa (units of classification that commonly have a rank in the hierarchy), and a taxon can have more
than one name without a consensus about the preferred one.

As a result, biological texts are written, content is indexed in databases, and
information is searched for using different names and terms from different times
and authorities. In biological research, scientific names are used instead of common names, but in many applications vernacular names in different languages
are used instead. Data fusion is challenging and information retrieval without
deep biological knowledge is difficult.

We argue that a shared system for publishing and managing the scientific and
vernacular names and underlying conceptions of organisms and taxonomies is
needed. From a research viewpoint, such a system is needed to index research
results and to find out whether a potential new species is already known under
some name. Biological information needed by environmental authorities cannot
be properly indexed, found or aggregated unless the organism names and identifiers are available and can be aligned. For amateur scientists and the public,
aligning vernacular names to scientific names and taxonomies is often a prerequisite for successful information retrieval.

This paper presents a meta-ontology and its applications addressing these
problems. Our research hypothesis is that semantic web technologies are useful
in practise in modelling change in the scientific perception of biological names
and taxonomies, for creating a platform for collaboratively managing scientific
knowledge about taxonomies, and for publishing taxonomies as ontology services
for indexing and information retrieval purposes in legacy systems.

In the following, biological classification systems are first discussed and a
meta-ontology TaxMeOn for defining such systems is presented [13]. Three use
case applications of the meta-ontology are then discussed: a system for managing vascular plant names collaboratively (26,000 species) based on the SAHA
metadata editor [12], application of the ONKI ontology service [25] for publishing taxonomic species lists on the semantic web (over 80,000 taxa of mammals,
birds, butterflies, wasps, etc.), and a more focused application for managing the
names and scientific findings of the Afro-tropical beetle family Eucnemidae. Fi-
nally, contributions of our work are summarised, related work discussed, and
directions for further research are outlined.
?

?

?
2 Biological Names and Taxonomies

The scientific name system is based on the Linnean binomial name system where
the basic unit is a species. Every species belongs to some genus and every genus
belongs to a higher taxon. A scientific name often has a reference to the original
publication where it was first published. For example, the scientific name of the
bumblebee, Apis mellifera Linnaeus, 1758, means that Linnaeus published the
description of the bumblebee in 1758 (in Systema Naturae 10th edition) and
that bumblebee belongs to the genus Apis. The upper levels of the taxonomic
hierarchy do not show in a scientific name. A confusing feature of scientific
names is that the meaning of the name may change although the name remains
the same. Taxon boundaries may vary according to different studies, and there
may be multiple simultaneous views of taxon limits of the same organism group.
For example, a genus may be delimited in three ways and according to each
view different sets of species are included in the genus as illustrated in Fig. 1.
These differing views are taxonomic concepts. The usage of the correct name is
not enough, and Berendsohn [1] suggested that taxonomic concepts should be
referred to by an abbreviation sec (secundum) after the authors name to indicate
in which meaning the name is used.

The nature of a biological name system is a change, as there is no single interpretation of the evolution. Typically there is no agreement if the variation
observed in an organism is taxon-specific or shared by more than one taxon,
which makes the name system dynamic. For example, the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster was shifted into the genus Sophophora, resulting in a new name
combination Sophonophora melanogaster [7]. The most common taxonomic
changes and their implications to the scientific names are the following: 1) A
species has been shifted to another genus - the genus name changes. 2) One
species turns out to be several species - new species are described and named,
and the old name remains the same with a narrower interpretation. 3) Several
species are found to be just one species - the oldest name is valid and the other
names become its synonyms.

Taxonomic concept 1

Taxonomic concept 2

Taxonomic concept 3

Fig. 1. A genus is delimited in three different ways according to three different studies.
Black squares indicate species.

J. Tuominen, N. Laurenne, and E. Hyv onen

Species lists catalogue organisms occurring in a certain geographical area,
which may vary from a small region to global. Often species lists contain valid
taxon names with author information and synonyms of the valid names. They
are snapshots of time and used especially by environmental authorities. The
problem with species lists is that not all organism groups are catalogued and
changes are not necessarily recorded in the species lists. Traditionally printed
lists tend to be more detailed than online lists and their status is higher.

Species lists often follow different hierarchies and species may be associated
with different genera according to the person who published the list. The hierarchy in a species list is a compromise that combines several studies, and the
author can subjectively emphasise a view that he/she wishes. A taxon may also
have different taxonomic ranks in literature, for example the same taxon can
occur both as a species and a subspecies.

Common names tend to have regional variation and they do not indicate
hierarchy unlike scientific names. Vernacular names have an important role in
everyday language, but due to the variation and vagueness, they have little
relevance in science. Vernacular names are used mainly in citizen science.

3 TaxMeOn  Meta-ontology of Biological Names

We have developed a meta-ontology for managing scientific and vernacular
names. The ontology model consists of three parts that serve different purposes:
1) name collections, 2) species lists, and 3) name changes resulting from re-
search. These parts are manageable separately, but associations between them
are supported. Being a meta-ontology, TaxMeOn defines classes and properties
that can be used to build ontologies. The ontologies can be used for creating
semantic metadata for describing e.g. observational data or museum collections.
TaxMeOn is based on RDF using some features of the OWL. The model contains
22 classes and 53 properties (61 including subproperties), of which ten classes
and 15 properties are common to all the three parts of the model2.

The core classes of TaxMeOn express a taxonomic concept, a scientific name,
a taxonomic rank, a publication, an author, a vernacular name, and a status of a
name. Taxonomic ranks are modelled as classes, and individual taxa are instances
of them, for example the species forest fir forrestii (belongs to the genus Abies)
is an instance of the class Species. The model contains 61 taxonomic ranks, of
which 60 are obtained from TDWG Taxon Rank LSID Ontology3. In order to
simplify the management of subspecific ranks, an additional class that combines
species and taxonomic levels below it was created.

References embody publications in a broad sense including other documented
sources of information, for instance minutes of meetings. Bibliographic information can be associated to the reference according to the Dublin Core metadata
standard. In biology, author names are often abbreviated when attached to taxon

2 The TaxMeOn schema is available at

http://schema.onki.fi/taxmeon/

3 http://rs.tdwg.org/ontology/voc/TaxonRank
?

?

?
names. The TaxMeOn model supports the referring system that is typical to bi-
ology. Some of the properties used in TaxMeOn are part-specific as the uses of
the parts differ from each other. For instance, the property that refers to a vernacular name is only available in the name collection part as it is not relevant
in the other parts of the model.

The most distinctive feature of the research part [14] is that a scientific name
and taxonomic concepts associated to it are separated, which allows detailed
management of them both. In the name collection and species list parts, a name
and its taxonomic concepts are treated as a unit. Different statuses can be associated to names, such as validity (accepted/synonym), a stage of a naming
process (proposed/accepted) and spelling errors.

The model has a top-level hierarchy that is based on a rough classification,
such as the division of organism classes and orders. Ontologies that are generated using TaxMeOn, can be hung on the top-level classification. A hierarchy is
created using the transitive isPartOfHigherTaxon relation, e.g. to indicate that
the species forrestii belongs to the genus Abies.

Taxon names that refer to the same taxon can occur as different names in
the published species lists and different types of relations (see Table 1) can be
set between the taxa. Similarly, research results of phylogenetic studies can be
mapped using the same relations. The relations for mapping taxa are divided
on the basis of attributes of taxa (intensional) or being a member of a group
(ostensive). If it is known that two taxa have an association which is not specified,
a class is provided for expressing incomplete information (see the empty ellipse in
Fig. 2). This allows associations of taxa without detailed taxonomic knowledge,
and especially between taxa originating from different sources.

Table 1. Mapping relations used in species lists and research results. The three relations can be used as intensional and/or ostensive, using their subproperties.

Relation
congruent with taxon
is part of taxon

overlaps with taxon

Description
taxonomic concepts of two taxa are equal
a taxonomic concept of a taxon is included in a taxonomic
concept of another taxon
taxonomic concepts of two taxa overlap

In TaxMeOn, a reference (an author name and a publication year) to the
original publication can be attached to a name. A complete scientific name is
atomised into units that can be combined in applications by traversing the RDF
graph by utilising the isPartOfHigherTaxon and publishedIn relations.
Name collections. Scientific names and their taxonomic concepts are treated
as one unit in the name collection, because the scope is in vernacular names.
The model supports the usage of multiple languages and dialects of common
names. There may be several common names pointing to the same taxon, and
typically one of them is recommended or has an official status. Alternative names
are expressed defining the status using the class VernacularNameStatus and

J. Tuominen, N. Laurenne, and E. Hyv onen

references related to the changes of a name status can be added. This allows the
tracking the temporal order of the statuses. The model for vernacular names is
illustrated in Fig. 2.
Species lists. Species lists have a single hierarchy and they seldom include vernacular names. Species lists have more relevance in science than name collections,
but they lack information about name changes and a single list does not express
the parallel or contradictory views of taxonomy which are crucial for researchers.
Synonyms of taxa are typically presented and the taxonomic concept is included
in a name like in a name collection. Taxa occurring in different species lists can
be mapped to each other or to research results using the relations in Table 1.
In addition, a general association without taxonomic details can be used (see
Fig. 2).
Biological research results. In biological research results a key element is a
taxonomic concept that can have multiple scientific names (and vice versa). Instead of names, taxonomic concepts are used for defining the relations between
taxa. The same relations are applied here as in the speies list part (see Table 1). The latest research results often redefine taxon boundaries, for example
a split of taxa narrows the original taxonomic concept and the meaning of the
name changes although the name itself may remain the same. The new and the
old concepts are connected into a temporal chain by instantiation of a change
event. In Fig. 3 the concept of the beetle genus Galba is split into the concepts
of the Balgus and Pterotarsus. The taxon names are shown inside the ellipses

Pine trees 

Abies 

r
d

f
s
:
l

a
b
e

l
 

C. Coltman Rogers 

chengii 

VernacularName 

hasVernacular 

Name 

TaxonInNameCollection 

Synonym 

TaxonInNameCollection 
