Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 207215

A semantic web approach to biological pathway data

Kei-Hoi Cheung a,b,c,d,

reasoning and integration
, Peishen Qi d, David Tuck e, Michael Krauthammer e

a Center for Medical Informatics, Yale University, United States
b Department of Anesthesiology, Yale University, United States

c Department of Genetics, Yale University, United States

d Department of Computer Science, Yale University, United States

e Department of Pathology, Yale University, United States

Abstract

This paper describes the use of semantic web technology and Description Logic (DL) for facilitating the integration of molecular pathway
data, which is illustrated by an Web Ontology Language (OWL)-based transformation of a more complex pathway structure (Reactome) into
a simpler one (HPRD). The process starts by adding OWL axioms to BioPAX, a pathway interchange standard. The axioms are designed for
mapping BioPAX-formatted Reactome interactions to molecular binding event interactions, which can be easily aligned with the HPRD data.
Using an automated OWL reasoner, we find overlapping and non-overlapping molecular interactions between the two pathway datasets. The paper
demonstrates the potential of semantic web and its enabling technologies in biological pathway data reasoning and integration.
 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Semantic web; Life sciences; Pathway; BioPAX; Knowledge representation and reasoning

1. Introduction

1.1. Heterogeneous formats

According to the 2005 update on the molecular biology
database collection [1], there are 719 publicly accessible life
sciences databases (which are web-accessible). Many of these
databases contain information about biological pathways (e.g.,
KEGG [2], Reactome [3], and BIND [4]). In the post-genomic
era, life scientists have geared towards the understanding of how
genes or proteins interact with each other at the systems level
[58]. As the number and diversity of these pathway databases
continue to expand, there is a growing need to compare, vali-
date, and integrate data across these databases. Cross-database
pathway analyses have benefited a variety of biomedical and
drug-related research including studies that aim at understanding disease mechanisms at the molecular level [9,10], and studies
in drug discovery [11,12]. Despite these successes, there remain
major difficulties in integrating and analyzing data across different pathway databases.


Correspondence to: 300 George Street, Suite 501, New Haven, CT 06511,

USA. Fax: +1 203 737 5708.

E-mail address: kei.cheung@yale.edu (K.-H. Cheung).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2006.05.005

As the eXtensible Markup Language (XML) has become the
lingua franca for representing different types of biological data
[13], there has been a proliferation of semantically-overlapping
XML formats that are used to represent diverse types of
pathway data. Examples include the XML-derivatives KGML
(http://www.genome.jp/kegg/xml/), SBML [14], CellML [15],
PSI MI [16], BIND XML [17], and Genome Object Net XML
[18]. Efforts have been underway to translate between these
formats (e.g., between PSI MI and BIND XML, and between
Genome Object Net and SBML [19]). However, the complexity
of such a pair-wise translation approach increases dramatically
with a growing number of different pathway data formats. To
address this issue, a standard pathway data exchange format
is needed. While the Resource Description Framework (RDF)
(http://www.w3.org/RDF/) is an important first step towards the
unification of XML formats in describing metadata (ontolo-
gies), it is not expressive enough to support formal knowledge
representation. To address this problem, more sophisticated
XML-based ontological languages such as the Web Ontology
Language (OWL) [20] have been developed. An OWL-based
pathway exchange standard, called BioPAX, has been released
to the research community (http://www.biopax.org/).

K.-H. Cheung et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 207215

1.2. Different levels of details

Different pathway databases may model pathway data with
different levels of details. For example, one database might treat
valine, leucine, and isoleucine biosynthesis as a single process,
while another database might treat these as separate processes.
Also, one database might consider the deactivation of AKT by
PP2A to be part of apoptosis, while another database might consider this step as part of the Phosphoinositide-3-Kinase pathway.
To provide different levels of granularity and detail in pathway
data modelling, different pathway data representation formats
(e.g., SBML and BIND XML) have been developed.

2. Semantic web use case: integrating disparate
pathway datasets

Making sense out of the ever-increasing research data on
mechanisms of signaling transduction pathways is a challenging
undertaking. Exact computer models of signaling events, such
as stochastic molecular simulations, or models using differential
equations, are hampered by the sheer complexity of the mod-
els, as well as data that is noisy and incomplete. A solution to
these problems is the use of simplified network representations,
which have been shown to be sufficient for answering essential research questions [23], and have the potential to overcome
the problem of missing and noisy data. This is because simplified representations allow for the straightforward integration of
different pathway resources, which may differ in the level of representational details. Integrated pathway resources are thought to
provide combined evidence for identifying true positive network
interactions, filtering out noisy data. Also, combined evidence
may cover larger parts of an interaction network than a single
pathway resource alone, alleviating the missing data problem.
A major facilitator of pathway integration has been the development of pathway interchange languages, such as BioPAX, An
increasing number of pathway databases including HumanCyc
[21] and Reactome [3] have exported data in the OWL-based
BioPAX format. While standardizing pathway data exchange is
important, BioPAX should not be limited to this purpose only.
As described by Luciano [22], the future applications of BioPAX
would include pathway data integration and reasoning given its
ontological richness (e.g., it includes the notion of a complex
involved in a pathway). OWL classes can be created for assisting our pathway integration effort. For example, some OWL
constructors (e.g., intersectionOf) or axioms (e.g., equivalentClass and equivalentProperty) can be used to identify individuals that represent the same molecular entity across pathway
resources. In addition, BioPAX provides a multi-level approach
to pathway data representation. The first level of BioPAX is
designed to represent metabolic pathways. Recently, level 2 of
BioPAX has been released, which incorporates the representation of molecular networks (e.g., proteinprotein interactions).
Level 3 of BioPAX, which models signaling pathways, is currently underway. Such a multi-level modeling approach would
allow BioPAX to evolve incrementally as consensus is reached
on how to represent increasingly complex pathway data types.
In addition, and especially important to this project, it would

allow bridging and mapping between these different levels to
be more manageable and generalizable through standard OWL
representation and reasoning. Once different pathway datasets
are represented in the common BioPAX format, they can be
compared more readily.

2.1. Molecular network representations

At first glance, one might be able to differentiate between
two basic types of networks: logical signal transduction networks and biochemical networks. As can be seen in Fig. 1, the
logical network representation of FASL activates FAS, and FAS
activates Caspase 8 consists of two simple arrows between the
respective interaction partners.

However, the biochemical interactions underlying these activation events reveal a much more complicated picture. The binding event between FAS and FASL consists of the trimerization
of FASL:FAS receptor monomers, and the activation of Caspase
8 involves the dimerization of two Caspase 8 subunits, which
are released from a molecular complex involving FAS, FASL,
FADD and a Caspase 8 precursor. The two representations are
complementary: the logical view communicates explicitly the
consequence of the FASL/FAS binding (the activation of Caspase 8), while the biochemical view does so only implicitly. Both
the logical and the biochemical view include information about
the order of events: in the former by providing edge directional-
ity, in the latter by explicitly stating the input and output of some
biochemical reaction. There exists a third network representation
that lies somewhere between the logical and biochemical rep-
resentation, and could be termed molecular binding network.
The hallmark of this representation is that it does not provide any
explicit information on the order of events. Network edges simply indicate that two molecules interact, based, for instance, on
experimental evidence of physical binding. A prototype molecular binding network is a proteinprotein interaction network, as
shown in Fig. 1 (right), that shows proteinprotein interactions
as encoded in the Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD)
[24]. HRPD represents a curated and centralized database platform that allows visual depiction and integration of information
pertaining to domain architecture, post-translational modifica-
tions, interaction networks and disease association for each
protein in the human proteome. It exports data in a standard
XML format (PSI-MI [16]), which is structured around an entry
describing one or more interactions that are grouped together.
By contrast, the biochemical network in Fig. 1 shows actual
data from Reactome [3] (the data for the signal transduction
networks is derived from SCIENCEs signal transduction knowledge environment [25].) Reactome is a curated resource of core
pathways and reactions in human biology and provides data in
the SBML format [14], which is intended to describe a biochemical network. Currently, Reactome datasets are also available in
the BioPAX format.

There are obvious difficulties in integrating data from these
different resources. We are now discussing the use of semantic
web technologies for transforming different representations into
a simpler network structure, which facilitates the integration
task. Specifically, we are going to transform a biochemical

Fig. 1. Types of molecular interaction networks.

network from the Reactome database into a molecular binding
network, enabling the integration of the Reactome data with
molecular binding data from HPRD. A molecular binding
network corresponds to the common granularity level between
the two original pathway resources. HPRD-PSI-MI by default
provides molecular binding information. However, Reactome-
SBML/BioPAX does not; instead, it provides interaction at a
much higher level of detail (conversion, catalysis, transport,
etc.).

2.2. Semantic reasoning for transforming Reactome
BioPAX biochemical interactions to molecular binding
interactions

The Reactome BioPAX representation predominantly
employs the biochemicalReaction class to confer the details
of a signaling interaction. A biochemicalReaction is a rather
complex entity, with LEFT and RIGHT slots for the substrates
and products, respectively. We are interested in mapping such
reactions into the simpler molecular binding representations as
shown in Fig. 1 (right). The latter representation is limited to
proteins only, and essentially displays binding events between
the proteins in the LEFT slot of the biochemicalReaction class,
while excluding information on the results of a binding event
(the RIGHT slot in the biochemicalReaction class). We are using
OWL-based reasoning techniques to identify biochemicalReaction instances that can be represented in this way. We are first
using the constructors and axioms provided by OWL to define a
novel molecularBindingEvent class. The latter class represents
a simple molecular binding event between two or more proteins,

and is equivalent to a BioPAX conversion class (the parent of
the biochemicalReaction class) with at least two proteins in its
LEFT slot. Using this class definition, automatic reasoning tools
can quickly find all biochemicalReaction instances that comply with these restrictions. This rule is certainly not complete.
An extension to this rule includes the identification of molecularBindingEvent instances in cases where a protein binds to a
protein complex. Usually when this happens, we would draw
a molecular binding relationship between the protein and each
member of the protein complex. We are therefore expanding the
definition of a molecularBindingEvent to include biochemicalReaction instances that have at least one protein in its LEFT
slot, as well as a protein complex in another LEFT slot. These
reasoning approaches effectively identify Reactome biochemicalReaction instances that can be re-written in terms of simple
protein binding events. The re-writing rules are straightforward:
first, employ Description Logic (DL) reasoning for the detection
of Reactome biochemicalReaction instances that are also molecularBindingEvent instances, and then use XSLT to read out all
proteins in the LEFT slot (recursively, in case of a protein com-
plex) of those instances. Finally, establish a molecular binding
relationship between these proteins. This is done by creating a
PSI-MI file, which is designed to hold information on molecular binding events. This effectively transforms the apoptosis
pathway from the Reactome BioPAX representation into a PSIMI representation. This new representation can then be easily
merged with existing pathways in the PSI-MI format, such as
numerous pathways from the Intact database [26].

The recent release of BioPAX level 2 provides an alternative
way of representing molecular binding events/PSI-MI data. PSI-

K.-H. Cheung et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 207215

MI data can now be directly mapped to the high level BioPAX
physicalInteraction class. As the final release of BioPAX level 2
was not available at the time of writing of this paper, we did not
pursue this option. However, in theory, our approach can now be
seen as a way to map BioPAX biochemicalReaction instances
to BioPAX physicalInteraction instances. In other words, the
approach is a step towards integrating any BioPAX-translated
biochemical and molecular binding pathways within BioPAX
itself.

3. Methods

As a demonstration, we apply our approach to detecting
molecular binding events from the apoptosis pathway of Reactome represented in the BioPAX format (http://www.reactome.
org/cgi-bin/biopaxexporter?DB=gk current&ID=109581).
In
general, our approach can be applied to other pathways as well
as other BioPAX-formatted pathway datasets (e.g., HumanCyc
[21]).

For implementation, we use Prot eg e 3.1 with OWL plugin
2.1 (build 284) and RacerPro v1.8.1 as the facilities for handling and reasoning over BioPAX dataset. Prot eg e [27] is a free,
open source ontology editor and knowledge-base framework.
Its OWL plugin [28] enables us to load and save BioPAX ontology and datasets, edit classes in OWL expressions, and execute
reasoners. Racer [29] supports the full OWL standard and is
a widely-used OWL reasoning system. The original apoptosis
dataset using BioPAX ontology is extended with our own rules
defined for the molecular binding event. It is then loaded into
Prot eg e, which provides access to Racer and a graphical user
interface.

To capture the concept of molecular binding event (and
its extension) presented in Section 2, we extend the BioPAX
ontology. The extension includes proteinParticipant, proteinComplexParticipant and molecularBindingEvent, and other auxiliary OWL concepts and axioms. A proteinParticipant is a
kind of physicalEntityParticipant, with the restriction that its
PHYSICAL-ENTITY is a protein. The molecularBindingEvent
class is defined as a union of two separate classes: a molecularBindingEvent protein protein represents the simple molecular binding event between two or more proteins. Besides being
a sub-type of BioPAX conversion, the values in two of its

LEFT slots must be instances of proteinParticipant. A molecularBindingEvent protein complex denotes a molecular binding
event between a protein and protein complex. The latter requires
us to add two new concepts to BioPAX. A proteinComplex is a
complex subclass that restricts one of its COMPONENT slots
to be of type proteinParticipant. The proteinComplexParticipant class is a pysicalEntityParticipant subclass that restricts its
PHYSICAL-ENTITY slot to be of type proteinComplex. The
graph view for the OWL (or BioPAX) representations of these
classes are shown in Fig. 2.

Note that the definition of molecularBindingEvent protein
protein denotes that the LEFT slots must have at least two values
of type proteinParticipant. Such kinds of restrictions are called
qualified cardinality restrictions (QCRs) [30] in DL. How-
ever, QCRs are not supported by the current OWL standard,
which only provides unqualified cardinality restriction through
its restriction(prop mincardinality(n)) and restriction(prop max-
cardinality(n)) constructs. In contrast, both Racer and the latest
version of Prot eg e-OWL plugin support QCRs. We included
QCRs and extended OWL accordingly. Description Logics
including OWL generally support unqualified cardinality restric-
tions, and it has been shown that their worst-case complexity of
reasoning remains the same when extended with QCRs [31].

While existing reasoning techniques are successful in dealing with class-level concepts in real world ontologies, it is not
clear if these techniques will also be able to cope with realistic
sets of instance-level data. The difficulty is not so much due to
the computational complexity of instance-level reasoning, but
arises mainly from the fact that the number of individuals might
be extremely large. Taking the apoptosis dataset as an example,
which includes about 800 individuals, the Racer (or Pellet [32])
reasoning engine fails to respond when we issue an instance
type query to it. The database-centric Instance Store (IS) system [33] is designed to tackle applications with large amount of
individuals and easily scales to sizes over 100,000 s individuals.
However, the limitation of IS restricted us from using it for our
work. It can only deal with a slot-free individual set, which does
not contain any axioms asserting slot relationships between pairs
of individuals. Our approach for discovering molecular binding
events, in contrast, depends heavily on the relationships between
individuals (such as the LEFT slot relating a biochemicalReaction to a physicalParticipant).

Fig. 2. Graphical representation of the OWL classes (e.g., molecularBindingEvent) and axioms.

To overcome the limitation of Racer reasoning for large size
datasets, we utilized an intrinsic property of the to-be analyzed
pathway dataset. In the graph representation of the RDF apoptosis dataset (the Reactome BioPAX representation), a node
represents an individual and the slots are denoted by the edges
linking the nodes together. We can easily identify that each biochemicalReaction instance can be isolated to its own sub-graph
by cutting off incoming edges. Such a sub-graph includes individuals that are directly or indirectly related to those biochemicalReaction with slots that occur in the definition of our new
concepts. Instead of submitting the whole large graph to Racer,

we send smaller sub-datasets separately and issue queries for
the individuals appearing in the sub-graphs. This work-around is
semantically equivalent to the approach where the whole dataset
is used to detect molecularBindingEvent instances, though we
are not going to prove it here.

4. Results

With the axioms defined, we load the Reactome apoptosis
dataset into Prot eg e. From the instance window in Prot eg e
there are 66 biochemicaluser interface, we can see that

Fig. 3. Screenshot of Prot eg e after computing the inferred types of individuals.

K.-H. Cheung et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 207215

Reaction instances in this dataset. After configuring the
reasoning connection to the Racer server, we execute the
task of computing the inferred types of all the individuals in
the dataset, a function that can be invoked by clicking the
I> button provided by Prot eg e-OWL plugin. Here the task
loops over the sub-datasets. Each loop contains two steps:

a Tell operation, which informs Racer about the BioPAX
ontology with our extension rules and all the asserted facts
from the sub-dataset, followed by an Ask operation for
querying the inferred types of the involved individuals. The
response from Racer is relayed to Prot eg e, which now list
classes and their inferred instances. In our example, there are

Fig. 4. Cytoscape visualization of the Reactome apoptosis pathway, which has been transformed into a PSI-MI molecular binding network (the proteinprotein
interactions, which are not recorded in HRPD, are also listed). The upper right subnetwork seems to represent the extrinsic apoptosis pathway. FADD (Q13158),
FAS (P48023), Caspase 8 (Q14790) and FASL (P25445) are all connected, similar to the molecular binding network shown in Fig. 1 (right).

i.e.

19 molecularBindingEvent protein protein instances and 14
molecularBindingEvent protein complex instances. The union
of them contributes to the 32 molecularBindingEvent instances,
with TNF TNF R1 binds TRADD TRAF2 and RIP Complex
being an instance of both classes. Fig. 3 gives a screenshot
of the inferred instances listed under their specific molecular
binding event classes. From the screenshot, we can identify
that FASL binds FAS Receptor, FasL Fas binds FADD, FASL
FAS Receptor Trimer FADD complex binds pro Caspase 8,
FASL FAS Receptor Trimer FADD complex binds pro Caspase 10 are all classified as molecularBindingEvent instances.
We can now extract the actual molecular binding events from
these instances,
identify the participating proteins and
construct a molecular binding network similar to the one in
Fig. 1 (right). As mentioned before, the most straightforward
representation of such a network is the PSI-MI format. We are
thus using an XSLT transformation to translate the Reactome
BioPAX biochemicalReaction instances, which have been
identified as molecularBindingEvent instances, into PSI-MI
molecular binding instances. The transformation essentially
identifies all the proteins in the LEFT slot of a biochemicalReaction instance, and lists those proteins as proteinParticipants
in a PSI-MI interaction. We can then visualize the PSI-MI file
using Cytoscape [34] (Fig. 4). As can be seen, we are able to
automatically construct a molecular binding network from the
Reactome biochemical network representation. The content
of this representation seems to mirror the molecular binding
network shown in Fig. 1 (right), which shows part of the
apoptosis pathway description from the PSI-MI Human Protein
Reference Database [24]. In both representations, FAS, FASL,
FADD and Caspase 8 are closely linked together. Another
observation in our results is that some of the proteinprotein
interactions derived from our reasoning method are not present
in HPRD (see Fig. 4), while all interactions in HPRD were
contained in Reactome. There are two possible explanations for
this: first, Reactome provides additional interaction information
not present in HPRD. Alternatively, some of the additional
interactions are caused by our inherent assumptions that all
proteins in the LEFT slots of a biochemical interaction are
binding which each other. While this assumption may inflate
the number of true protein interactions, it should not affect
the overall
the reconstructed proteinprotein
interaction network. In addition, Fig. 4 shows the overlapping proteinprotein interaction pairs, which can be seen as
high-confidence interactions with support from two different
pathway datasets.

topology of

5. Discussion and conclusion

We have presented a novel approach for transforming a
biochemical pathway representation into a simpler, molecular binding representation, using semantic web technologies.
Our use case consisted of the BioPAX release of the Reactome
biochemical apoptosis pathway (http://www.reactome.org/cgi-
bin/biopaxexporter?DB=gk current&ID=109581), which we
successfully transformed into a molecular binding network (see
Fig. 4). We believe that our approach has many advantages:

first, the conversion of a complex, biochemical representation
into a simpler molecular binding representation facilitates the
integration of existing pathway resources. The central unit in a
molecular binding representation is the protein, with edges forming binding relationships between the proteins. To combine such
datasets, all that is needed is to merge common proteins. In con-
trast, aligning two biochemical representations is very challeng-
ing, as they contain various molecular entities, which may differ
from one representation to another. Consider the FASL:FAS
Receptor Trimer:FADD:pro-Caspase-8 DISC molecular complex in Fig. 1 (middle). The naming, as well as the definition of
this complex, is quite unique to the Reactome data source, and
might not be encountered (in the same constellation) in a similar
biochemical source.

We would like to highlight some of the inherent features
of our approach:
the inference engine utilizes the parentchild relationships of the BioPAX definitions. Consequently,
we were able to define our MolecularBindingEvent class as
a BioPAX conversion class with specific proteins or complexes in the LEFT slot. Doing so,
the inference engine
could readily spot BioPAX biochemicalReaction instances that
could be classified as MolecularBindingEvent instances. This
is because biochemicalReaction is a child of conversion in
the BioPAX ontology. Also, the definition of the molecularBindingEvent protein complex class is inherently recursive.
We encountered biochemicalReaction instances with complexes
that were composed of another complex in the LEFT slot.
Our OWL-based molecularBindingEvent protein complex class
is able to correctly infer that such recursive constructs are
instances of a molecularBindingEvent. The reasoning about
proteins in recursive complexes is realized by proteinComplex and proteinComplexParticipant. These two classes form
a cycle on the ontology level, as they refer to each other in their
definitions.

Our approach is based on specific assumptions. Most impor-
tantly, we assume that all proteins, that participate in a BioPAX
conversion reaction bind to each other (i.e., a protein interaction is formed between each of the participating proteins). In
reality, these proteins may form a limited number of binding
pairs. For example, in a conversion reaction with proteins A,
B and C, there might be just two pairs, such as A binding B,
and B binding C. Further, we limited the definition of a molecularBindingEvent to the BioPAX conversion class. However,
there are further BioPAX interaction types, such as control inter-
actions. Our Reactome BioPAX apoptosis pathway contained 15
instances of the control class (or its children, catalysis and mod-
ulation). We did not capture those reaction instances, and the
participating proteins were not integrated into the final molecular binding network (Fig. 4).

In conclusion, we have demonstrated the use of semantic web
technology and Description Logic for pathway data reasoning
and integration. BioPAX-formatted data on biochemical interactions were automatically mapped to molecular binding event
interactions, which are simpler and can be easily combined with
data of similar complexity (PSI-MI). This was made possible by
OWL-based reasoning using Racer. It should be noted that we
see our semantic integration and reasoning approach as being

K.-H. Cheung et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 207215

complementary to existing statistical pathway integration and
analysis methods.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by NIH grant K25 HG02378

and NSF grant DBI-0135442.
