Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 216221

Aggregation of bioinformatics data using Semantic Web technology

Susie Stephens a,

, David LaVigna b, Mike DiLascio b, Joanne Luciano c
a Oracle, 10 Van de Graaff Drive, Burlington, MA 01803, USA

b Siderean Software, Inc., 390 North Sepulvada Boulevard, Suite 2070, El Segundo, CA 90245-4475, USA

c Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA

Abstract

The integration of disparate biomedical data continues to be a challenge for drug discovery efforts. Semantic Web technologies provide the
capability to more easily aggregate data and thus can be utilized to improve the efficiency of drug discovery. We describe an implementation of a
Semantic Web infrastructure that utilizes the scalable Oracle Resource Description Framework (RDF) Data Model as the repository and Seamark
Navigator for browsing and searching the data. The paper presents a use case that identifies gene biomarkers of interest and uses the Semantic Web
infrastructure to annotate the data.
 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Data aggregation; Bioinformatics; Faceted browsing; Oracle RDF Data Model; Semantic Web

1. Introduction

To make well-informed decisions, biomedical researchers
need to be able to easily access all relevant data. To achieve
this goal, data about genes, proteins, pathways, diseases, and
chemical compounds must be effectively integrated and readily
available to the researcher.

The life sciences has a rich history of making data available on
the Web. Early on, scientific researchers recognized the benefits
of sharing their data and made it available to other researchers
for the benefit of the greater good. However, because many of
these data repositories were developed in relative isolation, it has
resulted in a heterogeneous compute environment that makes it
challenging for scientists to find and properly utilize all known
information about an entity of interest. In this environment, scientists must jump from Web site to Web site following a path
of interconnecting identifiers in order to find all necessary data.
This process is difficult to automate because many Web sites do
not have programmatic interfaces to their data and it is difficult
to capture the scientific thought process.

Many articles have been written that highlight the challenges
of data integration within the biomedical domain and illustrate
the difficulty involved in integrating the many publicly available
bioinformatics data sources with in-house ones. The challenges


Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 781 744 0372; fax: +1 781 238 9857.
E-mail address: susie.stephens@oracle.com (S. Stephens).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2006.05.004

stem from the data sources having different identifier schemes,
inconsistent terminology, multiple data formats, and regular
changes to the underlying data models.

In hopes to lessen the burden of data integration and sharing,
life sciences researchers and organizations have recently begun
to explore Semantic Web technologies [1].

The benefits promised by the Semantic Web include aggregation of heterogeneous data using explicit semantics, simplified
annotation and sharing of findings, the expression of rich and
well-defined models for data aggregation and search, easier
reuse of data in unanticipated ways, and the application of logic
to infer additional insights [16].

The two main Semantic Web standards are Resource Description Framework (RDF) [14] and Web Ontology Language
(OWL) [15]. RDF represents data using subjectpredicate
object triples (also known as statements). This triple representation connects data in a flexible piece-by-piece and link-by-link
fashion that forms a directed labeled graph. The components of
each RDF statement can be identified using Uniform Resource
Identifers (URIs). Alternatively, they can be referenced via links
to RDF Schemas (RDFS), OWL ontologies, or to other (non-
schema) RDF documents.

Organizations in the life sciences are currently using RDF
for drug target assessment [http://www.olsug.org/wiki/images/
d/df/AWL.pdf], and the aggregation of genomic data [2]. In
addition, Semantic Web technologies are being used to develop
well-defined and rich biomedical ontologies to assist with data
integration and search [6,7,10]; the integration of rules to specify

and implement bioinformatics workflows [9]; and the automation of discovery and composition of bioinformatics Web Services [21].

This paper provides an overview of two specific Semantic
Web technologies, namely the Oracle RDF Data Model and Seamark Navigator from Siderean Software, and then provides an
example as to how these technologies can be utilized for drug
discovery.

2. Software components

2.1. Oracle RDF Data Model

In Oracle Database 10g Release 2, support is provided for
RDF and RDFS. The implementation is based on the object relational capabilities of the database. All RDF triples are stored in
the system as entries in tables, but the user interacts with the
triples at an object level. Functionality is provided to enable
users to link from the RDF Data Model to the multimedia capabilities within the database, thereby allowing images and textual
documents to form a component of the graph.

The RDF Data Model has proven scalable due to the ability to
reuse subject and object components of triples, and by allowing
data to be partitioned into distinct models. Database features
such as indexing, memory management, and parallelization can
be used with the RDF functionality. In addition, the Oracle Real
Application Clusters capability can be used with the RDF Data
Model, enabling users to run the database instance over several
nodes in a compute cluster. The scalability of the implementation
has been analyzed using UniProt [3].

SQL has been extended to allow users to search for an arbitrary pattern within the RDF data. The implementation supports
inferencing based on RDF, RDFS and user-defined rules [20].
The graph query capability is based upon the RDF query requirements as identified by the W3C Data Access Working Group
[17].

2.2. Seamark Navigator

Seamark Navigator from Siderean Software is a Web application that allows users to browse, search and organize RDF
data. Seamark can be used to generate RDF metadata from a
number of data types, including tab-delimited files, relational
data, XML, and RSS. Once the RDF metadata has been created,
Seamark can be used to organize the disparate data into a graph.
Seamark provides faceted navigation capabilities to guide
users to relevant content. A facet is a particular metadata field
that is considered important for the data set that is being nav-
igated. By selecting a particular facet value in the context of
browsing, Seamark adds a facet restriction and removes all items
that do not meet that restriction. The browser window is then
updated to reflect the new subset of relevant data. Selecting facet
values has the effect of zooming in on the data set, by removing
links to data that are no longer of interest. With faceted navi-
gation, it is possible to remove a restriction that was made at
an earlier point, thereby zooming out to increase the field of
search. Seamark has a flexible administrative environment that

allows customized interfaces to be easily designed, and for different views to be published to different individuals. Users can
also perform traditional keyword search for data within a whole
RDF graph or a pre-selected subset.

Seamark Navigator has been integrated with the Oracle RDF
Data Model to enable the effective search and navigation of RDF
graphs within the Oracle Database. In the current integration, the
RDF graph is extracted from the Oracle RDF Data Model into
Seamark using the Oracle graph query capability. Once the data
are loaded into Seamark, the data are indexed to support the
generation and execution of faceted browsing over the data. A
more extensive level of integration is underway that will enable
data to remain within the Oracle RDF Data Model at query time,
thus enabling Seamark to take full advantage of the scalability
features of the Oracle Database.

3. Drug discovery use case

The use case is provided to demonstrate the application of the
Oracle RDF Data Model and Seamark Navigator to data search
and browsing within drug discovery. The example aggregated
several publicly available bioinformatics data sets into the Oracle
RDF Data Model and utilized the Seamark Navigator interface
for the exploration, organization and visualization of these data
within the RDF infrastructure. A gene expression data set was
selected to exercise the RDF infrastructure.

3.1. Overview

The use case is derived from research originally undertaken
by Shipp et al. [19] where gene expression microarray experiments were used to study the disease characteristics of patients
with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and their response to anticancer treatment. These experiments provide a basis whereby
genes can be identified that would differentiate between the different forms of disease and lead to the identification of patient
subgroups. The classification of patients into subgroups can
assist with the discovery and development of more targeted
treatments for individuals. Once gene biomarkers have been
identified, it is necessary to determine their function, biological and chemical properties, disease associations, and role in
biological pathways.

The following sections describe the implementation of an
RDF infrastructure for the interrogation of probesets of interest,
and the results gained from that exploration.

3.2. Data mining

Oracle Data Mining (ODM) was used to identify top
biomarker genes for a subset of patients with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma that do not respond to chemotherapy. The
raw gene expression measurements from an Affymetrix scanner
were loaded into the Oracle Database using the SQL*Loader
utility. The Minimum Description Length algorithm for determining attribute importance in ODM [8] identified 88 values
with positive influence on the outcome. These 88 probesets provided information that could help distinguish those patients who

S. Stephens et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 216221

Table 1
Top biomarker genes for differentiating patients with diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma

Affymetrix probeset

Rank

M17863 s at
L28175 at
L40377 at
J05036 s at
U43519 at
M18255 cds2 s at

Importance

0.12034767
0.09065704
0.08976085
0.08450493
0.08120555
0.07303495

do not respond to chemotherapy, from those patients that do. As
little insight can be gleaned from probeset identifiers alone, the
RDF infrastructure was used to identify biologically interesting information relating to the six probesets with the highest
importance values (Table 1).

3.3. Data exploration and results

The top six probesets from the gene expression analysis
were entered into Seamark Navigator in order to retrieve related
gene and protein information, including Affymetrix description,
Entrez GenelD, UniProt Keywords, and Gene Ontology (GO)
ID.

It was discovered that one of the probesets that was ranked
highly by the Minimum Description Length algorithm was for
the gene Protein Kinase C Beta. This was of interest because
Protein Kinase C is known to be a critical protein messenger in
the transfer of growth signals for B-cells and B-cell lymphomas
[19].

By selecting all six probesets of interest simultaneously for
further drill down, it was determined that they corresponded to
43 GO terms. It was further revealed that there was clustering
within the GO molecular function classes of receptor activity,
receptor binding, hydrolase activity, and transferase activity. The
BiNGO plugin [11] for Cytoscape [18] was used to undertake
a Binomial test with Benjamini & Hochberg Fales Discovery
Rate correction to determine that the clustering was significant
to P < 0.05.

3.4. Infrastructure implementation

To provide support for the RDF data exploration through Seamark Navigator, 12 publicly available bioinformatics data sets
were identified. These collectively contained a wide range of
biologically relevant data. Each data set was manually examined to identify a cross reference that would be needed in order
to map between the different data sources. The goal was to create a concept map that linked all of the biological entities to one
another, enabling users to easily jump to information of interest among the different data sets. Several additional data sets
were required in order to achieve all of the desired mappings,
for example, gene2go and ec2go. The interconnectivity of the
chosen data sets is shown in Fig. 1.

URIs were assigned to the biological entities within the data
sets. The Life Sciences Identifier (LSID) standard was used in

Fig. 1. Linkage points between the selected bioinformatics data sets.

data sets that support this standard [4]. In other instances, data
set proprietary unique identifiers were used to generate URN
identifiers.

Enzymes, GO, IntAct, NCBI Taxonomy, and UniProt were
already available in RDF/XML, so these data sets were simply
downloaded from the Web. For the data that was only available in a flat file format, the XML DB feature within the Oracle
Database was used to convert data in a tab-delimited format
into XML. The data were either loaded into the database for the
transformation, or accessed externally through Java Database
Connectivity (JDBC). Extensible Stylesheet Language Transformations (XSLT) were then applied to each of the data sets in
XML to convert them all into RDF/XML.

The whole of GO was downloaded for the use case, but
in all other instances sub-sets of data were used. In total,
the data generated 316,296 triples (http://www.olsug.org/wiki/
index.php?title=Image:JWS.zip). The focus of the work was to
explore the interoperability among many different life sciences
data sources, as scalability has been previously examined. Further details regarding the data sets used, and the structure of the
URIs is provided in Table 2.

Once the RDF data were loaded into the Oracle RDF Data
Model, rules were used to link the data sets together. If different
data sets co-referenced the same URN, then the data regarding
that particular entity was collapsed. In this use case, all data
mappings were manually examined to ensure correctness. If the
use case were to be deployed in a production environment, it
would be possible to write a program that could automatically
perform the mappings between the data sets.

As Seamark Navigator is a faceted browser, it was necessary
to select the specific facets for each data set. In order to ensure
an intuitive user experience, attention was paid to which facets
were retrieved at each stage during the browsing process. The
initial Web page interface was designed to assist the user in identifying the data that they would be interested in interrogating.
Subsequent Web pages were designed to help guide the user to
relevant information of interest, while using filters to minimizing the size of the RDF search space. The interface was designed

Table 2
Bioinformatics data sources utilized in the case study

Data set

Affymetrix probesets
Entrez gene
Enzymes
Gene Ontology
IntAct

NCBI taxonomy

PubMed
UniProt
UniProt

Data set content

Probesets
Genes
Enzymes
Ontology
Protein interactions
Compounds
Pathways
Organisms
Diseases
Literature
Proteins
Keywords

URI origin

URI example

Created
Created
Created

Created
Created

Created

urn:lsid:uniprot.org: probe:J05036 s at
urn:lsid:uniprot.org: gene:814642
urn:lsid:uniprot.org: enzymes:1.16.1.7
urn:lsid:uniprot.org: go:3674
urn:lsid:uniprot.org: intact:EBI-367757
urn:lsid:uniprot.org: pathway:map00190
urn:lsid:uniprot.org: compound:C00003
urn:lsid:uniprot.org: taxonomy: 12333
urn:lsid:uniprot.org: omim:106195
urn:lsid:uniprot.org: pubmed: 15143089
urn:lsid:uniprot.org: uniprot:Q62225
urn:lsid:uniprot.org: keywords:2

to enable users to either retrieve data about a single biological
entity, or to retrieve data that applied to a group of entities. Once
the facets had been determined, Seamark was used to generate
a faceted browsing interface.

4. Discussion

Semantic Web standards have matured to a point where commercial software solutions are available to address real-world
problems. This paper provides insight into the power of RDF,
and the use of the Oracle RDF Data Model and the Seamark
Navigator from Siderean to the infrastructure for a biological
use case.

The Oracle RDF Data Model has generated much attention.
This stems from the desire to be able to manage RDF data in a
secure, scalable, and highly available environment. Users have
the flexibility of being able to incorporate multiple media data,
such as images and text, into the RDF graphs. It also provides
the ability to perform queries that span the three common data
formats: relational, XML, and RDF.

The ability to effectively manage data in RDF within the Oracle Database simplified the process of making data available to
Seamark Navigator. This is because it is now no longer necessary
for Seamark to perform transformations upon the data to make
it available in RDF. Additional benefits include simplified integration of RDF data with other enterprise data, reuse of RDF
objects, eliminating modeling impedance mismatch between
client RDF objects and relational storage, and easier maintenance of RDF applications.

With the current level of integration, the Oracle graph query
is used to pass requested RDF data to Seamark. However, work
is underway to move the data query into the Oracle Database
in order to provide a more scalable solution for large data sets.
Currently, a single instance of Seamark Navigator operating on
a 32-bit processor provides support for up to approximately 20
million triples, and a clustered implementation can scale up to
hundreds of millions of triples. The integration of Seamark Navigator with the Oracle RDF Data Model is sought to maintain
low latency while achieving an order of magnitude higher scal-
ability.

As data volumes continue to grow in the life sciences, it
becomes increasingly important to have effective mechanisms
for browsing data and to be able to query subsets of data of
interest. Faceted navigation helps overcome some of the limits
of search by revealing the scope of information available. This
provides context for exploration, discovery, and selection of the
content that is most valuable. Seamark eliminates the need to
know in advance what is stored in the data repository and how
it is classified.

The RDF infrastructure deployed was able to easily and
quickly retrieve biological data that related to the probeset
biomarkers. It also became possible for users to select or search
for the bioinformatics information of interest, rather than manually collecting identifiers to enable jumping between data
sources. In addition, the ability of faceted browsing to remove all
data that does not meet filter conditions, and being able to select
multiple entities for simultaneous search, it was possible to identify clustering of genes within GO. In this use case, it appears
that the results may be of biological interest, as the clustering
was found to be of statistical significance by the BiNGO plugin
for Cytoscape.

However, the identification of optimal facets for browsing can
be difficult when there are a large number of instances assigned
to a particular facet, as frequently occurs in the life sciences. For
example, thousands of entities would be under the facet heading
of genes. In addition, faceted browsing does not provide all necessary analytical tools and visualization capabilities required by
bioinformatics.

The infrastructure highlighted in the paper takes advantage
of RDF, with the goal of showing how this layer alone can be
used to successfully aggregate data. This approach was decided
upon as many life sciences organizations wish to achieve data
integration with ultimate flexibility. However, RDFS and OWL
can be used to provide a common vocabulary and a more formal
framework for data integration.

The availability of the Oracle RDF Data Model and Seamark
Navigator aided the building of the RDF infrastructure. How-
ever, these products did not obviate the need to identify data
sets that were cross-referenced, the transformation of data sets
into RDF, and the assignment and mapping of unique identifiers.
Data sets were selected such that they covered many biological

S. Stephens et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 216221

data types of interest (e.g. genes, proteins, disease), and had sufficient cross-references to enable all of the data to be connected.
It was therefore necessary to have a good understanding of the
data sets, and how they interrelated. The transformation of data
into RDF was relatively straightforward.

LSIDs were used to generate the URIs in data sets that supported this convention. However, in some cases it was necessary
to use different identification schemes. In order to link LSIDs
with data set proprietary identifiers, it was necessary to undertake manual linking of data sets. Going forward, it is hoped that
the life sciences community agrees upon a convention for the
identification of entities, as this will enable biological data sets
to be cross-referenced far more easily.

However, assigning unique identifiers is not a simple task
within the life sciences, as data are frequently described at different semantic levels. For example, in articles about gene expression analysis it is common for a gene name such as PRKCB1
to be referenced, rather than the probeset M18255 cds2 s at. In
articles about protein interaction it is common to state that two
genes interact, whereas it is really meant that the proteins produced by the genes interact. This can lead to incorrect biological
assumptions, as genes typically produce a variety of splice vari-
ants, and some of these variants will almost certainly not interact.
There is also ambiguity as to how proteins complexes are referenced in literature. For example, it may be stated that a protein
interacts with a second protein, when, in reality, both protein
names consist of a complex of proteins. Consideration, there-
fore, needs to be taken when identifiers are assigned to ensure
that they are at a level of granularity that will help biological
understanding to be furthered. In the case of protein identifiers,
it would be valuable if references pointed to specific proteins,
their molecular state, and other information that would influence
their behavior.

Much progress has been made in the adoption of LSIDs for
proteins and genes, and INChI [5] for chemical compounds.
However, over time, methods need to be developed for assigning identifiers to protein complexes, protein interactions, and
pathways. Currently, as a consequence of the ambiguity in naming of entities, care must be taken to ensure equivalence when
data sets are merged. Further, much of what is considered equivalence can depend on the semantic context of the operation.

Many technology approaches have been used for data integration projects. Data warehouse approaches have been built
to enable users to consolidate data into a relational database
environment. Challenges with this approach include the substantial planning and upfront effort required to unify the many data
sources, ongoing efforts are required to maintain the data model
and loaders, and a limited ability to share relational data with
other organizations. However, relational data stores do provide
a highly available, scalable, and secure environment. An alternative approach is federated data access, which allows users to
read or update data in multiple distributed data stores as if the
data were loaded into a single database. All vendors of enterprise relational databases offer such solutions. A challenge with
a federated database approach is that it does not require consistency between the data models that are being queried. As any
incompatibilities between the systems are discovered, for exam-

ple, naming conventions or units of measure, these problems will
need to be rectified and changes made to the applications that
access the data.

Many organizations are exploring the use of Web services
for defining domain-specific ways of describing information and
exchanging those definitions between applications. This enables
information to be viewed in context, although the application
environment is distributed. However, there are some challenges
to the use of Web services in drug discovery. For example, the
life sciences community has not agreed upon a single set of
XML schemata, which limits the flexibility of the approach, and
the dynamic nature of scientific data requires XML schemata
to be updated on a frequent basis [22]. In addition, while Web
services allow the correct syntactic integration by passing valid
instance data between scientific application systems, the semantics are not defined, thus relying on the knowledge of the person
integrating the applications to know the meaning of the lowlevel data structures. However, a number of research projects
are focused on applying semantics to Web services [12,13,21].
The Semantic Web has the benefit of helping to ensure that
two concepts that are found in different forms in different data
sources actually describe the same object. Being able to recognize homonyms, synonyms, and related terms is critical in data
integration. RDF provides a very flexible data model for adding
new data to both individual data sets and knowledge banks. The
Semantic Web provides standard specifications, such as OWL,
that can assist with uniting data if differing identifiers were initially selected. This functionality is especially valuable when
different departments choose to aggregate their data, for example bioinformatics with cheminformatics.

5. Summary

The integration of biomedical data within drug discovery has
proven to be a long-standing challenge. Semantic Web technology promises the ability to more easily aggregate such data,
thereby improving the efficiency of drug discovery. The Semantic Web infrastructure deployed enabled many disparate life
sciences data sets to be integrated. The Oracle RDF Data Model
provided a secure, scalable, and highly available environment
for managing the data. Seamark Navigator provided an effective environment in which to explore the relationships within
the data, and drilldown in areas of interest.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to the Oracle Spatial group for implementing
the RDF Data Model, Bob Haberstroh for guidance with the data
mining, and Melissa Cline and Ora Lassila for feedback on the
manuscript. JL wishes to thank the National Science Foundation
for support (IIS-0542041).
