Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 263266

CONFOTO: Browsing and annotating conference

photos on the Semantic web

Benjamin Nowack

Appmosphere Web Applications, Kruppstr. 100, 45145 Essen, Germany

Received 4 April 2006; accepted 6 September 2006

Abstract

This paper describes CONFOTO, a browsing and annotation service1 for conference photos which combines current web trends such as data
sharing and collaborative tagging with Resource Description Framework (RDF) system advantages like unrestricted aggregation and ontology
re-use. Interactive user interface components ease information exploring and editing, W3C-recommended import and export interfaces and formats
facilitate data integration and re-purposing.
 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Photo annotation; RDF; Semantic web; SPARQL; User interfaces

1. Introduction

A major recent trend in end-user web applications is the
ability to collaboratively define keyword-based classifications,
so-called folksonomies [1]. Folksonomies facilitate the creation of metadata, and, as services like Flickr2 or del.icio.us3
demonstrated, are able to get large numbers of contributors
involved. Ease of participation, instant gratification and early
network effects are among the benefits of such tagging sys-
tems. The simple design of current folksonomy implemen-
tations, however, leads to maintenance problems when the
collections of tags and tagged items grow. Personal keywords
cannot be used in different applications without duplication,
and a tag collection is limited to the applications basic scope.
A Flickr tag, for example, annotates an image, but there is
no possibility to associate a tag with an object depicted in a
photo, or an event the picture was taken at in an unambiguous
way.

The Resource Description Framework (RDF) [2] provides
means to solve these issues. Fine-grained annotations and typed
relations can be applied to both online and offline resources,
a standardized query language [3] allows remote querying and

E-mail address: bnowack@appmosphere.com.

1 http://www.confoto.org/.
2 http://flickr.com/.
3 http://del.icio.us/.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2006.09.001

data re-use across application boundaries. Despite its benefits,
RDF has the reputation of being too complicated for end-users or
average web developers. CONFOTO tries to combine the advantages of the Resource Description Framework with the usability
of mainstream web applications. An interactive user interface
helps to hide complexity, different input forms and views are
provided to serve novice users as well as contributors who are
familiar with RDF. CONFOTO is a Semantic web application for
browsing and annotating conferences, conference photos, and
attendees. The following sections of this systems paper describe
the system architecture, data exchange mechanisms and some
examples of use.

2. System architecture

CONFOTO extends a Web Content Management System
(WCMS)4 with RDF functionality and some applicationspecific components as shown in Fig. 1. User account and
other CMS-related data are maintained in a relational system
database, uploaded photos and thumbnails are stored on disk.
RDF-encoded information is spread across three separate repos-
itories.

The ontology store contains RDFS and OWL vocabularies
and provides an API for the creation of annotation forms and
browser views. User annotations are kept in a separate triple

4 http://www.appmosphere.com/en-sitekit.

B. Nowack / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 263266

Fig. 1. CONFOTO architecture.

space first and replicated to the main data store only after a user
has finished editing. This approach improves the response times
of the editing tools and reduces the time needed for index updates
in the (much larger) main store.

RDF/XML sources from the web are added to the main store
directly, custom wrappers are used to pre-process other XML
documents (e.g. Flickrs Atom [4] feeds or non-RSS 1.0 [5]
feeds of the w3photo project5). CONFOTO provides different
output formats for exported data. RDF/XML is the default seri-
alization, but simple RSS feeds or JavaScript Object Notation
(JSON) code can be generated, too. An experimental URIQA6
service enables automatic resource description discovery and a
SPARQL [3,6] endpoint can be utilized for fine-grained data
retrieval.

CONFOTOs backend is written in PHP7; ARC8 is the toolkit
used to implement standard RDF and querying functionality. The
frontend is built on top of a templating and plugin system which
allows embedding partly interactive, SPARQL-driven components (so-called Sparqlets) in HTML pages generated by the
CMS. A remote scripting [7] API makes it possible to read from
and write to the backend via JavaScript without having to reload
complete pages after each operation.

At the time of writing this paper, the main RDF store contained about 20,000 statements aggregated from 140 sources.

5 http://w3photo.org/.
6 http://sw.nokia.com/uriqa/URIQA.html.
7 http://www.php.net/.
8 http://www.appmosphere.com/en-arc.

Five hundred resource annotations were maintained by registered users.

3. Tools

CONFOTO is still at beta stage, several planned features are
not implemented yet or still limited. Some already available tools
are briefly described in this section.

3.1. Photo browser

The photo browser is based on a generic RDF viewer which
has been adjusted to generate galleries of clickable thumbnails.
Several filters can be used to create custom photo sets. Selecting
an image opens a details view which shows a larger version of
the image and a list of available annotations from the RDF store.
In case of non-literal values pointing to related resources (e.g.
persons depicted in the selected photo), the browser provides a
list of labels (e.g. titles of publications or names of persons) and
links to a dedicated browser, for example, persons, events or doc-
uments, if available (an example screenshot is shown in Fig. 2).
This functionality is implemented by utilizing very simple inference capabilities of OWLCHESTRA [8], the underlying OWL
API. For a given resource, a SPARQL query first retrieves the
asserted resource types (via rdf:type) from the data store. Potential naming properties are then obtained in a second step by
searching for special annotations in the locally described ontology classes. Class tree expansion is used to include super-classes
in the retrieval process. When no labeling property can be found,

Fig. 2. OWL-improved view (property and resource labels, resource-specific options).

Fig. 3. SPARQL- and remote scripting-enhanced annotation form.

Fig. 4. RDF data cart.

B. Nowack / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 263266

or when no label has been set for the selected resource, the class
name is used instead (e.g. A Person). Besides typing infor-
mation, property range axioms help detecting resource-specific
browsers.

3.2. Annotator

Fig. 3 shows a key feature of CONFOTO, the availability
of interactive, browser-based annotation forms. Again with the
help of SPARQL queries, the application tries to simplify the
annotation process and how information is displayed to the end-
user.

The figure above illustrates how several techniques are combined to improve the user experience. Separate tailored forms
are provided for the different annotation possibilities, switching
between them is possible by simply selecting from the tab bar,
each tab can be rendered and refreshed inline. Semantic web
applications work best when resources can be identified without ambiguity, ideally by using URIs, alternatively through the
use of inverse functional properties (IFPs). However, entering
URIs or a number of identifying attributes into a form reduces
usability and makes annotating resources cumbersome. CONFOTO therefore uses a type-ahead feature to find resources by
their label (or part of it). As soon as the user enters some letters
in the search box, a SPARQL query is sent to the server where
a list of matching resources is generated. URI- or IFP-identified
resources are preferred (and marked with an asterisk in the list),
tooltips offer additional helpful information. This mechanism
enables the seamless re-use of existing data.

3.3. RDF data cart

CONFOTOs RDF data cart is an experimental feature to
collect and export machine-readable annotations of resources
selected during a session. It works like a shopping basket in an
online shop, but saves resource descriptions instead of physical
objects (Fig. 4).

4. Conclusion and future work

CONFOTO demonstrates that Semantic web applications can
be optimized in terms of usability while keeping the advantages

of the Resource Description Framework. It is possible to provide
simple user interfaces similar to those used by tagging services
without giving up on rich annotations with explicitly typed rela-
tions. The system is however still in an early stage, many things
need more work. The possibilities of RDF and SPARQL could
be better illustrated if the browsers offered means for contextspecific views such as all photos taken by this person or all
events attended by this person. Furthermore, the browsers are
still too generic and display most of the data in a tabular way,
more resource-tailored views would make the service more user-
friendly. Other possible features include a custom query builder
or the option to create personal, filtered views, e.g. for a certain event or time frame. At the moment the development is
still focused on basic functionality and improving the systems
performance, though.

Acknowledgements

CONFOTO builds heavily on experiences and results from
the w3photo project. I received many hints, pointers, suggestions and comments on the Semantic web interest group chat
channel9, particularly with regard to the optimization of my
SPARQL infrastructure. Concerning the latter, I would also like
to thank Richard Cyganiak and Steve Harris for valuable email
conversations.
