Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 167

Editorial

Semantic web for life sciences

The life sciences are a promising application for semantic

web research and technologies for the following reasons:

- Data explosion: Much life science data for protein sequences,
structures and literature are online available and their integration is a bottleneck.

- XML: Many of these online resources offer data in XML.
- Standards: Life scientists actively develop standards to
exchange data, such as ProML for proteins, SBML for systems biology, MIAME for gene expression data to name only
a few.

- Ontologies: Life scientists develop large ontologies to annotate genomic data. Examples are GeneOntology, the open bioontologies OBO, the medical subject headings Mesh, Galen,
UMLS and SnoMed. Scientific abstracts, protein sequences
and structures are annotated with these ontological terms.

- Semantic web: Life scientists embrace semantic web tech-
nologies, such as the publication of data in RDF, ontologies
in OWL and computational services as web services.

Ontologies are the main focus of this special issue. The
three research papers cover biomedical ontologies from different angles: Baker et al. show how to integrate information on
enzymes and fungi into an OWL ontology. The formal representation of the knowledge in OWL allows for complex queries.
The formulation of these queries is supported by an iterative
process in which users can browse and select patterns. While
Baker et al. ontology draws from various information sources,
Golbreich et al. translate an existing large anatomical taxonomy from a frame-based format into OWL. The authors define
the necessary transformation rules and show that the resulting
OWL representation lends itself to reasoning tasks, which can
uncover inconsistencies. The work also shows that there is a
great need for scalable reasoning as the whole ontology proves
to be too large for current description logic reasoners. The human
anatomy taxonomy used by Golbreich et al. is large, but it covers
only one species. Anatomies of related species are similar, so
that there is a need to support their comparison and mapping.
This is not only a problem for anatomies, but for any kind of
ontologies, which overlap. Other examples are the GeneOntology and Mesh. The former is geared towards cell biology, while
the latter is designed for medical applications. However, they
share many concepts relating to biological functions and pro-
cesses. Lambrix and Tan address this problem. They develop a

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2006.05.008

framework and a system to align and merge ontologies, which
uses a number strategies. These strategies fall into different
classes, such as linguistic, structure-based, instance-based and
constraint-based approaches. The authors discuss the strengths
and weaknesses of these approaches on usecases comprising
concepts from GeneOntology and Mesh.

The short papers demonstrate how RDF and OWL can support the integration and the reasoning about data. Cheung et al.
show how to integrate protein interactions from two different
sources, which have different formats. Once mapped to OWL,
the authors are able to integrate both networks. Stephens et al.
describe a case study in which 100,000s of RDF statements stemming from twelve resources covering protein sequences, interaction data, taxonomy and others are stored in a relational database.
The authors show how a browsing and navigating tool is used to
query this large RDF store. Clark et al. describe another application using RDF as basis to store information on Alzheimer.
The focus of this work is the design of a community portal,
which supports discussion, formulation of hypotheses, organisation of experimental data. Finally, Ceusters and Smith show
how a formalisation of an informal flowchart-based algorithm
for the assessment and treatment of four forms of Schizophrenia can be formalised with an ontology. The formalisation is
the basis for possible automated monitoring of Schizophrenia
patients.

Overall, this special issue shows that the life sciences can benefit from the semantic web. Data sources are available in RDF
and OWL, infrastructure is in place to browse and reason with
these new formats, and applications are being built, which benefit from a formal representation of the underlying data. These
usecases are encouraging to move to the next step in which real,
scalable semantic web applications for the life sciences are built.


Eric Neumann
Bioinformatics Biotec/Department of Computing,
TU Dresden Tatzberg 47-51, 01307 Dresden, Germany

Michael Schroeder


Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 351 463 400 60;
fax: +49 351 463 400 61.
E-mail address: ms@biotec.tu-dresden.de (M. Schroeder)
URL: http://www.biotec.tu-dresden.de/

