Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 237242

Ontologies for ecoinformatics

Richard J. Williams a,b, Neo D. Martinez a, Jennifer Golbeck c,

a Pacific Ecoinformatics and Computational Ecology Lab, 1604 McGee Ave. Berkeley, CA 94703, United States

b San Francisco State University, Computer Science Department, San Francisco, CA, United States

c University of Maryland, Computer Science Department, A.V. Williams Building, College Park, MD 20742, United States

Received 1 September 2005; accepted 26 June 2006

Abstract

Rapid advances in information technologies continue to drive a flood of data and analysis techniques in ecological and environmental sciences.
Using these resources more effectively and taking advantage of associated cross-disciplinary research opportunities poses a major challenge to both
scientists and information technologists. These challenges are now being addressed in projects that apply knowledge representation and Semantic
Web technologies to problems in discovering and integrating ecological data and data analysis techniques. In this paper, we present an overview
of the major ontological components of our project, SEEK (Science Environment for Ecological Knowledge). We describe the concepts and
models that are represented in each, and present a discussion of potential applications of these ontologies on the Semantic Web.
 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Ecoinformatics; Ecology; Ontologies; Semantic Web

1. Introduction

Rapid advances in information technologies continue to drive
a flood of data and analysis techniques in ecological and environmental sciences. Using these resources more effectively and taking advantage of associated cross-disciplinary research opportunities poses a major challenge to both scientists and information
technologists. For example, unlike DNA sequences collected
by molecular biologists, raw data collected by environmental
biologists are rarely made available to many other scientists.
If the data are made available, access typically requires days
if not weeks of human labor and years of time before other
scientists can analyze the data. More often, interested scientists are unaware that such data even exist and the data are
more or less lost to history. These challenges have been recently
addressed by projects such as Science Environment for Ecological Knowledge (SEEK) and Semantic Prototypes in Research
Ecoinformatics (SPiRE), which apply knowledge representation and Semantic Web technologies to problems in discovering
and integrating ecological data and data analysis techniques.
These technologies rely on ontologies that appropriately cap-


Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 301 314 6604; fax: +1 301 314 9734.
E-mail addresses: rich@sfsu.edu (R.J. Williams), neo@PEaCElab.org

(N.D. Martinez), golbeck@cs.umd.edu (J. Golbeck).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2006.06.002

ture and encode scientific knowledge from the domains of
interest.

The SEEK and SPiRE projects have developed a collection
of ontologies for describing ecological organisms, systems, and
observations. The two major uses of ontologies are accessing and
analyzing ecologically important information. The first activity
uses the ontologies to describe ecological and environmental
data sets in sufficient detail to permit automation of the discovery of data sets relevant to addressing a particular scientific
question. The second activity uses the ontologies to describe
data analysis tools so that the semantic mediation system can
assist in the selection of tools and creation of scientific workflows given semantic descriptions of the incoming data and/or
the desired results.

The ontologies described here were designed to provide a rich
description of ecological and environmental data sets, so that the
first of these uses could be accomplished. Relevant characteristics of a data set that need to be described using ontologies
include (1) where, when, and by who the data were collected,
(2) a description of what was observed, typically including the
taxonomic classification and other traits of observed organisms,
and (3) the sampling protocol, including collection procedures
and associated experimental manipulations.

The ontologies are written using OWL and are contained in
a number of separate OWL documents. Conceptually separate
parts are contained in individual files. Together, the files describe

R.J. Williams et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 237242

a broad model of information covering various domains of inter-
est, which is then used to develop more highly domain-specific
models. The ontology currently addresses two broad areas, scientific observations and ecological and environmental science.
Several sub-models describe scientific observations and data sets
including models of space, time, units, and dimension as used in
describing data sets. The ontologies were developed using the
OWL-DL variant of the OWL languages, and all the ontologies
are available online at http://wow.sfsu.edu/ontology/rich/.

This paper will present overviews of some of the major
ontologies developed for the SEEK and SPiRE projects, and

describe the concepts and models that are represented in each.
We conclude with a discussion of potential applications of these
ontologies on the Semantic Web.

2. Ecology ontology

A diagram of a portion of the EcologicalConcepts.owl class
hierarchy is shown in Fig. 1. While omitting much detail, this
figure serves as a useful orientation to the concepts discussed in
this section. Ecology is modeled as the study of a systems components and the changes over time in those components. The

Fig. 1. A portion of the EcologicalConcepts.owl class hierarchy.

system components are typically biotic entities, though sometime abiotic entities are also seen as part of the system of interest.
Changes in the system occur due to processes that affect the entities in the system, interactions between the entities, either biotic
or abiotic, that make up the system, and interactions between
the systems components and its environment.

Biotic entities are separated into two basic types, either individual organisms or some kind of group or aggregate of organ-
isms. Individuals and groups are in turn are divided into whole
organism (s) or parts of organisms. Groups are often aggregated
at the level of species, but ecologists also use many other types of
aggregation. Among these are taxonomic groupings resolved to
something other than the species level (e.g., kingdom, phylum,
order) including organisms referred to by common names (e.g.,
dogs, plants) rather than taxonomic designations, organisms
with the same functional role in the ecosystem (e.g., carnivores),
and organism parts (e.g., leaves).

Interactions between entities are modeled either as directed,
such as a predatorprey interaction, or undirected, such as
competition. Directed interactions are further subdivided into
interactions in which there is material exchange between the
interacting entities, such as the energy and nutrient exchange
that occurs during a predator-prey interaction, and interactions
in which entities exchange information, such as chemical or
audible signals.

The traits of entities and interactions that a scientist chooses
to observe are typically influenced by the scientists theories
and hypotheses. The same is true of the way in which the scientist subdivides the observed world into individual entities and
interactions between those entities. However, scientifically interesting traits that capture scientists interest typically change
more frequently than the entities possessing the traits. The ontology is designed around this understanding, defining properties
independently of entities and processes. This flexible architecture allows new properties to be defined and attached to entities
and interactions without having to refine the underlying entity
and interaction classes.

An ecological system of interest typically comprises one or
more entities that exist within an environment. An Ecological
Environment describes the environment of one or more entities.
The environment is itself one or more biotic or abiotic entities,
as the distinction between entity and environment is dependent
on the perspective of the researcher. The distinction is that in
a particular experimental context, the environment is seen as
external to and not influenced by the system, but the environment
might influence the system.

Descriptive terms are frequently attached to ecological entities or interactions. For example, a scientist might label a species
as a predator or an omnivore. Descriptive terms, such as terms
used to describe the feeding behavior of various organisms, are
difficult to model and categorize because they often do not fit
cleanly into a set of independent categories. A second problem is that the terms are sometimes ambiguous and there is not
clear agreement among domain scientists to a terms meaning.
Despite these problems, descriptive terms are widely used and
can give important insight into a scientists understanding of the
ecological role of the entity in question.

By analyzing the terms used in the ecological literature to
describe feeding behaviors, we identified a small set of independent underlying concepts that can be used to define many
of these terms. For example, consider the terms predator, parasite and omnivore. Omnivore is inconsistently defined in the
scientific literature. Ecology texts define omnivores as organisms that consume species that are at different trophic levels in the food web (for example, see Ref. [1]). However,
most biology texts define omnivores as organisms that regularly consume both plant and animal taxa (for example, see
Ref. [3], http://www.biology-online.org/dictionary/omnivore).
We address this by separating omnivores into trophic omnivores
and its subset taxonomic omnivores. The different definitions
of omnivore mean that a term-based query, such as find all the
omnivores in a food web will have different results depending
on the definition of omnivore used, and that the definition of
omnivore expected be an ecology researcher and a high school
biology student are different. Using terms whose definitions are
precisely specified within the ontology will help resolve these
ambiguities.

Another useful example is the distinction between the terms
predator and parasite. Predator refers to an animal that kills
and eats other animals. Parasite also refers to an animal that
consumes some species, termed the host, but this interaction
occurs for an extended period of time and usually does not kill
the host. Thus, predators and parasites can be distinguished by
both the relative duration of the interaction between the two
organisms and whether that interaction results in the immediate
death of the organism being consumed.

These and many other idiosyncratic descriptions of feeding
behaviors are systematically broken into several independent
components concerning what is being eaten, how it is eaten, and
the effect of the eating. These components include taxonomic
categorization, trophic level, the part of the prey consumed, the
relative duration of the feeding interaction, and whether the feeding interaction leads to the death of the prey. The meaning of
feeding terms can be captured by one or more of these descriptors
and terms may have more meaning than is currently captured in
our feeding ontology. Still, the ontology provides a useful and
relatively rich way of defining many of the terms used to describe
feeding behaviors.

3. Ecological models, analysis methods, and ecological
networks ontologies

Ecology is modeled as a science of entities and interactions
occurring within an environment. This structure greatly facilitates the description of the many models in ecology. The model
ontology allows the rules of the interactions of entities to be
specified. Models are categorized using the common ecological
divisions of individual, population, community and ecosystem,
with further divisions within each of these broad categories.

Models are considered to be composed of model entities,
interactions and parameters. Each of these is further subdivided like the underlying model, into individual, population,
community and ecosystem model concepts. Parameters can be
associated with entities or interactions.

R.J. Williams et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 237242

A variety of interaction networks are studied by ecologists,
the most familiar being food webs, which records who eats
whom in an ecological community. Networks connect nodes
with either directed or undirected links. A food web is a network with directed links (DirectedNetwork), where each node
represents a set of organisms and each link represents a feeding
interaction, in which biomass and therefore energy is transferred
from some prey or otherwise classified organisms to the consumer organisms.

In addition to a set of entities associated with food webs, there
is also a set of properties associated with the entities. Properties
associated with a Food Web as a whole include connectance, the
number of links and the number of species. Properties associated
with a node in the food web include its trophic level, connectivity,
generality and vulnerability.

4. Observations and measurements ontology

Concepts used to describe scientific observations and mea-
surements, independent of a particular scientific domain, are
defined in MeasurementBase.owl. Our model of the empirical
scientific process of measurement is based on two fundamental concepts: the observation and what is being observed. The
observation can be of an item or its trait; in other words, a scientist either observes the existence of something or measures
some trait of the entity being observed.

A trait links two instances, the Trait that was observed and the
entity that the Trait was measured on. By decoupling the entities
and traits, it is possible to extend the ontology by introducing a
new trait without having to change the definition of the entity
that was observed. This accommodates the typical mode of innovation in scientific research, in which novel traits are commonly
developed, whereas the entities that the scientist studies, while
also evolving as scientific understanding develops, change much
more slowly. The value of a trait frequently has units associated
with it, and so there is a separate ontology describing units and
dimensions.

Observations are typically made at a particular time and loca-
tion, and using a specified measurement procedure. We refer to
these as the context of the observation. The ontology includes
classes and properties to express knowledge about the temporal and spatial context of a measurement. Descriptions of
spatiotemporal regions can include potentially nested intervals
in both space and time. The ontology also allows simple descriptions of measurement procedures. Understanding whether data
sets can be integrated depends on large part on understanding
whether measurement procedures are compatible. Automating
data integration will require a detailed ontology of ecological
measurement procedures.

5. Additional ontologies

have the seven main taxonomic ranks1. Instances of ranks point
to higher and lower ranks so that the hierarchy of ranks can be
traversed. The names of taxonomic ranks can be stored locally
or can be referenced to an external data file.

Ecological niche models are a category of ecological data
analysis methods that are used to model the spatial distribution
of species. The input data are the locations of the existence of
an organism, and environmental conditions at those locations.
The output is a prediction of the niche of the organism, or the
conditions under which the organism can survive. To support
this modeling, the EcologicalNicheModeling ontology contains
extensions of ecological models to describe the analysis techniques and the concept of an ecological niche.

6. Problems and limitations

As mentioned in the introduction, we chose to use the OWLDL sublanguage. Using OWL-Full was considered, as there were
several places where using classes as instances might have been
a useful modeling construct. We chose to avoid this construct
and find other ways to express the concepts that might have used
this construct so as to stay within the confines of OWL-DL and
be able to take advantage of the reasoning tools this language
offers.

There are many places in the ontologies where additional
relationships between classes and constraints on instance values
are known but cannot easily be expressed using OWL-DL. Many
class definitions could be made more precise by adding more
complex property value restrictions than are easily expressible in
OWL, such as restricting the class of an instance that is the value
of an object property that itself is a property of an object property
of the class in question, or restrictions on similar but longer
chains of property values. Another potentially useful property
value restriction not expressible in OWL is a restriction on the
range of values of a numeric datatype property, such as requiring
that the property be less than some value. A simple example of
numerical reasoning is that a geospatial location instance could
be inferred to be of class TropicalLocation if the value of its
latitude property was within 23
of the equator. Classification
based on numerical value of properties is common in science
and is an important omission in the current OWL languages.
These relationships will be added to the ontologies using a rule
system such as the proposed Semantic Web Rule Language.


Another potentially useful property value restriction difficult
to express in OWL are restrictions on the range of values of a
numeric datatype property, such as requiring that the property
be less than some value. A simple example of numerical reasoning is that a geospatial location instance could be inferred to
be of class TropicalLocation if the value of its latitude property
was within 23
of the equator. While user-defined XML Schema
datatypes can be used to define such a range and referred to from
an OWL document by a URI, there is no standard mechanism
for generating a URI for a particular user-defined datatype2 [ref:


Hierarchical classification and taxonomic identifiers are
important for organization and identification. SEEK includes a
simple ontology for representing taxonomic identifiers that can

1 Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Genus, and Species.
2 http://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-xsch-datatypes/.

http://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-xsch-datatypes/]. Thus, the abil-
ity, while technically there, is neither portable nor widely supported by OWL tools. Classification based on complex relations
between numerical values of properties is common in science,
and we anticipate needing relations more complex that even
offered in the OWL 1.13 proposal. These relationships will be
added to the ontologies using a rule system such as the proposed
Semantic Web Rule Language.

There are several places in the ontologies where classes are
related mathematically. A simple example occurs in the specification of the dimension of a measured value. The dimension
acceleration is specified as an instance of the DerivedDimension class and is composed of two DimensionPart instances
2. While the
that are multiplied together, distance and time
DerivedDimension class has a dimensionParts property that
must have one or more DimensionPart instances as values, the
ontology does not include the information that these DimensionPart instances must be multiplied together to form the dimen-
sion. The existence of unspecified relationships between various
classes means that the OWL specification is incomplete and any
user of the ontology must have knowledge of these unspecified
relationships in order to make full use of the ontology. This
information is currently included as comments in the relevant
classes.

7. Applications

The ontologies described here are designed to facilitate the
accessing and sharing of information about ecological systems
on the Semantic Web. The ontologies are used in a food web
knowledge base being developed as part of the Webs on the
Web project [5]. Food webs are models of trophic relationships in an ecosystem. They are built up from observations
about what species are found in an ecosystem and what those
species eat there. This data is compiled from studies of individual species, including direct observation of feeding interactions
and examination of stomach contents. However, it is difficult
to directly observe all components of a species diet. As a
result, the effort required to assemble a food web is very large
and many food webs have been criticized for being incomplete or inaccurate. The individual nodes in a food web, here
called species, are in fact often groups of functionally similar
species, and sometimes are only identified with their common
name rather than any taxonomic specifier. More complete and
accurate food webs would be valuable both for fundamental
scientific research into the dynamics of complex ecosystems
and for application in the conservation and management of
ecosystems.

Various applications of the highly inter-related data represented in the knowledge base are under development. Some data
sets contain brief descriptions of the feeding habits of the various species. For example, the species might be tagged as being
an herbivore. Using the definition contained in the ontology that
an herbivore is an organism that consumes plants, this infor-

3 http://www-db.research.bell-labs.com/user/pfps/owl/overview.html#2.3.

mation can be used to test the consistency of the food web data,
namely that all items consumed by the herbivorous species must
be members of the plant kingdom. If the same species appears in
a different food web, the fact that it is known to be an herbivore
can still be used to check the consistency of the feeding links in
the new web. If in inconsistency is found, there is either an error
in the food web data or an error in the original determination
that the species in question is an herbivore. The categorization that a species in a food web is an herbivore can also be
used to infer missing taxonomic information about that species
prey when only the preys common name is given (that common
name can be inferred to belong to a plant) or to perform conceptbased queries, such as locating all herbivores in a particular food
web.

Another application under development is an effort to infer
trophic relationships between species in a food web when observational data beyond the co-existence of species in a habitat is
lacking. We have named this project Meal of a Meal (MOAM) in
a nod to the Friend of a Friend (FOAF) project that is used in the
Semantic Web representation of social network data [2]. Using
data about food webs available on the Semantic Web, as well as
biological taxonomies and phylogenies, also represented with
Semantic Web ontologies, the goal of MOAM is to integrate
this information into a single model, and develop algorithms
that will suggest possible trophic relationships. The methods we
are developing use taxonomic and phylogenic similarity measures between species, known diet similarities of related species,
data on relative body sizes and data on habitat similarities to
infer trophic connections. The logic supporting this is (1) that
many if not most species who are closely related phylogenetically eat similar diets, (2) the diet similarity of taxonomically
related species varies across taxa, (3) species diets are strongly
constrained by the relative body size of predator and prey [4],
and (4) inference is more likely to be accurate when closely
related species used to infer diets live in similar habitats to the
target species.

8. Conclusion

We have described a collection of ontologies for representing
scientific ecological data on the Semantic Web. The ontologies are not only models of the connections between ecological
concepts, but are also used in several applications to represent instance data. Ecology, as a field where extracting useful
data from others research is a challenge, is a prime example of were Semantic Web-based data sharing is potentially
valuable. Currently, this work is largely independent of the
web, other than as a distribution mechanism. The food web
instance data used in the WoW project is collected into a single centralized knowledge base rather than being drawn from
a distributed set of data. This is mainly a result of the fact
that the semantic web and associated tools are in their infancy
and the ecological community is not currently producing data
with semantic markup and publishing it on the semantic web.
We see this work as a step on the path to that goal. These
ontologies and the applications that use them serve as a case
study of how carefully crafted scientific ontologies can be used

R.J. Williams et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 237242

to facilitate application development and data sharing on the
web.
