Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 229236

Referent tracking for treatment optimisation in schizophrenic patients:
A case study in applying philosophical ontology to diagnostic algorithms

Werner Ceusters a,b,

, Barry Smith c,d

a New York State Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, 700 Ellicott Street, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA

b Department of Psychiatry, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA

c Institute for Formal Ontology and Medical Information Science, Saarbr ucken, Germany

d Department of Philosophy, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA

Received 15 February 2006; accepted 1 May 2006

Abstract

The IPAP Schizophrenia Algorithm was originally designed in the form of a flow-chart to help physicians optimise the treatment of schizophrenic
patients in the spirit of guideline-based medicine. We take this algorithm as our starting point in investigating how artifacts of this sort can benefit
from the facilities of high-quality ontologies. The IPAP algorithm exists thus far only in a form suitable for use by human beings. We draw on the
resources of Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) in order to show how such an algorithm can be enhanced in such a way that it can be used in Semantic
Web and related applications. We found that BFO provides a framework that is able to capture in a rigorous way all the types of entities represented
in the IPAP Schizophrenia Algorithm in way which yields a computational tool that can be used by software agents to perform monitoring and
control of schizophrenic patients. We discuss the issues involved in building an application ontology for this purpose, issues which are important
for any Semantic Web application in the life science and healthcare domains.
 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: IPAP; Schizophrenia Algorithm; Realist ontology; Basic Formal Ontology; Electronic health record; Referent tracking; Automated decision support

1. Introduction

The International Psychopharmacology Algorithm Project
(IPAP) is an internationally supported initiative set up in 1985
by a team of psychiatrists, psychopharmacologists and algorithm designers in an effort to improve choice of medication in
psychiatry [1]. In 1995 [2], the IPAP Schizophrenia Algorithm
(IPAP-SA) was published by IPAP as a guideline consisting
of four schizophrenia treatment algorithms developed, respec-
tively, for the first schizophrenic episode, long-term medication
maintenance, schizophrenia complicated by comorbid psychiatric disorders, and schizophrenia complicated by neuroleptic
malignant syndrome. In January 2005, the latest version of this
IPAP guideline (v.20041223) was released and made available
on the web [3]. The algorithm is presented in the form of a


Corresponding author at: New York State Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, 701 Washington Street, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA.
Tel.: +1 716 563 6663.

E-mail address: ceusters@buffalo.edu (W. Ceusters).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2006.05.002

flow-chart, which has one entry condition  namely an established diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder 
and two exit conditions, one suggesting a modification to the
patients current treatment program, the other suggesting unaltered continuation of this program. The algorithm consists of
instructions like: if the patient exhibits severe agitation, consider a 46-week trial of an atypical or, if not available, a trial of
a typical antipsychotic. The nodes in the chart represent either
questions related to the condition of the patient or instructions on
how to modify the existing treatment regimen. In the electronic,
hyperlinked version of the flow-chart, the first set of nodes point
the user in the direction of more detailed specifications of symptoms to look for; nodes in the second set point to drugs which
might be prescribed and to scientific papers motivating treatment suggestions. The whole is also available in a pdf format
that can be printed out and consulted when the clinician is not
on-line.

The on-line version provides some obvious advantages over
a traditional journal or textbook publication. It can be accessed
immediately through any suitable browser, and new versions
become accessible as soon as they are released. On the other

W. Ceusters, B. Smith / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 229236

side, however, given that the algorithm is currently implemented
as a simple flow-chart in which the included hyperlinks serve
only human browsing, it still fails to exploit the real power of
the computer, which is to perform reasoning automatically. An
implementation could for instance draw on information already
available in the patients electronic health record (EHR) in such
a way as to process relevant features of the patients current
condition in light of those criteria which play a role in the corresponding step of the algorithm. A novel approach for building
such implementations is that of referent tracking, which relies
on an approach to the representation of entities in the healthcare
domain that is based on philosophical realism [4]. The cornerstone of this approach is the distinction between particulars (such
as John, or the fracture in his right tibia), and the universals
(human being, fracture, tibia) which these particulars instanti-
ate. The purpose of the research reported here was to carry out
the first step of enhancing the present version of the IPAP algorithm in such a way that it can be used in automatic decision
support. To this end it is necessary to identify the minimal set of
universals and particulars (tokens, instances) which must be represented in a referent tracking system in order to allow software
agents to carry out real-time monitoring and control activities to
optimise the treatment of schizophrenic patients in accordance
with IPAP guidelines. The analysis performed is intended to be
a case study with the goal of demonstrating how this approach
could be used for upgrading similar static and inert flow-chart
algorithms in such a way that they would constitute dynamic
application ontologies.

2. Background

The system we advance as a novel enhancement of the IPAPSA falls under the paradigm of expert system for real-time
monitoring and control that is described in [5]. However, it
is marked also by some special features of its own.

First, the IPAP-SA is designed to support monitoring and control primarily on the basis of phenomena observed on the side
of the patient which are qualitative, in the sense that they cannot be associated with quantitative magnitudes (in some cases
because quantitative values cannot be measured by means of
any currently available device). Thus, the algorithm embodies
a qualitative ontology of the domain of schizophrenia and its
treatment.

The second distinguishing feature concerns the issue of when
the system we envisage should be invoked. Traditionally, questions are raised in the course of using an expert system only
when [1] the system has already been activated by the clinician in the course of a clinical encounter to assist him in his
decision making and [2] the inference engine encounters a node
where if-then-conditions need to be evaluated in order to determine the next step to be taken. Under the paradigm advocated
here, in contrast, the IPAP-SA would be embedded in a monitoring system that would keep track continuously and in real
time of changes in those electronic health records to which the
monitoring system has access. The execution of the algorithm
would then be triggered automatically by relevant changes in
the EHRs associated with each patient. Note that these need not

be changes in the patients own EHR. In the case of significant
loss, for example, a term used in psychiatry to indicate that the
death of a loved one may result in psychiatric disturbances, the
event in question will be one that is registered initially in the
EHR of some other person. In the scenario we envisage, the
registration of such an event would trigger a software agent to
initiate a process designed to establish whether the event does
indeed constitute a significant loss for some other person under
scrutiny. Clinicians or patients may then be called upon by the
system to provide answers to additional questions generated by
the software, answers which cannot be found automatically in
the relevant EHR data. An obvious benefit of this approach,
which is known as the mixed initiative interaction paradigm, is
the more accurate management of risk. Since, for a schizophrenic
patient, a significant loss is qualified as a potentially dangerous
situation that might lead to suicidal ideation, one should try to
anticipate such ideation by contacting the patient with a view
to further monitoring and possibly modifying his treatment as
soon as possible after the significant loss, given that the time of
the next scheduled visit may already be too late.

The third distinguishing feature concerns the origin of the
data on which the algorithm will operate. For most expert systems for monitoring and control, the data derive from some single patient or from the patients immediate environment (e.g. the
temperature or air humidity in an IC unit). The IPAP Schizophrenia Algorithm, in contrast, rests on information that may need to
be looked for elsewhere, including in other information systems
containing EHRs, or in the wider environment of the patient.
This requires the use of a referent tracking system.

2.1. Referent tracking

No EHR can ever be complete. Yet it is often the case that
a plurality of EHRs are maintained by different institutions for
the very same patient, often with considerable overlap and complementarity of data, but sometimes also with contradictory
information. In addition, as argued above, data in one patients
EHR may be relevant to the care of other patients.

Unfortunately, however, the information contained in EHRs
is typically stored in such a way that it is difficult to tell whether it
is consistent, or whether given data refer to the same or to distinct
entities in reality. To resolve these problems we have proposed
that EHRs should be created in such a way that both software
and human agents can know precisely what included statements
are about. This problem is solved for individual patients via
the mechanism of unique alphanumeric patient identifiers. On
our proposal this same mechanism would be extended to all
the particulars to which reference is made in the clinical record
[4]. Systems containing data pertaining to the same particulars
could then be connected automatically, so that relevant changes
in one system come immediately to the attention of the other sys-
tems. The realization of this goal will require a more dynamic
type of connectivity than that which has been realized hitherto in the context of patient data warehouses or standard EHR
messagingbut connectivity of this sort will in any case increasingly be needed by healthcare institutions, and it will be needed
also to take full advantage of the ongoing trend for patients to

maintain a personal health record on the Internet, thereby keeping track of their own medical history [6].

In [4], we have sought to provide arguments to the effect
that expert systems created for real-time monitoring and control should exploit the facilities of a common referent tracking
system that is designed to guarantee that each of the real-world
entities found to be of salience in the course of the medical
care of each given patient would be individually represented by
its own explicit (alphanumeric) identifier in that patients EHR.
Current EHRs consist almost exclusively of statements to the
effect that a given patient has been diagnosed with a disorder
of such and such a type or has received a treatment of such and
such a type from this or that physician, where only the patient
and the physician involved receive unique identifiers. All other
information in the EHR is conveyed through combinations of
time-stamping information with general codes from clinical terminologies (as in John Smiths schizophrenia, first diagnosed
at 4 p.m. on 2006/03/29).

In the type of EHR we have in mind, in contrast, this particular schizophrenia  which is to say, this particular case or
instance of this disease in this particular patient  would also
receive its own unique alphanumeric identifier, hereafter called
as Instance Unique Identifier (IUI). In this way it becomes
possible to include within an EHR statements which are directly
about what it is on the side of the patient to which we refer when
talking about each particular instance. The assignment of IUIs
should be systematicthus IUIs should be applied (wherever
possible by software) to all instances salient to the healthcare of
a given patient at the point where corresponding general codes
are entered into the clinical record of that patient, which means
not only to instances of disorders, but also to the patients body
parts (his brain, a specific region of his brain, a specific tumour),
particular episodes in his clinical history, particular symptoms
he presents, particular family members, and so on. The feeling of
distress that he experiences today will receive a new IUI, distinct
from the IUI received by the similar feeling he experienced 2
years ago, even though both are associated with the same ICD10
or DSM-IV code.

The resultant referent tracking database (RTDB) may form
part of the legacy EHR system of the specific institution in which
the patient is managed. Better, however, would be to have the
computer systems of pluralities of institutions linked together
systematically in such a way that updates in referent tracking
data deposited in one system would immediately trigger relevant
actions in the others.

IUIs can be used in statements asserting that given particulars
are instances of given universals, for example, that particular
#12345 is an instance of the universal schizophrenia. Or they
can be used in statements asserting that given particulars stand in
given relations to each other, for example, that particular #12345
is contained in particular #12300. Ideally, relations will be used
which are defined within a formal framework of the type outlined in [7]. The encoded statements could then serve as basis
for logical reasoning, for example, in Semantic Web applica-
tions. It is for this reason that the formal specification of the
RTDB is expressed in a tuple-oriented language, so that statements therein can be easily translated into RDF or OWL [8].

IUIs can be used to track particulars whose nature changes over
given periods of time, and also for reasoning about particulars
whose nature is unknown. Thus, we can assign a IUI when a
disorder is postulated as being responsible for a given family of
symptoms even before we know enough to classify the disorder
in a determinate way.

3. Hypothesis

Our basic idea is that a patients EHR would be associated
with pertinent algorithms in such a way that changes in the RTDB
would trigger the automatic execution of those steps in patient
care which the algorithms recommend (steps which sometimes
need to be taken urgently, including the issuing of relevant warn-
ings). In order to assess whether it would be possible to use the
IPAP-SA in a setting of this sort, it was necessary to subject
it to a terminological and ontological analysis with the goal of
identifying any obstacles it might present to automation along
the lines described. The first such potential obstacle would be
the failure to trace back all the data elements mentioned in the
algorithm to corresponding particulars or universals of the sorts
which are recorded in a referent tracking system. Our hypothesis
was that this effort could be conducted successfully.

4. Methods

For our analysis, we used the version (v.20041223) of the
IPAP-SA available on the IPAP website on June 23, 2005 [1]. We
studied in detail the explanations provided for each of the nodes
in the flow-chart on the basis of the information sources referenced by the algorithm itself. We made an inventory of the data
elements which would be needed in order to assess whether a
given patients condition fulfils the criteria advanced in the decisional nodes of the flow-chart, identifying thereby also some of
the resources (including other relevant guidelines) that would
be required in making accurate assessments and comparisons
of the corresponding entities in reality. We then classified these
data elements according to whether they pertain to the realm of
particulars (e.g. this patients headache here and now) or of the
universals which these particulars instantiate (patient, headache,
death, significant loss, etc.). We evaluated the latter according
to the theory of Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) presented in [9],
which enforces distinctions such as that between enduring entities (such as the patients brain)  also called continuants  and
associated processes (e.g. the tremor of his left lower arm)also
called occurrents. It enforces also the distinction between independent entities (the patient, his arm, his brain) and dependent
entities (his headache, age, or temperature), the former serving
as bearers or carriers for the latter.

If a given patient exists,

then certain other particulars
necessarily exist also (or have existed at some earlier time). As
an example: if a given patient exists, then his age necessarily
existsthere are no persons without an age. This age is a
particular quality to which (if such an assignment has not
already been made) it is possible to assign a IUI. In the case of
attributes like age, which vary continuously through time, we
need to distinguish the attribute itself from those values which

W. Ceusters, B. Smith / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 229236

the attribute takes on at successive moments in time (which
will not be assigned IUIs of their own). In the case of variable
attributes such as temperature, corresponding numerical data
will be stored with time-stamp information in the RTDB.

In contrast to what is the case for age or temperature, disorders
are not such that, given the existence of the patient, some particular instance of disorder, too, must necessarily exist. This means
that a term like catatonia as used in the algorithm refers not to
some determinate particular but rather to a universal which may
or may not be instantiated in this particular patient. Thus, when
a referent tracking system is being used in support of patient
evaluation via the IPAP-SA, it must be determined through clinical assessment by physician or nurse whether there exists, for
each such universal, a corresponding instantiation on the side of
the patient.

To maximize the benefits to be derived from using a referent tracking system in the way described in the foregoing, we
must ensure that the various entities under review are treated
in appropriate ways by the system in light of the ontological categories to which they belong. To this end we specified
for each particular what BFO category it is an instance of
and for each universal by what top-level BFO category it is
subsumed.

5. Results and discussion

While all nodes in the IPAP-SA could be expressed by means
of one or other BFO category (or some combination thereof),
this was not in every case achieved without difficulty. Indeed,
identifying the ontological status of many of the entities referred
to in the algorithm required a detailed prior analysis. We believe
that this analysis may provide useful lessons for those embarking
on similar endeavors in the future and thus we provide a number
of examples in what follows, focusing here on those nodes which
are of relevance to the life science and healthcare domains taken
quite generally.

5.1. Persons and patients

The most important particular, from the perspective of the
IPAP-SA, is the person to be monitored. Assigning IUIs to
persons is of course common practice in many administrative
contexts, though their uniqueness is often restricted to the
environment in which a given information system (whether electronic or manual) operates. The library from which you borrow
books, the social security program in which you are registered,
the company for which you work, the health facility in which
you once were treatedall will likely have their own more or
less idiosyncratic systems of personal IDs. In the domain of
healthcare, however, the fact that the very same person might
be supplied with more than one unique identifier hampers the
aggregation of pertinent data in a way which increases costs and
the likelihood of error [10], so that many countries have initiated
programs to implement systems of unique patient IDs that are
valid nationwide, though in some countries (as in the case of
the US), such a measure is still seen as controversial because of
privacy concerns [11].

From an ontological perspective, it is important to note that
we envisage assigning an ID to the patient as person and not as
patient. A person is an entity that starts to exist some time at or
around conception, and ceases to exist when it dies. This entity
is an independent continuant, and thus has to be distinguished
from other entities with which it is closely associated, such as
the persons life (a dependent occurrent). The term patient,
on the other hand, refers obliquely to entities which are to be
classified as dependent continuants, namely to the roles which
persons start to play, for example, when they seek certain sorts
of advice in relation to their health. This same term is however
also used in a second sense, as signifying person who plays the
patient role. This tells us that, while natural language can be
used to establish the ontological nature of the entities referred to
by its means, it should not be trusted to give reliable indications
in this respect in every case.

5.2. Diseases

The second most important particular, from the perspective
of the IPAP-SA, is the disease that is being tracked. Diseases are
dependent continuants. A disease is dependent because it cannot
exist without some other entity (an organism) in which it exists:
without human bodies there would be no human diseases. The
thesis that a disease is a continuant is more difficult to grasp.
Some consider a disease to be a process, and hence an occurrent
[12]. The BFO view is that a disease is a disposition or power
analogous to a function (e.g. of a bodily organ) but classified
rather as a dysfunction, of a sort which affects or will affect the
well-being of the organism. The disease comes into existence
at a certain time and thereafter gives rise to a complex series of
processes (such as manifestations of symptoms), which together
form the course of the disease and can be recorded in the disease
history. It may give rise also to associated continuants (a tumour,
a redness of the skin, . . .), which come into existence as a result
of the processes in question and depend for their continued existence on their further continuation [13]. The relevant disposition
or power can be instigated by a bodily aggressor such as a virus,
by biomolecular reactions that go wrong, or by processes called
upon by the body to defend itself against something that is going
wrong in the external environment in which the person lives.

We use the term disease in a sense both wider and narrower
than that which is customary in the medical literature. It is wider
because it comprehends relevant continuants (which may begin
to exist as disturbances on the molecular level of granularity)
even before they are detectable by any means available to human
beings. It is narrower because it refers exclusively to dispositional entities (powers) and thus not, for example, to neoplasms,
malformities and other pathological independent continuants
which are commonly classified as diseases in many terminolo-
gies. We thus reserve the term disease for the disposition itself,
which can evolve over time and undergo changes while preserving its identity. We use the term disorder to refer to anything
through which the disease is manifested. The latter does not
represent a single universal, since manifestations can be of very
different sorts, including not only continuants such as tumours
and fractures, but also processes such as tremors and coughing.

None of the latter examples are properly to be considered as
diseases.

5.3. Schizophrenia

For the execution of the IPAP Schizophrenia Algorithm, it
is mandatory that the patients disease be an instance of one or
other of the universals schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder.
We assumed thus far that such a determination has already been
made. Now however we need to point out that the way the entry
conditions are phrased in the algorithm as currently formulated
poses certain problems. When we examine more closely the
associated documentation on this topic, two important questions
arise.

The first is logical in nature: does the patients established
diagnosis need to satisfy the diagnostic criteria of both DSMIV and ICD-10, or is it sufficient that either one or the other
be satisfied? This question is important, since there is only a
partial concordance between the two, concrete figures for this
concordance ranging from 60% (depending on the subtype of
schizophrenia) to 83% [14]. Thus, it is possible that a patients
disease has to be classified as schizophrenia according to one
system, but that it is not allowed to be so classified by the other.
The second question is ontological in nature: to what extent do
the terms (schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder) used
by ICD-10 and DSM-IV represent one, or two, or no universals
at all on the side of biomedical reality? Here, too, the referent tracking idea might bring certain advantages. We first make
what seems to us to be a reasonable assumption to the effect
that, if a given body of patient records systematically includes
diagnoses of schizophrenia and/or of schizoaffective disorder,
then there is something to which these terms refer on the side of
the corresponding patients. Each such something can be given
a IUI, say #I-9001 for the schizophrenia diagnosed in John, and
included in a referent tracking database that is used in carrying
out a variety of different types of diagnostic tests. By analysing
the results of such tests, we may in the long run be led to the
conclusion that #I-9001 is in fact a compound of two or more
disease particulars (or, in the worst case, that it is an empty ID
designating no disease at all) [15]. In this way, in the course
of time, experience might prove that schizophrenia itself is a
term that has no referent, for example, because what had been
thought to be a single disease is in fact a compound of several
diseases hitherto not cleanly separatedin ways which might
then lead to modifications to the IPAP algorithm itself.

5.4. The notion of risk

It is a matter of debate whether or not we should accept the
existence of a particular called the patients risk or possibility of
committing suicide. Krimsky gives risk a metaphysical status
as a unitary property or quality in the physical world [16]. We
think this assumption calls for further research. One possibility is that suicide risk is something measurable that depends on
the person, similar to his height or body temperature. Another
would be that suicide risk is best analyzed as a property not of
one single person but rather of a collection of persons. After all,

a collection of persons is a particular in its own right. Suicide
risk might also be analogous, for example, to the risk of suffering from leptospirosis. The latter depends almost entirely on
the environment [17], and can be changed even though nothing changes in the persons themselves. This latter view places
suicide risk in the realm of what mathematicians call latent vari-
ables, which are defined as unobservable attributes that causally
influence observable behaviour and which are studied by statistically relating covariation between observed variables to the
latent variables through the analysis of interindividual differences [18].

5.5. Gender

A patients sex is one of the parameters determining suicide
risk and thus relevant in the context of the IPAP-SA. There are
several issues which arise when we attempt to work out what
sort of dependent entity (quality, attribute) is at issue here, not
least because there are different ways in which the term sex
is used in relevant clinical contexts, where the term can refer
alternately to phenotypic sex, genotypic sex, gonadal sex, or
administrative sex. Clearly, any particular person has at any time
only one determinable phenotypic sex. The same can be said for
gonadal sex. By determinable, we mean that, with the necessary
technical equipment and skills, it would be possible to determine
the exact sex of any given person. It can be what we traditionally
understand as male or female, or even mixed. Quite often, one can
find in patient databases the value unknown. Clearly, however,
this is not to be understood in the same way that we understand
male or female: it is very unlikely that for a person whose
sex has been entered as unknown one has taken all measures
to determine the relevant value and then came to the conclusion
that it is of a type never seen before. Rather, this entry reflects the
fact that one did not or could not determine the given persons
sex, or that, for whatever reason, the relevant checkbox has not
been filled in properly in the database. To include unknown as
a different type of sex, alongside male and female, reflects a
confusion between epistemology and ontology of a sort which
has been shown to be pervasive in the development of biomedical
terminologies [19].

A peculiar notion is that of administrative sex, whose appli-
cation, depending on the community in which it is defined, is
based not only on scientific grounds but also on political, ethical,
and even religious considerations. An example are the different
treatments of the right of gender self-identification, which can
make it possible that the same person has a different administrative sex in Australia and in the US [20]. Although Rector et
al. claim that administrative sex is definitely a thing [21], we
do not know what kind of thing it would be, though it is clear to
us that it enjoys a totally different ontological relationship with
the person who serves as its bearer than do biological types of
sex.

Finally, there exists also the notion of genotypic sex, for which
the situation may be more complex, for example, because of
mosaicisms in which not all the cells of the body of a person
exhibit the same chromosomal pattern [22]. From an ontological
perspective, there is no problem in describing such a situation by

W. Ceusters, B. Smith / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 229236

using an appropriate set of foundational relationships to describe
how chromosomes relate to cells, cells to a persons body, and
so forth [23]. However, what names we choose to assign to conditions with different distributions of mosaicism is a matter of
convention on the part of the scientific community.

5.6. Race

Also subject to political and ethical debate is the notion
of race, although being a white Caucasian has been shown to
increase a males risk for suicide [24], if not directly, than at
least by means of other observed differences within racial groups
such as differences in the degree to which children are emotionally neglected [25]. Although today nearly all geneticists reject
the idea that biological differences are tracked by racial and
ethnic distinctions, the sequencing of the human genome has
identified certain genetic variants associated with different frequencies of disease susceptibility, environmental response, and
drug metabolism in different ethnic and racial populations as
traditionally defined [26]. This does not constitute an argument
for the acceptance of race as a natural kind, or, for example,
to accept Caucasian human as a subtype of human in the same
sense that human is a subtype of mammal. But it does motivate the recognition of ethnic or racial subpopulations, though
of course marked by difficulties in identifying criteria that would
allow any particular human to be correctly assigned to one or
other of these populations.

5.7. Behaviour and functionings

The IPAP-SA uses at several points the terms behaviour and
functioning, referring to entities classified by BFO as aggregates of processes. A persons behaviour and (psychosocial)
functioning may of course exist independently of the knowledge
any observer might (or might not) have about the processes in
question. But problems are raised nonetheless by certain aspects
of our treatment of behaviour and functioning. A person can
behave between time t1 and t2 in exactly the same way as between
t3 and t4, yet his behaviour might be appropriate on the first occasion but not on the second. We take it that the term behaviour
is used when one seeks to describe what persons do in a way
that is neutral with respect to what persons are supposed to do
(i.e. out of any context in relation to which specific behaviour
might be qualified with respect to norms, for example, as appropriate or inappropriate, or as aggressive or manic). The use of
the term functioning, in contrast, presupposes that behaviour
is evaluated in light of some function to be exercised. Thus, to
talk of a persons psychosocial functioning presupposes that his
behaviour is being evaluated in light of the functions which need
to be realized if the person in question is to preserve his integrity
as member of a community. It is thus astonishing that so many
ontologies in the domain of healthcare and the life sciences do
not make this important difference between a function and the
execution thereof [27,28].

IPAPs use of the term behaviour to designate a (neutral)
aggregate of processes leads to a number of ontologically important questions. Is it, for instance, possible that a particular person

has several stretches of behaviour going on in parallel during
some given period of time? How, more generally, are we to
assign IUIs to particular stretches of behaviour, for example, if
behaviour of some given type ceases for a time and then reap-
pears? As mentioned earlier, precise answers to such questions
would not be important if the IPAP-SA were to be used in isola-
tion, i.e. as activated by one clinician sitting in front of a single
patient. But they are vital if we want to allow adequate automatic reasoning on the part of multi-agent monitoring systems
in which information about multiple particulars is collected for
subsequent use for a variety of purposes.

6. Conclusion

We presented a first analysis of the IPAP-SA from an ontological perspective, primarily in order to find the relevant particulars
and universals that must be represented in a multi-agent computer environment in order to allow for a new type of automatic
monitoring of schizophrenic patients that will enable optimisation of their pharmacotherapeutic management. At the same
time, we wanted to provide some insight into the important differences that exist between the various entities that go to make
the what it is on the side of the patient in virtue of which we are
able to ascribe properties such as being a person, being male,
being Caucasian, being at risk for suicide, and so forth. These
expressions encode relationships of different ontological types,
whose proper understanding is crucial to the building of ontologies that can be re-used in clinical algorithms and related tools.
Rather than discussing each particular and universal thus iden-
tified, we focused on those cases that are central to the idea of
referent tracking, or that are exemplary for the kind of confusion
that is often exhibited in biomedical ontologies.

Our analysis in terms of particulars and universals is however
only a first, though still important, step. A deeper ontological analysis would involve the axiomatisation, as a basis for
implementation of a system for automatic reasoning, of the foundational relations that tie the relevant entities together.

Under currently prevailing paradigms, developing software
programs that exhibit intelligent behaviour comes down to building a conceptual model (a simplified digital simulacrum of
some domain) that selects from the real-world relevant generic
features organised in a way suitable for the fulfilment of the
programs task. It is in this light that the term ontology is used
in the field of knowledge representation to refer to the specification of a conceptualisation [29] or to that part of a domain
model that excludes the instances, yet describes what they can
be [30]. To build an ontology along these lines, developers use
a representation language such as one or other flavor of OWL
that allows them to verify automatically whether their model is
internally consistent. Often, adepts of this approach consider it
to be irrelevant whether or not their model represents any reality
on the side of the patient, just so long as the program behaves
in the way it is supposed to behave. The problem is that models
built in this way cannot be used for purposes other than those for
which they were originally designed. Building such models is
a labour-intensive process, and indeed still the main bottleneck
in building knowledge-based systems [31]. The huge amounts

of energy expended on such models in biomedical informatics
thus far constitute, we believe, a mammoth waste of resources.
The realism-based approach to domain ontologies outlined
in this paper, in contrast, promises more stable and more
well-founded ontologies and thus offers better perspectives for
reusability of the data analysed in their terms. It does this by
providing an alternative to the strategy for ensuring reusability of ontologies adopted on the currently dominant paradigm,
where it is assumed that to make ontologies reusable they must
be mapped one with another. This can occur either off-line, by
having domain experts spend time finding the common elements
in the ontologies to be combined [32], or dynamically, e.g. by
having two agents, each equipped with his own model, interact
[33] in a process of ontology negotiation. However, we know of
no truly successful examples of either methodology having been
applied in practice. Indeed the belief (almost never questioned)
that they can be so applied rests on a prior assumption, which
we believe to be false, namely that there is an underlying common understanding, a basic agreement, for example, among all
relevant domain experts, concerning what the various terms in
an ontology mean [34]. For on what should such agreements
on meanings be based? What could serve, here, as benchmark?
Perhaps concepts can serve this purposewere it not for the
fact that this very term is itself used to mean such a wide variety of different things (including: units of knowledge, units
of thought, meanings of terms, and so forth), quite often in
such a way that it is very hard to understand which meaning is
precisely intended [35].

On the instance-based approach sketched in the above, in con-
trast, it becomes possible for ontologies to be reused by other
software programs, not least in order to support the kind of mixed
initiative interaction paradigm for multi-agent systems which we
referred to above, in virtue of the fact that all the agents involved
are able to keep track of the very same referents in an unproblematic way by appealing to the RTDB. The approach thereby
provides the best possible measure for whether two (or more)
ontologies are indeed compatible; for it allows the world itself
to serve as benchmark as concerns whether two universals in an
ontology are or are not identical, and it provides a clear strategy
for ensuring that ontologies are built which are reusable. Not the
least advantage of the referent tracking approach, therefore, is
that it rests not on agreements concerning the meanings of terms
or concerning associated concepts, but rather on the universals
and particulars that populate the world [36].

Acknowledgments

The present paper was written under the auspices of the Wolfgang Paul Program of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation,
the Network of Excellence in Semantic Interoperability and Data
Mining in Biomedicine of the European Union, and the project
Forms of Life sponsored by the Volkswagen Foundation.
