Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 8283

Editorial

Semantic GridThe convergence of technologies

The semantic web and agents are key technologies in the
development of a knowledge-intensive and intelligent service
web. They each provide perspectives on working with distributed systems, both from an information and computational
viewpoint. Meanwhile, grid computing has emerged as a key
approach to delivering distributed computing solutions. In
this special issue, we explore the relationships between these
ideas.

From its roots in high performance computing and distributed collaborations, the grid has evolved to be defined
in terms of coordinated resource sharing and problem solving in dynamic, multi-institutional virtual organisations. Grid
tools and technologies  such as the middleware for sharing
computation and data  are having significant impact in various fields of work including scientific research but also in
business. Meanwhile, the web is becoming a place where
data can be shared and processed by automated tools as
well as by people . . . tomorrows programs must be able to
share and process data even when these programs have been
designed totally independently (W3C Semantic Web Activity
Statement).

The synergy of ideas here is striking. It was this observation
that in 2001 led to the proposal of the semantic grid as a means to
achieve the vision of a high degree of easy-to-use and seamless
automation to facilitate flexible collaborations and computations
on a global scale, by means of machine-processable knowledge
both on and in the grid.

The semantic grid addresses the challenges in grid computing and applications by adding meaning (ontologies, annotations
and negotiation processes as studied in the Semantic Web and
Software Agent paradigms) to the grid. In this way, the semantic
grid not only provides a general semantic-based computational
network infrastructure, but a rich, seamless collection of intel-
ligent, knowledge-based services for enabling the management
and sharing of complex resources and reasoning mechanisms. In
the semantic grid knowledge and semantics are deployed explicitly for grid applications and for the development of innovative
grid infrastructures. This knowledge-oriented semantics-based
approach to the grid goes hand-in-hand with the exploitation of
techniques and methodologies from intelligent software agents

and web services representing various components of the virtual
organisations.

In the intervening years, this vision has been put into practice through a series of projects. Semantic web ideas, tools
and technologies have now been applied in grid applications
and middleware for over 3 years, and best practice is emerging as the first projects have now completed. The community
has met through workshops, most notably the Dagstuhl Seminar
05271 on semantic grid in July 2005, which brought together
leaders from both the grid and semantic web communities
and provides the backdrop for this special issue. More information on the seminar can be found at http://www.dagstuhl.
de/05271/.

Out of this work we are pleased to bring three papers, which
explore the intersections and together capture key advances and
challenges in the semantic grid field.

In On Agents and Grids: Creating the Fabric for a New
Generation of Distributed Intelligent Systems, Yolanda Gil
argues for a convergence of grid and agents and the benefits of cross-cutting research, articulating the benefits of grid
to the agents community and vice versa. The case is motivated by first hand experience of agent systems, scientific
workflow planning and execution in grids. The paper observes
that agent systems embody current AI research on distributed
intelligent systems but have drawn from distributed computing
in limited ways, while grids aim to develop similarly intelligent capabilities but from the bottom up, and have concentrated more on managing low-level resources than higher-level
tasks.

In S-OGSA: a Reference Semantic Grid Architecture,
Oscar Corcho and colleagues from the OntoGrid project provide a systematic approach to defining a core set of capabilities
and behaviours for grid systems. This is achieved by extending
the existing Open Grid Services Architecture (OGSA) to support
the explicit handling of semantics, and defining the associated
knowledge services to support a spectrum of service capabilities.
This work is an important contribution as it is the first reference
architecture for semantic grid.

In The Semantic Grid and Chemistry: Experiences with
CombeChem, Taylor and colleagues from the CombeChem

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2006 Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2006.03.004

e-Science project present their experience of building a Semantic
DataGrid in the chemistry domain, based on a strategy of capturing semantic annotations at source and establishing schema
and ontologies based closely on current operational practice in
order to facilitate implementation and adoption. The resulting
DataGrid contains 10s of millions of RDF triples across multiple
stores and represents a substantial semantic web deployment in
the grid context. This is significant as a grounded study, led by
practitioners in the application domain.

We are very grateful to all the authors and reviewers. We hope
you find these papers stimulating, and that they serve to motivate interest and further research, which cuts across disciplines
towards realising new research and new capabilities.


David De Roure

School of Electronics and Computer Science,
University of Southampton, England
E-mail address: dder@ecs.soton.ac.uk
(D. De Roure)
York Sure 1
Institut AIFB, Universit at Karlsruhe (TH), Germany


Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 23 8059 2418;
fax: +44 23 8059 3313.
E-mail address: sure@aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de
(Y. Sure)
