Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 222228

SWAN: A distributed knowledge infrastructure for

Alzheimer disease research

Yong Gao a, June Kinoshita b, Elizabeth Wu b, Eric Miller c, Ryan Lee c,

Andy Seaborne d, Steve Cayzer d, Tim Clark a,e,

a MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA

b Alzheimer Research Forum1, MA, USA

c Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

d Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, Bristol BS34 8QZ, UK

e Initiative in Innovative Computing, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

Received 15 November 2005; accepted 1 May 2006

Abstract

SWAN  a Semantic Web Application in Neuromedicine  is a project to develop an effective, integrated scientific knowledge infrastructure
for Alzheimer Disease (AD) researchers, enabled by Semantic Web technology and deployed on Alzforum (www.alzforum.org), a scientific
web community for AD research. This infrastructure may later be deployed for research communities in other neuromedical disorders. SWAN
incorporates the full biomedical research knowledge lifecycle in its ontological model, including support for personal data organization, hypothesis
generation, experimentation, lab data organization, and digital pre-publication collaboration. Community, laboratory, and personal digital resources
may all be organized and interconnected using SWANs common semantic framework.
 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Alzheimer disease; Biomedical research; Knowledge lifecycle; Ontology; Digital resource

1. Introduction

Neurodegenerative diseases are highly complex disorders.
Researchers over the past 20 years have made significant
progress in understanding Alzheimer disease and related neurological disorders. They have produced an abundance of data
implicating diverse biological mechanisms in the etiology of
such diseases. These include genes, environmental risk factors,
changes in cell functions, DNA damage, accumulation of misfolded proteins, cell death, immune responses, changes related
to aging, reduced regenerative capacity, and others. Yet there is
still no clear agreement on the etiology of AD. Citation analysis from the Alzheimer Research Forum estimates that there
are more than 40,000 citations in the PubMed database of relevance to neurodegenerative diseases, and 150200 new studies
are published each week.


Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 617 947 7098; fax: +1 617 724 1480.
E-mail address: tim clark@harvard.edu (T. Clark).

1 www.alzforum.org.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2006.05.006

The challenge of integrating so much data into testable
is clearly formidable.
hypotheses and unified concepts
Researchers must strive to formulate testable hypotheses built on
a corpus of research derived from multiple experimental modalities within many subfields of biomedicine and related areas, in
all of which it is impossible to be expert simultaneously. The
situations for Parkinsons, Huntingtons, and ALS researchers
are similar.

SWAN is an attempt

to develop a practical, common,
semantically-structured, web-compatible framework for scientific discourse using Semantic Web technology [13] applied to
the problems of integrating multimodal scientific discourse, in
the search for a cure for Alzheimer disease. The initial concept
for SWAN was proposed in a talk at the W3C Semantic Web in
Life Sciences workshop, October 2004 [4].

SWAN is intended to operate at the individual and community
levels, enabling a system of interoperable personal and community knowledge bases. Individuals will use SWAN software as
a personal tool to find, filter, and organize information. At the
community level, the same software and the same ontological
framework can be used to organize and curate the research of

a laboratory or an entire research community. Contextualized
elements of the personal KB can be shared with the community
at a low incremental cost. Community KB elements may also
be shared with individuals and re-used in new contexts.

SWAN provides semantic interoperability of digital resources
based on a common set of software and a common ontology
of scientific discourse. This ontology is specified in an RDF
Schema available on the web.2 SWANs content is intended to
cover not just published literature, but all stages of the truth
discovery process in biomedical research, from formulation of
questions and hypotheses, to capture of experimental data, sharing data with colleagues, and ultimately the full discovery and
publication process. This content is intended to be constructed
and deployed by individual scientists working to organize their
own data and knowledge, for their own benefit; in cooperation
with community editors who collect, organize, and redistribute
this knowledge.

The community members in SWAN, unlike those in a process
such as Wikipedia,3 are principally concerned with advancing
their own research program. The incremental effort required to
share knowledge from the team to the community will be relatively small, beyond that required in the standard publication
process for scientific literature. We believe this will result in the
creation of the highly facilitative knowledge-sharing networks
argued for by the leadership of neuroscience research institutes
at NIH [5].

2. The system-level use cases

The major SWAN system use cases are designed to be
implemented as part of the existing scientific knowledge
ecosystemwhich includes scientists, scientific discourse,
experiments, data, grant applications, publications, scientific
databases, bibliographic databases,
scientific ontologies,
biomedical research collaborations, and scientific web commu-
nities.

SWANs principal goal is to apply Semantic Web technology to this existing ecosystem in a way that can (a) enhance
the productivity of the ecosystem as a whole (b) benefit each
human constituency to ensure uptake and socialization (c) enable
websites, individual scientists, and scientific laboratories to participate in virtual collaborations.

Primary System Use Case: Specify and implement a common
semantic framework for scientific discourse across the knowledge ecosystem of science, compatible with the Web and with
current approaches to managing scientific information. In this
way, knowledge and discourse can be organized on a community website, a laboratory website, or a personal computer in
mutually interoperable schemas.

Three Supporting System Use Cases further specify the pri-

mary use case:

2 Available at http://purl.org/swan/0.1. The trailing slash is significant. Also,
depending upon how they deal with content types, some browsers may require
a view source operation to see the RDF.

3 Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia http://www.wikipedia.org.

 Organize and annotate digital scientific resources as integrated KBs across content types, using multiple ontologies.
 Securely share digital scientific resources including the
ontologies and annotation generated in Use Case 1, from individuals to diverse communities and back again.
 Provide integrated access to digital scientific resources for a
single scientist, a single community, or multiple communities,
as a distributed knowledgebase, organized by the structures
specified in Use Case 1.

3. Discussion

Biomedical researchers engage in certain typical patterns of
activity in keeping up with the literature, developing hypothe-
ses, planning research, applying for grants, analyzing data, and
preparing for publication. These activities are common to the
vast majority of researchers. They include:
 Searching, reading, and thinking critically about the profes-
 Formulating testable hypotheses consistent with the story
 Finding possible connections amongst disparate data, creating
a plausible explanatory story or model which can bridge
gaps or open challenges in the existing body of knowledge

sional literature in their field

or explanatory model

ing it to other findings or hypotheses

 Designing experiments to test their hypotheses
 Running the experiments
 Collecting and analyzing experimental data
 Interpreting data, e.g. by modifying the hypothesis, connect-
 Organizing personal collections of publications and related
documents according to a relevant conceptual system to
enable retrieval at a later date
 Applying for grants to support their work (which typically
involves presenting the model, hypotheses, and preliminary
data)
 Communicating with other researchers, funding agencies,
institutional
 Writing scientific articles for publication, preparing confer-

publishers, conference organizers, and local
management

ence presentations, informal talks, and poster sessions

Many of these activities are currently supported by public or
private information systems, ranging from Google to personal
Excel spreadsheets and personal bibliographic managers such
as EndNote. However, these tools all have their shortcomings
from the knowledge ecosystem view, because they lack semantic
constructs connecting the personal, community, and sciencewide realms of discourse. Because digital resources in these
spaces are largely organized using incompatible knowledge
schemas, contextual information in the knowledge ecosystem
is continually lost as it passes through human beings navigating
point-and-click interfaces.

A public ontology is required for scientific communication
it establishes the terms of discourse. Biologists have been
developing ontologies since at least the time of Aristotle.
Private ontologies, inherently modifiable without discussion,

Y. Gao et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 222228

Fig. 1. Conceptual model of scientific publication.

are also required to support active research, in which new
things and processes are constantly discovered, described, and
named.

Clearly it is essential to incorporate shared public concepts
and relationships into the organizational scheme, while also providing for personal differences or discoveries to be modeled and
declared. What we are after here, from the viewpoint of the
philosophy of science, is a formal way to represent potentially
incompatible scientific models, which does not also force them
to become incommensurable. To do this we require some public
bridging ontology. In SWAN this is an ontology of reasoning
and discourse.

Visser et al. discuss the problem of heterogeneous ontologies as barriers to system interoperability of varying severity [6]
and discuss approaches to allowing heterogenous ontologies to
communicate within a distributed system. This is essentially our
problem, and we adopt an approach largely consistent with two
of their proposed solutions (1) domain partitioning and (2) alternative domain views [7]. We will limit ontology mismatches to
what Visser and Cui call content heterogeneity across a core set
of structures.

Formally, SWAN adopts what Hausser calls the +construc-
tive response in ontological model theory: in our ontological
model, the model-structure is part of the speaker-hearer [8].
We recognize the act of cognition as seated in individuals practicing a scientific discipline in the material world... and make
it part of our semantics. A significant part of this discipline
is represented by scientific discourse. Hausser associates the
[+constructive] interpretation particularly with the goal of analyzing language meaning, as opposed to the [constructive]
response, whose goal is to characterize truth and which he
associates (exclusively) with science and mathematics. How-
ever, we do not make such a dichotomy. At least in biomedicine,
discourse is not restricted to absolute propositions in which the

author and context are either absent from the scene, or irrelevant
to validation.

The [+constructive] model is in many ways implicit in bibliographic databases. GenBank [9] long ago4 moved from a data
model in which a consensus sequence was maintained, as absolute truth, to a model accepting and publishing the varying
experimental results of each researcher. This model therefore
recognizes the speaker... but the hearer remains implicit. An
explicit treatment of the hearer allows a collaboration network
to be established.

Publication is a prominent part of the scientific discourse.
Our notion is to join it with the supporting reasoning and evidentiary data in a knowledge schema. A conceptual model
of knowledge acquisition and publication by an individual
scientist is shown in Fig. 1. Documents (or evidence), and
assertions upon documents, are fundamental objects in our
system. Document assertions connect
the discourse to its
foundations, and concern the document characteristics, prove-
nance, content, statements about the documents, categorization
of the documents, and relationships to other documents and
assertions.

We are not attempting to construct a formal computational
language of biology. What we are attempting in our ontology
is to increase the interoperability across various models specified in text, through establishing improved connections among
documents and assertions about them.

Fig. 2 is a conceptual sketch of the relationship of scientific
hypotheses, public and private ontologies, and documents. We
believe that a successful knowledge infrastructure needs to support these relationships with special emphasis on public, private,

4 Circa 1990, when GenBank was transferred from Los Alamos National Lab-

oratories to the NCBI, and re-engineered.

Fig. 2. Representation of hypotheses as metadata.

and shared knowledge definitions; and to support evolution and
transition between these states.

4. Socialization

Successful socialization of our system is the key to success,
because it is powered by individual scientists. In our view, socialization has the following three basic requirements:

1. Scientists can use the system to organize their own personal
data, gaining efficiency, and insight into their own processes
and project history.

2. A convergent public view of data is supported through pub-

lication of private views.

3. A researcher may combine what he/she knows, with what
the public view of data in our system provides, to discover
something surprising and new.

We have attempted to support all three elements in the design

of SWAN.

Currently, papers are generally published as one-dimensional
units, meaning there are little to no links or associated information besides the references cited. Yet there is a whole host of
information that is not transmitted with a paper. Some journals
provide useful links to additional support/supplemental mate-
rials, which cannot be included in the paper due to the word
limit imposed by the editor. These limits help the journal publish more papers per issue (i.e. more cost effective), but severely
limit the scientist trying to duplicate experiments by the lack of
information.

Some investigators provide their own website to post additional information. Other beneficial information may include
images, tables, data base links (e.g. AlzGene), website links

(e.g. Alzheimer Research Forum), collaborator information,
previously published and non-published data (this may be
a problem due to copyright issues), and detailed methods,
including specifics on reagents (which can be a non-trivial
issue).

This additional information would give the paper multiple
dimensions by embedding this associated information within
the paper (when opened electronically) and/or providing links
to other information that is too large to embed. This concept is
an expansion of the orange to green transition seen in the righthand portion of Fig. 1. Clearly, all the information under Private
knowledge space is not transmitted in the publication process
for many reasons, including the motivation and the ability to
collect this information in a standardized way. If a researcher
is collecting this additional information in a software program
during the building of a Private hypothesis (Fig. 1 top-half),
knowing that it will be used for their publication (bottom half),
then it will provide strong motivation for its use. Additionally, if
the data structure becomes a standard way to relay information
to other researchers, investigators will support its use (e.g. Word
or Excel documents).

Publishing is one of the major factors motivating researchers,
because it is closely tied to securing funding and promotion. Publications are a snapshot of an individuals thoughts and experi-
ments, and of the evolution of scientific thought as a whole. As
indicated in the bottom of Fig. 1, time is the X-axis. The process depicted here represents a unit of time (although variable)
which repeats itself over a scientists life manyfold. Often what
is lost in this process is how these units became connected and
any information that never made it to publication. This could
be due to lack of time, funding, technical problems, incorrect
hypothesis or lack of acceptance by the scientific community
for a certain line of reasoning. Much of this information is kept

Y. Gao et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 222228

Fig. 3. SWAN semantic relationships.

as Private knowledge cloistered in notebooks or the archives
of the brain.

Providing a platform to document ideas that succeeded (i.e.
published), failed or were never evaluated has a very significant
scientific value allowing current or future generations to extend,
avoid, or develop these ideas. Such a model could either have a
historical perspective built on years of accumulated knowledge
or may be a de novo idea based on a new observation.

An immediate example of this programs value could be seen
in a studentteacher relationship, in transmitting the teachers
view of a particular subject to a naive student. If the student
wants to understand this view it would useful if he or she was
able to see a model of this hypothesis containing all the information gathered together to support this idea. This project has
the potential to build a program that would allow the collection
of thoughts, data, and experiences over a lifetime, creating a
scientific life history. Most of this data will be collected in the
Private knowledge space, but is built on the Publication Model
described above.

A significant question is, when will one allow their private
world to become public? At a minimum, scientists would be
inclined to release this Private knowledge at the end of their
scientific careers. Nonetheless, without the effort to collect this
highly valuable knowledge it is doomed to be lost forever. Addi-
tionally, some of the payoff of the collection of this Private

knowledge would not always be immediate, but would be the
beginning of a knowledge base that would grow, benefiting
future generations. These two models are not mutually exclusive,
but in fact are intertwined because the Publication Model is
an element repeated over time giving a Scientific Life History.
The value of collecting this information cannot be underestimated and to our knowledge has not been done in a systematic
manner that would be searchable.

5. The SWAN pilot

The SWAN pilot project has three major components, which

are intended to work together as an integrated whole.
 SWAN ontology.
 Semantic Bank & faceted browser.
 SWAN Information Management Tool (SwIM).

The SWAN ontology permits knowledge content from multiple stages of the scientific discovery life-cycle to be represented
in the W3C Resource Description Framework (RDF), in a way
that can support electronic pre-publication group sharing and
collaboration, as well as personal and community knowledge
base construction. The current version of this early schema 11
(Clark, Gao et al. [10]) can be persistently referenced on the web

for re-use by other applications. Fig. 3 gives an example of how
the schema instantiates a Hypothesis with supporting Claims
and evidence, combining public (community) and private infor-
mation.

Several

information categories created and managed in
SWAN are defined as subclasses of Assertion. They include Pub-
lication, Hypothesis, Claim, Concept, Manuscript, DataSet, and
Annotation. An Assertion may be made upon any other Asser-
tion, or upon any object specifiable by URL. For example, a
scientist can make a Comment upon, or classify, the Hypothesis
of another scientist. What makes this something more than an
intellectual exercise is that linking to objects outside SWAN
by URL allows one to use SWAN as metadata to organize  for
example  all ones PDFs of publications, or the Excel files in
which ones laboratory data is stored, or all the websites of tools
relevant to Neuroscience.

Each Assertion has a set of information including the
speakerhearer pairing (owner and persons it may be shared
with); abstract; citations to other Assertions or miscellaneous
URIs. Depending upon the subclass it may include some or all
the citation information normally associated with a journal
article. It may also reference a content image, such as a PDF;
and an entry in a public bibliographic database. Citations to
other Assertions may be evidentiary, inclusive, or referencing.

Evidentiary Citations are used in asserting that some Assertion
is evidence supporting a Hypothesis, Claim, or other Assertion.
Inclusive Citations are used to specify the Assertions which
belong to a Collection. Referencing Citations are used wherever a reference to something is made for a purpose other than
those previously described.

Annotation may be structured or unstructured. Structured
annotation means attaching a Concept (tag or term) to an
Assertion. Unstructured annotation means attaching free
text. Assertions may be imported from Alzforum, Pubmed,
EndNote bibliographies previously exported in XML, RDF
N3 serialization, and from other SWAN-RDF stores, using
SwIM. Assertions may also be exported in RDF or in EndNotecompatible XML. SWAN Assertions may be organized by
placing them in a Collection.

SWAN uses a speakerhearer core ontological model. There-
fore, Persons and Groups need to be defined as sources and
targets of discourse for each Assertion. Groups are named collections of Persons. Persons are a subclass of Group containing
only a single Person.

Concepts are nodes in controlled vocabularies, which may
also be hierarchical (taxonomies). Concepts natively supported
include special Alzforum categories, MeSH terms, and Gene
Ontology 12 13 (Harris et al. [12]) categories. Genes and Pro-

Fig. 4. mySWAN browser snapshot.

Y. Gao et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 4 (2006) 222228

teins are considered Concepts in SWAN, as are Organism names.
Personal concepts may be added by the user.

A SWAN Collection is a set of Assertions. Typically a Collection might include publications, annotations, statements of
Hypotheses and supporting evidence, and so forth.

The Alzforum website may be extracted, transformed to
SWAN-RDF, and stored in a Semantic Bank repository. This
is an RDF knowledge base, which can be queried and displays
its contents in the browser. The current SWAN Semantic Bank
is a prototype of one way SWANs information can be published
on the web in a directly accessible and queryable form. This is
an extension of previous work at MIT on the Simile project [13].
A pilot version of the SWAN Information Management
(SwIM) Tool (Fig. 4) has been developed to allow hypotheses,
concepts, publications and other information to be annotated,
linked to fundamental documents, and organized by annotators
and/or individual scientists. These objects are stored in SWANRDF form in a personal or community semantic repository. This
tool is a simplified version of what will eventually be used by
scientists to manage their personal data, or by a laboratory or
community website to manage shared data.

SwIM allows knowledge elements (Assertions) from the individual repository to be constructed; linked to existing digital
resources such as Excel files and PDFs; organized; and shared
to the community space, with specific collaboratorsor kept
private.

SwIM attempts to provide a pragmatic knowledge modeling
capability to scientists, based on observations and discussion of
how they actually do their work and what would be useful. For
example, other more elaborate and elegant approaches have been
developed to modeling scientific claim [14]. Our approach limits
the models complexity to what we feel can be of immediate
benefit to a working scientist in preparing a grant application or
writing a paper.

SwIM permits linking any Assertion to an arbitrary URL as
the underlying object the assertion is made upon. This means
for example that a concept map can be constructed of useful
Websites (WebPage is a class in the SWAN vocabulary) and
published as RDF metadatawhich can itself be stored in a
Semantic Bank and viewed through a browser as a resource
ontology.

6. Conclusion

The primary goals of SWAN are to provide an improved
structure for public discourse between laboratories, to enable
surprise connections between groups working (possibly
unknowingly) on related matters, to synthesize scientific results
across the AD community, and to enable a better organizational
memory within individual laboratories.

We are not building an informatics model of biology. Such
an effort would lag perpetually behind the science. It could be of
little use to specialists because cutting-edge research  at least in

biomedicine  tends to produce controversy before it produces
a single accepted model.

What we are after is to build an extensible model of digital
resources in the process biologists themselves follow, through
which they endeavor to construct accurate models of biological
phenomena. We will then use this model to create tools biologists
can use to accelerate the process of discovering new knowledge,
by removing barriers to effective discourse and increasing the
interconnectedness of new discoveries.

Acknowledgements

We thank Dean Hartley, Brad Hyman, Zane Hollingsworth,
Marian DiFiglia, Lars Hernquist, Dora Kovac, David Grossman,
Sean Martin, Ralph Swick, Sherrilynne Fuller, Jim Hendler, and
Carol Goble, for thoughtful discussion, constructive criticism,
and moral support. We are also grateful for the support of the Ellison Medical Foundation, which funded portions of this research.
