Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 11 (2012) 6371

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : h t t p : / / w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Challenges for the multilingual Web of Data
Jorge Gracia a,
John McCrae b
a Ontology Engineering Group, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Campus de Montegacedo s/n, Boadilla del Monte 28660, Madrid, Spain
b Semantic Computing Group, CITEC, University of Bielefeld, Universitatsstrae 25, D-33615 Bielefeld, Germany
c Unit for Natural Language Processing, DERI, National University of Ireland, Galway, IDA Business Park, Lower Dangan, Galway, Ireland

, Elena Montiel-Ponsoda a, Philipp Cimiano b, Asuncion Gomez-Perez a, Paul Buitelaar c,

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 24 July 2010
Received in revised form 31 August 2011
Accepted 1 September 2011
Available online 14 September 2011

Keywords:
Multilingualism
Web of Data
Linked Data

The Web has witnessed an enormous growth in the amount of semantic information published in recent
years. This growth has been stimulated to a large extent by the emergence of Linked Data. Although this
brings us a big step closer to the vision of a Semantic Web, it also raises new issues such as the need for
dealing with information expressed in different natural languages. Indeed, although the Web of Data can
contain any kind of information in any language, it still lacks explicit mechanisms to automatically reconcile such information when it is expressed in different languages. This leads to situations in which data
expressed in a certain language is not easily accessible to speakers of other languages.

The Web of Data shows the potential for being extended to a truly multilingual web as vocabularies and
data can be published in a language-independent fashion, while associated language-dependent (linguis-
tic) information supporting the access across languages can be stored separately. In this sense, the multilingual Web of Data can be realized in our view as a layer of services and resources on top of the existing
Linked Data infrastructure adding (i) linguistic information for data and vocabularies in different lan-
guages, (ii) mappings between data with labels in different languages, and (iii) services to dynamically
access and traverse Linked Data across different languages.

In this article, we present this vision of a multilingual Web of Data. We discuss challenges that need to
be addressed to make this vision come true and discuss the role that techniques such as ontology local-
ization, ontology mapping, and cross-lingual ontology-based information access and presentation will
play in achieving this. Further, we propose an initial architecture and describe a roadmap that can provide a basis for the implementation of this vision.

O 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Tim Berners-Lee envisioned the Semantic Web as an extension
of the current Web in which information is given well-defined mean-
ing, better enabling computers and people to work in cooperation [2].
Since then, the Web has witnessed an enormous growth in the
amount of semantic information published in recent years, which
has been stimulated to a large extent by the emergence of the
Linked Data initiative [3,4]. Linked Data is a term referring to the
recommended best practices for exposing, sharing, and connecting
RDF [23] data via de-referenceable URIs on the Semantic Web. The
crucial idea behind Linked Data is to connect data using Semantic
Web techniques and building on current Web infrastructure, thus
transforming the Web into a global database in which resources

 Corresponding author.

are linked across sites and where facts and related knowledge are
available for consumption by advanced, knowledge-based web
applications. In the rest of this paper we will use the term Web
of Data exactly in this way. Linked Data has found a wide acceptance among governments,1 media companies, and academia all
over the world [20,3,25]. These early adopters have clearly identified
the potential benefits of publishing data in Linked Data format and
are publishing their data sources following the Linked Data princi-
ples. The so called Linking Open Data (LOD) initiative2 has further
stimulated the emergence and adoption of the Linked Data principles in the construction of a web of linked open data.

Now that massive amounts of semantic data are becoming
available on the Web, the question emerges how end users should
access and interact with this wealth of data. As language is the
most important means by which humans communicate, it is rea-

E-mail addresses: jgracia@fi.upm.es (J. Gracia), emontiel@fi.upm.es (E. Montiel-
Ponsoda), cimiano@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de (P. Cimiano), asun@fi.upm.es (A. Gomez-
Perez), paul.buitelaar@deri.org (P. Buitelaar),
jmccrae@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de (J.
McCrae).

1 See for example http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/psi/index_en.htm

for a European initiative or http://www.data.gov/ for a US based one.

2 http://esw.w3.org/SweoIG/TaskForces/CommunityProjects/LinkingOpenData

1570-8268/$ - see front matter O 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2011.09.001

J. Gracia et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 11 (2012) 6371

sonable to assume that users would find a language-mediated way
of accessing the Web of Data intuitive, appealing and effortless. In
fact, the traditional Web is language-specific and information can
only be accessed across languages if web sites are translated into
the corresponding languages. In contrast, the Semantic Web can
be assumed to be inherently language-independent, which means
that information is given well-defined meaning by formally defining vocabularies or ontologies, building on Semantic Web languages such as OWL [1] or RDF [23]. In this sense, we argue that
the Web of Data and hence the Semantic Web offer a great opportunity to make web information broadly accessible, independent of
culture and native language. The main challenge involved in building this Multilingual Semantic Web is, however, to bridge the
gap between language-specific information needs of users and lan-
guage-independent semantic content.

In spite of the fact that much of the information available as
Linked Data is by its nature language-independent, many resources
also include linguistic information in the form of RDF(S) or SKOS
[26] labels (rdfs:label, skos:prefLabel, etc.) which documents how
a resource is named in multiple languages. Furthermore, by the
use of standards such as the IETF language tags (RFC 5646), which
builds on the ISO standard for representing language, script and region (ISO-639, 15924 and 3166 respectively), a general standard
for the representation of labels in different languages, dialects,
and writing systems has already been established. We also note
here that some resources have linguistic information encoded
within the label itself (generally, within the URIs fragment identi-
fier). Furthermore, internationalized resource identifiers (IRI) were
introduced by RFC 3987 to allow for non-ASCII characters to be included within these identifiers. However, although IRIs allow for
constructing more human readable identifiers, they are not intended to represent complex linguistic information. We refer to
[28] for an in-depth discussion on the use of local names and labels
to describe resources in several natural languages.

Nowadays, most of the ontologies used in the Semantic Web as
well as most of the data published according to the Linked Data
principles have labels expressed in English3 only, leading to an English bias in the Semantic Web which does not mirror the actual language distribution in the Web. It is likely that this situation will
change as soon as more language communities start publishing their
data in the Linked Data format. Indeed, our hypothesis is that this
will be a growing trend shortly. At present, there are already many
non-English Linked Data sources, e.g., Dogmazic,4 a French vocabulary of Creative Commons music, GeoLinkedData.es,5 an open initiative to publish Spanish geospatial data in Linked Data (in Spanish,
Catalan, and Galician, among other languages), as well as many other
governmental
initiatives originating from European Commission
directives with the goal of making data of public interest available
in an open fashion. Therefore, once monolingual resources in other
languages are transformed into the Linked Data format, non-English
monolingual Linked Data will increase in size over the years, creating
islands of monolingual data. This will render the task of providing
cross-language access to Linked Data even more challenging. These
islands of monolingual Linked Data will result in situations in
which access is restricted to speakers of the right language. It is
our standpoint that knowledge access which is restricted to speakers
of certain languages does not match the open spirit of the Web of
Data where most of the information is open and therefore accessible
to anybody in principle. Thus, in this paper, we propose an infrastructure that has the potential of creating a level playing field offer-

3 E.g., Around 80% of ontology literals (with declared language) indexed in Watson
are in English. See http://watson.kmi.open.ac.uk/blog/2007/11/20/
1195580640000.html

4 http://www.dogmazic.net/
5 http://geo.linkeddata.es/

ing equal opportunities for speakers of different languages when
accessing web data.

In this article, we pose ourselves several simple questions: How
can universal access to the Web of Data be guaranteed to users,
independent of the language they speak? How can the retrieval
of Linked Data be supported if that data is distributed across
unconnected monolingual data sources? With these questions in
mind, one of the major challenges in future Semantic Web research
will be to make sure that no matter in which language ontology
terms are expressed, nor in which language the relevant data is
published as Linked Data, cross-lingual access to knowledge and
data has to be supported. Since the Web of Data is now becoming
a reality, and the trend to transform databases into the Linked Data
format is acquiring momentum, we need to be ready to manage
multilingual access to ontologies and data. The main contribution
of this paper is to identify and analyze such challenges as well as
to propose a set of specific strategies in order to address them.

The remainder of the article is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we present a motivating scenario and raise some specific research
questions. Section 3 presents a proposal for architecture of services
that might enable us to make the vision of a multilingual Web of
Data true. A discussion on the different challenges involved in
the creation of a multilingual Web of Data is presented in Section
4 and a roadmap of the tasks ahead is proposed in Section 5. Final-
ly, conclusions are presented in Section 6.

2. Motivating scenario

The Web has already transformed the way in which societies
communicate, work, interact or even spend free time. We believe
that it is time for the Semantic Web community to tackle the challenge of turning the Web into a multilingual Web of Data. In the
following we will illustrate by means of a simple, hypothetical 
but in our view realistic  example the different challenges that
have to be addressed to realize this vision.

Let us imagine a Spanish tourist without a good command of
German who is travelling in Germany. He realizes that he forgot
his medication at home. He only remembers its commercial name
in Spain (Beglan, a medicine to treat asthma) but not its active
ingredients. He would like to find out about pharmacies or medical
centers near his hotel in which the drug is available and which remain open until late. A potential query the user would have in
mind could be: dame farmacias cercanas abiertas por la tarde y
que dispongan de Beglan o alguna medicina equivalente (in English:
give me nearby chemists that are open in the evening and have Beglan or an equivalent medicine in stock).

The main difficulty in answering the query is the fact that: all
information about Beglan will be available on Spanish sites, which
will not contain any information about where the Spanish tourist
will be able to find an equivalent drug in Germany close to his ho-
tel. Secondly, German sites will contain the information about
opening hours and available stock of pharmacies close to his hotel,
but no information about Beglan. A suitable answer to this query
can be found if either (i) the German equivalent of Beglan is known
somewhere on the Web (e.g., as a mapping between the URIs representing the two drugs) or (ii) the German equivalents of the active ingredients contained in Beglan are known, such that a
medicine with the same substances can be found.

In the multilingual Semantic Web that we envision, our tourist
would query the Web of Data in his/her own language, i.e., Spanish,
and would get the relevant data in that language due to the fact
that the Linked Data cloud would be equipped with mechanisms
for cross-language querying as well as presentation of results in
any language. In particular,
in our vision of the Multilingual
Semantic Web, such mappings would be part of the Web of Data,

linking islands of monolingual Linked Data together. Notice that
the user in our example does not need to be aware of these semantic mechanisms acting behind the scenes.

This scenario raises several specific research questions related
to the wider use of Linked Data. One area concerns the need to
bridge the gap between the users information needs and Linked
Data from a multilingual perspective:

(1) How can a user pose questions in his/her own language to be
processed against the web of Linked Data? In our example,
Spanish keywords such as medicina (Spanish word for
medicine) or farmacias (chemists) have to be mapped to
appropriate vocabulary elements independently of the language of the query, such that the intended meaning of the
query can be formalized and transformed into an adequate
SPARQL query, for instance. Research on multilingual question answering and multilingual semantic query construction will help to accomplish precisely this.

(2) How can Linked Data be delivered to ontology-based applications localized to different languages? In particular, given a
semantic query expressed in some ontological vocabulary,
how can we find relevant resources from the Linked Data
cloud that might not be expressed using the same vocabu-
lary? In the example, imagine we deal with a semantic query
on a Spanish vocabulary which asks for a list of medicines.
Relevant data in German might be available but not directly
linked to that Spanish ontology. Techniques to discover such
data and establish cross-lingual links are needed to deliver
data from sources in different languages.

(3) How should the results of a semantic query be adapted to the linguistic and cultural background of a user? In our example, German data has to be translated back and verbalized into
Spanish. More complex situations are also possible, such as
languages using different literal representation (e.g., Chinese
vs. German) or displaying rules (i.e., right-left vs. left-right).
This will require the adaptation and localization of user
interfaces and presentation views to a specific linguistic
and cultural context.

The above mentioned questions are mainly concerned with user
interaction. In order to support such an interaction which crosses
language boundaries, a Linked Data web where resources are
linked across languages is required as a basis. Important questions
which arise in this context are the following:

(1) How can we adapt and translate the lexical/terminological layer
of an existent ontology into other languages? In order to
expand the multilingual coverage of existing ontologies (to
allow traversing and querying them no matter what language they are in), ontology translation and localization
techniques have to be developed.

(2) Which approaches are suited to discover correspondences
between ontologies expressed in different languages? Similarly,
how can we align Linked Data across different natural lan-
guages? This will involve ontology alignment techniques
extended to deal with multiple languages (also required
for research question 2). Let us imagine that in our example
we do not find a direct equivalence of Beglan with other
medicines in Germany, but we discover its properties in a
certain semantic dataset (e.g., its active ingredient is salme-
terol, it is delivered as an inhalator, etc.). Based on the comparison of
its properties, semantic mappings can be
established with other datasets in German, thus supporting
the discovery of the fact that Aeromax and Serevent are the
German equivalents of Beglan because they share the same
properties (active ingredients, via of administration, etc.).

(3) How to represent multilingual Linked Data? We understand
multilingual Linked Data as a set of resources in the Web
of Data with associated linguistic information in several lan-
guages. Methods to represent and store multilingual Linked
Data have to be devised. Current semantic standards offer
ways of supporting this (e.g., rdfs:label) which might be
enough for a great number of use cases. Nevertheless, richer
models will be needed for supporting more demanding
applications (e.g., information extraction from multilingual
sources, verbalization methods, etc.) which can benefit from
additional linguistic information such as lexical variation,
part-of-speech, corpus provenance, etc.

(4) How to generate multilingual Linked Data? There is ongoing
work on the creation of Linked Data from relational databases and other forms of data silos. Such methods have
to be enriched to enable the generation of cross-lingual
links, as well as the storage of multilingual lexical information in the representation models mentioned above.

The solutions to these research questions will contribute to
realizing a Web of Data with advanced multilingual capabilities.
In the remainder of the paper we analyse such open issues and
identify a set of specific techniques that support the creation of a
multilingual Web of Data.

3. A web of multilingual Linked Data

In Section 2 we have identified the principal issues that arise in
dealing with multiple languages in the context of Linked Data, formulated in terms of research questions. In this section we reflect
on these further and propose an architecture that has the potential
to support the scenarios that we envision.

it still

language,

Although the Web of Data inherently supports multiple languages in the sense that it can represent any kind of data independent of any specific natural
lacks explicit
mechanisms to automatically exploit and reconcile such data in order to support access in any natural language. We understand the
multilingual Web of Data as the current cloud of Linked Data enriched with a layer of services and resources that support and enhance the multilingual capabilities of the Web of Data with: (i)
linguistic information for different natural languages to be used
in rendering the information contained in Linked Data sources,
(ii) mappings across Linked Data regardless of the language in
which the data has been originally expressed, and (iii) services to
dynamically access and traverse Linked Data across languages.

In our view, the multilingual Web of Data will not be a new
piece of Web infrastructure but will consist of services and models
built on top of the current Web and Linked Data infrastructure. A
possible architecture that instantiates this view will be discussed
in the following paragraphs.

First of all, we identify some generic requirements for this

architecture:

 The core of the architecture is the Linked Data cloud. This
means in particular that publishing of and access to multilingual information on the Web of Data has to follow the Linked
Data principles.

 The data remains untouched in the original Linked Data sources,
while a further layer is added to account for linguistic, i.e., multilingual specification.

 The architecture will be arranged in two dimensions: (i) multilingual information and (ii) multilingual services, as will be
explained in more detail below.

Fig. 1 gives an overview of a possible architecture that fulfils
the above requirements. The cloud of Linked Data is represented

J. Gracia et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 11 (2012) 6371

in the center of the figure. The cloud is enriched with a layer of
multilingual information (multilingual mappings and multilingual
linguistic information) and with a set of services for creating, representing and accessing that multilingual information. On the
bottom of the figure we represent a set of data silos that could
be exported as Linked Data. These data silos can be monolingual
or multilingual. Services for generating multilingual Linked Data
are needed to transform these data silos into multilingual Linked
Data. In addition, services are needed for the cross-lingual discovery and representation of mappings between Linked Data vocabularies and datasets expressed in different natural languages, as
depicted on the right-hand side of the figure. Such cross-lingual
linkage services are supported by localization services which
translate or localize the vocabularies or ontologies used in the
Linked Data cloud into several natural languages. A set of models
to represent information about linguistic realization of vocabulary
elements in different languages will also be needed to support
more complex multilingual natural language processing applica-
tions. On top of the figure we represent the layer of cross-lingual
access services that give the user access to the multilingual Web
of Data. The following paragraphs explore this in some more
detail.

3.1. Multilingual Information

In our proposed architecture, a multilingual Web of Data has to

be supported by:

(a) Multilingual

linguistic information. For instance,

linguistic information for generating and/or
interpreting the multilingual realization of semantic definitions in Web ontologies and Linked Data. This includes
labels in multiple languages and can be enriched with
additional
imagine
that Beglan is defined in an ontology; the simplest way
information in English might
of representing its lexical
be stating that onto:Beglan rdfs:label
Beglan@es. Richer
lexical
that
Beglan is a proper noun, thus favouring smarter translation and verbalization strategies. This is of course beyond
the expressivity of rdfs:label and will require additional
modeling methods.

representations would allow indicating

(b) Multilingual mappings between Web ontologies/vocabularies
that establish cross-lingual connections, as well as between
Linked Data sets that use different languages in their lexical
representation. Notice that these cross-lingual
links can
have associated linguistic information in several languages
(so, in the most general case, we call them multilingual map-
pings).
In particular, this information layer can contain
semantic relationships between terms from ontologies in
different languages (e.g., stating that onto 1: Beglan is equivalent to onto 2: Aeromax) or translations between lexical
entries of ontology terms (e.g., Medikament@de is the German translation for medicina@es).

Possible ways of representing this multilingual information are

further discussed in Section 4.

3.2. Multilingual services

The following set of services will support the creation of a multilingual network of Linked Data and its exploitation in order to
provide access across languages:

(1) Services for generating multilingual Linked Data. Publishing
services are required to guide and support the creation of
multilingual Linked Data on the basis of monolingual or
multilingual databases. These services require cross-lingual
linking services to operate and produce as output new
Linked Data enriched with multilingual mappings and associated linguistic information. Typically, these processes will
be run off-line and might involve user supervision. Generation services can also benefit from ontology localization
techniques that will be used to create multilingual vocabularies and datasets from monolingual ones.

(2) Services for translation and ontology localization. They will
allow an automatic translation of the vocabularies and ontologies used in the Linked Data cloud. These services will have
to rely on models to represent multilingual linguistic information associated to vocabularies and ontologies (and
potentially also to datasets) in the cloud. Localization services can serve as means for supporting the cross-lingual
linking of vocabularies and datasets in the Linked Data cloud.

Fig. 1. Architecture of a multilingual Web of Data, composed of multilingual and cross-lingual services and multilingual information around the cloud of Linked Data.

(3) Services for cross-lingual linkage. A family of services has to be
developed for discovering cross-lingual mappings (i.e., relationships between ontology terms or
semantic data
expressed in different languages) and multilingual mappings
(i.e., cross-lingual mappings that can be multilingual them-
selves). This includes the development of ontology mapping
techniques that can align vocabularies in different languages
as well as techniques to link datasets in different languages.
These services will allow for cross-lingual mapping to be discovered off-line. However, we also foresee the case in which
translation and localization services are dynamically
accessed, and cross-lingual mappings are computed on the
fly, pre-populating the required multilingual infrastructure
(multilingual mappings and linguistic annotations) to be
associated with Linked Data (similarly to the periodical
updating of DBpedia).

(4) Services for cross-lingual access, supporting the access of the
cloud of Linked Data independently of the natural language
used. This family of services will include techniques for
semantic query generation, question answering, query fed-
eration, visualization methods, etc. They will operate typi-
cally
and
responding to cross-lingual queries on the Linked Data. As
a side effect, this will also incrementally populate the multilingual infrastructure (multilingual mappings and linguistic
annotations), which will be made persistent and stored for
future reuse.

dynamically

processing

at

run-time

by

While we have emphasized the need for (semi-) automatic ap-
proaches, it is desirable to create strong incentives so that people
feel motivated to participate in the endeavour of creating a multilingual Web of Data by manually defining mappings, publishing
lexica for their favourite ontologies in their language, verifying
the quality of translations, etc. Participation of users forms part
of the success story of the Web. People in fact do not only contribute content to the Web in the form of websites, they also create
links between pages, contribute questions and answers on blogs
and forums, upload videos and images, etc. People are thus willing
to contribute to the Web with their own resources. A big challenge
for the multilingual Web of Data as sketched in this article is to create appropriate incentives for people to devote resources and to
contribute to this endeavour as well.

Besides creating new multilingual resources compliant with the
Linked Data principles, it seems obvious that already existing ones
can also play a principal role. This is the case for EuroWordNet6 or
the various WordNets that have been created in different natural
languages in subsequent projects (GlobalWordNet,7 Meaning,8
BalkaNet, etc.), and which have been linked to the so-called InterLingual Index, a set of common concepts initially obtained from the
Princeton WordNet. Since WordNet is one of the resources that have
been included in the Linked Data cloud from early on, it is not unreasonable to think that the rest of WordNets will follow the same
transformation process. Such a multilingual resource could be used
with two purposes: (1) as a multilingual dataset that can be accessed
in different languages in the Linked Data cloud, and (2) as a multilingual lexical resource that can be reused within the Linked Data cloud
to enrich available datasets with lexical information, or even to help
in the process of establishing mappings between multilingual datasets in the cloud. However, WordNet contains mainly domain-inde-
pendent concepts and does not cover lexical information on specific
domains of knowledge. Hence, other models are required to directly
enrich datasets in the cloud, unless specific WordNets containing

domain lexical elements are created and linked to datasets in the
cloud. Since domain specific WordNets are already available for
some domains (see KYOTO project9), this approach could be adopted
for Linked Data. The question would then be if the lexical-semantic
information captured in WordNets would suffice, or if further models of linguistic and terminological descriptions should be devised to
enrich the semantics captured in the Linked Data cloud.

4. Challenges

In order to make the vision of multilingual Linked Data come
true, the specific research questions introduced in Section 2 have
to be addressed. These questions provide a natural roadmap for
the development of a multilingual Web of Data. The issues that
these questions raise rely upon four core challenges, namely:
ontology localization, multilingual mappings, representation of
multilingual Linked Data, and cross-lingual access to the Web of
Data.

4.1. Ontology localization

Inspired by software localization [12], ontology localization
[10,13,36] has been defined as the process of adapting an ontology
to the needs of a particular (linguistic and cultural) community. In
this context, some techniques have been developed with the main
goal of translating the terminological layer of the ontology, so that
it can be reused in multiple linguistic (and cultural) scenarios (see
[14,15]). A localized ontology can be understood as an ontology
adapted to the target community and language, that is used independently from the original ontology. In this case, localization
would be understood in line with the localization of software prod-
ucts, in which one or more monolingual ontologies are obtained as
end product. However, it can also be understood as an ontology in
which its terminological layer has been translated to one or several
target languages, and in which the different linguistic versions
interoperate, resulting in a multilingual ontology. As has been
identified in [10,13], the translation of the terminological description of ontologies may not always suffice to make the ontology
reusable in different linguistic and cultural scenarios. This fact is
mainly related to the domain represented by the ontology, whose
conceptualization may not always be compliant with the needs of
the target community. In this case, modifications or adaptations of
the conceptualization would be needed, although this will not be
further dealt with in this paper. Some ontology localization tools
already exist, such as LabelTranslator [14,15]. In its current version,
this system uses a translation service that obtains automatic translations for each ontology label by consulting a number of linguistic
resources, such as multilingual lexica (EuroWordNet), multilingual
terminologies (IATE,10 a multilingual term base of the EU), and
translation services (Babelfish,11 GoogleTranslate12). Then, candidate
translations are disambiguated according to the ontological context.
The translations obtained for the different ontology elements are
then stored in an external model that associates a set of linguistic
descriptions in several natural
languages to ontology elements,
resulting in a multilingual ontology. The Protege plugin OntoLing
[3032] instead provides an environment for manual enrichment
of ontology classes with linguistic information stored in a set of
dictionaries that can be accessed from the plug-in API.

In order to support the full automatic localization of vocabularies and ontologies, more research is needed in the area of ontology
localization so that the accuracy of current approaches can be

6 http://www.illc.uva.nl/EuroWordNet/
7 http://www.globalwordnet.org/
8 http://adimen.si.ehu.es/wei4/doc/mcr/meaning.html

9 http://www.kyoto-project.eu/
10 http://iate.europa.eu
11 http://babelfish.yahoo.com/
12 http://translate.google.com/

J. Gracia et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 11 (2012) 6371

increased. Further, techniques will have to reduce the cost of localizing in order to be usable at Web scale. Furthermore, localization
tools have to be user-friendly and integrated into standard work
practices.13

4.2. Cross-lingual mappings

There are three levels at which relationships between ontology
terms or semantic data with labels in different languages can be
established:

(1) Conceptual level: At this level, concepts from different ontologies described in different languages can be semantically
related by using ontology constructs, either to represent
taxonomical relations (i.e., owl:equivalentClass, rdfs:subClas-
sOf, etc.) or domain dependent relations (i.e., ontology properties coming from other ontologies). We call
them
conceptual cross-lingual mappings. Such links permit to establish a correspondence between or among concepts included
in different ontologies, and which are described in the same
or in a different language. Consider for example an ontology
of the hydrographical domain and in particular the relation
between the concept watercourse in an ontology documented in English and cours deau in an ontology documented in French. Both labels are referring to the same
concept, but they are expressed in different natural lan-
guages. We could also make use of the rdfs:subClassOf relation if an ontology documented in a different or the same
language would contain a world phenomenon described
with a higher granularity level. Let us take the case of the
concepts fleuve and riviere in the same ontology of the
hydrographical domain in French. Fleuves are rivers that
flow into the sea, whereas rivieres can be defined as rivers
that flow into the sea or into another stream. Both lexicalized concepts in French do not have an exact equivalence
or direct correspondence in English, but its closest concept
is described by river in English, which subsumes both con-
cepts. This has been illustrated in Fig. 2.

(2) Instance level: At this level, links are established between
individuals instead of between their associated concepts.
Thus, we call them instance cross-lingual mappings. At this
level also ontological constructs such as owl:sameAs can be
used to represents the cross-lingual mappings. For example
we can state that Spain in the English dataset GeoNames14
is the same as Espana in the Spanish dataset GeoLinkedDa-
ta15. Other types of relations can be used instead when appro-
priate,
for example to state that geolinkeddata:Madrid
isCapitalOf geonames:Spain. This relation can be multilingual
itself, thus corresponding to the notion of multilingual mapping introduced above. For instance the property isCapitalOf
can be associated to labels is capital of@en and es capital
de@es.

(or

instances)

(3) Linguistic level: Here the links would not be established
between the concepts
themselves but
between their associated linguistic information. We call
them linguistic cross-lingual mappings. This sort of mappings
can be very useful when keeping uncoupled the conceptual
and linguistic information is a major requirement. In order
to allow two ontologies to interoperate at the linguistic
level, mappings would be established between the linguistic
descriptions of their concepts, which are not necessarily

exact equivalents but the closest correspondences between
culture-specific concepts. In this case, no semantic relation
is established between the concepts as in the cases described
above. In the simplest case, a property labeled translation
or cultural equivalent (for instance) might be established
between the lexical realizations of the concepts.

Fig. 3 shows a possible solution for level 3 in which the linguistic relations are mediated by external lexical information. We call
senses the relations established between concepts and their lexical-
izations. This link restricts the meaning of lexical entries (e.g., riv-
er) in the specific context of the ontology, thus providing
disambiguation among the potential senses. In this way, concepts
in the ontology point to lexical entries in monolingual lexicons.
Translations can be inferred between lexical entries in the different
monolingual lexicons. The main advantage of such an approach is
that the relations between labels in different languages can be
made explicit at the sense level, which would be in charge of dealing with inter-cultural and inter-linguistic disparities.

Regarding the way cross-lingual ontology mappings (levels 1
and 2) can be represented, we consider current Semantic Web languages and ontology matching formats rich enough to support this.
Indeed, cross-lingual ontology mappings can be considered a subcase of ontology mappings. On the other hand, representation of
cross-lingual linguistic mappings (level 3) would need a more careful study involving ontologies describing translations16 and definition of online lexica based on Semantic Web principles [24].

Besides representing cross-lingual mappings, another major issue is how to discover them. While many approaches to the automatic identification of mappings are available (so called ontology
alignment or matching [16]), there are not many approaches that
identify such mappings between ontologies with labels in different
languages. Ontology matching approaches have to be extended to
be able to discover matches between vocabularies in different lan-
guages. It seems plausible to assume that current techniques can
be extended to support multiple languages without requiring the
development of radically different approaches. In fact, most of
the extant current ontology matching systems rely to some extent
on comparisons based on lexical information and could be extended by allowing for cross-language comparisons by either integrating machine translation systems (compare [17,39,35]) or
multilingual lexical resources. Other matching systems rely on
the computation of semantic similarity or relatedness between
entities. Thus, cross-lingual measures of semantic relatedness or
similarity need to be developed to support multilingual ontology
matching and cross-lingual link discovering. In [11,27] some existing monolingual techniques are adapted for their use with bilin-
gual
lexica as a source of background knowledge, showing
promising results. A broader approach [19] has been proposed
for computing cross-lingual relatedness using the inter-language
links contained in Wikipedia. The potential use of existing monolingual measures when applied to multilingual contexts has to be
further analyzed and new cross-lingual semantic measures have
to be devised. A very interesting research avenue is the development of semantic similarity and relatedness measures that  in
contrast to the ones described in [11,27,19]  do not rely on
particular lexica or knowledge sources but exploit the Linked Open
Data cloud or the Web as a whole as corpus.

Eventually, multilingual mappings should be shared on the Web
for exploitation by cross-lingual information access methods and
other techniques that require traversing multilingual ontological
information. Although several solutions are possible here, a natural

13 The EU funded project Monnet on Multilingual Ontologies for Networked
Knowledge has a focus on such development: http://www.monnet-project.eu/
14 http://sws.geonames.org/2510769/
15 http://geo.linkeddata.es/page/resource/Pa%C3%ADs/Espa%C3%B1a

16 E . g . , L O D o n t o l o g y h t t p : / / s e m l a b s . u p m c . f r / L O D I n T r a n s l a t i o n /
LodInTranslationOntology.owl

Fig. 2. Example of cross-lingual conceptual mappings.

Fig. 3. Example of cross-lingual linguistic mappings mediated by lexical information.

way of doing this is to represent and store such mappings in a way
that is compliant with the Linked Data principles, thus becoming
part of the Linked Data cloud itself. In principle, owing to the distributed nature of the Semantic Web, anyone could upload their
discovered mappings to the cloud.

4.3. Representation of multilingual lexical information

Vocabulary elements can be realized in a variety of different
ways across languages. The rdfs:label property can capture such
variance at the term level, but is not sufficient to capture syntactic
variation across languages. For example, a certain property border might be represented as a transitive verb in English (to bor-
der), via a verb with a prepositional phrase in German (grenzt
an) and as a construction involving the verb to have in Spanish
(tiene frontera con). Such different constructions by which the
same property can be realized across languages cannot be represented using the rdfs:label property. Further,
linguistic crosslingual mappings cannot be directly expressed in RDF(S) as they

would require the reification of labels in order to say that river
is a translation equivalent of riviere and fleuve. Models
which feature the required expressivity to represent such multilingual lexical information are needed. While such models exist already (e.g., LexInfo [8,9,7] or LIR [33,29]), they need to be
modularized so that those applications in need of only simple
models will not be forced to deal with the full complexity of these
models. The lexicon model for ontologies (lemon [24]) is organized
already in such a modular fashion and thus will be usable by applications requiring different degrees of expressivity. Tool support for
these models as well as more convincing applications exploiting
these models will be needed in the near future to convince stakeholders in the Web of Data to adopt such models.

4.4. Cross-lingual access to and querying of Linked Data

Currently, the standard way for accessing RDF data is by means
of SPARQL [34]. Appropriate mechanisms will be needed to facilitate querying of multilingual data in the LOD building on SPARQL.

J. Gracia et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 11 (2012) 6371

In particular, available mappings between vocabulary elements in
different languages should be taken into account in order to, given
a query in a particular language, retrieving answers of the same,
some other or even multiple languages. Further, the extension of
SPARQL endpoints with descriptions specifying the supported languages will facilitate tasks such as query federation [6], planning,
and source selection in a multi-lingual context.

Nevertheless, the use of SPARQL is not intended for end-users,
who are more used to other ways of interaction, such as key-
word-based queries. How to transform a set of user keywords or
a query posed in natural language into a formal query is still a research question that has attracted the attention of many recent research efforts [21,37,38,5,22]. These techniques have been initially
conceived to operate with a single language, and some of them prefer to use monolingual English resources such as WordNet. Never-
theless, we do not find theoretical limitations in current question
answering and semantic query construction systems that prevent
its use across languages. Some first steps to be explored towards
the realization of this goal are the use of cross-lingual semantic
measures and the exploitation of multilingual background knowledge sources.

A further option that we envision is to allow ontology-centered
applications to access that subset of Linked Data that is relevant to
the ontology in question, even if the languages of the ontology and
the data do not match. This will require; (i) the discovery of multilingual mappings between a given ontology in one language
and the ontologies used in Linked Data, typically with descriptions
in English17 or even other languages in the future; (ii) the creation of
consistent views over Linked Data with results relevant to that
ontology. Another interesting scenario arises when instead of relying
on one predefined ontology, several ontologies are dynamically accessed to describe the semantics of a user query [38]. In this case
we have to deal with the problem of redundancy (different ontological descriptions representing the same meaning) [18]. Techniques to
cope with this issue are thus required, especially in a multilingual
environment, where we need to capture for instance that ontologies
referring to the Spanish term medicina are describing the same
concept as ontologies defining the English equivalent medicine.

Finally, content negotiation, used in the Web for offering different formats and language versions of the same Web document, can
play a role when localized semantic information has to be served to
the final user or application.

5. Roadmap

in future

stages.

required incentives for the development of more complex infra-
structure
existent
techniques to migrate data silos into the Linked Data format will
be extended to enrich the produced semantic data with multilingual mappings.

Furthermore,

current

5.2. Stage II

Semantic search engines might index multilingual lexical information available on the Web as well as integrate available ontology localization tools to support answering ad-hoc queries in any
language. More complex models for representing multilingual lexical correspondences will be available, supporting cross-lingual
natural language processing applications requiring deeper multilingual lexical knowledge.

5.3. Stage III

Users might recognize the benefit of the provision of multilingual lexical information offers, a situation that might create the
appropriate incentives to motivate people to add and evaluate
manual and (semi)automatic mappings between vocabularies in
different languages. Further, an ecosystem of services that accomplishes various tasks will be available as part of the Web of Data.
Services that can be exploited for cross-language querying will
provide on-demand translation to be exploited by an advanced
set of techniques for establishing cross-lingual mappings. Building
on more complex models for representing multilingual linguistic
information, search engines might be able to process natural language questions in any language. Semantic search engines will be
able to adapt their result presentation to conventions of the linguistic and cultural community to which the user belongs.

In working towards this roadmap, several research fields should
be involved in order to benefit from their expertise. Especially
interesting is the expertise available in the database community
with respect to the representation of multilingual information in
databases. The computational
linguistics and lexical resources
community could contribute their models for the representation
of multilingual lexicons such as LMF. From the area of machine
translation, different approaches could be reused to develop systems that are able to translate the lexical layer of ontologies. Techniques from word sense disambiguation as developed in the
natural language processing community will also play a major role
here as identification of the right senses of a label in a given ontology might allow for more accurate translations.

A roadmap towards making the multilingual Web of Data come

true could look as follows:

6. Conclusions

5.1. Stage I

Lightweight models for representing multilingual lexical information will be available in combination with a first generation of
ontology localization services that support the translation of the labels of some vocabulary or ontology into another language. Simple
techniques for inferring links across vocabulary with labels in different languages will be available. These first techniques might
make use of multilingual lexical (EuroWordNet) and terminological resources as well as extant translation services to discover such
mappings. Early applications using the above mentioned multilingual knowledge (e.g., to automatically localize semantic web
pages) or providing cross-lingual query support will provide the

17 As can be confirmed by taking a look at recommended vocabularies in Linked
Data (http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/bizer/pub/LinkedDataTutorial/
#whichvocabs)

The traditional Web is characterized by the fact that information is only available across languages if web sites are translated,
thus necessarily leading to duplication of information. The Web
of Data has the potential for extending the Web to a truly
multilingual Web as information can be published in a languageindependent fashion using the RDF data model and following the
Linked Data principles. The multilingual Web of Data can be real-
ized, in our view, as a layer of services and resources on top of
Linked Data which adds (i) linguistic information in different
languages (ii) mappings between data with labels in different lan-
guages, and (iii) services to dynamically access and traverse the
Linked Data across different languages. All these extensions are
challenging, but current Semantic Web and Linked Data technologies are mature enough to render the vision feasible.

In this paper we have discussed the challenges involved in
building a multilingual Web of Data and proposed a general architecture for realizing this. A multilingual Web of Data seems feasi-

ble given the current state of Semantic Web Technology, but in order to build it we need to understand that in the same way that
much of the traditional Web is a Web for people made by people
as a collective, a multilingual Web of Data can at best only provide
the infrastructure which needs to be populated by people, adding
mappings between vocabularies in different languages, lexica for
ontologies etc. This is, indeed, one of the most challenging aspects
of the roadmap towards a multilingual Web of Data envisioned in
this paper.

Acknowledgements

We thank Dr. Ignacio Garcia-Alvarez for his kind assistance with
our motivating example. This work is supported in part by the
European Union under Grant No. 248458 for the Monnet project
as well as by the Centro Nacional de Informacion Geografica and
CDTI under the R&D programme Ingenio 2010 for the R&D project
Espana Virtual, by the Science Foundation Ireland under Grant No.
SFI/08/CE/I1380 (Lion-2), and by the CICYT project TIN2010-17550
named Multilinguismo en Ontologias y Linked Data funded by
the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation.
