Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 17 (2012) 3343

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Ontology paper
FaBiO and CiTO: Ontologies for describing bibliographic resources and citations
Silvio Peroni a,, David Shotton b

a Department of Computer Science, University of Bologna, Mura Anteo Zamboni 7, 40126 Bologna, Italy
b Research Data Management and Semantic Publishing Research Group, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS, UK

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 5 September 2011
Received in revised form
30 July 2012
Accepted 6 August 2012
Available online 13 August 2012

Keywords:

Publication characterization
Scholarly reference
Semantic publishing

Semantic publishing is the use of Web and Semantic Web technologies to enhance the meaning of a
published journal article, to facilitate its automated discovery, to enable its linking to semantically related
articles, to provide access to data within the article in actionable form, and to facilitate integration of
data between articles. Recently, semantic publishing has opened the possibility of a major step forward
in the digital publishing world. For this to succeed, new semantic models and visualization tools are
required to fully meet the specific needs of authors and publishers. In this article, we introduce the
principles and architectures of two new ontologies central to the task of semantic publishing: FaBiO, the
FRBR-aligned Bibliographic Ontology, an ontology for recording and publishing bibliographic records of
scholarly endeavours on the Semantic Web, and CiTO, the Citation Typing Ontology, an ontology for the
characterization of bibliographic citations both factually and rhetorically. We present those two models
step by step, in order to emphasise their features and to stress their advantages relative to other preexisting information models. Finally, we review the uptake of FaBiO and CiTO within the academic and
publishing communities.

 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Scholarly authoring and publishing are in the throes of a
revolution, as the full potential of on-line publishing is explored.
Yet, to date, publishers have not adopted Web standards for
their work, but rather employ a variety of proprietary XML-based
informational models and document type definitions (DTDs).
While such independence was reasonable in the pre-web world of
paper publishing, it now appears anachronistic, since publications
and their metadata from different sources are incompatible,
requiring hand-crafted mappings to convert from one to another.
For a large community such as publishers, this lack of standard
definitions that could be adopted and reused across the entire
industry represents losses in terms of money, time and effort.

In contrast, modern web information management techniques
employ standards such as RDF [1] and OWL 2 [2] to encode
information in ways that permit computers to query metadata
and integrate web-based information from multiple resources
in an automated manner. Since the processes of scholarly
communication are central to the practice of science, it is essential
that publishers now adopt such standards to permit inference
over the entire corpus of scholarly communication represented
in journals, books and conference proceedings. This requires the
availability of appropriate ontologies that are specially tailored

 Corresponding author. Tel.: +39 3487234548; fax: +39 0512094510.

E-mail addresses: speroni@cs.unibo.it, essepuntato@cs.unibo.it,

essepuntato@gmail.com (S. Peroni), david.shotton@zoo.ox.ac.uk (D. Shotton).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2012.08.001

to the requirements of authors, publishers and their readers. The
purpose of this paper is to present two such ontologies that form
key components of the semantic publishing revolution.

Semantic publishing is the use of web and semantic web
technologies to enhance a published document such as a journal
article so as to enrich its meaning, to facilitate its automatic
discovery, to enable its linking to semantically related articles,
to provide access to data within the article in actionable
form, and to allow integration of data between papers [3,4].
Semantic publishing and scholarly citation using web standards
are presently two of the most interesting topics within the
scientific publishing domain. Research areas in this domain include
the development of:
 semantic models (vocabularies, ontologies)
the
requirements of scholarly authoring and publishing;
 visualization and documentation tools that permit such ontologies to be easily understood;
 annotation tools that allow these models to be used for
enhancing documents with relevant semantic assertions;
 new algorithms to take advantages of these semantic annotations when searching over large sets of on-line documents.

that meet

In this article, we address the first point by describing the
principles and architecture of two ontologies central to the task
of semantic publishing: FaBiO, the FRBR-aligned Bibliographic
Ontology,1 an ontology for recording and publishing bibliographic

1 FaBiO, the FRBR-aligned bibliographic ontology: http://purl.org/spar/fabio.

S. Peroni, D. Shotton / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 17 (2012) 3343

records of scholarly endeavours on the Semantic Web, and CiTO,
the Citation Typing Ontology,2 an ontology for the characterization
of bibliographic citations, both factually and rhetorically. These
ontologies are members of SPAR, the Semantic Publishing and
Referencing Ontologies,3 a suite of orthogonal and complementary
OWL 2 DL ontology modules that together permit the creation of
comprehensive machine-readable RDF metadata for all aspects of
semantic publishing and referencing.

The rest of this article is organised as follows: in Section 2 we
introduce principles that have guided our work, and in Section 3
we briefly describe the existing ontologies and vocabularies we
took into account when developing FaBiO and CiTO. These new
ontologies are then presented in Sections 4 and 5 respectively. In
Section 6 we describe the contexts in which FaBiO and CiTO are
now being employed, and finally in Section 7 we sketch out some
conclusions and future directions of our work.

2. Characteristics, starting point and principles

The main characteristics of this work, that mark it out as distinct
from previous contributions, is the creation of two new semantic
publishing and referencing ontologies of sufficient expressivity to
meet the requirements of end users such as academic authors and
publishers.

We have also developed two new presentation technologies,
(LODE)4 and the
the Live OWL Documentation Environment
Graphical Framework For OWL Ontologies (Graffoo),5 which support
the interaction between end users and ontologies. LODE can be
seen in action by opening the URL http://purl.org/spar/fabio/ in
a Web browser window (and is described in [5]), while the use
of Graffoo is exemplified in Figs. 1 and 2 of this paper. These
tools, which are not further described in this paper, facilitate the
documentation, visualisation and navigation of ontologies, and
enable them to be more readily understood by potential users
such as academic researchers, publishers and librarians who, while
expert in their own domains, may lack skill in ontology modelling
and knowledge formalisation.

To inform our work, we have had informal discussions with
publishers (including Oxford University Press, Public Library of
Science, Royal Society of Chemistry and Societa Editrice il Mulino),
associated bodies (including ALPSP, CrossRef and Publishing
Technologies) and members of academic communities (including
the Digital Libraries, Document Engineering Linked Data and
Semantic Web communities) to clarify their requirements.

We have attempted, as far as possible, to re-use existing models,
ontologies and vocabularies of relevance to this domain, while
developing our new modules to describe better those parts of the
domain previously neglected.

The starting point for our work was version 1.6 of CiTO,
the Citation Typing Ontology, described in [6]. This was both
preliminary and incomplete, and yet contained within the
single ontology both terms for handling bibliographic document
descriptions and also properties to enable the characterisation
of citations, as well as terms to permit recording of the number
of citations to a given article, both within the citing paper and
globally.

Our first decision, as we sought to develop ontological descriptions for this domain, was to modularise that ontology, in order

2 CiTO, the Citation Typing Ontology: http://purl.org/spar/cito.
3 The SPAR Ontologies: http://purl.org/spar.
4 Live OWL Documentation Environment (LODE): http://www.essepuntato.it/
lode.
5 Graphical Framework For OWL Ontologies (Graffoo): http://www.essepuntato.
it/graffoo. Note that Figs. 1 and 2 of this article comply with Graffoo.

to better develop each aspect of the original vision independently,
and to keep each ontology module small and homogeneous enough
to be readily understandable. In addressing this modularisation,
we followed established methodologies for ontology modularization and development [7,8], and took into account the following
principles:
 The bibliographic description of documents and the characterisation of citations should be covered by two separate yet interoperable ontologies.
 To permit maximum reusability of each ontology module,
logical constraints, for example domain and range constraints
on properties, should be added only where they are strictly
required.
 Where well-known and widely shared vocabularies covering
parts of the domain we wanted to describe already existed,
these should, where appropriate, be properly imported and re-
used.

3. Related works

While wanting to re-use existing information models and
vocabularies of relevance to scholarly publishing as far as possible,
we had to come to terms with their limitations. In this section,
we briefly introduce and comment upon these well-known
vocabularies that we have considered and/or fully or partially
employed within our own work.
Dublin core. Born as consequence of a conference held in Dublin,
Ohio, USA in 1995 that involved both technicians (librarians, pub-
lishers, archivists) and academics (researchers, software devel-
opers), the current versions of the Dublin Core (DC) Metadata
Elements [9] and of the DC Metadata Terms [10] are the most
widely used vocabularies for describing and cataloguing resources.
While very useful for creating basic metadata that permit resource
discovery, the main limitations of DC is a consequence of the
generic nature of its terms.
PRISM. The Publishing Requirements for Industry Standard Metadata
(PRISM) [11] is a specification defining a rich set of metadata
terms for describing published works. The PRISM metadata terms
are expressible both in XML, according to a specific DTD, and in
RDF [12]. While PRISM has a much richer set of terms for describing
bibliographic entities than DC, its main limitation is that it is a flat
structure, lacking hierarchies. Developed primarily to describe the
component parts of a bibliographic record, is not rich enough to
describe the variety of bibliographic entities (e.g. research paper,
book review, anthology) nor the relationships between them
(e.g. that a research paper may be published as a journal article
or as a conference paper; and that the same paper appearing as
a journal article may have different formats  such as HTML and
PDF  and different physical embodiments  as a computer file or
as a ten-page printed paper). This requires one to use PRISM with
another ontology to enable a complete description of bibliographic
entities.
SKOS. Often, publishers need to classify the documents they publish
according to discipline-specific thesauri or classification schemes,
for example those belonging to economics6 or computer science.7
The Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS) [13] is an RDFS
model to support the use of knowledge organization systems
(KOS) such as thesauri, classification schemes, subject heading
lists and taxonomies within the framework of the Semantic Web.

6 The Journal of Economic Literature Classification Scheme: http://www.aeaweb.
org/jel/jel_class_system.php.
7 The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Computing Classification
System 1998 http://www.acm.org/about/class/1998.

The reception of this language has been particularly positive: a
large number of well-known thesauri and classification systems
have started to convert their respective specifications into SKOS
documents.8 This makes SKOS the de facto standard for encoding
controlled vocabularies for the Semantic Web.
FOAF. The Friend of a Friend Ontology (FOAF)9 is a simple and widely
used vocabulary for describing people and their institutions [14],
useful in this context for describing authors.
SWRC. The Semantic Web for Research Communities (SWRC)
ontology [15] (labelled in German) enables the description of
people, institutions, organisations and scholarly publications. It
includes a few terms that describe bibliographic entities relevant
to academia, such as journals, books and theses. However, since
it has been developed primarily to describe academic research
communities, its vocabulary covers only part of the publishing and
bibliographic domain.
FRBR. The Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records (FRBR)
[16] is a general model, proposed by the International Federation
of Library Association (IFLA), for describing documents and their
evolution. It works for both physical and digital resources and
has proven to be very flexible and powerful. FRBR describes all
documents from four different and correlated points of view,
as illustrated as follows by consideration of the book Alices
Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll:
 Work. A FRBR Work is a high-level abstract Platonic concept
of the essence of a distinct intellectual or artistic creation, for
example the ideas in Lewis Carrolls head concerning Alices
Adventures in Wonderland. A Work is realised through one or
more Expressions.
 Expression. A FRBR Expression is the specific form that a Work
takes each time its content is realised in physical or electronic
formthus the original text of Alices Adventures in Wonderland
and its Italian translation Le Avventure di Alice nel Paese delle
Meraviglie refer to different expressions of the same work. An
Expression is embodied in one or more Manifestations;
 Manifestation. A FRBR Manifestation of a work defines its
particular physical or electronic embodiment, e.g. the particular
format in which Alices Adventures in Wonderland is stored,
for instance as a printed object or in HTML. A Manifestation is
exemplified by one or more Items.
 Item. A FRBR Item is a particular physical or electronic copy of
Alices Adventures in Wonderland that a person can own, e.g. the
printed version of that book you have in your bookcase.

BIBO. BIBO [17] is an OWL Full ontology that allows one to write
descriptions of documents for publication on the Semantic Web,
bibo:Document being the core class of this model. It includes
both DC and PRISM terms to cover common needs, uses FOAF
to describe authors, and adds other classes and properties such
as bibo:AcademicArticle, bibo:Journal, bibo:Collection, bibo:Book,
bibo:Chapter and bibo:Issue to describe the publishing domain.
BIBO is a good ontology that
is widely used among the
bibliographic community. A comparison of BIBO and FaBiO is given
below, in Section 4.3.
SWAN Citations Ontology. Another model used to define bibliographic resources is the Citations Ontology10 module included in

E.g. AGROVOC http://aims.fao.org/website/AGROVOC-Thesaurus/sub; The
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh; The
Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) http://id.loc.gov/search/; and Nuovo
Soggettario of the National Central Library in Florence http://thes.bncf.firenze.
sbn.it/.
9 FOAF: http://www.foaf-project.org/ ; http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/.
10 SWAN Citations Ontology Module: http://swan.mindinformatics.org/spec/1.2/
citations.html.

the SWAN (Semantic Web Applications in Neuroscience) Ontolo-
gies, version 1.2 [18]. In this ontology, compliant with OWL 2 DL,
the main class Citation11 is used as super-class, of which everything
else (e.g. JournalArticle, WebArticle and Book) is sub-class.

4. Representing bibliographic information using FaBiO

The need for ontologies that are sufficiently expressive for

describing documents has been presented in Section 1.

The vocabularies described above are either poor in concepts
or are flat, preventing their use for accurately describing the
complexity of publishing reality. We will
illustrate this by
considering the representation of a typical bibliographic reference
using first BIBO and then FRBR. We will then show how this
information can be more accurately described using FaBiO.
Consider the following typical bibliographic reference:

Yves Marcoux, Elias Rizkallah (2009). Intertextual semantics: A
semantics for information design. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 60 (9): 18951906. John Wiley
& Sons, Inc. DOI: 10.1002/asi.21134. First published online (PDF
and HTML) 21 August 2009.

From the previous description we can extract the following

information:
1. The document is an academic research articlededucible from

the journal in which it is published.

2. Yves Marcoux and Elias Rizkallah are the authors of the article.
3. The article was published in 2009.
4. The article is entitled Intertextual semantics: A semantics for

information design.

5. It was published in the 9th Issue of the 60th volume of the
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology.

6. The DOI of the article is 10.1002/asi.21134.
7. The article was first published online on the 21st of August,

2009, in two particular formats (PDF and HTML).

8. The page range of the article within the printed version is from

starting page 1895 to ending page 1906.

9. The publisher of the journal is John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

4.1. Bibliographic reference metadata encoding using BIBO

BIBO [17] is the first OWL ontology specifically designed to
address the domain under discussion, and it expands the DC
Terms vocabulary with terms specific for bibliographic metadata,
particularly relating to legal documents, and also for various types
of events. It includes PRISM and FOAF terms.

In the following RDF encoding example, the information given
in the bibliographic reference cited above is encoded using BIBO12:

:intertextual-semantics a bibo:AcademicArticle

; bibo:authorList ( :marcoux :rizkallah )
; dcterms:title "Intertextual semantics: A semantics for
information design"
; dcterms:issued "2009"xsd:gYear
; bibo:doi "10.1002/asi.21134"
; bibo:pageStart "1895"
; bibo:pageEnd "1906"
; dcterms:hasFormat :html, : pdf
; dcterms:isPartOf [ a bibo:Issue

; bibo:issue "9"

11 Note that in this ontology the word Citation is used to denote the object of a
citation, i.e. a cited document, rather than the performative act of making a citation,
which is the usage employed both in CiTO and within this article.
12 This and all the following RDF excerpts are written in Turtle [19].

S. Peroni, D. Shotton / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 17 (2012) 3343

; bibo:volume "60"
; dcterms:isPartOf [ a bibo:Journal

; dcterms:title "Journal of the American Society for

Information Science and Technology"
; dcterms:publisher :wiley-and-sons ]] .

:html a bibo:AcademicArticle

; dcterms:format type:text/html
; dcterms:issued "21-08-2009"xsd:date .

:pdf a bibo:AcademicArticle

; dcterms:format type:application/pdf
; dcterms:issued "21-08-2009"xsd:date .

:marcoux a foaf:Person

; foaf:givenName "Yves"
; foaf:familyName "Marcoux" .

:rizkallah a foaf:Person

; foaf:givenName "Elias"
; foaf:familyName "Rizkallah" .

:wiley-and-sons a foaf:Organization

; foaf:name "John Wiley & Sons, Inc." .

There are some obscure points that emerge from the preceding

that

the property for

formalisation:
 Some of the statements are too generic. For example, the
property dcterms:issued that is used to represent the various
dates associated with the publication of this article, is itself
employed in conjunction with two different date formats,
i.e. the publication year 21-08-2009  xsd:date and the date
the article was first published online 2009xsd:gYear. While
this design choice is reasonable, it lacks precision.
 BIBO specifies
listing authors
(bibo:authorList) must have, as its range, either an rdf:List or an
rdf:Seq, which implicitly results in having an OWL full ontol-
ogy. Of course this is a perfectly reasonable and valid modelling
choice. However, it would prevent potential use of DL-oriented
reasoners over data encoded in this way, since OWL 2 DL does
not support these RDF classes.13
 Like PRISM, BIBO can record a volume number through the
data property bibo:volume, but, although it has the classes
bibo:AcademicArticle, bibo:Issue and bibo:Journal, BIBO lacks the
concept of Volume as a distinct class among other bibliographic classes that have a hierarchical partitive relationship to
one another (i.e. Journal Article > Issue > Volume > Journal).
 The relations between the various formats of the article in the
example are not clear. For example, the manner in which the
resource :intertextual-semantics relates to the resource :pdf 
is not specified. Does the latter represent the content of the
former in a particular format, or there is something more?
 Additionally, there is no precise way to indicate that the page
numbers refer only to the printed article, not to the HTML
version.
 Furthermore, because it lacks the layered structure of FRBR,
BIBO does not have the flexibility to distinguish between
concepts at these various levels, for example that an academic
paper could have various possible expressions as a journal
article, a conference paper or a book chapter. The class
bibo:AcademicArticle is in fact a conflation of the concepts
academic paper and journal article.

4.2. Bibliographic reference metadata encoding using FRBR

It is possible to handle some of the issues raised above by
adopting the more structured FRBR model [16], as expressed in
the FRBR Core ontology,14 together with DC terms for textual
statements (i.e. those statements having a literal string as their
object). This is illustrated in the following example:

:intertextual-semantics a frbr:Work
; frbr:creator :marcoux , :rizkallah
; frbr:realization :content .

:content a frbr:Expression

; dcterms:title "Intertextual semantics: A semantics for
information design"
; dcterms:issued "2009"xsd:gYear
; dcterms:identifier "doi:10.1002/asi.21134"
; frbr:embodiment :printed, :html, :pdf
; frbr:partOf [ a frbr:Expression
; dcterms:identifier "9"
; dcterms:description "Issue"
; frbr:embodiment :printed-issue
; frbr:partOf [ a frbr:Expression
; dcterms:identifier "60"
; dcterms:description "Volume"
; frbr:partOf [ a frbr:Expression
; dcterms:title "Journal of the American Society for

Information Science and Technology" ] ] ] .

:printed-issue a frbr:Manifestation
; frbr:producer :wiley-and-sons
; dcterms:issued "09-2009"xsd:gYearMonth
; frbr:part :printed .

:printed a frbr:Manifestation

; frbr:producer :wiley-and-sons
; dcterms:issued "09-2009"xsd:gYearMonth
; dcterms:extent [ a dcterms:SizeOrDuration

; dcterms:description "1895-1906" ] .

:html a frbr:Manifestation

; frbr:producer :wiley-and-sons
; dcterms:format type:text/html
; dcterms:issued "21-08-2009"xsd:date .

:pdf a frbr:Manifestation

; frbr:producer :wiley-and-sons
; dcterms:format type:application/pdf
; dcterms:issued "21-08-2009"xsd:date .

:marcoux a frbr:Person

; dcterms:description "Yves Marcoux" .

:rizkallah a frbr:Person

; dcterms:description "Elias Rizkallah" .

:wiley-and-sons a frbr:CorporateBody

; dcterms:description "John Wiley & Sons, Inc." .

Although it is possible to use FRBR in this manner to give a
structured and unambiguous description of all the bibliographic
entities, this example makes clear the severe limitations of FRBR,
due to the lack of specific terms in the FRBR Core ontology to
permit publications to be described in normal everyday language,
e.g. Journal or Page.

13 For a longer and clearer justification of why RDF collections and containers are not usable and interpreted correctly by OWL 2 DL, please consult
http://hcklab.blogspot.com/2008/12/moving-towards-swan-collections.html.

14 The FRBR Core in RDFS and the related implementation in OWL 2 DL are
available respectively at http://vocab.org/frbr/core and http://purl.org/spar/frbr.
Note that in the latter, frbr:part and frbr:partOf are both defined as transitive object
properties.

4.3. Bibliographic reference metadata encoding using FaBiO

FaBiO, the FRBR-aligned Bibliographic Ontology (current version
1.6), was developed precisely to address the issues revealed by the
previous examples, while re-using the previous fundamental work
in this domain (so as not to re-invent the wheel). In particular, DC
Terms, PRISM, FRBR and SKOS terms are all included in our model.
Considering again the previous bibliographic reference exam-

ple, a possible FaBiO formalisation is:

:intertextual-semantics a fabio:ResearchPaper

; dcterms:creator :marcoux , :rizkallah
; frbr:realization :version-of-record .

:version-of-record a fabio:JournalArticle

; dcterms:title "Intertextual semantics: A semantics for
information design"
; fabio:hasPublicationYear "2009"xsd:gYear
; prism:doi "10.1002/asi.21134"
; frbr:embodiment :printed , :html ,:pdf
; frbr:partOf [ a fabio:JournalIssue
; prism:issueIdentifier "9"
; frbr:embodiment :printed-issue
; frbr:partOf [ a fabio:JournalVolume
; prism:volume "60"
frbr:partOf [ a fabio:Journal

; dcterms:title "Journal of the American Society for

Information Science and Technology" ] ] ] .

:printed a fabio:PrintObject

; prism:startingPage "1895"
; prism:endingPage "1906"
; frbr:part of :printed-issue .

:printed-issue a fabio:Paperback

; dcterms:publisher :wiley-and-sons
; prism:publicationDate
"09-2009"xsd:gYearMonth .

:html a fabio:WebPage

; dcterms:publisher :wiley-and-sons
; dcterms:format type:text/html
; prism:publicationDate
"21-08-2009"xsd:date .

:pdf a fabio:DigitalManifestation

; dcterms:publisher :wiley-and-sons
; dcterms:format type:application/pdf
; prism:publicationDate
"21-08-2009"xsd:date .

:marcoux a foaf:Person

; foaf:givenName "Yves"
; foaf:familyName "Marcoux" .

:rizkallah a foaf:Person

; foaf:givenName "Elias"
; foaf:familyName "Rizkallah" .

:wiley-and-sons a foaf:Organization

; foaf:name "John Wiley & Sons, Inc." .

(Note that fabio:WebPage is subclass of fabio:DigitalManifestation,
that fabio:Paperback is a subclass of fabio:PrintObject, and that
fabio:PrintObject is subclass of fabio:AnalogManifestation.)
With FaBiO, it thus becomes possible:
 To write semantic descriptions of a wide variety of bibliographic
objects, including research articles, journal articles, journal
issues and journal volumes, using terms that closely resemble
the language used in everyday speech by academics and
publishers;

 To employ FRBR categories to define clear separations between
each part of the publishing process, involving different people
(authors, publishers, readers) depending on which aspect of the
bibliographic entity we are considering: the high-level conceptualisation of the research paper, the version of record of that
paper forming a journal article, the publication of that article in
various formats, and the individual physical or electronic exemplars of the published article that people may read and own.
 To include with ease elements from other vocabularies for describing particular entities involved in a publishing process that
are not specified by FaBiO itself, such as those from FOAF for
persons and organizations.

The most closely similar ontology to FaBiO in terms of its terms
and intended usage is BIBO, the Bibliographic Ontology, which
has already been introduced in Section 3 and in Section 4.1.
The principal differences between BIBO and FaBiO are:
1. that FaBiO is structured according to the FRBR model, providing
the greater expressivity required for unambiguously describing
the various essences of a bibliographic object, as discussed
above15; and

2. that it has a more comprehensive collection of classes and properties than does BIBO, permitting more precise descriptions of
bibliographic entities.

This semantic richness of FaBiO is enhanced when it is used together with other SPAR ontologies, such as the Citation Typing Ontology (CiTO), described in Section 5, the Bibliographic Reference
Ontology (BiRO)16 for describing bibliographic references, reference lists, bibliographic records, etc., the Document Components
Ontology (DoCO)17 for describing the structural and rhetorical components of documents (e.g. paragraph, Results), the Publishing Roles
Ontology (PRO)18 for defining roles held by agents involved in a
publication process (e.g. author, publisher, editor, reviewer), and
the Publishing Status Ontology (PSO)19 for defining the possible status of a bibliographic object (e.g. submitted, under review, accepted for publication) [20].

BIBO might have been considered a good starting point for
the development of FaBiO. However, the fact that BIBO collapses
everything describing a bibliographic entity within the classes
bibo:Document or bibo:Collection makes it impossible to align BIBO
classes with FRBR endeavours (Works, Expressions, Manifestations
and Items, that are all disjointed classes) while keeping the entire
ontology logically consistent.

It should perhaps be mentioned here that we deliberately
excluded a class fabio:Document from FaBiO, since the term
Document has so many different possible definitions as to make
its inclusion within the FRBR hierarchy problematic. We have not
found this exclusion to pose any problems when using FaBiO to
describe bibliographic entities.

It is thus for users to choose which of these two ontologies, BIBO
or FaBiO, best suits their purposes. Because of their similarities,

15 Note that understanding when an authorial process produces a new Work,
or just another Expression of a previous Work, strictly depends on the particular
scenario under consideration. FRBR does not give any strict guideline to follow
in these casesand neither does FaBiO. Thus, for instance, the relation between a
conference paper and a subsequent journal article can differ case by case. It can
happen that the journal article is just another Expression of a common Work (e.g. if
we revise the original text of the conference paper by correcting just few typos or
misworded paragraphs), or alternatively an entirely new Work (e.g. when we adapt
and extend the conference paper in a significant way to make it suitable for journal
publication).
16 The Bibliographic Reference Ontology (BiRO): http://purl.org/spar/biro.
17 The Document Components Ontology (DoCO): http://purl.org/spar/doco.
18 The Publishing Roles Ontology (PRO): http://purl.org/spar/pro.
19 The Publishing Status Ontology (PSO): http://purl.org/spar/pso.

S. Peroni, D. Shotton / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 17 (2012) 3343

we have defined a SKOS alignment between BIBO and FaBiO, in
order to facilitate metadata conversion between the two models.
That alignment document, entitled BIBO2SPAR, is freely available
online.20

Other advantages of FaBiO are outlined below.

4.4. New capabilities when using FaBiO

4.4.1. Using external models

As already mentioned, FaBiO was developed with the minimum
of restrictions to its classes and to the domains and ranges of
its properties. This flexibility has the great advantage of allowing
FaBiO to be used together with other ontologies. We have already
seen how FOAF can be used to describe agents. Another common
requirement is that of specifying the order of components in a list,
for example authors in an author list or references in a reference
list. Unlike the use of bibo:authorList, which breaks OWL 2 DL
compliance as explained above, this can be achieved in a manner
that is compliant with the decidable and computable OWL 2 DL by
combining FaBiO with the Collections Ontology (CO),21 an OWL 2
DL ontology specifically designed for defining orders among items,
in the following way:

:intertextual-semantics a fabio:ResearchPaper

; dcterms:creator :listOfAuthors .

:listOfAuthors a co:List

; co:firstItem [co:itemContent :marcoux
; co:nextItem [co:itemContent :rizkallah ]].
In this way we can still keep the model

in OWL 2 DL.
Additionally, because the ranges of dcterms:creator and other
properties within FaBiO have intentionally been left unspecified,
FaBiO guarantees a level of interoperation with other models
without incurring in any undesirable collateral effects, such as
ontology inconsistencies or the generation of undesired inferences.
For instance, OAI-ORE [21] is an excellent well-known vocabulary that can be combined with FaBiO to describe aggregations
of bibliographic entities, contributors and the like, since FaBiO and
OAI-ORE are both very flexible and reusable. However, we did not
want to restrict users to using only OAI-ORE, instead of other models (e.g. CO), to define these kinds of scenarios.22

4.4.2. Extending FRBR within FaBiO

One of the explicit requests from publishers and end-users was
to be able to create shortcuts between FRBR endeavours (work,
expression, manifestation, item) that were not part of the original
FRBR model. Let us introduce an example to illustrate these needs,
by slightly changing the bibliographic reference we introduced
previously:

Yves Marcoux, Elias Rizkallah (2009). Intertextual semantics: A
semantics for information design.
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/asi.21134/full.

In this reference, we have just a FRBR workthe paper by Marcoux
and Rizkallahand the URL for a specific FRBR item that portrays
that workthe HTML version of the paper on the publishers web
site. If we wished to link these concepts using the FRBR OWL
ontology terms we have employed so far, we would be obliged to
specify each intermediate FRBR endeavour, namely the expression

20 BIBO2SPAR mapping document: http://sempublishing.svn.sourceforge.net/
svnroot/sempublishing/SPAR/BIBO2SPAR.ttl.
21 CO, the Collections Ontology: http://purl.org/co.
22 Examples of how to use FaBiO and OAI-ORE in combination lie beyond the scope
of this paper.

and manifestation of that paper, even if we were not interested in
doing so:

:intertextual-semantics a frbr:Work
; frbr:creator :marcoux , :rizkallah
; frbr:realization [ a frbr:Expression
; dcterms:title "Intertextual semantics: A semantics for

information design"

; frbr:embodiment [ a frbr:Manifestation

; frbr:exemplar

wiley:10.1002/asi.21134/full ] ] .

In order to avoid this kind of verbosity,

it is possible to
use the new FaBiO properties shown in Fig. 1 to link a work
directly to its manifestations (fabio:hasManifestation) or to its items
(fabio:hasPortrayal), and to link an expression directly to its items
(fabio:hasRepresentation).

These added properties allows us to be less verbose:

:intertextual-semantics a frbr:Work
; frbr:creator :marcoux , :rizkallah
; frbr:realization [ a frbr:Expression
; dcterms:title "Intertextual semantics: A semantics for

information design"

; fabio:hasRepresentation
wiley:10.1002/asi.21134/full ] .

4.4.3. Categorising bibliographic resources with SKOS

As

shown,

any

One of the most important needs for a publisher is to categorise
each bibliographic entity it produces by adding free-text keywords
and/or specific terms structured according to recognised classification systems and/or thesauri. While the definition of keywords is
possible in FaBiO using the PRISM property prism:keyword, terms
from thesauri, structured vocabularies and classification systems
are best described using SKOS [13]. To facilitate this, FaBiO extends
some classes and properties of SKOS as shown in Fig. 2.

can be

FRBR endeavour

associated
(fabio:hasSubjectTerm) with one or more descriptive terms (fabio:
SubjectTerm, a sub-class of skos:Concept) found in a specific dictionary (fabio:TermDictionary, a sub-class of skos:ConceptScheme)
that is relevant to (fabio:hasDiscipline) one or more particular disciplines (fabio:SubjectDiscipline, also a sub-class of skos:Concept)
describing a field of knowledge or human activity such as Computer Science, Biology, Economics, Cookery or Swimming. At the
same time, the subject disciplines themselves can be grouped into
a fabio:DisciplineDictionary.

Our selected example can thus be enriched as follows:

:intertextual-semantics a fabio:ResearchPaper

; fabio:hasSubjectTerm acm:markup-languages
, acm:semantics
; prism:keywords "semantics of markup"
, "semiotic application" , "xml" .

<http://www.acm.org/class/1998>

a fabio:TermDictionary
; skos:prefLabel "The 1998 ACM Computing
Classification System"
; fabio:hasDiscipline
dbpedia:Computer_science .

acm:markup-languages a fabio:SubjectTerm

; skos:prefLabel "Markup languages"
; skos:inScheme

<http://www.acm.org/class/1998>

; skos:broader acm:document-preparation .

acm:semantics a fabio:SubjectTerm

; skos:prefLabel "Semantics"
; skos:inScheme

<http://www.acm.org/class/1998>

; skos:broader

acm:formal-definitions-and-theory .

Fig. 1. The main FRBR object properties relating FRBR endeavours (work, expression, manifestation, item), and the related new object properties introduced by FaBiO
(fabio:hasManifestation, fabio:hasRepresentation, fabio:hasPortrayal) to provide shortcuts between Work and Manifestation, Work and Item, and Expression and Item,
respectively.

Fig. 2. The extension to the common SKOS classes and relations implemented in FaBiO.

5. Characterising citations with CiTO

Bibliographic citation, i.e., the act of referring from a citing
entity to the cited one, is one of the most important activities of
an author in the production of any bibliographic work, since the

acknowledgement of sources that this activity represents stands at
the very core of the scholarly enterprise. The network of citations
created by combining citation information from many academic
articles and books is a source of rich information for scholars, and
can be used by a publisher to create new and interesting ways of

S. Peroni, D. Shotton / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 17 (2012) 3343

browsing their data, as well as for calculating metrics reflecting the
relative importance of a journal (e.g. the impact factor) or an author
(e.g. the h-index).

The reasons that an author cites other publications are
manifold, as pointed out by Teufel et al. [22] and Jorg [23].
Usually, it is because the author has gained assistance of some sort,
perhaps in the form of background information, ideas, methods
or data, from the cited previously published works, and wishes
to acknowledge this. More rarely, citations may be made because
the citing works review, critique or refute previous works. Most
citations are direct and explicit (as in the reference list of a journal
article). However, they can also be indirect (for example, by means
of a citation to a more recent paper by the same research group on
the same topic, e.g. as a means of citing a method first described in
an earlier preliminary paper), or implicit (as in artistic quotations
or parodies, or in extremis in cases of plagiarism).

Classical scholarship has well-developed methods for citing
individual sections, paragraphs or verses of referenced works. In
contrast, in modern scientific practice a citation is made to the
previously published paper as a whole, with little or no indication
given as to why that paper has been cited or what portions of it
are relevant to the discussion at hand, except what the reader can
glean from the citation context.

Of course, previously developed models for describing bibliographic objects allow for the existence of citations among
bibliographic entities to be recorded. For instance, taking again the
previous example about the article Intertextual semantics: A semantics for information design, using BIBO [17] we can declare
citations as follows:

# :version-of-record is the published
# Expression of :intertextual-semantics
:version-of-record bibo:cites

# The following resources are Expressions
# (vor stands for version of record)
:towards-a-semantics-vor
, :meaning-and-interpretation-vor
, :design-everyday-things-vor
, :exploring-intertextual-semantics-vor . . .

Alternatively, we can use the Discourse Relationships Module23

in SWAN v1.2 [18] in the same way:

: version-of-record

discourse-relationships:cites
:towards-a-semantics-vor
, :meaning-and-interpretation-vor
, :design-everyday-things-vor
, :exploring-intertextual-semantics-vor . . .

However, while the cites properties in these two ontologies, as
well as the more generic property dcterms:relation in DC Terms,
permit the bald existence of a citation to be recorded, they do not
permit the author to augment the citation with any specific factual
and/or rhetorical meanings that would describe the reasons the
author had in mind when creating citations to some particular
documents rather than to others.

CiTO, the Citation Typing Ontology2, seeks to improve upon this
situation by making it possible for authors (or others) to capture
the intent when citing a particular publication, permitting them
to create metadata describing their citations that is quite distinct
from metadata describing the cited works themselves. CiTO thus
permits the motivations of an author when referring to another

23 The Discourse Relationships Ontology: http://swan.mindinformatics.org/spec/
1.2/discourserelationships.html.

Fig. 3. The diagram shows the CiTO v 2.0 object properties grouped in terms of
their characterisation as rhetorical and/or factual, and, for the former, in terms of
their connotation (positive, neutral or negative). All the properties shown, except
cito:cites and cito:sharesAuthorsWith, are sub-properties of cito:cites itself. The
inverse property of cito:cites, namely cito:isCitedBy, and its inverse sub-properties,
are not shown.

document to be captured. For instance, the previous example may
be rewritten using CiTO as follows:

: version-of-record

cito:disputes :towards-a-semantics-vor
; cito:citesAsRelated
:meaning-and-interpretation-vor
; cito:agreesWith
:design-everyday-things-vor
; cito:extends
:exploring-intertextual-semantics-vor . . .

The current version of CiTO, version 2.3, contains and extends
the citation-specific object properties that were originally contained in CiTO version 1.6 [6], to the exclusion of all other original classes and properties within CiTO v1.6, which, as part of the
modularization we have undertaken, have been moved into FaBiO
or into two of the other SPAR ontologies, the Citation Counting and
Context Characterization Ontology (C4O)24 and the Publishing Status
Ontology(PSO)19.

CiTO now contains just two main object properties, cito:cites
and its inverse cito:isCitedBy, each of which has thirty-two sub-
properties, plus two additional generic object properties that may
be used to make statements relating two entities that do not
constitute formal citation acts: cito:shareAuthorsWith and cito:likes,
the latter permitting social media likes statements to be encoded
in RDF.

As shown in Fig. 3, these properties (and, consequently, their
inverses) may be classified as rhetorical25 and/or factual, with the
rhetorical properties being grouped in three sets depending on
their connotation: positive, informative (or neutral) or negative.26

When developing CiTO from CiTO v1.6, we intentionally
removed the domain and range constraints from its object

24 C4O, the Citation Counting and Context Characterization Ontology: http://purl.
org/spar/c4o.
25 We use the word rhetorical to refer to the particular (subjective) role and
function that a portion of text and/or a bibliographic entity may have within a
scholarly publication, as described, for example, by [2426].
26 Although we cluster the CiTO properties in Fig. 3, their formal hierarchy is
left intentionally vague. Since the exact meanings of terms may be somewhat
overlapping, we think this lack of rigid structure increase the reusability of CiTO
properties among different contexts.

properties, so that this ontology could be easily integrated with
other models. Obviously, it can be successfully used in conjunction
with FaBiO, so that descriptions of a bibliographic entity and its
citations can be mixed within a single RDF graph:

:version-of-record a fabio:JournalArticle

; dcterms:title "Intertextual semantics: A semantics for

information design"

; cito:disputes :towards-a-semantics-vor . . .

:towards-a-semantics-vor fabio:ConferencePaper

; :frbr:realizationOf [

a fabio:ResearchPaper
; dcterms:creator :renear

, :dubin , :sperberg-mcqueen ]

; dcterms:title

"Towards a semantics for XML markup"
; cito:isDisputedBy : version-of-record . . .

In addition, we have recently included in CiTO additional
properties (i.e. cito:compiles and cito:isCompiledBy) for making
specific assertions about datasets, computer programs and other
similar digital objects, and we have also developed the Argument
Model Ontology,27 an ontology that enables descriptions of
argumentation in scholarly works according to the Toulmin model
of argument [27].

6. Community uptake of FaBiO and CiTO

FaBiO and CiTO are now being used or are being considered for
adoption in a variety of academic and publishing environments,
as described below. The adoption of these models by different
communities can be ascribed, at least in part, to the minimization
of the constraints applied to the ontological entities, so that the
ontologies can be applied in a wide variety of situations.
Linked Open Vocabularies Dataset. The Linked Open Vocabularies
Dataset (LOV),28 that describes the growing ecosystem of linked
open vocabularies (RDFS or OWL ontologies) used in the Linked
Data Cloud, gives the SPAR Ontologies a special node within the
Library vocabulary space.29
SWAN ontology. The most recent version (v2.0) of the SWAN
ontology ecosystem [18] has recently been harmonised to include
FaBiO and work seamlessly with CiTO [28]. This harmonisation
was undertaken collaboratively by the authors, while developing
version 1.6 of CiTO [6] into CiTO v2.0 and FaBiO v1.0, and by Paolo
Ciccarese and Tim Clark (Harvard University), authors of the SWAN
Ontologies. The resulting combined CiTO/FaBiO + SWAN model is
specified in OWL 2 DL, is fully modular, and inherently supports
agent-based searching and mash-ups.
CiteULike. Egon Willighagen has pioneered the use of CiTO30 to
characterise bibliographic citations within CiteULike,31 the free
service for managing and discovering scholarly references. A user
can add a CiTO relationship between articles via the CiteULike
interface, provided that both the citing and the cited articles are
in the users library.

27 The Argument Model Ontology:
http://www.essepuntato.it/2011/02/argumentmodel.
28 LOV, The Linked Open Vocabularies Dataset: http://labs.mondeca.com/dataset/
lov/.
29 SPAR in LOV: http://labs.mondeca.com/dataset/lov/details/vocabularySpace_
SPAR.html.
30 http://chem-bla-ics.blogspot.com/2010/10/citeulike-cito-use-case-1-
wordles.html.
31 CiteULike: http://www.citeulike.org/.

WordPress. Martin Fenner describes32 a plug-in for WordPress
called Link-to-Link,33 that makes it easy to add citation typing
to references within a blog post, using a sub-set of the most
commonly used CiTO relationships presented in a convenient
drop-down menu.
Linked Education. The open platform Linked Education,34 which
aims at sharing and promoting the use of Linked Data for
educational purposes, recently added CiTO to its listing35 of RDF
schemas and vocabularies suitable for use in educational contexts,
for example to describe educational resources.
Virtual Observatory. Accomazzi and Dave [29] report the adoption
of the FaBiO and CiTO ontologies as part of their semantic
knowledge base, allowing easier integration and linking of the
body of heterogeneous astronomical resources into what they term
a Virtual Observatory.
Open Citations Corpus. The Open Citations Corpus36 is a database of
approx. 6.3 million biomedical literature citations, harvested from
the reference lists of all open access articles in PubMed Central.
These contain references to approx. 3.4 million papers, which
represent 20% of all PubMed-listed papers published between
1950 and 2010, including all the most highly cited papers in every
biomedical field. CiTO, FaBiO and other SPAR ontologies have been
used to encode information about bibliographic records in RDF, as
explained in the Open Citations Blog.37
Web Tracks. WebTracks38 is an open source project funded
by the JISC Managing Research Data Programme39
is
developing a peer-to-peer protocol to enable web-scale link
tracking. WebTracks focuses on actually making these connections,
particularly between research datasets and related publications.
WebTracks creates semantically annotated links between data
resources using CiTO, yielding a graph of citation and provenance
to enable web-scaled data management by exposing links between
related objects.
Societa Editrice il Mulino. The active collaboration between the
Italian scholarly publishing house Societa Editrice il Mulino40 and
the Department of Computer Science of the University of Bologna
has led to the recent prototyping of an application called Folksauro
(the name comes from the concatenation of the words folksonomy
and thesaurus). Using FaBiO and DoCO as its main ontologies,
and one or more discipline-specific thesauri developed in SKOS,
Folksauro allows a user to associate terms from the thesauri and/or
free-text keywords with the whole document, and/or with its subparts (chapters, sections, paragraphs, etc.), by means of an intuitive
interface that hides the complexity of models and languages used.
Utopia. Utopia Documents41 is a novel smart PDF reader that
semantically integrates visualization and data-analysis tools with
published research articles in PDF format. It uses CiTO to record
bibliographic citations, and has a mechanism that deconstructs a
PDF document into its constituent parts, which are then annotated
using DoCO, the Document Components Ontology17. It also pulls

that

32 http://blogs.plos.org/mfenner/2011/02/14/how-to-use-citation-typing-
ontology-cito-in-your-blog-posts/.
33 http://wordpress.org/extend/plugins/link-to-link/.
34 http://linkededucation.org/.
35 http://linkededucation.wordpress.com/data-models/schemas/.
36 The Open Citations Corpus: http://opencitations.net/.
37 The Open Citations Blog: http://opencitations.wordpress.com/.
38 WebTracks: http://webtracks.jiscinvolve.org/wp/about/.
39 JISC Managing Research Data Programme: http://www.jisc.ac.uk/whatwedo/
programmes/mrd.aspx.
40 Societa Editrice il Mulino: http://www.mulino.it.
41 Utopia Documents: http://getutopia.com.

S. Peroni, D. Shotton / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 17 (2012) 3343

bibliographic citation data live from the Open Citations Corpus and
uses them to display the citation network for the paper manifested
by the PDF, or for any of the articles referenced in that papers
reference list.
CrowdoMeter. CrowdoMeter42 is a project by Euan Adie and Martin
Fenner. It displays tweets about scientific articles and allows one
to link those with the original articles using a subset of CiTO
properties.
Data.open.ac.uk. The Open University has recently developed a
platform43 that allows the extraction, interlinking and publication
of data concerning the institutional repositories of the Open
University, with the intention of making them available for reuse
and querying. All the citations between scholarly papers present in
the dataset are described using CiTO.

7. Conclusions

In this article we have presented FaBiO, the FRBR-aligned
Bibliographic Ontology (current version 1.6), and CiTO, the Citation
Typing Ontology (current version 2.3). FaBiO and CiTO are two new
OWL 2 DL ontologies for describing bibliographic resources and
bibliographic citations on the Semantic Web. We have introduced
those two models step by step, in order to emphasise their features
for describing bibliographic objects and to stress their advantages
relative to other pre-existing models. Finally, we have reviewed
related work, and have described the community uptake of FaBiO,
CiTO and other SPAR ontologies.

We plan to extend our contribution in this field from
different perspectives. First of all, we are working to persuade
publishers to adopt FaBiO and CiTO for recording and exposing
their bibliographic and reference metadata. At the same time,
we plan to extend CiTO to include some additional citation
categories, particularly cito:contrastsWith, bearing in mind the
citation annotation scheme developed by Teufel et al. in [22],
which, while in broad agreement with our own, has a different
viewpoint, uses a different vocabulary and introduces some new
concepts. In addition, our intention is now to develop a community
around the SPAR ontologies, to maintain their development and
expand them to cover other scenarios within the publishing
domain, particularly the publication of datasets. We welcome
contact from those who would like to participate in this work.

Acknowledgments

We thank Paolo Ciccarese and Tim Clark of Harvard University for their support and valuable conceptual and technical suggestions given while we were developing FaBiO and
CiTO from CiTO v1.6 and were collaborating with them to harmonise these with SWAN. We are also grateful to our local col-
leagues, particularly Jun Zhao, Graham Klyne and Fabio Vitali,
for their warm support, constructive criticisms and help given
throughout these developments. Aspects of this work have been
supported by the JISC (Joint Informations Systems Committee)
through a grant to DS to support the Open Citations Project.
This work would not have come about but for the enlightened
policy of the Department of Computer Science of the University of Bologna of sending doctoral students on extended internships in foreign universities, from which both authors have greatly
benefited.

42 Crowdometer: http://crowdometer.org.
43 Open Linked Data from The Open University: http://data.open.ac.uk.
