Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 15 (2012) 7172

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Letter
Reply to comment on WebPIE: A Web-scale parallel inference engine using
MapReduce

Dear Sirs,
Thank you for having shared with us this letter. We are always
keen to discuss any unclear points and any limitations of our work,
and we thank Dr. Patel-Schneider for his letter.

The letter that we received can be divided in two parts. The
first part addresses points which, as the letter states,
can be
overcome without changing the thrust of the paper. This leads us
to a corrigendum with clarifications and bug fixes in the original
paper. Although these are valuable improvements, none of these
invalidate our approach or our evaluation.

The second part of the letter addresses the deep question
whether the general approach in the paper can actually perform
scalable RDFS materialization. By addressing the four points
below, we conclude that fortunately the answer to this question
is yes.
1. There is a significant bug in Algorithm 6, which uses only
two reducers...

The algorithm does not create only two reducers. The number
of reducers is set a priori, depending on the number of machines
used. The keys (0+ type and 1+ subclass) are used to calculate
a hashcode that will determine which reducer will be assigned to
that pair.
2. The scalability is not properly analyzed. With two million
triples in the input the transitive closure may include four
trillion triples

It is indeed possible to construct worst-case scenarios. In
Section 8.2 (p. 71), the paper states: The computational worst-case
complexity of even the RDFS/OWL Horst fragment precludes a solution
that is efficient on all inputs. Any approach to efficient reasoning
must make assumptions about the properties of realistic datasets, and
optimize for those realistic cases. The paper then enumerates the
key assumptions behind our algorithms.
3. The authors say that they are performing RDFS materializa-
tion. On the other hand, the authors say that they do not consider certain aspects of the problem and that they ignore the
first case of rule 5.

In Section 3.5 (p. 62), the paper states: We ignore the first case of
rule 5, following the advice against ontology hijacking from [15] that
suggests that users may not redefine the semantics of standard RDFS
constructs. One can differ in opinion about this design choice, but
one can hardly argue that we were not explicit about it.
4. A second basic problem is that it is possible to infer schema
triples from combinations of schema triples and non-schema
triples, which then participate in other inferences.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2012 Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2012.09.002

Our paper describes this case in detail at the end of Section
3.5: The only possible loop we can encounter is when we extend the
schema by introducing subproperties of rdfs:subproperty. In this case
rule 7 could fire rule 5, generating a loop. [...] The loop generated by
schema does not occur in our data. [...] However, in case it happens,
all the rules must be re-executed until fix-closure. The purpose of
this re-execution loop is to cover also the case in which schema
information is derived from non-schema information. This loop is
not necessary if the data does not contain such special cases. In any
case, WebPIE is configured by default to repeat the execution of
the RDFS rules until fix point. This also correctly treats the alleged
counterexample.

Conclusion

The corrigendum summarizes our improvements to the paper
as prompted by the letter. None of these invalidate our approach
or our evaluation. We welcome all further comments on our work,
and all reported bugs in the code (which has always been publically
available; see Ref. [8] in our paper) will be corrected and published
in future releases.

We would like to end with a more general comment. We
think that, underlying the points above, there is a difference of
opinion about the value of incomplete inference on real world
datasets versus complete inference under a worst-case analysis.
It is certainly the case that WebPIE performs incomplete RDFS
reasoning, and the paper makes no secret of this. Our impression
is that Dr. Patel-Schneider views this as a bug, because it does not
comply with the formal definition of a full RDFS closure. We, on the
other hand, regard it as a feature, because it aims to ignore trivial or
undesirable inferences, and it allows WebPIE to scale to very large
datasets. Reconciling these two perspectives will certainly be the
basis for fruitful future work.

Sincerely,
Jacopo Urbani
Department of Computer Science,
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam,
1081 HV Amsterdam, Netherlands
E-mail address: jacopo@cs.vu.nl.

Spyros Kotoulas
IBM Research Ireland, IBM Technology Campus,
Damastown Industrial Estate, Dublin 15, Ireland
E-mail address: Spyros.Kotoulas@ie.ibm.com.

Letter / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 15 (2012) 7172

Jason Maassen
Frank van Harmelen
Henri Bal
Department of Computer Science,
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam,
1081 HV Amsterdam, Netherlands

E-mail addresses: jason@cs.vu.nl (J. Maassen),
Frank.van.Harmelen@cs.vu.nl (F. van Harmelen), bal@cs.vu.nl
(H. Bal).
Available online 14 September 2012

