Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 17 (2012) 2532

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Ontology paper
The SSN ontology of the W3C semantic sensor network incubator group
Michael Compton a,, Payam Barnaghi b, Luis Bermudez c, Raul Garcia-Castro d, Oscar Corcho d,
Simon Cox e, John Graybeal f, Manfred Hauswirth g, Cory Henson h, Arthur Herzog i, Vincent Huang j,
Krzysztof Janowicz k,l, W. David Kelsey m, Danh Le Phuoc g, Laurent Lefort a, Myriam Leggieri g,
Holger Neuhaus p, Andriy Nikolov n, Kevin Page o, Alexandre Passant g, Amit Sheth h, Kerry Taylor a
a CSIRO ICT Centre, Australia
b University of Surrey, UK
c Open Geospatial Consortium, USA
d Universidad Politecnica de Madrid, Spain
e CSIRO Earth Science and Resource Engineering, Australia
f Marine Metadata Interoperability, USA
g DERI at the National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland
h Wright State University, USA
i Fraunhofer Gesellschaft, Germany
j Ericsson, Sweden
k University of California, Santa Barbara, USA
l 52 North Initiative for Geospatial Open Source Software, Munster, Germany
m Boeing, USA
n The Open University, UK
o University of Southampton, UK
p Tasmanian ICT Centre, CSIRO, Australia

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

The W3C Semantic Sensor Network Incubator group (the SSN-XG) produced an OWL 2 ontology to
describe sensors and observations  the SSN ontology, available at http://purl.oclc.org/NET/ssnx/ssn. The
SSN ontology can describe sensors in terms of capabilities, measurement processes, observations and
deployments. This article describes the SSN ontology. It further gives an example and describes the use of
the ontology in recent research projects.

Crown Copyright  2012 Published by Elsevier B.V.

Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.

Article history:
Received 9 August 2011
Received in revised form
11 May 2012
Accepted 11 May 2012
Available online 16 June 2012

Keywords:
Semantic sensor web
Linked sensor data
Ontologies
Semantic interoperability
Sensor web enablement

1. Introduction

Observations, and the sensors that obtain them, are at the core
of empirical science. Sensors are used in applications ranging from
meteorology to medical care to environmental monitoring to security and surveillance. The use of sensing devices and networked
sensing devices is increasing. This increase is accompanied by an
increasing volume of data, as well as increasing heterogeneity of
devices, data formats, and measurement procedures.

 Corresponding author.

E-mail address: Michael.Compton@csiro.au (M. Compton).

Therefore, as the prevalence of sensing devices and systems
grows, ways to manage the sensors and accompanying volume of
generated data become important. The Sensor Web Enablement
(SWE) [1] initiative of the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC)
defined data encodings and Web services to store and access
sensor-related data. These standards, for example, SensorML [2]
and O&M [3,4], provide syntactic interoperability [5]. An additional
layer is required to address semantic compatibility [6].

Semantic Web technologies have been proposed as a means to
enable interoperability for sensors and sensing systems. Semantic
Web technologies could be used in isolation or in augmenting SWE
standards in the form of the Semantic Sensor Web [5].

1570-8268 Crown Copyright  2012 Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2012.05.003

Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.

M. Compton et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 17 (2012) 2532

Semantic technologies can assist in managing, querying, and
combining sensors and observation data. Thus allowing users
to operate at abstraction levels above the technical details of
format and integration, instead working with domain concepts and
restrictions on quality. Machine-interpretable semantics allows
autonomous or semi-autonomous agents to assist in collecting,
processing, reasoning about, and acting on sensors and their
observations. Linked Sensor Data [7,8] may serve as a means to
interlink sensor data with external sources on the Web.

Shared semantic definitions help not only with data integration
from multiple sources, but can also assist in integrating new data
into historical, temporal and spatial contexts. Definitions of sensors
and their capabilities are also useful for provenance and quality
reasoning. For example, if the accuracy of a sensor depends on
phenomena other than that which it measures, then a specification
of this can be used as a guide to search for spatially and temporally
related measurements of the phenomena on which the accuracy
depends, allowing the calculation of quality metrics.

The W3C Semantic Sensor Network Incubator group (SSN-
XG) defined an OWL 2 [9] ontology to describe the capabilities
and properties of sensors, the act of sensing and the resulting
observations. This article describes the ontology, its development,
an example and current uses.
Paper contributions and organisation

This paper makes two contributions. The bulk of the paper
relates to the first and central contribution: a description of the
SSN ontology (Sections 27). An outline of the SSN-XG (Section 2)
and development of the ontology (Section 2) is presented first,
followed by the general structure of the ontology (Section 3). The
detailed description of the ontology begins with a central pattern
(Section 4), followed by sensor (Section 5), observation (Section 6)
and system (Section 7) perspectives.

The second contribution is an example of the use of the ontology
(Section 8.1) and a discussion of projects and applications in which
it has been used (Section 8.2). This is followed by concluding
remarks (Section 9).

2. The W3C semantic sensor network incubator group

W3C incubator groups are one-year (plus possible extensions)
exploratory activities on emerging Web-related concepts, guidelines or activities. They can lead to further W3C activities, member
submissions or recommendations. The SSN-XG was initiated by the
CSIRO, Wright State University, and the OGC as a forum for the development of an OWL ontology for sensors and to further investigate annotation of, and links to, existing standards.

The SSN-XG ran from March 2009 to September 2010. Some 41
people, from 16 organisations, joined the group, with 20 members
attending more than 10 meetings. The activities of the group were
recorded on the groups wiki,1 where the groups final report2
can be found. The final report includes sections on use cases,
the groups review of existing sensor and observation related
ontologies, the SSN ontology, mappings of terms from the ontology
to other standards and vocabularies, and material on the groups
other main deliverable on semantic annotation of OGC Sensor Web
Enablement standards.
Development of the SSN ontology

The group began by reviewing existing ontologies and stan-
dards, and developing use cases. The use cases were focused into

1 http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/ssn/wiki/Main_Page (last accessed 11th
May 2012).
2 http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/ssn/XGR-ssn/ (last accessed 11th May
2012).

four categories  entitled: data discovery and linking, device discovery and selection, provenance and diagnosis, and device oper-
ation, tasking and programming  with a prototypical example in
each.

The device discovery and selection use case, for example,
requires the ontology to represent sensor types, models, methods
of operation and common metrological definitions like accuracy,
precision, measurement range, and the like, thus allowing sensor
capabilities to be defined relative to prevailing conditions. Such
definitions would enable a sensor network designer to search a
database for sensors matching required parameters of operation
and accuracy, perhaps cross checking against recorded climatic
conditions or running a simulator to analyse expected performance
of such a network.

The data discovery and linking use case focused on finding
and linking data, given qualitative, spatial or temporal bounds. It
requires the sensor specifications from the device discovery and
selection case, observation data and linkage to other data sources.
While the provenance and diagnosis use case requires context
information from sensor and observation data, deployment
information, custodian descriptions, maintenance schedules and
data linkage to derive trust levels or to further analyse previous
measurements. The device operation, tasking and programming
use case requires sufficient information to reprogram a device or
understand the consequences, in terms of, say, energy usage or
network cost, of a reprogramming.

In documenting the expectations of group members, such use
cases also serve to expose the tension between completeness
and focus in ontology modelling: the choice between an ontology
that can model programming concepts, observed phenomena and
maintenance schedules and one that is sensor only. Indeed, the
review (see also [10]) showed that while there were a number of
existing artefacts (twelve ontologies were reviewed) none covered
the requirements of the use cases or satisfied a design goal of
limiting to sensor specific concepts and relations.

Limiting the ontology to sensor only concepts should serve
to increase modularity and reusability and became the inclusion
criteria for the group. Thus, the ontology should enable the sensor
aspects of the use cases, without needing to fulfil all the modelling
requirements.

Discussions revealed different interpretations of concepts; even
fundamental concepts like sensor  a single sensing device, or any
sensing system; a single stimulus to observation sensor, or one that
allows multiple calculations and combination of stimuli.

Thus, after much discussion, and a few false starts, the group
consensus was to build an ontology to describe sensors, that was:
as far as possible sensor specific; compatible with OGC standards,
without being constrained by them; and that generally chose the
broadest definition for concepts, so that subconcepts could be later
defined for more specific interpretations. For example, the result
for sensor was any entity capable of following some method to
sense, allowing sensing devices as a subconcept.

The SSN ontology was developed by group consensus over a
period of one year. First, the core concepts and relations were
developed (sensors, features and properties, observations, and
systems). Then, measuring capabilities, operating and survival
restrictions, and deployments were added in turn. Finally, the
alignment to DOLCE-UltraLite3 (DUL) and the realisation of the core
StimulusSensorObservation ontology design pattern [11] were
added.

The alignment to a foundational ontology makes ontological
commitments explicit, further explains concepts and relations,
and restricts possible interpretations towards their intended

3 http://www.loa-cnr.it/ontologies/DUL.owl (last accessed 11th May 2012).

Fig. 1. The SSN ontology, key concepts and relations, split by conceptual modules. The concepts not depicted are largely properties for measurement capabilities, and survival
or operating ranges: accuracy, precision, resolution and the like. Note the central importance of sensors, observations and properties, brought out by the SSO ontology design
pattern.

meaning [12]. DUL was chosen as the upper ontology because it is
more lightweight than other options, whilst having an ontological
framework and basis, for example with qualities, regions and
object categories, that was consistent with the groups modelling.

3. The SSN ontology

The SSN ontology, available at http://purl.oclc.org/NET/ssnx/ssn,
is organised, conceptually but not physically, into ten modules,
Fig. 1. The full ontology consists of 41 concepts and 39 object
properties, directly inheriting from 11 DUL concepts and 14 DUL
object properties.

The ontology can describe sensors, the accuracy and capabilities
of such sensors, observations and methods used for sensing. Also
concepts for operating and survival ranges are included, as these
are often part of a given specification for a sensor, along with
its performance within those ranges. Finally, a structure for field
deployments is included to describe deployment lifetime and
sensing purpose of the deployed macro instrument.

Related, but not sensor specific, material such as units of mea-
surement, locations, hierarchies of sensor types, and feature and
property hierarchies were left aside. Where appropriate, concepts
were included to allow linking to such external ontologies. For ex-
ample, an observation is of a particular property of a feature, where
observations are fully described by the ontology, while feature and
property are left as place holder concepts. The intention is that in
building an ontology based on the SSN ontology, knowledge engineers would include the SSN ontology, suitable units, location and
feature ontologies, and link these via subclassing or equivalence re-
lations. This combination can then be used to describe a hierarchy
of sensors relevant to the particular application. The SSN-XG wiki
pages contain a number of illustrative examples.

The SSN ontology is built around a central Ontology Design
Pattern (ODP) [13] describing the relationships between sensors,
stimulus, and observations, the StimulusSensorObservation
(SSO) pattern [11]. The ontology can be seen from four main

perspectives:
 A sensor perspective, with a focus on what senses, how it senses,
and what is sensed;
 An observation perspective, with a focus on observation data
and related metadata;
 A system perspective, with a focus on systems of sensors and
deployments; and,
 A feature and property perspective, focusing on what senses a
particular property or what observations have been made about
a property.
The ontology takes a liberally inclusive view of what a sensor
is: anything that observes; and allows such sensors to be described
at any level of detail, for example, allowing sensors to be seen
simply as objects that play a role of sensing, as well as allowing
sensors to be described in terms of their components and method
of operation. Humans and also simulations can be modelled as
sensors.

Concepts and properties in the ontology are commented
with rdfs:comment, rdfs:isDefinedBy, rdfs:label, rdfs:seeAlso [14],
and dc:source.4 The rdfs:seeAlso comments link to further
explanation on the groups wiki, while the dc:source comments
use the SKOS [15] terms skos:exactMatch and skos:closeMatch
to relate concepts and properties to SensorML, O&M and the
International Vocabulary of Metrology [16, also known as ISO/IEC
Guide 99:2007]. Scripts were developed that derive navigable
documentation from the ontology.5

The following sections present the SSO pattern and the sensor,
observation and system perspectives (the feature and property

4 Dublin core definitions are available at http://dublincore.org (last accessed 11th
May 2012), where dc:source is defined as A related resource from which the
described resource is derived.
5 http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/ssn/wiki/SSN (last accessed 11th May
2012).

M. Compton et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 17 (2012) 2532

Fig. 2. The StimulusSensorObservation Pattern (central concepts in bold).

perspective being covered by the relations introduced in the other
sections). Namespaces for the SSN and DUL ontologies are written
prefixing concepts and properties as ssn: and dul:, respectively.

4. The StimulusSensorObservation Pattern

Central to the ontology is the StimulusSensorObservation
ontology design pattern [11], Fig. 2. The pattern links sensors,
what they sense, and the resulting observations, encompassing
three of the four perspectives  the missing system perspective is
more about system organisation and deployments than sensing,
but clearly links to the pattern. The SSO has been developed as
a minimal, common ground for heavy-weight ontologies for the
Semantic Sensor Web, as well as to explicitly address the need for
light-weight semantics for Linked Data.

4.1. Stimuli

Stimuli are changes or states (dul:Event) in an environment
that a sensor can detect and use to measure a property. A
stimulus (ssn:Stimulus) is thus a proxy (ssn:isProxyfor) for an
observable property (ssn:Property), or a number of observable
properties. For example, changes in electrical resistance as a
proxy for temperature in a thermistor, or current generated
by spinning wind cups for wind speed. Properties themselves
are observable characteristics of (ssn:isPropertyOf) real-world
entities (ssn:FeatureOfInterest).
In the DOLCE alignment we
specify ssn:FeatureOfInterest  dul:Event  dul:Object, rather
than using dul:Entity, since one cannot sense properties of abstract
entities, such as sets and regions. The notion of a stimulus marks
the borders of empirical science [17,18].

4.2. Sensors

In the SSO ontology, sensors (ssn:Sensor) are physical objects (dul:PhysicalObject) that observe, transforming incoming
stimuli (ssn:detects) into another, often digital, representation
(ssn:SensorOutput). Sensors may be hardware devices, sensing
systems, scientific computational models, human run laboratory
setups  anything that senses. A sensor follows (ssn:implements) a
method (ssn:Sensing  dul:Method  dul:Description) describing
how the sensor observes: this may be, for example, a description
of the scientific method implemented by the sensor.

The sensing method, though, is distinct from a process or
workflow description of how the sensor operates (not described by
the SSN ontology, workflow and process descriptions being more
widely applicable and expected to be imported from a suitable
ontology). A method is an abstract description; there may be any
number of ways to concretely realise one.

4.3. Observations

Observations (ssn:Observation) are the nexus of the SSO
pattern. For a sensing event, an observation can link the act of
sensing (dul:includesEvent, not in the pattern), the event that
is the stimulus (dul:includesEvent), the sensor (ssn:observedBy),
a method (ssn:sensingMethodUsed), a result (ssn:observation-
Result), an observed feature (ssn:featureOfInterest), and property
(ssn:observedProperty), placing all in an interpretative context.
While observations have been modelled in different ways in the
literature, we defined them as social constructs (ssn:Observation
 dul:Situation). That is, observations are contexts for interpreting
incoming stimuli and fixing parameters such as time and
location. Researchers interested in the internal processes by which
sensors translate stimuli into other representations may model
observations as events.

5. Sensor perspective

The SSO pattern describes a sensor in terms of its stimulus,
sensing method, and the observations it makes. The complete
sensor perspective, Fig. 3, enriches this picture to include the
capabilities of sensors. For any property observed (ssn:observes)
by a sensor, the performance (accuracy, etc.) of the sensor might be
affected by prevailing environmental conditions, related or not to
the property under observation. This is modelled as measurement
capabilities.
The measuring capability of sensors

The fact that the accuracy of a sensor is affected by prevailing
conditions is an observable property of the sensor. Indeed, sensing
devices, are often described by a data sheet that lists properties
observed of the sensor in various conditions. That is, accuracy,
measurement range, precision, resolution, and the like are all
properties that one might observe of a sensor (which means that
the capabilities of a sensor can be specified using observations
recorded in the SSN ontology).

The ontology models ssn:Accuracy, ssn:DetectionLimit, ssn:
Drift, ssn:Frequency, ssn:Latency, ssn:MeasurementRange, ssn:
Precision, ssn:ResponseTime, ssn:Resolution, ssn:Sensitivity and
ssn:Selectivity as measurement properties (ssn:Measurement
Property  ssn:Property). A sensor may have (ssn:hasMeasure-
mentCapability) a number of measurement capabilities (ssn:Meas-
urementCapability  ssn:Property), describing the capability of
the sensor in (ssn:inCondition) various conditions (ssn:Condition),
which are in turn observable properties of the sensors environ-
ment.

A measurement capability instance collects together observed
properties of a sensor in the conditions specified. A sensor may
have links, through ssn:hasMeasurementCapability, to any number

Fig. 3. Ontology view focusing on measurement capabilities of sensors, with highlighting focus on measurement capabilities. A sensor may be linked to any number of
capability descriptions, each specifying, for example, how the sensors accuracy and resolution are affected by prevailing environmental conditions.

of ssn:MeasurementCapability instances: for example, multiple
instances with the same property, but different conditions, specify
the capability of the sensor in a range of conditions, while,
for sensors that observe multiple properties, multiple instances
with different properties, perhaps each with different conditions,
specify the capability of the various sensing functions.

Note that the SSN ontology does not restrict the observations of
a device to fall within the prescribed measurement ranges (or make
assertions about a device that is used beyond its measurement or
survival capacity). These would be application specific algorithms
to detect outliers, calculate quality metrics, determine damage, or
any number of other parameters. Such algorithms would use the
specification to determine the parameters (potentially asserting
new facts back into the ontology) and may be implemented as OWL
restrictions, rules, other code that access the knowledge base and
reasoner through an API, or a combination of these. The purpose
of the ontology is to record the specification and enable such
algorithms, not to enforce one such algorithm on all applications.

6. Observation perspective

Complementing the sensor perspective is the observation
perspective, which completes the description of an observation introduced in the SSO pattern. Observations are contexts for interpreting incoming stimuli and, hence, place the observing event and
stimulus in an interpreting context. The context includes observed
feature (ssn:featureOfInterest), property (ssn:observedProperty),
observing sensor (ssn:observedBy), result (ssn:observationResult),
and method (ssn:sensingMethodUsed) from the SSO pattern. It can
also, in complement to a sensors capabilities, record an adjudged
quality of the observation (ssn:qualityOfObservation), a time the
result became available (ssn:observationResultTime) and a time at
which the sampling took place (ssn:observationSamplingTime)
time being an aspect the SSN ontology does not describe and is left
for an imported time ontology.

The treatment of an observation as a social construct, interpreting events, participants and associated result, differs from O&M, in
which observations are seen as the observing events themselves,
but is in line with the pattern proposed by Blomqvist.6 The treatment here has the benefit that it separates a stimulus event from
potential multiple interpretations of it and that it signifies the interpretative nature of observing. Despite the different ontological
classifications of observation, the associated data remains the same
as O&M.

6 http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Submissions:Observation
cessed 11th May 2012).

(last

ac-

A sensing method can both describe the principle underlying
a sensor and describe how observations were made: that is, the
principle underlying the observation, describing, for example, how
a sensor was positioned and used. In some cases, this allows a
modelling choice, where, for example, sensing devices used in a
particular way could be best modelled as sensors used as per an
observation method, whereas, a more intricate setup may be more
appropriately modelled as a sensor than observation method.

The ontology is thus designed to support modelling complex
cases. For instance, the same sensing device, such as a specific
thermometer, can be used to measure soil as well as ground
temperature. Measurements for these observed properties arrive
at different observation values and refer to different features of
interest and, hence, cannot be combined. It is the measurement
procedures that distinguishes both observations. For instance, air
temperature is typically measured 2 m above ground with a
sensor protected from direct solar radiation. Consequently, the
SSN ontology can be used to foster semantic interoperability
by preventing agents and Web services from combining both
temperature measures. Probst and Lutz have shown that this is not
possible on the syntactic level [19].

7. System perspective

The system perspective, Fig. 4, is constructed around a system (ssn:System) concept representing parts of sensing infras-
tructure. A system has components (ssn:hasSubSystem) which
are systems. Systems, of which devices and sensing devices
are subconcepts (ssn:SensingDevice  ssn:Device  ssn:System),
have operating and survival ranges (ssn:hasOperatingRange and
ssn:hasSurvivalRange), may be mounted on platforms (ssn:
onPlatform) and may be deployed (ssn:hasDeployment).

7.1. Operating and survival restrictions

Prevailing environmental conditions may affect the performance of a sensor, similarly, a system or device may have a defined operating environment, and environmental extremes may
exceed the capacity of a system to survive and make further
observations. The general structure for describing operating and
survival ranges is the same as for sensors and measurement ca-
pabilities, indeed they are observable properties of systems. The
operating range (ssn:OperatingRange), describing characteristic of
the environmental and other conditions in which the system is intended to operate, includes features such as power ranges, power
sources, standard configurations, and attachments. The survival

M. Compton et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 17 (2012) 2532

and the Kno.e.sis Center8 (also an example of semantically annotating streaming sensor data); a sensor embedded products example
from the SmartProducts project9; an agriculture and meteorology
example; and a specification drawn from a commercial sensor data
sheet.

The ontology of the data sheet example,10 Fig. 5, imports the
SSN ontology and the QU ontologies11 of quantities and units. The
example uses properties (called quantity kinds in QU), units of
measure, and values from the QU ontologies. QU quantity kinds are
specified as subsumed by ssn:Property and the QU units are used
in specifying concrete values.

It is a good case study because the device measures two
properties (wind speed and direction) and the accuracy of the wind
speed measurements is dependent on prevailing conditions. That
the accuracies are expressed as relative and absolute errors further
shows the detail that can be obtained.
Further, the device data sheet also includes the characteristic
transfer function of the device: U = 0.24 + (0.699  F ), where
U is wind speed in m/s and F is frequency in Hz. This is the formula
used by the device to relate the turning of the cups (the frequency)
to windspeed: it is the measurement method. In the example, the
function is documented as a string, but could equally be expressed
in MathML [20], as a program fragment, or described using an
ontology for processes and workflows, such as one based on OWLS12 or PML13such formal definitions can be used to construct
sensors from specifications [21].

The example would help satisfy the device selection and
provenance use cases, and could be extended with a suitable device
ontology with concepts for size, weight, power usage and, if the
device were reprogrammable, as in [22], concepts for the tasking
and reprogramming use case.

The example specifies properties of all such devices, not
a particular device. Generally, an ontology extending the SSN
ontology defines types and classes of devices as (TBox) concepts
and instances (actual devices in particular places) as (ABox)
individuals. This division, between TBox definitions of sensor
classes and ABox definitions of sensor instances (similarly for
observations), means ABox individuals need not repeat the general
information for the sensor type, which is inferred to be present.
Instead, only contextual information, such as location, deployment,
etc., is required; an advantage over SensorML which has no such
class/instance division.

8.2. Uses of the SSN ontology

By people not involved in the SSN-XG, the ontology has been
used as part of an architecture for the web of things [23], in sensing
for manufacturing [24], for representing humans and personal
devices as sensors [25] and as part of a linked data infrastructure
for SWE [26].

Along with those mentioned in Section 8.1, the ontology has

also been used by SSN-XG participants in the following ways.

The SPITFIRE FP7 project14 combines the ontology with an
event model,15 a context and cognition ontology and linked open

8 http://knoesis.wright.edu/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).
9 http://www.smartproducts-project.eu/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).
10 http://purl.oclc.org/NET/ssnx/meteo/WM30 (last accessed 11th May 2012).
11 http://purl.oclc.org/NET/ssnx/qu/qu and http://purl.oclc.org/NET/ssnx/qu/qu-
rec20 (last accessed 11th May 2012).
12 http://www.w3.org/Submission/OWL-S/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).
13 http://tw.rpi.edu/portal/Proof_Markup_Language (last accessed 11th May
2012).
14 http://www.spitfire-project.eu/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).
15 http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Ontology:Event_Model_F
cessed 11th May 2012).

(last

ac-

Fig. 4. Ontology view showing systems, deployments, platforms and operating and
survival conditions.

range (ssn:SurvivalRange) describes environmental conditions to
which a sensor can be exposed without causing lasting damage:
i.e., the sensor continues to operate as per defined measurement
capabilities. If, however, the survival range is exceeded, the sensor
is considered damaged such that measurement capability specifications may no longer hold.

7.2. Deployment

A deployment (ssn:Deployment  dul:Process  dul:Event) is
a process that encompasses all phases in the lifetime of a deployed
system: such as, installation, maintenance and decommissioning.
A system is deployed on (ssn:deployedOnPlatform) a platform
(ssn:Platforma role an entity plays whilst a system is attached).
Locations of platforms, systems or sensors and temporal
properties of deployments are areas where other ontologies are
required to fill in the details. Broadly, location can be represented
as either abstractions of real-world locations, or as absolute or
relative locations. In the first case, relating (dul:hasLocation) a
sensor to a place (dul:PhysicalPlace), as in the sensor/platform is
on the eastern edge of the lake; indeed the relation between a
sensor and a platform can be specified in this way (ssn:onPlatform
 dul:hasLocation). Absolute and relative locations, on the other
hand, acknowledge that location is an observable aspect of an
entity, which thus may have a property (ssn:hasProperty) stating
location using, for example, absolute or relative latitude and
longitude.

Temporal properties could be included by specifying a date for
deployment processes (dul:hasEventDate) or by including a time
ontology, perhaps treating time as observable and classifying time
concepts into the DUL hierarchy (using dul:TimeInterval).

8. Examples and uses of the SSN ontology

8.1. Examples

Examples on the groups wiki combine the SSN ontology with
units of measurement, feature and quality, and domain ontologies.
The examples are: two LOD examples, from the SENSEI7 project [7]

7 http://www.sensei-project.eu/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).

Fig. 5. Simplified view of wind sensor example. The wind speed sensor has accuracy dependent on wind conditions. Not shown in the figure are the operating and survival
ranges and the specification of the wind direction sensor, which comes with options for 355 and 360 measurement ranges. The sources of new concepts are shown with
wm30: and qu: namespaces. Values incorporate DUL regions and QU units.

data sources such as linked geodata16 and DBpedia.17 This gives
a scalable data model for representing sensor information and
inferred semantic descriptions of sensors, which is used, for
example, with SPARQL in queries that involve both the sensor
data and the contextual linked data. The linked data is also used
to automatically annotate new sensors based on the context
that can be discovered in the sensor data and the LOD cloud.
For example, spatially or thematically related sensors can be
discovered through the linked data with the integration of place
names, coordinates, sensing types, etc. Linking sensed features,
sensors and other Internet of Things objects through the LOD cloud
gives a machine processable, but also human-friendly, semantic
entity representation in line with the linked data paradigm (see
also [27,28]).

The SSN ontology and the SSO pattern are also key for the
Semantic Sensor Web and Linked Sensor Data work at 52 North.18
The ontology and SSO pattern are used in the implementation
of a transparent and RESTful proxy for OGCs Sensor Observation
Service (SOS). The proxy takes a URI and returns an RDF
representation of requested observation data. The URIs are defined
by a schema that provides both identity and filter encoding.
The proxy can be installed in front of a SOS to serve Linked
Sensor Data on-the-fly [29]. 52 North has also implemented a
semantically-enabled Sensor Plug & Play framework [30]. The SSN
ontology is combined with ontologies for observed properties,
such as SWEET,19 and SWE documents are annotated to link to
these ontologies. On installation of a new sensor, the framework
can thus interpret the metadata advertised in the corresponding
SensorML document and serve up observations as annotated O&M.
Further, if a requirement for a particular type of stream has been
requested as a template request from SWE services, the framework
can resolve the semantics of the SWE descriptions, taking into
account for example property or sensor hierarchies, and uses SWRL
rules to match and convert compatible units. This allows on-
the-fly integration of sensors with the Sensor Web, minimising
administration efforts. Thus the manual interaction and mediation
required to register new sensors can be reduced to a minimum and
the probability of semantic mismatching can be reduced.

16 http://linkedgeodata.org/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).
17 http://dbpedia.org/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).
18 http://52north.org/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).
19 http://sweet.jpl.nasa.gov/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).

The ontology is a fundamental ontology in the SemsorGrid4Env
project,20 which aims to build large semantic sensor network
applications for environmental management [31,32]. The project
deployed APIs for developing web applications and mashups that
use the semantics to simplify the configuration and deployment
of services. The SSN ontology is linked with ontologies for
coastal features, services and roles for emergency response,21
as well as SWEET, and United Kingdom mapping data.22 Using
spatiotemporal and geographic extensions to SPARQL, data can be
queried from sources such as relational databases, XML stores, or
triple stores. The system allows the discovery of data sources and
services based on content and spatiotemporal coverage as well as
integration of heterogeneous sensor and stored data sources.

The ontology was used in publishing data from the Spanish
Meteorological Agency.23 It is used in the Exalted project24 for
query management, event processing and communication. And
used at CSIRO in research on sensor network installation, querying,
programming and provenance.25

9. Conclusion

The W3C Semantic Sensor Network Incubator Group developed
an OWL ontology  the SSN ontology  for describing sensors.
The SSN ontology can describe sensors, sensing, the measurement
capabilities of sensors, the observations that result from sensing,
and deployments in which sensors are used. The ontology
covers large parts of the SensorML and O&M standards, omitting
calibrations, process descriptions and data types, each not sensor
specific.

The StimulusSensorObservation ontology design pattern can
be used separately for the light-weight semantics preferred by
some Linked Data applications. It may be preferable to arrange
the ontology in physically separate modules, with, for example,

20 http://www.semsorgrid4env.eu/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).
21 http://www.semsorgrid4env.eu/ontologies/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).
22 http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite/ontology/
May 2012).
23 http://aemet.linkeddata.es/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).
24 http://www.ict-exalted.eu/ (last accessed 11th May 2012).
25 http://www.csiro.au/science/Sensors-and-network-technologies.html (last accessed 11th May 2012).

(last accessed 11th

M. Compton et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 17 (2012) 2532

the SSO pattern, the bulk of the sensor concepts and deployments
in separate ontologies (deployments ontology importing sensor
concepts, which imports SSO, which imports DUL).

In allowing the TBox/ABox division discussed in Section 8.1, the
SSN ontology allows class and instance definitions to be managed
in separate ontologies, perhaps by separate authorities, an option
not available for SensorML: for example, device manufacturers
providing concept definitions for products and users specifying
instances on deployment.

The SSN ontology is currently used in a number of research
projects. Its development was informed largely by participants use
cases, existing OWL ontologies, OGC standards, and vocabularies
such as the International Vocabulary of Metrology.
