Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 24 (2014) 12

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Editorial
The Semantic Web Challenge 2012

F. Lecue, M. Stephenson, E. Daly, V. Bicer, A. Gkoulalas-Divanis, G.
Di Lorenzo, A. Schumann and P. Aonghusa from IBM Researchs
Smart Cities Team. The mayor of Dublin wanted to know why
his ambulances were perennially late, so this team integrated
and analysed knowledge from hundreds of information sources
emanating from the city, ranging from usual twitter feeds to
garbage collection tags and many more, to help the mayor improve
city service.

The two systems that won third place jointly in the Open Track
were Wildfire Monitoring by K. Kyzirakos, M. Karpathiotakis,
G. Garbis, C. Nikoladu, K. Bereta,
I Papatousis, T. Herekakis,
D. Michail, M. Koubarakis and C. Kontoes from the National
and Kapodistrian University of Athens, National Observatory of
Athens and the Harokopeio University of Athens, and Open SelfMedication by Olivier Cure of Universite Paris-Est, LIGM. The
Wildfire Monitoring system combines multimedia satellite images
with ontologies and Linked Geospatial Data to improve the wildfire
monitoring service used by the Greek civil protection agencies,
military, and firefighters. Cures system, on the other hand, advises
on self-medication, using the Linked Open Data cloud to mine
contraindications for various over the counter medications and
adds to these where they were missing. A mobile geo-location
price comparison tool enables users to find nearby pharmacies
that sell the cheapest drugs, enabling French health care insurance
companies to reduce their costs.

Finally, the winner of the Billion Triples Track challenge was
Exploring the Linked Data Cloud by X. Zhang, D. Song, S.Priya,
Z. Daniels, K. Reynolds and J. Heflin of Lehigh University. This tool
allows for users to understand how massive data sets are populated
and reveals patterns in within these data sets.

These papers demonstrate the high quality and diverse nature
of the 2012 challenge entries, impressing the judges as being
interesting, well designed, highly polished, and having clear use
cases for both the general public and for domain experts. They
show the diversity of ways in which Semantic Web data can be
used, and represent some of the best applications developed in the
research community, combining a wide range of technologies with
clear use cases and well-designed interfaces.

The goal of the Semantic Web Challenge1 is to provide
researchers and industry with a forum to showcase the best
Semantic Web applications, to demonstrate practical progress
towards achieving the vision of the Semantic Web, and to
show the value of Semantic Web technologies within various
application domains. The Semantic Web Challenge has been
organised annually since 2003.

The Semantic Web Challenge 2012 took place at the 11th
International Semantic Web Conference held in Boston, USA, from
1315 November, 2012. The challenge consisted of two tracks:
the Open Track and the Billion Triples Track. The Open Track
requires that applications are designed to operate in an open Web
environment and that they utilise the semantics of the data which
they process, whilst the Billion Triples Track focuses on dealing
with very large amounts of RDF data, which has been crawled from
the public Web and thus exhibits characteristics such as vocabulary
heterogeneity and varying data quality. For the 2012 challenge, we
provided the participants of the Billion Triples Track with an RDF
data set consisting of approximately 1.4 billion triples.

The Semantic Web Challenge 2012 received 22 submissions (19
for the Open Track and 3 for the Billion Triples Track), which was
substantially more than in 2011. All submissions were evaluated
rigorously by a jury composed of leading scientists and experts
from industry in a 3-round knockout competition, according to
a comprehensive set of challenge requirements. In the second
round, the nine best submissions were chosen based on their
presentation as a poster and demonstration. In the final round,
the winners were picked after oral presentations and further live
demonstrations.

In this special issue, we present articles about the awardwinning systems: the top systems in the Open Track and the
winner of the Billion Triples Track.

The winner of the Open Track was Event Media by Houd
Khrouf, Vuk Milicic and Raphael Troncy from EURECOM, Sophia
Antipolis, France. This system demonstrates how to use Semantic
Web technology to more efficiently and easily integrate multiple
online and social media content sources that evolve over time.

The runner-up of the Open Track was Semantic Processing of
Urban Data (SPUD) by S. Kotoulas, V. Lopez, R Lloyd, M. Sbodid,

1 http://challenge.semanticweb.org/

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2014.03.002
1570-8268/
 2014 Published by Elsevier B.V.

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 24 (2014) 12

We would like to thank all the members of the jury for
their detailed judgment of the strengths and weaknesses of the
submitted applications. The jury consisted this year of:
 Tom Heath (Talis, UK)
 Peter Mika (Yahoo!, Spain)
 Enrico Motta (Open University, UK)
 Sweitze Roffel (Elsevier, USA)
 Daniel Schwabe (PUC-Rio, Brazil)
 Hideaki Takeda (National Institute of Informatics, Japan)

Special thanks also go to the sponsor of the Semantic Web

Challenge  Elsevier  for their long-standing support.

Andreas Harth
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany

Diana Maynard
