Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) v

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Editorial

This special issue of the Journal of Web Semantics is composed of
revised and extended versions of some of the best papers presented
at the Semantic Web track of WWW 2007 held at Banff, Canada,
May 812, 2007.

We received 114 submissions and accepted 16 for presentation.
We co-chairs found the quality of the 16 papers were very high
and were happy to have been able to arrange five exciting sessions on ontologies, similarity and extraction, query languages and
databases, Semantic Web and Web 2.0 and applications. This special issue contains three best papers among the 16 accepted papers.
One from the ontology session, one from the query languages and
databases session and one from the applications session. Let us
briefly introduce each of them.

The first paper is Syndication on the Web using a Description Logic Approach. Syndication plays a critical role in connecting
information publishers and consumers on the WWW. To make the
connection more efficient and effective, a more powerful approach
is needed for matching the information needs of the consumers
with the content that is offered by the publishers. This paper proposes a new syndication method using the Web Ontology Language
OWL which enables a more fine grained selection of relevant infor-
mation. A novel matching approach is offered based on incremental
query answering. The proposed method is a natural extension of the
current RSS1.0 syndication.

The second paper is ActiveRDF: embedding Semantic Web data
into object-oriented languages. The success of database-driven

applications relies heavily on the efficient access to relational and
object-oriented data. Since the data model of the Semantic Web is
different from the conventional data model of databases, Semantic Web applications need different ways to access and manipulate
the data represented in the Semantic Web standards. ActiveRDF
enables such applications to access and manipulate Semantic Web
data in an efficient way. It is based on a thorough investigation of the
mismatches between Semantic Web data and object-oriented data
representations. Example applications exploiting ActiveRDF show
the usefulness of the developed approach.

The third paper is Yago: A Large Ontology from Wikipedia
and WordNet. In the Semantic Web, everything needs to scale.
Ontologies are no exception, of course. However, large ontologies
tend to be of low quality. Yago is a large-scale ontology consisting of 1.7 million entities and 15 million facts about them and
was automatically built from Wikipedia and WordNet. Unlike other
ontologies that have been generated automatically, Yago manages
to achieve high quality. This is why Yago is expected to make a
considerable contribution to the development of Semantic Web
applications.

We, co-editors, would be happy if readers enjoy this special issue
and find it informative for their research as well as for developing
Semantic Web applications.

Riichiro Mizoguchi
Rudi Studer

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2008 Published by Elsevier B.V.
