Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 241242

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Editorial
Introduction to the special issue on the Semantic Web Challenge 2006 and 2007

The Semantic Web Challenge (challenge.semanticweb.org)
started in 2003 with the inspiration to showcase the best of semantic technology, to stimulate research and development and to serve
as an informal benchmark that can be used not only to compare systems but also to measure the progress in the field. The idea of the
Challenge was summed up in the phrase show us what is possible
and that is what the Challenge has provided since then: the motivation to create compelling end-user applications that show the
technology at work as part of real-life applications. The Challenge
has been a success in that although the applications created would
not be competitive on the marketplace directly without significant investment, all of the top applications exhibited features that
went well beyond in what was visible at the time on the commercial scene. In essence, the participants demonstrated the reasons
for continuing to invest in semantic technologies and have driven
the research agenda by calling out areas that have needed further
attention.

It has been clear from the beginning that semantic technologies
are applicable in a broad range of domains and thus restricting the
Challenge to a particular task would have seriously limited showing what is possible. Similarly, its been noted that each particular
application requires a different mix of technological components
and while its possible to measure individual components in quantifiable ways (e.g. to measure the speed of executing a query) such
measurements would tell little about the overall end-user expe-
rience. Thus from the beginning the Challenge has been open to
all contributions as long as they have met the minimal criteria of
applicability in terms of manipulating the meaning of data, using
sources of knowledge under diverse ownership and control, and
representing a complete application intended for an end-user (and
not a developer). The applications have been judged on a number of dimensions that express the desirable characteristics of a
Semantic Web application such as applying expressive reasoning
methods, exhibiting desirable scaling properties, using multimedia
items etc. (The complete list of minimal criteria and the additional
desirable features are listed on the Challenge web site.) Each year
the judging has been carried out by members of the Advisory Board
with the help external experts. The authors of the top systems have
been awarded prizes every year, which was made possible by the
sponsors of the Challenge.

The first three Challenges have received 10, 18 and 7 sub-
missions, respectively. These systems have been demonstrated at
the yearly ISWC conferences and their short descriptions have
appeared in the conference proceedings. The papers describing the
winning systems of these competitions have also appeared as jour-

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2008.09.001

nal articles [2,3,1]. In 2006 and 2007 the Challenge has received
14 and 18 submissions, respectively. This Special Issue is a collection of six articles describing the six winning systems of these past
2 years. As a collection, these descriptions and the accompanying
demos show the tremendous progress the competition has seen in
many areas. One sign that is immediately apparent to the reader is
that while in the past a system may have relied on the user entering
a complex query in an obscure knowledge representation formalism to retrieve a piece of information, by 2007 the winning systems
have managed to hide almost all of the complexity of navigating
complex result sets.

The articles also demonstrate the broad applicability of Semantic Web technology. In our first paper from the Semantic Web
Challenge 2006, Schreiber et al. demonstrate how metadata and
ontologies can be used to relate items from the collections of different museums and make them searchable as a single virtual
collection. The main challenges addressed are ontology alignment and providing keyword-based search over metadata graphs
through an easy-to-use interface. The work of Celma et al. addresses
another form of non-textual media, in particular music, where
the main issue the authors tackled is music recommendation
based on personal preferences. As in the case of museum artifacts,
audio metadata also aided in integrating information from multiple sources without an explicit understanding of the content. The
last winner of 2006 is a framework for generating metadata applications for Web communities. The technological highlight is the
use of P2P technology, which provides for privacy considerations as
well as implementing pull mechanisms for keeping data up to date.
The system is designed in a way that starting up new communities
and composing the user interface of the community application is
driven by the semantics of the data and requires minimal programming effort.

From the even broader field of the Semantic Web Challenge
2007, the work of Heath and Motta stood out by providing the
most comprehensive user experience. The application targets the
domain of reviews, where semantic technology again brings the
key element of integrating content from across the Web, in particular combining reviews with information about the object(s)
being reviewed. The Potluck system by Huyhn et al. impressed
reviewers by providing a surprisingly simple and intuitive interface for one of the most complex operations on Semantic Web
data, the merging of data sources, which includes the alignment
of schemas as well as the cleaning of the resulting data. This is a
significant achievement in that it allows casual users to mash-up
data without necessarily being aware of semantic technology. Our

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 241242

last paper by Wang et al. returns to the museum scene and picks
up where the work of the first article finished. The system adds
personalized recommendations to the virtual museum based on
the users ratings of individual art works and a machine understanding of concepts and relationships in the art domain. This
work also demonstrates a possible future of museums where the
online visitors can continue exploring the real museum while taking with them all the knowledge and information gathered online,
or vice versa, continuing online a visit that began in the physical
museum.

We hope the reader will enjoy these articles as much as we

enjoyed organizing the Challenge in these years.
