Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 137138

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Editorial
Introduction to the special issue on Semantic Multimedia

It is the target of this special issue to collect and report on
recent work that aims at narrowing the large disparity between
the low-level descriptors that can be computed automatically from
multimedia content and the richness and subjectivity of semantics
in user queries and human interpretations of audiovisual media 
the so-called Semantic Gap.

Research in this area is important because the amount of information available as multimedia for the purpose of entertainment,
security, teaching or technical documentation is overwhelming but
the understanding of the semantics of such data sources is very lim-
ited. This means that the ways in which it can be accessed by users
is also severely limited and so the full social or economic potential
of this content cannot be realised.

Addressing the grand challenge posed by the Semantic Gap
requires a multi-disciplinary approach and this is reflected in recent
research in this area. Thus, by its very nature, this special issue is
targeting an interdisciplinary community. For example, multimedia researchers who deal with signal processing, computer vision,
pattern recognition, multimedia analysis, indexing, retrieval and
management of raw multimedia data are increasingly leveraging
methods and tools from the Semantic Web field by considering
how to enrich their methods with explicit semantics. Conversely,
Semantic Web researchers consider multimedia as an extremely
fruitful area of application for their methods and technologies and
are actively investigating how to enhance their techniques with
results from the multimedia analysis community. A growing community of researchers is now pursuing both approaches in various
high-profile projects across the globe. However, it remains difficult
for both sides of the divide to communicate and learn from each
other. It is our hope that this special issue will go some way towards
easing this by presenting recent state-of-the-art results from both
communities.

To provide an outlet and to improve communication and collaboration between the two fields this special issue on Semantic
Multimedia is actually a double special issue brought forward by
Elseviers Journal of Web Semantics as well as by Springers Multimedia Tools and Applications. Contributions were sought from both
communities and for both journals in a joint call. The 37 papers submitted to the joint special issue demonstrate the large interest in
Semantic Multimedia. Only 9 of these papers met the rigorous standards of the two journals and were accepted. We thank all authors
for their contributions, as they have exerted great enthusiasm for
the research topic and have exposed interesting research  sometimes at early stages of development  that will bear plenty of fruit
over the next few years. We also thank all reviewers, from both

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2008.02.004

communities, who helped ensure the highest possible quality in all
accepted papers.

In this issue of the Journal of Web Semantics, the reader may
find three contributions. They mainly target the management of
multimedia based on semantic metadata for varying purposes such
as generation and delivery on the sides of producers, mediators and
consumers of multimedia content.

From Semantic Annotation to Multimedia Generation. The
first paper Automatic generation of matter-of-opinion video documentaries by Stefano Bocconi, Frank Nack and Lynda Hardman
describes a model for personalizing video documentaries. Taking
into account user choices and rhetorical presentation patterns, the
model, implemented in the system Vox Populi, generates documentaries in a bottom-up fashion from given data exploiting semantic
annotations.

Semantics for Producers and Mediators of Multimedia News Con-
tent. The second paper The Semantic Web as a Newspaper Media
Convergence Facilitator by Roberto Garcia, Ferran Perdrix, Rosa Gil
and Marta Oliva considers the changing processes of news production and delivery. It integrates metadata of multimedia news
content (press, radio and television) and provides an environment with advanced browsing and searching functionalities for
this content together with the audio transcript and background
knowledge.

A Semantic System for Your Kid  And Not Only for Her. The third
paper sides with the consumer  rather than with the producers
and mediators of multimedia knowledge. The system paper Zem-
Pod: A Semantic Approach to Podcasting by Oscar Celma and Yves
Raimond describes a running system that combines audio analysis with semantic capabilities of subscribing to audio resources for
easier access to such multimedia data.

In the special issue of Multimedia Tools and Applications one
may find six contributions. In this case, the papers rather target
the use of explicit semantics, ontologies and semantic models to
advance multimedia-related techniques in a variety of problems
including video analysis, image classification, image/object/music
retrieval and user relevance feedback.

Content Understanding and Structuring. The first paper Play Segmentation for the Play-Break based Sports Video Using a Local Adaptive
Model by Jinguk Jeong presents a framework for providing access
to semantic segments in sports videos that could be subsequently
used in a variety of advanced content-based applications. A generic
framework is presented that can be adapted to specific sports, and
its performance in the case of detecting play segments in baseball
is illustrated on a test corpus of over 75 h.

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 137138

Semantic Classification of Visual Content. The second paper
Semantic Image Classification using Statistical Local Spatial Relations
Model by Dongfeng Han, Wenhui Li and Zongcheng Li introduces
a novel learning model employing spatial and statistical information for semantic image classification. Inspired by probabilistic
Latent Semantic Analysis for text mining, this approach introduces
a new factor modeling spatial relation information between image
regions.

Leveraging the Power of Ontologies in Multimedia Search. The third
paper Image Retrieval ++  Web Image Retrieval with An Enhanced
Multi-Modality Ontology by Huan Wang, Liang-Tien Chia and Song
Liu investigates the design and use of an ontology for multimodal
similarity matching and ranking for multimedia retrieval on the
Web. A new ranking mechanism is proposed to measure conceptual similarity in the ontology, integrating both textual and image
features.

Bridging the Gap in 3D Object Retrieval. The fourth paper Semantic Force Relevance Feedback, Content-Free 3D Object Retrieval and
Annotation Propagation: Bridging the Gap and Beyond by Efstathios
Onasoglou and Petros Daras introduces user feedback into the
content-based retrieval problem and extends existing approaches
to relevance feedback to include both low-level and semantic fea-
tures. They demonstrate how their approach can be used to improve
retrieval performance for databases of 3D objects.

Using Semantics in Music Retrieval. The fifth paper Relevance
Feedback for Category Search in Music Retrieval Based on Semantic
Concept Learning by Man-Kwan Shan, Meng-Fen Chiang and FangFei Kuo also considers relevance feedback, but targets audio rather
than visual data, and specifically semantic retrieval of music seg-
ments. The approach uses both local and global features to identify
significant audio segments that are in turn mapped to semantic
concepts.

Considering the User and What She Really Wants. The sixth
paper Media objects for user-centered similarity matching by Jean
Martinet, Shinichi Satoh, Yves Chiaramella and Philippe Mulhem

presents a user-centric definition of importance for use in similarity matching of media objects. Various criteria and hypotheses
for quantifying importance are presented, leading to weighting
scheme that is validated in the case of image-based retrieval.

In conclusion, we hope that this selection of papers goes some
way towards illuminating some recent exciting results in the field
of Semantic Multimedia. From these papers it is clear that there is
significant effort being invested by both the Semantic Web and the
multimedia analysis research communities in this area. We believe
that a key objective of both communities should be to continue
and broaden interdisciplinary efforts in this field with a view to
extending the significant progress made to date.

Yannis Avrithis a
Noel E. OConnor b
Steffen Staab c,
Raphael Troncy d
a NTUA, Athens, Greece
b Dublin City University, Ireland
c University Koblenz, Germany
d CWI, The Netherlands
 Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 261 2872761.
E-mail addresses: iavr@image.ntua.gr (Y. Avrithis),
oconnorn@eeng.dcu.ie (N.E. OConnor), staab@uni-koblenz.de
(S. Staab), Raphael.Troncy@cwi.nl (R. Troncy)
URLs: http://www.image.ntua.gr/iavr/ (Y. Avrithis),
http://www.eeng.dcu.ie/oconnorn/ (N.E. OConnor),
http://isweb.uni-koblenz.de (S. Staab),
http://www.cwi.nl/troncy/ (R. Troncy)

18 February 2008
