Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 283290

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Recommendations based on semantically enriched museum collections
Yiwen Wang a,, Natalia Stash a, Lora Aroyo a,b, Peter Gorgels c, Lloyd Rutledge d, Guus Schreiber b

a Eindhoven University of Technology, Computer Science, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, Netherlands
b Free University Amsterdam, Computer Science, Netherlands
c Rijksmuseum Amsterdam, Netherlands
d Telematica Institute, Netherlands

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 1 May 2008
Received in revised form 31 August 2008
Accepted 15 September 2008
Available online 30 October 2008

Keywords:

Semantics-driven recommendations
Content-based recommendations
Enriched collections
Cultural heritage vocabularies
Interactive user modeling dialog
Museum tours
Mobile museum guide

1. Introduction

This article presents the CHIP demonstrator1 for providing personalized access to digital museum col-
lections. It consists of three main components: Art Recommender, Tour Wizard, and Mobile Tour Guide.
Based on the semantically enriched Rijksmuseum Amsterdam2 collection, we show how Semantic Web
technologies can be deployed to (partially) solve three important challenges for recommender systems
applied in an open Web context: (1) to deal with the complexity of various types of relationships for recommendation inferencing, where we take a content-based approach to recommend both artworks and
art-history topics; (2) to cope with the typical user modeling problems, such as cold-start for first-time
users, sparsity in terms of user ratings, and the efficiency of user feedback collection; and (3) to support
the presentation of recommendations by combining different views like a historical timeline, museum
map and faceted browser. Following a user-centered design cycle, we have performed two evaluations
with users to test the effectiveness of the recommendation strategy and to compare the different ways
for building an optimal user profile for efficient recommendations. The CHIP demonstrator received the
Semantic Web Challenge Award (third prize) in 2007, Busan, Korea.

 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Museum collections contain large amounts of data and semantically rich, mutually interrelated metadata in heterogeneous
distributed databases [1]. Semantic Web technologies act as instrumental [2] in integrating these rich collections of metadata by
defining ontologies which accommodate different representation
schemata and inconsistent naming conventions over the various
vocabularies. Facing the large amount of metadata with complex
semantic structures, it is becoming more and more important to
support users with a proper selection of information or giving
serendipitous reference to related information. For that reason, as
observed in [3,4], recommender systems are becoming increasingly popular for suggesting information to individual users and
moreover, for helping users to retrieve items of interest that they
ordinarily would not find by using query-based search techniques.
From a museum perspective [5], personalized recommendations do
not only help visitors in coping with the threatening information
overload by presenting information attuned to their interests and

 Corresponding author. Tel.: +31 206747367.
E-mail addresses: y.wang@tue.nl (Y. Wang), n.v.stash@tue.nl

(N. Stash), l.m.aroyo@cs.vu.nl (L. Aroyo), schreiber@cs.vu.nl (P. Gorgels),
p.gorgels@rijksmuseum.nl (L. Rutledge), Lloyd.Rutledge@cwi.nl (G. Schreiber).

1 http://www.chip-project.org/demo/.
2 http://www.rijksmuseum.nl.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2008.09.002

background, but is also considered to increase users interest and
thus stimulate them to visit the physical museum as well.

The Web 2.0 phenomena enables an increasing access to various
online collections, including also digital museum collections. The
users range from first-time visitors to art-lovers, from students to
elderly. Museum visitors have different goals, interests and background knowledge. With the help of Web 2.0 technologies they
can actively participate on the Web by adding their comments,
preferences and even their own art content. Meanwhile, Web
languages, standards, and ontologies make it possible to make
heterogeneous museum collections mutually interoperable [1] on
a large scale. All this transforms the personalization landscape and
makes the task of achieving personalized recommender systems
even more challenging.

In this article, we present work done in the CHIP project. The rest
of the article is structured as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the
research challenges, in particular, for recommendations in the open
Web context. Then, in Section 3 we explain how the museum collection is enriched by using common vocabularies and in Section 4
we elaborate on the content-based recommendations for artworks
and topics. Further, in Section 5, we describe the user model specification and explain the technical architecture (Section 6) with an
illustrative use case (Section 7). Results of two user evaluations are
given in Section 8. Finally, we discuss our approach and outline
directions for future work.

Y. Wang et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 283290

2. Research challenges

While the open world brings heterogeneous data collections
and distributed user data together, it also poses problems for recommender systems. For example, how to deal with the semantic
complexity; how to enable first-time users to immediately profit
from recommendations; and how to provide efficient navigation
and search in semantically enriched collections. To address the
issues, we identify three main research challenges for recommender systems on the Semantic Web:

(i) Enhancing recommendation strategies

In [1,6], we see examples of how ontology engineering and
ontology mapping enable content interoperability through
rich semantic links between different vocabularies in heterogenous museum collections. This, however, raises new
problems for recommender systems applied in such a con-
text, for example, how to deal with the semantic complexity of
different types of relationships for recommendation inferencing and how to increase the accuracy and define the relevance
of recommendations based on the semantically enriched col-
lection. Currently, there are many recommendation strategies
[7,8,4] to address these issues: collaborative filtering compares
users in terms of their item ratings (e.g. Amazon.com3 and
last.fm4); content-based recommendation selects items based
on the correlation between the content of the items (e.g.
Pandora5 and MovieLens6). Ruotsalo and Hyvonen proposed
an event-based [9] recommendation strategy that utilizes topics from multiple domain ontologies to enhance the relevance
precision. In CHIP we have deployed a content-based [10] strat-
egy, which uses users ratings on both artworks and art topics
in a semantically enriched museum collection.
(ii) Coping with cold-start and sparsity problems

The heterogeneous population of museum visitors increasingly grows. However, most users are still first-time or called
one-time users to both virtual and physical museums [5].
Thus, coping with the cold-start problem becomes even more
crucial for recommender systems applied in the museum
domain. In other words, how do we allow first-time users to
immediately profit from the recommender system, without
requiring much user input beforehand? In addition, in the process of enriching the museum collections, there is an increase
in the number of and the size of semantic structures used. This
exceeds far beyond what the user can rate and thus creates the
problem of rather sparse distribution of user ratings over the
collection items. It becomes difficult to recommend effectively
when there are not sufficiently many ratings in a large collec-
tion. To solve these two closely related problems, a hybrid user
modeling approach is widely used [11,4], combining both user
and content centered attributes for generating recommenda-
tions. In CHIP, we follow a twofold approach. On the one hand,
we build a non-obtrusive and interactive rating dialog [12] to
allow for a quick instantiation of the user model, and, on the
other hand, we realize this dialog over the most representative
samples for the collection of artworks in order to enable a fast
population of ratings on artworks and topics [10].

(iii) Supporting recommendation presentation and explanation

Due to the heterogeneous character of the data, it is becoming more and more important to facilitate navigation and

3 http://www.amazon.com/.
4 http://www.last.fm/.
5 http://www.pandora.com/.
6 http://www.movielens.org/login.

Table 1
Mappings between ARIA data and other vocabularies.

Source data

Vocabulary

Mapped topics

Total topics

Metadata techniques,

materials and artists styles

Metadata artists names
Metadata creation sites
Metadata subject themes

Iconclass

search in multi-dimensional collections [13]. How to let users
explore a large amount of heterogeneous information and
still allow for a comprehendable overview? Among the different techniques for visualization clustering [13], faceted
browsers provide a convenient and user-friendly way for hierarchical navigation, as exemplified in MUSEUMFINLAND7 and
E-culture projects8. In CHIP, we focus on using and exploring the effectiveness of existing techniques like Spectacle9 and
Simile10 to cluster multiple recommendations based on properties and present them with different views (e.g. timeline
and museum map). Additionally, there is also the problem
of explanation, i.e. how to provide users a logic insight in
recommendations based on the semantic structure of the col-
lection. Traditional ways to cope with this is using histograms
of other users ratings or likeness to previously rated items [4].
In CHIP, explanations are given based on semantic relationships of artworks and topics, which has shown to improve the
transparency for recommendations [14].

3. Metadata vocabularies

The Rijksmuseum digital

collection is

ARIA11(educational Website-oriented

stored in two
database)
databases:
and ADLIB12(professional curator database). The current CHIP
demonstrator works with the ARIA database, which consists of
729 of the museums most popular artworks, 486 themes, 690
encyclopedia keywords and 43 catalogue terms. The ARIA database
has two main problems: (i) inconsistent descriptions: artworks are
annotated with different descriptions without using any standard
vocabularies; and (ii) flat structure: no semantic relationships are
described except for general hierarchical relationships between
topics (e.g. top, broader and narrower topics) and themes, which
brings a severe obstacle for content-based recommendation infer-
ence. To address this problem we have focussed on enriching the
ARIA database with shared vocabularies. For this, the E-culture
project provided the RDF/OWL representation using three Getty
vocabularies13(ULAN, AAT, TGN) [15] and the CATCH STITCH
project produced mappings to Iconclass thesaurus14[2]. We also
use SKOS Core15, created for the purpose of linking thesauri to each
other. It specifies the skos:narrower, skos:broader and skos:related
relationships between ARIA topics. Mapping to common vocabularies introduces a semantic structure to the ARIA collection.
Table 1 gives an overview of all mappings.

7 http://www.seco.tkk.fi/applications/museumfinland/.
8 http://e-culture.multimedian.nl/.
9 http://www.aduna-software.com/products/spectacle/.
10 http://simile.mit.edu/.
11 http://www.rijksmuseum.nl/collectie/ontdekdecollectie.
12 http://www.rijksmuseum.nl/wetenschap/zoeken.
13 http://www.getty.edu/research/conductingresearch/vocabularies/.
14 http://www.Iconclass.nl/libertas/ic?style=index.xsl.
15 http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/.

Fig. 1. Metadata vocabularies in RDF Schema.

The metadata of artworks in CHIP is defined by VRA Core16 interpreted here to be a specialization of Dublin Core17 for describing
works of art and images of works of art. Fig. 1 gives a top-level
overview of the RDF Schema used in CHIP, where concepts for places
(creation places, birth and death places) in ARIA refer to the geographic location concepts in TGN; artist names in ARIA refer to artist
names in ULAN; art styles in AAT are linked to artists in ULAN, and
via the link to artists in ARIA the concept of style is introduced in
the Rijksmuseum collection; and, finally, subject themes in ARIA
refer to concepts in Iconclass. For example, in Fig. 1, the artwork
The Jewish Bride is created by Rembrandt (ULAN concept) in
1642 (ARIA concept) in Amsterdam (TGN concept). It uses material Oil paint (AAT concept) and has a subject Cloth (Iconclass
concept). Artist Rembrandt is born in Amsterdam (TGN concept)
and has a style of Baroque (AAT concept).

To enlarge the scope of the recommendations and to address
the scalability aspects of our approach, we plan to include also the
ADLIB database (70,000 objects) in the current demonstrator. The
enrichment of this collection has already been provided by the E-
culture project.

4. Content-based recommendations for artworks and
topics

In CHIP, a user can start the exploration of the Rijksmuseum
collection by first building a user profile, which is driven by an
interactive rating dialog [16] over the museum collection. In this
rating dialog, we distinguish three steps:

Step 1. The user gives ratings to both artworks and associated top-

ics on a 5-degree continuous scale of preference.

Step 2. Based on the semantic relationships, the Art Recommender
calculates a Belief value to predict the users interest in other
artworks and topics.

In this calculation of belief values for directly linked top-
ics, a smoothing method, (called Laplace smoothing), is used:

j = (Nj + )/(Npresented + Nstates  ) where 
j is the probability that the user likes a topic with j stars, Nj is the number

16 http://www.vraweb.org/resources/datastandards/vracore3/categories.html.
17 http://dublincore.org/.

of times the topic appears in a set of rated artworks (e.g., artworks the user rated as I like it), Npresented is the number
of times the topic is presented among rated artworks,  is
the smoothing parameter (often set to 1), and Nstates is the
number of rating states (5 in our case).

Using this formula, we then calculate the belief value for

topics and artworks:

Belieftopic =

j=1


j  Wj Beliefartwork =

t=1

Belieftopic

Ntopics

where Wj is the rating of the artwork and Ntopics is the number of topics.

In other words, the rating of an artwork propagates a
belief value to all topics that are directly linked to this artwork and likely to some semantically related topics. The
belief value of each topic is used, in turn, to determine the
belief value for artworks.

Step 3. The user may give a rating to either recommended artworks or topics and this is collected as user feedback on
the recommendations in the same scale to refine the recommendations presented.

The use of common vocabularies makes it possible to infer
additional artworks and topics via semantic properties such as
vra:creator, vra:creationSite and vra:materialMedium [17]. Following the content-based recommendation strategy, we allow for the
enlargement of the recommendation scope through meaningful
links. Also, it is partially helpful for solving the cold-start and
sparsity problems. Even with a limited amount of ratings, the
demonstrator still may produce recommendations through the
semantic relationships and order them based on the belief value.
For example, if the user rates the artwork The Nightwatch with
5 stars, the artwork The Sampling Officials and the topics Rembrandt van Rijn and Lastman, Pieter will be recommended. The
underlying inference is that The Nightwatch has a creator Rembrandt van Rijn, who also painted The Sampling Officials, and
he has the student-of relationship with Lastman, Pieter. The rich
semantic relationships offer explanations for users to understand

Y. Wang et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 283290

Fig. 2. Main classes and properties in the CHIP User Model.

why a recommendation is produced. By allowing users to rate recommended artworks and topics, it enables a fast rate-recommend
loop for refining the users preferences and increasing the accuracy
of recommendations.

Besides the semantic-driven recommendation based on con-
tent, we have explored various approaches to address the cold-start
and sparsity problems. By consulting museum domain experts, we
present users a subset of artworks containing representative topics
to rate first in the rating dialog. In such a way, the user profile collects user ratings with well-balanced distributed topics in a short
time and make it possible to quickly generate recommendations
through the entire collection.

As an example of distributed user data integration, we have
mapped a small set of iCITY18 user tags to CHIP art topics. The result
of this experiment [18] suggests that the user tags may be used to
populate the user model in CHIP and enable instant generation of
recommendations. However, as we discussed in [19], this approach
depends heavily on the correctness of the mappings. Another constraint is that the user tags are mostly seen as a stream of concepts
that can be interpreted in various of ways, where the museum
vocabularies are static.

5. A user model specification

Our goal of building a user model in CHIP is to provide a shared
and common understanding of user information and behaviors for
enhancing the personalized access to museum collections. Ideally,
the user profile needs to store: (i) users personal information; (ii)
objects that the user has interacted with; (iii) users activities over
the objects (e.g. the user rates an object with a value); and (iv)
the corresponding contextual information such as time, place and
device. All these data allow us to get information of the user in
context.

Currently, we have built a minimal user model as a specialization
of FOAF19. Main classes and properties from FOAF used in CHIP are
foaf:Person and foaf:holdsAccount.

 Class: foaf:Person is used to represent the information about a
person who holds an account chip:User on a Web site. Account
specific information is described by chip:User, a subclass of
foaf:OnlineAccount.
 Property: foaf:holdsAccount is used to link a foaf:Person to a
chip:User.

The core class in the user model is the RatedRelation. It uses
the definition of semantic N-ary relations20 to represent additional
attributes describing a relation. For example, Saskia rates artwork
Nightwatch with a value of 5. This rate relation contains information in the original three arguments: who has rated (Saskia), what
is rated (Nightwatch), and what value the rating gives. Each of the
three arguments in the original N-ary relation gives rise to a true
binary relationship. In this case, there are three properties: has-
Rated, ratedObject and ratedValue, as shown in Fig. 2. The additional
labels on the links indicate the OWL restrictions on the properties.
We define both ratedObject and ratedValue as functional properties,
thus requiring that each instance of RatedRelation has exactly one
value for Object and one value for Value.

There are in total 5 classes in the range of ratedObject prop-
erty: vra:Work, ulan:Person, tgn:Place, aat:Concept and ic:Concept.
These objects are well-defined with properties in Fig. 1 Metadata
vocabularies in CHIP RDF Schema. In the definition of the User class
(of which the individual Saskia is an instance), we specify a property hasRated with the range restriction going to the RatedRelation
class (of which RatedRelation 1 is an instance). In addition, we have
defined the Tour class and two related properties: hasTour and tour-
Work. The range of tourWork is the class vra:Work.

Further extension of this specification would require more
indepth treatment of contextual information (e.g. device, time,
location) and how this is linked to user activities, such as rating
an artwork or creating a tour. In addition, also observational data,
e.g. artworks visited, time spent with artworks, could be useful to
collect, and may possibly be used to increase recommendation effi-
ciency, effectiveness and relevance. For example, does recording the
time spent with an artwork, allow us to infer an actual preference
for that artwork, even it is not included in the tour or not rated?

18 http://icity.di.unito.it/.
19 http://www.foaf-project.org/.

20 http://www.w3.org/TR/swbp-n-aryRelations/.

Fig. 3. CHIP overall architecture.

If we know where a user has been, when visiting a city, does this
allow us to infer a consistent interest in particular topics?

6. Architecture and implementation

Fig. 3 shows the core CHIP components, third-party open APIs,
which deliver semantic search results in CHIP (E-Culture API) or
additional user data (iCity API) and tools that CHIP uses for data
visualization.

The server-side CHIP core components are described below:

 Collection data refers to the enriched artwork collection, currently
the Rijksmuseum ARIA database, maintained in a Sesame Open
RDF memory store and queried with SeRQL.
 User data contains user models stored in OWL and tour data stored
in XML. To be used by the Mobile Tour Guide, the user models
currently have to be transformed to XML.
 Web-based components are an Art Recommender and a Museum
Tour Wizard realized as Java Servlets and JSP pages with CSS and
JavaScript.

Another CHIP client, implemented on a PDA (MS Windows
Mobile OS) contains a standalone application Mobile Guide. It is
an RFID-reader-enabled device and could also work offline inside
the museum and subsequently be synchronized with the serverside on demand. The user profile and the tour data (both in XML)
can be downloaded from the CHIP server to the mobile device to
be used during the tour in the museum. When the museum tour
is finished, the user data can be synchronized with the user profile
on the server.

Fig. 4 presents the details with respect to the usage of the E-
Culture API for semantic search in CHIP. Each user query in CHIP
is sent to the E-Culture server, which sends a JSON file back with
a list of artworks related to the search query. For every artwork
we get a score (relevance of the search result) and a path (search
path in the graph). We then further process the JSON file and add
more CHIP-specific information to each artwork, like concepts that
are associated with this artwork (from the collection data) and the
artwork rating (from the users data). The resulting CHIP JSON file
is sent to Simile Exhibit tool to be presented in a faceted view.

In order to experiment with user tag interoperability between
the CHIP demonstrator and third party applications, we have
adopted an open API to request and link user data from iCity using
RSS feed. Once the users personal (login) information is authenticated in a dialog between iCity and CHIP, we map the iCity user tags
to the CHIP vocabulary set (ARIA shared with Getty and Iconclass)
[18], by using the SKOS Core Mapping Vocabulary specification.

7. Usage scenario

In this section we describe a typical usage scenario of the CHIP
demonstrator in order to illustrate the main usersystem interac-
tions.

Saskia is planning her first-time visit to the Rijksmuseum Ams-
terdam. She does not know a lot about the collection and she would
not be able to spend much time there either. Here is how the CHIP
demonstrator could help her:

 finding out what she likes in the Rijksmuseum collection;

Fig. 4. Application of E-Culture API in CHIP.

Y. Wang et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 283290

Fig. 5. Screenshot of Art Recommender.

Fig. 6. Screenshot of Museum Tour Wizard.

 preparing a personalized museum tour (in terms of time to spend
and number of artworks to see);
 storing the data of her visit so that she can later on use it.

To login on the CHIP online demonstrator Saskia needs to create a user account. Once logged in, she can choose either the Art
Recommender tab, to quickly get acquainted with the Rijksmuseum
collection and find out her art interests, or she can choose the Tour
Wizard tab to create different personalized tours and see their layout on the Rijksmuseum map or on a historical timeline. A general
Semantic Search option supported with an autocompletion function
is available, if she wants to search for artworks or topics.

Everywhere in the CHIP demonstrator Saskia can give a rating
(in a 5-degree rating scale) from 1 star (I hate it) to 5 stars (I like
it very much) on an artwork or a topic presented on the screen.
Each rating of an artwork results in: (i) directly including the artwork with the rating in her user profile, (ii) using the updated user
profile to generate a list of recommended artworks and a list of rec-

ommended topics. For each recommended artwork or topic, Saskia
can click on the why (see Fig. 521) for an explanation. For recommended topics, why explains which artworks with this topic have
been rated positively, and for recommended artworks, it explains
which topics from these artworks have been rated positively. Also,
Saskia can rate recommended artworks or topics and update her
user profile for a further refinement of recommendations.

Based on the collected ratings from Saskia, the Museum Tour
Wizard generates automatically two tours: Tour of favorites containing all her positively rated artworks and Tour of recommended
artworks containing the top 20 recommended artworks. Saskia
can explore the tours by viewing the artworks on a museum map
(see Fig. 6) or on a historical timeline. She can also create new tours
by using the search option for finding topics or artworks to add to
the tour.

21 The screenshots are based on the design by Fabrique (http://www.fabrique.nl/).

When Saskia is in the museum she can upload her tours on a
PDA and use it for guidance. Artworks currently unavailable in the
exhibition are filtered out, but are still to be seen on the PDA as
background information [18]. For example, Saskias tour of favorites
consists of 15 artworks and is estimated to last for 75 min. But she
wants to spend at the maximum one hour, so the Mobile Guide
reduces her tour to 12 artworks. When she is ready to start, the
Mobile Guide recommends her a sequence of artworks and a route
to follow.

The usage scenario assumes that all artworks in the museum
are tagged with RFID tags. During the tour, Saskia can request information about new artworks by using the RFID tag reader attached
to the PDA, which plays an audio and provides an option to rate
this artwork. After listening to the audio and rating the artwork,
she follows the initial tour. When the tour is finished, Saskia may
synchronize her updated user profile on the PDA with the user profile that was created earlier online. In this way, she has saved all
her interactions in the museum and maintained an updated user
profile online.

8. Evaluation

The overall rationale of the evaluation is to follow a usercentered design cycle in the construction of each part of the
CHIP demonstrator. We have performed two initial evaluations at
Rijksmuseum Amsterdam with real users to test particular aspects
of the demonstrator and derive requirements for further develop-
ment.

8.1. Evaluation I: effectiveness of recommendations, novices vs.
experts

The goal of the first evaluation [10] is to test the effectiveness
of the content-based recommendations with the CHIP Art Recom-
mender. 39 Rijksmuseum visitors participated in this study with an
observer. They used the CHIP Artwork Recommender in an average
of 20 min. The knowledge of the users of the Rijksmuseum collection was tested with questionnaires before and after the test session
with the CHIP demonstrator. Our hypothesis was:

The Art Recommender helps novices to elicit or clarify their art preferences from their implicit or unclear knowledge about the museum
collection.

To test the hypothesis, we have compared the precision of users
topics of interest before and after using the Art Recommender (rat-
ing and getting recommendations) [10]. Looking at the wide variety
of users, we defined an expert-value as a weighted sum of users
personal factors (e.g. prior knowledge of the museum collection,
frequency of visiting the museum, interest in art) collected from
the questionnaire to distinguish between novice and expert users.
As reported in [10], the results confirmed our hypothesis, a significant increase of precision was found for novices, while there
is a slight increase for experts. However, the distinction between
novices and experts is not clear-cut. Plotting the precision on a continuous range of the expert value, we observed, ignoring extreme
values, a convergence as expert level increases.

In addition, we have derived four dominant factors about the

museum visitors target group. Most of the users appear to be:

 Small group with 24 persons and a male took the leading role
(67%).
 Mid-age people in 3060 years old (62%).
 No prior knowledge about the Rijksmuseum collections (62%).
 Strong interest in art (92%).

Table 2
Evaluation II: results in six groups.

Group

Sequence of artworks
Target of ratings
Number of user ratings
Match of preferences

Ra

24%

Ra + Rt

30%

Ra

45%

Ra + Rt

48%

E + S
Ra

49%

E+S
Ra + Rt

44%

From this, we get a clear image what are the characteristics of
the main target users. The main questions in this context are: (i)
what kind of interaction and personalization topics do we need
for providing personalized access to the museum collection?; (ii)
How to structure, store and use the user characteristics to refine
the current user model?

8.2. Evaluation II: Representative samples for rating, sparsity and
cold-start

The second evaluation was performed online with 63 partici-
pants, most of them are first-time users of the CHIP demonstrator.
Based on a functionally enhanced CHIP Art Recommender, which
allows to search for artworks and topics, we explored different
alternatives for getting recommendations through the entire col-
lection, to solve the sparsity and partially the cold-start problem.
The evaluation consists of two parts: Part 1 is to let users assess
45 well-distributed topics and Part 2 is to randomly split users
into six different groups to rate artworks and topics in a short
time (limited to 5 min). These six groups follow different alternatives to build their user profiles according to two independent
variables: (i) sequence of artworks, which are presented in the Art
Recommender for users to rate; and (ii) target of ratings. These two
variables ranged over the following values: Sequence of artworks
(random, expert-sorted, expert-sorted + self-selected); and Target
of ratings (rate artworks, rate artworks and topics). Here expertsorted means that domain experts selected the first 20 artworks,
which overall cover a well-balanced distribution of topics through
the entire collection. After that, artworks appear in the order of the

number of topics each contains. The expert-sorted + self-selected
condition allows to search for artworks and topics based on expert-
sorted. Table 2 gives an overview of the results according to
the six groups using different approaches, where R (Random), E
(Export-sorted), S (Self-selected), Ra (Rate artworks) and Rt (Rate
topics).

The results show that: first, the expert-sorted sequence of artworks works very well for first-time users to quickly build their
user profiles with well-distributed topics through the entire collec-
tion; and second, rating both artwork and topics synchronously
increases the total amount of the users contributions (ratings) and
it seems to improve the precision of recommendations; however,
at some moment, it might lead to information overload.

All in all, the two evaluations gave us some critical insights in:
(i) how to further specify the target group and adapt the user interaction and interfaces for the main groups of users; (ii) how the
sequence of artworks affects the recommendation relevance and
ranking. Further we learned about the context in which the users
are visiting the museum, e.g. in small groups of 24 persons, and
usability issues of the mobile device.

9. Discussion and future work

In this article, we demonstrated how Semantic Web technologies are deployed in a realistic use case to provide personalized recommendations in the semantically enriched museum
collection. The semantic enrichment provides relational and hier-

Y. Wang et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 283290

archical structure which we further exploit in a combined artwork
and topic based recommendations. The evaluation suggests that
this approach helps especially novices to elicit their art preferences
about the collection.

However, it also brings up a new problem with respect to calculating the recommendation relevance. For example, if the user
rates an artwork, we currently treat all its properties, such as cre-
ator, creationSite and material equally in the recommendation
strategy, where they could carry different importance for each user.
In other words, the creator could be more interesting to the user
than the material. Moreover, material is likely to be a less discriminative factor for recommendations, as most of the artworks in this
collection are of the same material. Thus, each artwork property
should be assigned with a different weight in the recommendation strategy. Even more, the relevance of each property for a given
user should be dynamically adjusted according to the users rat-
ings, or used with a default value when not enough user ratings
are available. If a user mostly rates values of the property of cre-
ationSite, these should have a priority in recommendations. To
solve this problem, we are now looking for strategies to define a
dynamic weight for properties when calculating the Belief value of
an artwork and topics for recommendations.

Web 2.0 enjoys increasing popularity and offers a rich network with a large number of user communities and a staggering
amount of user generated content. For recommender systems this
suggests, as a main opportunity, the integration of distributed
user data for recommendations. Such integration would amount
to a unified user model that can be used across multiple appli-
cations, enriching the potential for recommendations by using
the distributed user data. However, to realize such a user model,
issues of storage, linking, representation and inference must be
solved.

As a first step of defining such a user model specification, we
proposed to extend the existing FOAF specification with possibilities to express user activities and interests in objects. Moreover,
as observed in [20], Web 2.0 is a user-centered community,
whereas the Semantic Web must be regarded as primarily a network connecting professional data through semantic relations.
When we extrapolate this observation to our approach in CHIP,
the major challenge is not to linking data from social networks
and other Web 2.0 applications, but to bridge the gap between
the semantic structure of museum collection data, which is professional semantics, and the variety of meanings found in open
social networks, which rely on what is commonly called emergent semantics. The direction of bridging this semantic gap, as
suggested by [21], is to add structure to user data, as a function
of how this data links to repositories of information. One way
of creating such a structure, as proposed for SIOC in [22], is to
characterize social networks not as relations between people, but
rather as object centered sociality. Objects could simultaneously
be characterized by semantically linked meta data, obtained from
professionals. Admittedly, this is still a long way from collective
intelligence [21], but it is likely a significant step towards providing better recommendations, that take the users social context into
account.

Acknowledgement

The CHIP (Cultural Heritage Information Personalization)
project is funded by the Dutch Science Foundation funded program
CATCH22(Continuous Access to Cultural Heritage) in the Nether-
lands.
