Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 243249

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Semantic annotation and search of cultural-heritage collections:
The MultimediaN E-Culture demonstrator
Guus Schreiber a,, Alia Amin b, Lora Aroyo a, Mark van Assem a, Victor de Boer c,
Lynda Hardman b, Michiel Hildebrand b, Borys Omelayenko a, Jacco van Osenbruggen b,
Anna Tordai a, Jan Wielemaker c, Bob Wielinga c
a VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
b Centre for Mathematics and Computer Science CWI, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
c University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 30 July 2008
Accepted 19 August 2008
Available online 10 October 2008

Keywords:
Semantic search
Digital heritage
Semantic annotation
Virtual collections

1. Introduction

In this article we describe a Semantic Web application for semantic annotation and search in large virtual
collections of cultural-heritage objects, indexed with multiple vocabularies. During the annotation phase
we harvest, enrich and align collection metadata and vocabularies. The semantic-search facilities support
keyword-based queries of the graph (currently 20 M triples), resulting in semantically grouped result
clusters, all representing potential semantic matches of the original query. We show two sample search
scenarios. The annotation and search software is open source and is already being used by third parties.
All software is based on established Web standards, in particular HTML/XML, CSS, RDF/OWL, SPARQL and
JavaScript.

 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

The main objective of the MultimediaN E-Culture project is to
demonstrate how novel Semantic Web and presentation technologies can be deployed to provide better indexing and search support
within large virtual collections of cultural-heritage resources. The
architecture is fully based on open Web standards, in particular
XML, RDF/OWL and SPARQL. The central hypothesis underlying this
work is that the use of explicit background knowledge in the form
of ontologies/vocabularies/thesauri is in particular useful for information retrieval in knowledge-rich domains.

The cultural-heritage domain is such a knowledge-rich domain.
Collection holders traditionally spent considerable effort on the
(manual) indexing process of collection objects. Many institutions
use and develop controlled vocabularies to standardize the indexing process. The result is that the domain is dominated by a
multitude of vocabularies for different subareas in many different
languages. Some efforts have been made to develop collectionspanning vocabularies, such as the Getty vocabularies (see further),
but it is clear that the domain is too large and diverse to be covered
by a single (set of) vocabulary(ies). There is also significant vari-

ation in the annotation structure for collection objects, although
many institutions use a format that is, or can be interpreted as, a
specialization of Dublin Core.

Due to the abundance of vocabularies, the availability of existing semantic annotations of cultural objects, and the fact that this is
mainly publicly accessible information (or at least a willingness to
make it accessible), cultural heritage appears to be an ideal candidate for application of Semantic Web technology. With the growth
of the World-Wide Web collection holders have been increasingly
interested in making their collections available online. There are
large international initiatives to make inter-collection access pos-
sible, for example the European Europeana initiative.1 The key
problems in inter-collection search lie in the different annotation
formats and vocabularies used by collection holders.

The E-Culture project started out with the goal to show that
inter-collection search can be achieved at relatively low cost with
Semantic Web technology. The approach that we have taken
roughly consists of three elements:

(i) Providing facilities for harvesting, enriching and aligning col-

lection metadata and vocabularies.

 Corresponding author. Tel.: +31 20 598 7739/7718.
E-mail address: schreiber@cs.vu.nl (G. Schreiber).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2008.08.001

1 http://www.europeana.eu.

G. Schreiber et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 243249

(ii) Providing facilities for semantic search through the resulting graph, including various presentation mechanisms for the
search results.

(iii) Providing facilities for users to add metadata and/or content.

In this article we report on the results with respect to the first
two components; work on the third component in under way and
is discussed under future work. The following premises underly our
approach:
 The project does not develop new ontologies/vocabularies but
solely uses existing ones. The project may develop however
vocabulary extensions, in particular through vocabulary align-
ments.
 The project uses existing metadata of multiple collections.

The online version of the demonstrator can be found at: http://e-

culture.multimedian.nl/demo/search.

Readers are encouraged to first take a look at the demonstrator before reading on. We suggest you consult the tutorial (linked
from the online demo page) which provides a sample walk-through
of the search functionality. Please note that this is a product of an
ongoing project. Visitors should expect the demonstrator to change.
We are incorporating more collections and vocabularies and are
also extending the annotation, search and presentation function-
ality. We are incorporating more collections and vocabularies and
are also extending the annotation, search and presentation func-
tionality. We are incorporating more collections and vocabularies
and are also extending the annotation, search and presentation
functionality.

Due to space limitations this article is basically a summary of the
key ingredients of the MultimediaN E-Culture demonstrator, which
won the Semantic Web Challenge in 2006. Readers should consult
the references provided for details. Section 2 describes the semantic
annotation process of collections. In Section 3 we discuss the search
architecture and some details of the graph-search algorithm. Section 4 provides a peek at the demonstrator through two sample
search scenarios. Research issues arising from the endeavour are
discussed in Section 5.

2. Semantic annotation: collection data, metadata and
vocabularies

A this point we have collected descriptions of 200,000 objects
from six collections annotated with a range of thesauri and several proprietary controlled keyword lists, which adds up to 20
million triples (detailed statistics are available from http://e-
culture.multimedian.nl/demo/). The objects in the collections come
from the Rijksmuseum Amsterdam,2 the National Museum of
Ethnology,3 the Royal Tropical Institute,4 the Netherlands Institute for Art History,5 the Royal Library,6 and the Web collection
Artchive.7 We assume this material
is representative for the
described domain.

The demonstrator hosts four general thesauri, namely the three
Getty vocabularies,8 i.e., the Art & Architecture Thesaurus (AAT),
Union List of Artists Names (ULAN) and the Thesaurus of Geo-

2 http://www.rijksmuseum.nl.
3 http://www.volkenkunde.nl.
4 http://www.kit.nl.
5 http://www.rkd.nl.
6 http://www.kb.nl.
7 http://www.artchive.org.
8 http://www.getty.edu/research/conductingresearch/vocabularies/.

Fig. 1. Four steps of the harvesting, enrichment and alignment process of collection
metadata and vocabularies.

graphical Names (TGN), as well as the lexical resource WordNet,
version 2.0. The Getty thesauri were converted from their original
XML format into an RDF/OWL representation using the conversion
methods principles as formulated in Ref. [10]. The RDF/OWL version of the data models is available online.9 The Getty thesauri are
licensed.10 The RDF/OWL conversion of WordNet is documented in
a publication of the W3C Semantic Web Best Practices and Deployment Working Group [9]. It is an instructive example of the issues
involved in this conversion process, in particular the recipes for
publishing RDF vocabularies [6].

In addition, the MultimediaN E-Culture demonstrator contains
collection-specific metadata and vocabularies. We assume that the
collection owner provides a link to the actual data object, typically
an image of a work such as a painting, a sculpture or a book. When
integrating a new collection into the demonstrator we typically
receive one or more XML/database dumps containing the metadata
and vocabularies of the collection. The harvesting and enrichment
process consists of four steps and is summarized in Fig. 1. Details of
the process with a full case study can be found elsewhere [8]. The
project is developing support software for this process, of which
the first version has been released as open source under the name
AnnoCultor.11

Step 1: Make vocabulary(ies) interoperable. Thesauri are translated into RDF/OWL, where appropriate with the help of the SKOS
format for publishing vocabularies [7]. The same principles are followed as sketched above for the Getty and WordNet vocabularies.
Step 2: Align metadata schema. As a second step, the metadata
schema of the collection is mapped to VRA,12 a specialization of
Dublin Core for visual resources.13 This mapping is realized using
the dumb-down principle by means of rdfs:subPropertyOf and
owl:equivalentProperty relations. A full example can be found
in the paper by Tordai et al. [8].

Step 3: Enrich metadata. Collection metadata are first transformed in a purely syntactic fashion to RDF/OWL triples,
thus preserving the original structure and terminology. Sub-
sequently, the metadata go through an enrichment process in
which we process plain-text metadata fields to find matching concepts from thesauri already in the demonstrator. For
if the dc:creator field contains the string Pablo
example,
Picasso, we will add the concept Pablo Picasso from ULAN

9 http://e-culture.multimedian.nl/resources/.
10 The partners in the project have acquired licenses for the thesauri. People using
the demonstrator do not have access to the full thesauri sources, but can use them
to annotate and/or search the collections.
11 http://sourceforge.net/projects/annocultor.
12 Visual Resource Association core categories, see http://www.vraweb.org/
projects/vracore4/.
13 An unofficial OWL specification of the VRA elements, including links to Dublin
Core, can be found at http://e-culture.multimedian.nl/resources/.

Fig. 2. ClioPatria architecture of the demonstrator.

to the metadata. Most enrichments concern people, places and
materials.

Step 4: Align vocabulary(ies). Finally, the thesauri are aligned
using owl:sameAs and skos:exactMatch relations. For exam-
ple, the art style Edo from a local ethnographic collection was
mapped to the same art style in AAT (see the second search
scenario for an example of why such mappings are useful). Our
current database (April 2008) contains 38,508 owl:sameAs and
9635 skos:exactMatch triples and these numbers are growing
rapidly. Within the Getty vocabularies one set of links is systematically maintained: places in ULAN (e.g., place of birth of an artist)
refer to terms in TGN. Within the project we are adding important sets of links. For example, links between art styles in AAT (e.g.,
Impressionism) and artists in ULAN (e.g., Monet) have a high
added value for certain search strategies. de Boer [3] has worked
on deriving these semi-automatically from texts on art history.

After this harvesting process we have a graph representing a
connected network of works and thesauri lemmas that provide
background knowledge. VRA and SKOS provide a  albeit weak 
semantics, and underneath the richness of the original data is still
preserved.

3. Semantic search

3.1. Technical architecture

The technical baseline of the MultimediaN E-Culture demonstrator is formed by the ClioPatria software, built on top of
SWI-Prolog and its (Semantic) Web libraries.14 Fig. 2 gives an
overview of the architecture. The reader is referred elsewhere for
detailed information about ClioPatria [1113]. The software is freely
available under a GPL license.15

ClioPatria provides two APIs on top of the SWI-Prolog Semantic

Web libraries:

(i) A SPARQL API which supports database queries of the RDF

graph.

(ii) A graph-search API which provides limited RDF/OWL reasoning.

The graph-search algorithm for keyword-based search is
briefly described in the next subsection. OWL reasoning is
limited to three OWL features: symmetry (owl:inverseOf,
owl:SymmetricProperty),
(owl:Transitive-
Property), and resource equivalence (owl:sameAs). The algorithm also interprets similar SKOS relations (skos:broader,
skos:exactMatch).

transitivity

ClioPatria provides the application logic for constructing the
MultimediaN E-Culture demonstrator. Basically,
it provides a
clientserver architecture which supports the search and presentation facilities with the help of standard Web components, in
particular HTML + CSS, AJAX and the Yahoo! Widget library.

Example search scenarios with the demonstrator are shown
in Section 4. Third parties are using the ClioPatria search API for
other applications, for example the CHIP Rijksmuseum tour wizard [2] and the European digital heritage portal Europeana.16 For
details of ClioPatria the reader is referred to the ISWC08 paper of
Wielemaker et al. [11].

3.2. Keyword search with semantic clustering

One of the goals of the demonstrator is to provide users with
a familiar and simple keyword search, but still allow the user to
benefit from all background knowledge from the underlying thesauri and taxonomies. The underlying search algorithm consists of
several steps, that can be summarized as follows (for details see
[11]). First, it checks all RDF literals in the repository for matches
on the given keyword. Second, from each match, it traverses the RDF
graph until a resource of interest is found, we refer to this as a target
resource. Finally, based on the paths from the matching literals to
their target resources, the results are clustered.

To improve performance in finding the RDF literals that form
the starting points, the RDF database maintains a btree index of
words appearing in literals to the full literal, as well as a Porterstem and metaphone (sounds-like) index to words. Based on these
indexes, the set of literals can be searched efficiently on any logical
combination of word, prefix, by-stem and by-sound matches.17

14 http://www.swi-prolog.org.
15 See http://e-culture.multimedian.nl/software/ClioPatria.shtml.

16 http://www.europeana.eu.
17 See http://www.swi-prolog.org/packages/semweb.html#sec:3.8.

G. Schreiber et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 243249

In the second step, which resources are considered of interest
is currently determined by their type. The default settings return
only resources of type artwork (vra:Work), but this can be overridden by the user. To avoid a combinatorial explosion of the search
space, a number of measures had to be taken. Graph traversal is
done in one direction only: always from the object in the triple
to the corresponding subject. Only for properties with an explicit
owl: inverseOf relation is the graph also traversed in the other
direction. While this theoretically allows the algorithm to miss out
many relevant results, in practice we found that this is hardly an
issue. In addition to the direction, the search space is kept under
control by setting a threshold. Starting with the score of the literal
match, this score is multiplied by the weight assigned to the property being traversed (all properties have been assigned a (default)
weight between 0 and 1), and the search stops when the score
falls under the given threshold. This approach not only improves
the efficiency of the search, it also allows filtering out results with
paths that are too long (which tend to be semantically so far apart,
that users do not consider them relevant any more). By setting the
weights to non-default values, the search can also be fine tuned to
a particular application domain.

In the final step, all results are clustered based on the path
between the matching literal and the target result. When the paths
are considered on the instance level, this leads to many different
clusters with similar content. We found that clustering the paths
on the schema level provides more meaningful results. For example,
searching on keyword fauve matches works from Fauve painters
Matisse and Derain. On the instance level, this results in different
paths:

while on the schema level, this becomes a single path:

The paths are translated to English headers that mark the start
of each cluster, and this already gives users an indication why the
results match their keyword. The path given above results in the
cluster title Works created by an artist with matching AAT style.
To explain the exact semantic relation between the result and the
keyword searched on, the instance level path is displayed when
hovering over a resulting image.

4. Sample search scenarios

In this section we give two sample scenarios of the use of the
MultimediaN E-Culture demonstrator. The reader is invited to try
these out him/herself (see the link in Section 1). It should be noted
that the collection is continuously extended, so the actual search
results are likely to vary over time.

still have many different intentions with this simple query: a painting by Picasso, a painting depicting Picasso, the styles Picasso
has worked in? Without an elaborate disambiguation process it is
impossible to tell in advance.

Fig. 3 shows part of the results of this query in the MultimediaN demonstrator. We see several clusters of search results. The
first cluster contains works from the Picasso Museum. The second
cluster contains works by Pablo Picasso (only first five hits shown;
clicking on the arrow allows the user to inspect all results). Further down we see clusters of surrealist and cubist paintings (styles
that Picasso worked in; details not shown for space reasons), and
works by George Braque (a prominent fellow cubist painter, but the
works shown are not necessarily cubist). Other clusters (not present
in the figure) are works made from Picasso marble and works with
Picasso in the title (includes two self-portraits). We are aiming to
create clusters such that the user can afterwards choose herself
what she is interested in. We have found that even in relatively
small collections of 100 K objects users discover interesting results
that they were not ware of that existed. We have termed this type
of search tentatively post-query disambiguation: in response to
a simple keyword query the user gets (in contrast to, for exam-
ple, Google image search) semantically grouped results that enable
further detailing of the query. It should be pointed out that the
knowledge richness of the cultural-heritage domain allows this
approach to work. In less rich domains this approach is less likely
to provide added value.

Next to the result clustering ClioPatria support carious other
presentation facilities, such as showing the results on a Google map.

4.2. Scenario 2: Tokugawa

Another typical search scenario concerns the exploitation of
vocabulary alignments. As mentioned before, many collection
owners have their own homegrown vocabulary variants. Consider the situation in Fig. 4, which is based on real-life data. A
user is searching for Tokugawa. This Japanese term has actually two major meanings in the heritage domain: it is the name
of a 19th century shogun and it is a synonym for the Edo style
period. Assume for a moment that the user is interested in finding works of the latter type. The National Museum of Ethnology
in Leiden actually has works on this style in its digital collec-
tion, such as the work shown in the top-right corner. However,
the Dutch ethnographic thesaurus SVCN, which is being used
by the museum for indexing purposes, only contains the label
Edo for this style. Fortunately, another thesaurus in our col-
lection, the aforementioned AAT, does contain the same concept
with the alternative label Tokugawa. In the harvesting process
we learned this equivalence link (quite straightforward: both are
Japanese styles with matching preferred labels). The existence
of this link allows us to retrieve the painting as a result of the
Tokugawa query, despite the fact that it is not indexed with this
term.

Although this is actually an almost trivial alignment, it is still
extremely useful. The cultural-heritage world (like any knowledge
domain) is full of such small local terminology differences. Multilingual differences should also be taken into consideration here. If
Semantic Web technologies can help making such matches, there
is a definite added value for users.

4.1. Scenario 1: Picasso

Assume a user is typing in the query Picasso. Although the
name Picasso is reasonably unique in the art world, the user may

Over the past 2.5 years the E-Culture demonstrator has grown
from 4000 to 200,000 objects. We are now planning large-scale
deployment in the context of the European digital heritage portal

5. Discussion

Fig. 3. Selection of clustered search results for query Picasso: works from the Picasso Museum, works by Picasso, works of art styles used by Picasso (cubist, surrealist, for
space reasons only heading shown), works by professional relations of Picasso (George Braque, colleague cubist painter).

europeana.eu where we intend to grow to a collection of 1214 M
objects from musea, libraries and archives. We discuss here the
lessons we learned so far, including the main research challenges
we see from our perspective.

5.1. Semantic annotation

When we started the semantic annotation process with the
first collection (the Artchibe collection) it was mainly a manual

Fig. 4. A user searches for Tokugawa. The Japanese painting in the top-right matches this query, but is indexed with a thesaurus that does not contain the synonym
Tokugawa for this Japanese style. Through a same-as link with another thesaurus that does contain this label, the semantic match can be made.

G. Schreiber et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 243249

Fig. 5. Autocompletion facility: potential matches are grouped in respective types.

art. However, while adding more collections we got more grip on
the process for making a collection ready for the Semantic Web.
The four-step process model (Fig. 1) supported by the AnnoCultor
toolkit is the tangible result. In general, it takes us now 13 weeks
to include a new collection. This may seem like a long time, but
the result is a set of tools that can be run automatically each time
a collection owner has to update the collection data. Only in case
of (in practice relatively infrequent) changes in the schema of the
metadata or of the vocabularies, additional manual work is needed.
Thesaurus conversion (step 1) is usually simple, certainly given
the fact that vocabulary owners are routinely starting to skossify
their vocabularies. Representing the interoperability of metadata
schemas through a RDF property hierarchy (step 2) is a big plus
for the cultural-heritage field, where up till now cumbersome XSLT
techniques prevail.

The enrichment of metadata (step 3) is basically an informationextraction task, which is by its nature simpler than general IE in
document collections, due to the structured nature of the data. Recognizing Amsterdam as a particular location is easier when it is
a string value in a dc: location field. The main research challenge
here is identity resolution of works (e.g., the Night Watch appears in
multiple collections). This is actually a complex problem, as we see
not just simple same-as relations, but also X detail of Y, work
series, etc.

With respect to vocabulary alignment (step 4) we are at the
moment just looking at the low hanging fruit, e.g., simple syntactic alignments such as the Tokugawa example. Much more can be
done here; we see this as a second critical area of research. However,
Hendlers adagium a little semantics goes a long way is certainly
true in this domain: the current limited set of alignments boosts
already the search results. The information-retrieval nature of our
task helps here: the results do not have to be perfect, as long as a
sufficiently large set is relevant.

One statistical fact is worthwhile to mention: on average we
1718 metadata triples per collection object. It should be noted that
these are mainly museum objects: for library and archive objects
the numbers may be different.

5.2. Semantic search

how much information is linked to an artist). For the moment we
are still using a relatively straightforward graph-search algorithm
[11], but this will likely need rethinking when the number of collection objects goes up an order of magnitude. This is definitely an
important research challenge. We mention two avenues one could
explore. Hollink et al. [5] has done an experiment where she tried
to discover graph patterns in WordNet which increase recall without jeopardizing precision. This led to six preferred WordNet path
patterns, most of these using some combination of hyponym and
meronym relations. Such patterns may also exist for other vocabularies or combinations of vocabularies. Secondly, one can try to
exploit metaknowledge of the hierarchy of metadata schema properties to drive the search.

In a sense, semantic search in large collections is still for the most
part unexplored terrain. The problems we are facing are similar to
the issues in the Linked Data initiative.18 Of course, our dataset is
smaller, but on the other hand the branching factor in the graph is
likely to be much higher due to the knowledge-rich nature of the
area.

In this article we have only addressed keyword-based search.
We have experienced that users tend to prefer this type of search,
because they have grown accustomed to the Google-type search.
This does not mean we think this should necessarily be the only
search paradigm. For example, we have experimented with faceted
search [4]. We have also tentatively explored relation search: find
interesting relationships between two URIs, e.g., between two
artists or between an artist and a location. This is potentially an area
where semantics can provide functionality that cannot be provided
by standard IR techniques.

5.3. User involvement

Cultural-heritage partners have been sitting at our work table
from the beginning. This has been an enormous help in steering
the project. We have done a number of user studies, for example
examining search behaviour of cultural-heritage experts [1].

User involvement is a key theme in cultural heritage. Many
musea are interested in tagging (cf. Steve Museum,19 Powerhouse
Museum,20 but are unsure how to combine this with their in-house

The current RDF/OWL graph with 200 K objects and multiple
(some quite large) vocabularies already poses enormous search
challenges. The vocabulary concepts generate many potential graph
paths (for example, check the website of ULAN to see for yourself

18 http://linkeddata.org/.
19 http://www.steve.museum/.
20 www.powerhousemuseum.com.

annotation practices. Musea have many objects in their collection
which require annotation, for which they do not have the necessary
resources. At the same time they are afraid of the quality of user
annotations. We are now exploring some mixed schemes in which
Web users can annotate collection objects with semantic tags.
When a user types in a term, an autocompletion facility allows her
to pick the right concept. Fig. 5 shows an example of this (the autocompletion mechanism is here used in combination with keyword
search, but is essentially the same). We are currently performing
a case study with the Rijksmuseum to explore interactive annotation facilities. The main problems are not technical, but social:
how should external user annotations be handled? This is a subject where Web 2.0 issues get intermingled with issues related to
quality and trust. For example, it requires mechanisms for external annotations to be approved by museum professionals and for
Web users to be acknowledged as experts by musea. There is still a
lot of work to be done here, which brings us well out of the context
of the present paper.

We view the work described in this paper as a step towards
showing that the Semantic Web endeavour has a chance of suc-
ceeding, at least in knowledge-rich web islands such as cultural
heritage. It is fair to say that in some areas we have only scratched
the surface, but there are sufficient positive pointers to continue
this effort. Similar encouraging experiences have been reported by
the MuseumFinland project21 which won the second prize in the
2004 Semantic Web Challenge.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Marco de Niet, Annelies van Nispen (Digital
Heritage Netherlands22), Marie-France van Orsouw and Annemiek
Teesing (Netherlands Institute for Cultural Heritage23) for their
valuable input. This research would not have been possible without
the gracious support of the collection owners: the Rijksmuseum
Amsterdam, the National Museum of Ethnology, the Royal Tropical Institute, The Netherlands Institute for Art History, the Royal
Library, and the Web collection Artchive. The E-Culture project
is a subproject of the MultimediaN (Multimedia Netherlands24)
project funded by the Dutch BSIK Programme.
