Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 13

Editorial

Semantic Web and Web 2.0

The cluster of technologies and design patterns known as
Web 2.0 has now emerged as the leading contender for the
next evolution of the Web. Researchers, developers, and venture capitalists are all flocking toward the banner of Web 2.0,
based on its promise of massively increased sharing and participation among web users. At the same time, the technologies
of the Semantic Web have been quietly maturing and spreading,
and now they provide a clear way to apply a basic level of formal
semantics to the infrastructure and pages of the web. In distinctive ways, both the patterns of Web 2.0 and the technologies of
the Semantic Web address the fundamental concept of socially
shared meaning.

In the past year, it has become clear that these two techniques
are natural complements of each other. Further, the combination of Semantic Web technologies with Web 2.0 application
design patterns should give rise to a new and exciting off-
spring: the social-semantic web, also referred to as Web 3.0.
In a social-semantic web, certain formally representable parts
of human meaning can be encoded and reasoned about via the
tools of the semantic web, but can also be curated and maintained via the social, community-oriented techniques of Web
2.0. The results of this combination would be powerful indeed.
The social-semantic web promises that the subtle variations in
meaning that characterize different human communities can be
managed via the user-friendly collaboration mechanisms of Web
2.0, while still maintaining the expressive precision and reasoning power of the semantic Web. This would make possible a new
class of applications that could leverage the semantic relations
that exist between certain kinds of web-accessible data to automatically locate and fuse information, perform basic reasoning,
and pivot and transform representations to meet a wide variety
of user needs. This special issue of the Journal of Web Semantics
is dedicated to the emerging social-semantic web.

Given the early, experimental stage of the field, the impressive flowering of ideas so far, and the resulting fragmentation
of the works we have seen, we faced an interesting editorial
challenge in creating this special issue. We elected to depart
from the customary Journal of Web Semantics format of three-
to-four deep and lengthy research papers, in favor of a larger
number of shorter and hopefully more thought-provoking pieces.
We did not propose particular topics of interest in our call for
contributions, nor did we specify a desired format for contri-

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2008 Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2007.12.002

butions. Instead, we posed a set of questions to motivate our
contributors in thinking about the promises and pitfalls of combining Semantic Web and Web 2.0 technologies. In particular,
we requested that our authors consider two different types of
concrete challenges to the vision of the social-semantic web:
 Semantic Web technologies were initially designed before the
rise of the Web 2.0 methods for managing large-scale socially
contributed content. What lessons should Semantic Web technologies draw from the popularity of tag systems, social
networks, mashups, and other Web 2.0 techniques? Does the
success of the social, user-oriented contribution models of
Web 2.0 impact the way that Semantic Web data should be
created, deployed, exploited, managed, and shared? In short,
should particular aspects of the Semantic Web be reconsidered
in order to maximally leverage the strengths of Web 2.0?
 Web 2.0 applications always depend on some type of shared
semanticsfor example, between the software components
of a mashup, or within the user community that contributes to
a particular tagging system. Can the relative precision and
rigor of Semantic Web representations and inference add
significant value to Web 2.0 applications? Are the various
Semantic Web bridge technologies (like RDFa, GRDDL,
and SPARQL) adequate to the semantic demands of Web
2.0 applications? Can Semantic Web techniques be used to
substantially enhance perceived user value in Web 2.0 social
networks, for example by linking across communities?

We received contributions that span a range from discussion
papers to advances in research technology to demonstrations.
We selected ten papers that represent a balance in terms of these
specific types of contributions to the quickly emerging research
and technology landscape. They fell into three rough categories:
discussion papers, technology papers, and systems papers.

1. Discussion papers

Much to our surprise, while we expected debates to emerge
among the discussion papers, our authors were united in their
belief that the social-semantic web is likely to become a major
application area of Semantic Web technology. As Tom Gruber
explains in our first paper, Web 2.0 brings massive amounts

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 13

of user-generated content and a proven recipe of humans and
machines working together in synergy. However, he argues that
Web 2.0 stops at what he calls collected intelligence, the mere
pooling of contributions from individual users. Adding Semantic
Web technology into the mix would allow to reach true collective
intelligence, which he defines as the higher level understanding constituted by answers, discoveries and other results not
found in the original contributions. Gruber suggests that the
Semantic Web technology will act in two principal ways: by
adding structure to user data and by connecting the existing
silos of data that characterize the Web 2.0 landscape. What
makes Grubers argumentation particularly strong is the wealth
of examples drawn from his experiences at RealTravel, a Web
2.0-style travel site employing lightweight semantic technolo-
gies. These examples validate the old semantic web clich e that
a little semantics goes a long way, and at a fraction of the
cost.

In the next paper, Hendler and Golbeck also see the
manmachine synergy in the marriage of the Semantic Web and
Web 2.0. They cast their argument in terms of networks: while
Web 2.0 is a rich network connecting users, the Semantic Web
is a network connecting data through semantic relations. They
argue that the power of linking in networks increases superlinearly in networks in general, and that these two networks are
no exception. Interconnecting these networks is thus certain to
bring value as new connections become possible within them. As
an example, they discuss the existing poor connectivity of collaborative tagging systems as a semantic space (tags do not create
much of a link space), going almost as far as claiming that most
of tagging is selfish (serving only individuals or small groups).
These spaces they argue would benefit from minimal semantics
in the form of stable URIs for concepts and limited core ontolo-
gies. Hendler and Golbeck leave the problem of how to graft
ontologies on tag spaces as future work: they reject bottomup
methods or emergent semantics as a method that can only reliably determine the semantics of the most common terms (which
are not necessarily the ones users may care about), but they also
criticize expert-system style approaches to the Semantic Web.
They hint that the solution is partly a user-interface challenge,
e.g. capturing semantics at the point of metadata creation. Sim-
ilarly, they see a great deal of work to be done in exploiting the
new linkages.

Bojars, Breslin and Finn would certainly agree with Hendler
and Golbeck on the power of linking. Their attention is focused
on linking Web 2.0-style social spaces, especially the many
forums for discussion that exist on the Web. Their criticism of
the current state-of-the-art, in particular microformats, is exactly
the lack of possibilities for interlinking and their limited exten-
sibility. They describe the work they have carried out in the past
years in DERIs SIOC initiative, which provides a good example
of reusing existing core vocabularies in creating an overlay network of semantics. Their work is both technically advanced and
pragmatically feasible. In filling SIOCs semantic network with
live data, the authors also do not mind getting their hands dirty:
in fact, they have been doing a outstanding work in promoting
SIOC in the semantics community, helping others implement
it, and stepping in themselves to add SIOC support to existing

social platforms in order to capture semantic annotations at the
source.

2. Technology papers

While Bojars et al. are mostly concerned with the external
representation of contextual metadata, our first more focused
technology paper, Iyad Rahwans Mass Argumentation and
the Semantic Web, goes deeper in exploring how to impose
a layer of semantics on discussions themselves. More pre-
cisely, Rahwan describes a formal representation of generic
argument structures. Although primitive ways of connecting
arguments in the social space already exist (e.g. through the
use of tags, links and trackbacks as references), Rahwans proposal augments these with several much more formal concepts
of argumentation theory and rhetoric, such as the different roles
that facts can play in debate. To make this work, Rahwan needs
the human element in Web 2.0, because extracting argument
structures fully automatically is one of the hardest tasks in
natural language processing. Participants in complex intellectual debate are often willing to invest the extra time to express
their arguments in a careful and structured way. The idea of a
rich, ontology-based argument representation certainly holds the
potential for interesting applications, such as multi-perspective
question answering or argumentative semantic blogging where
participants can link precisely to particular aspects of a discussion and provide supporting evidence, endorsements or rebuttals
(which can be later retrieved and aggregated with the contributions of other users).

In one of the most formal papers in our collection, J aschke
et al. propose a method for ontology learning in folksonomies,
in particular based on frequently co-occurring sets of users, tags
and resources. They view ontologies as social constructs, where
a concept can be described by a set of tags pertaining to a set
of users and used to characterize certain kinds of resources.
Adapting results from Formal Concept Analysis, they provide
an efficient method of learning the most salient concepts in a
folksonomy. Interpreting or even visualizing the results is non-
trivial, but their method could lead us to better ways of navigating
and comprehending the complex and noisy folksonomies that
many Web 2.0 websites are built upon.

Ben Adidas paper provides a bridge between Web 2.0-style
term-based knowledge representation and the more logically
demanding formalisms of the Semantic Web. Translation is a
theme of many of the successful technologies we have seen
in recent months. Adidas proposal for translating between the
emerging worlds of microformats and RDFa is called hGRDDL
(lacking vowels, best pronounced as h-griddle). His idea is
to apply GRDDL-style transformations to convert microformatenabled web pages into semantically equivalent pages where
the microformats have been replaced with RDFa markup, while
ensuring that the transformation preserves the visual presentation of the page. hGRDDL is a practical proposal that prepares
us for the a world where RDFa and microformats will exist
side-by-side.

Battle and Bensons paper bridges the Semantic Web and
Web 2.0 at the level of access to data and services. They have

a straightforward, practical view on developments in Web Ser-
vices. In their paper, they develop two extremely interesting
infrastructure elements that will enable Semantic Web applications on top of existing or new services implemented according
to the popular REST pattern. The first element, the Semantic
Bridge for Web Services, enables Semantic Web developers to
execute SPARQL queries against existing web services. It does
so by wrapping the WSDL and OWL-S or WADL description of
Web service operations, and translating the results returned into
the SPARQL query result format. The second element, Semantic
REST, is a protocol intended for new Semantic Web applications
that need to support REST-style access to query and data manipulation functionality. Battle and Benson show how to extend
the capabilities of the existing SPARQL protocol by supporting updates and deletes. The two contributions of the paper are
demonstrated by a single example of distributed querying where
a SPARQL query is executed against a set of web services, some
wrapped using the Semantic Bridge and some supporting the
Semantic REST paradigm directly.

3. System papers

The next two papers, by Ankolekar et al. and Heath and
Motta, open our collection of system-oriented articles. They have
been placed together because they share a common use case of
semantic reviewing. Reviewing is a natural fit for work on the
boundary of the Semantic Web and Web 2.0, as it requires handling both structured and unstructured information (minimally:
the reviews and data about the objects being reviewed) and it also
has a strong social dimension. In parallel, both papers start by
taking stock of the virtues of Semantic Web and Web 2.0 tech-
nology, noting the many complementarities. Ankolekar et al.
considers semantic reviewing as an example of how enhanced
authoring tools will be able to assist both publishers and readers in producing and consuming content more efficiently. They
describe a semantic blogging platform that can be extended by a
movie widget when its owner would like to create a review about
a movie the she has just seen. The widget helps to create and
structure the content, which is subsequently mixed with external
data such as showtimes and exposed to the world in both human
and machine readable ways.

Reviewing is also the use case targeted by Revyu.com, the
web application described by Heath and Motta. In fact, the
Revyu system, which just won the ISWC 2007 Semantic Web
Challenge, could be considered as an implementation of the
Ankolekars vision. Revyu also places the emphasis on ease
of user interaction, mixing owned content with external data,
and in general being a good Semantic Web citizen by opening

up its data and services. The difference from the proposal of
Ankolekar et al. is that Heath and Motta envision authoring and
consuming to be centralized and contextualized to a significant
extent.

Finally, our collection of papers on Semantic Web and Web
2.0 would not be complete without discussing semantic wikis.
Semantic wikis have been an important and active testbed for
ideas on the convergence between Web 2.0 and the Semantic
Web. Wiki-oriented ideas for semantics have evolved along two
distinct dimensions. First, wikis can provide the collaboration
framework and tools that have usually been missing from tra-
ditional, single user ontology editors for the Semantic Web.
Adding wiki-style collaboration features to ontology editing
tools is thus a natural next step in the evolution of ontology
editors. In fact, as shown by recent examples such as Free-
base, ontology editing and data acquisition can be carried out in
parallel and the approach can scale to large numbers of users.
Second, specialized extensions for handling semantic and structured information have been added to existing Wiki platforms,
such as the popular MediaWiki software that powers Wikipedia.
These new extended wiki platforms provide much better control
over data, as well as the tantalizing possibility of generating new
pages and displays of aggregated content by performing querying and reasoning over the collected data. The paper of Buffa et
al. provides a brief, but complete survey of Semantic Wikis. The
authors also present their own Semantic Wiki, called SweetWiki.
SweetWiki combines ideas from folksonomy and ontology-style
representation, sports a rich user interface, and includes many
of the latest developments in extensibility, exchange formats,
querying, and reasoning.

4. Conclusion

These ten papers provide a comprehensive overview of the
best current thinking on the social-semantic web, in its vision,
technology, and systems manifestations. We are excited by the
prospects of this new evolution of the web, and we look forward
to its further development.


Peter Mika
Vulcan Inc., 505 Fifth Avenue South, Suite 900, Seattle, WA
98104, United States

Mark Greaves


Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 206 342 2276;
fax: +1 206 342 3276.
E-mail address: markg@vulcan.com (M. Greaves)

