Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 151161

The semantic web as a newspaper media convergence facilitator

Roberto Garc a a,

, Ferran Perdrix a,b, Rosa Gil a, Marta Oliva a

a Departament dInform`atica i Enginyeria Industrial, Universitat de Lleida, Jaume II 69, E-25001 Lleida, Spain

b Diari Segre Media Group, Del Riu, 6, E-25007 Lleida, Spain

Received 21 January 2008; accepted 23 January 2008

Available online 10 March 2008

Abstract

Newspapers are evolving and this causes great changes in how newspapers reach their consumers, but also in how newspapers work internally.
Advanced computerised support is needed in order to cope with the new needs, which require that machines are aware of a greater part of the
underlying semantics. Ontologies and Semantic Web technologies are clear candidates for web-wide semantics. However, newspapers have made
great investments in their current news management systems and their wish is to undertake a smooth transition. Our proposal is to build an
ontological framework based on existing journalism and multimedia standards. These standards are based on XML technologies. Therefore, we
have developed a generic XML Schema to OWL mapping, complemented with an XML to RDF one. Together, they allow reusing existing metadata
that, once in a semantic space, facilitates data integration, news management and retrieval. The resulting ontological framework is being applied
in the Diari Segre Media Group1, which produces press, radio and television content.
 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: News; Newspaper; Ontology; Multimedia; Integration

1. Introduction

Web news publishing is evolving fast, as the majority of
Internet services, and nowadays this service is trying to adapt
information to a way that best fits users interests in order to
increase its usage. With that, newspapers are looking forward to
profit more from their news sites. In parallel, many of the newspaper companies are changing into news media houses. They
own radio stations and video production companies that produce content unsupported by traditional newspapers, but that is
delivered by Internet newspapers or new mobile services. Ini-
tially, Internet news were a mere reproduction of those in the
printed edition. Nowadays, Internet news are evolving fast, they
are constantly updated and provide new services for those users
interested on reaching this information as soon as possible and
enjoying new ways of interaction with them [13].

Consequently, news industry communication model is changing from the traditional one shown on the left of Fig. 1 to the one

Corresponding author. Fax: +34 973 702 702.


1 http://www.diarisegre.com.

E-mail addresses: rgarcia@diei.udl.cat (R. Garc a), fperdrix@diei.udl.cat,

fperdrix@diarisegre.com (F. Perdrix), rgil@diei.udl.cat (R. Gil),
oliva@diei.udl.cat (M. Oliva).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2008.01.002

shown in the right. In the former, each channel is considered separately (press, TV, radio, Internet, mobile phones. . .) and implies
his way creating his own message, transmitting over this channel and using his own interface in order to show the message
to the receivers. On the other hand, the latter is based on an
information convergence flux. In this model, transmitters make
information in collaboration with other transmitters and produce
messages that include as media as it is necessary (video, text,
audio, images. . .). Finally, receivers choose the channel that best
fits their needs in order to get access to messages. Moreover, the
involved roles, transmitter and receiver, are not fixed as before.
Newspapers promote that their readers become also transmitters.
In any case, the new content flux generalises both situations as
roles do not change, just who plays them.

Media houses must adapt to the requirements imposed by
this new model. First of all, there are changes in how they reach
consumers. News are build up from a combination of different content types (video, audio, the traditional text plus images,
etc.) and are delivered to users through different channels and
adapted to many kinds of devices (PC, PDA, smart phones, etc.).
Therefore, formats must be selected and adapted according to
the device and connection the user is using. These operations
include transcoding of formats, resizing of images or recoding
for higher levels of compression. Moreover, multi-channel dis-

R. Garc a et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 151161

Fig. 1. Traditional news information flux (left) and new convergent flux (right).

tribution must take into account that for each channel we must
define its own content, aesthetic and interaction model. These
characteristics define what an interactive channel is [4].

However, changes are not just restricted to the relation with
consumers. Digital media eliminates many time and space
restrictions and changes editorial team routines. Moreover, all
different media converge into a unified news object that is produced by interdisciplinary teams. Consequently, more efficient
and effective means for news management are needed in order
to facilitate coordination and production of these multimedia
assets.

The news industry is currently using content management
solutions for these means, but the additional requirements
of a convergent editorial office stress the need for advanced
knowledge management and information retrieval. Currently,
knowledge management and information retrieval is carried out
mainly by the documentation department, who is in charge of the
news archival process. They classify news using a hierarchical
thesaurus.

Journalists search this information when they need to inform
themselves on subjects, stories or events. This search can be
performed in extreme situations, e.g., lack of time, or lack of
knowledge in relation to the archive system. This is reflected
in the way journalists formulate their queries. The gap between
archivists and journalists mental models implies that more flexible content categorization and search systems are needed. For
instance, in the Segre media house, archivists are used to the
proprietary content taxonomy that has been used for years while
journalist prefer the standard taxonomy proposed by IPTC,
IPTC NewsCodes2. This trend is even bigger when we consider
cross-media content production and coordination in order to get
multimedia news.

Therefore, in order to take advantage of the possibilities
offered by the digital medium to exploit a newspaper archive,
the aspects that can be improved include:
 keyword search falling short in expressive power;
 weak interrelation between archive items: users may need to
combine several indirect queries manually before they can get
answers to complex queries;

ing archive news across newspapers;

 lack of a commonly adopted standard representation for shar-
 lack of internal consensus for content description terminology
 lack of involvement of journalist in the archiving process.

among reporters and archivists;

In this paper, we explore Semantic Web technologies [5] as
a way to overcome many of the challenges of digital and convergent media houses. The size and complexity of the stored
information, and the time limitations for cataloguing, describing and ordering the incoming information, make newspaper
archives a relatively disorganised and difficult to manage cor-
pus. In this sense, they share many of the characteristics and
problems of the WWW, and therefore the solutions proposed in
the Semantic Web vision are pertinent here.

In order to implement more advanced newspaper content
management applications, they should be more informed about
the content they are managing. They are not just files with some
weak interrelations. There is a lot of knowledge embedded in
these pieces of content and in their interrelationships. In order
to make computers aware of it, the implicit semantics must be
formalised using ontologies, the knowledge engineering artefact
for computerised knowledge representation and management.
Semantic Web technologies facilitate the building block for Web
ontologies, which add the facilities for web-wide ontology sharing and integration. The latter is a key feature for convergent
and globalised media houses.

The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2
presents the state of the art of journalism and multimedia meta-
data, and then analyses the current situation. Section 3 presents
the methodology that has been employed in order to produce
an ontological framework based on existing standards. Section
4 shows the ontological infrastructure that has been generated,
the architecture of the semantics processing infrastructure and
some examples of semantic integration mappings. In Section 5,
one of the applications that have been developed on top of the
Semantic Web infrastructure is introduced. Finally, there are the
conclusions and a sketch of the future plans in Section 6.

2. State of the art

2 NewsCodes, http://www.iptc.org/NewsCodes.

In order to build an ontological infrastructure for the Semantic Newspaper, it is important to analyse the state of the art of

the metadata initiatives in the journalism domain. Additionally,
digital newspapers have stressed the requirements of multimedia
management. Digital news are managed as multimedia packages that integrate text, images, video, audio, etc. Therefore, it
is also important to analyse the current situation in the more
general multimedia metadata domain. Both aspects are studied
next, first journalism metadata and then multimedia metadata.
This section ends with an analysis of the current situation, which
identifies the keys points that have guided our approach to build
the ontological framework.

2.1. Journalism metadata

One of the main standardization frameworks in the journalism
domain is the International Press Telecommunications Council3
(IPTC), an international consortium of news agencies, editors
and newspapers distributors. IPTC has developed standards like
the Information Interchange Model4 (IIM), NewsCodes (for-
merly the Subject Reference System), the News Industry Text
Format5 (NITF) or NewsML6.

Currently, almost all of them have evolved towards XMLbased standards to represent and manage news along their whole
lifecycle, including their creation, exchange and consumption.
For instance, NewsML is used to represent news as multimedia packages and NITF deals with document structure, i.e.
paragraphs, headlines, etc. On the other hand, the Subject Reference System (SRS), now part of IPTC NewsCodes, is a subject
classification hierarchy with three levels and seventeen categories in its first level.

This kind of metadata constitutes one of the kinds managed
by Segre Media Group systems. It is used for items from different news agencies and currently constitutes one of the main
integration efforts.

2.2. Multimedia news items metadata

All the previous initiatives are centred on the journalism
specific aspects of a semantic newspaper. However, as it has
been pointed out, newspapers are evolving towards the digital
multimedia domain. Therefore, they stress more and more their
multimedia management requirements.

In the multimedia metadata domain, as it is extensively shown
in the literature [69], the MPEG-7 [10] standard constitutes the
greatest effort for multimedia description. It is divided into four
main components: the Description Definition Language (DDL,
the basic building blocks for the MPEG-7 metadata language),
Audio (the descriptive elements for audio), Visual (those for
video) and the Multimedia Description Schemes (MDS, the
descriptors for capturing the semantic aspects of multimedia
contents, e.g. places, actors, objects, events, etc.).

3 IPTC, http://www.iptc.org.
4 IIM, http://www.iptc.org/IIM.
5 NITF, http://www.nitf.org.
6 NewsML, http://www.newsml.org.

In addition to MPEG-7, which concentrates on content
description, MPEG-21 defines an open framework for multimedia delivery and consumption. This standard must be also
considered because it focuses on the content management issues
for full delivery and consumption chain, from content creators
applications to end-users players. The different MPEG-21 parts
deal with diverse aspects like Digital Rights Management or
Digital Items, the definition of a fundamental content unit for
distribution and transaction very useful for convergent media
management. This common framework might help integrating
different multimedia metadata schemes, especially proprietary
ones like the one provided by the Milenium Quay7 cross-media
archive system currently being used at Segre Media Group.

2.3. Situation analysis

The main standards that have been presented, both in the
journalism and multimedia domains, are based on XML and
specified by XML Schemas. The more significant case is the
MPEG-7 one. It is based on a set of XML Schemas that define
1182 elements, 417 attributes and 377 complex types. NewsML
and NITF are also very big standards, they define more than
100 elements, and the NewsCodes hierarchy of subjects defines
more than one thousand different subjects.

The size of these standards makes it very difficult to manage
them. Moreover, the use of XML technologies implies that a
great part of the semantics remains implicit. Therefore, each
time an application is developed; semantics must be extracted
from the standard and re-implemented.

MPEG-7 constitutes a valuable starting point for more specific developments, i.e. it can be seen as an upper-ontology
for multimedia. However, the lack of explicit semantics makes
MPEG-7 very difficult to extend in an independent way, i.e. third
party extensions.

The same applies for MPEG-21 or the journalism standards.
Moreover, standards from both worlds share many concepts so
it would be possible, and easier, to integrate them once their
implicit semantics are available from a computer processing
point of view.

Our approach to the inconveniencies observed in this state of

the art is presented in the next section.

3. Approach

We have undertaken the application of the Semantic Web proposals to the newspapers world by following a smooth transition
strategy [11]. This strategy advises about keeping compatibility
(at least initially) with the current technology: browsers, proto-
cols, web and application servers, databases, and architectures.
The objective is then to design a platform that is an extension of previously working systems in mass media companies.
The manual creation of semantic instances for news items, at
a regular daily pace, is indeed a feasible goal in the future.
The introduction of new semantic documentation tools requires,

7 Milenium Quay, http://www.mileniumcrossmedia.com.

R. Garc a et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 151161

however, a careful work of analysis, design, testing and balancing of the additional burden that such tools may impose on
archivists, journalists or end-users.

In order to put into practice the smooth transition strategy, the
first step has been to reuse existing standards in the journalism
and multimedia fields, which have been for long very active in
standardization.

However, as it has been highlighted in the state of the art,
all the more recent standards are based on XML but lack formal semantics that facilitate applying a Semantic Web approach.
Therefore, in order to facilitate the transition from current standards and applications to the semantic world, we have applied
the XML Semantics Reuse methodology, which is detailed in
Section 3.2.

3.1. Existing approaches

There are other existing initiatives that try to move journalism
and multimedia metadata to the Semantic Web world. In the
journalism field, the Neptuno [12] and NEWS [13] projects can
be highlighted. Both projects have developed ontologies based
on existing standards (IPTC SRS, NITF or NewsML) but from an
ad hoc point of view. Therefore, in order to smooth the transition
from the previous legacy systems, complex mappings should be
developed and maintained.

The same can be said for the existing attempts to produce semantic multimedia metadata. Chronologically, the first
attempts to make MPEG-7 metadata semantics explicit where
carried out, during the MPEG-7 standardisation process, by Jane
Hunter [14]. The proposal used RDF to formalise a small part of
MPEG-7, and later incorporated some DAML + OIL construct
to further detail their semantics [15]. However, at that moment,
there were not mature technologies for Web-wide metadata
semantics formalisation. Moreover, XML had already a great
momentum, so it was the logical choice.

From this point, once Semantic Web has matured, there have
been more attempts to relate MPEG-7 with Web ontologies.
However, none of them has retaken the initial effort to completely move MPEG-7 to the Semantic Web. This initiatives
range from separated modules for existing MPEG-7 tools that
offer reasoning capabilities for concrete aspects of multimedia
management [7], to a partial OWL modelling of the MPEG-7
Multimedia Description Schemes intended to facilitate MPEG-
7 extensions [9]. Moreover, they are not systematic; they are
applied on an ad hoc basis, which makes them very costly to
apply to the whole MPEG-7 standard.

All these initiatives have produced very interesting results,
both in the journalism and multimedia fields, and they are complementary to our objective, i.e. to smoothly move towards a
semantic newspaper based on the main journalism and multimedia standards.

The method we have used to perform this is detailed in the
next section. It is a generic XML Schema to OWL mapper combined with an XML to RDF translator. It has already shown its
usefulness with other quite big XML Schemas in the Digital
Rights Management domain, such as MPEG-21 REL [16] and
ODRL [17], and in the music metadata field [18].

3.2. XML semantics reuse methodology

The main caveat of semantic multimedia metadata is that it is
sparse and expensive to produce. The previously introduced initiatives are appropriate when applied to limited scopes. However,
if we want to increase the availability of semantic multimedia
metadata and, in general, of semantic metadata, we need methods that are more productive. The more direct solution is to take
profit from the great amount of metadata that has been already
produced by the XML community.

There are many attempts to move metadata from the XML
domain to the Semantic Web. Some of them just model the XML
tree using the RDF primitives [19]. Others concentrate on modelling the knowledge implicit in XML languages definitions,
i.e. DTDs or the XML Schemas, using web ontology languages
[20,21]. Finally, there are attempts to encode XML semantics
integrating RDF into XML documents [22,23].

However, none of them facilitates an extensive transfer of
XML metadata to the Semantic Web in a general and transparent way. Their main problem is that the XML Schema implicit
semantics are not made explicit when XML metadata instantiating this schemas is mapped. Therefore, they do not take profit
from the XML semantics and produce RDF metadata almost as
semantics-blind as the original XML. Or, on the other hand, they
capture these semantics but they use additional ad hoc semantic
constructs that produce less transparent metadata.

Therefore, we have chosen the XML Semantics Reuse
methodology [24] and the XML Schema to OWL and XML to
RDF tools implemented in the ReDeFer project8. This methodology combines an XML Schema to web ontology mapping,
called XSD2OWL, with a transparent mapping from XML to
RDF, XML2RDF. The ontologies generated by XSD2OWL are
used during the XML to RDF step in order to generate semantic metadata that makes XML Schema semantics explicit. Both
steps are detailed next.

3.2.1. XSD2OWL mapping

The XML Schema to OWL mapping is responsible for
capturing the schema implicit semantics. This semantics are
determined by the combination of XML Schema constructs. The
mapping is based on translating these constructs to the OWL
ones that best capture their semantics. These translations are
detailed in Table 1.

The XSD2OWL mapping is quite transparent and captures a
great part XML Schema semantics. The same names used for
XML constructs are used for OWL ones, although in the new
namespace defined for the ontology. XSD and OWL constructs
names are identical; this usually produces uppercase-named
OWL properties because the corresponding element name is
uppercase, although this is not the usual convention in OWL.

Therefore, XSD2OWL produces OWL ontologies that make
explicit the semantics of the corresponding XML Schemas. The
only caveats are the implicit order conveyed by xsd:sequence
and the exclusivity of xsd:choice.

8 ReDeFer project, http://rhizomik.net/redefer.

Table 1
XSD2OWL translations for the XML Schema constructs and shared semantics with OWL constructs

XML Schema
element | attribute
element@substitutionGroup
element@type
complexType|group |attributeGroup
complexType//element
extension@base | restriction@base
@maxOccurs @minOccurs
sequence choice

Shared informal semantics

rdf:Property owl:DatatypeProperty owl:ObjectProperty
rdfs:subPropertyOf
rdfs:range
owl:Class
owl:Restriction
rdfs:subClassOf
owl:maxCardinality owl:minCardinality
owl:intersectionOf owl:unionOf

Named relation between nodes or nodes and values
Relation can appear in place of a more general one
The relation range kind
Relations and contextual restrictions package
Contextualised restriction of a relation
Package concretises the base package
Restrict the number of occurrences of a relation
Combination of relations in a context

For the first problem, owl:intersectionOf does not retain
its operands order, there is no clear solution that retains the
great level of transparency that has been achieved. The use
of RDF Lists might impose order but introduces ad hoc constructs not present in the original metadata. Moreover, as it has
been demonstrated in the Semantic Web community, the element
ordering does not contribute much from a semantic and knowledge representation point of view [25]. For the second problem,
owl:unionOf is an inclusive union, the solution is to use the disjointness OWL construct, owl:disjointWith, between all union
operands in order to make it exclusive.

To conclude, one important aspect is that the resulting OWL
ontology may be OWL-Full. This is due to the fact that, in some
cases, the XSD2OWL translator must employ rdf:Property for
those xsd:elements that have both data type and object type
ranges. However, this can be fixed in the case of MPEG-7
because there are only 23 elements that have both complex
type and simple type content, which causes them to be mapped
to rdf:Properties. Two different properties are generated, a
DatatypeProperty and an ObjectProperty, for each of them.
Consequently, the ontology can be made OWL-DL.

3.2.2. XML2RDF mapping

Once all the metadata XML Schemas are available as mapped
OWL ontologies, it is time to map the XML metadata that
instantiates them. The intention is to produce RDF metadata
as transparently as possible. Therefore, a structure-mapping
approach has been selected [19]. It is also possible to take a
model-mapping approach [26].

XML model-mapping is based on representing the XML
information set using semantic tools. This approach is better
when XML metadata is semantically exploited for concrete pur-
poses. However, when the objective is semantic metadata that
can be easily integrated, it is better to take a more transparent
approach.

Transparency is achieved in structure-mapping models
because they only try to represent the XML metadata structure,
i.e. a tree, using RDF. The RDF model is based on the graph so
it is easy to model a tree using it. Moreover, we do not need to
worry about the semantics loose produced by structure-mapping.
We have formalised the underlying semantics into the corresponding ontologies and we will attach them to RDF metadata
using the instantiation relation rdf:type.

The structure-mapping is based on translating XML metadata instances to RDF ones that instantiate the corresponding

constructs in OWL. The more basic translation is between
relation instances, from xsd:elements and xsd:attributes to
rdf:Properties. Concretely, owl:ObjectProperties for node to
node relations and owl:DatatypeProperties for node to values
relations.

However, in some cases, it would be necessary to use
rdf:Properties for xsd:elements that have both data type and
object type values. Values are kept during the translation as simple types and RDF blank nodes are introduced in the RDF model
in order to serve as source and destination for properties. They
will remain blank for the moment until they are enriched with
semantic information.

The resulting RDF graph model contains all that we can
obtain from the XML tree. It is already semantically enriched
thanks to the rdf:type relation that connects each RDF property to the owl:ObjectProperty or owl:DatatypeProperty it
instantiates. It can be enriched further if the blank nodes are
related to the owl:Class that defines the package of properties
and associated restrictions they contain, i.e. the corresponding xsd:complexType. This semantic decoration of the graph
is formalised using rdf:type relations from blank nodes to the
corresponding OWL classes.

At this point we have obtained a semantically enabled representation of the input metadata. The instantiation relations can
now be used to apply OWL semantics to metadata. Therefore, the
semantics derived from further enrichments of the ontologies,
e.g. integration links between different ontologies or semantic
rules, are automatically propagated to instance metadata thanks
to inference.

However, before continuing to the next section, it is important
to point out that these mappings have been validated in different ways. First, we have used OWL validators in order to check
the resulting ontologies, not just the MPEG-7 Ontology but also
many others [16,17]. Second, our MPEG-7 ontology has been
compared to Hunters and Tsinarakis ones [15,9]. This comparison has shown that our mapping captures the same semantics
as those captured by hand by Hunter using RDF Schema and
DAML + OIL. Moreover, the same OWL constructs as those
used by Tsinaraki are generated, plus many more that are difficult to capture without the help of computerised means. For
instance, AudioType is modelled using a cardinality restriction
on Audio but it lacks an all values from AudioSegmentType
restriction on the same property. Finally, the two mappings have
been tested in conjunction. Testing XML instances have been
mapped to RDF, guided by the corresponding OWL ontologies

R. Garc a et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 151161

Fig. 2. Metadata integration and retrieval architecture.

from the used XML Schemas, and then back to XML. Then, the
original and derived XML instances have been compared using
their canonical version in order to correct mapping problems.

4. Ontological infrastructure

As a result of applying the XML Semantics Reuse methodol-
ogy, we have obtained a set of ontologies that reuse the semantics
of the underlying standards, as they are formalised through
the corresponding XML Schemas. All the ontologies related
to journalism standards, i.e. NewsCodes NITF and NewsML,
are available from the Semantic Newspaper site9. This site also
contains some of the ontologies for MPEG-21 useful for news
modelling as convergent multimedia units. The MPEG-7 Ontology is available from the MPEG-7 Ontology site10.

The ontologies that are going to be used as the basis for the

info-structure of the semantic newspaper are:
 NewsCodes Subjects Ontology: an OWL ontology for the
subjects part of the IPTC NewsCodes. It is a simple taxonomy of subjects. An existing RDF Schema from the Neptuno
project [12] has been reused. It has been trivially modified in
order to make it an OWL ontology in order to facilitate the
integration of the subjects taxonomy in the global ontological
framework. However, in order to avoid some undesired inferences due to the fact that the subjects are taxonomy terms and
not classes, the future work is to model this taxonomy using
SKOS [27].
 NITF 3.3 Ontology: an OWL ontology that captures the
semantics of the XML Schema specification of the NITF stan-

9 Semantic Newspaper, http://rhizomik.net/semanticnewspaper.
10 MPEG-7 Ontology, http://rhizomik.net/mpeg7ontos.

dard. It contains some classes and many properties dealing
with document structure, i.e. paragraphs, subheadlines, etc.,
but also some metadata properties about copyright, author-
ship, issue dates, etc.
 NewsML 1.2 Ontology: the OWL ontology resulting from
mapping the NewsML 1.2 XML Schema. Basically,
it
includes a set of properties useful to define the news structure
as a multimedia package, i.e. news envelope, components,
items, etc.
 MPEG-7 Ontology: The XSD2OWL mapping has been
applied to the MPEG-7 XML Schemas producing an ontology
that has 2372 classes and 975 properties, which are targeted
towards describing multimedia at all detail levels, from content based descriptors to semantic ones.
 MPEG-21 Digital Item Ontologies: a Digital Item (DI) is
defined as the fundamental unit for distribution and transaction in MPEG-21. In order to model DIs, the MPEG-7
schemas for the Digital Item Identifier (DII), the Digital Item
Declaration Model (DIDM) and the Digital Item Declaration
Language (DIDL) have been mapped to OWL. Other parts
of the MPEG-21 standard, specially the Rights Expression
Language (REL) [16], have been also mapped to OWL using
XSD2OWL and can be used if required.

4.1. System architecture

Based on the previous XML world to Semantic Web domain
mappings, we have built up a system architecture that facilitates
journalism and multimedia metadata integration and retrieval.
The architecture is sketched in Fig. 2. The MPEG-7 OWL ontol-
ogy, generated by XSD2OWL, constitutes the basic ontological
framework for semantic multimedia metadata integration and
appears at the centre of the architecture. In parallel, there are the
journalism ontologies. The multimedia related concepts from the

journalism ontologies are connected to the MPEG-7 ontology,
which acts as an upper ontology for multimedia. Other ontologies and XML Schemas can also be easily incorporated using
the XSD2OWL module.

Semantic metadata can be directly fed into the system
together with XML metadata, which is made semantic using
the XML2RDF module. For instance, XML MPEG-7 metadata has a great importance because it is commonly used for
low-level visual and audio content descriptors automatically
extracted from its underlying signals. This kind of metadata
can be used as the basis for audio and video description and
retrieval.

In addition to content-based metadata, there is context-based
metadata. This kind of metadata is higher level and it is usually,
in this context, related to journalism metadata. It is generated by
the system users (journalist, photographers, cameramen, etc.).
For instance, there are issue dates, news subjects, titles, authors,
etc.

This kind of metadata can come directly from semantic
sources but, usually, it is going to come from legacy XML
sources based on the standards XML Schemas. Therefore, in
order to integrate them, they will pass through the XML2RDF
component. This component, in conjunction with the ontologies previously mapped from the corresponding XML Schemas,
generates the RDF metadata that can be then integrated in the
common RDF framework.

This framework has the persistence support of a RDF store,
where metadata and ontologies reside. Once all metadata has
been put together, the semantic integration can take place, as it
is exemplified in Section 4.2.

4.2. Semantic integration outline

As mentioned in the introduction, one of the main problems
in the Wold Wide Web and intraweb domains is that of heterogeneous data integration. Even within a single organization,
data from disparate sources must be integrated. Our approach
to solve this problem is based on Web ontologies and, as the
focus is on multimedia and journalism metadata integration, our
integration base are the MPEG-7, MPEG-21 and the journalism
ontologies.

In order to profit from the system architecture presented
before, when semantic metadata based on different schemes has
to be integrated, the XML Schemas are first mapped to OWL.
Once this first step has been done, these schemas are easily
integrated into the ontological framework using OWL semantic
relations for equivalence and inclusion: subClassOf, subProper-
tyOf, equivalentClass, equivalentProperty, sameIndividualAs,
etc.

These relationships capture the semantics of the data inte-
gration. Then, once metadata is incorporated into the system
and semantically decorated, the integration is automatically performed by applying inference. Table 2 shows some of these
semantics mappings, performed once all metadata has been
moved to the semantic space, plus the preliminary mappings
performed during the XML to RDF mapping. The later are necessary in order to recognise implicit identifier, i.e. attributes used

Table 2
Journalism and multimedia metadata integration mapping examples

Semantic Mappings
 nitf:tobject.subject. subj:Subject
nitf:tobject.subject.detail subj:explanation
nitf:body newsml:DataContent
newsml:Subject subj:Subject
XML2RDF Mappings
tobject.subject.refnum rdf:ID

to identify instances that are not explicitly used as identifiers
in XML. The mappings have been generated using the FOAM
ontology mapping framework [28].

5. Semantic media integration from human speech

This section introduces a tool, build on top of the ontological
infrastructure described in the previous sections, geared towards
a convergent and integrated news management in the context
of a media house. As it has been previously introduced, the
diversification of content in media houses, who must deal in an
integrated way with different modalities (text, image, graphics,
video, audio, etc.), carries new management challenges. Semantic metadata and ontologies are a key facilitator in order to enable
convergent and integrated media management.

In the news domain, news companies like the Diari Segre
Media Group are turning into news media houses, owning radio
stations and video production companies that produce content
not supported by the print medium, but which can be delivered
through Internet newspapers. Such new perspectives in the area
of digital content call for a revision of mainstream search and
retrieval technologies currently oriented to text and based on
keywords. The main limitation of mainstream text IR systems is
that their ability to represent meanings is based on counting word
occurrences, regardless of the relation between words [29]. Most
research beyond this limitation has remained in the scope of linguistic [30] or statistic [31] information. On the other end, IR is
addressed in the Semantic Web field from a much more formal
perspective [32]. In the Semantic Web vision, the search space
consists of a totally formalized corpus, where all the information
units are unambiguously typed, interrelated, and described by
logic axioms in domain ontologies. Such tools enabled the development of semantic-based retrieval technologies that support
search by meanings rather than keywords, providing users with
more powerful retrieval capabilities to find their way through in
increasingly massive search spaces.

Semantic Web based news annotation and retrieval has
already been applied in the Diari Segre Media Group in the
context of the Neptuno research project [12]. However, this
is a partial solution as it just deals with textual content. The
objective of the tool described in this section is to show how
these techniques can also be applied to content with embedded human-speech tracks. The final result is a tool based on
Semantic Web technologies and methodologies that allows managing text and audiovisual content in an integrated and efficient
way. Consequently, the integration of human speech processing
technologies in the semantic-based approach extends the seman-

R. Garc a et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 151161

Fig. 3. Architecture for the semantic media integration from human speech tool.

tic retrieval capabilities to audio content. The research is being
undertaken in the context of the S5T research project11.

As it is shown in Fig. 3, this tool is based on a human
speech recognition process inspired by [33] that generates the
corresponding transcripts for the radio and television contents.
From this preliminary process, it is possible to profit from the
same semi-automatic annotation process in order to generate
the semantic annotations for audio, audiovisual and textual con-
tent. Keywords detected during speech recognition are mapped
to concepts in the ontologies describing the domain covered
by audiovisual and textual content, for instance the politics
domain for news talking about this subject. Specifically, when
the keyword forms of a concept are uttered in a piece of speech,
the content is annotated with that concept. Polysemic words
and other ambiguities are treated by a set of heuristics. The
speech recognition system is first trained with an annotated corpus from news programs performed by different speakers, after
which it is ready to be used on the target speech corpus. The
speech is parameterized using Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC). More details about the annotation and semantic
query resolution processes are available from [32].

Once audio and textual contents have been semantically
annotated, it is possible to provide a unified set of interfaces,
rooted on the semantic capabilities provided by the annotations.
These tools, intended for journalists and archivist but also been
adapted for the general public, are shown on the left of Fig. 3.
They exploit the semantic richness of the underlying ontologies upon which the search system is built. Semantic queries
are resolved, using semantic annotations as it has been previously described, and retrieve content items and pieces of these
contents. News contents are packaged together using annota-

11 See http://nets.ii.uam.es/s5t.

tions based on the MPEG-21 and MPEG-7 ontologies, as it is
described in Section 5.1. Content items are presented to the
user through the Media Browser, detailed in Section 5.2, and
the underlying semantic annotations and the ontologies used to
generate these annotations can be browsed using the Knowledge
Browser, described in Section 5.3.

5.1. Semantic news packaging using MPEG ontologies

Actually, in an editorial office there are a lot of applications
producing media in several formats. This is an issue that requires
a common structure to facilitate management. The first step is
to treat each unit of information, in this case each new, as a
single object. Consequently, when searching something upon
this structure, all related content is retrieved together.

Another interesting issue is that news can be linked to other
news. This link between news allows the creation of information threads. A news composition metadata system has been
developed using concepts from the MPEG-21 and MPEG-7
ontologies. It comprises three hierarchical levels as it is shown
in Fig. 4.

The lower level comprises content files, in whatever format
they are. The mid level is formed by metadata descriptors (what,
when, where, how, who is involved, author, etc.) for each file,
mainly based on concepts from the MPEG-7 ontology generated
using the methodology described in Section 3.2. They are called
the Media Digital Items (Media DI).

These semantic descriptors are based on the MPEG-7 Ontology and facilitate automatised management of the different kinds
of content that build up a news item in a convergent media
house. For instance, it is possible to generate semantic queries
that take profit from the content hierarchy defined in MPEG-7
and formalised in the ontology. This way, it is possible to pose

that conform them. These objects are called News Digital Items
(News DI). There is one News DI for each news item and all
of them are based on MPEG-21 metadata. The part of the standard that defines digital items (DI) is used for that. DI is the
fundamental unit defined in MPEG-21 for content distribution
and transaction, very useful for convergent media management.
As in the case of MPEG-7 metadata, RDF semantic metadata
is generated from XML using the semantics made explicit by
the MPEG-21 ontologies. This way, it is possible to implement
generic processes also at the news level using semantic queries.
On top of the previous semantic descriptors at the media
and news item level, it is possible to develop an application for integrated and convergent news management in the
media house. The application is based on two specialised interfaces described in the next subsections. They take profit from
the ontological infrastructure detailed in this paper, which is
complemented with ontologies for the concrete news domain.
However, the application remains independent from the concrete
domain.

Fig. 4. Content DI structure.

5.2. Media browser

generic queries for any kind of segment (e.g. AudioSegment-
Type, VideoSegmentType. . .) because all of them are formalised
as subclasses of SegmentType and the implicit semantics can be
directly used by a semantic query engine.

Table 3 shows a piece of metadata that describes an audio
segment of a Diari Segre Media Group news item used in the
S5T project. This semantic metadata is generated from the corresponding XML MPEG-7 metadata using the XML to RDF mapping and takes profit from the MPEG-7 OWL ontology in order
to make the MPEG-7 semantics explicit. Therefore, this kind of
metadata can be processed using semantic queries independently
from the concrete type of segment. Consequently, it is possible to
develop applications that process in an integrated and convergent
way the different kinds of contents that build up a new.

The top level in the hierarchy is based on descriptors that
model news and put together all the different pieces of content

Table 3
MPEG-7 Ontology description for a news item audio segment generated from
XML metadata

<?xml version=1.0?>
<rdf:RDF

xmlns:mpeg7 = http://rhizomik.net/ontologies/2006/03/Mpeg7-2001.owl#>
<mpeg7:AudioType rdf:about = http://rhizomik.net/audio/2007-01-13.mp3>

<mpeg7:Audio>

<mpeg7:AudioSegmentType>

<mpeg7:MediaTime>

<mpeg7:MediaTimeType>

<mpeg7:MediaTimePoint

rdf:datatype = &xsd;time>01:27.0</mpeg7:MediaTimePoint>

<mpeg7:MediaDuration

rdf:datatype = &xsd;time>P5S</mpeg7:MediaDuration>

</mpeg7:MediaTimeType>

</mpeg7:MediaTime>

</mpeg7:AudioSegmentType>

</mpeg7:Audio>

</mpeg7:AudioType>
</rdf:RDF>

The Media Browser takes profit from the MPEG-21 metadata
for news and MPEG-7 metadata for media in order to implement
a generic browser for the different kinds of media that constitute
a news item in a convergent newspaper. This interface allows
navigating them and presents the retrieved pieces of content and
the available RDF metadata describing them. These descriptions
are based on a generic rendering of RDF data as interactive
HTML for increased usability [34].

The multimedia metadata is based on the Dublin Core schema
for editorial metadata and IPTC News Codes for subjects. For
content-based metadata, especially the content decomposition
depending on the audio transcript, MPEG-7 metadata is used
for media segmentation, as it was shown in Table 3. In addition to the editorial metadata and the segments decomposition,
a specialized audiovisual view is presented. This view allows
rendering the content, i.e. audio and video, and interacting with
audiovisual content through a click-able version of the audio
transcript. Fig. 5 shows both the metadata and the audiovisual
content views.

Two kinds of interactions are possible from the transcript.
First, it is possible to click any word in the transcript that has
been indexed in order to perform a keyword-based query for all
content in the database where that keyword appears. Second,
the transcript is enriched with links to the ontology used for
semantic annotation. Each word in the transcript whose meaning
is represented by an ontology concept is linked to a description
of that concept, which is shown by the Knowledge Browser
detailed in the next section. The whole interaction is performed
through the user web browser using AJAX in order to improve
the interactive capabilities of the interface.

For instance, the transcript includes the name of a politician
that has been indexed and modelled in the ontology. Conse-
quently, it can be clicked in order to get all the multimedia
content where the name appears or, alternatively, if the name has
been semantically annotated, it can be clicked in order to browse

R. Garc a et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 151161

Fig. 5. The Media browser interface integrating content metadata and the semantically annotated transcript.

all the available knowledge about that politician encoded in the
corresponding domain ontology.

5.3. Knowledge browser

This interface is used to allow the user browsing the knowledge structures employed to annotate content. The same RDF
data to interactive HTML rendering used in the Media Browser is
used here. Consequently, following the politician example in the
previous section, when the user looks for the available knowledge about that person and interactive view of the RDF data
modelling him is shown. This way, the user can take profit from
the modelling effort and, for instance, be aware of the politician
party, that he is a member of the parliament, etc.

This interface constitutes a knowledge browser so the link to
the politician party or the parliament can be followed and additional knowledge can be retrieved, for instance a list of all the
members of the parliament. In addition to this recursive navigation of all the domain knowledge, at any browsing step, it is
also possible to get all the multimedia content annotated using
the concept currently being browsed. This step would carry the
user back to the Media Browser.

Thanks to this dual browsing experience, the user can navigate through audiovisual content using the Media Browser and
through the underlying semantic models using the Knowledge
Browser in a complementary an inter-weaved way. Finally, as
for the Media Browser, the Knowledge Browser is also implemented using AJAX so the whole interactive experience can be
enjoyed using a web browser.

6. Conclusions and future work

This research work has been guided by the need for a semantic
journalism and multimedia metadata framework that facilitates
semantic newspaper applications development in the context of
a convergent media house. It has been detected, as it is widely
documented in the bibliography and professional activity, that
IPTC and MPEG standards are the best sources for an ontological framework that facilitates a smooth transition from legacy

to semantic web era systems. MPEG-7, MPEG-21 and most of
the IPTC standards are based on XML Schemas and thus they
do not have formal semantics.

Our approach contributes a complete and automatic mapping
of the whole MPEG-7 standard to OWL, of the media packaging part of MPEG-21 and of the main IPTC standard schemas
(NITF, NewsML,. . .) to the corresponding OWL ontologies.
Instance metadata is automatically imported from legacy systems through a XML2RDF mapping, based on the ontologies
previously mapped from the standard XML schemas. Once in
a semantic space, data integration, which is a crucial factor
when several sources of information are available, is facilitated
enormously.

Therefore, though the semantics that can be reused from
XML Schemas are lightweight, they provide the anchor points
where more elaborated formalisations can be connected. For
instance, the COMM Ontology [35], which formalises parts
of MPEG-7, might be integrated with the proposed MPEG-
7 ontology. This way, more advanced reasoning capabilities
might be available and initiatives like the COMM Ontology
might enjoy input metadata coming from MPEG-7 XML data in
order to enlarge the scenarios where they can be put into prac-
tice. Another initiative we are currently considering is NewsML
G212. Like NewsML, it is also based on XML Schemas so we
are going to apply the same approach to it.

Finally, semantic metadata facilitates the development of
applications in the context of media houses that traditional newspapers are becoming. The convergence of different kinds of
media, that now constitute multimedia news, poses new management requirements that are easier to cope with if applications
are more informed, i.e. aware of the semantics that are implicit
in news and the media that constitute them. The benefits of
semantic metadata are being tested in the Diari Segre Media
Group, a newspaper that is becoming a convergent media house
with press, radio, television and an Internet portal. As it has
been detailed, a set of semantics-aware tools have been devel-

12 NewsML G2 Architecture (NAR), http://www.iptc.org/NAR.

oped. They are intended for journalist and archivists in the media
house, but they can be also adapted to the general public at the
Internet portal.

Acknowledgements

This work has been partly supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Education research project S5T - Scaleable
semantic personalised search of spoken and written contents on
the Semantic Web (TIN2005-06885) http://nets.ii.uam.es/s5t
