Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 7 (2009) 271

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Editorial
The Semantic Web challenge, 2008

The Semantic Web challenge was created to show off the benefits of semantic technologies by developing integrated, easy to use
applications that could provide new levels of Web functionality for
end users on the Web or within enterprise settings. Applications
submitted to the competition demonstrate clear practical value
that goes above and beyond what is possible with conventional
web technologies alone.

In 2008, a second track was added to the challenge to push
research in the scaling of Semantic Web technologies. The Billion
Triples Track required the participants to make use of a data set
 consisting of about a billion triples  provided by the organiz-
ers. The goal of this challenge was not to be a benchmarking effort
between triple stores, but rather to demonstrate applications that
could scale to a Web size using realistic Web-quality noisy data.

In this issue we present papers by five of the six winning sys-
tems: the three winners of the regular challenge and two of the
winners of the Billion Triple Challenge.

The first place winner was Paggr, a system for creating Web
widgets for linked data queries. Essentially, Paggr is an online tool
that provides novel ways to manage and repurpose information on
the web when that info is available in Semantic Web formats. Paggr
allowed access to a number of different datasets and query types,
making it a very flexible way to interact with linked data systems.
The second place winner was DBpedia Mobile, an application
for browsing DBpedia information via a mashup with geonames
and other location data presented on a map (and available via a
mobile client). DBPedia, as most readers know, is a central node
in the growing linked data cloud, and this application showed the
power of using this Wikipedia-based dataset in conjunction with
various geospatial data.

Third place was taken by HealthFinland, a semantic web-based
portal for managing health information. Using Semantic technolo-
gies, HealthFinland is able to customize health information found
on the Web to the needs of a particular user. Thus, a younger person

looking for information on, say, diet, would find different guidance
than might a more senior citizen. A number of health ontologies are
used in producing the semantics used in the system, and interfaces
are provided both to the human user, via a Web-based frontend,
and to a machine, via a widget-based service interface.

For the Billion Triples Challenge, the winning application was
SemaPlorer, a system allowed users to interactively explore and
visualize a very large subset of the billion triple data semantic data
set in real-time. Its use case was to allow a user to learn about
a city, tourist area, or other area of interest. By visualizing the
data using a map, media, and different context views, the system
goes beyond the simple storage and retrieval of large numbers of
triples. SemaPlorer leveraged a number of the different semantic
data sources such in the Billion Triple Dataset, including DBpedia,
GeoNames, WordNet, and personal FOAF files. It also connected
with a large Flickr data set converted to RDF, thus extending the
triples provided to make for a map-based browser of a very large
dataset.

Third place in the competition was Marvin, a system which used
a novel method to generate a sound, but not necessarily complete,
closure of the billion triples data. Marvin distributed the data to
many processors, materialized locally, and then reshuffled the
data among processors. In this way, the closure probabilistically
approaches within epsilon of the complete system, but with very
efficient use of multiple processors in a cluster or other distributed
machine.

These five papers demonstrate the diversity of ways that
Semantic Web data can be used, and represent some of the best
applications developed in the research community.

Peter Mika
Yahoo

Jim Hendler
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2009 Published by Elsevier B.V.
