Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 133136

Translating the Foundational Model of Anatomy into OWL


Natalya F. Noy

, Daniel L. Rubin

Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA

Received 26 February 2007; received in revised form 28 August 2007; accepted 2 December 2007

Available online 8 December 2007

Abstract

The Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA) represents the result of manual and disciplined modeling of the structural organization of
the human body. It is a tremendous resource in bioinformatics that facilitates sharing of information among applications that use anatomy
knowledge. The FMA was developed in Prot eg e and the Prot eg e frames language is the canonical representation language for the FMA. We
present a translation of the original Prot eg e frame representation of the FMA into OWL. Our effort is complementary to the earlier efforts
to represent FMA in OWL and is focused on two main goals: (1) representing only the information that is explicitly present in the frames
representation of the FMA or that can be directly inferred from the semantics of Prot eg e frames; (2) representing all the information that
is present in the frames representation of the FMA, thus producing an OWL representation for the complete FMA. Our complete representation of the FMA in OWL consists of two components: an OWL DL component that contains the FMA constructs that are compatible
with OWL DL; and an OWL Full component that imports the OWL DL component and adds the FMA constructs that OWL DL does not
allow.
 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Ontology; OWL; Semantic Web; Foundational Model of Anatomy

1. Motivation and goals

The Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA) [9] represents the result of manual and disciplined modeling of the
structural organization of the human body. Many workers in
biomedical informatics consider the FMA to be a tremendous
resource that facilitates sharing of information among applications that use anatomy knowledge. The FMA developers used
the Prot eg e ontology editor [2] to create the FMA and the
Prot eg e-frames representation is the canonical representation
language for the FMA. With the development and use of biomedical ontologies in the context of the Semantic Web, researchers
often want to access the FMA using the tools designed for
the Web Ontology Language (OWL) [4]. The FMA Prot eg e
representation relies heavily on some of the features that are
common in frame-based representations but are not so common in OWL (and, in particular, in OWL DL) ontologies. These

features include metaclasses, classes (rather than instances) as
property values, and attributed relationships between classes
(see [7] for details of the Prot eg e frame representation of the
FMA).

Previous efforts to represent portions of FMA in OWL [5,3]
focused on transforming the FMA into the form that Description
Logics reasoners could use efficiently, producing useful infer-
ence. Because the original FMA representation was not designed
to be used with DL classifiers, such transformation necessarily
involves making assumptions about the FMA representation that
are not present in the frames version.

Previous efforts also focused on a subset of the FMA. How-
ever, anatomy is a broad field and different user communities
are interested in different portions of the FMA. Therefore, a
complete representation of FMA in OWL is needed.

Our effort is complementary to the previous efforts because
the goals of our transformation were different. Specifically, our
goals were two-fold:


Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: noy@stanford.edu (N.F. Noy),

rubin@stanford.edu (D.L. Rubin).

(1) Integrity: Represent only the information that is explicitly
present in the frames representation of the FMA or that can
be directly inferred from the semantics of Prot eg e frames.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2007.12.001

N.F. Noy, D.L. Rubin / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 133136

(2) Completeness: Represent all the information that is present
in the frames representation of the FMA, thus producing an
OWL representation for the complete FMA.

Thus, our goal was to provide a complete OWL rendering of
the canonical Prot eg e-frames representation of the FMA. Our
goal was not to find the most appropriate representation of the
FMA in OWL (or OWL DL). Rather, we wanted to stay as close
to the structure of the original representation as possible when
representing it in OWL and to make as few assumptions as possible about the semantics of the representation. Thus our OWL
representation does not contain the types of structures that DL
classifiers use to infer new subsumption relationships or inconsistencies in the ontology because the frames representation did
not have these constructs.

To the best of our knowledge, our work is the only one at the
time of this writing that produced an OWL representation of the
complete FMA rather than its fragments.

We believe that the resource that we provide has significant

utility for the biomedical community. For example:

standard ontology language that is endorsed by W3C.

 The resource is a complete representation of a FMA in a
 Researchers can extend the OWL version of the FMA that we
publish with additional statements to support different types
of reasoning applications. For example, researchers extended
an OWL representation of the FMA to create an application to
reason about the anatomic consequences of penetrating injury
[10].
 Most OWL tools can now load the full FMA (provided the
tools can generally handle ontologies of the size of the FMA).
 Other OWL researchers can write conversion scripts against
this version to transform it into another representational form
that is more suitable for their work. (In fact, since making the
resource available, we had several reports of just such use,
which was not possible before.)

2. Components of FMA in OWL

Because the FMA uses metaclasses and classes as property values, among other things, we could not use OWL DL
for our representation [6], and OWL Full was a natural language of choice for us. However, many researchers need an
OWL DL version for compatibility purposes. For example, if
they want to extend the FMA and have an OWL DL ontology as the result, they need an OWL DL version of the FMA
to start with. Hence, we chose a two-layered approach to the
OWL representation of the FMA (Fig. 1): first, we created
an OWL DL component that included the part of the FMA
that could be directly represented in OWL DL. This part contains all FMA classes and the class hierarchy; all properties;
their domains and ranges; specification of functional properties;
property restrictions (such as cardinality constraints and local
ranges, which became cardinality restrictions and allValuesFromrestrictions in OWL). We designated six properties
as annotation properties (Fig. 1) and these properties and their
values are also in the OWL DL model. Second, we created an
OWL Full component that imports the OWL DL model using
the owl:imports construct. The OWL Full constructs refer to
classes and properties in the OWL DL model, making additional
assertions about them. Note that partonomy and adjacency information in FMA is represented at the level of classes and therefore
is part of the OWL Full component in our translation. For details
of our translation, please see the corresponding technical report
[8].

Researchers are currently developing OWL 1.1 [1]a new
version of the OWL language, which, among other features, will
allow some level of meta-modeling within the DL framework.
The OWL 1.1 authors suggest the technique of punning to enable
statements about classes: with punning, the same name can be
used for a class and an individual, as long as the use of the name
as an individual has no effect on the meaning of the name as
a class. It is possible that with the use of punning, all of the
information in the FMA can be translated into OWL 1.1 (such

Fig. 1. The two-layered approach to the OWL languages: the OWL DL component contains part of the FMA that directly corresponds to the DL species of OWL.
The OWL Full component imports the DL one and makes additional assertions about its classes and properties.

transformation is beyond the scope of this work since OWL 1.1
is not currently a standard).

3. Related work and discussion

There have been several earlier efforts to represent the FMA
in OWL [5,3]. These efforts pursued a different goal, mainly
to transform the FMA into the form that Description Logics
(DL) reasoners could use efficiently, producing new subsumption relationships, or finding inconsistencies. Therefore they
necessarily had to make assumptions about the FMA components that were not explicitly present in the canonical Prot eg e
frames representation. For instance, in the transformation by
Golbreich et al. [5], relationships between classes (where a literal transformation would require using classes as property
values, which is not allowed in OWL DL) became existential
restrictions (someValuesFrom) in OWL: such approach is
more natural in DLs and allows more inference to be performed
by a classifier. Similarly, Dameron et al. [3] introduced disjoint
and closure axioms that were not explicitly present in the original
representation.

For the biomedical researchers who plan to use DL reasoning
with specific portions of the FMA, these transformations may
be more appropriate. For the researchers who require the FMA
in its entirety and as close to its original Prot eg e representation
as possible and who do not plan to use DL classifiers with the
FMA itself (but may want to use it with ontologies they derive
from it), the transformation resulting from the effort described
here may be more appropriate. In addition, our effort may benefit
researchers who need only the information that is contained in
our DL version and wish to use it as a foundation upon which
they may add additional restrictions appropriate to their specific
needs and application domain.

Note, however, that at the time of this writing we are not
aware of any successful attempts to use a DL classifier to perform subsumption reasoning on all of the FMA. First, the sheer
size of the FMA poses a considerable challenge: classifiers simply run out of memory when given such a large OWL ontology
to process [12]. In fact, none of the classifiers that we tried on a
machine with 4G of memory was able to classify or validate the
OWL DL file before we removed values for all annotation properties (thus reducing the size of the OWL DL file by 80%). This
limitation makes the current active area of research on ontology
modularization [11] all the more pertinent. While we may not
yet be able to classify ontologies of the size of the FMA as a
whole, we may be able to classify subsets of it. Note that we can
load both the OWL DL and OWL Full version of the FMA into
Prot eg e 3.3 for browsing and editing. Second, the FMA does
not have any necessary and sufficient conditions defined for its
classes. Zhang et al. report on using one of the patronomic relations (constitutional part of) to define a class [12].
However, their experiments demonstrated that using this property as a definitional one was inappropriate. It is not clear if there
is any property or a set of properties that could be used automatically for necessary and sufficient conditions because the
FMA simply was not designed with these types of definitions in
mind.

While we tried to introduce as few assumptions as possible
into the semantics of frames, there are some fundamental differences between the semantics of frames and OWL that we had to
keep in mind. One of the key differences is the use of the closedworld assumption in frames and the open-world assumptions in
OWL. Thus, it is impossible to achieve the identical semantics of
the two representations without making additional assumptions
that are not in the original representation. Consider, for example,
the notion of allowed classes for slots in Prot eg e frames, which
we translated into the allValuesFromrestrictions in OWL.
In the former case, we are saying that if there is an instance
where a slot value is not a member of the allowed class then
that instance violates the constraints on the model. In the second case, if there is an instance where slot value is not known
to be a member of the class in allValuesFrom, that value
is assumed to be in that class. Closing the OWL model in
this case would require making assumptions about disjointness
of classes in the FMA. Thus, the semantics are different, but
such difference is inevitable due to the fundamental differences
between the languages.

In many cases though we were able to get the correct semantics even though the natural semantics of frames and OWL
differ. For instance, several domain statements for a slot in
Prot eg e mean that the slot is valid for instances of any of
the classes among the domains. In OWL, if there are multiple
domain statements for a property, then any individual with this
property must be an instance of each of the classes in the declared
domains. Thus, when a slot in Prot eg e had multiple domains, we
set the domain of the OWL property to be the union of these.
The same is true for ranges of properties (allowed classes for
slots in Prot eg e).

Even though we tried to add as few assumptions about the
semantics of the FMA representation as possible, the conversion script that we wrote is not a generic conversion script from
Prot eg e frames to OWL. First, we have omitted from consideration any Prot eg e-frames features that are not used in the FMA
representation (e.g., numeric slots and their ranges, subslots,
standalone individuals that are not values for slots on classes,
etc.). Some of these features do not have a straightforward representation in OWL (such as numeric minimum and maximum),
but we did not have to worry about it because our goal was
strictly to convert the FMA.

Second, some of our decisions on the OWL counterparts to
the frames constructs are specific to the FMA representation and
cannot be generalized. The main example is the class-valued
slots. In Prot eg e frames, one can specify that values of a particular slot are limited to classes that are subclasses of the allowed
parents for the slot. There is no similar construct in OWL. In gen-
eral, it is incorrect to assume that a class-valued slot with allowed
parent A is equivalent to the same slot with range (allowed
class) A. However, in the specific structure of the FMA, it is
indeed correct to make such assumption: in the FMA, classes
are both subclasses and instances of their superclasses Simi-
larly, we did not represent default values for slots (i.e., as the
information on the slots) because they were already materialized in the FMA representation: Prot eg e assigns default values
for slots at the time it creates an instance. Therefore, all the

N.F. Noy, D.L. Rubin / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 133136

slots in the FMA representation that we were translating already
had the values assigned. Thus, simply by translating the values
of these slots we got the materialized defaults in the OWL
version.

4. Availability, versions, statistics

We used FMA version 2.0, accessing it from a mySQL
database. We used the Protege 3.3 release. The FMA in OWL
contains 78,988 classes; 3309 restrictions; 110 object properties;
54 datatype properties; 6 annotation properties.

The FMA in OWL is available at

the National Center for Biomedical Ontology: http://bioontology.org/projects/
ontologies/fma/. The conversion software is available at http://
www.bioontology.org/wiki/index.php/FMAInOwl.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the National Center for Biomedical Ontology, under roadmap-initiative grant U54 HG004028
from the National Institutes of Health. We are grateful to
Olivier Bodenreider, Todd Detwiler, Christine Golbreich, Onard
Mejino, and Songmao Zhang for fruitful discussions. We thank
anonymous reviewers of an earlier draft for their insightful comments and suggestions.
