Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 2128

Using the Semantic Web for linking and reusing data across

Web 2.0 communities


U. Boj ars

, J.G. Breslin, A. Finn, S. Decker

Digital Enterprise Research Institute, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland

Received 20 June 2007; received in revised form 17 September 2007; accepted 6 November 2007

Available online 4 December 2007

Abstract

Large volumes of content (bookmarks, reviews, videos, etc.) are currently being created on the Social Web, i.e. on Web 2.0 community sites,
and this content is being annotated and commented upon. The ability to view an individuals entire contribution to the Social Web would be an
interesting and valuable service, particularly important as social networks are often being formed through created content and things that people
have in common (object-centred sociality). SIOC is a Semantic Web research project that aims to describe online communities on the Social
Web. This paper describes how SIOC and the Semantic Web can enable linking and reuse scenarios of data from Web 2.0 community sites, and
introduces a SIOC Types module to further specify the type of content items and act as a glue between user posts and the content items created
and annotated by users.
 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: RDF; Semantic Web; SIOC; Social software; Web 2.0

1. Introduction

The Web is increasingly becoming a social place: there has
been a shift from just existing on the Web to participating on the
Web. Community applications such as collaborative wikis, blog-
ging, photo and bookmark sharing, and online social networks
have become very popular recently, both in personal/social and
professional/organisational domains [1]. Most of these collaborative applications provide common features such as content
creation and sharing (images, user profiles, bookmarks, arti-
cles, etc.), provisions for discussions related to the content
(comments, talk pages) and user-to-user connections (circle of
friends, private messaging, etc.) and networks of users are also
forming through content items of common interest (in what has
been termed object-centred sociality [2]).

Moreover, applications are going beyond just data to provide categorising and interlinking for better search and retrieval.
As examples of this, there has been huge growth in taxonomy and folksonomy usage [3] on sites like the Wikipedia,


Corresponding author. Tel.: +353 91 495079; fax: +353 91 495541.
E-mail addresses: uldis.bojars@deri.org (U. Boj ars), john.breslin@deri.org

(J.G. Breslin), aidan.finn@deri.org (A. Finn), stefan.decker@deri.org
(S. Decker).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2007.11.010

del.icio.us, CiteULike and Flickr and within some application
areas interconnections between people as well as content have
been formed through social networks, trackbacks, blogrolls and
interwiki links. However, these applications are hitting boundaries in terms of information integration. For example, many
people have multiple user accounts through which they will
create new or replicated content across sites, and there is little in terms of connections between these user accounts and the
associated content.

Why one would choose the Semantic Web for enhancing
their Web 2.0 experience? The Semantic Web offers a generic
infrastructure for interchange, integration and creative reuse of
structured data, which can help to cross some of the boundaries
that Web 2.0 is facing. Current Web 2.0 sites offer poor query
possibilities apart from searching by keywords or tags. Microformats allow embedding of structured information into web pages
but lack a generic data representation (other than embedding in
HTML) and are limited in representing connections between different types of objects. Adding semantics to Web 2.0 sites aims
to tackle some of these issues by creating a web of linked, mashable data: facilitating better (i.e. more precise) querying when
compared with keyword matching, providing more reuse possibilities and creating richer links between content items. Existing
efforts to represent structured data on Web 2.0, on the other hand,

U. Boj ars et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 2128

Fig. 1. Connecting communities through linked semantic data.

offer a large amount of data that we can use. By exploiting each
others achievements the Semantic Web and Web 2.0 together
have a better opportunity to realise the full potential of the web
[4].

In this paper, we will describe how a combination of the
SIOC (Semantically Interlinked Online Communities) ontology
[5] and other projects that aim to add semantic information
to the current Web can be used to bring various social applications together and take them beyond some of their current
limitations towards the vision of a Social Semantic Web (see
Fig. 1). Through the use of Semantic Web data, searchable and
interpretable content is retrieved from existing Web 2.0 collaborative infrastructure and intelligent use of this content can then be
made. The SIOC Types module1 introduced in this paper extends
core SIOC classes with additional types needed for describing
different Web 2.0 objects and aims to facilitate locating appropriate RDF vocabularies and classes suitable to describe these
objects.

We will begin with some background summaries of related
projects, describe the visions of this work, and detail our implementations to date, and will finish with conclusions and future
work.

2. Background

The motivation for this work is to combine SIOC with other
initiatives to expand the potential of the Social Web. We will now
describe some of these initiatives and detail how we can augment
them to create a linked Web of Data that is often locked within
various social spaces.

Fig. 2. Main classes and properties in SIOC.

2.1. SIOC core ontology

The SIOC core ontology2 defines the main concepts and
properties required to describe information from online communities on the Semantic Web. Through this ontology and the
initial set of applications that make use of its terms, SIOC aims
to meet the needs of communities and users on the evolving
Web, as community-centric content sites become more prevalent and finding relevant items from these communities is now
more important than ever.

The main terms in the SIOC core ontology are shown in Fig. 2.
In brief, Users create content Items (e.g., Posts) that reside in
Containers (e.g., Posts in Forums) on data Spaces (e.g. Sites).
Initially, the SIOC Project was created to describe the realm of
Web-based discussions, occurring on message boards, blogs and
web archives of mailing lists. However, it soon became obvious
that SIOC can span various applications for online communities,

1 http://rdfs.org/sioc/types

2 http://www.w3.org/Submission/2007/02/

and can be tailored towards very specific domains. The SIOC
Types module was created to extend it, and various subtypes of
core classes were created to describe the various types of content
items that people are creating, annotating and talking about on
Web 2.0 platforms.

One of the problems with combining social media data is in
knowing what accounts the user holds on different social media
sites so that one can access information about the content created by the user on each of these sites. A combination of the
FOAF (Friend of a Friend) vocabulary and SIOC can be used to
describe content created by a person across several different sites
by including a list of her social media site accounts in personal
FOAF profiles and using SIOC to express user-created content
on these sites.

Existing SIOC exporter tools can be used to export RDF information about the content and structure of Web 2.0 platforms
(blogs, wikis, forums, etc.) and are available for several common content creation platforms.3 An important property of these
SIOC exporters is that information from every page of a site is
represented in RDF making all the main information contained
within a site is available in a machine readable form and ready
for reuse.

2.2. Microformats

Microformats4 allow specific pieces of structured information to be embedded within HTML markup that makes up web
page. This information can then be reused by various applica-
tions. Microformats have been successful in bringing semantic
metadata to the current Web through a vibrant developer commu-
nity. Through this community, several microformats have been
created and are currently in use. The hCard microformat enables
to describe information about a person such as name and contact
details; the hReview microformat describes information about
reviews and the hAtom microformat allows to describe information about content items available for syndication, such as blog
posts and comments.

There are some limitations with microformats, especially
in representing relationships between individual fragments of
data, which limits the ability to properly describe the linked,
Web nature of data (e.g., hAtom is sometimes used to represent
blog comments, but does not have a property to indicate what
blog post the comment is in a reply to). Parsing of microformats can also be a difficult task where a significant number of
exceptions and special cases have to be taken into account. References to objects (such as people, content items, etc.) can often
be ambiguous.

A generic approach for storing the information contained
within microformats is needed if we are to store and query
information about all different kinds of Web 2.0 objects in
a uniform way. One option would be to store microformats
in their native HTML format, but these would be difficult to
process and query. Alternatively, domain specific data stores

and applications could be used for each particular kind of
microformat object, but they may lack flexibility and limit
the ability to query over links between different object types.
The third option is to use RDF, which has advantages over
the two as it is more generic and allows to store and process
information about all types of resource and relations between
them.

2.3. APIs

Social media sites such as Flickr, Twitter or Facebook have
started to open APIs that can be used by other applications to
interact in new ways with the site and its data. Such APIs often
provide richer data models than is possible via metadata embedded into web pages and can be a good basis for building data
exporters for the Semantic Web.

However, traditional APIs have a number of shortcomings
[6]. Some of these limitations include: (1) they do not work
with clients that have not been designed with the specific API
in mind; (2) their content cannot be accessed by search engines
and other generic web agents and (3) each mashup only allows
access to data from a limited number of sources chosen by the
developer. In contrast, information on the Semantic Web can be
used by generic clients, including RDF browsers, RDF search
engines, and web query agents. Therefore, applications that can
lift the data from such APIs to the Semantic Web may become
useful.

2.4. Structured and semantic blogging

There have been some approaches for adding more information to blog posts, so that this information can be reused in other
applications. The structured blogging effort5 has created tools
to provide microformat data from blogging platforms such as
WordPress and Moveable Type. In structured blogging, structured data about people, reviews, events and other objects are
becoming a part of blog posts. Sometimes a person will need for
more structure in their posts (e.g. when doing a review) and may
best be served by filling in an appropriate form during the post
creation process. An advantage of microformats and structured
blogging is that they can serve as an introduction to semantics
for non-technical users: users simply choose their post type and
some semantic content is generated in the background. A little
bit of structure added by the user allows us to generate a lot more
semantics.

The semantic blogging [7] aims to describe semantic information about individual content items within blog posts (internal
semantic) using RDF. It is similar to structured blogging, but is
more flexible as a result of using RDF as a data model. Some
semantic blogging applications, allow a user to drag and drop
items from the desktop and automatically generate their descriptions in RDF. This allows to describe precise semantics of data
items in blog posts, but needs to reach a larger user base before
it becomes a considerable source of data.

3 http://rdfs.org/sioc/applications/
4 http://microformats.org/

5 http://structuredblogging.org/

U. Boj ars et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 2128

Fig. 3. Creating social networks via object-centred sociality.

3. Vision

Our work combines the benefits of different approaches
described in Section 2  we propose to use existing information on Web 2.0 and convert it to RDF which can be used as a
flexible model for describing and integrating data. SIOC vocabulary is useful to describe user-created content and acts as a
core to which additional structured information (e.g. data about
items described in the blog post) can be added to. SIOC Types
module facilitates locating appropriate RDF vocabularies and
classes suitable to describe these items. Using these tools, we
can describe what a post is about (sioc:about), what type of post
we have created (e.g. an idea, a review, etc.) and any attachments
(sioc:attachment) or other parts (dcterms:hasPart) that may be
contained in it.

3.1. Consolidating user-created content

As mentioned in the introduction, an interconnection of Web
2.0 content by using Semantic Web technologies such as SIOC
can lead to many interesting possibilities on the individual and
community level. We will now describe one of them.

Imagine an example where a user (Bob) has created content
on Flickr, YouTube, etc., through his various user identities on
those sites. We could also say that each Web 2.0 content item is
a user-contributed post, with some attached or embedded con-
tent. This can be modeled as a content circle where a person
(described using FOAF) is at the inner layer of a content cir-
cle, the next layer is formed of its user accounts (sioc:User) and
the outer layer is the content  text, files, associated metadata 
created by them on community sites (described using SIOC, its
Types module and other relevant vocabularies).

Object-centred sociality [2] illustrates one usage of the SIOC
Types module in relation to Web 2.0 sites. This idea is conceptually illustrated in Fig. 3 where the model of content circles is
extended by showing a person being linked across communities
to other people (via their user profiles) connected together by

the content they create together, co-annotate or for which they
use similar annotations.

For example, Bob and Carol are connected via bookmarked
URLs that they both have annotated and also through events that
they are both attending, and Alice and Bob are using similar tags
and are subscribed to the same blogs. SIOC and FOAF can be
used together to describe the objects in this social network of
users. The SIOC Types module, described in Section 5, acts as
a glue by pointing to external vocabularies to use for each particular type of content. All this information, integrated together,
allows us to build a picture of all the objects that a user has
interacted with, discussed and commented upon across different social network sites, from which the links between the users
themselves emerge.

4. Describing data from Web 2.0 sites with RDF

The Resource Description Framework (RDF) allows semantic information to be expressed as a graph consisting of resources
(objects) and properties used to describe objects attributes and
relationships between them. RDF is a universal model that all
information, including real-world objects and their representation on Web 2.0 sites, can be expressed in. It is designed to
facilitate integration of data from different sources, expressed in
a number of vocabularies, and allows expressing links between
various objects, e.g., a person and a software project she created.
The ability to create links between objects and to point to
additional machine-readable information about these objects can
often be very useful. For example, if a person is working on a
software project and this project is described in Wikipedia, we
can create a link to DBPedia  a machine-readable representation
of Wikipedia data [8]  with some RDF data about this project.
We will now illustrate how information about a typical online
community site content  blog post with comments  can be
described in RDF, and how meaningful queries can be asked
over this linked data set. The snippet below presents a blog post
and its comment described in RDF (using Turtle notation):

an indication of relations between people. If the information
on who created different kinds of Web 2.0 objects is available,
then we can define simple rules that will add new information
about relations between people, for example:

This is a basic example which describes the source information as a set of linked objects (a post, a comment and a
person) and their properties. This information can be enhanced
with additional linked data, located anywhere on the Web, e.g.,
we could add a rdfs:seeAlso property to :person2 pointing to a
location of this persons FOAF RDF profile, containing information about other social media site accounts this person has (e.g.,
Flickr), people he knows and topics he is interested in. The RDF
data model allows to seamlessly join data coming from all these
distributed locations on the Web.

As soon as all the information is described in RDF, we can
ask queries over this heterogeneous data set. For data described
using microformats, you would usually extract a particular
microformat (e.g., hCard) and store it in a domain-specific
application (e.g. an address book). In such a scenario, a user
would be limited to using only queries on the properties of
address book entries, but will not be able to tap into a much
richer information contained in the relations between different
types of objects. By converting Web 2.0 data into RDF (e.g. by
using GRDDL6) we can use make a richer use of this informa-
tion. Here is an example query for retrieving information about
all persons who have replied to posts created by a particular
user, represented in a human readable pseudocode:

This query returns information about a set of people whom
a user is connected to via comments to his posts. If the user
shares the same identification (e.g., a URI) across a number of
community sites then relevant information from all of these sites
will be returned. This and other queries over RDF data are used
by the Social SIOC Explorer [9] to extract social relations and
context from online community sites.

While ability to query linked data already gives us powerful
tools to explore the Social Web, new information can also
be created from the existing information, e.g., by using rules
to create new, derived data which can also be published
back to the web. Details about using rules on RDF data is
outside the scope of this paper, and therefore we will just
provide a simple example, relevant to our work. Object-centred
sociality, introduced earlier, considers user-created objects as

The SPARQL RDF query language [10] can be used both for
querying RDF (using SELECT statements) and to express simple rules like the one in the example above (using CONSTRUCT
statements) with additional RDF rule languages available for
more complex use cases.

5. Implementation of SIOC Types module

SIOC follows a modular design where additional ontology
modules can be created for specializing and further extending
classes and properties contained within the SIOC Core ontology.
Currently there are two modules defined: (1) SIOC Services
module and (2) SIOC Types module. The Services module
allows one to indicate web services that are associated with
(located on) a sioc:Site or a part of it, and is not directly relevant to this paper. In this section we will concentrate on the
SIOC Types module and describe it in more detail.

The SIOC Types module extends the core ontology by
introducing subtypes of SIOC classes such as sioc:Container,
sioc:Item, sioc:Forum and sioc:Post. This module has two roles:

(1) to define subtypes of SIOC objects needed for more precise representation of various elements of online community
sites (e.g., sioc t:Comment is a subclass of sioc:Post and
sioc t:MessageBoard is a subclass of sioc:Forum);

(2) to introduce new subtypes for describing different types of
Web 2.0 objects in SIOC and pointing to existing ontologies suitable for describing details of these objects (e.g., a
sioc t:ReviewArea may contain sioc t:Review(s) which can
be described in detail using the Review Vocabulary7).

This second role of the SIOC Types module aims to bring
together tools  different RDF vocabularies  to describe Web
2.0 objects and sites in RDF. While the vocabularies may exist for
some of these types, due to the distributed nature of the Semantic
Web it is not a simple task to find these vocabularies. Sometimes
a single vocabulary will not cover all the information needed,
and a number of vocabularies may need to be combined or new
terms and/or vocabularies created. The SIOC Types module does
not aim to replace these vocabularies but rather adds value by
acting as a one-stop shopa single location that can point to
other suitable vocabularies for many common content types.

Fig. 4 lists main sub-types of sioc:Container and sioc:Forum
we identified as necessary to represent collections of popular
types of Web 2.0 objects. These subtypes are listed on the left
side of the figure while the right side of the figure lists relevant

6 http://www.w3.org/TR/grddl/

7 http://dannyayers.com/xmlns/rev/

U. Boj ars et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 2128

Fig. 4. Container classes in SIOC Types and related content items which they may contain.

ontologies that can be used to represent these objects. Containers and objects contained within them are linked together using
sioc:has container and sioc:container of properties.

Currently, the initial version of the SIOC Types module uses
an rdfs:seeAlso property to point SIOC Types objects to related
vocabularies and classes to use for describing individual items
contained within them. We chose this property as a weak link
pointing to related objects and are exploring more formal ways
how to link vocabularies together. One option is to subclass
individual item classes in SIOC Types module from the relevant
classes identified in an external ontology. The downside of this
option is that one particular class has to be chosen contradicting
the distributed nature of the Semantic Web where there can a
number of suitable ontologies which users may wish to choose
from.

After social media site data are described in RDF using SIOC,
its types module and other relevant vocabularies, the advantages
of producing RDF data can be reaped through semantically
enabled applications for browsing, reusing and sharing. For
example, WordPress SIOC Importer can import any sioc:Post
item into a WordPress blog entry, and generic RDF browser
applications such as Disco and Tabulator may be used for exploring the Web of Data.

6. Examplerepresenting reviews

Structured blogging allows the creation of a group of
pre-defined content types and assists a user in entering and publishing structured information about this content. The hReview
microformat schema defines several fields that can be used to
describe a review: summary, item type, item info, reviewer, dtre-
viewed, rating, description, tags, permalink and license. The
fields that are defined for hReview are fixed in advance and are
limited to describing data defined in the hReview schema or by
one of the other microformats.

The Review vocabulary is designed to represent a review
in RDF. The vocabulary properties are createdOn, hasRe-
view, maxRating, minRating, rating, reviewer and text. The
number of fields defined for the Review vocabulary is less
than for the hReview microformat, but RDF makes it possible to combine a number of ontologies in a well defined
way thus allowing to express all the information in hReview and some additional data. External object descriptions
such as DBPedia or FOAF profiles can be linked to. E.g.,
a rev:Review may link to an external FOAF file on the
authors website that describes the author and his or her online
accounts.

Fig. 5. Describing a review (a) in hReview and (b) as linked RDF data.

Table 1
Mapping between hReview and RDF vocabularies

hReview field

RDF field(s)

Summary
Item type
Item info
Reviewer
dtreviewed
Rating
Description
Tags
Permalink
Licence

dc:title
Classes linked from SIOC Types
sioc:about
foaf:maker, foaf:Person, rev:reviewer
dcterms:created
rev:rating
sioc:content, rev:text
sioc:topic
sioc:link, URL
cc:license

An example of a structured review post represented using
hReview is shown in Fig. 5a while Fig. 5b shows the same review
data represented using linked RDF data. Notice that the RDF data
shown here resembles the basic example from Section 4 (a post
and a comment linked to it) with a rev:Review object added.

Table 1 lists how the terms in the hReview microformat map
to a combination of Review, SIOC, FOAF and other vocabularies
used as needed. This shows how using RDF gives us greater flexibility as we can combine different vocabularies to describe items
of interest. SIOC Types allows us to specify detailed information
about the types of objects and to connect different types of RDF
classes (describing real-world and Web 2.0 objects) together by
linking to the relevant vocabularies to use to describe them. The
roles of all the different RDF vocabularies and their namespace
abbreviations used in the mapping above are as follows:
 FOAF (foaf) is used to describe information about a person
 SIOC (sioc) is used to describe information about the blog
post that a review is contained in, some of the information contained within a review and other kinds of online community
site information (e.g., comments to a review post);

who created the review;

 SIOC Types module (sioc t) is used to define different types of
items that a review is about and also to specify that a container
is a sioc types:ReviewArea;
 Review RDF (rev) is a domain specific vocabulary used to
describe the main properties of a review, and CC is a domainspecific RDF vocabulary used to describe Creative Commons
licenses;
 Dublin Core (dc and dcterms) is used to describe general
properties such as review title and creation date and to connect
a sioc:BlogPost with a review that is a part of a post.

Information from microformats can be reused using utilities such as the Firefox Operator plugin. Operator currently
only detects a single fragment of information it can use from
a reviewthe hCard used to describe the reviewer. Even if
extended to extract more, it will still be working with individual pieces (fragments) of the information available, e.g., losing
an important link between a comment and a post that a comment responds to. A review expressed in RDF, on the other
hand, is designed with relations between objects in mind and
can be easily extended with more properties and pointers to
where additional structured data are available (e.g. if URL2 is
some software the we can link to a detailed DOAP description
for this product).

7. Conclusions and future work

Many social media sites already express structured information through open APIs and microformats, but both have their
limitations. In this paper, we have demonstrated how information about Web 2.0 can be combined with the Semantic Web
technologies in a mutually beneficial way: with open APIs and
microformats acting as a way to get structured information from
the social media sites, and Semantic Web technologies offering
a generic infrastructure for interchange, integration and creative
reuse of structured data.

U. Boj ars et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 6 (2008) 2128

In this paper, we described the use of SIOC, FOAF and
other vocabularies for describing social media site information
as linked RDF data. We introduced the SIOC Types ontology
module which can act as a glue that brings together various
vocabularies needed for describing information about different
types of objects in RDF. Main challenges to be addressed in
future work are in exploring better techniques for describing
combinations of RDF vocabularies to use to describe Web 2.0
objects and in defining concrete mappings from these objects
into RDF.

We hope that this work will help in bridging the efforts of
Semantic Web and Web 2.0 communities and help us all to
achieve more that can be done by each of these efforts indi-
vidually.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Science Foundation Ireland
under Grant No. SFI/02/CE1/I131. We gratefully acknowledge
Conor Hayes for his valuable feedback and all members of
the SIOC developer community for their contribution in adding
semantics to online community sites.
