Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 23 (2013) 1

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Editorial
Data Linking

In this special issue of the Journal of Web Semantics, we present
two papers dealing both with one of the most important problem in
the field of web data management: data interlinking. This field has
gained significant interest over the last years, with the evolution
of web technologies enabling the emergence of a web of data.
The exponentially increasing number of data sources published as
linked data or embedded in web pages through the use of dedicated
schemas require techniques able to efficiently identify common
entities appearing across these sources.

Over the last years many systems were developed involving a
wide range of techniques taking into account various information
about the data sets involved in order to find the most accurate links
between them. Vocabularies, existing links, data ranges, ontology
alignments, and user input are combined for the best results. Most
efficient systems are semi-automated as they require the user to
input a linkage specification, indicating what to link with what and
thus guiding the tool in the process. However, for web scale data
interlinking, the amount of user input in a link specification is still
too high. Most recent research thus focus on minimizing the user
input. The two papers in this special issue are presenting research
results going in this direction, each of them following a specific
path to achieve a similar goal.

In the first paper Active Learning of Expressive Linkage Rules
using Genetic Programming, the authors of the interlinking tool Silk

present a technique to automate the construction of linkage specifications through active learning and genetic algorithms. The resulting system only requires the user to validate a few links until
an acceptable specification is reached.

In the second paper An Automatic Key Discovery Approach for
Data Linking, Fatiha SAIS, Nathalie Pernelle, and Danai Symeonidou
propose a technique to automate the selection of predicates to be
compared during the interlinking process. The method discovers
sets of properties allowing to identify data resources uniquely
in a given data set, similarly to the notion of keys in relational
databases.

Both articles have gone through a very rigorous selection process and were both improved since their first submission. It was
an editorial choice to only retain articles meeting a very high stan-
dard, resulting in only two articles published. We believe this will
ensure a stronger field of research. Enjoy reading!

The Editors
Alfio Ferrara
Andriy Nikolov
Francois Scharffe

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2013 Published by Elsevier B.V.
