Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 18 (2013) 18

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Editorial: Special Issue on the Semantic and Social Web

using social techniques to solve problems in the Semantic Web
space (improving ontology creation).

The first paper, Community Analysis through Semantic Rules
and Role Composition Derivation by Rowe, Fernandez, Angeletou
and Alani, describes how the distribution of different roles in
an online community can affect its health, giving indications of
how to maintain the activity and the positive social signals in
any community. For this purpose, the authors have modeled the
contributions and roles of users in business community forums
(through a user behavior ontology that extends SIOC), running a
rule-based interpretation engine on top of the data.

The second paper,

Folksonomized Ontology and the 3E
Steps Technique to Support Ontology Evolvement, by Alves
and Santanche, presents an approach to bidirectionally fuse
folksonomies and ontologies (in what is called a folksonomized
ontology or FO), with the aim of enhancing a social tags semantics
and also of extracting the semantics embedded in folksonomies for
producing and enhancing ontologies. The 3E steps technique for
reviewing, visualizing and enhancing th FO data is described and
tested using data collected from Flickr and Delicious.

We would like to thank our team of reviewers for their
dedication to producing this special issue, both at the original
review and revision stages of the process. We thank the journal
editors Tim Finin and Steffen Staab for their kind invite to create
this issue. Thanks also to Silke Werger for helping us through the
process.

John Breslin
NUI Galway

Meenakshi Nagarajan
IBM Research

The Social Web has grown considerably in the past eight
years, with the emergence of sites like Facebook, Twitter, Flickr
and WordPress.com. Most sites on the Social Web offer similar
functionality: users share content (be it photos, blog posts, videos,
bookmarks, etc.); users connect with other users, either directly
or via common interests often reflected by shared content; users
add free-text tags or keywords to content; users comment on
content items; and so on. There is a huge amount of inherentlymeaningful metadata being made available on the Social Web
through content creation, the formation of social networks, and
other tasks being performed on these sites. However, much of the
Social Web exists as data silos, with connections and content items
(and their associated metadata) locked into various services, either
by design or a because of a lack of standardization across these
sites.

In parallel with the development of the Social Web, the
Semantic Web has put in place standards and mechanisms
for exchanging data between services, for creating agreed-upon
vocabularies of terms in particular domains, and for enabling
information integration across distributed data providers. It has
traditionally suffered from a chicken-and-egg problem where
there was a lack of interesting applications due to a lack of data
adhering to Semantic Web standards, but with the emergence of
the Social Web, a large amount of data is being created on a daily
basis by millions of users, and this provides a very rich data source
for semantically-enabled applications to work with. The Semantic
Web can also assist with the data silo issue referred to previously,
by providing a set of common vocabularies for data exchange
between sites on the Social Web (e.g. FOAF, SIOC, MOAT, Facebook
OGP, etc.).

In this special issue, we present two interesting papers that
tackle challenges or issues relating to the Social Web using
semantic technologies (modeling community activity), and to

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2013 Published by Elsevier B.V.
