Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 2728 (2014) 1

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/websem

Editorial
The Semantic Web Challenge 2013

The goal of the Semantic Web Challenge is to provide researchers and industry with a forum to showcase the best Semantic Web applications, to demonstrate practical progress towards
achieving the vision of the Semantic Web, and to show the value
of Semantic Web technologies within various application domains.
The Semantic Web Challenge has been organized annually since
2003.

The Semantic Web Challenge 2013 took place at the 13th
International Semantic Web Conference held in Sydney, Australia,
from 23 to 25 October, 2013. As in previous years, the challenge
required that applications had to provide a practical value to
web users or domain experts. Systems should also make use
of heterogeneous information sources under diverse ownership
or control, and the meaning of data should play a central role.
The Semantic Web Challenge 2013 received 17 submissions. All
submissions were evaluated rigorously by a jury composed of
leading scientists and experts from industry in a 3-round knockout competition, according to a comprehensive set of challenge
requirements. All 17 submissions were invited to present a poster
and demonstration during the ISWC conference. Following this,
nine finalists were chosen to give an oral presentation and live
demo during a dedicated session, with the winners then being
selected.

In 2013, there were five systems selected as winners, four in
the Open Track, with a special Big Data Prize being awarded to the
best systems making use of large-scale data sets. This special issue
presents articles about these five systems.

The winning system was The BBC World Service Archive Prototype by Yves Raimond and Tristan Ferne of the BBC. The system
used a combination of audio processing, crowdsourcing, analytics
and visualization to allow the BBC to link and access archive materials with, and during live broadcasts in real time.

In second place was Constitute: The Worlds Constitutions
to Read, Search and Compare by Zachary Elkins, Tom Ginsburg,
James Melton, Robert Shaffer, Juan F. Sequeda and Daniel Miranker
from the University of Texas at Austin, The University of Chicago
and University College London. Each year, around five nations draft
a brand new constitution. Constitute provides a curated solution
allowing exploration of relevant aspects of the worlds constitu-
tions, providing a valuable knowledge resource to constitutional
drafters.

Joint third place was awarded to B-hist: Entity-Centric Search
over Personal Web Browsing History by Michele Catasta, Alberto
Tonon, Vincent Pasquier, Gianluca Demartini, Philippe CudreMauroux and Karl Aberer of EPFL and University of Fribourg, and

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2014.08.001
1570-8268/
 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

STAR-CITY: Semantic Traffic Analytics and Reasoning for CITY
from Freddy Lecue, Simone Tallevi-Diotallevi, Jer Hayes, Robert
Tucker, Veli Bicer, Marco Luca Sbodio and Pierpaolo Tommasi of
IBM Researchs Smart Cities Team. B-hist supports entity-centric
search of a users web browsing history, while STAR-CITY used
Semantic Web technologies to enhance analysis and presentation
of traffic monitoring.

Finally, the Big Data Prize went to Muhammad Saleem, Maulik
R. Kamdar, Aftab Iqbal, Shanmukha Sampath, Helena F. Deus and
Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo of Universitat Leipzig, NUI Galway and
Foundation Medicine Inc. for Fostering Serendipity through Big
Linked Data. The system linked publications from PubMed with
a significant subset of the Linked Cancer Genome Atlas.

Once again, these papers demonstrate the high quality and
diverse nature of the challenge entries. All entries were welldesigned and polished and supported clear use cases. In addition, it
was pleasing to see entries addressing real problems with potential
for significant societal impact. The entries illustrate the use of
Semantic Web data, and showcase some of the best applications
developed in both academic and industrial research communities.
We would like to thank all the members of the jury for their detailed judgment of the strengths and weaknesses of the submitted
applications. Judging the challenge is an intense process that requires significant commitment from the jury, which consisted this
year of:
 Dave De Roure (University of Oxford, UK)
 Willem van Hage (SynerScope, The Netherlands)
 Peter Mika (Yahoo!, Spain)
 Enrico Motta (Open University, UK)
 Sweitze Roffel (Elsevier, The Netherlands)
 Hideaki Takeda (National Institute of Informatics, Japan)
Our special thanks also go to the sponsor of the Semantic Web

Challenge  Elsevier  for their long-standing support.

Andreas Harth
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
E-mail addresses: aha@aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de, harth@kit.edu.
Sean Bechhofer
University of Manchester, UK
Available online 26 August 2014

