Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 203208

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

An ontology for representing financial headline news
Sehl Mellouli, Faouzi Bouslama, Aichath Akande

Management Information Systems Department, Universite Laval, Quebec, Canada

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 11 July 2008
Received in revised form 20 January 2010
Accepted 3 February 2010
Available online 11 February 2010

Keywords:
Ontology
Financial headline news
Knowledge Meta Process methodology
Reliable headlines
Uncertainties

1. Introduction

This paper presents the development of an ontology to represent financial headline news. This ontology is
developed using the On-To-Knowledge methodology where the focus is on the design steps of the Knowledge Meta Process. This development is part of an ongoing project which aims to design a virtual stock
market simulator based on multi-agent systems. The proposed ontology has 31 concepts and includes
201 attributes. The testing results conducted on reliable headline news show that 99% of these headline news can be properly represented by the attributes of the right category in the ontology. Unreliable
headline news characterized by news having uncertainties, incompleteness, ill-definition, or imprecision
cannot be represented by the proposed ontology. Approaches for representing these unreliable headline
news are discussed.

 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

The stock markets have always been complex to understand and
to predict. Recently, the Subprime crisis collapsed most of the
worlds financial markets. Before it occurs, there were probably various indicators collected from sources of information which could
have signalled the crash. If these news which are daily published
on sources of information such as Reuters Bloomberg, and Yahoo
Finance were properly extracted, analyzed, classified and repre-
sented, the tendencies of the financial market would have been
predicted and decisions-makers would have been alerted before-
hand. For example, eighteen months before the crisis happened,
the real-estate market in the US lost around 20% of its value and
the American Federal Reserve gradually raised its intervention rate
from 1.25% to 5.25% between 2004 and 2006 [1].

In seeking to describe the basic categories and relationships of
entities and concepts of any stock market, one can think of creating a knowledgebase of the domain. By using an ontology, one can
represent the financial information with all of its complexity and
relationships. This paper is an attempt to develop a well-structured
ontology to represent various types of financial headline news.
There are already ontologies being used to represent some aspect
of the financial domain. In one application [2], a financial ontology has been developed to describe symbols of stock markets.
In another application [3], called the Financial Exchange Frame-

 Corresponding author. Tel: +1 418 656 2131x11449; fax: +1 418 656 2624.
E-mail addresses: sehl.mellouli@sio.ulaval.ca (S. Mellouli),

faouzi.bouslama@fsa.ulaval.ca (F. Bouslama), akandeaicha@hotmail.com
(A. Akande).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2010.02.001

work (FEF), an ontology has been designed to model the Financial
Exchange Theory (FET). FET proposes a base for the definition of
a several financial entities including international financial products and financial transactions. Though these financial ontologies
describe part of the financial aspects, they lack the description of
the structure of the financial news. Moreover, these ontologies do
not provide the type and the characteristics of the financial news.
To develop a well-structured ontology, this paper proposes to use
the On-To-Knowledge Methodology [4]. The Tom Gruber (tm)s five
principles [5] for ontologies design are used in the validation pro-
cess.

The design and testing of the ontology are conducted using
headline news extracted from Reuters. The ontology has 31 concepts and 201 attributes. A sample of 227 headline news composed
of 136 reliable news and 91 unreliable news is used for test-
ing. Unreliable headline news are characterized by uncertainties,
incompleteness, ill-definition or imprecision. The tests are conducted in two stages. First of all, the category of the headline news
to be tested is identified, then in a second stage the information
in the body text making the headline news is mapped into the
attributes of the identified category. There are two sets of attributes
in the proposed ontology: general or common attributes shared by
all categories, and specific attributes for each sub category. A test
is successful if the information of the headline news is properly
mapped to the attributes.

The testing results conducted on reliable headline news show
that 99% of these headline news can be properly represented by the
attributes of the right category in the ontology. Unreliable headline
news cannot be represented by this ontology since it does not formally model any unreliable concept. However, this paper provides
an insight on how to model unreliable headline news for further

S. Mellouli et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 203208

expansion of the proposed ontology. This research work is part of
an ongoing more comprehensive project which aims to design and
develop a virtual stock market simulator based on multi-agent sys-
tems. Agents have all to gain from having a common understanding
of the financial news. Agents can therefore take informed decisions
on selling or buying stocks. The research work described in this
paper focuses on the development of the ontology for financial
news representation. Forthcoming papers will show how agents
can use this ontology to comprehend and process any financial
news.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces
ontologies and the Knowledge Meta Process methodology. Section
3 shows the development process of the financial headline news
ontology. Section 4 gives the testing results. Finally, Section 5 is a
discussion and a conclusion.

2. Ontology development

Ontologies have been widely used in Knowledge Engineering
(KE) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) to structure the concepts of a
domain. An ontology is represented as a knotted tree of linked
concepts or classes. A class can have subclasses which represent
concepts more specific than the superclass. The properties of each
concept describe the characteristics and the attributes of the concept and the attributes restrictions. An ontology and the individual
instances of the classes constitute a knowledge base.

There are several techniques to design and develop ontologies [4][6]. Each of them encompasses a number of fundamental
rules and specifications to guide developers in the design of proper
ontologies. In this paper, the On-To-Knowledge Methodology [4]
is chosen for two reasons. Firstly, it conforms to the IEEE 1074-1995
standard [7] which helps ultimately achieve quality ontologies. Sec-
ondly, the methodology is appropriate as the developed ontology is
part of an ongoing project to design a virtual stock exchange market
in which intelligent agents are used to trade stocks. Based on the
available financial news, these agents are expected to take decisions
on the buying and selling of stocks. Therefore, they are expected to
be able to automatically extract and interpret data from these news.
Moreover, one of the core ideas of using On-To-Knowledge is to be
able to extract meta data semi-automatically from documents and
subsequently to use them for querying and browsing [4].

The On-To-Knowledge methodology is divided into two distinct
processes: the Knowledge Meta Process focusing on development,
and the Knowledge Process relating to the post implementation
process of the ontology. This research focuses on the Knowledge
Meta Process as the present work is in a developmental stage. The
Knowledge Meta Process consists of five main steps [4]: feasibility
study, Kick-off, refinement, evaluation, and application and evolu-
tion. The feasibility study step consists of identifying the resources
and the potential solutions. At the end of the study, a decision has
to be taken on whether it is possible to continue or not. The Kickoff phase provides a semi-formal description of the ontology. The
refinement step consists of refining the results of the Kick-off phase.
Then the ontology is evaluated. Many techniques have been developed for ontologies design evaluation such as the Tom Grubers
Five principles which includes clarity, coherence, extendibility,
minimal encoding bias, and minimal ontological commitment [5].
Finally, the ontolgy is deployed and can evolve over time. Each of
these steps requires to be validated before moving to the next step.
Each of these steps requires to be validated before moving to the
next step.

The development of the proposed ontology involved the expertise of two IT professors, a Master student, and an expert in the
financial domain, all based at Universite Laval. It took the developers five months of partial time to complete their work.

3. Financial news ontology

The first step of the Knowledge Meta Process methodology is
the project scope and feasibility study. This development requires
the use of information sources on financial news. Several of these
sources are available. In this research study, Reuters is chosen as
a source of information since Universite Laval provides a direct
access to Reuters financial news. As the financial domain covers
a wide range of sub-domains that are plagued with news having
precise and complete as well as ill-defined and uncertain pieces
of news, it is expected that the ultimate ontology be complex and
quite involved.

The second step in the Knowledge Meta Process is the financial
news extraction and Kick-off. The information to be represented
by the ontology needs to be delimited. To this end, a corpus
of one thousand financial headline news is extracted from the
Reuters site. These news are selected from four key sectors of the
Canadian economy which are the telecommunications, the auto
industry, hydrocarbon (oil) distribution, and the raw materials sec-
tors, respectively.

For each sector, a set of different news related to one particular
organization or a company are extracted. The collected headline
news were published between January 2007 and September 2008.
The headlines are then categorized by sectors and by companies.
These headline news are neither in a standard format nor on the
same subject. For example, the following financial news which
reads 11 February 2008 15:35 CNW & Aliant launches public
awareness and education campaign to mark global Safer Internet
Day is about a social implication of the company Bell Aliant. There
are various types of headline news. Some relates to the social activ-
ities, some are of economic nature and others depict the financial
news. Moreover, these headline news refer to different concepts
and data types, and one of the challenges in developing an ontology for these news is how to discover those concepts for fitting
these different headline news into a single ontology. The building
of this ontology is shown in the following steps.

The third step is the development of the ontology. This step is
part of the Kick-off and refinement steps of the Knowledge Meta
Process methodology. A combined approach is used in the development of the ontology. The first attempt in the development of
the ontology is to organize the news in a homogeneous manner.
Hence, the way to proceed is to identify the semantic of the news
and to group them under different subjects.

The first attempt of this organization provided four categories
in which the financial headline news can be grouped. Fig. 1, shows
the four categories of news:

 Social category: These headline news are related to social external implications of a firm which have no direct economic effects

Fig. 1. Categories of financial headline news.

on its revenue such as the voluntary work, the support for associations which defend humanitarian causes, lawsuits in which a
firm is implicated, etc. Here is an example of headline news in
this category: Aliant launches public awareness and education
campaign to mark global Safer Internet Day.

 Economic category: These headline news are related to investments and strategies of a firm in order to improve its services
and increase its capital and profits. The following extract is an
example of headline news in this category: Toronto stocks set to
fall on inflation jitters.

 Financial category: These news are related to financial stock
markets behaviours and tendencies. Example of news from this
category is Astral Media Inc. < ACMa.TO > Q3 SHR C$0.67.

 Environmental category: These headline news represent both
the ecological news, and the decisions and actions that a firm
takes to help save the environment. Example of news extract
in this category: Program details announced for ecoRevolution
Conference-Industry experts to present at international symposium on business and the environment in Moncton, NB on
November 27

A second round of analysis is done by refining each category. The
refinement results in either the creation of new categories or the
merging of existing ones. For example, the Environmental headline news can be considered as part of Socials headline news since
they are related to social actions of firms linked to the environ-
ment. Financial headline news are also considered as Economic
headline news because they represent the evolution of companies shares traded on stock markets which have a direct impact
on the capital, the profits and the assets of those organizations. As
for the Economic category, more groups in the form of subclasses
are created where a clear distinction is made between news related
to mergers, acquisitions and agreements of a firm, stock-markets
evolution, products and services, etc. Fig. 2illustrates the graphical representation of the different hierarchies of these economic
subclasses.

The news in the sub-classes are further analysed to reveal new
groups. In fact, in the Stock Market category for example, two distinct types of headline news can be distinguished. On one side, there
are headline news which provide specific information on the evolution of stock markets such as the NYSE (New York Stock Exchange)
or the TSX (the Toronto Stock Exchange), and on the other side,
there are other headline news specific to firms daily, weekly,
monthly or annually financial results. Thus, two news classes are
created in the Stock Market to represent this knowledge. Fig. 3
shows the Stock Market class and subclasses.

The financial news concepts are gradually refined by adding
more samples of headline news in the study. Fig. 4 shows the results

Fig. 2. The economic sub-classes.

Fig. 3. The Stock Market class and sub-classes.

of these refinements which depicts the overall structure of the proposed financial headline news ontology.

After the identification of the concepts of the ontology, the
focus shifts to their attributes. General information and key words
which characterize each headline news are then identified. In fact,
common attributes to all headline news have been noticed. These
attributes are the name of the company related to the news, the
date of extraction, the symbol of the source name, and the category
to which the news belongs to.

For example, this headline news 14-Feb-2008 15:35 CNW
Aliant launches public awareness and education campaign to mark
global Safer Internet Day can be mapped to the common attributes
as follows:

 Company name: Bell.
 Date of extraction: 14 February 2008.
 Source name: CNW.
 Category related to: socials.

After the identification of general attributes of financial news,
the focus is on particular and specific attributes related to the sub-
classes. For Stock Exchange sub-category for example, the specific
attributes actor, verb action, complement are identified. The following example of headline news extracted from Bell associated
news (Toronto stocks set to fall on inflation jitters) is identified as belonging to the Stock Exchange category. Moreover, the
information inherent in this news can be mapped to the specific
attributes as follows:

 actor: Toronto stocks;
 verb action: set to fall;
 complement: on inflation jitters.

Another example of headline extracted from Astral which states
Toronto stock index seen rising on record oil price is mapped as
follows:

 actor: Toronto stocks;
 verb action: seen rising;
 complement: on record oil price.

When considering the Agreement category, all the attributes
of Stock Exchange category are also true. In addition the attribute
partner name is added. For example, the attributes of the following
headline news which reads Astral joins CHUM in Canada digital
radio project are mapped as follows:

 actor: Astral;
 verb action: joins;
 partner name: CHUM;
 complement: in Canada digital radio project.

Here is another example showing the mapping of the headlines
information to the specific attributes of the Agreement category.
The headline news extracted from Bell reads Aliant and SolutionInc
Sign multi-Year contract for Aliant Hotspot Management:

S. Mellouli et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 203208

Fig. 4. The final financial news ontology.

 actor: Alliant;
 verb action: sign;
 partner name: Solution Inc.;
 complement: multi-Year contract for Aliant Hotspot Manage-

ment.

The values that the attributes can take are usually restricted. For
example, the values that the hour attribute can take are between
0 and 24. After the identification of general attributes of financial
news, the focus is on the particular and specific attributes related to
the subclasses. For Stock Exchange sub-category for example, the
specific attributes actor, verb action, complement are identi-
fied. For Agreements, all of these attributes are also valid plus the
attribute partner name.

This process is carried on while using all the news related to each
class. Finally, the classes, subclasses and attributes in the ontology are closely checked to guarantee the comprehensiveness and
integrity of the ontology. The final ontology is composed of 31 concepts and includes 201 attributes.

 03 June 2008 13:30 CNW CGI announces Open Source software
to support EPAs National Environmental Information Exchange
Network.

By conducting a thorough investigation of the headline news
used for testing, one can notice that these news can be split into
two categories: a reliable headline news category and an unreliable
headline news category. Reliable headline news are the headlines
that are clear, precise and concise. Unreliable headline news can
be characterized by any of the following features: uncertainties,
incompleteness, ill-definition, or imprecision. An uncertain piece
of news is deduced by the lack of information to ascertain whether
it is true of false. An imprecise news gives a true information but
data is missing to accurately describe it. An incomplete news do
not have all the parts for its completeness whereas an ill-defined
news does not make a sense or it is not properly defined. Out of the
total number of headline news used for testing, there are 91 unreliable headline news which are distributed as shown in Fig. 5: 50 are
imprecise, 2 are uncertain, 30 are ill-defined and 8 are incomplete.

4. Tests and evaluation of the ontology

4.1. testing results

The testing phase follows the deign and development of the proposed ontology. A sample of 227 financial headlines news related to
different firms and sectors of economy is used in the testing process.
Here are some samples of headline news used in the testing:

 17 June 2008 08:30 RTRS Air Canada reduces fall and winter

capacity in response to record price of fuel.

 02 May 2008 17:03 RTRS UPDATE 3-Toronto stocks climb 200 pts

on robust resources.

Fig. 5. Unreliable news distribution.

It will be considered in future work when the ontology will be
automatically populated. The population of an ontology requires
the understanding of each piece of information so that it can be
mapped to the right concept. It necessitates additional capabilities
such as natural language processing to solve the automatic ontology
population.

4.2. Ontology structure evaluation

The Tom Grubers five principles emphasises the important
aspects that an ontology needs to observe. The five principles are
presented hereafter, and a justification on how the proposed financial news ontology fulfills these principles is given.

 Clarity: An ontology should effectively communicate the
intended meaning of defined terms. Definitions should be objec-
tive. Where possible, a complete definition (a predicate defined
by necessary and sufficient conditions) is preferred over a partial
definition (defined by only necessary or sufficient conditions).
All definitions should be documented with natural language. [8]
The proposed ontology fulfills this criterion. Indeed, the name
given to the defined concepts and attributes characterize the
financial domain, but their definition is independent of the financial context. Indeed, for example the Economic, Environment,
Politics or Stock market concepts can be associated with another
domain such as the Banking domain for example. Similarly, the
names of the attributes are also independent of the domain.
Indeed, the attributes Company name and Date of extraction can
be associated with any firm evolving in any industry sector.

 Coherence: An ontology should be coherent: that is, it should
sanction inferences that are consistent with the definitions. If
a sentence that can be inferred from the axioms contradicts a
definition or example given informally, then the ontology is inco-
herent. [8] Each financial headline news represented by the
attributes of a category belongs to that category and can not be
in another one.

 Minimal encoding bias: The conceptualization should be specified at the knowledge level without depending on a particular
symbol-level encoding. An encoding bias results when, a representation choice are made purely for the convenience of notation
or implementation. Encoding bias should be minimized, because
knowledge-sharing agents may be implemented in different
representation systems and styles of representation. [8]. The
definition of the ontology, the concepts and the attributes are
all independents of the tool Protege 2000 [9] used to develop the
ontology. Indeed, any other ontology development software can
be used to represent the same classes, attributes and instances
defined in this financial headline news ontology without biasing the comprehension and the interpretation of the represented
knowledge.

 Minimal ontological commitment: An ontology should require
the minimal ontological commitment sufficient to support the
intended knowledge sharing activities. An ontology should make
as few claims as possible about the world being modeled, allowing the parties committed to the ontology freedom to specialize
and instantiate the ontology as needed. [8]. As both tests results
reveal, the financial news ontology covers a minimal ontological
commitment. Indeed, since the rate of representation of reliable
news is 99% and not 100%, and since the rate of reliable news versus unreliable ones is 60% and not 100%, the financial headline
news ontology can be specialized as needed.

 Extendibility: An ontology should be designed to anticipate the
uses of the shared vocabulary. It should offer a conceptual foundation for a range of anticipated tasks, and the representation
should be crafted so that one can extend and specialize the
ontology monotonically. [8] Additional attributes can be eas-

Fig. 6. Reliable news distribution.

There are 136 reliable headline news out of total of 227 headline news used for testing. They constitute around 60% of the total of
the headline news. The unreliable headlines makes the remaining
40%, a quite considerable percentage of the total. These unreliable
headline news are not used in the testing process of the ontology for
two reasons. First, the ontology is built based only on reliable news.
Second, the ontology in its current format does not include representation of any concepts related to the four features of unreliability
such as the uncertainties or the incompleteness. This challenging
work is an ongoing future extension of the proposed ontology.

Fig. 6 shows the distribution of the reliable headline news in
their respective four categories: Socials, Economics, Politics and
Announcement. As shown, economics news constitutes almost half
of the news sample. This is due to the fact that the economic
category has the most subcategories which are Stock exchange,
Companies financial results, Currency, Investment, Mergers acquisitions agreement, Products, and Services.

The tests are conducted as follows. Take for example the
following financial news which was extracted from Air Canada
associated news: UPDATE 3-Toronto stocks climb 200 pts on
robust resources. First of all, the category of the headline news to
be tested is identified. This example represents a news in the Stock
Exchange category since it relates to Toronto stocks. The objective
of the testing will then shift the focus to the mapping of the headline
news inherent information to the categorys attributes. Therefore,
the pieces of information in the headline news are checked whether
they map to the attributes of the identified category. A test is successful if the information of the headline news is properly mapped
to the attributes. For this example, the mapping of the information
to the attributes of the Stock Exchange category is as follows:

 News: 02 May 2008 17:03 RTRS UPDATE 3-Toronto stocks climb

200 pts on robust resources.

 News attributes: Date of extraction: 02 May 2008 Source name:
RTRS Company name: AIR CANADA. Category related to: Stock
exchange.

 Stock exchange attributes: actor: Toronto stocks verb action:

climb complement: 200 pts on robust resources.

The test results show that the ontology can represent 99% of reliable headline news. It is worth noting that some financial headline
news could not be properly represented by the proposed ontology.
For example, the following financial news BMO RAISES ASTRAL
MEDIA <ACMa.TO> PRICE TARGET TO C$51 FROM C$46, KEEPS
OUTPERFORM has two verbs Raises and Keeps. The ontology
cannot represent a news having multiple verbs in its structure.

The ontology is only a static representation of the financial headline news domain. As stated earlier, in the testing process, the
category of each headline news is a priori identified. However, in
reality, some news may belong to two or more different categories.
The proposed work in this paper does not deal with such news.

S. Mellouli et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 203208

ily added to the financial news ontology without changing its
basic structure. Indeed, if the exact hour, minutes, seconds and
microseconds of extraction, respectively, are relevant informa-
tion, attributes representing them can be added to the News
attributes. Also, as the tests show a 40% of unreliable news in the
sample chosen to test the ontology, it is clear that the financial
news ontology can be extended to model these particular news.

5. Conclusion and discussion

This paper presented the development of a well-structured
ontology for the representation of financial headline news. This
ontology included 31 concepts and 201 attributes. The testing was
conducted using a set of 227 samples of news composed of 136 reliable and 91 unreliable headline news, respectively. The proposed
ontology successfully represented 99% of reliable news. For unreliable headline news, the capabilities of the proposed ontology must
be extended to represent the complexity emanating from unreliable headline news. Hence, there is a need to extend this research
work to include the representation of knowledge that can be impre-
cise, ill-defined, incomplete or uncertain.

Several modeling techniques have been applied in the development of ontologies to represent unreliable knowledge. These
models are generally based on Bayesian Networks (BN). The
OntoBayes Model [10], the probabilistic Description Logic Program (PDLP) [11] and PR-OWL [12] are some examples of these
approaches. The OntoBayes Model [10] is an ontology-driven
uncertainty model which uses probability and dependencyannotated Web Ontology Language (OWL) to represent uncertain
information in Bayesian Networks structures. The OntoBayes
model provides an extension of ontologies which has the capability of capturing uncertainty knowledge about concepts, properties
and relations in domains and supports reasoning with inaccurate information. The PDLP model combines two approaches; the
probability and the description logic. This model applied to Logic
programming and algorithms techniques provides a fast reasoning
of systems such as the Tourism Ontology Uncertainty Reasoning system (TOUR). PR-OWL is an extension of OWL to represent
probabilistic ontologies. It provides a framework for authoring
probabilistic ontologies and is based on the Bayesian first-order
logic called Multi-Entity Bayesian Networks. These models require
the prior knowledge of all of the likely situations of the domain
under investigation. But in this world full of unpredictable and
volatile knowledge, what should constitute the unrealistic part in
order to take a decision that must be taken at a precise moment?
In fact, the belief-function approach models human decision
behaviour and value judgment more naturally than the traditional
probabilistic approach [13]. This theory provides a more realistic

representation of the world. It was proposed to model quantified
belief and it provide alternatives to the models based on probability functions or possibility functions [14]. The power of this
theory comes from its ability to represent any form of uncertainty:
full knowledge, partial ignorance and total ignorance (and even
probability knowledge) [15]. It also allows to express total and
partial ignorance. Moreover, it is a generalization of the Bayesian
inference. Under the belief function, one can evaluate not only the
state of nature but also all possible combinations of these states
of nature. Another significant advantage of belief functions theory
is the combination rule (Dempsters Rule) to model dependencies between variables and to combine information obtained from
multiple sources. Consequently, the theory of beliefs functions to
represent the unreliable financial headline news will constitute
the subject of investigation for the authors to carry on with full
comprehensive development of the ontology.
