Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 9596

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Introduction
Bridging the GapData Mining and Social Network Analysis for Integrating
Semantic Web and Web 2.0

The last years have seen increasing collaboration of researchers
from the Semantic Web, Web 2.0, social network analysis
and machine learning communities. Applications that use these
research results are achieving economic success. Data now become
available that allow researchers to analyze the use, acceptance and
evolution of their ideas.

Highly popular user-centered applications such as Blogs, social
tagging systems, and Wikis have come to be known as Web 2.0 or
the Social Web. A major reason for their immediate success is the
high ease of use of new Web 2.0 services. These sites do not only
provide data, but also generate an abundance of weakly structured
metadata. A good example is tagging. Here, users add keywords
from an uncontrolled vocabulary, called tags, to a resource. Such
metadata are easy to produce, but lack any kind of formal ground-
ing, as used in the Semantic Web.

The Semantic Web complements the bottom-up effort of the
Web 2.0 community in a top-down manner. Its central point is a
stronger knowledge representation, based on some kind of ontology with a fixed vocabulary and typed relations. Such a structure is
typically something users implicitly have in mind when they provide their information in Web 2.0 systems. However, for further
use, this structure is hidden in the data and needs to be extracted.
Techniques to analyze network structures or weak knowledge rep-
resentations, such as those found in the Web 2.0, have a long
tradition in different other disciplines, like social network analy-
sis, machine learning and data mining. These kinds of automatic
mechanisms are necessary to extract the hidden information and
to reveal the structure in a way that the end user can benefit from
it. Using established methods to represent knowledge gained from
unstructured data will also be beneficial for the Web 2.0 in that it
provides Web 2.0 users with enhanced Semantic Web features to
structure their data.

For this special issue, we invited submissions that show how
synergies between Semantic Web and Web 2.0 techniques can be
successfully used. Since both communities work on network-like
data structures, analysis methods from different fields of research
could form a link between those communities, and we encouraged
submissions that show potential links. We encouraged authors
to illustrate how techniques from social network analysis, graph
analysis, machine learning and data mining methods, as well as
other fields, can provide productive synergies between Web 2.0
and Semantic Web. From a total of 41 submissions that underwent
a rigorous three-step reviewing process, three contributions were
chosen that exemplify the above-mentioned connections between
Social and Semantic Web in excellent ways.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2010.04.008

All three papers describe how data from the Semantic Web can
profit from a semantic approach by structuring these data, and how
the produced semantic representation of the actors and contents
of Social-Web platforms can be fed back to users to enable them to
better utilize the Web. The example utilization/application areas
studied in detail comprise the whole gamut of todays Web: the
Social Web, the Semantic Web, and even applications that transcend the traditional Web and reach out into mobile and ubiquitous
devices. The three papers also investigate different types of starting datatexts relating to activities, tags relating to multimedia
resources, and (social-)media information of all kinds relating to
a person. The techniques they use are likewise complementary,
originating from machine learning, data/text mining and naturallanguage analysis, and social network analysis. Finally, ontologies
for knowledge representation show a range of knowledge to be
represented: from properties of an entity (person) via properties of
situations and actions to subjective facets of entities.

The first paper, Bridging the Gap Between Tagging and Querying
Vocabularies: Analyses and Applications for Enhancing Multimedia
IR by Kerstin Bischoff, Claudiu Firan, Wolfgang Nejdl and Raluca
Paiu, is motivated by one of the key goals of the Web 2.0 activity
social tagging: to help other users to find resources. The authors
observe that this goal is impeded by the fact that users who are
searching for content employ different keywords/tags than those
set by tag creators. This difference between querying vocabulary
and tag space leads to suboptimal results in search. The solution
approach is to develop methods for recommending tags to creators
that are more likely to be used in search. The input data are an
increasingly relevant type of Web 2.0 data: tags attached to multimedia resources such as music and pictures. The semantic facets
extracted from these data are usage (theme) and opinion (mood)
characteristics of the annotated items; usage and opinion being
what people tend to search for in such data. Bischoff et al. develop
multi-class classifiers for recommending tags to the annotators that
are more likely to be used in subsequent queries. Their evaluation
shows that the recommended annotations are of high quality, both
compared to expert ground truth and rated by user judgments.

The second paper, Automatic Construction of a Large-Scale Situation Ontology by Mining How-to Instructions from the Web by
Yuchul Jung, Jihee Ryu, Kyung-min Kim and Sung-Hyon Myaeng,
is motivated by another key goal of the Web 2.0 and its precursors like UseNet: to share common problems and let others profit
from solutions one has found. The authors observe that HowTos
on the Web are a rich source of data and knowledge, but are barely
semantically structured today, which makes search for previous

Introduction / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 9596

successful solutions to a problem like how to change a flat tire or
how to make an airport check-in fast and safe depend on keyword
search with all its well-known problems. The presented solution is
to learn an ontology from the Web 2.0 material in two steps. First,
action mining that extracts pairs of a verb and its ingredient (i.e.,
objects, location, and time) from individual instructional steps in
the HowTo text is performed to form goal-oriented situation cases
using the results. In the second step, the situation cases are normalized and integrated to form a situation ontology. Jun et al. evaluate
the two steps of their approach and show its high quality by measuring accuracy of the action-mining method and by comparing
the coverage of their situation ontology with existing large-scale
ontology-like resources constructed manually. They discuss two
application scenarios in detail: the detection of situation characteristics (and the ability to recommend actions) for context-aware
services in ubiquitous computing, and the automatic composition
of semantic web services.

The third paper, Disambiguating Identity Web References
using Web 2.0 Data and Semantics by Matthew Rowe and Fabio
Ciravegna, is motivated by a key characteristic of the Web 2.0:
that the entities about which there is abundant information are
no longer (only) resources such as products or problem-solving
instructions, but the users themselves. In the decentrally organised Web, such information is typically not bundled at one place;
rather, information in many places may refer to the same physical
person. This may be wanted (for example, to achieve a separation
of ones different social roles and identities), but it also harbours
risks. For example, identity theft may occur: person A may be
misrepresented and defrauded by someone else who poses as A
and creates information on A somewhere on the Web without As
knowledge. A software monitoring what information the Web (2.0)
as a whole contains about a person is an application that could be
used to address that risk (as well as other goals). The authors therefore propose to monitor the web presence of a given individual
by obtaining background knowledge to support automated disambiguation processes. They generate this background knowledge by
exporting data from multiple Web 2.0 platforms as RDF data models and combining these models together for use as seed data. They
present two disambiguation techniques. The first uses the semi-

supervised machine learning technique of Self-training; the second
uses the graph-based technique of Random Walks. The semantics of
data support the intrinsic functionalities of these techniques. Rowe
and Ciravegna evaluate their approach by comparing their disambiguation techniques against several baseline measures including
human processing; both their techniques outperform several baselines measures.

Thus, together these three papers cover a comprehensive range
of application areas, data types, and techniques, that together can
be regarded as representative of current problems and solution
approaches at the interface between the Social and the Semantic
Web. New insights provided by machine learning and social network analysis techniques will lead to a new type of knowledge. We
envision that research in this area will be of growing interest, as the
automatic extraction of knowledge from weakly structured sources
contributed by a huge mass of users and the combination with
structured knowledge will be an important basis for the Semantic
Web. It will lead to a broad range of new applications, which allow
for combining knowledge of different types, levels and from different sources to reach their goals. The upcoming ubiquitous web
is one target application area which will benefit from the newly
integrated knowledge.

Bettina Berendt
Department of Computer Science, K.U. Leuven,
Belgium

Andreas Hotho
Data Mining and Information Retrieval Group,
University of Wurzburg, Germany

Gerd Stumme
Knowledge and Data Engineering Group, University
of Kassel, Germany
 Corresponding author.
E-mail address: Bettina.Berendt@cs.kuleuven.be
(B. Berendt)

