Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 163168

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Invited paper
Dynamic visualization of statistical learning in the context of high-dimensional
textual data
Michael Greenacre a,, Trevor Hastie b

a Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona 08005, Spain
b Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-4065, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Our ability to record increasingly larger and more complex sets of data is accompanied by a decline in our
capacity to interpret and understand these data in the fullest sense. Multivariate analysis partially assists
us in our quest by reducing the dimensionality in optimal ways, but our view is stuck in two dimensions
because of the planar nature of the graphical medium, be it the printed page or the computer screen. We
are developing protocols and tools to add motion to scientific graphics so that high-dimensional data
can be visualized dynamically. Using the freely available R language and modern methods of statistical
learning and data mining, we construct animation sequences that take the viewer on a dynamic journey
through the data. The idea is illustrated using a large data set of all the abstracts of the journal Vaccine
in the years 20032006, according to their word frequencies and citation counts.

 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Article history:
Received 29 June 2009
Received in revised form
13 November 2009
Accepted 25 March 2010
Available online 11 June 2010

Keywords:
Animation
Classification
High-dimensional data
Learning
Visualization
Text mining

1. Introduction

Just as we use the elements of language and style with due
care in the verbal communication of our research, so we should
be paying equal attention to the graphical medium through which
we convey our visual ideas. Graphics has its language and its aesthetic elements, such as shading, symbols, color and area. Up to
now the scientific literature uses static graphical images to depict
numerical information. These inanimate figures are by construction two-dimensional and need visual scanning to comprehend the
information that they convey. A moving graphic, on the other hand,
while occupying the same space on a page, adds the dimension of
time and guides the eye, as we shall demonstrate.

The ability already exists to supplement online scientific articles
with video materialfor a technical description, see [1]. An example in the health sciences is in the Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine
where several articles include videos, for example the rotation of
three-dimensional embryo and fetal scans in [2]. Our present interest is not in this type of video presentation of three-dimensional
physical objects but rather in the dynamic display of multivariate numerical datasuch displays are non-existent in the present
scientific literature, although several proposals have been made

 Corresponding author. Tel.: +34 93 5422551.
E-mail addresses: michael@upf.es, michael.greenacre@gmail.com

(M. Greenacre), hastie@stanford.edu (T. Hastie).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2010.03.007

for animating statistical analyses to assist in model diagnosis and
interpretation of results (see, for example [3,4]).

Drawing a parallel with motion art is particularly relevant to our
approach. In his book Sight, Sound, Motion [5] on the use of video and
animation, Zettl talks about the encoding process, where an idea is
molded so that it fits the mediums technical as well as aesthetic
production and reception requirements. For Zettl, applied media
aesthetics places great importance on the influence of the medium
on the messagethe medium itself acts as an integral structural
agent.

To illustrate the idea, the dynamic graphic in Fig. 1 shows the
modeled relationship between the probability that an email is spam
as a function of the proportion of a set of spam words that it
contains (this set was identified previously as often occurring in
spam emails). This relationship, which was established using logistic regression, also depends on the length of the email, but in a
complex way. The model relating the three variables p (probability
of spam), S (proportion of spam words) and L (length of email) is as
follows:

1  p

= 3.37  20.0S  0.0142L + 0.0000279L2

log

+ 0.517SL  0.00114SL2.

The effects of the variables S and L on the probability of spam
are very difficult to interpret, because of the presence of length and

M. Greenacre, T. Hastie / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 163168

directly into the online version of this article (see the end of the
article for a link to the dynamic version).

2. Unsupervised learning on a large corpus

The data considered here are the abstracts of all the articles
in the four years 20032006 of the journal Vaccine. An automatic word identification and count was conducted using the
program Leximancer [7], the count being expressed as a proportion of the length of the abstract. We restricted our study to 176
words, each of which had occurred in at least 2.5% of the 2735
abstracts (i.e., in approximately 70 abstracts), eliminating from
consideration all non-substantive words such as articles, prepo-
sitions, etc. The data matrix is very sparsethere are 2735 rows
(the abstracts) and 176 columns (the words), and of the 481,360
cells in the matrix only 56,941 (i.e., 11.8%) contain positive counts,
otherwise the rest (424,419 cells) contain zeros. An appropriate multivariate method for reducing the dimensionality of this
type of sparse count data is correspondence analysis, abbreviated
as CA (see [8]). CA represents each abstract by the relative frequencies of the words it contains, and similarly represents words
by their relative frequencies across abstractsthese sets of relative frequencies are called profiles. Inherent in the method is the
assignment of weights to words proportionally to their overall
frequencies. Hence low frequency words get low weight and so
influence the results less than high frequency words, which get
higher weight.

The space in which CA situates the abstracts and the words is
175-dimensional, one less than the number of words. The method
then identifies the best fitting low-dimensional approximation of
the configuration, onto which the points are projected. In practice
this low-dimensional view of the data is almost always a plane
because of the planar nature of the page or computer screen, but
a three-dimensional approximation would improve the quality of
the data display if we had the facility to see the third dimen-
sion.

A popular method of unsupervised learning is to perform a cluster analysis on the rows and/or columns of the data matrix. We used
Ward clustering of the profiles of the words across the abstracts,
adapted to the same metric and weighting system as in CA, to investigate whether there are distinct groups of words (for details of
Ward clustering in the CA context, see [8], chapter 15). Fig. 2 is
a (static) representation of the clustering tree, and four groups of
words are apparent. It is not possible to read all the words but we
can see that groups 3 and 4 are the largest, group 2 is the smallest,
and group 4 is the most distinct because it joins the other groups
at the highest point on the clustering tree.

Having established these four word clusters, we can witness a
specific search for them in the original 175-dimensional space of
the words. Fig. 3 is an animation that takes us from the initial CA
solution in two dimensions, which best shows individual words, to
the one which best distinguishes between the four word groups.
The words are connected to their group averages, or centroids, and
the groups are also delimited by their convex hulls (see [8], chapter 25)notice how overlapping they are at the start of the tour
and how their internal variance reduces at the end, with group 2
separating out on the vertical axis.
The way the animation is constructed is as follows. The original
2735 176 data matrix of (relative) counts is supplemented with
four additional columns containing the accumulated word counts
in the four word groups. As we stated earlier, in CA each word is
weighted proportionally to its total count across the abstracts. Let
us denote by c the vector of counts of the 176 words, divided by the
grand total in the whole table. Thus the 176 elements of c are all
positive and sum to 1these are the actual weights for the words.

Fig. 1. Plot of predicted probability that an email is spam, given the proportion of
spam words it contains. The dynamic graphic demonstrates the dependency of
this relationship on the length of the email, which has an interaction with the word
proportion. Probabilities higher than 0.5 are colored red. (In the dynamic version
click on this figure to start the animation. See the end of this article about how to see the
dynamic version). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend,
the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)

squared length and their interactions with the spam word propor-
tion, as well as the logit (or log-odds) transformation of probability
that is the response variable in the logistic regression. Dynamic
graphics can be used to understand this model, as shown in Fig. 1
(click on the graphic in the online version, otherwise go to the
web link given at the end of this section). Probability of spam is
always an increasing function of the proportion of spam words, but
the relationship changes shape as the length of the email varies.
It seems that emails of intermediate length are where we see the
most distinction between regular and spam emails in relation to
the proportion of spam words. Very short emails and emails longer
than 300 words appear less likely to be spam.

Moving from model representation to data display, we need to
deal with dimensionality much higher than three: in linguistics
every word is a potential variable, while genomic research is breaking all records for multidimensionality, with thousands of variables
being the norm. The way we tackle such complex data is to look for a
small number of dimensions that relate most relevantly to the phenomenon of interest. It is this search for a low-dimensional solution
that can be animated in real time.

The search for structure in data, also called statistical learning,
can be supervised or unsupervised, by which we mean the following
(see [6]). Suppose that we have an outcome variable, for example
survival from cancer, and a training set of data on which we learn
how to predict survival. Supervised learning is achieved by considering a sequence of models of changing complexity, evaluating
each one by a process of validation on a set of cases not used to
develop the classification rule. On the other hand, we might have
no outcome variable, in which case unsupervised learning involves
looking for structure in the form of groupings of cases or underlying patterns in their similarities. In all cases, the learning process is
highly computer-intensive as well as visual. Our interest is to visualize the evolution of this process and its results using dynamic
graphics, where the use of motion will assist us in our understanding of both the methodology and the data.

To illustrate the dynamic visualization of high-dimensional
data, we use a large textual database of all the abstracts from several years of a medical journal. We will have two objectives: first,
to look for structure in this database, without any particular outcome variable (unsupervised learning approach); and second, to
see if we can predict how much the article will be cited, where the
citation count is considered as an outcome (supervised learning).
The dynamic figures that result from our approach are embedded

Fig. 2. Hierarchical Ward clustering of the 176 words in terms of their profiles across the abstracts, with weighting of each word by its overall relative frequency. Four clusters
of words are apparent. This is a static graphic.

The four additional columns for the group centroids, which contain
the union of the words in the four clusters, have the same grand
total as the original table. Their four column sums, divided by this
total, constitute four values which we denote by the vector s, and
will be used to weight the four centroids. The augmented matrix,

Fig. 3. Tour of the multidimensional space of the words in the abstracts. The starting
image is the usual CA map, while the final image is the one that best distinguishes
between the word groups, which are delimited by their convex hulls. In-between
we see the transition as weight is shifted from individual words to word groups. (In
the dynamic version click on this figure to start the animation).

with 180 columns, is analyzed, with 180 column weights defined
by the vector w as follows:

w =

(1  )s

The parameter  varies from 1 to 0 and changes the weights
assigned to the words and word centroids in the following way.
At the start, when  = 1, there is no weight on the four centroids,
and the usual weights c are operating on the individual words, so
we have the original CA solution. The positions of the centroids
are not optimally represented since they have zero weightas we
saw at the start of the animation, they lay close together and not
well separated. At the end, when  = 0, we have all the weight on
the centroids, according to s, and none on the individual words,
which gives the space that best separates the centroids of the clus-
ters. In-between we have a dynamic transition of weight from the
individual words to the centroids, and hence the picture gradually
changes as the centroids separate and, equivalently, the dispersion
within each group drops.

It should be stressed that the positions of all points, individual
words and centroids, are fixed in the full 175-dimensional space.
What changes is our planar view of this constellation of points as
we move through the space, putting changing emphasis (weight)
on the displayed points and so changing the focus. The boxes at
upper and lower left of the dynamic display give some information
about what is happening during the tour. The Procrustes statis-
tic, plotted at lower left, shows how different the configuration
of the words is from the initial one where no information about
the word groups is included. The blue curve shows the evolution
of the two-dimensional configuration while the black curve shows
the evolution of the configuration in three-dimensional space. The
upper box shows the evolution of the quality of representation of
the centroids, again in the two-dimensional representation actually
shown (the blue curve) and with the third dimension added, which
is not seen (the black curve). At the final step the two-dimensional
solution shows 80.9% of the centroids, while the three-dimensional
solution shows 100%, since the four centroids point can be visualized exactly in three dimensions.

In order to see the exact space of the centroids (i.e., the final
frame of Fig. 3 in three dimensions) we constructed a rotation, again

M. Greenacre, T. Hastie / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 163168

Fig. 4. Rotation of the four word clusters in three-dimensional space; the 2765 abstracts are depicted by blue dots and are at the weighted averages of the words that they
contain. (In the dynamic version click on this figure to start the animation). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of the article.)

showing the clusters of words connected to their respective cen-
troids. In addition, the 2735 abstracts are shown as blue dots (Fig. 4).
The rotation shows that the plane of the first and third dimensions
separates out groups 1, 3 and 4. The configuration of the abstracts
is tetrahedral, illustrating the simplex geometry that is inherent
in CA: each abstract is situated at its particular weighted average
of the words it contains, where the words are weighted by their
frequency in the respective abstract. Thus, abstracts that lie at a
centroid will contain only words from that group, abstracts on an
edge connecting two centroids will have varying mixtures of those
two groups, while the abstracts forming a triangle at the base of
the tetrahedron seen in Fig. 4 contain mixtures of groups 1, 3 and 4,
but have none of the words from group 2 at the opposite vertex. The
separation of these groups has substantive relevance: for example,
group 2 (colored purple) represents the theme of measles, pertussis (whooping cough) and tuberculosis (treated with vaccine BCG),
which results in high mortality worldwide, while group 4 (colored
green) contains terms associated with epidemiological studies and
group 4 (colored brown) consists of the technical aspects of vaccine
development.

From Figs. 3 and 4 we can learn the following. When groups
of co-occurring words are obtained by some clustering procedure,
these can be seen by focusing the display on their centroids, which
occupy a low-dimensional part of the word space. In fact, even
when word groups are not clustered naturally, a cluster analysis will segment them into groups and this group structure can
be visualized. This will not necessarily be the case in supervised
learning, where the grouping variable is observed, not determined
from the data. Fig. 4 is also an example of how moving around

a three-dimensional configuration can provide a feeling for the
third dimension. Because additional variance is included on the
third dimension, this is always a positive benefit of the dynamic
graphic.

3. Supervised learning on a large corpus

In contrast to unsupervised learning, supervised learning uses
the word counts to predict a response variable. As a response variable we considered the citation counts of the articles, in order to see
if there was any relation between level of citation and the words
used in the abstracts. Since we had articles published from 2003
to 2006 and citation counts for those same years, the total citation counts were adjusted according to the time since publication
to ensure comparability across abstracts. There are several ways to
perform supervised learning, and we chose a way in line with the
previous analyses: the (adjusted) citation count of each abstract
was classified into a low, medium or high group, with roughly
equal numbers of abstracts in each group. Then we embarked on
a tour through the 175-dimensional space, searching for the best
way to separate the citation group centroids (compared to Fig. 3
where we separated the clusters of words, here clusters of abstracts
are being separated). In this case the two-dimensional view of
the three groups is sufficient. The tour from the space of individual abstracts to the space of their group centroids is shown
dynamically in Fig. 5. Looking at the evolution of the Procrustes
statistic, it is clear that the three groups of points (again delimited by their convex hulls) are almost entirely overlapping and the
configuration hardly changes until we are towards the end of the

Fig. 5. Search for the space which separates the three groups of abstracts according to low, medium and high numbers of citations. Separation turns out to be very weak and
in the lowest dimensions of the abstract space. (In the dynamic version click on this figure to start the animation).

tour, showing the three groups to be separable only in the furthest (and smallest) dimensions of the space. At the end there are
big changes to the picture but still the centroids of the three citation groups stay close together, with group 3 (the high citation
group) separating slightly to the right. We can find slight indications of some words being used more frequently in these highly
cited articles. For example, of the words that also separate out to
the right, delivery is used on average 66% more in highly cited articles than in low and medium cited ones; clinical 46% more, trial
52% more, Hiv 57% more, Bcg 52% more, and Dna 40% more.
Based on a permutation test, this group of words does occur significantly more often in highly cited papers (p = 0.008). But these
differences are not sufficient to give a useful prediction rule, as
shown by the poor separation of the three groups. This is a good
example of statistical significance not necessarily implying substantive worth. This may be reassuring to researchers in this area:
citation counts do not appear to be related to the themes and
keywords chosen for an article, at least not in the journal Vac-
cine.

4. Conclusion

Introducing motion into scientific graphics provides an additional dimension of time to use in conveying information to the

reader. The choice of the timeline is crucial to the success of the
graphic. In some cases the timeline exists naturally when observations are made sequentially, or if the planar graphic depends on an
additional variable, as in Fig. 1. In order to see three-dimensional
figures, the timeline is the orientation of the viewpoint that orbits
around the image, as in Fig. 4. In order to witness the supervised
learning process, the timeline is the parameter that linked the unsupervised result with the supervised result so that the transition
could be witnessed smoothly (Figs. 3 and 5). This parameter can
also be used as a tuning parameter [6] to decide on the optimal
prediction space in supervised learning.

Returning to Zettls Applied Media Aesthetics [5], he talks of
the five principal aesthetic fields: light/color; the two-dimensional
field of area and screens within screens; the three-dimensional
field of space; the four-dimensional field of time/motion; and
the five-dimensional field of sound. We have demonstrated that
our use of motion in scientific graphics pushes us well along to
the fourth-dimensional field, whereas we are presently stuck in
the two-dimensional one. Adding sound would lead to a further
improvement, completing the picture, as it were. The author, for
example, could give comments as the picture is changing and at
the appropriate points of time, thereby enhancing the explanation.
Admittedly, the way to read the dynamic graphic is not always
obvious, and training might be necessary to accustom users to this

M. Greenacre, T. Hastie / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 163168

new way of representing data. To facilitate a wider use of animations of this type and thus allow experimentation to ascertain their
effectiveness, software needs to be developed using open-source
tools as much as possible. This is truly a grand challenge and
we believe that scientific publishing can and will catch up with
the major audiovisual developments on the web and become more
visual, motive and emotive.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the Fundacion BBVA, Madrid;
partial support was provided by the Spanish Ministry of Science
grants MTM2008-00642 and MTM2009-09063. Andrew Smith and
Paul Stockwell facilitated the application of the program Leximancer
to pre-process the word counts in the Vaccine abstracts, Darin
McBeath of Elsevier provided us with the citation counts for each
abstract and Lars Smabrekke of the University of Troms commented on the word clusters.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

The Acrobat 9 version of

this article, which includes
the video animations embedded into the PDF file, can be
downloaded from http://www.econ.upf.edu/michael/dynamic or
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2010.03.007.

The animations in the dynamic version can be started by clicking
on the figures (Figs. 1, 35). To stop the animation, either move
away from the page, or right click on the mouseor <ctrl> click
on a Macthen select disable content. Full-screen graphics can
also be selected in this way. The frames for the animations were

generated in R [9], mostly using the ca package [10]. Videos were
produced using Adobe Flash, and embedded into the PDF file of the
article using Acrobat Professional version 9 [11]. If you encounter
issues viewing the animation you may need to alter your Adobe
Reader settings. Go to Edit, Preferences and select the Documents
category. Set View Documents in PDF/A mode to Never and Click
OK. Finally you need to state that you trust the document to allow
the animation to play. We are developing tools in R to construct a
wide range of dynamic graphics.
