Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 143144

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Preface
Introduction to the Special Issue

Recent advances in technology are challenging the traditional
business model of publishers, as individuals are now able to inexpensively publish and distribute content themselves. Yet these
same advances do offer publishers a rich opportunity to develop
novel offerings for scientists. In response to the wealth of oppor-
tunities, the idea of the Elsevier Grand Challenge on Knowledge
Enhancement in the Life Sciences was conceived by Gully Burns
at the University of Southern California and Anita de Waard and
colleagues at Elsevier, and formulated as a contest to elicit innovative ways in which scientific information might be communicated
and used. The contest invited members of the scientific commu-
nity, primarily in life sciences, semantic web, and natural language
processing, to describe and prototype tools to improve the interpretation and identification of meaning in journals and databases
relating to the life sciences. The objective was to generate useful new ideas that could have a widespread impact on scientific
publishing in general.

Specifically sought were new ways to:

(1) improve the process/methods/results of creating, reviewing

and editing scientific content,

(2) interpret, visualize or connect the knowledge more effectively,

and/or

(3) provide tools/ideas for measuring the impact of these improve-

ments.

Over 70 ideas were submitted to the Grand Challenge. After a
rigorous review by an international panel of judges that included
leading scientists from academia and industry as well as representatives from Elsevier, 9 semi-finalists were invited to present
their ideas in person to the panel in December 2008. Four of the
ideas were selected for the final round in April 2009. The first
and second prize winners received awards of $35,000 and $15,000,
respectively.

This special issue of the Journal of Web Semantics contains the
9 semi-finalists papers, selected according to the judging criteria
that focused on the overall vision, novelty, usability, and technical
feasibility of the work.

Thoma et al. describe work that is being undertaken at the U.S.
National Library of Medicine to create an Interactive Publication.
This work describes the concept, and outlines the benefits and
challenges of self-contained, multimedia-rich interactive publica-
tions. They outline tools that they have created for authoring and
visualizing such publications.

Ahmed et al. describe the SLIF project that combines text mining of figure captions and image processing to extract structured

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2010.04.003

information from biomedical literature. The results can either be
queried online or accessed through web services. A usability study
is presented that compares the results of SLIF to those of typical
search engines.

The paper by Garcia et al. describes the concept behind the
Living Document and provides details regarding its implementa-
tion. A Living Document enables concepts that are described within
a paper to be interconnected with other sources of information
regarding those concepts using the web. The technical approaches
utilize tagging and semantic web.

In the article by Greenacre and Hastie, a variety of tools and prototypes are presented that have been developed to add motion to
scientific graphics, allowing high-dimensional data to be visualized
dynamically thus aiding interpretation and understanding.

Newman et al. introduce the use of topic maps for visualizing the semantic content of collections of documents, which has
applicability in aiding scientists in understanding the span of their
search results. Techniques are described for assessing the validity
and accuracy of topic maps.

In the tradition of the semantic web, Novacek et al. have built a
prototype of a tool called CORAAL that combines asserted publication metadata with knowledge extracted from the text in the form
of triples. The results are then made available through a search and
browse interface. This work won second prize in the Challenge.

ODonoghue et al. introduce a tool called Reflect, which augments web browsing by allowing end users to view semantic
annotations about small molecules, genes and proteins. The paper
describes the tagging process, and outlines how additional entity
types can be added to Reflect. This work won first prize in the
Challenge.

The paper by Page describes a proof of concept for interlinking
structured content within papers to data within external databases.
A web interface was designed to enable the useful interrogation of
the enriched data environment.

Wan et al. introduce the Citation-Sensitive In-Browser Summariser (CSBIS), a natural language tool designed to aid scientists
in the task of browsing the literature. CSBIS presents users with
both a generic and tailored preview about a citation, dynamically
generated with respect to the context in which it is referenced in a
paper.

The number and quality of submissions to the Elsevier Grand
Challenge was very high. We would like to congratulate all the
authors of papers in this special issue for having reached the final
rounds.

We would like to also acknowledge the panel of judges who
brought a diversity of knowledge to the competition and who were

Preface / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 143144

very dedicated to thoroughly reviewing the large number of sub-
missions:
 Eduard Hovy (Chair), Director of the Natural Language Group,
Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA
 Bernard Aleva, Global Director of Publishing, Life Sciences, Else-
vier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
 Emily Marcus, Editor of Cell, Cell Press, Cambridge, MA, USA
 David S. Rosenthal, Stanford University Libraries, Palo Alto, CA,

 David Shotton, Image Bioinformatics Research Group, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
 Rafael Sidi, VP Product Development, ScienceDirect, Elsevier,
New York, NY, USA
 Susie Stephens, Principal Research Scientist, Eli Lilly, Boston, MA,

 Alfonso Valencia, Protein Design Group, National Centre for
Biotechnology, CNB-CSIC, Madrid, Spain

We would like to highlight the far-sightedness manifested by
Elsevier in setting up this contest. It demonstrated that their keen
interest in cutting edge technology for enabling scientists to gain
maximum value from literature.

The diversity of ideas submitted to the Challenge, ranging from
visionary to already in part implemented, was truly exciting. There

was also great diversity in subject matter ranging from visualization techniques, to text mining, and greater integration of
literature with other data sources. The response illustrated clearly
the potential for much richer and in-depth interactions between
the producers and consumers of scientific content. We hope that
the Challenge, this special issue, and the further ongoing discussions that have been initiated by these events, lead to a rethinking
of the nature of scientific publishing.

E.H. Hovy
University of Southern California/Information
Sciences Institute, 4676 Admiralty Way,
Marina del Rey, CA 90292-6695, United States
Susie Stephens (Dr.)
Director Biomedical Informatics, Johnson & Johnson
Pharmaceutical Research & Development LLC,
145 King of Prussia Road, Radnor, PA 19087,
United States
 Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: hovy@isi.edu (E.H. Hovy),
sstephens1@its.jnj.com (S. Stephens)

