Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 155162

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Invited Paper
Semantic Web and Social Web heading towards Living Documents in the
Life Sciences
Alexander Garcia-Castro a,, Alberto Labarga c, Leyla Garcia b, Olga Giraldo d, Cesar Monta na e,
John A. Bateman a
a University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany
b University of Bundeswehr, Neubiberg, Germany
c University of Granada, Spain
d International Center for Tropical Agriculture, Cali, Colombia
e Los Andes University, Bogota, Colombia

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 3 June 2009
Received in revised form 15 October 2009
Accepted 26 March 2010
Available online 2 April 2010

Keywords:
Semantic Web, Social Web, Knowledge
integration, Knowledge representation,
Folksonomy

Rather than a document that is constantly being written as in the wiki approach, the Living Document
(LD) is a document that also acts as a document router, operating by means of structured and organized
social tagging and using existing ontologies. It offers an environment where users can manage papers and
related information, share their knowledge with their peers and discover hidden associations amongst
the shared knowledge. The LD builds upon both the Semantic Web, which values the integration of wellstructured data, and the Social Web, which aims to facilitate interaction amongst people by means of
user-generated content. In this vein, the LD is similar to a social networking system, with users as central
nodes in the network, with the difference that interaction is focused on papers rather than people. Papers,
with their ability to represent research interests, expertise, affiliations, and links to web based tools and
databanks, are the central axis for interaction amongst users. To support this, we have also implemented
a novel web prototype that enables researchers to accomplish three activities central to the Semantic Web
vision: organizing, sharing and discovering. Availability: http://www.scientifik.info/livingdocument.

 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Although a significant portion of our knowledge about Life
Sciences is stored in papers and online databases (DBs), the
relationship amongst the information contained within papers,
existing DBs and online resources is negligible. Digital libraries
within the biomedical domain store information related to meth-
ods, biomaterials, topics, statements of problems being addressed,
hypotheses, results, etc. But retrieving papers addressing the same
topic and for which similar biomaterial has been used is not a trivial
task. In order to improve search and retrieval, and also to enrich the
available metadata, digital libraries should provide the facilities by
means of which links can be established between atomic components of papers (domain terminologies, concepts, words, pieces of
images or segments of video) and resources over the Web that are
capable of processing and/or adding meaning to them. Although

 Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: alexgarciac@gmail.com, cagarcia@uni-bremen.de

(A. Garcia-Castro), alberto.labarga@scientifik.info (A. Labarga),
leyla.garcia@ebusiness-unibw.org (L. Garcia), oxgiraldo@cgiar.org (O. Giraldo),
cesar.montana@gmail.com (C. Monta na), bateman@uni-bremen.de (J.A. Bateman).

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2010.03.006

tagging papers as a whole is now possible, this is still insufficient;
marking and linking atomic components of papers is also necessary in order to enrich the metadata structure and to facilitate
concept-based social interaction. For instance, for papers containing data types such as proteins, genes and metabolic pathways,
digital libraries should link them to corresponding data entries
in DBs, Knowledge Organization Systems (KOS), and/or existing
online resources. Biomedical ontologiessuch as those from the
Open Biomedical Ontologies (OBO, http://www.obofoundry.org)
initiativecould be used as an anchor point over which links
are established and further expanded by collaborative tagging.
Combining social tagging and ontology-based marking improves
information retrieval and facilitates enriching metadata [13], thus
encouraging methods that shift the creation of metadata from the
individual to a collective [4].

The research reported here investigates how to support the
annotation of atomic components of research papers in the Life
Sciences by combining ontology-based and user-generated tags
within a social network built upon the tagged concepts. To this
end we propose the Living Document (LD); a document that lives
on the web by interacting with other papers and resources related
to the data types that it hosts. In this manner researchers can tag
individual components of their papers drawing on categories from

A. Garcia-Castro et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 155162

ontologies such as the Gene Ontology [5] (GO) via automatic tagging systems but without being exposed to the complexity of those
ontologies. Researchers are also able to generate their own tags, or
extend existing ones. The LD is therefore not a document that is
constantly being written, as in the wiki approach, but rather one
that acts as a document router drawing on both structured and
organized social tagging and existing ontologies. Under this view,
we see papers as containers of knowledge and argue that, as such,
the hosted knowledge should be easily networkable with related
resources. For instance, if we consider a sentence such as IGFBP-2
expression is negatively regulated by PTEN and positively regulated by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and Akt activation
[6], we can see that this contains valid ontology terms that could
be linked to existing databases and relevant online resources. By
the same token, domain experts reading the paper containing this
sentence could enhance the annotation by providing, for example,
more external resources relevant to the terms identified.

The framework presented here is based centrally on tags and
a Semantic Web (SW) technology layer making use of such tags.
From the sole perspective of software functionality, there are two
main types of tags: (i) predefined tags, i.e., those coming from existing ontologies and (ii) user-generated tags, i.e., those created by
the community, which collectively mediate interaction and provide the semantic tissue between papers. The combination of these
two types of tags also makes it possible to build upon the knowledge contained in existing ontologies by associating their concepts
with new user-defined tags. For instance, a paper in which drought
tolerance is compared between Oryza sativa (rice) and barley in
saline soils will have genes, metabolic pathways, geographical loca-
tions, atmospheric conditions attached to locations and specific
periods of time, soil conditions, breeding conditions, etc. This paper
could be enriched with both manual and automatic tags. Due to the
interoperability infrastructure already built by bioinformaticians,
biological DBs are highly interrelated. This makes it possible to
execute crossed queries that retrieve integrated views: thus relat-
ing, for instance, molecular markers associated to those genes that
have been studied, or geographic locations to online resources such
as Google Maps. The underlying interest of the authors is then
how to move from the collected intelligence closer to the collective intelligence within Life Sciences. As Berners-Lee highlights in
his definition of the SW, by better enabling computers and people to work in cooperation in an environment where information is
given a well-defined meaning [7], we assume that structured and
targeted collaboration is key to the realization of the SW vision.
Life Sciences pose an ideal scenario for making this vision real as
there are (i) communities of practice actively engaged in the development of their resources, (ii) ontologies being used by databases
for annotation purposes and developed by communities of practice,
(iii) highly interlinked and interrelated databases and (iv) analysis
tools related to these databases. These features make it feasible to
generate a concept-centric social network where papers accurately
define relevant interaction paths and over which papers can be easily linked to external resources capable of consuming the data types
they contain.

This paper is organized as follows. Related work is presented in
Section 2. In Section 3 the LD approach, its corresponding architecture and functional features are presented. Finally, in Sections
4 and 5, we discuss the work done, sketching some consequences
drawn from our first trials, and outline some relevant paths for the
future.

2. Related work

There are several systems supporting various aspects of the
problem we address here but no single system provides all

that is necessary. Resources such as Delicious (http://delicious.
com), Bibsonomy (http://www.bibsonomy.org) and Connotea
(http://www.connotea.org)
facilitate the tagging of online
resources and bibliographic references,
thereby harnessing
the collective knowledge that is modelled by collective tagging.
Collaboration is thus based on similarities in tags and tagged
objects. Within the biomedical community this notion of community annotation has recently started to be adopted more broadly.
For instance, WikiProteins [8] delivers an environment in which it
is possible to address a biological problem: the annotation of pro-
teins. This allows the wider research community to directly benefit
from the generation and peer-review of knowledge at minimal
cost. The more annotations the system gets, the better the chances
are for users to interact with other researchers who share similar
interests/problems, for example working on the same motif, crystallographic method, etc. [8]. WikiProteins allows the annotation
of proteins as a whole; however, annotating valid biological parts
of a proteine.g. positional featuresis not possible. Within the
context of a paper these valid biological parts could more usefully
be assimilated to words/specialized-terminology/ontology terms.
Another example that illustrates the usefulness of harnessing the
collective intelligence is BIOWiki [9]; this collaborative ontology
annotation and curation framework facilitates the engagement of
the community with the sole purpose of improving an ontology.
Similar to both WikiProteins and BIOWiki is the system myExperiment [10], which provides an environment where the community
interacts on the basis of a common problem; in this case, however,
sharing and reusing workflows is the main goal.

Within the publishing industry there has also been a series of
efforts in promoting the use of Social Networks in combination with
documents. BioMedExperts (BME, http://www.biomedexperts.
com), for example, is a professional network in which literature
references are used to support interaction. Although this system
does not directly support tagging by users, it does support automatic tagging based on a reference terminologythereby allowing
the identification of researchers with similar interests. The system
Nature Network (http://network.nature.com/) works in a similar way; it does not, however, facilitate any controlled vocabulary
for annotating the literature references. Interestingly, the widely
known PubMed system (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed)
also does not offer any kind of tagging system; nor does it make
use of existing ontologies to classify documentsin this case, MESH
(http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/meshhome.html) is used to index
documents. Moreover, although highly interrelated to DBs and
analysis resources provided by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), PubMed does not provide a direct
relationship between the data types available in the abstracts
and those NCBI resources. How semantic descriptors of resources,
user profiles and enriched metadata may improve the usability of digital libraries has been investigated within a further
system, that of the JeromeDL (http://www.jeromedl.org) project.
This system offers a richer retrieval system and applies Semantic Web principles to the management of digital libraries. Finally,
collaboration is enhanced still further in the Annotea project
(http://www.w3.org/2001/Annotea) by supporting shared metadata based Web annotations, bookmarks, and their combinations;
our own LD reuses concepts from Annotea within a more focused
usage scenario.

Most of the investigated sites offer tagging systems for biorelated documents. However none of their functionalities addresses
the problem of tagging atomic components of a paper within
a social concept-centric network. Indeed, within the publishing industry in Life Sciences, publishers offer limited integration
between the information contained in published papers and the
Web [11]. For instance, no automatic or semi-automatic tagging
systems are available, nor are there knowledge management facili-

Fig. 1. Overview of POAP.

ties built over the papers and consistent with the data types sitting
on them. Moreover, available application-programming interfaces
(API) deliver functionalities that are not related to the contents of
the stored paper.

3. The Paper-Of-A-Paper Ontology and the Living Document

One disappointing aspect of digital libraries is that papers,
although in digital format, neither are interconnected nor interoperate with other valid resources capable of consuming the data
types available in papers within Life Sciences. Most systems limit
their functionalities to simple query facilities such as: which other
papers were published by an author; given this, users are able to
jump to a list of papers. Also, users can click&jump from bibliographic references, and then again jump to another paper. These
are very limited functionalities for digital documents that live on
the Web. The LD addresses these limitations not only by allowing
researchers to define the network environment of a paper within its
research context but also by predefining a network based on existing ontologies and resources. Papers are conceptually related to
each other and to external resources. Papers have structural components such as authors, words, images, tables, etc.; the overall
structure reflects the interests and lines of work of readers and
writers. Seen in this way, therefore, a paper can be considered as
a concept-based interconnection bus that provides interest-driven
networking between the papers writers, external resources and
readers.

3.1. Representing conceptual networks across papers

In order to facilitate the representation of the papers document structure and the conceptual networks that papers
support, we have developed the Paper-Of-A-Paper Ontology (POAP,
http://www.mywikipaper.org). POAP represents the network of
concepts and associated external resources derived from the tagging activity. POAP interoperates with the Meaning Of a Tag (MOAT)
ontology [12] and the Social Semantic Cloud of Tags (SCOT) ontol-

ogy [13]; both of these offer representations for the tag as well as
for the social tagging activity. POAP was carefully designed to play
a similar role to the Friend-Of-A-Friend (FOAF) ontology in humancentric social networks. The intersection between POAP and FOAF
facilitates accurate interaction based on documents, in our case,
research papers.

POAP extends these models in order for tags to represent networks of concepts across papers and external resources. A simple
view that illustrates some sections of POAP and how it is interoperable with other models is presented in Fig. 1. Ultimately POAP aims
to support, in coordination with models such as BioMoby [14], the
discovery of services capable of consuming those valid biological
data types available in papers.

3.2. Architecture and implementation

A general overview of the LD is presented in Fig. 2. Documents
have sections (images, tables, words, phrases) and these can be
tagged by users or by automatic pipelines. Other workflows can
be easily added via the LD API.

library,

For the purpose of our prototype we have developed the necessary infrastructure for the storage, indexing, annotation and
retrieval of articles. Initially we have worked with papers from
the Elsevier digital collection, but adding new data sources,
such as PubMed, DBLP (http://dblp.uni-trier.de) or any other
XML-based digital
is also straightforward. The search
and retrieval module has been developed on top of the Lucene
(http://lucene.apache.org/) project framework; this is an open-
source, high-performance, full-featured text search engine library
written entirely in Java. Our system allows the user to search globally across Elsevier journals or individually in selected resources;
it also facilitates filtering by authors or dates by using an advanced
search. An overview of the architecture we have implemented is
illustrated in Fig. 3.

Our prototype already makes use of annotation pipelines
such as WhatIzIt (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/whatizit) [15]. Reflect
(http://reflect.ws) will also soon be incorporated, while services

A. Garcia-Castro et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 155162

Fig. 2. General overview of the Living Document.

that have recently become available, such as the Open Biomedical Annotator [16], BioNotate (http://bionotate.sourceforge.net/)
and some of the Web services offered by Bioportal [17], can also
be plugged into our architecture as shown in Fig. 3. Annotation
pipelines in general make it possible for users to generate their
tags over specific sections (e.g. words, sentences) of papers. There
are currently over 500 papers in our system and new documents

can be easily loaded. Users can share and reuse tags for improved
definition of queries; it is also possible for users to specify external
resources associated with tags and sections of the tagged papers.

For instance, by means of WhatIzIt users can tag words such
as NADPH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate); this
tag has a default external resource that provides more information about it, UniProt (www.uniprot.org). Other users could have

Fig. 3. General system architecture.

Fig. 4. Users are able to generate sets of automatically generated tags by using existing ontologies and/or annotation pipelines.

found it important to manually tag the term Ca Channels and
link it to a different external resource. In order to support other
digital libraries and different annotation pipelines our architecture
supports the Service Provider Interface (SPI) paradigm for retrieval
and annotationsee Fig. 3. The SPI is a software mechanism that
supports replaceable components via a set of hooks. On top of
these SPIs, we have built a semantic layer supporting MOAT, FOAF,
POAP and other controlled vocabularies (also shown in Fig. 3). This
makes it possible for the new metadata to be managed so that more
expressive queries can be supported.

3.3. The LD prototype

The LD prototype itself allows the generation of two types
of tags, those generated by an automatic workflow, such as
WhatIzIt, and those generated by human users. The automatic
annotation infrastructure is built around the Monq software package (www.ebi.ac.uk/kirsch/monq-doc/monq); this Java library
enables the processing of text input streams based on regular
expressions. The library binds regular expressions to actions that
are automatically executed whenever a match occurs in the text
stream being processed. A filter server is a computer program, also
Java technology, which accepts TCP connections on a particular port
from clients across the network. Each filter server specializes in recognizing the vocabulary of a particular terminology. Clients connect
to a filter server and send a stream of text. The server then runs a collection of embedded discrete finite automata (DFA) on the incoming
text to recognize and tag the terminology with XML tags.

Multiple filter servers can be cascaded to form processing
pipelines, whereby the output of one filter becomes the input of
the next. In this case the XML tags added by each server carry
the data needed to accomplish the tasks of complex distributed
text mining algorithms. Currently, we support the annotation
of Swissprot protein/gene names, drug names, organism names,
disease names, chemical entities and gene ontology terms. The
pipeline also considers some disambiguation based on acronym
resolution and term frequency. Protein/gene names resembling
acronyms, for instance NPY (neuropeptide Y), are analyzed in
order to disambiguate whether the target name is really a Pro-
tein/Gene name. If it is unclear, then the pipeline will assume
that names with a high frequency in the British National Corpus
(http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk) are common enough as to be considered relevant in the biomedical field. The result of this process is
an extended XML document containing the annotated information.
Users can, for instance, tag the paper using GO as illustrated in
Fig. 4; once the set of tags has been generated users are free to add

or modify the set of predefined tags. The functionality embedded
within the set of predefined tags also includes a set of predefined
links built over the tag. For example, as illustrated in the figure,
the GO term membranes has a direct reference to its corresponding DB entry in AMIGO (http://amigo.geneontology.org). By default
these tags are automatically linked to a further set of external
resources such as ENTREZ (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Entrez),
AMIGO, SRS (http://srs.ebi.ac.uk) and others. Both, the ontologies
being used to support the automatic tagging and the corresponding external resources being used by default, can readily be
extended.

The addition of new external resources, such as URIs capable of
either consuming tags as input data types, or adding extra informa-
tion, is currently achieved by typing the information required into
a text field. By adding new tags and external resources, the clouds
of tags for each paper are constantly being updated. Furthermore,
users can use the clouds of tags in order to find more information
and build more expressive and accurate queries, as suggested in
Fig. 5. In addition, users can identify tags that are associated with
collections of documents. This tag association is a measure indicating how closely related the documents are. More importantly,
users can browse through the surrounding area of the tags so that
they can contextually discover how valid the coincidence in tags
may be. For instance, two documents may share the user-generated
tag <X> but this coincidence alone may not be a sufficient indicator that the documents are actually related because one tag
may have multiple meanings or be applied in different contexts
(Fig. 6).

An interesting side effect of social tagging of this kind is the
semi-automatic generation of social trust rankings. As users tag
documents, these tags are easily identified by ownership. Thus any
user can ask for some particular persons tags without including in
the cloud of tags those generated by anyone else. A user can also
select only those tags generated for a given paper by user X, Y, and
W; this usage reflects the fact that people tend to trust tags generated by particular members of the community more than those
produced by others.

4. Discussion

Folksonomies have recently gained attention from the research
community [18], partly because of their rapid and spontaneous
growth and partly because of the need for structuring and classifying information. Although social tagging is widely used and, as
has been demonstrated by numerous applications, clearly bene-
ficial, clouds of tags per se are not formal classification systems;

A. Garcia-Castro et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 155162

Fig. 5. Tags have references to external resources.

rather, they are a complementary form of organization system.
For the task of finding information, taxonomies tend to be rigid
and purely text-based search is not optimal. Tags introduce distributed human intelligence into the system [19]; also, tags are axes
over which collaboration is supported. When researchers collabo-
rate, the structure of the collaboration is based upon similarities
in their work; an aspect of this similarity may be defined by the
literature that researchers are reading. It has been observed that if
two researchers use similar literature they are working on similar
or conceptually related problems. Bibliographic references, keywords and abstracts are a valuable starting point for supporting
information retrieval across large digital libraries and interaction
based on similar interests. However; they do not offer the possibility for establishing networks of associated concepts across papers
(NACAP); nor do they offer the facility for linking concepts from the
paper to external resources (P2ext).

Both these features, NACAP and P2ext, are central to the structure of real collaboration amongst researchers. Extending support
for this interaction by using social tagging over entire documents augments the support for the collaboration based on similar
research interests. Moreover, the metadata thus generated can help
researchers to retrieve an article when descriptive elements are not
known. The main function of these tags is not to support a fixed

taxonomical classification, but a dynamic one [7], allowing the relevance and content of articles to keep pace with the evolution of
scientific discovery. This dynamic annotation is the serendipity that
may allow researchers to find other researchers working on similar
areas as they find papers via generated tags. Providing a platform
where both NACAP and P2ext can be exploited, both at the time
of authoring the paper and post-publication, will greatly enhance
social networking and information retrieval in Life Sciences. This
enhancement allows knowledge to be discovered more expediently
and facilitates the formation of sub-networks of collaboration over
specific knowledge units, defined by tags. Social tagging provides
direct insight into the knowledge conveyed within the body of a
scientific paper.

Ideally social networks and ontologies should help offer an environment in which researchers can take advantage of collective
knowledge. In principle, efforts such as Delicious and Connotea
facilitate both, social interaction and harvesting the collective
intelligence. Delicious offers a collective annotation facility for
bookmarks in which the community interacts via the annotations
they generate over their own bookmarks; the community as a
whole benefits from everybodys knowledge as it is always possible to access everybodys annotations. Connotea is a more targeted
environment in which users share their bibliographic references as

Fig. 6. Using tags to refine queries.

well as those annotations that describe the shared set of references.
The Connotea approach relies on the assumption that users with
similar interests should have bibliographic references in common.
The limitation of Connotea is that it assumes that an annotation,
independently from the nature of the annotated object, always has
a structure similar to that of a bibliographic reference. In order to
offer insights into papers, systems similar to Connotea facilitate the
manipulation of abstracts. However, abstracts per se do not provide
a full summary of the work described in some document, nor do
they offer any way to integrate the document into existing knowl-
edge. Connotea, as well as similar systems, does not support the
entire structure of collaboration that is usually found within and
across communities of researchers.

During the testing phase of our system, we had two trial
researchers perform a collection of typical knowledge management
and research tasks. During this work, both trial researchers moved
from simple tagging into building classifications as well as using
tags for refining queries. Interestingly, for those papers we used in
our tests, the recommendations given by the original digital library
were not always consistent with the paper discovered by the generated tags. The tag-based recommendation was more accurate.
The axes, tag-tagged object and tagger, over which the tagging was
being performed were consistent with those described by MOAT
and SCOT; such simple models proved to be easily extendible so
that semantic and syntactic components of a scientific paper could
be represented by POAP and coherently orchestrated with MOAT,
SCOT and other existing tag-related models.

Concept Web Linker (CWL) is a similar approach to the
one presented in this paper  see http://conceptweblinker.
wikiprofessional.org. Both, this approach and ours, assume a paper
deeply interconnected with other papers and with the Web.
However, unlike CWL, the LD approach embraces a generative
technology so users can actively generate the tools they need for
the kind of information they want to manage. Furthermore, CWL
does not allow users to improve the definition of queries based
on available tags, thus limiting the usability of the cloud of tags.
The generative capacity of a system should be understood as its
capacity to produce unanticipated change through unfiltered contributions from broad and varied audiences [20]. Currently, the
generative capacities in CWL are restricted; for instance, it is not
possible to add annotation pipelines. More importantly, CWL does
not make use of social networking technology. Generative technology of the kind we argue for enables an open market for which
specialized plug-ins can be developed; in this way it will be possible to build better and more specialized mining tools over digital
libraries.

5. Conclusions and future work

We have developed a Web prototype that allows the ontologybased or user-generated tagging of atomic components within
the structure of scientific papers in Life Sciences. It also makes
it possible for users to deploy tags in order to improve the definition of their queries and to better filter search results; users
can always refine their searches adding terms to the queries from
the cloud of tags. Finding related papers is then supported not
only by those available tags, but also by the prototypes use of
eTBlast (http://invention.swmed.edu/etblast); this allows the user
to input an entire paragraph and returns MEDLINE abstracts that
are similar to it. The LD enables authors to easily add scientific
hyperlinks to their documents and research papers as semantic
annotations, drawn from ontologies or provided by their peers;
this links their papers to the Web in a meaningful way. The
LD is complementary to the recently released MS Word Add On
(http://ucsdbiolit.codeplex.com, May 11/09); however, it goes one

step further as it involves massive collaboration in the process of
generating semantic annotations; it is also appropriate for existing
digital libraries.

Our architecture is flexible so that loading XSLT files from other
digital libraries is possible; we are currently starting to work with
PubMed and DBLP (http://dblp.uni-trier.de/) for further testing.
Another digital library of interest to us is Google Scholar; we are
using Googles latest API in combination with the Google Web
Development Toolkit (GWT) and its corresponding extensions in
order to exploit user and ontology generated tags. We are also
carrying out more detailed evaluations not only concerning the
tagging and its related operations but also regarding the added
value required for communities to adopt and actively participate
in scientific-oriented folksonomies. Our interest is the same: the
intersection between the SW and the Social Web in Life Sciences.
One interesting aspect that has arisen from our work with biologists
is the need for intelligent interfacesi.e., interfaces consistent with
the information being delivered. We are consequently redesigning
our interfaces to cater to this requirement. Support for browsers
other than Internet Explorer (IE) as well as the release of the project
to the SourceForge community is also being pursued. And finally,
we are conducting further research into the relationship between
ontologies and the new breed of tagsonomies that naturally arises
out of approaches such as ours.

Acknowledgements

Funding: Alexander Garcia acknowledges the financial support
of the EU: Large-Scale Integrating Project OASIS, Grant Agreement
# 215754.
