Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 196202

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Invited paper
Supporting browsing-specific information needs: Introducing the
Citation-Sensitive In-Browser Summariser
Stephen Wan a,, Cecile Paris a, Robert Dale b

a ICT Centre, CSIRO, Sydney, Australia
b Centre for Language Technology, Faculty of Science, Macquarie University, Australia

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 22 June 2009
Received in revised form
10 November 2009
Accepted 25 March 2010
Available online 2 April 2010

Keywords:
Text summarisation
User-centric design
Document browsing aids
Contextual summaries

1. Introduction

Practitioners and researchers need to stay up-to-date with the latest advances in their fields, but the continual growth in the amount of literature available makes this task increasingly difficult. In this article,
we describe the Citation-Sensitive In-Browser Summariser (CSIBS), a new research tool to help manage the
literature browsing task. The design of CSIBS was based on a user requirements analysis which identified
the information needs that biomedical researchers commonly encounter when browsing through academic literature. CSIBS supports researchers in their browsing tasks by presenting both a generic and a
tailored preview about a citation at the point at which they encounter it. This information is aimed at
helping the reader determine whether or not to invest the time in exploring the cited article further, thus
alleviating information overload. Feedback from biomedical researchers indicates that CSIBS facilitates
this relevance judgement task, and that the interface and previews are informative and easy to use.

Crown Copyright  2010 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Researchers regularly browse through large repositories of
online academic literature, to update their existing knowledge or
to quickly familiarise themselves with a new topic. However, with
a near exponential growth in available publications and scientific
material, the task of browsing through and staying up-to-date with
academic literature is a particularly challenging one, especially
for the increasingly time-poor researcher. Given that a significant
amount of research time is dedicated to the task of gathering and
reviewing information (Hersh [4] suggests as much as 18%), there
is a need to develop new tools to support researchers in this task.
The work presented in this paper caters to situations in which
the researcher, who is already reading an article, wishes to browse
through the related cited material. Typically, we expect to find
additional important information by this browsing task. Indeed, in
a survey of biomedical researchers, we found that two thirds of
researchers regularly browsed scientific literature in this manner.
In this scenario, as one reads a document (the citing document), a
large number of citations may be encountered. Each citation points
to a cited document and is embedded within a citation context.
Some tools can already help with the straightforward task of automatically downloading cited documents. For example, reference

managers such as JabRef 1 and Sente 2 can perform this blind down-
loading. However, this does not address the question of document
relevancy at the time of reading the citing document. When relying
on just these tools, the original reading context explaining why the
document is potentially relevant is typically lost.

We propose that, to make relevance judgements, information
about the cited document is needed most when the citation context
is first encountered. That is the moment at which the researchers
curiosity in the cited document is first triggered. Given the potentially large number of possibly interesting citations, this results in
the following browsing-specific problem: how can we help a user
quickly determine whether the cited document is indeed worth
downloading, perhaps paying for, and reading?

To address this problem, we present the Citation-Sensitive InBrowser Summariser (CSIBS), a tool developed as part of the Elsevier
Grand Challenge.3 CSIBS supports readers in deciding which cited
documents they should read. We designed the tool in consultation
with potential users, researchers in the biomedical domain, to identify how CSIBS can facilitate their day-to-day research activities.
Over the course of the semi-final and final rounds, feedback from
users was used to focus research and development of the Grand
Challenge, the outcome of which is the focus of this paper.

 Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: stephen.wan@csiro.au (S. Wan), cecile.paris@csiro.au (C.

Paris), rdale@science.mq.edu.au (R. Dale).

1 http://www.jabref.sourceforge.net.
2 http://www.thirdstreetsoftware.com.
3 http://www.elseviergrandchallenge.com.

1570-8268/$  see front matter. Crown Copyright  2010 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2010.03.002

Fig. 1. A sample pop-up with an automatically generated preview. This pop-up appears in a web browser when the user mouses over the citation. Words that match the
citation context are coloured and emboldened. The figure also illustrates the presentation of relevant section titles, used to group extracted sentences. This grouping provides
a better organisation of the citation-sensitive preview.

We first began with a user requirements analysis, which
revealed two prominent tasks: appraising the cited document, and
relating the citation context to specific content in the cited doc-
ument. Ultimately, in performing these two actions, the reader is
trying to decide whether or not to read the cited document in full.
It is this overall task that CSIBS strives to facilitate.

CSIBS provides researchers with information which is useful at
the point at which citations are encountered. The application provides information about the cited document to the user, based on
his or her current reading context, within the same browser in
which the citing document is being viewed (for example, Adobe
Acrobat Reader or a web browser), thus avoiding an interruption
to the primary reading activity. The key observation here is that
the reading context can indicate why the reader might be interested in the cited document. In addition to meta-data about the
cited document and its abstract, CSIBS therefore shows a contextualised preview. This contextualised preview contains important
sentences from the cited document that are related to the reading
context.

Our hypothesis is that the content of a citation context enables
CSIBS to determine what information in the cited document will be
of most value, given what has just been read by the reader in the citing document. This portion of the preview is built using automatic
text summarisation methods that exploit the links and anchor texts
in hypertext documents [15].

The preview is shown as a pop-up text box within the document browser. An example showing the pop-up, as viewed using
a web browser, is presented in Fig. 1. CSIBS previews can also be
viewed in PDF documents using Adobe Acrobat, as presented in
Fig. 2. The integration of this support into the browser, overlaying summaries on top of the citing document, enables readers to
maintain their focus of attention while providing relevant snippets
tailored to their information needs. CSIBS thus helps the reader
avoid following less relevant citations, by indicating whether or
not additional information about the citation context exists in the
cited document.

The present paper is structured as follows. We first present
related work in Section 2. Section 3 briefly describes the user study

S. Wan et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 196202

Fig. 2. A preview pop-up available within a PDF document. The image on the right is a magnified version of the pop-up. It contains an automatically generated preview
which is made available by double-clicking the citation in Adobe Acrobat. This pop-up interface allows the researcher to select and copy the text in the preview.

we carried out to determine the primary information needs of readers as they encounter citations; this study was carried out in the
biomedical domain. Section 4 describes the design and implementation of the CSIBS system, based on the results of our user study.
Section 5 discusses our preliminary evaluation study. Finally, Section 6 presents our current on-going and future research interests.
Concluding remarks are provided in Section 7.

2. Related work

The ways in which technology can help readers of academic
texts have been scoped by Shotton et al. [12], who describe what
might be possible in the future of academic publishing. Our work
in automatically generating previews is related but focuses on
the provision of information about cited documents. The tasks of
users in academia, specifically in the humanities [2] and in mathematics [17], have been studied previously, revealing a number
of teaching and research activities that might be supported by
technology.

Task-based analyses in the biomedical domain have been carried out by Bartlett and Neugebauer [1], and by Tran et al. [14]. Their
analyses, like ours, use qualitative studies to uncover the underlying uses of information. However, the tasks outlined in these
related works are focused on a specific set of information needs
in a research area: for example, the determination of a functional
analysis of gene sequences. Our work differs in that we wish to take
a higher-level view in order to elicit information needs that occur
in scientific research more broadly, at least in the domain of the
biomedical sciences.

Li et al. [5] analysed the usage of scientific text, specifically
focusing on the types of queries made when searching over largescale scientific literature repositories. Our analysis differs in that
we seek to understand the information needs and the underlying

tasks being performed by researchers in the context of browsing,
as opposed to searching, through the literature.

To facilitate these tasks, we investigate technologies that are
able to locate and present useful information from within scientific
documents. Other research has addressed similar goals: the extraction of tabular information from within scientific documents has
been explored by Liu et al. [6]; and key phrases from scientific publications are identified by Nguyen and Kan [9], who do so by taking
account of document structure. In this paper, we are interested in
extracting sentences that justify the citation context, thus helping
the reader make a relevance judgement about the cited document.
Sentence-related extraction technologies have been explored
within the field of automatic text summarisation, although with
a different application perspective than ours. The detection of sentences containing citation information has been studied in the
context of finding patent information in Japanese text [7]. In earlier
work by Nanba et al., such sentences were used to automatically
compile survey articles [8].

Using co-citation information for summarisation has also been
explored. An overview is provided in Elkiss et al. [3]; in that work,
the authors analyse the similarity between citation contexts for
a particular document. Similarly, approaches for summarising an
academic document based on the citations of that document found
in the literature at large have been studied [10].

Citation contexts have also been classified according to the
rhetorical role they play in the document that is currently being
read [13]. Given this classification, cited documents are summarised by showing sentences that support the specific rhetorical
role. These approaches are similar to ours in that they exploit the
use of citations between documents as linkages. However, except
in the case of Teufel and Moens [13], these approaches only produce
summaries that are independent of the reading context, while our
approach deliberately tailors a preview to the citation context that

has just been read. Our work differs from that of Teufel and Moens
[13] in that we tailor the preview to the content of the citation
context and not to the rhetorical role of the citation.

There are also a number of commercial products that address the
needs of users in academia. Knowledge extraction systems focusing on biomedical text, such as BioMed Experts,4 Illumin8,5 and
ConceptWeb,6 can automatically extract facts or highlight linkages
(for example, by using clustering approaches) between researchers
and published research. Often these tools provide improved search
interfaces by suggesting ways in which to expand a query. These
tools are complementary to browsing-oriented tools like CSIBS,
which focuses on the under-explored browsing scenario. For exam-
ple, once a document is retrieved via one of these search engines,
a researcher can use CSIBS to navigate further through the space of
document citations.

3. User requirements analysis

To determine what readers of scientific literature require of
cited documents, we conducted a user requirements analysis. We
focused on users of biomedical literature because we had access to
an extensive corpus of material in this domain as participants in the
Elsevier Grand Challenge. However, our study and the questions we
asked of participants were not specific to this domain. We began by
interviewing subjects from an appropriate user demographic and
recording their verbal descriptions about a real scenario situated
in their day-to-day activities. Following this, we designed a questionnaire for wider participation which presented scenario-based
questions attempting to uncover participants information needs
and tasks. Participants were asked to provide free text answers.
The responses were then collated and analysed for commonali-
ties, bringing to the fore those issues that were salient across the
participants. We recruited 24 users with a background in biomedical life sciences. All 24 participants started the questionnaire, and
18 completed it. Of the 24 participants, two-thirds indicated that
they browsed through academic literature at least once a week. The
main section of the questionnaire consisted of a series of questions,
corresponding to the issues we wanted to explore. Principally, we
wanted to know what information needs researchers have of a
cited document, and what specific tasks this information serves. We
analysed the free-text responses, checking for repeated terms and
concepts that could form the basis of clustering. Salient information needs were matched to corresponding tasks. The most salient
groupings of responses revealed the following:7

(1) There were two main types of information needs, met respectively by meta-data and content-oriented information. These
correspond to the two tasks of appraising the cited document
(making a value judgement about it) and relating content in the
cited document to the citation context, a general task referred to
here as the citation-focused task. Specific examples of the latter
include: explaining why a document was cited; selecting new
baselines for the design of new experiments; advancing ones
understanding of the topic of the citation context; investigating the details of the citation context further; and justifying the
citation context. The underlying content-oriented information
need is triggered by the text that the participant has just read.
Both the appraisal and the content-focused tasks serve to help
make a relevance judgement about the cited document.

Fig. 3. A system architecture diagram. CSIBS produces preview-annotated PDF documents and HTML web pages.

(2) The main difficulty that participants reported was in performing citation-focused tasks. Intuitively, this accords with
ones expectations given that, ordinarily, a citation-focused task
would require manually scanning through the full cited document to search for specific information.

(3) Searches within the cited document to find passages of text that
match the citation can be automated, guided by key words from
the citation context, provided that the results are presented in
such a way that makes the reasons for information selection
understandable and transparent to the user.

4. Citation-Sensitive In-Browser Summarisation

We took the three main outcomes of the user requirements
analysis and used them (1) to decide what kinds of information to
present in the pop-up preview, and (2) to determine what interface
issues were pertinent in this scenario. In this section, we provide
an overview of the outcome, CSIBS. Specifically, we focus on how
the preview is generated and delivered on multiple presentation
media.

4.1. The CSIBS system

Our system architecture is presented in Fig. 3. CSIBS produces
a preview-annotated version of a published academic document,
rendered either as an Adobe Portable Document Format (PDF) document or a HyperText Mark-up Language (HTML) web page. The
annotated document is a modified version of the original article
with CSIBS previews inserted into the appropriate citation con-
texts. With the annotated document, the reader can activate the
previews with mouse interactions in the appropriate browser.

We now describe the process involved in generating the annotated document using data retrieved from databases maintained by
Elsevier, including the full text of the cited documents. CSIBS is first
provided with an identifier for the document that the reader has
requested. This information is easily obtained from portals housing scientific data, such as ScienceDirect.8 The system retrieves the
XML version of this document.9 All citation instances are identified in the XML representation; these are then extracted and
matched with the full references at the end of the document. Metadata for each of the cited documents is retrieved from the EMBASE

4 http://www.biomedexperts.com.
5 http://www.illumin8.com.
6 http://www.wikiprofessional.org.
7 A paper describing the full details of the user requirements analysis was pub-

lished as [16].

8 http://www.sciencedirect.com.
9 While the functionality of CSIBS can be ported to other document collections,

the current system assumes the availability of XML data.

S. Wan et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 196202

web service.10 This provides, amongst other things, the Elsevierspecific Publication Item Identifier (PII), which is used to retrieve
the XML representation of each cited document from the Elsevier
XML Repository.11

Each citation instance, its meta-data and the XML for the corresponding cited document is then passed to the summarisation
engine, which computes the contents of the pop-up. The resulting contextualised preview contains a subset of the meta-data for
appraising the cited document, the abstract, and a citation-sensitive
preview consisting of sentences extracted from the cited document that match the citation context. The meta-data corresponds
to a generic view of the cited document and is independent of the
citation context, while the citation-sensitive preview will differ
depending on what is said about the cited document in the citation context. Finally, the preview is inserted into the appropriate
place in the annotated version of the published article by inserting
dynamically produced JavaScript code at each citation point.

To facilitate the researchers literature browsing activities, CSIBS
can be deployed as a web service attached to an existing publications portal (provided that appropriate permissions to databases
are in place), so that the portal can provide the preview-annotated
documents.

4.2. Meta-data information

CSIBS coordinates the retrieval of different meta-data, returned
from queries to an online publications database. This currently
includes:
 The full reference: this is useful in providing readers with information about the publication.
 Author information: CSIBS includes data to help the reader establish a level of trust in the citation, primarily focusing on the
authors affiliation.
 The citation count for the cited document: this is extracted to
help users appraise the citation.

These pieces of information were commonly identified as useful
in helping readers make value judgements about the cited work.
For example, having the full reference allows the reader to make
informal judgements based on information about the host journal,
such as its impact factor. We found that such judgements were
frequently made in the biomedical domain.

4.3. Citation-sensitive previews

The module that generates the citation-sensitive preview
requires, as input, the citation context and the text from the cited
document. The latter is obtained by extracting the text from the
XML representation of the document and performing sentence seg-
mentation. As output, the module produces a short list of sentences
that helps the reader perform the citation justification task. These
are extracted based on locating matching words. The process of
finding matching words excludes stop words, words with minimal content including, for example, prepositions, determiners and
auxiliary verbs. We cap the number of extracted sentences at a
predefined limit, n, currently set to four.

To select sentences, we represent the citation context and each
sentence in the cited document as a vector, where each dimension represents a term in the vocabulary, and the value for that
position in the vector is the term frequency. We use vector space
methods [11] to find the best n sentences that match the citation

10 http://www.embase.com.
11 http://labs-repo.elsevier.com/repo.

context, based on the cosine similarity metric. This metric measures
the cosine of the angle between two vectors: one representing a
sentence and the other representing the citation context. If the vectors are orthogonal, the cosine will be zero, which is interpreted as
indicating that the sentence is unrelated to the citation context.

The attractiveness of this approach lies in its speed and simplic-
ity. This is a crucial design point for an application which we intend
to be used over the web. For such applications, interaction times
must be sufficiently low. Previews can be computed in approximately 0.03 s, making the process amenable to batch processing of
multiple documents or, in the future, live generation of previews
at runtime.

The vector space approaches were chosen as they allow a precise matching of words in the citation context, thus minimising the
risk of exacerbating any existing information overload problems by
further burdening the reader with poorly matching sentences. To
help the user, word matches are highlighted, allowing the reader
to understand why particular sentences were extracted. Users are
thus able to determine which retrieved sentences are useful. Of
course, false positives are always possible. However, with this inter-
face, users can see when sentences are only marginally related,
given the lack of informative words that are highlighted, and thus
they can ignore any false positives that do occur. In our user requirements analysis (see Finding 3 in Section 3), we found transparency
in determining results to be a desirable trait for an automated sys-
tem.

Relevant section headings from the cited document are also provided as a means of grouping extracted sentences to improve the
organisation of the citation-sensitive preview. When a sentence is
chosen, we locate the innermost section to which it belongs and
retrieve the section heading. Section headings are then used to
group multiple sentences belonging to the same section. Sections
and their sentences are presented in the same order in which they
appear in the cited document. The structure of the cited document
was also reported by participants in the user study as being useful,
since it provides a snapshot of the relevant parts of a document
and allows readers to ascertain the scope of relevant material at a
glance.

One key feature of the contextualised preview is that the
information presented should differ depending on the underlying
information need represented by the citation context. Intuitively,
one would expect that a preview of an article cited in the introduction section should be different from a preview triggered by a
citation in the methods and materials section, for example. Fig. 4
presents two citation-sensitive previews side by side, each generated for the same cited document but triggered by different citation
contexts. These examples are taken from a published article, for
which a preview-annotated ScienceDirect webpage version was
created by CSIBS. Since the citation contexts are different  coming from the methods and materials and discussion sections,
respectively  the resulting citation-sensitive preview changes to
adapt to the context.

In this example, the preview on the left presents information
relating to a method, specifically the procedure which is not documented in the citing document. The second preview on the right
presents information about the conclusions drawn from the work
described in the cited document, which is more relevant to the
discussion at the end of the citing document, where this second
citation occurs.

5. The utility of CSIBS

We provide here a brief overview of a preliminary qualitative
evaluation. The goal of this evaluation was to examine how participants would react to the pop-up previews. The feedback allows us

Fig. 4. Although both pop-ups display citation-sensitive previews for the same cited document, the contents are not the same because the citation contexts, displayed
underneath each pop-up, are different.

to further clarify our analysis and subsequent development. Three
biomedical researchers, all of whom had taken part in our original user requirements analysis, participated in the evaluation. Each
participant was shown nine different passages containing a citation context, each situated in a different FEBS Letters 12 publication
(which was also presented in full to the participants). Subjects were
asked to make relevance judgements on the cited document given
the citation context and a preview. In this evaluation, the actual
judgements are not as important as the self-reported levels of confidence which we asked the participants to provide, on a 3-point
Likert scale.

The small sample size does not permit hypothesis testing. How-
ever, we are encouraged by the positive gains in self-reported
confidence scores when participants were shown the CSIBS pre-
views, compared to simply showing the full reference, which is
currently the only citation information available to researchers.
Since both the abstract and citation-sensitive previews evoked
comparable positive gains in self-reported confidence (+1.2 and
+2.2, respectively), we assume that these types of information facilitated the relevance judgements. Participants also reported that, for
the citation-sensitive preview, two thirds of the sentences were
found to be useful on average.

The participant feedback also indicated support for the CSIBS
interface and the preview information presented. One participant
made some particularly interesting observations regarding the
selected sentences and the structure of the cited document. Specif-
ically, useful sentences tended to be located deeper in the cited
document, for example in the methods sections. This participant

12 The Journal of the Federation of Europeans Biochemical Societies.

suggested that, for an expert user, showing sentences from the earlier sections of a publication was not useful; for the same reason,
the abstract might be too general and not helpful in justifying a
citation. Finally, one participant remarked that, in those situations
where each document downloaded from a proprietary repository
incurs a fee, the citation-sensitive previews would be very useful
in deciding whether to download the document.

In a subsequent evaluation, we tested CSIBS with 26 biomedical researchers who had not participated in our user requirements
studies. We found that results again supported the utility of CSIBS.
Due to space constraints, we focus on the reactions of the participants to the interface, as represented by their feedback comments.
Note that a recurrent theme is the usefulness of preview informa-
tion, which participants described as helping the relevancy task
they were asked to perform:
 The ability to preview RELEVANT [sic] information contained in
references is brilliant and would be an enormous help for my
work. Easy access to such a tool in combination with easy access
to the references in the citations would certainly change the way
I would read papers. (Researcher)
 I think the preview is a great idea, it would save a lot of time in
terms of looking up entire articles to determine their relevance.
(PhD Student)
 The preview information was informative, and helps one to
decide whether or not the cited article is worth reading. (Post-
Doctoral Researcher)

The following comments about the citation-sensitive preview
show that our interface decisions in presenting information (for
example, using structural information) were found to be effective:

S. Wan et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 196202

 The preview information which was presented in a structured
way, with subtitles, paras, etc. was good and easier to under-
stand. (Post-Doctoral Researcher)
 In general it gave you a snap shot of what to expect in the arti-
cle. Often this would be enough to know whether the article was
worth reading. (Post-Doctoral Researcher)

Preview information was found to be useful not only for the
relevancy task but also to help researchers acquire new knowledge:
 In some cases, the preview gave a useful expansion of the highlighted sentence. This feature would be particularly helpful when
learning about a new research area. (Post-Doctoral Researcher)

6. Future work

In future work, we will research methods for further improving
the tailoring of citation-sensitive previews to the context. Addi-
tionally, in our work to date, we have demonstrated CSIBS on
one scientific discipline, that of biomedicine. We aim to apply
the techniques to other disciplines; we expect the transfer to
other scientific domains to be straightforward given the domainindependent design of CSIBS.

7. Conclusion

We presented a new research tool aimed at supporting
researchers as they acquire knowledge through the perusal of scientific literature. The Citation-Sensitive In-Browser Summariser
(CSIBS) was designed and developed by taking into account real
tasks and information needs of academic researchers, particularly
biomedical researchers. CSIBS helps readers determine whether or
not a cited document is worth reading further, addressing two types
of activities: article appraisal and citation-focused tasks. These
tasks are facilitated by providing readers with documents annotated with previews. Our evaluations of CSIBS indicated that the
preview information is helpful for making relevance judgements,
and that the CSIBS interface is useful and intuitive. We conclude
that the contextual previews naturally complement the documents
own abstract, given that generated previews can present detailed
information from the body of the cited document that is more relevant to the specific citation context.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank the participants in our user studies for
their time and insightful comments. We would also like to thank

Elsevier for permitting access to their data via the Elsevier Grand
Challenge. Finally, we would like to thank Julien Blondeau, Michael
Muthukrishna and Ilya Anisimoff for their efforts in performing
engineering tasks and HCI studies.
