Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011) 315

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the

World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : h t t p : / / w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Editorial
The Semantic Web Challenge, 2010

The Semantic Web Challenge1 has been organized in cooperation
with the The Semantic Web Science Association (SWSA) since 2003
with the aim of showcasing the best Semantic Web Applications currently being developed. The challenge not only illustrates what the
Semantic Web can provide to the world, but also stimulates state-
of-the-art research by enabling researchers to publicize their work
to a wide and diverse audience and to compare it with the most recent work in the field. All submissions are evaluated rigorously by a
jury composed of leading scientists and experts from industry in a
three-round knockout competition, according to a comprehensive
set of challenge requirements. In the second round, the eight best
submissions are chosen based on their presentation as a poster
and demonstration. In the final round, the winners are picked after
oral presentations and further live demonstrations.

The Semantic Web Challenge 2010 took place at the 9th International Semantic Web Conference held in Shanghai, China from
7 to 11 November, 2010. As in previous years, the challenge consisted of two tracks: the Open Track and the Billion Triples Track.
The Open Track requires that applications are designed to operate
in an open Web environment and that they utilize the semantics of
the data which they process, whilst the Billion Triples Track focuses on dealing with very large amounts of RDF data, which has
been crawled from the Web and thus exhibits characteristics such
as vocabulary heterogeneity and varying data quality. For the 2010
challenge, we provided the participants of the Billion Triples Track
with an RDF data set consisting of 3.2 billion triples. We are very
grateful to Andreas Harth for the enormous effort he put into
crawling the web to compile this dataset, and to the KarlsruherInstitutfurTechnologie which provided the necessary hardware for this labour-intensive task.

The Semantic Web Challenge 2010 received 18 submissions (14
for the Open Track and 4 for the Billion Triples Track). In this special issue, we present articles about the winning systems: the three
award-winners in the Open Track and the winner of the Billion Triples Track.

The first place winners of the 2010 Open Track were the team
from Stanford University, comprising of Clement Jonquet, PaeaLe-
Pendu, Sean M. Falconer, AdrienCoulet, Natalya F. Noy, Mark A.
Musen, and Nigam H. Shah for NCBO Resource Index: OntologyBased Search and Mining of Biomedical Resources. Their entry
provides very clear benefits to the biomedical community, bringing
together knowledge from many different sources on the web with
a large corpus of scientific literature though the clever application
of Semantic Web technologies and principles.

1 http://challenge.semanticweb.org

1570-8268/$ - see front matter O 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2011.06.010

The second prize in the Open Track was awarded to the team
from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, comprising Dominic DiF-
ranzo, Li Ding, John S. Erickson, Xian Li, Tim Lebo, James Michaelis,
Alvaro Graves, Gregory Todd Williams, Jin GuangZheng, Johanna
Flores, ZhenningShangguan, Gino Gervasio, Deborah L. McGuinness
and Jim Hendler, for the development of TWC LOGD: A Portal for
Linking Open Government Data  a massive semantic effort in
opening up and linking public US government data, and providing
the ecosystem and education for using this data in different con-
texts. The third prize in the 2010 Open Track was won by a combined team from the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Oxford
University and the University of Southern California comprising
of Denny Vrandecic, VarunRatnakar, Markus Krotzsch, and Yolanda
Gil for their entry Shortipedia  a Web-based knowledge repository and collaborative curating system, pulling together a growing
number of sources in order to provide a comprehensive, multilingual and diversified view on entities of interest  a kind of Wikipedia on steroids.

The Billion Triples Track was won by Creating voiD Descriptions for Web-scale Data by Christoph Bohm, Johannes Lorey,
Dandy Fenz, EykKny, Matthias Pohl, Felix Naumann from HassoPlattner Institute in Potsdam, Germany. This entry uses state of the
art parallelization techniques, and some serious cloud computing
power, to dissect the enormous Billion Triples dataset into topicspecific views.

These four papers demonstrate the diversity of ways in which
Semantic Web data can be used, and represent some of the best
applications developed in the research community, combining a
wide range of technologies with clear use cases and well-designed
interfaces.

We would like to thank all the members of the jury for their
extraordinary commitment and their detailed judgment of the
strengths and weaknesses of the submitted applications.

Christian Bizer
Freie Universitat Berlin, Garystr 21, 14195 Berlin, Germany
Tel.: +49 838 55509; fax: +49 838 52027
E-mail address: chris@bizer.de

Diana Maynard
University of Sheffield, UK

