Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 342347

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Invited paper
TrialX: Using semantic technologies to match patients to relevant clinical trials
based on their Personal Health Records
Chintan Patel, Karthik Gomadam 1, Sharib Khan 1, Vivek Garg 2

Applied Informatics Inc., New York, NY 10006, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 10 February 2010
Received in revised form 25 June 2010
Accepted 10 August 2010
Available online 15 September 2010

Keywords:
Clinical trials
Healthcare informatics
Web 2.0
Semantic web applications

Clinical trials form a critical link in the translation of basic biological research into routine clinical practice.
However, finding eligible participants for clinical trials is a critical hurdle and a frequent cause for delays
in the completion of trials. The lack of comprehensive, efficient, and consumer-friendly online tools has
limited consumers ability to pro-actively find the right clinical trials and participate in them. The rising
use of Internet as a medium for seeking health information and the advent of online Personal Health
Records (PHRs) platforms such as Microsoft HealthVault (MHV) and Google Health (GH) have created the
opportunity to change the status quo. These platforms are connected to databases of several healthcare
organizations and enable patients to import their medical record and utilize it for self-management by
using third-party applications built on these platforms.

In this paper we discuss TrialX, a consumer-centric tool that matches patients to clinical trials by
extracting their PHR information and linking it to the most relevant clinical trials using semantic web
technologies. We use an ontology, HealthOnt, that provides the underlying representation for integration
and semantic retrieval of health data and clinical trials. TrialX is currently live and integrated with both
MHV and GH and has matched thousands of patients to clinical trials in the last 12 months.

 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Clinical trials are medical research studies performed on
humans to evaluate the safety and efficacy of new drugs.3 They
form a critical and essential phase in the lifecycle of drug devel-
opment. Every year more than 50,000 clinical trials are conducted
in the United States alone. However, finding the right participants
(patients or healthy volunteers) has been and continues to be a
major bottleneck in the timely completion of these trials. Four out
of five trials are delayed and among these, 50% of the trial delays
are due to participant recruitment challenges [1,2]. The situation is
particularly troublesome in the domain of oncology, where fewer
than 3% of potentially eligible cancer patients enroll in trials [3]. In
fact more than 75% of participants are not even aware of them,
even though surveys have repeatedly shown that a majority of
patients would be open to participating in trials if they had the
right information.4

From a social and public health perspective, delays in clinical
trials have several adverse consequences. One, it entails the loss
of human life that could otherwise have benefited from the new
intervention (particularly with conditions such as advanced cancers where experimental treatments are the last resort for some
patients). The delay in trial completion postpones the entry of a
drug in the general market thus postponing its benefits to the large
population. Another consequence of the low recruitment rates is
that finding patients for trials of uncommon conditions can be challenging and at times impossible, causing the failure of drugs to treat
such conditions to make it to the market. The delay has economic
consequences too; since a drugs patent period is limited, every days
delay in clinical trial results leads to lost revenues in the range of
$1$8 million per day for pharmaceutical companies [2]. In total,
delays in clinical trials result in over $10 billion/yr in estimated
missed revenues for pharmaceutical companies.

Two fundamental hurdles prevent increased participation of

patients in clinical trials.

 Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: chintan@trialx.com (C. Patel), karthik@trialx.com

(K. Gomadam).

1 Work done as consultant to Applied Informatics Inc.
2 Work done when previously employed at Applied Informatics Inc.
3 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clinical trial Accessed October 03, 2009.
4 http://www.ciscrp.org/information/facts.asp.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2010.08.004

1. The current process of finding eligible participants is largely
driven by clinical trial investigators (physicians charged with
conducting the trial) or specialized recruitment professionals
with limited options for patients to be pro-active in the process
of finding and enrolling in trials.

2. The existing participant-oriented tools such as websites that list
clinical trials or websites designed to signup patients for clinical
trials (such sites are called eRecruitment sites), have several lim-
itations; they lack user-friendliness [4] and many patients dont
know enough details of their health conditions (such as what
medications they are taking) to find the most relevant trials from
the thousands of trials active at any time.

1.1. Impact of technology and web

Two significant trends are converging to create an opportunity
for disruption in the current patient recruitment landscape and to
make it possible to create the kind of solution that addresses the
problems described above. One is the rise of Internet as a health
information-seeking medium for consumers. The data from the
Pew Internet and American Life Project shows that the Internet
has become a common source of health information for a large
number of people; these studies estimate that between 75% and
80% of Internet users search for health information online, with a
steady upward trend in this number [5]. On average, 8 million people search for health related information online every day. Websites
such as WebMD are visited by millions of health consumers every
month. In addition to general health searches, clinical trial information (or information about new treatments) ranks as one of the
important health topics that users search for on the Web. According
to the National Library of Medicine, its clinical trials listing website,
ClinicalTrials.gov, receives close to 65,000 unique visitors a day and
serves more than 50 million page views per month.5

The second converging factor is that the healthcare industry is
on the verge of an unprecedented adoption of Healthcare Information Technology (HIT) solutions such as Electronic Health Records
(EHRs) and Personal Health Records (PHRs). The recent American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, has specifically allocated
more than $20 billion for incentivizing EHR adoption [6]. Riding this thrust in HIT and the consumer health trend, technology
corporations including Google and Microsoft are building sophisticated PHR platforms (Google Health6 and Microsoft HealthVault,7
respectively) to enable consumers to have access to their health
information from organizations such as Cleveland Clinic and be
able to use that information for self-management of their health
conditions.

1.1.1. Personal Health Records and their impact

The Markle foundations connecting for health collaborative, has
defined a PHR as an electronic application through which individuals can access, manage and share their health information and of
others for whom they are authorized, in a private, secure and confidential environment [7]. The US Health and Human Services and
the Office of the National Coordinator for HIT have identified PHRs
as a potentially disruptive technology and a national priority [8].
These PHR platforms could be the enablers of a radical paradigm
shift in the health information economy; the shift of locus of control
of health information to the patient (consumer).

The central goal of the new PHR platforms, GH and MHV is to let
patients use their health information for better self-management
by using third-party application services built on these PHRs. Thirdparty PHR applications can re-use the data within a patients PHR
(with due patient consent and with required measures to protect
patient privacy) and provide personalized and useful services to the
patient. The provision in these PHRs to enable patients to control
what they can do with their health information and who they can

5 http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/info/about.
6 http://google.com/health. Accessed October 01, 2009.
7 http://www.healthvault.com. Accessed April 04, 2009.

Fig. 1. Information flow between PHRs and TrialX.

share the information with, has been described as a tectonic shift
in the health information economy by Mandl and Kohane [9]. Such
a platform provides an excellent opportunity to use semantic technologies to utilize the information in the PHR to match patients
to relevant clinical trials. In fact, one of the important PHR use
cases described by Mandl and Kohane, is the possibility of patients
using their PHR information to find clinical trials that match their
health profile. If realized, this new PHR model can have a potentially
dramatic effect on addressing the current roadblocks that exist in
utilizing medical records for research purposes, as patients can now
give their consent to third-party application providers such as a
clinical trial matching service, as described in this paper.

We present the details of our system TrialX, a consumer-centric
application that is built on top of PHRs and enables patients to discover trials that match their health conditions and connects them
with the trial investigators. By leveraging PHRs, TrialX is poised to
significantly alter the dynamics of the clinical trials recruitment
landscape. PHRs could be adopted by millions of consumers in the
coming years, thus significantly increasing awareness and outreach
for clinical trials recruitment. If successful, our PHR-based approach
could have major public health impact by increasing access to
new treatments, reducing the delays in getting drugs to market
and improving the likelihood of finding patients for trials of rare
conditions. Moreover, the ability to pull patient-consented PHR
information creates the possibility of mining de-identified data for
obtaining surveillance statistics on clinical trials recruitment, or
beyond, for surveillance of adverse events related to clinical trials
or post-market drug surveillance.

2. TrialX information flow

Fig. 1 describes the overall information flow within the TrialX system. TrialX is integrated with MHV, GH and Indivo PHRs.
These systems in turn are integrated with databases of several healthcare organizations such as hospitals (Cleveland Clinic,
NewYork-Presbyterian) and pharmacies (CVS). A patient can
import his or her health record from any of the partner organizations of these platforms. After importing, they can choose to allow
third-party applications built on these platforms (such as TrialX) to
use their record to provide useful services. For example, an application in HealthVault can read the height, weight, age and gender
of a patient and calculate their Body Mass Index (BMI) and explain
the significance of the same to the patient.

We illustrate this integration with an example from Google
Health (as shown in Fig. 2. The Google Health platform allows
patients to add healthcare applications that utilize the PHR infor-
mation. Patients can add the TrialX application from within the
Google Health platform and after adding the application can generate matching trials by clicking the show matching trials link. This
is illustrated in Fig. 2.

C. Patel et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 342347

Fig. 2. Integration between Google Health and TrialX.

The TrialX system works in the backend to pull the patients
condition, demographics and other information securely and uses
this information to generate a list of matching trials on TrialX.com.
The next section describes the components used in TrialX and the
matching algorithm.

3. Semantics driven TrialX architecture

To enable integration, representation and subsequent querying
of diverse data sources of patient records and clinical trials, TrialX uses three key components that are based on semantic web
technologies.

3.1. Scalable semantic health data model

The representation of health care data is a challenging problem.
The sheer number of data-types such as conditions, medications,
allergies, laboratory results and corresponding values such as dia-
betes, metformin and blood glucose is enormous. To handle this
problem, we developed HealthOnt, a generic top-level ontology
to represent the health care data-types and values (see Fig. 3).

Fig. 3. HealthOnt ontology. The HealthEntity, HealthProperty and HealthValue are
top-level concepts that are combined into an EAV-triplet under HealthAssertion. An
example of PatientRecordAssertion: Medication, taking, Vancomycin and ClinicalTri-
alAssertion: Medication, notTaking, Antibiotics.

HealthOnt uses an Entity-Attribute-Value (EAV) based top-level
representation to encode HealthEntities such as Condition, Med-
ication, Laboratory Tests. The attributes (HealthProperty) include
concepts such as lessThan, greaterThan, taking, notTaking and so
on and these are used to represent granular information about an
entity. For example an entity such as Age can have an attribute
lessThan with value 65. The HealthValue represents the actual
numeric value or coded value from an external ontology such as
the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS), RxNorm or International Classification of Diseases (ICD). These EAV triplets are used
to create a HealthAssertion, which can be PatientRecordAssertion, for
representing patient data from PHRs, ClinicalTrialAssertion for modeling the structured eligibility criteria, QueryLogAssertion for storing
intermediate website logs and so on. The key idea is that this representation allows scalable representation of healthcare information
obtained from patient records and clinical trial data sources for
different tasks as follows:

1. HealthOnt for semantic matching. HealthOnt facilitates direct
semantic matching of the patient data and clinical trial information since both share the same top-level concepts. Before
the matching can occur, an intermediate transformation step is
required and this is described in the next section on data inte-
gration.

2. HealthOnt and RESTful API. Each HealthEntity is associated with a
REST-based web query parameter that allows direct translation
of web requests to internal data-structures and algorithms for
processing the requests through TrialX APIs.

3. HealthOnt for dynamic web forms. The HealthEntity are also associated with a DisplayEntity to enable generation and validation
of dynamic web forms to collection patient information. TrialX
allows domain experts to create eligibility questionnaires on the
fly using this extensible representation.

3.2. Semantic data integration

The integration of diverse data sources is one of the core challenges addressed in the TrialX application. The patient data arrives
from different sources such as PHRs (GH, MHV, Indivo), EHRs, and
various health and wellness websites. On other hand, the clinical
trial information is integrated from sources such as ClinicalTri-
als.gov, CenterWatch.com, Clinical Trial Management Systems in
hospitals and so on. To handle multiple, growing data sources for

Table 1
The matching of patient record (PatientRecordAssertion) against structured clinical trial criteria (ClinicalTrialAssertion). The concepts from ClinicalTrialAssertion are semantically
expanded to include all the children in the ontology to determine the match, the concept Multiple Myeloma is expanded to match Stage II multiple myeloma and Revlimid is
identified as a type of Immunomodulator.

HealthEntity

Age
Condition
Activity Level
Received Previous Drug
Zip

PatientRecordAssertion

51 yrs
Stage II Multiple Myeloma
Fully Active
Revlimid

ClinicalTrialAssertion

18100 yrs
Multiple Myeloma

Immunomodulators (exclusion criteria)
10032 (25 miles)

Match

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

obtaining patient records and clinical trials, we perform integration
in 2 steps:

1. HealthOnt Transform Layer. Firstly, a wrapper is created for each
source data system (PHRs, EHRs etc.) and the data items are
mapped to the corresponding one or more HealthEntity in TrialX or new entities are added if required. After the mapping, the
common TrialX REST API is used to POST the data processed by
the wrapper to store the new data in TrialX. The patient data and
clinical trial data are transformed into PatientRecordAssertions
and ClinicalTrialAssertions respectively.

2. Semantic Mapping Layer. After the data is stored in TrialX, the
value fields in the HealthAssertions are mapped to the UMLS
concepts using lexical matching tools[10]. The UMLS integrates
about 9 million terms from 140 biomedical terminologies into
2 million unique concepts (a unit of meaning). The UMLS also
enables mapping codes across different terminologies. We use
these cross-terminology mappings to directly transform coded
data values from the input source.

3.3. Real-time semantic matching and query

At the heart of the TrialX platform is the matching module. This
module performs full clinical record based computational matching
of participants with clinical trials using semantic and natural language processing (NLP) techniques. We analyze key sections of the
patients health record including demographics, health conditions,
laboratory results, medications, and procedures. This information
is used in matching the patient with the eligibility criteria information obtained from a trial description. One of the key features
of the matching is that it is performed at a semantic concept level
(biomedical meaning) rather than checking for absence or presence of a criterion at the lexical level. Consider a patient taking the
drug Vancomycin. This patient will be matched to a clinical trial
that requires patients taking antibiotics. This is because, the matching algorithm can infer using semantic conceptual knowledge that
Vancomycin is an antibiotic. By using a semantic approach to trial
matching, we provide more meaningful results as compared to lexical (term level) search results. The matching is done by comparing
the HealthAssertions of each patient medical record with the assertions for the database of assertions for the trial criteria (see example
in Table 1)

4. Semantic search versus keyword based search

There are several ways in which the results of a semantic-based
search as performed by the TrialX system differs from a traditional
keyword based search. To illustrate the differences we provide the
results of a search performed for a hypothetical patient record
using TrialX and ClinicalTrials.gov, consider the following patient
scenario:

55 y.o. male with lung cancer, living in Baltimore, Maryland (USA)
looking to enroll in a clinical trial at the Johns Hopkins Medical Center.
ClinicalTrials.gov search parameters: We entered the keywords
lung cancer, location term as Johns hopkins, country as United

States and restricted the search to open studies only (currently
active studies). ClinicalTrials.gov offered no fields to enter patient
demographics. TrialX search parameters: We entered medical condition = lung cancer, demographics such as age = 55, gender = male,
city= Baltimore and State = MD and study site = Johns hopkins.

We manually evaluated the accuracy of the retrieved clinical trials from ClinicalTrials.gov and TrialX. The ClinicalTrials.gov
returned 30 clinical trials and TrialX generated 5 matching clinical
trials. All 5 studies produced by TrialX were also present in the (top
6) CT.gov results. The additional results (25 studies) generated on
ClinicalTrials.gov were excluded from the TrialX search results for
several reasons. Nine trials in the ClinicalTrials.gov set contained
trials with conditions that were either broader or narrower than
lung cancer. Additionally, the pure keyword based searching in
ClinicalTrials.gov produced several false positives (43%). For exam-
ple, a false positive trial was shown because it matched the keyword
lung in sponsor institution field, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute and cancer on National Cancer Institute. Three trials in
the ClinicalTrials.gov data set were not included in the TrialX set
because they did not contain any email address (this is a technical exclusion because TrialX only stores trials that one at-least one
email contact associated with them). The email information is used
to enable patients to contact the investigator of the trial through
the TrialX messaging system.

5. User interface and visualization

Complexity of medical information can often be overwhelming to users. Rather than just listing a set of matching trials as
blue links on a white page, TrialX results are shown in a matrix
that highlights the match across different trial criteria and patient
conditions. This view allows users to get detailed description of
the match results and allows them to explore/tune their search by
adjusting the values for the different facets. These facets might vary
across different conditions and are captured in the TrialX semantic
model. An illustration of the matrix view is provided in Fig. 4. The
order of columns in this view is determined by the importance of a
particular attribute to the condition for which the user is searching
for trials.

6. Sharing the goodness

TrialX provides multiple ways for third-party websites to access
clinical trial information. We have created a RESTful API through
which clinical trials information can be obtained in an RDF output.
The RDF information allows general health and wellness websites
or bloggers to incorporate clinical trial information enriched with
semantic metadata. For example, Web resources that have content
on diabetes would automatically be able to pull related clinical trial
content from TrialX. Fig. 5 illustrates the RDF export of an Asthma
clinical trial.

TrialX also provides a widget generation service that uses mined
trial information along with external semantic knowledge to identify the minimum matching information for a clinical trial. The
user interface elements (a dropdown for trial phase) are cap-

C. Patel et al. / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 342347

Fig. 4. Search results matrix view.

tured into the triple store and are incorporated into the widgets
based on the requirements. This service can be accessed from
http://trialx.com/widget. This widget can also be embedded across
other Web applications. Fig. 6 illustrates a widget generated for
diabetes.

TrialX also has an iPhone application and we are currently developing an enterprise grade health care platform that can be deployed
in clinical sites.

7. Discussion and conclusion

In this paper we have described the need for building online
consumer-centric technologies to connect patients to relevant clinical trials. We are leveraging paradigm changing technologies such
as PHRs in combination with semantic web technologies to match
patients based on the information in their record and the information provided for a clinical trial.

The approach utilized to build TrialX provides a mechanism
for connecting patients to relevant and personalized information.
We have created a fundamentally different type of solution that

is designed to empower patients and give them the tools to learn
about clinical trials, obtain recommendations for the most suitable
trials that match their health conditions without having to fill complex questionnaires and lets them have direct access to the clinical
trials investigator, without having to go through multiple layers or
navigate complex and poorly designed sites.

7.1. Impact of TrialX

We envision that TrialX will have a positive impact at two
different levels. One is the immediate impact that a PHR-based
clinical trials recruitment solution can have on increasing access
to new treatments and reducing the time needed to find eligible
patients, thus speeding up clinical trials and the availability of new
treatments. Another major impact of such a solution would be its
potential to make clinical trials of rare conditions more viable; several trials of rare condition fail to complete because of the lack
of reach to such populations or because the cost of doing so with
current methods is prohibitive.

Beyond the immediate benefits, TrialX and other PHR based
applications in general open up the possibility of new data sources
for population-based surveillance. One of the key functions and
core components of a public health agency is surveillance and
epidemiology. Several public health agencies routinely conduct

Fig. 5. RDF export of Asthma trial information.

Fig. 6. TrialX widget for diabetes.

surveillance for several notifiable conditions. Some do more specialized surveillance in the areas of chronic diseases, syndromic
surveillance and behavioral risk factors assessments (such as the
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System surveys conducted by
the CDC and the state public health agencies). An emerging area of
epidemiology and surveillance is Infodemiology and Infoveillance.
Infoveillance, is defined as the epidemiology of health information needs and entails tracking trends in health information search
behavior across different conditions, demographics and geography.
The concept has being utilized to trend, in real-time, the spread
of Influenza in a given population and nationally though Google
Flu Trends.8 It is possible to apply the concept of Infodemiology
to do surveillance of clinical trial recruitment information and
search behavior. For instance, we can measure metrics, based on
user search behavior, on how many patients search for trials of a
given condition, stratified by demographics and geography. Similar metrics can be created to track enrollment status of patients
in different trials. To our knowledge, this would be the first of
its kind real-time data related to consumers information needs
about clinical trials and recruitment, thus providing a new type
of infoveillance. Collecting such data would provide a new method
to use PHR information for public health surveillance. Since PHRs
could be potentially used by millions of consumers in the years to
come, it provides an unprecedented amount of data that can be reused (after proper de-identification) for public health surveillance
purposes.

The system has received enthusiastic response from the users
and is actively growing. It provides the framework and the core
technologies that can be used to extend the concept a generalized
system HealthX, for connecting health consumers to personalized
health information resources based on their PHR.
