Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 375376

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents

on the World Wide Web

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / w e b s e m

Editorial
User interaction in semantic web research

What is semantic web user interaction (SWUI) and why do we
want to give it special attention in a journal? Since the first international SWUI workshop at the World Wide Web (WWW) conference
in 2004, those of us drawn to this topic have been asking this
question. In 2004, the description of the Semantic Web did not
have an Interaction Layer on its stack. The concern of developing
the Semantic Web seemed entirely on the back end. And yet, the
motivating scenario for the Semantic Web postulated in the 2001
Scientific American article was based on what the approach would
offer humans.

Some of us perceived a disconnect: from our own experience in
interaction design, both in research and professional practice, we
had seen repeatedly the problems of starting with the technology
and assuming that the interaction would take care of itself. Part of
our efforts in SWUI was to identify challenges and opportunities for
interactions that the semantic web would afford. Consequently, the
workshop has been held variously in conjunction with ACMs Conference on Human Factors (CHI), the International Semantic Web
Conference, the World Wide Web Conference, and on occasion,
co-located between the US and EU.

By the third SWUI in 2006, as part of the International Semantic Web Conference, Tim Berners-Lee presented a revised Semantic
Web Layer Cake diagram that was now topped with a User Interfaces layer. That was also the workshop where a first critique was
presented of what many views onto the Semantic Web looked like
at that time: Big Fat Graphs (BFG). The concern of that paper was
that it was easy to throw a BFG onto RDF, but what problem did that
solve for whom in trying to make use of and sense of information?
That question of interfaces to help make sense of semantic
data became a theme for SWUI. A few of us looked at data integration challenges and explored what kind of UI paradigm would
best enable exploration of the metadata associated with semantic
web-based information. Tools like/facet, Topia, mSpace, Haystack,
Tabulator and semantic wikis have all been explored at SWUI.
In each of these projects the concern has been to bring together
multiple data sources in a way that lets users explore, query and represent that information to build new knowledge. An outstanding
challenge that remained was how to afford these kinds of explorations over wild data on demand, rather than over well tamed,
well curated, integrated heterogeneous data sets?

By 2008, this latter challenge was given greater impetus by
the movement towards Open Data initiatives and the shift in the
Semantic Web community towards Linked Data. The US government started the data.gov initiative to publicize government data;
the UK followed suit with data.gov.uk Tim BernersLees first TED
talk in Feb 2009 focused on the power of connecting data together,
exhorting the audience to demand raw data now.

1570-8268/$  see front matter  2010 Published by Elsevier B.V.
doi:10.1016/j.websem.2010.10.003

Co-incident with that cry was the call for this issues theme of
Exploring New Interaction Designs Made Possible by the Semantic
Web. This theme raises questions such as: Once we have even more
data, coming from private, social and these new public sources, how
are we supposed to make sense of it? What tools will we need to
let us explore, integrate, query and present it? Does this flood of
data mean new interaction paradigms or simply new tools to put
this data to use in existing paradigms? Does doing so require new
methods for design or evaluation?

The two papers from this theme that appear in this issue help
to answer these questions. The paper Evaluating the Usability of
Natural Language Query Languages and Interfaces to Semantic Web
Knowledge Bases by Esther Kaufmann and Abraham Bernstein,
shifts emphasis from the coldly measured accuracy of query-based
retrieval to a focus on how well the user can form queries on the
semantic web and processes their results. Not only is the evaluation
technique user-oriented, so is the underlying motivation: usable
natural language query interfaces help novice users explore new
information domains, which places the semantic web concern of
domain-independence in the context of usability.

In From the Web of Data to a World of Action, Alan Dix and
his colleagues shift the emphasis from what data is and how it is
linked to what distributed applications and their users do with data,
and how they cooperate in doing it. This paper shows how several
tools solve user interaction problems in ways that are specific not
only to semantic web but also to the distantly collaborative way the
semantic web is intended to work. Here, we see not just how the
semantic web changes the form of data itself, but also its impact on
how we share and use data.

Managing this call has encouraged us to think about what a
semantic web / user interaction paper might be, to act as guidance
for future submissions in this area to this journal. To that end, we
offer the following heuristics:

1) Components to enable interaction: SWUI papers are motivated
by a clear and well-grounded usability problem for engaging
with semantic web/linked data. A contribution to addressing
that challenge does not need to produce a user interface. For
instance, we know that there is a challenge for being able to bring
together data sources about geographical domains. Data sets
may use terms like boundaries, regions, postal codes or GPS latitude and longitude coordinates. In order for a person to be able
to bring together, for instance hospital waiting times and police
crime statistics for areas in the UK, each of which uses very different but overlapping boundaries, some mechanisms to identify
these regions and then merge them need to be provided. Creating a solution to that problem is a SWUI contribution: it is an

Editorial / Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web 8 (2010) 375376

enabling technology necessary for on demand, user-driven data
integration. Some standard mechanism to demonstrate how the
approach has been validated is also encouraged.

2) Novel interaction: A SWUI paper that develops a novel approach
for interaction most often needs some form of credible user
assessment. For instance, if one claims that their interaction is
novel and enables people to carry out a new process, then evidence that people can carry out the process is usually necessary
for that case to be made.

3) User-motivated systems or models: In any case, we would not
want to hamstring the presentation of a great new approach
that expresses clearly innovative new ideas for lack of a usability
assessment. Systems papers that demonstrate back end to front
end efforts are often hardest hit by these kinds of issues: the system has taken so much energy to develop to solve a particular
problem that asking for the paper to also feature an evaluation seems overly taxing. In these cases, we suggest the usual
research requirements apply to demonstrate novelty and con-
tribution. Likewise, we encourage researchers to ground their
innovation up front within at least a well-defined, validated
user-oriented scenario. On other words, what problem is the
system addressing for a citizen, and what research challenges
are being addressed in the system to solve this issue?

Since the call for journal papers in this theme went out in
2009, open data and linked data have become increasingly common terms. There are interesting visualizations of some linked
data sources associated with data.gov and data.gov.uk. There are
data-oriented visualization tools like Microsofts Pivot and Seeds
Vizualising.org

And yet what we still see is largely Web 2.0 style mashups: the
visualizations are largely hand crafted, and do not permit for citizens to add new data sources to them or to change the queries.
One still needs to be a programmer to interact with integrating
heterogeneous data sources.

We suggest that there is an increasing and profound need to
focus on Citizen rather than Programmer requirements to make
raw data now accessible, discoverable, usable, and queryable.
From our own work, we know that the challenge of simply integrating two related but heterogeneous data sources is non-trivial. The
data is messy and the field labels can be intractable. We need tools
to make it easier for people to produce cleaner data for humans to
read and machines to use. When we focus on the citizen who might
want to access data sources to build up new knowledge, we can get
a headache with how demanding the requirements are to create
such tools. These challenges are also the gift of this new research
area.

Guest editing for this theme in the journal has been another
rewarding step in this endeavor. We thank all authors who submitted papers under this theme, for their effort, and for showing how
others approach this topic. Special gratitude goes to the reviewers
for these submissions, who exchanged insights into what is important and desired in this area. We look forward to more papers in
this space coming into JWS and the field in general.

mc schraefel
Intelligence, Agents, Multimedia Group, Electronics
and Computer Science, University of Southampton,
SouthamptonUK

Lloyd Rutledge
Information Systems and Business Processes,
Faculteit Informatica, Open Universiteit,
The Netherlands

E-mail addresses:
mc+jws@ecs.soton.ac.uk (M. Schraefel),
