User Evaluation Study of a Tagging Approach to 

Semantic Mapping 

Colm Conroy, Rob Brennan, Declan OSullivan, and Dave Lewis  

Knowledge and Data Engineering Group, 

Trinity College Dublin 

{coconroy,rob.brennan,declan.osullivan,dave.lewis}@cs.tcd.ie 

Abstract.  A  key  aspect  of  semantic  interoperability  is  the  semantic  mapping 
process itself. Traditionally, semantic mapping processes conducted by knowledge  engineers  have  been  proposed  to  bridge  this  gap.  However,  knowledge 
engineers alone are unlikely to cope with the ever increasing amount of mapping work required, especially as mappings themselves begin to be specialised 
for different contexts. One solution is to develop new mapping processes that 
enable users to participate in the mapping process themselves. In this paper we 
present an evaluation study of our user-driven tagging approach to the semantic 
mapping process. In our approach, users actively participate in generating mappings  by  categorising  automatically  generated  candidate  matches  presented  in 
natural language over a long time period. In the evaluation study three groups 
of users generated mappings between their personal ontologies and a sports ontology  describing  sports  news  content  from  RSS  feeds.  The  mapping  process 
was embedded within the users' work environment as a Firefox browser exten-
sion.  The  study  is  discussed,  focusing  on  whether  the  mapping  process  is  
unintrusive, engaging and simplified  for the user. The  evaluation results  were 
promising  and  indicate  that  people  with  various  levels  of  expertise  could  become active in the semantic mapping process. 

1   Introduction 

The development of user-friendly ontology authoring approaches have been predicted 
to lead to a step change in the deployment of the Semantic Web [1]. However any 
technology  that  produces  a  proliferation  of  ontologies  will  lead  to  an  avalanche  of 
semantic  interoperability  problems  unless  we  simultaneously  empower  users  to  resolve  semantic  mapping tasks themselves.  Semantic  mapping has been identified as 
one of the  most time-consuming data  management problems [2],  with high requirements for user input [2]  where fully automated solutions are impossible [3]. Thus a 
scalable solution to wide-scale semantic interoperability cannot rely on using knowledge  engineers  to  create  mappings  which  bridge  the  semantic  gap  between  the  increasingly  personalised  user  experience  [4]  and  domain  knowledge  models.  New 
user-centric  semantic  mapping  approaches,  processes  and  tools  are  required,  with  a 
consequent emphasis on usability evaluation rather than matching algorithm optimisa-
tion. Such a mapping approach, based on casual web users categorising automatically 

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 623637, 2009. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 

C. Conroy et al. 

generated candidate matches presented in natural language over a long time period, is 
described here. Unique aspects of our approach include the combination of: (a) natural language-based presentation; (b) integration within the normal desktop work environment as a web-browser extension; (c) the use of Web 2.0-style tags as our match 
categorisation mechanism used to generate mappings from candidate matches; (d) the 
freedom  users  have  to  express  in  their  own  terms  the  relationship  of  candidate 
matches; (e) the segmentation of the mapping process into small sessions which allow 
individual  tasks  to  be  completed  quickly  and  unobtrusively  while  the  users  can  see  
the  feedback  effects  of  their  mapping  actions  on  the  trial  semantic  interoperability 
application. 

Key factors for evaluation of the success of our approach are: (a) the simplification 
of  the  semantic  mapping  process  so  that  non-knowledge  engineers  can  accurately 
generate meaningful mappings in domains of interest to them; (b) creation of a sufficiently engaging mapping process that will encourage users to continue to participate 
over time since our  mapping  approach splits the normally  long  mapping task into a 
large  number  of  small  sessions;  (c)  unintrusive  integration  of  the  mapping  activity 
with a user's everyday tasks so that over time the mapping process does not become 
distracting  or  annoying  for  the  user.  This  paper  presents  an  experimental  study  that 
examines the usability of our prototype user-driven tagging semantic mapping application in terms of whether the users found it provided an unintrusive, engaging and 
simplified  mapping  process.  The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  organised  as  follows:  
Section 2 discusses related work, Section 3 presents the tag mapping tool, Section 4 
give  the  details  of  the  experimental  study  carried  out,  and  Section  5  offers  some  
conclusions and future work. 

2   Related Work 

Even though the performance of automatic  matching tools  [5] is steadily improving 
there is still a need for users to be involved in the mapping process for the foreseeable 
future [6]. The number of user trials on mapping tools has been small [7] and those 
that have taken place have tended to focus purely on the mapping effectiveness and 
have  not  addressed  usability  or  visualization  issues.  User  evaluations  for  the 
PROMPT  and  Chimera  mapping  tools  have  been  performed  in  the  medical  domain 
[8] and results showed that each user found merging quite difficult, and in particular 
performing any non-automated procedures was highlighted as extremely tough.  

Although  the  goal  of  mapping  tools  is  to  map  between  different  information 
sources, the existing tools focus primarily on the calculation of candidate matches  
they do not aim to provide the assistance and support for the user during the entire 
mapping  process.  Some  recent  work,  however,  has  focused  on  improving  usability. 
For example, Robertson et al. [9] presents better ways to display mappings to users 
using  standard  visualisation  techniques  and  demonstrates  their  effectiveness  with  a 
user  study.  Bernstein  et  al.  have  presented  on  an  incremental  interactive  schema 
matching  technique  [10]  which  displays  suggested  candidate  matches  for  a  selected 
schema element to the user rather than for the global set of elements. The history of 
the user's mapping actions is also taken as a heuristic in selecting candidate matches 
for  each  schema  element.  Falconer  and  Storey  [2]  have  presented  a  theoretical  
?

?

?
framework for cognitive support in mapping tools that gives design guidelines based 
on state of the art of cognitive support research and results gathered from an observation case study. The paper gives a list of tool requirements and framework principles 
which they have use to develop a tool called CoGZ.  Mocan et al. [11] have proposed 
a formal model for ontology mapping creation  which provides the use of connected 
perspectives  to  deemphasize  non  relevant  aspects  of  the  ontologies  being  matched 
while  displaying  the  relevant  entities  for  each  match.  In  contrast  to  the  previous 
works, our research is focused on allowing users of various different levels of exper-
tise, not just technically aware users who can grasp the meaning of a graph type struc-
ture, to participate in the mapping process.  

Shvaiko and colleagues [12] have provided a semantic mapping system which provides proofs and explanations of mappings. The proofs are displayed using short, high 
level  explanations  in  natural  language  without  any  technical  detail.  These  are  designed to be intuitive and understandable by ordinary users. The results of an experimental  study  have  been  promising  and  shown  the  potential  to  scale  to  the  semantic 
web. Kaufmann and Bernstein [13] have conducted an evaluation study on the usability of natural language interfaces (NLIs) and concluded that they are indeed useful for 
casual end-users. Recently a number of NLIs for authoring ontologies have emerged 
which  are  tasked  with  allowing  domain  experts  to  participate  in  the  ontology  engineering cycle, e.g. [1]. Soantag [14] has proposed an approach for a dialogue-based 
interaction  mapping  process  where  medical  domain  experts  will  validate  mappings 
via verbal communication.  

Increasingly techniques from the semantic desktop research community will enable 
the creation of a personal ontology on behalf of a user [15]. Some of the techniques 
used are reverse engineering techniques, re-use of ontologies, and conceptualization 
of folksonomies. There has been significant focus on modelling the users own interest 
based on the tags they used in folksonomies [16]. Results have been promising and 
showed a far richer interest profile can be generated when multiple folksonomies are 
combined. There have been various studies focusing on analysing user incentives and 
motivations behind tagging. In particular [17] found that the  motivations tend to be 
personally-focused and [18] that the user-generated tags are consistent with the content they are attached to. In contrast to these approaches, the work described in this 
paper uses tagging as a way to categorise the algorithmically derived candidate match 
results for relationships between concepts within two different ontologies. 

3   Tag Mapping Tool Design 

The tag mapping tool supports the creation of personalised mappings between users 
sporting interests and a sport news ontology used to represent and store sports news 
stories from RSS feeds1. These mappings are used to deliver personal sporting news 
to  the  users  by  filtering  the  sport  news  relevant  to  the  users  sporting  interests.  The 
users are required to progressively validate candidate matches via a tagging interface. 
The  design  of  the  tag  mapping  tool  allows  the  mapping  cycle  to  occur  over  an  extended duration within the users environment via a mapping process which has been 

                                                           
1 The ontologies & matching file can be found at http://www.cs.tcd.ie/~coconroy/tagmatch/ 

C. Conroy et al. 

described in detail in previous work [19, 20]. The main steps, each performed itera-
tively, include: (a) Determine when to present mapping tasks (section 1 aspect e); (b) 
Determine what mapping tasks to present; (c) Present the mapping task; (d) Perform 
the mapping interaction; and (e) Evaluation of the user response. The tool is split into 
two parts: a Firefox extension and a mapping server. Fig. 1 shows the architecture of 
the tool. A Firefox extension was picked as the implementation framework since this 
allows the  mapping process to occur  within an environment the  user  will use every 
day, i.e. browsing (section 1 aspect b). Graphical message alerts via a browser status 
bar icon is displayed as a prompt for the user if there are either any mapping tasks to 
perform  or  if  any  new  RSS  information  is  available.  The  RSS  information  is  displayed via a sidebar in the browser window and also in message alerts whenever new 
RSS  information  is  available.  In  this  prototype  the  only  mapping  task  the  user  is 
prompted to perform is to tag a matching result. Future extensions of the prototype 
could add additional mapping tasks. 

The  mapping  server  is  used  to  execute  the  mapping  logic  of  the  application  and 
also stores the ontologies and mappings. The same sport ontology formed each users 
own  personal  ontology  and  candidate  matches  were  derived  to  the  sport  news  
ontology  with  Align  [21]  (18  missed  matches  were  appended). To  personalise  their 
ontology  users  choose  their  specific  interests  within  the  general  sport  domain  when 
registering,  e.g.  football,  tennis,  and  so  on.  These  interests  link  to  a  concept  within 
their  own  ontology  and  is  used  to  locate  the  RSS  items  of  interest  for  the  user  via 
mappings constructed with the sport news ontology. Although every user has a set of 
concepts  interests  in  the  ontology  which  corresponds  to  their  sport  interest,  each 
user is still required to categorise all of the candidate matches between the ontologies. 
In this initial prototype the ontologies remain stable, further work will investigate the 
case of evolving ontologies. 

Fig. 1. Mapping architecture of tagging mapping tool 

 

The  extension  prompts  the  user  to  undertake  only  three  mapping  sessions  (each 
with 3 mapping tasks) every time the browser is opened, step (a). The first session is 
prompted  five  minutes  after  the  browser  is  opened  while  the  other  sessions  are 
prompted  hourly  afterwards  until  all  three  sessions  have  been  prompted.  When  a 
mapping session is prompted the mapping server determines which mapping tasks are 
?

?

?
to  be  asked,  step  (b),  according  to  both  the  accuracy  of  the  candidate  matches  (via 
matching tool) and the number of RSS news item instances available via the match-
ing. The ontological information is visually displayed, step (c), to the user in natural 
language, see Fig. 2. The natural language used represents the ontological information 
using  bullet  points  to  outline  the  structure  of  the  concept  (section  1  aspect  a),  i.e. 
child, parent, property. This choice of presentation interface was informed by a previous experiment [22] which established that natural language mapping representations 
were useful for end-users. The user is then required to tag the candidate match, step 
(d), to gather the user's feedback on the suitability of the match (section 1 aspect c). 
The user may input the tags on offer from the suggested list or new tags they can create (section 1 aspect d). Note that the user may use multiple tags. The list of tags entered  by  the  user  is  then  evaluated,  step  (e),  on  the  mapping  server  which  will  
categorise the candidate match based on the tags entered. The categories used in our 
approach  are:  Equivalent,  Equivalent  Sometimes,  Different,  and  Unknown.  The 
equivalent  and  equivalent  sometimes  categorises  are  used  to  categorise  candidate 
matches  which  are  valid  mappings.  Equivalent  sometimes  mappings  are  also  used 
where the target concept is more general than the source concept. The different category is used to categorise matches in which the mappings is not valid. The unknown 
category  is  used  to  categorise  candidate  matches  which  were  only  tagged  with  new 
tags the user created. In the current prototype there is no support for re-categorising 
matches  in  the  unknown  category  but  in  future  work  we  plan  to  re-classify  these 
matches via monitoring (see section 5). The focus of the current work is to evaluate 
the effectiveness of the basic tagging approach. The evaluation of this experiment is 
discussed in section 4.2. 

Fig. 2. The tagging mapping interface 

C. Conroy et al. 

4   Experimental Study 

To  assess  the  effectiveness  of  our  tag  mapping  tool,  we  conducted  an  experimental 
study addressing three groups of questions: (1) Unintrusive  How interfering for the 
user is the tool? Is the tool disruptive for the user? (2) Engaging  Is the user participating  in  the  mapping  process  over  time?  Are  users  answering  mapping  tasks  
regularly?  (3)  Simplified    Are  the  tasks  confusing?  Does  the  user  understand  the 
information? What is the quality of the mappings? 

4.1   Experimental Design 

Scenario. The experiment involved the participants using the Firefox extension of the 
tag  mapping  tool  within  their  browser  on  their  own  personal  computer  over  a  two 
week period. At the start of the experiment each participant was asked to select their 
personal interests from a list of sport concepts. During the experiment each participant 
was asked to answer the mapping session prompts when convenient and to look at any 
RSS feed items they found interesting. The total number of mappings required to answer by the user during the course of the experiment was 32. The reason for the low 
number of mappings is because we anticipate that a users interests will be relatively 
shallow and that mapping tasks will be done over time in small sessions as their interests vary. 
 
Participants. Three different groups of users were used to examine the impact of the 
experiment  upon each of the  groups:  Ontologically  aware  users  who  have ontology 
work experience (volunteers from our research group), Technology aware users who 
have  database/UML  modelling  experience  but  no  ontology  experience  (volunteers 
from  students)  and  Non-Technology  Aware  users  who  have  basic  computer  experience  with no database/UML  modelling or ontology experience (volunteers from  the 
university sports centre). Four volunteers from each of the three groups took part in 
the experiment, making for a total of 12 participants. Note that the low numbers for 
each group will not give definitive outcomes for the experiment. Instead the numbers 
used were kept low so we could gain more detailed feedback and analysis from each 
user through interviewing techniques, with a view to learning from this experiment to 
assist the design for the large scale experiment that we have planned for 2009.  
 
Procedure.  Our  sample  size  satisfies  the  requirements  for  reliable  SUS  evaluations 
[23] but we used our own questionnaires so we that could examine the approach in-
depth. Each participant was required to use the tool over a two week period on their 
own personal computer. It included several steps.  

The participants were first asked to fill in a pre-study questionnaire which included 
several questions about their background so we could assess their technical skills. An 
introduction to the tag mapping tool was given to each participant describing how to use 
the  tool  and  what  they  were  required  to  do  during  the  course  of  the  experiment.  The 
participants  were  shown  the  tagging  interface  and  explained  how  to  interact  with  the 
tool. Each participant was also required to select their personal interests from a list of 
sport concepts to form their concept interests. After the introduction was finished the 
participants were asked to use the tool over a two week period. While the participants 
?

?

?
were using the tool all their actions with the tool were logged through Ajax calls to the 
mapping server. 

The participants were required to answer a mid experiment questionnaire2 to give 
their initial thoughts of the tool which were focused on the usability of the tool, e.g. 
Is the questions and supplied information confusing. A four point scale was taken to 
allow  users  to  express  different  levels  of  satisfaction.  After  the  experiment,  participants filled out a post-study questionnaire to evaluate their final thoughts. Again the 
questionnaire  focused on the  usability of the tool  with a  four point scale. The same 
questions were asked from the mid experiment questionnaire and other questions were 
added, e.g. how abrupt was the timing of the question prompts. 

Finally an interview was conducted with each participant to give their general impression and reaction to the tool. The survey answers were taken into account during 
each interview. Some of the questions asked were: how simple was the mapping task, 
how engaging was the mapping task and how interruptive were the mapping tasks. 
 
Data Collected. The following data was collected: (a) Mid experiment Questionnaire 
 used to examine the initial usability and usefulness of the tool, (b) Post Questionnaire  used to examine the long-term usability and usefulness of the tool, (c) Interviews  used to give the in depth account of the participants experience with the tool, 
(d) Log of users actions  used to track the users behaviour with the tool, (e) Resultant Mappings  the quality of the mappings were analysed to give the precision for 
each  group.  The  number  of  participants  used  (12)  in  the  experiment  was  relatively 
small but the number of events was much larger (2,538 total giving approx. 21 events 
per  day  for  every  user)  giving  a  reasonable  data  to  analyse  and  which  allows  us  to 
draw some indications and conclusions, especially for the event-centric metrics.  
 
Metrics. To evaluate our approach to semantic  mapping  we separate the evaluation 
into three key areas already stated before: unintrusive, engaging and simplified. By 
unintrusive we mean that the mapping process should not disrupt the user from their 
daily work and that the process ought to blend into the background while they work. 
A couple of specific (there are others) quantitive metrics and qualitative feedback we 
defined for unintrusive tasks were,   
  Percentage  of  mapping  sessions  entered  (Fig.  3):  an  unintrusive  task  will  have  a 

high rate of response to task prompts. 

  How interruptive  was the  mapping task (Interviews): an unintrusive task  will  not 

be perceived as interruptive by users. 

By engaging we mean that the user will enter and finish mapping sessions regularly 
over time seeing benefits with personalised RSS feed sports news through mappings 
accomplished. A couple of specific (there are others) quantitive metrics and qualitative feedback we defined for unintrusive tasks were   
  Percentage  of  mappings  done  (Fig.  4):  an  engaging  task  will  have  a  high  rate  of 

mappings done. 

  How engaging were the mapping tasks (Interviews): an engaging task will lead to 

users answering that they felt engaged to complete the task. 

                                                           
2 All Questionnaires can be found at http://www.cs.tcd.ie/~coconroy/tagmatch/ 

C. Conroy et al. 

By simplified we mean that the user will be able to achieve rich mappings in a time 
efficient way that is not confusing to the user. A couple of specific (there are others) 
quantitive metrics and qualitative feedback we defined for simplified tasks were: 
  Mappings  accuracy  w.r.t.  gold  standard  (Fig.  6):  a  simplified  task  will  assist  the 
users in making valid mapping decisions such that they have a high rate of generation of correct categorised mappings. 

  How simple was the mapping task (Interviews): a simplified task will lead to users 

answering that they found the task straightforward to achieve. 

  Mean mapping session time (Fig. 4): a simplified task will be quick to complete. 
  What was the quality of user response: The quality of tags should be high. 

4.2   Evaluation 

In this section we present the results gathered from the experiment. The graphs give 
the logged event data for the overall browsing hours. The browsing hours were also 
separated in half, in order to analyse the results per half. 

Fig. 3. Mapping Session Prompts 

 

4.2.1   Unintrusive 
To  assess  whether  users  were  using  the  mapping  application  we  tracked  how  many 
mapping session prompts they clicked on or ignored, which is an indication of how 
annoying the tool is to users, i.e. intrusive. These results, in Fig. 3, give an indication 
of the participation rate of each group and to a lesser extent the perceived utility of the 
task for users within each group. The results show on average that almost half of the 
prompts asked were entered (approx 45%). On the other hand there is a slight increase 
(<10%) in the number of prompts ignored in the second half. However, the entered 
rate is still quite high in the second half (approx 42%) which indirectly demonstrate 
?

?

?
that users did not find the mapping sessions in general to be overly inconvenient in 
their daily work, otherwise we would expect to have seen a greater drop in the number of sessions entered in the second half of the experiment. 

Fig. 4 gives the results for the mean time taken for each user group to achieve a 
mapping and indicates that the mapping sessions are not time-consuming with a mapping  task  taking  on  average  38  seconds  (session  approx  2  minutes).  The  mean  task 
time  reduced  slightly  (by  2  seconds)  over  the  second  half,  however  with  the  nontechnical aware group the time doubles. This is an alarming increase but looking at 
the number of mappings done by non-technical users (Fig. 4) might suggest that this 
increase in part could be attributed to the low number of mappings achieved by the 
users. The standard deviation is approximately 14 seconds.  In the survey taken a 73% 
majority felt that the application blended into the background while they were undertaking their daily  work  while all the  users felt the application  was not disruptive to 
their  daily  work  rising  from  92%  in  the  mid-week  survey.  Another  93%  of  respondents did not find the mapping session prompts to be disruptive.  

When looking at participation of the groups individually in entering mapping sessions (Fig. 3), it shows that the ontology aware group ignored rate increases sharply 
(approx 25%) in the second half which is in contrast to the non-technical users who 
have a reduction in the number of prompts ignored (approx 8%). When asked in the 
interviews why they were ignoring the mapping session prompts, users answered that 
a  lot  of  the  prompts  were  displayed  when  they  were  busy  with  a  daily  task  which 
would  lead  to  the  user  ignoring  them.  Some  of  the  comments  given  by  users  were: 
The  mapping tasks  were  not overly interruptive just  when I  was  working it  was, it 
didnt bother me at any other time and also When I am doing something and I did 
not want to be interrupted it was annoying but when I am just browsing the web it is 
fine.  Just when I am concentrating it is not. The feedback given suggests that users 
would prefer mapping tasks to be asked in a more suitable context. 

 

Fig. 4. Mean Time per Mapping (left) & Percentage of Mappings Achieved (right) 

4.2.2   Engaging 
From Fig. 4 we can see that the overall number of mappings done is quite high at 75% 
done. However looking at the results in depth we can see a minor drop in the percentage done in the second week but even more worrying is that the non-technical group 
only achieved 45% of the mappings. The low percentage of mappings done by nontechnical  users  can  be  attributed  to  the  low  number  of  hours  browsing  by  the  users 
over  the  course  of  the  experiment,  average  of  7  12  hours.  Contrasting  this  with  the 

C. Conroy et al. 

non-technical  users,  average  was  17  hours,  and  ontology  aware  user,  average  13  12 
hours, shows the non-technical group had the browser open for less than 50% of the 
time of technical users and  less 60% of the ontology  aware users. When taking  the 
number  of  mappings  done  per  browsing  hour  it  shows  that  6%  are  done  by  non-
technical, 5.71% are done by technical and 6.30% are done by ontology aware. This 
suggests  that  the  non-technical  users  were  quite  competitive  when  compared  to  the 
two other groups when taking browsing statistics into account.   

For every time a user responded to a mapping session prompt, we tracked the users 
actions  which  allows  us  to  calculate  the  number of  mapping  sessions  finished  (Fin), 
abandoned  (Abd)  and  not  started  (Non).  A  not  started  mapping  session  is  one  in 
which no more user events are recorded, this could be due to system unreliability or if 
a user simply ignores the session after it starts. These results will give us an indication 
if users are finding the  mapping task too complicated or too time-consuming. In the 
results, see Fig. 5, 8% of the sessions were abandoned which is quite low and could 
possibly be explained by the user suddenly getting busy, e.g. they just got an email or 
they got a message on internet messenger. More alarming and interesting is that 30% 
of the mapping session entered were not even started, i.e. the user exited immediately 
without  finishing  a  mapping  task.  During  interviews  conducted  with  the  participants 
when asked about this they answered that they exited the mapping task when it  was 
asking them something they were not interested in, i.e. if a user had not included football as an interest then they were perplexed as to why it was being asked as a mapping 
task  and  chose  not  to  answer.  A  comment  given  was  I  was  engaged  with  the  tasks 
when it was something I was interested in but when it was something I was not interested in I did not want to do it. Also a couple of the users mentioned that the submit 
and close mapping session buttons were placed too close together on the screen and 
that they accidental pressed the close button when submitting tags for a mapping. 

In the survey taken only 25% of the users found that answering the mapping tasks 
tailored the sports news. Instead a massive 42% found it did nothing at all and 33% 
said it only slightly changed. With 75% of the users not seeing the sport news getting 
more tailored it shows that most users are not seeing the benefits that the mappings 
should be bringing. A suggested reason as to why some users did not see benefits may 
be due to the important mappings, the mappings  which affect the users interests the 
most, being miss-categorised through the wrong choice of tags or undetermined tags 
being used.  With 59% of the mappings correct (Fig. 6) with respect to the gold standard this gives our reason some supporting evidence. 

4.2.3   Simplified 
In the interviews we asked how simple they found the mapping task. The general response from each group was that they found the mapping tasks were very straightforward and not difficult at all. Some of the comments given were it was very simple, I 
have many options and the choice was obvious and it was pretty simple just click on 
tags. I understood the information it was pretty straightforward. The participants also 
mentioned they were confused by some of the candidate matches generated, e.g. Basket and Motor Racing, which were very poor candidates for mappings. The users did 
not like being asked to categorise these types of mappings. Finally everybody mentioned in their interviews that they liked the tagging approach as it gave more choices 
than just yes or no and also allow them to be expressive.  
?

?

?
Fig. 5. Mapping Sessions Entered. The mapping sessions entered are separated into the sessions finished (Fin), abandoned (Abd) and not started (Non). 

Table  1  shows  the  distribution  of  the  three  most  popular  suggested  tags  for  each 
category. This gives an impression of what suggested tags the users like to use the most. 
The results show that the term same is a frequently used tag in the most popular suggested tags for each category. In the equivalent sometimes category mostly the same 
was the fourth rank. Also the terms equivalent and different are popularly used by 
the users. These terms have the highest frequency of use and so might be expected to 
have the most well-defined semantics for the user. However, some of these terms were 
the tags used for incorrectly categorised mappings (29% of the incorrect mappings). But 
looking  at  the  incorrect  mappings  made  this  had  more  to  do  with  the  mapping  being 
unclear to the user rather than the tag, i.e. Football and American Football might be 
viewed as the same concept without reading the description or given some context.  

Table 1. The list of suggested tags used by users: Ranking and percentage for the top three tags 
in each category are given. The tag categories are equivalent, equivalent sometimes and differ-
ent. The suggested tags accounted for 81% of the overall number of tags used. 

Category 

Equivalent 

Equivalent Sometimes 

Different 

Rank 

Tag 
The same 

% used 
40% 

Tag 
Part of is 

% used 
32% 

Equivalent 

30% 

= 

22% 

Equivalent 
sometimes 
Is a part of 

24% 

23% 

% used 
28% 

the 

22% 

Tag 
Different 
from 
Not 
same 
Never 
same 

the 

16% 

C. Conroy et al. 

After analysing both the new tags added by users and the matches that the new tags 
were  applied  to,  the  set  of  new  tags  could  be  categorised  as:  Miss-spelt  tags  -  tags 
which are spelt incorrectly; Meaning of a suggested tag  tags which have the same 
meaning as a suggested tag; Tag giving semantic meaning  tags which correspond to 
a property; Alert to bad mapping  tags users have used to indicate that the mapping 
is  wrong;  Other   tags  which indicate a general correspondence. In future  work  we 
hope to categorise these newly added tags by users through various techniques including monitoring the mapping usage and the history of other users, with similar inter-
ests, mapping actions. 

4.2.4   Quality of Mappings 
Fig. 6 shows the results of the mapping accuracy for each group. The results showed 
that overall 59% of the mappings made were deemed to be accurate. Looking through 
each group shows the ontology aware group achieved the highest accuracy with 74% 
while both the technical and non-technical groups had an accuracy of 51%. In addition  the  results  show  that  the  inconclusive  mappings  were  higher  than  the  incorrect 
mappings for both the technical and non-technical groups which is in contrast to ontology aware group. Upon examination of logs this is because the technical and nontechnical groups are creating more new tags than the ontology aware group. There is a 
significant error rate for both the non-technical group at 21% and the ontology aware 
group at 19%. Examining all of the incorrect mappings showed that 73% had a relationship  correspondence,  e.g.  Golf  and  Golf  Course,  which  were  categorised  as 
Equivalent  or  Equivalent  Sometimes.  The  other  27%  were  matchings  in  which  the 
two  matched  concepts  had  a  common  parent  concept,  e.g.  Golf  and  Soccer,  which 
were mostly categorised as Equivalent. Examining all of the tags used in the incorrect 
mappings showed: 

1. 59%  were  tags  which,  in  the  interviews,  the  participants  mentioned  they  thought 
the tags had different meanings that what they were supposed to be, e.g. part of 
was meant to be used to represent the union set theory relation but instead it was 
used as a way to express a concept to property correspondence.  

2. 20%  were  an  equivalent  sometimes  tag  for  matches  which  in  fact  had  a  corre-

spondence, i.e. a subclass of used for the match Basket and Basketball.  

3. 12% were tags which suggest the user misunderstood the descriptions of the concepts being matched, e.g. the same used for Football and American Football.  
4. 9% were an equivalence tag for matches which in fact had a correspondence, e.g. 

the same on the match Wimbledon and Wimbledon Trophy. 

The majority of these points indicate users made a wrong choice of tag which could 
be due to certain tags being unclear, e.g. part of, while in other cases it may be due 
to users being unsure of what tag to use. It should also be noted that some users may 
be not inclined to add their own tags and just preferred to click on a suggested tag that 
seemed appropriate to them.  In contrast to the other points, the  third point  suggests 
that some users were just tagging based on the concept names and not the description 
this could be due to the descriptions being unclear or users being not inclined to read 
the description. These are important issues for mapping interface design and suggest 
that only standard tags that should have a clear meaning should be displayed at first to 
?

?

?
users and that each of the tags created by a user will have a personal meaning to them. 
It  would  also  be  beneficial  to  track  the  use  of  the  mappings  to  make  sure  they  are 
categorised correctly to see if users are  using suggested tags in a personalised  way, 
i.e. evaluate if the mappings are showing benefits to the user by monitoring the use of 
the mappings. 

Fig. 6. Mapping Precision. The mappings are separated into the categories which are correct 
(), incorrect (X) and inconclusive (?). 

 

5   Conclusions and Future Work 

The  main  goal  of  this  experiment  was  to  assess  the  effect  of  a  tagging  approach  to 
semantic  mapping in the  users own  work environment. We evaluated the approach 
under three main usability areas: unintrusive, engaging and simplified. The analysis 
of the results points to several issues. First, we found that the tag mapping tool does 
not hamper the daily work of users and indeed it blends into the background, although 
when the user is busy they find it annoying and distracting whenever a mapping session prompt appears. We envisage that this issue  would be resolved if the  mapping 
tasks  were  context-sensitive  to  what  the  user  is  doing.  Second,  if  users  are  asked 
mapping tasks that are not related to their interests or if the benefits from  the  mappings are unclear then the users would become less engaged in the mapping process. 
This observation shows it is important to keep the mapping tasks related to the users 
interests and to also keep showing the benefits of the mapping process to maintain the 
user  interest.  Third,  users  can  achieve  rich  mappings  through  the  use  of  tagging  although some of the suggested tags were unclear to some users. The tagging mapping 
task is simple and straightforward enough for users but there is still a need to make 
the information given clearer. Although we have shown the mapping process can be 

C. Conroy et al. 

implemented within the casual web users work environment with a tagging approach 
there is still need for improvement. The authors have the following suggestions: 
  It is important that users do not see the mapping process as a distraction or interfering in their work. The mapping session must be asked in context which is suitable 
and agreeable to the user. 

  To make sure the users are not confused by the mapping tasks, it is vital that the 
mapping task and supporting ontological information are represented in an easily 
identifiable and clear way to the users.  

  The personalisation of a user tag set may improve the quality of mappings.  
  It is necessary to only present quality matches for the user to tag.  
  To solve the problem of miss-categorised mappings we propose actively evolving 
the mappings. The system should assess whether a mapping, over both time and 
context,  is  bringing  benefits  to  the  user,  and  if  not  the  mapping  should  evolve. 
Types  of  evolving  include  changing  the  mapping  category,  making  it  more  spe-
cific, getting subsumed or subsuming mappings, and generating child mappings. 

  Gather support from other users in the mapping process. For example a user may 
be not inclined to achieve any mapping task so it would be beneficial if other users 
with similar interest could help if they are willing (directly or indirectly). 

In conclusion, we believe our results are promising in that our experimental analysis 
indicates that users with varied levels of expertise can become active in the mapping 
process over time in their own area of interest. However, there is still a need to refine 
our approach to help engage  the user  more in the  mapping process. In our next experiment  we  will  focus  primarily  on  improving  the  context  for  mapping  tasks  and 
evolution of mappings. 
 
Acknowledgments. This research is partly funded by the Irish Higher Education Authority under the PRTLI 4 NEMBES project. 
