Effects of Using a Research Context Ontology for  

Query Expansion 

Carola Carstens 

German Institute for International Educational Research, Information Center for Education 

Schlostrae 29, 60486 Frankfurt, Germany 

carstens@dipf.de 

Abstract.  This  thesis  investigates  the  question  whether  and  how  ontologies 
such as the ones currently evolving in the Semantic Web can serve as knowledge  structures  for  the  generation  of  query  expansion  terms  in  information  
retrieval  systems.  This  issue  is  examined  using  a  specific  example  domain, 
namely educational research. Initial results support the already well-researched 
finding that query expansion can increase recall. Subsequent experiments will 
focus  on  comparing  the  effectiveness  of  thesaurus  and  ontology-based  query 
expansion, on identifying ontological relationships which are especially useful 
for  the  generation  of  query  expansion  terms  in  the  domain  of  educational  re-
search, and on evaluating the usefulness of different ontological relationships as 
expansion terms for different types of queries, as well as for different query expansion modes. 

Keywords: 
Expansion. 

Information  Retrieval,  Ontologies,  Semantic  Web,  Query  

1   Research Interest 

Following the Semantic Web vision [1], more and more ontologically organized Semantic Web data is currently being produced. With regard to the retrieval of this data, 
the Semantic Web has a strong focus on data retrieval, allowing to query the data by 
formal query languages. In addition to being directly queryable for certain ontology 
objects, ontological knowledge bases can also support information retrieval scenarios. 
Ontologically structured Semantic Web data constitutes a new abundance of corpusindependent knowledge that may be exploited for the implementation of query expansion mechanisms.  

While the existing research on query expansion focuses on the use of thesauri, this 
research  aims  at  investigating  the  use  of  ontologies  for  that  purpose,  their  semantic 
relationships usually being more numerous than those typically comprised in thesauri. 
As research context related data is widely available on the Semantic Web, the use of a 
research  context  ontology  for  query  expansion  is  examined.  More  specifically,  the 
domain of educational research serves as an example application area.  

The main research interest of this work is to investigate if ontologies such as the 
ones currently evolving in the Semantic Web are promising knowledge structures for 

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 919923, 2009. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 

C. Carstens 

the implementation of query expansion mechanisms in information retrieval systems. 
Furthermore, the following more-detailed research questions are addressed: 

(cid:129) Can ontologies generate added value in query expansion mechanisms, as compared 

to thesauri? 

(cid:129)  Which  ontological  relationships  are  most  useful  as  query  expansion  terms  for  the 

field of educational research? 

(cid:129) Which ontological query expansion terms are most suitable for which type of query 

terms (concept, project, person, organization queries)? 

(cid:129) Which ontological relationships are suitable for automatic query expansion; which 

for interactive query expansion? 

2   State of the Art 

In the Semantic Web, a large proportion of the data that is published is research context  related  data.  This  is  for  example  illustrated  by  the  datasets  of  the  ISWC  and 
ESWC  conferences1  and  the  data  of  the  AIFB  semantic  portal  of  the  University  of 
Karlsruhe2. For the purpose of publishing such data, the vocabulary of evolving standard ontologies such as SWRC [2], FOAF3 and SKOS4 can be used. 

While this semantically interpretable data can be easily retrieved with the help of 
formal query languages (data retrieval), the role that full-text search and information 
retrieval  play  on  the  Semantic  Web  is  still  an  open  research  issue  [3,  4].  One  step 
towards the integration of data and information retrieval is the augmentation of traditional search engine results with structured Semantic Web data. For example, this is 
achieved in the Semantic Search application by Guha et al. [5] and is also supported 
by Yahoo!s SearchMonkey initiative5. 

Another possible integration  of ontologies and  information retrieval is the  use of 
ontologically  structured  data  as  background  knowledge  for  the  implementation  of 
query  expansion  mechanisms  in  information  retrieval  systems.  Much  research  has 
already been conducted on the use of corpus-independent thesauri for this purpose [6, 
7, 8, 9]. This research has shown that thesaurus-based query expansion often induces 
an increase in recall, usually accompanied by a significant loss in precision. 

Taking a more detailed look at the effect of certain thesaurus relationships on the 
effectiveness of query expansion, Greenberg determined that synonyms and narrower 
terms are well suited for automatic query expansion, because they increased relative 
recall with a decline in precision that was not statistically significant [6]. This finding was further reinforced in her follow-up study focusing on the differences between 
automatic query expansion and interactive query expansion [7]. A more recent study 
by Navigli and Velardi examined the use of expansion terms derived from WordNet 
[10],  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  the  use  of  gloss  words  for  query  expansion 
achieved top scores for the precision@10 measure, outmatching query expansion by 
synsets and hyperonyms, for example. 

                                                                                              
1 http://data.semanticweb.org/dumps/ 
2 http://www.aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de/english 
3 http://www.foaf-project.org/ 
4 http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/ 
5 http://developer.yahoo.com/searchmonkey/ 
?

?

?
As in the aforementioned study, several other authors also refer to thesauri as ontologies in the context of query expansion, although these lightweight ontologies are 
mostly restricted to typical thesaurus relationships, namely synonyms, broader terms, 
narrower  terms  and  related  terms  [11].  Query  expansion  based  on  ontologies  with 
additional semantic relationships, by contrast, has yet to be studied extensively. 

3   Research Design 

In order to simulate the existence of Semantic Web data for the domain of educational 
research,  a  domain-specific  ontological  knowledge  base  is  created  in  the  first  step. 
The research context ontology (rescon) schema is modeled around the basic concepts 
person,  organization,  project  and  concept.  With  the  aim  of  representing  commonly 
used  Semantic  Web  relationships,  the  schema  partly  integrates  vocabulary  from  the 
FOAF, SWRC and SKOS ontologies, as illustrated in figure 1. This schema is instantiated  with  data  from  several  domain-specific,  structured  or  semi-structured  data 
sources,  resulting  in  a  total  of  27,082  concepts,  5,526  persons,  7,665  organizations 
and 540 projects. As shown in figure 1, the objects are interrelated by semantic relationships such as swrc:employs, skos:related and foaf:topic_interest.  

rescon:partOf

swrc:Organization

rescon:hasPredecessor
rescon:hasPredecessor

swrc:Project

rescon:partOf
rescon:partOf

rescon:hasSuccessor
rescon:hasSuccessor

swrc:employs

swrc:carriesOut

skos:isSubjectOf

foaf:Person

skos:Concept

foaf:topic_interest

rescon:synonymous

skos:narrower

skos:broader

skos:related

 

Fig. 1. Research context ontology schema 

In  the  second  step,  a  prototypical  retrieval  system  based  on  Lucene6  is  imple-
mented, incorporating both an automatic and an interactive mode for query expansion. 
Its configuration determines which ontology relationships are used for the generation 
of query expansion terms. 

In the automatic query expansion mode, the expansion terms are added directly to 
each of the original query terms  with the Boolean OR operator, before the query  is 
sent  to  the  Lucene  index.  This  is  known  as  the  building-block  strategy  [12].  In  the 
interactive  mode,  by  contrast,  the  system  generates  expansion  terms  as  suggestions 
that  are  presented  to  the  user,  who  can  then  decide  whether  or  not  to  make  use  of 
them  to  start  a  new  search.  Moreover,  the  user  has  the  option  to  either  broaden  the 
original query or to narrow it down with the Boolean AND and OR operators.  

The systems effectiveness is then measured in information retrieval experiments. 
This  evaluation  phase  consists  of  two  parts:  the  first  part  focuses  on  the  automatic 
query expansion mode, while the second part investigates the interactive mode. 
                                                                                              
6 http://lucene.apache.org/ 

C. Carstens 

In  the  automatic  mode,  different  ontology  relationships  are  used  sequentially  as 
query  expansion  terms  to  determine  how  they  affect  information  retrieval  effective-
ness.  This  can  be  evaluated  in  terms  of  the  standard  measures  recall  and  precision 
[13]. Depending on the type of query  be it a concept, a person, an organization or a 
project  the use of each semantic relationship as a query expansion term is analyzed 
sequentially. Accordingly, the concept query Musikunterricht (music lessons) can be 
expanded  by  the  synonym  Musikerziehung  (music  education),  the  related  term 
Tanzunterricht  (dance  lessons),  the  broader  term  Unterricht  (lessons)  and  the  narrower term Privatmusikunterricht (private music lessons).  

Compared to the automatic mode, the effectiveness of interactive retrieval systems 
is  more  difficult  to  evaluate,  because  the  systems  effect  is  difficult  to  isolate  from 
other variables,  such as  user  influences [14:15]. To circumvent this problem, a prequestionnaire is used to record data about the search experience and the topic-related 
knowledge of the participants. In a between-groups design, one group of users works 
with  a  baseline  retrieval  system  while  another  group  works  with  the  ontology  enhanced  system.  As  in  the  final  TREC  Interactive  Track  experiments  [14],  users  are 
given realistic tasks to accomplish, such as to identify documents that give evidence 
of the cooperation of two organizations, for example. Comparable topics are defined 
for each of the different types of queries. Finally, it is possible to analyze which group 
accomplishes  the  tasks  most  effectively  based  on  the  number  of  result  documents 
gathered in a certain time frame and the number of steps necessary for collecting the 
result documents.  

This  research  setup  makes  it  possible  to  identify  which  ontological  relations  are 
most suitable for which query expansion mode, which relations are most effective as 
query expansion terms for the domain under consideration, which relations are most 
effective for certain query types, and if ontological relations can generate added value 
compared to thesaurus relations. Although the experiments apply to one specific do-
main,  it  can  be  expected  that  the  results  on  the  use  of  relationships  from  a  general 
research context ontology may be at least partly transferable to other domains. 

4   Preliminary Results and Outlook 

At  the  current  stage,  a  pre-test  for  the  automatic  mode  has  been  conducted,  which 
already has some implications for the design of further experiments. For this pre-test, 
an  excerpt  from  the  German  Education  Index7,  a  bibliographic  database  for  the  domain of educational research, served as a test corpus. Its 215,948 documents were all 
in  German  and  contained  full-text  abstracts.  A  Lucene  index  was  built  using  the 
document  fields  abstract,  title  and  subtitle.  The  intellectually  assigned  keywords  of 
the documents served as relevancy judgments. As these keywords were restricted to 
terms  of  the  type  concept,  only  the  relations  synonymous  (SYN),  narrower  (NT), 
broader (BT) and related (RT) have been used sequentially as query expansion terms 
in  this  experiment.  The  average  effects  of  these  relations  on  information  retrieval 
effectiveness are listed in table 18. On the  whole, this experiment took into account 
3,067 SYN, 1,404 NT, 1,625 BT and 1,013 RT expansion terms.  

                                                                                              
7 http://www.fachportal-paedagogik.de/start_e.html 
8 Expansion terms that did not occur in the test corpus were excluded from this calculation. 
?

?

?
Table 1. Average influence of expansion terms on retrieval effectiveness (rounded) 

 

Average recall deviation from baseline query 
Average precision deviation from baseline query

+ 8 % 
- 5% 

+ 1% 
- 3% 

+ 15% 
- 38% 

+ 5% 
- 15% 

These preliminary results are in line with the results attained by Greenberg [6] insofar  as  they  show  that  query  expansion  with  semantic  relationships  can  induce  an 
increase in recall. Nevertheless, Greenberg reports a much higher increase in recall, 
up to nearly one quarter. This difference may be due to the fact that certain expansion 
terms  only  scarcely  occur  in  the  test  corpus,  thereby  not  permitting  the  expanded 
query to detect a high number of additional relevant documents. Therefore, the corpus 
frequency of the expansion terms will be taken into account in further calculations.  

These pre-test experiences will inspire the more comprehensive upcoming experi-
ments.  By  applying  further  evaluation  measures,  such  as  the  precision  at  different 
ranks, and by studying user influences in the interactive mode, they can be expected 
to produce even more meaningful results in practice.  
