The XMediaBox: Sensemaking through the Use

of Knowledge Lenses

Aba-Sah Dadzie1, Jos e Iria1, Daniela Petrelli2, and Lei Xia1

1 Dept. of Computer Science
2 Dept. of Information Studies

The University of Sheffield

{a.dadzie,j.iria,d.petrelli,l.xia}@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract. Sensemaking is the process of analysing complex situations
in order to make informed decisions. Semantic Web technology can be
effectively used to create new sensemaking systems that focus on concepts and knowledge instead of documents. We demonstrate how this is
achieved using information extraction to acquire knowledge and create
a semantic repository that can then be semantically searched. A domain
ontology is used to support the creation of an analysis tree; the semantic
visualisation enables knowledge discovery, a core aspect of sensemaking.

Keywords: Semantic web, Knowledge acquisition, Semantic visualisa-
tion, Sensemaking.

1 Background

Sensemaking is the process of analysing complex and uncertain situations in
order to take informed decisions [1]. It requires knowledge workers to find relevant information and formulate hypotheses based on the knowledge contained,
test the hypotheses and revise the effectiveness of the decisions adopted. While
some systems support only document manipulation in sensemaking (e.g., [2]),
the X-Media project [3] uses Semantic Web (SW) technology and ontology-based
visualisation to enable abstraction from the low level of multiple instances and
more easily compose a conceptual model of a situation. Knowledge acquisition
and retrieval, and visualisation are basic components of semantic sensemaking.
Knowledge acquisition (KA) transforms information into knowledge via classification and extraction. While information is heterogeneous and dispersed, coming from many sources, e.g., text documents, images, tables, etc., knowledge is
homogeneous and instantiates concepts and relations captured in domain on-
tologies. In knowledge retrieval, users search knowledge repositories to find those
missing elements that would improve their understanding of the current situa-
tion. Knowledge visualisation supports visual thinking by explicitly laying out
the retrieved knowledge, information and personal reflections.

We demonstrate the steps we follow during analysis using the XMediaBox,
developed as part of X-Media, using a non-restricted dataset. The XMediaBox
has also been evaluated with experts in a realistic, knowledge-intensive setting:
aerospace engineers working on gas turbine engines [4].

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 811815, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

A.-S. Dadzie et al.

2 Semantic Web for Sensemaking

We make use of SW technologies in three ways, by: i) capturing knowledge from
archive documents via automated KA from multimedia; ii) searching archive
information via hybrid search (semantic and keyword-based); and iii) visualising
knowledge-in-context to support visual thinking.

2.1 Capturing Knowledge

A wealth of information is hidden within unstructured text, image, and mixedmedia content. Information Extraction (IE) from text produces a semantic representation of the information (entities and relations) expressed in the text in
natural language. Analogously, Content Based Image Retrieval systems produce
a semantic representation of image content. Our applications represent information using ontologies; in particular, we use the Core Ontology of Multimedia
(COMM) [5] to represent the knowledge captured from multimedia documents.
We use state-of-the-art algorithms from the IE and IR (information retrieval)
literature in addition to rule- and machine learning-based approaches (Saxon
[6], T-Rex [7]) to extract knowledge from single and multiple media documents.
We perform entity recognition and relation extraction from text and region-
of-interest classification from images to populate the knowledge repository ([8]
details our approach). Fig. 1 shows an example of the semi-structured, multimedia documents analysed in X-Media, with (form) fields mapping to concepts in
the domain ontology and images whose content may be described in the text.

2.2 Searching Knowledge

The KA step creates a knowledge base (KB) that the user can search using specific tools. We will demonstrate a hybrid search engine that combines ontologyand keyword-based searching to increase the effectiveness of retrieval [9]. The
knowledge retrieved and associated documents may be inspected by the user,
who decides relevance to the current analysis. Adding the knowledge retrieved
into the ongoing sensemaking scenario enriches the metadata attached to it, and
as a result, the knowledge captured in the KB. This also aids data categorisation,
leading to more accurate retrieval across different media and document types.

2.3 Visualising Knowledge

Information visualisation provides effective support for intuitive analysis [10] and
understanding of ontology structure [11] and ontology-based information. In X-
Media we go a step further and provide multiple ways of visualising knowledge
in order to support better understanding of complex scenarios. We have developed Knowledge Lenses, alternative views on the underlying data that support
different levels of abstraction. Each knowledge lens has a different focus: the
interconnections between knowledge in documents, human understanding (via
notes), or the knowledge in the semantic repository. The semantics behind the
data enable a smooth transfer from document to knowledge to personal notes.
?

?

?
Fig. 1. A definition form in the XMediaBox (top, left) maps form fields to relevant
concepts in the domain ontology. The interactive table (top, right) contains users
thoughts linked to evidence. The panel at the bottom is used to bookmark and share
knowledge objects. Two examples of the data referenced within the system are shown.

3 Sensemaking via Knowledge Lenses

The sensemaking process within the XMediaBox is articulated in several steps,
each providing a different view on the current situation and related information.
Each step corresponds to a tab on the user interface (see the top of Fig 1:
status, search, analysis and closure). The sensemaking process may span several
months; however it always begins by defining the purpose of the investigation. A
definition form contextualises the issue using selected domain ontology concepts.
The information input by the user initialises a search of legacy corpora and other
pertinent repositories to identify information relevant to the current case. The
documents retrieved may be inspected and, if found to be relevant, bookmarked
for future use, for e.g., as evidence to support a hypothesis.

As the sensemaking progresses evidence is collected and users understanding
develops. The status of the investigation is recorded using interactive tables (see
Fig. 1), contextualising the implicit knowledge embedded in the documents using free text and semantic annotation via ontologies. The tables summarise the
knowledge exploration, supporting sharing with other knowledge workers.

While search is an activity carried out only when the user needs to collect new
evidence, analysis, which is the core of sensemaking, is sustained throughout the
process. User understanding is built up during the systematic analysis of evidence
and counter-evidence, and on the evaluation of which hypotheses explain the
phenomena observed. The XMediaBox captures this rationalisation process in
the interactive analysis tree (see top, Fig. 2) that helps users formulate new and
analyse existing hypotheses. The system supports users in building the analysis
tree from suggestions in the domain ontology, focusing on the relations hasCause
(with inverse hasEffect), and subpart and isA relations between physical objects.

A.-S. Dadzie et al.

Fig. 2. Two knowledge lenses based on a domain ontology. The knowledge tree (top)
provides structured visual analysis, and the knowledge graph (bottom) clusters hypotheses with evidence in common, simultaneously highlighting outliers. Attaching evidence
to nodes tags them with the corresponding hypotheses, enriching the metadata and
leading to more effective knowledge creation, categorisation, retrieval and reuse. [The
modules were built using the prefuse visualisation toolkit (http://prefuse.org)].

Relevant documents, snippets of evidence and comments retrieved from the
KB or created within the system may be attached to each (cause/hypothesis)
node in the tree during the sensemaking process, creating an individual perspective on the hypotheses being investigated and the resulting knowledge space. The
knowledge lens thus created supports pattern spotting, helping users determine
which branch in the investigation contains the more valid hypothesis and which
others need further investigation. Attaching the multimedia document in Fig. 2
to the node brake cable indicates that it contains evidence that the hypothesis
failure of the brake cable may be the root cause of the issue. Extracting a snippet that links the concept component to disc brake with the relation removed
(with a record of its provenance), is equivalent to manually annotating the document content. Both actions update the metadata in the knowledge repository;
subsequent searches on the ontology concepts will retrieve this document.

While the knowledge tree provides a structured view of the knowledge space for
the current analysis, the knowledge graph provides a more complete overview of
the relationships between the hypotheses (concepts of interest) and the knowledge and annotated evidence. The knowledge graph serves as an alternative,
less restricted view on the knowledge space, showing interconnections between
evidence that may not be easily identified otherwise. It further supports the discovery of existing, but not yet identified knowledge during exploratory analysis,
by providing a means for browsing the contents of the knowledge repository.

A prototype of the XMediaBox has been evaluated by 12 aerospace engineers
during a simulation of a sensemaking activity using a grounded, domain-specific
?

?

?
scenario [4]. Documents fed into the knowledge capture phase used multiple
formats: text only, images only, or multimedia  both text and images. The
documents formed part of a very large company archive, processed using the
KA techniques summarised. Guided by ontology-based suggestions, the engineers
extended an analysis tree, populated the tree with the factual evidence retrieved,
and recorded their understanding of the knowledge space created. The evaluation
showed that Semantic Web technology effectively supports different levels of
abstraction: table summaries, tree analysis and exploratory graphs, shifting the
sensemaking activity from document manipulation and management to a higher
conceptual level, that of knowledge management and discovery.

Acknowledgements
The research described in this paper is funded by the X-Media project, sponsored
by the European Commission as part of the Information Society Technologies
(IST) programme under EC grant number ISTFP6-026978. Thanks also to Fabio
Ciravegna for the invaluable discussions and contributions to the paper.
