Semanta  Semantic Email in Action 

Simon Scerri, Ioana Giurgiu, Brian Davis, and Siegfried Handschuh 

Digitial Enterprise Research Institute, 

National University of Ireland Galway, IDA Business Park, Galway, Ireland 

{simon.scerri,ioana.giurgiu,brian.davis, 

siegfried.handschuh}@deri.org 

Abstract. Semanta is a system supporting Semantic Email, implemented as an 
add-in to two popular Mail User Agents, using existing email transport technology  and  integrated  with  the  Social  Semantic  Desktop.  It  enables  machines  to 
support email users  with correctly interpreting, handling and keeping track of 
action items within email messages, visualizing email workflows, and extracting tasks and appointments from email messages.  

Keywords: Semantic Email, Email Workflows, Speech Act Theory. 

1   Introduction 

Recent surveys have shown that about 80% of knowledge workers prefer emails as a 
business communication tool1. However email has been known to present knowledge 
management  problems  for  its  users,  who  become  overwhelmed  with  the  tasks  they 
need to perform and keep track of, eventually resulting in their failure to keep up with 
the ongoing email workflows whilst gaining a loss in productivity. We do not restrict 
email use, but support its management by providing structure and semantics to email's 
characteristic ad-hoc workflows. In supporting these workflows, we support the users. 
In our approach, the content of an email message can be summarized into a number of 
Action  Items  (e.g.  Meeting  Request,  Task  Assignment,  File  Request  etc.).  Once  ex-
changed, every single action item can be seen as the start, or continuation of a separate  workflow.  We  have  presented  the  theoretical  ideas  behind  the  sMail  (Semantic 
Email) Framework in detail in previous work [1], and demonstrated [2] how Semantic 
Email can perform an important role in the social fabric of the Social Semantic Desktop [3]. We will now demonstrate the usefulness of its implementation - Semanta, via 
a common email exchange scenario between two knowledge workers, after an insight 
into related work and the systems architecture. 

2   Related Work 

The notion of Semantic Email was originally introduced by Dowell et. al. [4] to refer 
to  an  email  message  consisting  of  a  structured  query  coupled  with  corresponding  
                                                           
1 http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-100628406.html 

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 883887, 2009. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 

S. Scerri et al. 

explanatory text, based on a number of Semantic Email Processes that represent commonly  occurring  workflows  within  email.  The  system,  successfully  implemented 
within Mangrove [5], provided templates which exposed structured knowledge about 
these  scenarios  to  both  humans  and  machines.  Semanta  is  more  flexible,  since  although we do provide templates, our approach is more oriented towards ad-hoc email 
processes,  i.e.  we  support  email  workflows  as  they  evolve,  without  restricting  the 
users  actions  whatsoever.  We  also  apply  Speech  Act  Theory  [6]  to  provide  more 
adequate representation of email action items. Although the same theory was applied 
to email beforehand  particularly to address the problems of email task management 
[7][8] and email classification [9][10][11]; it was never combined with semantic tech-
nologies.  We  represent  action  items  by  speech  act  instances  from  within  the  sMail 
Ontology2. Furthermore, by grounding Semanta within the Nepomuk3 Social Semantic Desktop, semantic knowledge obtained from email is integrated  with that on the 
semantic desktop so that other applications can re-use it.  

3   Semanta 

The following is a very brief overview of Semantas architecture, which consists of   
four main components:- 

  Text Analytics Service - provides semi-automatic annotation of email con-

tent by employing Ontology-Based Information techniques via the use of the 
GATE Framework [12] and the Jape Patterns Engine [13] 

  Social Semantic Desktop - provides an RDF store that Semanta can read and 
write to, and the conceptual modelling required for Semantic Email data to 
be integrated in the Semantic Desktop knowledge base. 

  Simplistic Graphical User Interface - abstracts theoretical models and semantics 
from the user beneath add-ins to popular Mail User Agents (Outlook, Thunderbird). 
  Semantic Email Service  Exposes knowledge in the sMail Framework to 
Semanta and serves as the link between the GUI and the other components 

4   Scenario 

We highlight the support for ad-hoc email workflows provided by Semanta via a typical email exchange scenario4 between two (more participants are supported) hypothetical colleagues - Claudia and Dirk. Claudia proceeds to write an email via Microsoft 
Outlook,  her  preferred  email  client.  When  she  is  done,  Semanta  attempts  automatic 
annotation of action items in the content, and finds two action items: 

1.  How is the review report going? - an Information Request addressed to Dirk 
2.  Can  we  discuss  the  review  tomorrow  afternoon?  -  a    Meeting  Request  be-

tween Claudia and Dirk addressed to Dirk 

                                                           
2 http://ontologies.smile.deri.ie/smail# 
3 http://www.nepomuk.semanticdesktop.org/ 
4 More demonstrations available at  http://smile.deri.ie/projects/semanta/#Demonstrations 
?

?

?
 Although Claudia is happy with these annota-
tions, she can change or create annotations via 
the  Semanta  Annotation  Wizard.  The  latter 
assists  the  user  with  the  intuitive,  step-by-step 
construction or modification of semantic annotations representing action items (Fig. 1). When  
Claudia sends the email, metadata is invisib ly 
transported  alongside  the  email  content  in  the 
email  headers.  When  Dirk  receives  the  email, 
Semanta detects action items within and flags it 
appropriately  in  the  inbox.  After  opening  it, 
Dirk  can  react  to  the  action  items  via  a  right 
mouse click. Depending on its type, the user is 
given a number of appropriate options. In Fig. 
2, Dirk has reacted to the Information Request 
by providing the required information (So far, 
so  good).  As  regards  the  Meeting  Request 
apart  from  approving,  ignoring,  declining  or 
amending  it,  Dirk  can  react  in  any  other  way 
via  the  Other..  option.  In  fact  Dirk  wants  to 
question the purpose of the meeting. The annotation wizard is shown right away so that Dirk 
can choose an action (e.g. Request Information) 
and provide text for this action (What is there 
to  be  discussed?).  This  constitutes  an  additional  action  item  in  this  ad-hoc  email  workflow.  When  Dirk  closes  the  incoming 
email,  its  semantic  representation  on  his  desktop  is  updated,  and  a  reply  email  is 
automatically sent back to Claudia.  

Fig. 1. Annotation Wizard 

 

Claudia replies to Dirks question and although he acknowledges her reply, he forgets  to  reconsider  her  meeting  request.  This  is  a  frequent  email  problem  hindering 
collaborative  work,  but  it  can  be  addressed  by 
Semantas  Action  Item  Tracker.  Dirk  uses  the 
tracker to view all action items he received but 
still needs to process, via the Pending Incoming  Item  view.  One  of  these  items  represents 
Claudias  Meeting  Request  (Fig.  3).  Action 
items are shown in the context of the workflow 
that  they  belong  to.  In  the  Context  pane  on 
the  right,  Dirk  can  see  that  he  reacted  to  this 
request by asking for more information regarding  the  event  (What  is  there  to  be  dis-
cussed?).  He  also  sees  that  although  Claudia 
replied  to  the  latter  request  (The  way  for-
ward!),  he  forgot  to  reconsider  the  meeting 
proposal.  After  making  up  his  mind,  he  opens 
the  containing  email  directly  from  the  tracker 
and accepts the Meeting Request. 

Fig. 2. Processing Incoming Email 

S. Scerri et al. 

 

Fig. 3. Semanta's Action Item Tracker, visualizing email workflows 

When Dirk accepts the meeting, Semanta detects that an event involving Dirk has 
been generated (Fig. 4). Dirk can either dismiss detected events/tasks, or add them to 
his Outlook Calendar/Tasklist. Dirk chooses to add the event to his calendar, whereby 
the semi-populated, native Outlook Appointment Item creation window is brought up. 
The subject of this appointment item is obtained from the text of the original Meeting 
Request followed by the text of Dirks Meeting Approval. The meeting attendees for 
this appointment are known given the semantic annotation for the Meeting Request as 
shown in annotation 2 at the start of our scenario. Dirks meeting approval also triggers an automatic email reply notifying Claudia that her  meeting proposal has been 
approved. When Claudia reads this email, she is also assisted with the addition of this 
event to her calendar.  

The  objects  involved  in  this  email  exchange 
and  their  relationships  are  represented  semantically  using  the  Social  Semantic  Desktop  ontolo-
gies5,  e.g.  the  emails  (nmo:Email),  the  action 
items  (smail:SpeechAct),  the  appointment  item 
(ncal:Event),  Claudia/Dirk  (nco:Contact),  etc.  In 
Fig.  3  we  saw  how  semantic  relationships  between action items in email  workflows and their 
relationship  to  the  messages  used  to  carry  out 
these  workflows  can  be  utilised  for  the  users 
benefit. Semanta provides three other useful functions    the  Related  Email  button  directly  loads 
the email that generated the appointment from within the appointment item window; 
the  Related  Activity  button  points  back  to  the  generated  appointment  from  within 
the  email;  and  the  Previous  Email  button  enables  Dirk  to  traverse  up  the  email 
thread.  

Fig. 4. Event Detection 

 

5   Conclusion 

We  have  demonstrated  how  Semanta  -  a  fully-implemented  system  supporting  Semantic  Email,  can  assist  the  user  with  the  execution  of  previously  implicit  ad-hoc 
                                                           
5 http://www.semanticdesktop.org/ontologies/ 
?

?

?
email workflows. By exposing knowledge about email messages, contacts involved, 
action  items  within  and  the  workflows  they  generate,  resulting  events  and  tasks,  as 
well as their relationships to machines, the user can be assisted with better managing 
their email use. Furthermore, the integration of Semanta within the Social Semantic 
Desktop  means  that  the  aggregated  semantic  knowledge  is  immediately  exposed  to 
other desktop applications. The results of an initial evaluation [14] show that its support for semantic email processes is applicable to everyday email  usage, and that  it 
does not constrain the conventional ways in which people tend to use email.  

 

Acknowledgments.  The  work  presented  in  this  paper  was  supported  (in  part)  by  
the  Lion  project  supported  by  Science  Foundation  Ireland  under  Grant  No. 
SFI/02/CE1/I131 and (in part) by the European project NEPOMUK No FP6-027705. 
