Cupboard  A Place to Expose Your Ontologies

to Applications and the Community

Mathieu dAquin1 and Holger Lewen2

1 Knowledge Media Institute (KMi), The Open University, United Kingdom

2 Institute AIFB, Universitat Karlsruhe (TH), Germany

m.daquin@open.ac.uk

lewen@aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de

Abstract. In this demo, we present the Cupboard system for ontology
publishing, sharing and reuse. This system is intended to support both
ontology engineers and ontology users/practitioners. For the developers
of ontologies, it offers a complete infrastructure to host their ontologies
in online ontology spaces, providing mechanisms to describe, manage and
effectively exploit these ontologies (through APIs). Furthermore, these
ontologies are then exposed to the community, providing users with a
complete, friendly environment to find, assess and reuse ontologies.

1 Introduction

In the recent years, there has been an ever-increasing amount of ontologies indexed by ontology search engines such as Watson1. Yet, even with so many
ontologies now available to reuse, the tasks of finding, assessing and effectively
making use of existing ontologies remain difficult. We argue that the main factor
inhibiting ontology reuse relates to the lack of support for ontology practitioners
to find, assess and exploit existing ontologies, and incidentally to the lack of
support for ontology engineers to effectively deploy and expose their ontologies
for use and reuse.

Ontology search engines provide a partial answer to this problem, as they support users in finding, selecting and, in some cases, using ontologies (see e.g., [1]).
However, they still lack mechanisms for assessing ontologies, for providing rich
ontology metadata, for providing alignments between ontologies, etc. In other
terms, they only focus on providing the ontologies, without leaving ontology publishers and users any control or any possibility of interaction among themselves
and with the ontologies. In addition, there have been several initiatives coming
up with ontology repositories lately (see e.g., [2,3]). However, these systems are
generally limited in their scope (e.g., considering only a particular domain or a
particular type of ontologies) and leave only little control to the user over the
ontology publication process.

 This work was partially supported by the European Commission in the IST project

NeOn (IST-2006-027595).

1 http://watson.kmi.open.ac.uk

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 913918, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

M. dAquin and H. Lewen

Apart from the Watson ontology search engine already mentioned, the NeOn
project2 is developing a number of technologies that, if put together and integrated in a broader system, can provide a more comprehensive answer to the
aforementioned problem. More specifically, Oyster [4] is a peer-to-peer ontology
sharing system which relies on rich metadata for ontologies, using the OMV format [5]. The alignment server [6] is an open system dedicated to the creation,
management and evaluation of ontology alignments. In addition, a topic specific
open rating system (TS-ORS) [7] for ontologies is being developed to allow users
to review different properties of ontologies and to express trust in reviewers.

In this demo, we present Cupboard, an online system that relies on these
components and integrates them to provide a complete and friendly environment for ontology publishing, sharing and reuse. One of the most important
questions addressed in this development concerns the incentives provided for an
ontology engineer to share his/her ontology and invest the time to properly add
it to a repository. For many users, setting up their own server infrastructure,
generating search indexes and setting up SPARQL-endpoints was quite a cumbersome task. Cupboard does not only allow users to add their ontologies in a
personal space, but actually indexes them (using the Watson engine), provides
mechanism to link them (using the Alignment Server), hosts them and exposes
them through APIs and SPARQL, thus offering the infrastructure for engineers
to actually deploy their ontologies with minimal efforts. Moreover, Cupboard
is designed to be a community tool, helping ontology users and practitioners
(including ontology developers) in finding and reusing ontologies, through the
use of rich ontology metadata (thanks to Oyster and OMV) and to advanced
ontology review mechanisms (using the TS-ORS system).

2 The Cupboard System

Cupboard is different from classical ontology repository systems as it does not
provide one single space where ontologies are exposed. On the contrary, each
user can create his/her own ontology space, containing the ontologies he/she has
selected. In a sense, Cupboard can be seen more as a system to host ontology
repositories, than as an ontology repository itself.

2.1 Overview

The main advantage in relying on this notion of ontology spaces is that each
ontology space virtually implements a complete infrastructure for building semantic applications. Indeed, each uploaded ontology is automatically indexed
using the Watson engine. Watson is designed to be an ontology search engine,
but focuses on providing the necessary access mechanisms (through services,
APIs, SPARQL, etc.) to enable semantic applications to dynamically exploit
ontologies made available online (see [1]). In Cupboard, each ontology space

2 http://neon-project.org
?

?

?
becomes like a little Watson, making it possible for developers to easily build
applications exploiting the exposed ontologies.

However, for ontology and application developers, Cupboards ontology spaces
should do more than listing ontologies. To be used jointly in applications, ontologies have to be related with each other. Using the Alignment Server [6] as
a core component, Cupboard allows users to populate their ontology spaces not
only with ontologies, but also with alignments (mappings). Using the Alignment
[6], alignments can be uploaded for a given (pair of) ontology(ies). The
Format
Alignment server then offers to Cupboard the necessary features to support the
management, evaluation, and even production of alignments.

Uploading an ontology into Cupboard is not only a way to build applications,
but also a way to share this ontology with the community for reuse. It is therefore
important to provide efficient ways for users to find, assess and select ontologies
in Cupboards ontology spaces. The system naturally inherits the powerful search
mechanisms implemented in the Watson engine. In addition, information for
example on the provenance of the ontology or the methodology used to build
it are essential for ontology selection. Cupboard relies on the Oyster system [4]
to provide users with the possibility to enter rich metadata about ontologies (in
the OMV format [5]) and to manage these metadata.

Finally, one of the most important issues hampering reuse concerns the evaluation of ontologies. In Cupboard, we intend to exploit the community feature
of the system, so that users can provide precise reviews on ontologies (reviewing
separately different characteristics, like reusability, complexity, coverage, etc.)
The TS-ORS System [7], used to handle and manage these reviews, implements
a mechanism to rank ontologies according to these evaluations. However, reviews are subjective evaluations, as users might have different views on ontolo-
gies. When searching for an ontology to reuse, not only the review information
should be exploited to support the user, but also the information about how
much he/she would trust a particular review or a particular reviewer. Such trust
information is obtained through the classical Did you find this review useful?
question, and handled by the TS-ORS system to compute trust information used
to personalize ontology ranking.

Figure 1 shows different parts of the Web interface of Cupboard, in particular
displaying an ontology space, uploading an ontology, inspecting and searching
the content of a particular ontology, reviewing it, etc.

2.2 Architecture

While the different technologies employed and combined in the system have been
described and implemented before, Cupboard provides homogeneous (user and
programming) interfaces to these components and features. The main challenges
during integration were defining the interfaces between components, optimizing
the performance and generating an easy-to-use Web interface. However, this
has been made easier by the fact that the integrated systems are designed to
work as independent, remote components, resulting in a naturally distributed
architecture for Cupboard.

M. dAquin and H. Lewen

p

l

o

a

d

e

v

i

e
w

O n t o l o g y S p a c e

e

t

a

d

a

t

a

x

p

l

o

r

e

Fig. 1. Screenshots of some components of the Cupboard Web interface

As depicted in Figure 2, the central component of Cupboard is a specifically
made component, called the Cupboard core, which is in charge of orchestrating the interaction between all the other components, external applications and
users. It heavily relies on the Watson engine to provide basic functionalities such
as storing the ontologies, indexing them for search, validating them and exposing them to applications. The TS-ORS open rating system, the Oyster ontology
metadata sharing system and the Alignment Server each provide specific functionalities to the system, that are federated and exposed in an homogeneous way
to the Cupboard Web interface and APIs, through the Cupboard core.

Watson Search Interface

Watson API

Align API

Cupboard Web Interface

Cupboard API

Cupboard Core Component

Ontologies

Alignments

(meta)reviews

Watson
Indexer

Watson
Services

Alignment

Server

Oyster

TS-ORS

Ontology
Indexes

Alignment

Base

Ontology
Metadata
Registry

Review
and Trust

info.

Fig. 2. Cupboards architecture
?

?

?
3 Demonstration and Availability

In the demonstration, users will learn how to use Cupboard, to upload, expose
and explore their ontologies, as well as to find, select, reuse and assess other
users ontologies. They will learn about the benefits of using Cupboard through a
variety of concrete, real-life scenarios, supporting different user groups (ontology
engineers, application developers, ontology publishers, etc.) in tackling different
tasks (ontology sharing, reuse, application, evaluation, etc.).

At the time of writing, Cupboard is being tested by a selected group of users.
It will be made openly available (at http://cupboard.open.ac.uk) by June
2009, allowing users to register and create their own ontology spaces. At a later
stage, Cupboard will also be distributed as an open source system, to allow organizations to deploy their own Cupboard servers, in case for example intellectual
property restrictions prevent them from sharing their ontologies online.

4 Conclusion

In this document, we presented Cupboard, an online ontology publishing and
sharing environment that addresses two major problems faced by the Semantic
Web community: the deployment of inter-linked ontologies for exploitation in
applications, often requiring heavy infrastructures, and the reuse of existing ontologies where, besides search mechanisms, rich metadata and proper assessment
of the ontologies are required. To tackle these problems, we propose a complete
system, based on a number of well-established technologies, allowing ontology
engineers to deploy their ontologies, providing the necessary infrastructures to
support their exploitation, and ontology users in reusing available knowledge,
providing essential, community-based functionalities to facilitate the search, selection and exploitation of the available ontologies. To the best of our knowledge,
Cupboard is the first system to put together all these functionalities to create
an essential infrastructure component for Semantic Web developers and more
generally, a useful, shared and open environment for the ontology community.
