Using Partial Reference Alignments to Align Ontologies

Patrick Lambrix and Qiang Liu

Department of Computer and Information Science

Link opings universitet

581 83 Link oping, Sweden

Abstract. In different areas ontologies have been developed and many of these
ontologies contain overlapping information. Often we would therefore want to
be able to use multiple ontologies. To obtain good results, we need to find the
relationships between terms in the different ontologies, i.e. we need to align them.
Currently, there already exist a number of ontology alignment systems. In
these systems an alignment is computed from scratch. However, recently, some
situations have occurred where a partial reference alignment is available, i.e.
some of the correct mappings between terms are given or have been obtained.
In this paper we investigate whether and how a partial reference alignment can
be used in ontology alignment. We use partial reference alignments to partition
ontologies, to compute similarities between terms and to filter mapping sugges-
tions. We test the approaches on previously developed gold standards and discuss
the results.

1 Introduction

In recent years many ontologies have been developed. The benefits of using ontologies
include reuse, sharing and portability of knowledge across platforms, and improved
documentation, maintenance, and reliability (e.g. [5]). Ontologies lead to a better understanding of a field and to more effective and efficient handling of information in
that field. Many of the currently developed ontologies contain overlapping information.
For instance, Open Biomedical Ontologies (OBO, http://www.obofoundry.org/) lists 26
different anatomy ontologies (October 2008). Often we would want to be able to use
multiple ontologies. For instance, companies may want to use community standard ontologies and use them together with company-specific ontologies. Applications may
need to use ontologies from different areas or from different views on one area. Ontology builders may want to use already existing ontologies as the basis for the creation
of new ontologies by extending the existing ontologies or by combining knowledge
from different smaller ontologies. In each of these cases it is important to know the
relationships between the terms in the different ontologies. Further, the data in different
data sources in the same domain may have been annotated with different but similar
ontologies. Knowledge of the inter-ontology relationships would in this case lead to
improvements in search, integration and analysis of data. It has been realized that this
is a major issue and much research has recently been done on ontology alignment, i.e.
finding mappings between terms in different ontologies (e.g. [4]).

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 188202, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009
?

?

?
In the current alignment systems an alignment is computed from scratch. However,
recently, some situations have occurred where a partial reference alignment is avail-
able, i.e. some of the correct mappings between terms are given or have been obtained.
One example is the development of Bioportal (bioportal.bioontology.org, [13]) where
mappings between different ontologies in the biomedical domain have been collected.
Bioportal also supports collaborative ontology alignment (one of the challenges for ontology alignment described in [15]) where experts can focus on their piece of expertise.
In this case for some parts of the ontologies mappings will be available while they are
still lacking for other parts of the ontologies. Another situation is an iterative ontology
alignment methodology where people and ontology alignment systems interact to iteratively align and improve the quality of the mappings. In systems such as SAMBO
[7], users can input their own mappings as well as accept or reject mapping suggestions generated by the system. Both the mappings given by the users and the rejection and acceptance of system-generated mappings by users influence future iterations
of ontology alignment. Finally, the Ontology Alignment Evaluation Initiative (OAEI,
http://oaei.ontologymatching.org/) introduced in 2008 a new task in the Anatomy track
[10] where a partial reference alignment was given and participating systems could use
the partial reference alignment to improve the quality of their mapping suggestions.

In this paper we investigate whether and how a partial reference alignment (PRA) can
be used in ontology alignment. We use PRAs in the different steps of ontology align-
ment. We use PRAs in a preprocessing step to partition the ontologies into mappable
parts that are likely to contain correct mappings and therefore not every term in the
first ontology needs to be compared to every term in the second ontology. We also use
PRAs in the computation of similarities between terms. Further, we use PRAs to filter
mapping suggestions. We test the approaches on previously developed gold standards
(from [7] and the Anatomy track of OAEI) and discuss the results.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we give background information. We describe a framework for ontology alignment as well as the
systems, the gold standards and the evaluation measures that we have used in our ex-
periments. The experiments are described in section 3. We investigate the use of PRAs
in the different components of the ontology alignment framework. We also investigate
the influence of the size of the PRA on the quality of the alignments. The results of
the experiments are shown and discussed in section 4. The paper concludes in section 5.

2 Background

2.1 Ontology Alignment

A large number of ontology alignment systems have been developed (see, for instance,
review papers [7,14,12,6], the book [4] on ontology matching, and the ontology matching web site at http://www.ontologymatching.org/). Many ontology alignment systems
are based on the computation of similarity values between terms in different ontologies
and can be described as instantiations of the general framework in figure 1. The framework consists of two parts. The first part (I in figure 1) computes mapping suggestions.
The second part (II) interacts with the user to decide on the final alignment.

P. Lambrix and Q. Liu

