Supporting the Reuse of Global Unique
Identifiers for Individuals in OWL/RDF

Knowledge Bases

Xin Liu1, Heiko Stoermer1, Paolo Bouquet1, and Shu Wang2

1 University of Trento

Department of Information Science and Engineering,

{liu,stoermer,bouquet}@disi.unitn.it

Trento, Italy

2 Jilin University

Department of Computer Science and Technology,

Chang Chun, Ji Lin, China

wangshu83@gmail.com

Abstract. In the current state of Semantic Web knowledge represen-
tation, it is fairly common that individuals in ontologies have different
identifiers even if they are meant to denote the same object in the real
world. This makes data integration at the level of individuals quite diffi-
cult. In this demonstration, we show two plug-ins called Okkam4N and
Okkam4P developed for the NeOn Toolkit and Prot eg e software respec-
tively, which support the reuse of globally unique identifiers for individuals in OWL/RDF knowledge bases. The key idea is that users are given a
chance to look for an existing URI in the publicly available Entity Name
System for the corresponding individual in the local OWL/RDF knowledge bases. They are available and tested for the latest official release
versions, the NeOn Toolkit 1.2 and Prot eg e 3.4.

1 Introduction

One of the major problems that have emerged in the Semantic Web(SW) effort is
the problem of uniquely identifying entities [1], or individuals on OWL terms.
Entities play a major role for the SW since they represent atomic objects of
reference and reasoning. Nevertheless, we currently face the problem of uniquely
identifying and referencing these entities, which prohibits us from making the
next step towards the goal of the SW, that of reasoning about entities in a
globally distributed knowledge base. The problem derives from the fact that
different users, or systems, assign and use different identifiers for the same realworld entity. As a result, we cannot effectively reason about this entity, exactly
because it is not consistently being assigned the same identifier across distributed
data sources.
 This work is partially supported by the FP7 EU Large-scale Integrating Project
OKKAM  Enabling a Web of Entities (contract no. ICT-215032). For more
details, visit http://www.okkam.org.

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 868872, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009
?

?

?
If we could assume that individuals in different ontologies which represent
the same actual resources have the same URI, this kind of heterogeneous data
problem would be far less significant. In this way, recognizing the same resource
distributed in heterogeneous data sources would be only based on simply comparing their identifiers rather than depending on their data structures or content
similarities for approximating identity. However, in the current infrastructure of
the SW, there is no component to support content creators to reuse already existing URIs of individuals which have already been referred to in other applications
or repositories.

The Okkam project[2] is dedicated to solving the issue of identifiers crisis in
the SW. It proposes a web-scale infrastructure called the Entity Name System
(ENS )[2] to support the reuse of existing URIs for any type of individuals (per-
son, location, organization, event, etc) and provides a few APIs to applications
to exchange information with the ENS. The principal mechanism of the ENS
is to match the request provided by users or knowledge bases and the entity
properties stored in the ENS repository in order to return a list of candidate
individuals. This can enable knowledge creation applications to reuse globally
unique identifiers for entities.

Fig. 1. Currently available ENS-Empowered Tools

But there are various types of content in the SW, html files, RDF documents,
relation database management systems, plain text documents and so on. So
different ENS -empowered tools1 are required to aim at different types of knowledge bases. So far, a few client applications have already been developed to deal
with entities in some given types of knowledge bases. E.g. Foaf-o-matic[3] is for
FOAF profiles; Okkam toolbar is for website contents; Okkam4MSW is for Microsoft word; the two plug-ins Okkam4P[4] and Okkam4N we present here are
for OWL/RDF ontologies. As illustrated in Fig.1.

In this demonstration, we show two plug-ins named Okkam4N and Okkam4P
for the NeOn Toolkit2 and Prot eg e software3 respectively, as well as their primary
1 ENS-empowered tools are standard end-user applications extended with functionalities which facilitate the creation of okkamized content through the use of ENS. All
the currently available tools can be found at http://www.okkam.org/test-tubes
http://www.neon-toolkit.org
http://protege.stanford.edu

X. Liu et al.

principles and benefits. With the two plug-ins, ontology editors can create ontologies which feature globally unique, shared identifiers for individuals through
the use of the ENS. In this way, different knowledge bases can be easily aligned
at the level of individuals.

2 Okkam4N and Okkam4P

2.1 Primary Principles

The Okkam4N uses the Eclipse4 plug-in infrastructure to extend the NeOn
Toolkit and the Okkam4P uses the plug-in framework developed at Stanford5 to
extend the functionality for Prot eg e-OWL editor. Both of them make use of an
extension point which allows a plug-in to appear in the right-click popup menu
of a selected individual and can be effortlessly hooked into the application architectures to implement the function. The information exchange with the ENS
is achieved by invoking the web services provided by the Okkam project.

2.2 Benefits

In the files generated by the NeOn Toolkit or Prot eg e, the name of an individual
relies on the automatic mechanism of the applictions or the input of human
beings. These identifiers are difficult to be understood by other knowledge bases
or applications because their scope is usually local. But after being enriched by
ENS -empowered tools, the identifiers of various nodes which present the same
real-world resource can be assigned to the same globally unique identifier stored
in the ENS. So various knowledge bases can be linked together through the nodes
which have the same identifier automatically by applications, consequently more
useful information will be retrieved from the integrated one.

3 Demonstration

We will demonstrate the current versions of Okkam4N and Okkam4P. In order
to show the plug-ins more clearly, we present the sequence diagram (Fig.2) to
show the process of reusing a globally unique identifier for an individual.

We take the NeOn Toolkit with the Okkam4N plugin and an individual
Barack Obama with some properties (firstname, lastname, nationality, birth-
date, etc) as an example to show how to reuse a pre-existing identifier in local
knowledge bases. First of all, users should create and edit the property values
of the individual in local applications. Then, in order to reuse a pre-existing
identifier for this individual, a request, which consists of the individual type and
individual characterism description, will be sent to the ENS. The description is
a collection of datatype property name-value pairs and used to distinguish one
individual from all the others. Users can get each property from a new popup

http://www.eclipse.org
http://www.stanford.edu/
?

?

?
Fig. 2. Sequence diagram of reusing a pre-existing URI

dialog (Fig.3a) and assist to generate the request. After looking up the similar individuals, the ENS will return users a ranked list of matched candidates
(Fig.3b), among which users can select one correct individual and reuse its iden-
tifier, thus causing the substitution of the locally generated identifier with the
pre-existing one in the XML code of the ontology; otherwise if no matching individual is found or no matched candidates returned from the ENS, users can
choose to publish this individual with its properties to the ENS, which will create
a new globally unique identifier for it so that other applications or users could
reuse it. In this case, the newly created identifier will be used in the XML code.
In this way, various ontology files mentioning Barack Obama are interlinked
relying on the nodes which share the same identifier, thus generating a semantic
environment of this individual (as showed in Fig.4).

(a) The information of the specific
individual

(b) The matched candidate list

Fig. 3. The screensnap of Okkam4N

X. Liu et al.

Fig. 4. The semantic environment of Barack Obama

4 Conclusion

In this demonstration, we show two plug-ins named Okkam4N and Okkam4P,
which can reuse the shared, globally unique identifiers for individuals issued by
the ENS in the OWL/RDF knowledge bases created by the NeOn Toolkit or
Prot eg e software.

With the effort of Okkam4N, Okkam4P and other ENS -empowered tools,
more useful information would be retrieved from various types of knowledge
bases. The diffusion of the use of ENS -empowered tools can help to address the
difficulties during the process of data integration.
