Towards a Semantic Infrastructure for

User Generated Mobile Services

Marcin Davies

Telecommunications Research Center Vienna (ftw.), Austria

davies@ftw.at

Abstract. This paper presents a research approach towards a semantic
infrastructure for user generated mobile services. Building on the concept of semantic microservices, the aim of this work is to sufficiently
lower the barrier for end-users in order to enable easy ad-hoc creation,
customisation, and discovery of mobile services.

Keywords: Semantic web services, end-user development, user-centric
service creation, microservices, mobile services, web 2.0.

1 Introduction and Problem Description

The current trend of active user participation and service creation on the Internet (Web 2.0, mashups, widgets, etc.) will certainly continue within mobile
environments. The enabler technology is mostly available as mobile terminals
have an enormous capacity in terms of processing power, interaction, and inter-
facing. Furthermore, high-speed data coverage as well as flat-fee data plans are
increasing to enable an always-on experience in the mobile world.

There is massive potential when mobile devices not only present data but provide valuable information and services to other users. Instant mobile services like
traffic jam information, recommended places, or friend locations can be of benefit
to a large audience and will pave the way to a new mobile internet empowering
end-users to easily find and provide relevant, context-aware information.

Although early approaches towards end-user service creation on the web exist
(e.g. Yahoo! Pipes [1]), they cannot be directly transferred to mobile environments (user interface issues, different architecture, etc.). Furthermore, they are
too complex for a widespread use (i.e. requiring programming skills) and to
facilitate spontaneous service creation on the go.

Driven by the main research question whether and how much semantic technologies can lower the barrier for end-users in order to enable easy ad-hoc cre-
ation, customisation, and discovery of mobile services, this thesis introduces
the concept of microservices1  small, sharply focused, and semantically annotated services that can be flexibly created, adapted, and discovered by end-users.
Leveraging this concept, this work will elaborate a semantic infrastructure as a
step towards a broad adoption of mobile microservices.

1 The term also refers to the fact that these services are running on small devices.

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 924928, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009
?

?

?
2 Related Work and Areas of Contribution

This thesis project will be based on and contribute to the state of the art in three
main areas, namely (1) Service Description and Modelling, (2) Knowledge Warehousing and Service Discovery, and (3) End-User Service Creation Paradigms.

2.1 Service Description and Modeling

Semantic Web Services (SWS) commonly operate on service descriptions encoded in OWL [2] or RDF [3] and service models such as OWL-S [4] or WSMO
[5]. In addition, there exist more lightweight approaches such as SAWSDL [6]
and SA-REST [7] that put a semantic layer on traditional, non-semantic service description methods such as WSDL [8]. However, none of these techniques
are tailored to the needs of mobile services, which are fundamentally different
in terms of e.g. life span, context dependency, or service availability. Moreover,
existing toolkits for describing SWS (e.g. [9]) are directed towards professionals
and are not feasible for end-users while on the go. Therefore, the thesis will
explore user-friendly ways of mobile service description and annotation.

Microservice descriptions are interpreted by an execution environment (similar
to a virtual machine) on a mobile device and can be shared and customised by
other users to create new services. Since existing approaches such as WS-BPEL
[10] and model-driven architectures and languages like Executable UML [11] are
too much focused on big software systems, this work will present a lightweight
microservice model building on the REST [12] architecture that allows for easy
integration with existing Web standards and protocols.

2.2 Knowledge Warehousing and Service Discovery

A central part of this thesis will consider management and discovery of the previously discussed semantic microservice descriptions. Existing and widespread
software like Jena [13] or Sesame [14] allows for arbitrary ontology management,
but needs to be enriched by an additional layer supporting community-driven
ontologies [15] and ontology matching [16] for microservices and their provided
content, revision of knowledge (due to a possibly limited life span of microser-
vices) and content- and context-aware recommendation mechanisms (to deliver
meaningful results in mobile scenarios).

2.3 End-User Service Creation Paradigms and Methods

Current examples for end-user created software on the Web such as Microsoft
Popfly [17] allow users to create new web applications by visual editing of functional blocks. However, these examples can only be regarded as a first step, both
in terms of ease of use (still requiring significant knowledge) and functionality
(mostly restricted to aggregation of information not provision of it). With respect
to the mobile domain, current service creation approaches (e.g. [18,19]) are very
limited (again in terms of functionality) or not tailored to mobile devices and usage
scenarios (with regard to user interfaces, capabilities, and context information).

M. Davies

The research area of End-User Development [20] considers different approaches
for end-users to create software (e.g. Programming by Example). However, these
directions will need to be explored in the context of software services, open com-
munities, and mobile usage patterns. In addition, current end-user development
methods are still at an early stage and can benefit from semantic technologies (e.g.
by using annotations or rules to describe the behavior of functional blocks).

3 Methods and Approach

The overall methodology for the thesis is shown in Fig. 1 and explained in detail
below.

1. Pre-Analysis

Questionnaires / Interviews / Evaluations

Literature Review

Scenarios /
Expectations

Requirements

Gaps of Existing 

Approaches

State of the Art

4. Summative Evaluation

2. Specification of

Microservice Infrastructure

3. Prototype Implementation and Formative Evaluation

Fig. 1. Overall Methodology

1. Pre-Analysis

In this first phase of the thesis, initial requirements, possible usage scenarios,
and user expectations for microservices will be collected by interviews and
web questionnaires. In addition, existing frameworks and tools (e.g. LabView
[21], Yahoo! Pipes [1], Microsoft Popfly [17]) and small mockups for alternative approaches (e.g. question-based service creation) will be evaluated with
regard to specific criteria, e.g. time needed, perceived complexity, and quality of experience (QoX). This pre-analysis should also help to explore gaps
in existing solutions that semantic microservices might be able to fill.

2. Specification of Microservice Infrastructure

Based on these results and, of course, review of existing work and the state of
the art, a suitable semantic microservice infrastructure will be specified and
described. This also includes semantic descriptions of the basic components
needed to build microservices.

3. Prototype Implementation and Formative Evaluation

The next step of the thesis will be a prototype implementation of the semantic microservice infrastructure. This framework will consist of serverside software to search and discover microservices (knowledge warehouse) as
well as a mobile client that allows for creation, customisation, and execution
?

?

?
of microservices. By following an iterative design approach, the semantic
components derived in early stages of the development will be evaluated in
small-scale user studies2 in order to gather early user feedback and to refine
the prototype implementation.

4. Summative Evaluation

Finally, the validity of the developed infrastructure will be assessed in a
final user study with regard to easier service creation, customisation, and
discovery and by considering the criteria derived in the pre-analysis phase.
In addition, the study will also show the applicability to different usage
scenarios, e.g. tourism, gaming, recreation, or social networking.

4 Preliminary Results
Besides a first definition of scenarios, requirements, and a general system architecture for microservices (cf. [23]), the most relevant achievements so far are
towards a specification for the microservice description language. As outlined in
Sect. 2.1, microservice descriptions will be used during the whole microservice
lifecycle (e.g. creation, modification, execution) and are therefore an essential
part of a microservice infrastructure. Currently, the specification foresees the
following language parts (more information can be found in [24]):

 Microservice Profile: provides a descriptive and functional definition of the

microservice by an extensible set of metadata elements

 Microservice Logic: controls the data flow, capability and content handling,

and all other operational aspects of a microservice

 Microservice Rendering: defines the service user interface and provides an

abstract and device-independent layer for service presentation

 Microservice Content: describes the content that is manipulated or offered

by a microservice

5 Conclusions and Future Work
This paper introduced the idea of microservices and described related work and
areas of contribution. After outlining the planned approach, this work also presented some preliminary results. According to the methodology shown in Sect. 3,
the next major steps are to complete the pre-analysis phase (already started) in
order to receive a sound basis for the infrastructure specification (where work has
been started too  cf. Sect. 4). Finally, this infrastructure will be prototypically
implemented and evaluated in user studies.

Acknowledgements. This work has been supported by the European Commis-
sion, ICT FP7 Collaborative Project m:Ciudad [25]. The Telecommunications
Research Center Vienna (ftw.) is supported by the Austrian government and
the City of Vienna within the competence center program COMET. Thanks to
Anna V. Zhdanova for extensive feedback and supervision of this work.
2 If needed, Wizard-of-Oz techniques [22] will be applied that simulate behavior that

is actually not yet or fully implemented.

M. Davies
