A Context-Aware Approach for Integrating

Semantic Web Technologies onto Mobile Devices

Stefan Zander

University of Vienna

Department of Distributed and Multimedia Systems

Liebiggasse 4/3-4, A-1010 Vienna

stefan.zander@univie.ac.at

Abstract. Semantic Web technologies such as RDF are usually incorporated in the infrastructure of desktop and web applications and can
currently not be entirely deployed on mobile devices. Therefore, the
unique opportunities and novel features the Semantic Web offers are not
amenable in mobile application scenarios, in which context and contextawareness is essential. In this thesis, we propose a context-sensitive Semantic Web framework for mobile devices by which contextual data can
be processed semantically and integrated with data sets and services from
other communities. Mobile devices augmented with those capabilities can
operate autonomously and independent in different environments.
Keywords:Mobilecomputing,SemanticWeb,context,context-awareness.

1 Introduction and Problem Description

Mobile phones and mobile computing in general became central parts in our
everyday life. Additionally, new research areas such as Ambient Intelligence or
pervasive and ubiquitous computing gain increasing interest. Their idea is to create smart, intelligent, and adaptive environments in which mobile devices can
request and consume proliferated services and resources autonomously, where
decision making processes are not only based on the users presence or pref-
erences, but also on the surrounding environment [1]. Central to this idea is
the notion of context and context-awareness [2,3]. Ambient Intelligence environments must elaborate on the semantics and meaningfulness of user-related tasks
and activities in order to provide appropriate services and valuable information.
Currently, Semantic Web based applications and services can hardly be deployed on mobile devices because of the lack of suitable implementations for
RDF storage and management, although the necessity of Semantic Web technology and ontologies in particular for realizing a context-aware mobile computing infrastructure is broadly acknowledged [1,4]. In this thesis, we elaborate on
the technical and conceptual background needed for integrating Semantic Web
technology onto mobile devices and employ technologies such as RDF for the
realization of a powerful, adaptable, and scalable context-aware infrastructure
for harnessing contextual data that can be used for requesting ambient services
and data sets from linked data repositories.

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 949953, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

S. Zander

2 Related Work and State of the Art

2.1 Mobile Semantic Web Frameworks

We have analyzed two XML parsers for mobile environments, NanoXML for
J2ME1 and kXML2, as well as two mobile RDF frameworks, Mobile RDF3 and
Jena4. Our survey reveals that Jena is the most advanced framework providing
ontology and inferencing support, although its API is currently in prototypical
status and only allows for processing RDF data serialized in N-Triples format.
None of the evaluated frameworks support queries on RDF data via SPARQL
or other query languages. A serialization mechanism between RDF data and the
internal storage mechanisms used by mobile devices could also not be found. Such
mechanisms are needed since many mobile platforms do not use a file system
for permanent data storage but provide platform-specific storage systems such
as the Record Management System (RMS).

2.2 Context and Context-Awareness

The notion of context is characterized by considerable confusion according its
nature, usage, and its role in interactive systems [5]. Technical disciplines primarily concentrate on sensorial factors such as location, time, activity etc., whereas
social disciplines consider context as a dynamic, emergent phenomenon evolving in the course of interaction that cannot be represented by specific properties.
Context needs an interdisciplinary and holistic research approach for understanding the interdependence between context and technology [6,5]. A context model
should be developed according to its application domain since the generality of
a context model in terms of expressiveness and powerfulness is inversely proportional to its practical applicability and usability [7]. Replacing the prevailing
system-centric view of context-awareness by a user-centric view is suggested by
[6], since context-awareness is an activity-driven process, centered around user
activities. The advantages context provides to the Semantic Web are elaborated
in [8] and [4], introducing an architecture for a context modeling and processing
framework for pervasive applications ([4]) as well as a context mechanism for
the Semantic Web to support data aggregation ([8]).

2.3 Related Projects

DBpedia Mobile5, a location-aware mobile application, allows users to access information from the DBpedia project [9] about the physical environment
surrounding them. Users are able to receive additional information by exploring links to other resources located in the Semantic Web. A similar approach is

http://sourceforge.net/projects/nanoxml-j2me/
http://kxml.sourceforge.net/
http://www.hedenus.de/rdf/index.html
http://poseidon.elet.polimi.it/ca/?page_id=59
http://wiki.dbpedia.org/DBpediaMobile
?

?

?
taken by the mSpace Mobile6 project in which access to location-based information according to the users current situation is provided via a spatial browser.
Considered contexts are time, space, and subject. The IYOUIT 7 project collects
contextual information about certain aspects of the users lifestyle such as visited places or people met and reflects this information on the Web. People are
able to share their personal contexts within a community portal.

Although these projects make use of Semantic Web technologies such as RDF,
the processing of contextual data is done on external servers/applications rather
than on the device itself. Certainly, this dependency is useful for a variety of
scenarios but embodies risks in case of connectivity problems, server breakdowns
etc. If devices were able to process semantic data directly, they could operate
autonomously and independent from external services and specific environments.

3 Proposed Approach
Our overall objective is to make Semantic Web technologies attractive to mobile computing by showing the unique opportunities and novel features these
technologies can provide. Therefore, we have composed an application scenario
demonstrating how a mobile device supports the user by understanding the situations and different contexts in which she operates:

The invitation to a project meeting John received via email mentions the topic,
place, and participants. His mobile device semantically interprets this information
and adds a calendar entry, the locations GPS coordinates, and information about
the other meeting participants (e.g., by retrieving their FOAF profiles8) to Johns
personal dataspace. By combining this information the device could infer on the
situation in which John might be at that time (in meeting) and take appropriate
actions when necessary. At the meeting, Johns address book already contains the
contact data of the other participants together with additional information about
them (e.g., personal homepage, department or company website, recently published
articles, etc.) and corresponding events, retrieved from exposed LOD9 repositories.
The realization of this scenario requires mobile devices to be augmented with
capabilities to process semantic data (RDF) directly using a scalable, lightweight
context model based on ontological semantics expressed by means of OWL. This
model serves as the basis for collecting and interpreting sensed data, which must
be done on different levels [4]. Machine learning techniques guarantee that the
context model continually adapts according to the users intentions and tasks.
This process is supported by feedback mechanisms implicitly and explicitly to
minimize the misinterpretation of contextual data. Time and history have significant influence on the users behavior and allow for inferencing on what the user
has done in comparable situations to get a better understanding on current and
future actions. Since the device is aware of Johns current situation, it is able to

http://mspace.fm/projects/mobile
http://www.iyouit.eu/portal/
http://www.foaf-project.org/
http://esw.w3.org/topic/SweoIG/TaskForces/CommunityProjects/
LinkingOpenData

S. Zander

operate accordingly and suggest appropriate actions (e.g., detect the importance
of an incoming call; detect whether John will arrive at the meeting belatedly and
notify the other participants before; record all the places one visited within a
certain time frame and automatically interlinks them with related data from
LOD repositories etc.). We believe that the computational model of the semantic desktop [10] also applies to mobile devices and their personal dataspaces.

4 Methodology and Evaluation

The application scenario introduced earlier serves as a basis for deducing requirements of the underlying Semantic Web framework. Since none of the evaluated
frameworks provide the required functionalities a priori, we decided to build
on the Jena framework and extend it as needed. To get an impression about
the interdependence between context, context-awareness, and mobile technology we surveyed how context and context-awareness is defined and understood
across different communities. Questions on how to align and synthesize them
with semantic technologies under the restrictions mobile devices impose will be
addressed and redefined in the course of the thesis.

Our Semantic Web framework aims to facilitate the deployment of contextsensitive mobile Semantic Web applications and will be iteratively enhanced and
extended. We propose a multi-layer architecture where each layer is responsible
for a certain group of context-related tasks (e.g., sensing, acquisition, aggrega-
tion, interpretation, inferencing, representation etc.). Questions on how to efficiently process and store triple-based data on devices with limited processing
power, memory and power capacity are of concern too.

As proof of concept, the proposed application scenario will be developed as
a Google Android10 application, where the requirements deduced serve as the
basis for a qualitative evaluation. Additionally, feedback questionaries will be
developed and answered by industrial partners involved in the related project
MobiSem11 to evaluate user satisfactoriness according to the functionalities pro-
posed. We also perform measurements with respect to efficiency in processing,
storing, and inferencing semantic data as well as memory consumption on the
basis of a quantitative evaluation.

5 Current Status and Results Achieved

Our conducted survey on existing mobile Semantic Web frameworks reveals that
almost all evaluated frameworks are in very early stages, the Jena framework
being the most advanced one. Reviewing the literature on context and contextawareness indicates that these terms are used very ambiguously across commu-
nities. Recent research into this topic claims for dynamic, user-centric context
models to better reflect the characteristics and emergent nature. A prototypical

http://code.google.com/android
http://www.mobisem.org
?

?

?
Android application based on the Jena packages has been implemented allowing for retrieving N-Triple serialized RDF data that can be stored and processed
directly on a mobile device. We are currently implementing a simple form of
inferencing to reason about the RDF data stored and take specific contextual
parameters for requesting RDF data from the Linked Geo Data project12.

6 Conclusion

Semantic technologies are on the doorstep to become central parts of the applications operating on desktop computers as well as on the Web. We want to
take this a step further by building a context-sensitive Semantic Web framework
for integrating Semantic Web technologies into the applications operating on
mobile devices. Our framework will enable the collection and interpretation of
contextual data that can be used for requesting ambient services and allocating
resources that have a specific relationship to the users current situation.
