Knowledge Applications for Life Events: 

How the Dutch Government Informs the Public about 

Rights and Duties in the Netherlands 

Ronald Heller and Freek van Teeseling 

Be Informed, Linie 620, 7325 DZ Apeldoorn, Netherlands  
{R.Heller,F.vanTeeseling}@beinformed.nl 

Abstract.  The Dutch government has several ontology driven applications on 
the internet that inform the public about rights and duties that are relevant for 
certain life events. Life events such as New to Holland, The death of a close 
relative and Working and studying are examples of events in life where you 
want to be informed about your rights and duties. In the demonstration we show 
how we make use of an ontology to determine a profile of the user and how we 
give him or her the information that is tailored to his/her specific situation. 

Keywords:  Profile,  ontology,  life  events,  government,  knowledge-models,  
customer oriented. 

1   Background and Application Context 

Citizens demand better support and service from the government than ever before. The 
world  has  become  more  and  more  complex  and  citizens  demand  that  governmental 
organizations adapt to this ever-changing world more quickly. Agility is no longer just 
wanted  or  needed,  it  is  crucial.  Citizens  see  the  government  as  one big organization 
from their viewpoint, although it is actually a huge complex of tasks and responsibili-
ties,  divided  over  many  different  smaller  organizations.  This  results  in  the  fact  that 
many means are used to inform citizens about all kind of laws and regulations, e.g. the 
internet, brochures, commercials etc. The main problem is that citizens are unable to 
receive a complete overview of all the relevant information. This is why they ask the 
government for one clear answer with regards to which regulation they must comply 
to. They dont care which organization is involved. Politicians in the Netherlands have 
acknowledged this and strive for a more agile and efficient government. In the specific 
case  of  the  Netherlands,  this  means  that  over  1300  governmental  organizations  are 
asked to change their way of serving and informing the public. At the moment most 
information and services are offered to the customers from a supplier point of view. 
The  Dutch  government  intends  to  change  this  into  a  citizen-centric  approach.  Dutch 
governmental organizations are now working together towards a better customer inter-
action. They identified so called life events that are important for citizens. Examples of 
such life events are the death of a close relative [7] or the immigration into the Netherlands [4]. The  important  factor  should be  the  situation  and  information  status  of  the 

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 846850, 2009. 
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009 
?

?

?
citizen, not the product or service of the individual governmental organization. Several 
governmental  organizations  are  now  working  together  to be  able  to  inform  a  citizen 
when needed and with exactly the information needed.  

2   Demonstration 

The  demonstration  covers  one  life  event:  New  to  Holland  [5].  It  is  an  application 
giving  background  information  for  people  who  want  to  migrate  to  the  Netherlands. 
Twelve organizations  were involved in the development of this application, such as 
the Immigration office, organizations for taxes, grants and more. When you want to 
come  to  the  Netherlands  as  a  student  you  will  need  other  information  compared  to 
when you want to work or live or even come to the Netherlands as an Au pair. The 
demo will show how the personal situation of the customer is identified. An ontology 
is used for this profiling, and from this the ontology is used to decide on the relevant 
information. A WYSIWYG technique is used to create and store the knowledge mod-
els. There is no separation between model and implementation. A visual graph with 
subject-relation-object triples can be seen in the screenshot in figure 2. The customization to a specific application as New to Holland is essentially done by setting up an 
appropriate metamodel and the definition of patterns and guidelines necessary for the 
application [2]. 

In the case of live events this means that the governmental organizations are able to 
change the ontology by modeling the triples themselves using the graphical modeling 
environment. The tool supports an easy way of specifying which piece of information 
is relevant for certain citizens using strong typed relations between concepts.  

The demonstration will show the application, including the ontologies it is based on. 
In the demonstration we will also discuss the process of development, aspects of maintenance using ontologies and the reuse of models over ontologies and applications. 

3   Profiling Using Ontologies 

In  order  to  be  able  to  make  consistent  knowledge  models  that  can  be  managed  and 
maintained  by  the  information  owners  (business  users),  we  defined  a  metamodel 
based on the Be informed methodology [2].  

3.1   The Metamodel  

The metamodel for the life event is far from complex. It consists of three layers: pro-
file, advice and descriptions and annotations.  

First  we  identify  the  profile  of  the  customer,  and  following  this  it  is  determined 
which advices should be offered. The relevance of each piece of advice is dependent 
on the situation of the customer. One of the most important factors is the reason of his 
of her stay in the Netherlands (work, study, living). Other factors are also important, 
like the age of the customer and the nationality. The relevant advices are then linked 
to pieces of information to be shown with that advice (Description and annotations). 
Adding this layer also enables us to provide the information multi-lingual. In this case 
Dutch and English. This metamodel is used for all Life EventApplications. 

R. Heller and F. van Teeseling 

Fig. 1. The metamodel 

 

3.2   Modeling the Advice 
The involved organizations came up with roughly a hundred different pieces of information  that they thought  were of any interest to  the public.  All that  had to be done  was 
stating  when  these  pieces  where  relevant,  using  the  metamodel  as  mentioned  above. 
This metamodel allows to select among a set of goals and purposes for people to immigrate to the Netherlands (working, studying, asylum, working as an Au pair etc.) in 
interaction  with the  user and  dynamically. The  metamodel  in essence  specifies  which 
are the relevant questions to ask to decide dynamically on the purpose for the immigration and proceed accordingly. This resulted in knowledge models like shown in figure 2. 

Fig. 2. Knowledge model example 

 
?

?

?
In the example Permit for Au Pair is a concept of type Advice, triggered by purposes combined with length of stay, nationality and age. Reuse of knowledge is key to 
knowledge management, so knowledge about nationalities is reused where needed. In 
the model above the deducted concept of EU-membership is important for inferring 
the au pair advice, and is reused in different deductions.  

4   Life Events on the Internet 

On the web one can currently find several life event applications. Go to http://www. 
overheid.nl [5] to find the most up to date list. The demonstration will mainly cover 
the New to Holland application. 

4.1   New to Holland 

In the application a personal checklist is the actual profile that we use to infer which 
pieces  of  information  are  relevant  for  the  customer.  The  left  screenshot  shows  the 
start interface for the users. The right screenshot shows the inferred result. Again this 
is rather a simple screen where users can read relevant information, that applies to that 
specific profile. The application uses the power and possibilities of an ontology which 
remains in the background and opaque to the user. It does however offer easy use in 
managing  and  maintaining  the  knowledge  involved  using  the  Studio  environment 
from figure 2. 

Fig. 3. New to Holland website 

 
