MoKi: The Enterprise Modelling Wiki

Chiara Ghidini1, Barbara Kump2, Stefanie Lindstaedt2,3, Nahid Mahbub1,

Viktoria Pammer2,3, Marco Rospocher1, and Luciano Serafini1

1 FBK-irst. Via Sommarive 18 Povo, 38050, Trento, Italy

2 Knowledge Management Institute, TU Graz. Inffeldgasse 21a, 8010 Graz, Austria

3 Know-Center. Inffeldgasse 21a, 8010 Graz, Austria

Abstract. Enterprise modelling focuses on the construction of a structured description, the so-called enterprise model, which represents aspects relevant to the activity of an enterprise. Although it has become
clearer recently that enterprise modelling is a collaborative activity, involving a large number of people, most of the enterprise modelling tools
still only support very limited degrees of collaboration. Within this
contribution we describe a tool for enterprise modelling, called MoKi
(MOdelling wiKI), which supports agile collaboration between all different actors involved in the enterprise modelling activities. MoKi is based
on a Semantic Wiki and enables actors with different expertise to develop
an enterprise model not only using structural (formal) descriptions but
also adopting more informal and semi-formal descriptions of knowledge.

1 Research Background: Enterprise Modelling

According to [1], an enterprise model is a computational representation of the
structure, activities, processes, information, resources, people, behavior, goals,
and constraints of a business, government, or other enterprise. We refer to
enterprise modelling as the process of creating an enterprise model. Often, an
enterprise model focuses on the description of two specific aspects of an enter-
prise: (i) its processes and activities, and / or (ii) the business domain within
which the enterprise operates. Additionally, other aspects of an enterprise, like
goals, human resources, organisational structure and roles etc. may also be important assets to be described in an enterprise model. This is due to the central
role that enterprise models are playing in the development of a large number of
applications, including Internet and (Semantic) Web based applications.

Building an enterprise model requires a number of skills. These skills span
from knowing the different aspects that have to be described in the models,
to having the ability of encoding such knowledge into formal statements, to
having the ability of integrating different aspects, such as structure, activities,
processes, information, resources, people, behavior, goals, and constraints into a
uniform and coherent vision. Given the complexity of enterprise modelling, it is
unrealistic to assume that all the actors possess all the skills above. For instance
different actors may have very different expertise in encoding some content into
formal languages, or may know only of specific aspects of an enterprise. For this

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 831835, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

C. Ghidini et al.

reason, enterprise modelling is inherently a collaborative activity, performed by
different actors with different know-how and technical skills. To support these
different actors we foresee a system in which content can be represented at
different degrees of formality. This will allow domain experts to create, review
and modify models at a rather informal/human intelligible level and knowledge
engineers to check the quality of the formal definitions and their correspondence
with the informal parts they intend to represent. In order not to increase the
overhead of human work, translation between different levels of formality should
be as much automatised as possible. To support a coherent development and
integration of the different components of the enterprise model we also foresee
a tool in which all the relevant aspects of an enterprise can be modelled in a
collaborative and cooperative manner, thus exploiting the synergy of having to
think the same thing out only once. To meet this vision we are developing MoKi
(Modelling Wiki), a collaborative tool that (i) supports access to the enterprise
model at different levels of formality (informal, semi-formal and formal), (ii)
supports integrated modelling of several aspects of an enterprise, and (iii) ensures
a coherent development of the formal part. In the current implementation of
MoKi, we focus on an enterprise model describing the domain, the processes and
the competencies of an enterprise. The choice of these aspects was originally
motivated by the EU-project APOSDLE described in Section 3.

2 Key Technology: Semantic Wiki

MoKi is a tool based on Semantic MediaWiki (SMW) [2]. It extends SMW offering specific support for enterprise modelling. The choice of developing MoKi
on top of a semantic wiki was made for several reasons. First, wikis are a state
of the art collaborative tool. Second, users are quite familiar with wikis and
editing of wiki pages, due to the growing popularity of wiki-based web sites.
Third, it provides a uniform tool for the (informal) specification of the different
components of an enterprise model (domain, processes, and competencies in our
case). Fourth, the natural language descriptions inserted in a semantic wiki can
be structured according to predefined templates, with the help of semantic constructs like attributes and relations. As a consequence, the informal descriptions
in natural language contain enough structure to be automatically translated in
formal models, thus allowing the reuse of informal descriptions for automatic
ontology creation. Finally only a web-browser is required on the end user side
to use the system.

Model elements are associated to MoKi pages which contain informal but
structured information about the element itself. The typical page contains (i) an
informal description of the element considered in natural language (images or
drawings can be used as well), and (ii) a structured part, where the element is
described by means of triples of the form (subject, relation, object), with the element itself playing the role of the subject. This natural language based, but also
structured, description provides a natural bridge between formal and informal
representation of knowledge. The user fills a page via forms, so he/she does not
?

?

?
Fig. 1. An example of MoKi page

need to know any particular syntax or language to participate in the creation of
the enterprise model. All the actors involved in the modelling activities can also
interact with each others and exchange further ideas and comments using the
discussion SMWs built-in functionality. An example of a MoKi page is shown
in Figure 1. To support modelling, MoKi provides groups of functionalities, described below, that can be accessed via a wikis style menu bar.1
Import. We provide two types of import functionalities. First, functionalities
to import pre-existing structured knowledge. Currently it is possible to upload
OWL domain ontologies, and to import list of domain concepts or tasks organized in a simple textual structure where indentation is used to indicate a
hierarchy. Depending on the users choice, the hierarchy is interpreted as taxonomy or partonomy. The import functionality takes care of creating the indicated concepts as well as the properties denoting the desired hierarchy. Second,
text analysis functionalities such as the extraction of relevant terms from digital resources and the clustering of such terms according to their relatedness
are included to support the utilization of available unstructured knowledge relevant for the modelling activity. The latter functionalities are provided by the
KnowMiner [3], an advanced text analysis tool developed by the Know-Center.
Model Management. This set of functionalities supplies the basic functionality
each modelling tool necessarily provides: creating, editing and deleting model
elements. Depending on the type of element, pre-defined templates are loaded
when it is created or edited. Such templates contain for instance properties for
specifying a taxonomy or partonomy, or a sequence in the case of tasks.
Visualization. These functionalities allow to produce different types of graphical overviews of the models: they help the actors to deal with the global picture

1 In what follows, we indicate with model element any basic component of the

models (e.g. a concept, a relation, a task, a competency and so on).

C. Ghidini et al.

on the models and not only with the single model elements. For example, with
the help of the IsA Browser and the PartOf Browser, the user can easily visualize
and rearrange via drag n drop the taxonomy and partonomy of concepts in the
domain model.
Export. These functionalities support the fully automatic export of knowledge
of the enterprise model into standard knowledge representation languages. At
the moment the supported formalism is OWL for the whole enterprise model.
On-going work is devoted to the addition of formal languages especially for
task/process specification, where a number of standards already exist.

MoKi is built to facilitate the plugging-in of new or existing state-of-the-
art tools as we have done with KnowMiner. We plan to use this feature to
add further functionalities in the future (e.g. tools providing knowledge elicitation techniques like card-sorting or laddering). Concerning the informa/semi-
formal/formal structuring of a page we currently focus on the semi-formal part,
which also contains some informal description. A demo version of MoKi can be
tried out on-line at moki.fbk.eu. A detailed description of the current version
of MoKi is contained in the MoKi manual, available at the MoKi web site.

3 Use Cases and Application

MoKi has been successfully applied within the EU-project APOSDLE (See
www.aposdle.org). Within this context, MoKi has been used to develop enterprise
models in the following domains: environmental consultancy, electromagnetism
simulation, innovation and knowledge management, requirements engineering,
and statistical data analysis. Some of the experiences of an early usage of the system are described in [4]. In addition MoKi is used in applications that go beyond
typical enterprise modelling: the representation of medical guidelines encoded in
the ASBRU language (as part of the OncoCure project [5]), and the collection of
data for the Personal Health Record of the Province of Trento, Italy (as part of the
TreC project, see trec.fbk.eu). In each of these cases, MoKi has been applied in
the context of a collaborative paradigm as described in [6].

4 System Demonstration

In the live demonstration we will present the main MoKi features that can be
used to develop an enterprise model. We will first show how pages describing
entities of the enterprise model look like, and we will describe the basic editing
functionalities (add, edit, delete, rename). Then, we will demonstrate the import functionalities, starting from the domain model import. We will show that
it is possible to create and pre-fill (annotations, class subclass/partof relations)
pages in MoKi by importing an already available ontology. Then we will show
that if there is an already available list of domain concepts (tasks) organized via
plain-text indentation according to a taxonomy or partonomy (task/subtask de-
composition), it it is possible to load pre-filled pages in MoKi preserving this kind
of hierarchical structure. We will also present the term extraction functionality
?

?

?
by uploading a digital resource (a pdf or MS Word document) to the MoKi and
retrieving a list of candidate concepts, from which we will choose some to add as
entities in our enterprise model. As regards the visualisation functionalities, we
will demonstrate how to get different overviews of the models: we will show (i)
how to display (and edit) in a tree-view the taxonomy or partonomy hierarchy
of the element of the domain model, and (ii) how to display in a tabular-view
the list of all elements (and their main properties) in the models. Finally, we
will demonstrate that the enterprise model (its components) designed in MoKi
can be exported into an OWL formal model, and later refined with any OWL
ontology editor.

5 Conclusions

In this demonstration we have presented a new collaborative tool, called MoKi,
to support the creation of integrated enterprise models. MoKi supports collaboration in the modelling activities among people with different skills and levels of
expertise. We are currently improving the tool in several directions, which span
from including support for the modelling of competencies, improving support for
processes modelling and processes visualization, and improving the preservation
of the alignment between the content described in MoKi pages and the formal
models created.

Acknowledgements. We thank all the people involved in the modelling activities within the APOSDLE project for their useful suggestions and feedback.
APOSDLE is partially funded under the FP6 of the EU Commission within the
IST work program (FP6-IST-2004-027023). The Know-Center is funded by the
Austrian Competence Center program Kplus under the auspices of the Austrian
Ministry of Transport, Innovation and Technology and by the State of Styria.
