Towards a Semantic Service Broker

for Business Grid

Henar Mu noz Frutos

Telef onica Research & Development

Valladolid, Spain

henar@tid.es

Abstract. The increasing number of infrastructure services requires the
existence of mechanisms to discover and select services and resources,
called service broker, based on customer requirements. This mechanism
should improve the interoperability among customer-provider and be a
backward compatible and light weight approach. The introduction of
semantic annotations in service description (both functional and nonfunctional properties) as well as a conceptual model for business Grid
can help to achieve them. Finally, the extension of the semantic Open
Grid Service Architecture (S-OGSA) with the incorporation of the semantic service broker can incorporate the required capabilities to the
Grid middleware.

Keywords: Service Broker, Business Grid, semantic annotations, ontol-
ogy, Quality of Service.

1 Introduction

Current business Grid markets allow enterprises to collaborate in a dynamic environment in order to buy and sell resources (computation, storage, applications,
etc ...). Moreover, these resources are virtualized as services called Grid services
to reduce their complexity and be available through the Internet, boosting the
number of available services. Due to the increase of the available services, some
automatic mechanisms are required in order to simplify and reduce the human
intervention in business.

The Web service technology provides an infrastructure for developing distributed systems and performing electronic business operations [1]. This technology implements the Service Oriented Computing (SOC) paradigm, which
considers three main stakeholders: i) service producer, which offers, in our e, ii)
service broker and iii) service consumer. In our case, the service producers, concretely infrastructure providers, offers resources as services, to service consumers
which specify their requirements. In addition, the service broker, on behalf of
the customer, discovers a set of available services for the service consumer with
a certain level of the consumer satisfaction.

Thus, the service broker should locate services that fulfil a concrete user request normally by capabilities constrains. However with the increasing number

L. Aroyo et al. (Eds.): ESWC 2009, LNCS 5554, pp. 939943, 2009.
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2009

H. Mu noz Frutos

of functional similar services in the Web [2], the discovery process is not able
to find the best service to meet user requirements while ensuring the Quality of
Service (QoS) [3]. Thus, a service selection process is required based on specified customer preferences or restrictions, which are considered as non-functional
properties such as price, reputation and reliability, which are QoS attributes and
may impact the quality of the service offered by a Web Service [3].

As part of the non-functional properties, some information related to the way
of provisioning the service by the provider side can be useful. This is part of the
Service-Level Agreement (SLA) templates, where besides service descriptions,
it is defined information about the resources (hardware and software) to be
provided, the quality of service (QoS) level to be maintained, etc [4]. Thus, a
service specification offered by a provider can be materialized as a capability
(functional description) provided and a set of non-functional constraints (QoS
metrics, service provision terms) by using the TSLA files.

However, in this highly dynamic scenario, providers and customers may use
different terminologies or even languages, to describe the conditions and requisites [5]. In this matter, it is required a mutual agreement on the service(s)
functional and non-functional properties to develop a method for automatically
matching the offers and the requests. In order to increase the interoperability
among customers-providers, some works introduce semantic technologies in the
definition of QoS metrics. Domingue et al [6] and Ren et al [3] present different conceptual models formed as ontologies so as to extend service descriptions.
However, these solutions are not backward compatible, and demand providers
to change their service offer descriptions. Moreover, they are not lightweight ap-
proaches, which increase the complexity to user in annotating services and the
framework to implement such solutions.

In addition, considering lightweight approaches, the work introduced by
Kopecky [7] defines the usage of semantic annotations for describing services
based on the Web Service Modelling Ontology (WSMO). However, this approach
lacks in the information provided by providers related to SLA. In addition, Oldham et al [8] propose the introduction of semantic annotations for QoS terms
inside WS-Agreement [4], but extending the XML schemas, being an alternative
not backward compatible.

Thus, our approach should be able to build a service broker with the following features: i) improve the interoperability among customer-providers, ii) be
backward compatible and iii) be a lightweight approach.

2 Proposed Approach

The proposed approach tries to satisfy the main requirements commented above
composed by a service broker model and an architecture which implements this
model. In order to describe the non-functional properties (including the service provision) together service functional descriptions, we use TSLA from the
WS-Agreement recommendation [4]. Moreover, in order to increase the interoperability among customers and providers, we are going to introduce semantic
?

?

?
technologies in terms of semantic annotations both in service description and
QoS metrics in the TSLA. Semantic annotations allows to link SLA standards
terms with concepts belonging to a conceptual model as part as the document
[9]. The main drivers behind this approach are: i) the necessity for a backward
compatible approach, so that, components non aware of semantic annotation
can continue working with service descriptions and ii) a lightweight approach to
perform any operation (selection, negotiation ...) at runtime [5].

2.1 Service Broker Model
In order to introduce the semantic annotations, the service broker model is defined by i) a specification for introducing semantic annotations, ii) a conceptual
model for service descriptions formed as ontologies and iii) a service selection al-
gorithm. The specification for Semantic Annotation for SLA (SA-SLA) is based
on the W3C recommendation Semantic Annotation for Web Service Description Language (SA-WSDL) [9], which allows WS-Agreement terms (as metrics,
KPI, service descriptions) to be pointed to semantic concepts from more expressive ontologies. Regarding the conceptual model, the approach tries to define a
generic set of concepts (functional and non-functional) in a business Grid sce-
nario, which are extensible, and can be customized to include domain-specific
concepts. Finally, the service selection algorithm will involve i) the discovery of
service regarding functional properties and ii) the selection of services based on
customer requirements in terms of non-functional properties. This algorithm is
going to allow for working with imprecise requirements in order to provide a way
of ranking and incorporate more amount of services in the compete market.

2.2 Architecture
Corcho et al [10] defines a Reference Architecture for the introduction of semantic
technologies to Grid, called semantic Open Grid Service Architecture (S-OGSA).
Concretely, S-OGSA defines a model, the capabilities and the mechanisms for
the Semantic Grid. Thus, we can extend current S-OGSA architecture with the
Semantic Grid Service Broker, being a new Semantically Aware Grid Service
(SAGS), which should work with the rest of S-OGSA architecture to fulfill their
complete functionality.

The service broker should work with different modules: i) a Grid service discovery and ii) a non-functional properties selector, besides all modules corresponding
to the semantic infrastructure. In the broker design, we intent to create a discovery pattern that will be based on the well-known principle of the separation
of concerns. This principle will be applied decoupling the functional properties
from the non functional properties matching.

3 Methodology

Methodologically, we propose a quantitative experimentation, obtaining results
from different experiments. Concretely, for the experimentation, we are going to

H. Mu noz Frutos

take the Virtual Scenario of the BREIN project [11]. There, an engineering company (ANSYS) tries to outsource the computing infrastructure required for software simulations in order to reduce costs. Thus, due to the existence of several
infrastructure providers (BSC, HLRS), the framework should be able to select the
best provider in each moment which satisfy the customers requests. Thus, for experimentation proposes, we are going to build a simulation testbed composed by
a set of service descriptions and TSLA files, which are semantically annotated.

As the main three statement we want to demonstrate are: i)backward com-
patible, ii)light weigh and iii) improve interoperability, we have to design the
experiments in order to show it. Thus, we will provide some annotated and
non-annotated services with different used terminologies. Finally, the idea is to
compare our approach with others like for instance WSMO, in order to analyze
the advantages of our solution.

4 Results

In the implementation of the solution, we are following an agile project management approach, such as depicted by SCRUM and others originally developed for
large scale IT development tasks. With this approach a set of goals considered
relevant for the idea objectives is identified and implemented. Moreover, to have
the full implementation some other external implementations or algorithms can
be taken in order to be able to have early results. Table 1 can summarize the
main goals defined and their current status.

Table 1. Goals in the semantic Grid service broker

Goals

Status Comment

1 SA-SLA specification
2 Ontologies
3 QoS Broker
4 QoS selection algorithm
5 Metrics Collection
6 Functional properties dis-

covery

90% To be submitted to GRAAP (OGF)
35% QoS ontology, service ontology.
80% Extension according to ontologies
0% Including imprecise constrains
0% Obtain metric value for providers
0% Annotating WS-Agreement

scription with SA-SLA

service de-

5 Conclusions and Future Work

This document has established the main pillars towards the realization of a semantic grid service broker for business Grid. It has started from the definition
of the context, where mechanisms are required for the discovery and selection of
Grid services considering non-functional properties. Moreover, the first analysis
of the state of the art pointed out that the existing approaches are not usually
focused on service Grid and do not solve the heterogeneity problem planned in
a open market place. Finally, other approaches, which can satisfy these require-
ments, lack in a backwards compatible and light weight approach, with allows
?

?

?
continuing working with current components. Our proposed approach relies on
the introduction of semantic annotations in TSLA and ontologies to work towards these requirements. Currently, there are some developed results as the
QoS broker, but we should continue working on the state of the art to guarantee
that the idea is original, as well as some bullet points marked in the proposed
approach.
